
Since Grandfather first spoke these words, the most famous of American
poets has drawn sweet tears from all of us, by his beautiful poem of
Evangeline.

And now, having thrown a gentle gloom around the Thanksgiving fire-side,
by a story that made the children feel the blessing of a secure and
peaceful hearth, Grandfather put off the other events of the Old French
War till the next evening.




Chapter X


In the twilight of the succeeding eve, when the red beams of the fire were
dancing upon the wall, the children besought Grandfather to tell them what
had next happened to the old chair.

"Our chair," said Grandfather, "stood all this time in the Province House.
But, Governor Shirley had seldom an opportunity to repose within its arms.
He was loading his troops through the forest, or sailing in a flat-boat on
Lake Ontario, or sleeping in his tent, while the awful cataract of Niagara
sent its roar through his dreams. At one period, in the early part of the
war, Shirley had the chief command of all the king's forces in America."

"Did his young wife go with him to the war?" asked Clara.

"I rather imagine," replied Grandfather, "that she remained in Boston.
This lady, I suppose, had our chair all to herself, and used to sit in it,
during those brief intervals when a young French woman can be quiet enough
to sit in a chair. The people of Massachusetts were never fond of Governor
Shirley's young French wife. They had a suspicion that she betrayed the
military plans of the English to the generals of the French armies."

"And was it true?" inquired Clara.

"Probably not," said Grandfather. "But the mere suspicion did Shirley a
great deal of harm. Partly, perhaps, for this reason, but much more on
account of his inefficiency as a general, he was deprived of his command,
in 1756, and recalled to England. He never afterwards made any figure in
public life."

As Grandfather's chair had no locomotive properties, and did not even run
on castors, it cannot be supposed to have marched in person to the Old
French War. But Grandfather delayed its momentous history, while he
touched briefly upon some of the bloody battles, sieges, and onslaughts,
the tidings of which kept continually coming to the ears of the old
inhabitants of Boston. The woods of the north were populous with fighting
men. All the Indian tribes uplifted their tomahawks, and took part either
with the French or English. The rattle of musketry and roar of cannon
disturbed the ancient quiet of the forest, and actually drove the bears
and other wild beasts to the more cultivated portion of the country in the
vicinity of the sea-ports. The children felt as if they were transported
back to those forgotten times, and that the couriers from the army, with
the news of a battle lost or won, might even now be heard galloping
through the streets. Grandfather told them about the battle of Lake
George, in 1755, when the gallant Colonel Williams, a Massachusetts
officer, was slain, with many of his countrymen. But General Johnson and
General Lyman, with their army, drove back the enemy, and mortally wounded
the French leader, who was called the Baron Dieskau. A gold watch,
pilfered from the poor Baron, is still in existence, and still marks each
moment of time, without complaining of weariness, although its hands have
been in motion ever since the hour of battle.

In the first years of the war, there were many disasters on the English
side. Among these was the loss of Fort Oswego, in 1756, and of Fort
William Henry, in the following year. But the greatest misfortune that
befell the English, during the whole war, was the repulse of General
Abercrombie, with his army, from the ramparts of Ticonderoga, in 1758. He
attempted to storm the walls; but a terrible conflict ensued, in which
more than two thousand Englishmen and New Englanders were killed or
wounded. The slain soldiers now lie buried around that ancient fortress.
When the plough passes over the soil, it turns up here and there a
mouldering bone.

Up to this period, none of the English generals had shown any military
talent. Shirley, the Earl of Loudon, and General Abercrombie, had each
held the chief command, at different times; but not one of them had won a
single important triumph for the British arms. This ill success was not
owing to the want of means; for, in 1758, General Abercrombie had fifty
thousand soldiers under his command. But the French general, the famous
Marquis de Montcalm, possessed a great genius for war, and had something
within him, that taught him how battles were to be won.

At length, in 1759, Sir Jeffrey Amherst was appointed commander-in-chief
of all the British forces in America. He was a man of ability, and a
skilful soldier. A plan was now formed for accomplishing that object,
which had so long been the darling wish of the New Englanders, and which
their fathers had so many times attempted. This was the conquest of
Canada.

Three separate armies were to enter Canada, from different quarters. One
of the three, commanded by General Prideaux, was to embark on Lake
Ontario, and proceed to Montreal. The second, at the head of which was Sir
Jeffrey Amherst himself, was destined to reach the River St. Lawrence, by
the way of Lake Champlain, and then go down the river to meet the third
army. This last, led by General Wolfe, was to enter the St. Lawrence from
the sea, and ascend the river to Quebec. It is to Wolfe and his army that
England owes one of the most splendid triumphs, ever written in her
history.

Grandfather described the siege of Quebec, and told how Wolfe led his
soldiers up a rugged and lofty precipice, that rose from the shore of the
river to the plain on which the city stood. This bold adventure was
achieved in the darkness of night. At day-break, tidings were carried to
the Marquis de Montcalm, that the English army was waiting to give him
battle on the plains of Abraham. This brave French general ordered his
drums to strike up, and immediately marched to encounter Wolfe.

He marched to his own death. The battle was the most fierce and terrible,
that had ever been fought in America. General Wolfe was at the head of his
soldiers, and while encouraging them onward, received a mortal wound. He
reclined against a stone, in the agonies of death; but it seemed as if his
spirit could not pass away, while the fight yet raged so doubtfully.
Suddenly, a shout came pealing across the battle-field--"They flee! they
flee!" and, for a moment, Wolfe lifted his languid head. "Who flee?" he
inquired. "The French," replied an officer. "Then I die satisfied!" said
Wolfe, and expired in the arms of victory.

"If ever a warrior's death were glorious, Wolfe's was so!" said
Grandfather; and his eye kindled, though he was a man of peaceful
thoughts, and gentle spirit. "His life-blood streamed to baptize the soil
which he had added to the dominion of Britain! His dying breath was
mingled with his army's shout of victory!"

"Oh, it was a good death to die!" cried Charley, with glistening eyes.
"Was it not a good death, Laurence?"

Laurence made no reply; for his heart burned within him, as the picture of
Wolfe, dying on the blood-stained field of victory, arose to his
imagination; and yet, he had a deep inward consciousness, that, after all,
there was a truer glory than could thus be won.

"There were other battles in Canada, after Wolfe's victory," resumed
Grandfather; "but we may consider the Old French War as having terminated
with this great event. The treaty of peace, however, was not signed until
1763. The terms of the treaty were very disadvantageous to the French; for
all Canada, and all Acadia, and the island of Cape Breton, in short, all
the territories that France and England had been fighting about, for
nearly a hundred years--were surrendered to the English."

"So, now, at last," said Laurence, "New England had gained her wish.
Canada was taken!"

"And now there was nobody to fight with, but the Indians," said Charley.

Grandfather mentioned two other important events. The first was the great
fire of Boston, in 1700, when the glare from nearly three hundred
buildings, all in flames at once, shone through the windows of the
Province House, and threw a fierce lustre upon the gilded foliage and
lion's head of our old chair. The second event was the proclamation, in
the same year, of George the Third as king of Great Britain. The blast of
the trumpet sounded from the balcony of the Town House, and awoke the
echoes far and wide, as if to challenge all mankind to dispute King
George's title.

Seven times, as the successive monarchs of Britain ascended the throne,
the trumpet-peal of proclamation had been heard by those who sat in our
venerable chair. But, when the next king put on his father's crown, no
trumpet-peal proclaimed it to New England! Long before that day, America
had shaken off the royal government.




Chapter XI


Now that Grandfather had fought through the Old French War, in which our
chair made no very distinguished figure, he thought it high time to tell
the children some of the more private history of that praiseworthy old
piece of furniture.

"In 1757," said Grandfather, "after Shirley had been summoned to England,
Thomas Pownall was appointed governor of Massachusetts. He was a gay and
fashionable English gentleman, who had spent much of his life in London,
but had a considerable acquaintance with America. The new governor appears
to have taken no active part in the war that was going on; although, at
one period, he talked of marching against the enemy, at the head of his
company of cadets. But, on the whole, he probably concluded that it was
more befitting a governor to remain quietly in our chair, reading the
newspapers and official documents."

"Did the people like Pownall?" asked Charley.

"They found no fault with him," replied Grandfather. "It was no time to
quarrel with the governor, when the utmost harmony was required, in order
to defend the country against the French. But Pownall did not remain long
in Massachusetts. In 1759, he was sent to be governor of South Carolina.
In thus exchanging one government for another, I suppose he felt no
regret, except at the necessity of leaving Grandfather's chair behind
him."

"He might have taken it to South Carolina," observed Clara.

"It appears to me," said Laurence, giving the rein to his fancy, "that the
fate of this ancient chair was, somehow or other, mysteriously connected
with the fortunes of old Massachusetts. If Governor Pownall had put it
aboard the vessel in which he sailed for South Carolina, she would
probably have lain wind-bound in Boston harbor. It was ordained that the
chair should not be taken away. Don't you think so, Grandfather?"

"It was kept here for Grandfather and me to sit in together," said little
Alice, "and for Grandfather to tell stories about."

"And Grandfather is very glad of such a companion, and such a theme," said
the old gentleman, with a smile. "Well, Laurence, if our oaken chair, like
the wooden Palladium of Troy, was connected with the country's fate, yet
there appears to have been no supernatural obstacle to its removal from
the Province House. In 1760, Sir Francis Bernard, who had been governor of
New Jersey, was appointed to the same office in Massachusetts. He looked
at the old chair, and thought it quite too shabby to keep company with a
new set of mahogany chairs, and an aristocratic sofa, which had just
arrived from London. He therefore ordered it to be put away in the
garret."

The children were loud in their exclamations against this irreverent
conduct of Sir Francis Bernard. But Grandfather defended him, as well as
he could. He observed, that it was then thirty years since the chair had
been beautified by Governor Belcher. Most of the gilding was worn off by
the frequent scourings which it had undergone, beneath the hands of a
black slave. The damask cushion, once so splendid, was now squeezed out of
all shape, and absolutely in tatters, so many were the ponderous gentlemen
who had deposited their weight upon it, during these thirty years.

Moreover, at a council held by the Earl of Loudon with the governors of
New England, in 1757, his lordship, in a moment of passion, had kicked
over the chair with his military boot. By this unprovoked and
unjustifiable act, our venerable friend had suffered a fracture of one of
its rungs.

"But," said Grandfather, "our chair, after all, was not destined to spend
the remainder of its days in the inglorious obscurity of a garret. Thomas
Hutchinson, lieutenant-governor of the province, was told of Sir Francis
Bernard's design. This gentleman was more familiar with the history of New
England than any other man alive. He knew all the adventures and
vicissitudes through which the old chair had passed, and could have told,
as accurately as your own Grandfather, who were the personages that had
occupied it. Often, while visiting at the Province House, he had eyed the
chair with admiration, and felt a longing desire to become the possessor
of it. He now waited upon Sir Francis Bernard, and easily obtained leave
to carry it home."

"And I hope," said Clara, "he had it varnished and gilded anew."

"No," answered Grandfather. "What Mr. Hutchinson desired was to restore
the chair, as much as possible, to its original aspect, such as it had
appeared, when it was first made out of the Earl of Lincoln's oak-tree.
For this purpose he ordered it to be well scoured with soap and sand and
polished with wax, and then provided it with a substantial leather
cushion. When all was completed to his mind, he sat down in the old chair,
and began to write his History of Massachusetts."

"Oh, that was a bright thought in Mr. Hutchinson!" exclaimed Laurence.
"And, no doubt, the dim figures of the former possessors of the chair
flitted around him, as he wrote, and inspired him with a knowledge of all
that they had done and suffered while on earth."

"Why, my dear Laurence," replied Grandfather, smiling, "if Mr. Hutchinson
was favored with any such extraordinary inspiration, he made but a poor
use of it in his History; for a duller piece of composition never came
from any man's pen. However, he was accurate, at least, though far from
possessing the brilliancy or philosophy of Mr. Bancroft."

"But, if Hutchinson knew the history of the chair," rejoined Laurence,
"his heart must have been stirred by it."

"It must, indeed," said Grandfather. "It would be entertaining and
instructive, at the present day, to imagine what were Mr. Hutchinson's
thoughts, as he looked back upon the long vista of events with which this
chair was so remarkably connected."

And Grandfather allowed his fancy to shape out an image of
Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson, sitting in an evening reverie by his
fireside, and meditating on the changes that had slowly passed around the
chair.

A devoted monarchist, Hutchinson would heave no sigh for the subversion of
the original republican government, the purest that the world had seen,
with which the colony began its existence. While reverencing the grim and
stern old Puritans as the founders of his native land, he would not wish
to recall them from their graves, nor to awaken again that king-resisting
spirit, which he imagined to be laid asleep with them forever. Winthrop,
Dudley, Bellingham, Endicott, Leverett, and Bradstreet! All these had had
their day. Ages might come and go, but never again would the people's
suffrages place a republican governor in their ancient Chair of State!

Coming down to the epoch of the second charter, Hutchinson thought of the
ship-carpenter Phips, springing from the lowest of the people, and
attaining to the loftiest station in the land. But, he smiled to perceive
that this governor's example would awaken no turbulent ambition in the
lower orders, for it was a king's gracious boon alone that made the
ship-carpenter a ruler. Hutchinson rejoiced to mark the gradual growth of
an aristocratic class, to whom the common people, as in duty bound, were
learning humbly to resign the honors, emoluments, and authority of state.
He saw,--or else deceived himself--that, throughout this epoch, the people's
disposition to self-government had been growing weaker, through long
disuse, and now existed only as a faint traditionary feeling.

The Lieutenant-Governor's reverie had now come down to the period at which
he himself was sitting in the historic chair. He endeavored to throw his
glance forward, over the coming years. There, probably, he saw visions of
hereditary rank, for himself and other aristocratic colonists. He saw the
fertile fields of New England, portioned out among a few great
landholders, and descending by entail from generation to generation. He
saw the people a race of tenantry, dependent on their lords. He saw stars,
garters, coronets, and castles.

"But," added Grandfather, turning to Laurence, "the Lieutenant-Governor's
castles were built nowhere but among the red embers of the fire, before
which he was sitting. And, just as he had constructed a baronial residence
for himself and his posterity, the fire rolled down upon the hearth, and
crumbled it to ashes!"

Grandfather now looked at his watch, which hung within a beautiful little
ebony Temple, supported by four Ionic columns. He then laid his hand on
the golden locks of little Alice, whose head had sunk down upon the arm of
our illustrious chair.

"To bed, to bed, dear child!" said he. "Grandfather has put you to sleep,
already, by his stories about these FAMOUS OLD PEOPLE!"





PART III




Chapter I


On the evening of New Year's day, Grandfather was walking to and fro,
across the carpet, listening to the rain which beat hard against the
curtained windows. The riotous blast shook the casement, as if a strong
man were striving to force his entrance into the comfortable room. With
every puff of the wind, the fire leaped upward from the hearth, laughing
and rejoicing at the shrieks of the wintry storm.

Meanwhile, Grandfather's chair stood in its customary place by the
fireside. The bright blaze gleamed upon the fantastic figures of its oaken
back, and shone through the open-work, so that a complete pattern was
thrown upon the opposite side of the room. Sometimes, for a moment or two,
the shadow remained immovable, as if it were painted on the wall. Then,
all at once, it began to quiver, and leap, and dance, with a frisky
motion. Anon, seeming to remember that these antics were unworthy of such
a dignified and venerable chair, it suddenly stood still. But soon it
began to dance anew.

"Only see how grandfather's chair is dancing!" cried little Alice.

And she ran to the wall, and tried to catch hold of the flickering shadow;
for to children of five years old, a shadow seems almost as real as a
substance.

"I wish," said Clara, "Grandfather would sit down in the chair, and finish
its history."

If the children had been looking at Grandfather, they would have noticed
that he paused in his walk across the room, when Clara made this remark.
The kind old gentleman was ready and willing to resume his stories of
departed times. But he had resolved to wait till his auditors should
request him to proceed, in order that they might find the instructive
history of the chair a pleasure, and not a task.

"Grandfather," said Charley, "I am tired to death of this dismal rain, and
of hearing the wind roar in the chimney. I have had no good time all day.
It would be better to hear stories about the chair, than to sit doing
nothing, and thinking of nothing."

To say the truth, our friend Charley was very much out of humor with the
storm, because it had kept him all day within doors, and hindered him from
making trial of a splendid sled, which Grandfather had given him for a New
Year's gift. As all sleds, now-a-days, must have a name, the one in
question had been honored with the title of Grandfather's Chair, which was
painted in golden letters, on each of the sides. Charley greatly admired
the construction of the new vehicle, and felt certain that it would
outstrip any other sled that ever dashed adown the long slopes of the
Common.

As for Laurence, he happened to be thinking, just at this moment, about
the history of the chair. Kind old Grandfather had made him a present of a
volume of engraved portraits, representing the features of eminent and
famous people of all countries. Among them Laurence found several who had
formerly occupied our chair, or been connected with its adventures. While
Grandfather walked to and fro across the room, the imaginative boy was
gazing at the historic chair. He endeavored to summon up the portraits
which he had seen in his volume, and to place them, like living figures,
in the empty seat.

"The old chair has begun another year of its existence, to-day," said
Laurence. "We must make haste, or it will have a new history to be told
before we finish the old one."

"Yes, my children," replied Grandfather, with a smile and a sigh, "another
year has been added to those of the two centuries, and upward, which have
passed since the Lady Arbella brought this chair over from England. It is
three times as old as your Grandfather; but a year makes no impression on
its oaken frame, while it bends the old man nearer and nearer to the
earth; so let me go on with my stories while I may."

Accordingly, Grandfather came to the fireside, and seated himself in the
venerable chair. The lion's head looked down with a grimly good-natured
aspect, as the children clustered around the old gentleman's knees. It
almost seemed as if a real lion were peeping over the back of the chair,
and smiling at the group of auditors, with a sort of lion-like
complaisance. Little Alice, whose fancy often inspired her with singular
ideas, exclaimed that the lion's head was nodding at her, and that it
looked as if it were going to open its wide jaws and tell a story.

But, as the lion's head appeared to be in no haste to speak, and as there
was no record or tradition of its having spoken, during the whole
existence of the chair, Grandfather did not consider it worth while to
wait.




Chapter II


"Charley, my boy," said Grandfather, "do you remember who was the last
occupant of the chair?"

"It was Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson," answered Charley. "Sir Francis
Bernard, the new governor, had given him the chair, instead of putting it
away in the garret of the Province House. And when we took leave of
Hutchinson, he was sitting by his fireside, and thinking of the past
adventures of the chair, and of what was to come."

"Very well," said Grandfather; "and you recollect that this was in 1763,
or thereabouts, at the close of the Old French War. Now, that you may
fully comprehend the remaining adventures of the chair, I must make some
brief remarks on the situation and character of the New England colonies
at this period."

So Grandfather spoke of the earnest loyalty of our fathers during the Old
French War, and after the conquest of Canada had brought that war to a
triumphant close.

The people loved and reverenced the king of England, even more than if the
