herself, that he blamed himself for his words, and knelt by her,
restraining her hands.

"'Tis for its sake I would kill myself, and have my face beaten into
the bloody dust. I would kill it--kill it--kill it--more than I would
kill myself!"

"Nay, you would not, poor soul," he said, "if you were not distraught."

"But I am distraught," she wailed; "and there is naught but death for
both of us."

'Twas a strange situation for a young man to find himself in, watching
by the roadside the hysteric frenzy of a maddened girl; but as he had
been unconscious on the day he stood, an unclad man, giving the aid
that would save a life, so he thought now of naught but the agony he
saw in this poor creature's awful eyes and heard in her strangled
cries. It mattered naught to him that any passing would have thought
themselves gazing upon a scene in a strange story.

There was a little clear stream near, and he went and brought her
water, making her drink it and bathe the dust-stains from her face and
hands, and the gentle authority with which he made her do these simple
things seemed somehow to somewhat calm her madness. She looked up at
him staring, and with long, sobbing breaths.

"Who--are you?" she asked, helplessly.

"I am the Marquess of Roxholm," he answered, "and I ride to my father's
house at Camylott; but I cannot leave you until I know you are safe."

"Safe!" she said. "I safe!" and she clasped her hands about her knees
as she sat, wringing her fingers together. "You do not ask me who I
am," she added.

"I need not know your name to do you service," he answered. "But I must
ask you where you would go--to rest."

"To Death--from which you have plucked me!" was her reply, and she
dropped her head against her held-up knees and broke forth sobbing
again. "I tell you there is naught else. If your horse had beat my face
into the dust, none would have known where I lay at last. Five days
have I walked and my very clothes I changed with a gipsy woman. None
would have known." Suddenly she looked up with shame and terror in her
eyes, the blood flaming in her face. She involuntarily clutched at his
sleeve as if in her horror she must confide even to this stranger.
"They had begun to look at me--and whisper," she said. "And one day a
girl who hated me laughed outright as I passed--though I strove to bear
myself so straightly--and I heard her mock me. 'Pride cometh first,'
she said, 'and then the fall. _She_ hath fallen far.'"

She looked so young and piteous that Roxholm felt a mist pass before
his eyes.

"Poor child!" he said; "poor child!"

"I was proud," she cried. "It was my sin. They taunted me that he was a
gentleman and meant me ill, and it angered me--poor fool--and I held my
head higher. He told me he had writ for his Chaplain to come and wed us
in secret. He called me 'my lady' and told me what his pride in me
would be when we went to the town." She put her hands up to her working
throat as if somewhat strangled her, and the awful look came back into
her widened eyes. "In but a little while he went away," she
gasped--"and when he came back, and I went to meet him in the dark and
fell weeping upon his breast, he pushed me back and looked at me, and
curled his lip laughing, and turned away! Oh, John!--John Oxon!" she
cried out, "God laughs at women--why shouldst not thou?" and her
paroxysm began again.


At high noon a wagoner whose cart was loaded with hay drove into the
rick yard of a decent farm-house some hours' journey from the turn in
the road where my lord Marquess had been so strangely checked in his
gallop. An elderly gentleman in Chaplain's garb and bands rode by the
rough conveyance, and on a bed made in the hay a woman lay and groaned
in mortal anguish.

The good woman of the house this reverend gentleman saw alone and had
discourse with, paying her certain moneys for the trouble she would be
put to by the charge he commanded to her, himself accompanying her when
she went out to the wagon to care for its wretched burden.

Throughout the night she watched by her patient's bedside, but as day
dawned she left it for a moment to call the Chaplain to come quickly,
he having remained in the house that he might be at hand if need should
be, in accordance with his patron's wishes.

"'Tis over, and she is dying," said the good woman. "I fear she hath
not her wits, poor soul. All night she hath cried one name, and lies
and moans it still."

Mr. Fox followed her into a little cleanly, raftered chamber. He knelt
by the bedside and spoke gently to the girl who lay upon the white
pillows, her deathly face more white than the clean, coarse linen.
'Twas true she did not see him, but lay staring at the wall's bareness,
her lips moving as she muttered the name she had shrieked and wailed
at intervals throughout the hours. "John--Oh, John Oxon!" he could
barely hear, "God laughs at us--why should not such as thou?"

And when the sun rose she lay stiff and dead, with a dead child in her
rigid arm; and Mr. Fox rode slowly back with a grave countenance, to
join his lord and patron at the village inn, and tell him all was
over.




_CHAPTER XI_

"_It Might Have Been--It Might Have Been!_"


The heavenly summer weeks he passed with his beloved parents at
Camylott before they set forth on their journey to the Continent
remained a sweet memory in the mind of the young Marquess so long as he
lived, and was cherished by him most tenderly. In those lovely June
days he spent his hours with his father and mother as he had spent them
as a child, and in that greater intimacy and closer communion which
comes to a son with riper years, if the situation is not reversed and
his maturity has not drifted away from such fondness. Both the Duke and
Duchess were filled with such noble pride in him and he with such noble
love of them. All they had hoped for in him he had given them, all his
manly heart longed for they bestowed upon him--tenderness,
companionship, sympathy in all he did or dreamed of doing.

After his leave of absence it was his intention to rejoin his Grace of
Marlborough on the Continent for a period, since his great friend had
so desired, but later he would return and give up his career of arms to
devote himself to the interests of his country in other ways, and of
this his mother was particularly glad, feeling all a woman's fears for
his safety and all her soft dread of the horrors of war.

"I would not have shown you my heart when you went away from England,
Gerald," she said. "'Twould not have been brave and just to do so since
'twas your desire to go. But no woman's heart can lie light in her
breast when her son is in peril every hour--and I could not bear to
think," her violet eyes growing softly dark, "that my son in winning
glory might rob other mothers of their joy."

In their rides and talks together he would relate to his father the
story of his campaign, describe to him the brilliant exploits of the
great Duke, whom he had seen in his most magnificent hours, as only
those who fought by his side had seen him; but with her Grace he did
not dwell upon such things, knowing she would not be the happier for
hearing of them. With her he would walk through the park, sauntering
down the avenue beneath the oak-trees, or over the green sward to visit
the deer, who knew the sound of her sweet voice, it seemed, and hearing
it as she approached would lift their delicate heads and come towards
her to be caressed and fed, welcoming her with the dewy lustrousness of
their big timorous dark eyes, even the shyest does and little fawns
nibbling from her fair and gentle hand, and following her softly a few
paces when she turned away. Together she and Roxholm would wander
through all the dear places he had loved in his childish years--into
the rose gardens, which were a riot of beauty and marvellous colours
and the pride and joy of the head gardener, who lived for and among
them, as indeed they were the pride of those who worked under his
command, not a man or boy of them knowing any such pleasure as to see
her Grace walk through their labyrinths of bloom with my lord Marquess,
each of them rejoicing in the loveliness on every side and gathering
the fairest blossoms as they went, until sometimes they carried away
with them rich sheaves of crimson and pink and white and yellow. They
loved the high-walled kitchen garden, too, and often visited it,
spreading delight there among its gardeners by praising its fine
growths, plucking the fruit and gathering nosegays of the old-fashioned
flowers which bordered the beds of sober vegetables--sweet peas and
Canterbury bells, wall-flowers, sweetwilliams, yellow musk, and
pansies, making, her Grace said, the prettiest nosegay in the world.
Then they would loiter through the village and make visits to old men
and women sitting in the sun, to young mothers with babies in their
arms and little mites playing about their feet.

"And you never enter a cottage door, mother," said Roxholm in his young
manhood's pride and joy in her, "but it seems that the sun begins to
shine through the little window, and if there is a caged bird hanging
there it begins to twitter and sing. I cannot find a lady like
you"--bending his knee and kissing her white fingers in gay caress.
"Indeed, if I could I should bring her home to you to Camylott--and old
Rowe might ring his bells until he lost his breath."

"Do you know," she answered, "what your father said to me the first
morning I lay in my bed with you in my arm--old Rowe was ringing the
bells as if he would go wild. I remember the joyful pealing of them as
it floated across the park to come through my open window. We were so
proud and full of happiness, and thought you so beautiful--and you are,
Gerald, yet; so you are yet," with the prettiest smile, "and your
father said of you, 'He will grow to be a noble gentleman and wed a
noble lady; and they will be as we have been--as we have been,
beloved,' and we kissed each other with blissful tears in our eyes, and
you moved in my arm, and there was a tiny, new-born smile on your
little face."

"Dear one!" he said, kissing her hand more gravely; "dear one, God
grant such sweetness may come to me--for indeed I want to love some
woman dearly," and the warm blood mounted to his cheek.

Often in their tender confidences they spoke of this fair one who was
to crown his happy life, and one day, having returned from a brief
visit in another county, as they sat together in the evening she broke
forth with a little sigh in her sweet voice.

"Ah, Gerald," she said, "I saw in Gloucestershire the loveliest strange
creature--so lovely and so strange that she gave me an ache in the
heart."

"And why, sweet one?" he asked.

"Because I think she must be the most splendid beauteous thing in all
the world--and she has been so ill used by Fate. How could the poor
child save herself from ill? Her mother died when she was born; her
father is a wicked blasphemous rioter. He has so brought her up that
she has known no woman all her life, but has been his pastime and toy.
From her babyhood she has been taught naught but evil. She is so strong
and beautiful and wild that she is the talk of all the country. But,
ah, Gerald, the look in her great eyes--her red young mouth--her
wonderfulness! My heart stood still to see her. She hurt me so."

My lord Marquess looked down upon the floor and his brow knit itself.

"'Twould hurt any tender soul to see her," he said. "I am but a
man--and I think 'twas rage I felt--that such a thing should be cast to
ravening wolves."

"You," she cried, as if half alarmed; "you have seen her?"

"'Tis the beauty of Wildairs you speak of surely," he answered; "and I
have seen her once--and heard of her often."

"Oh, Gerald," said her Grace, "'tis cruel. If she had had a mother--if
God had but been good to her--" she put her hand up to her mouth to
check herself, in innocent dread of that her words implied. "Nay, nay,"
she said, "if I would be a pious woman I must not dare to say such
things. But oh! dearest one--if life had been fair to her, she--_She_
is the one you might have loved and who would have worshipped such a
man. It might have been--it might have been."

His colour died away and left him pale--he felt it with a sudden sense
of shock.

"It was not," he said, hurriedly. "It was not--and she is but
fourteen--and our lives lie far apart. I shall be in the field, or at
the French or Spanish Courts. And were I on English soil I--I would
keep away."

His mother turned pale also. Being his mother she felt with him the
beating of his blood--and his face had a strange look which she had
never seen before. She rose and went to him.

"Yes, yes, you are right," she exclaimed. "You could not--she could
not--! And 'twould be best to keep away--to keep away. For if you loved
her, 'twould drive you mad, and make you forget what you must be."

He tried to smile, succeeding but poorly.

"She makes us say strange things--even so far distant," he said.
"Perhaps you are right. Yes, I will keep away."

And even while he said it he was aware of a strange tumult in him, and
knew that, senseless as it might appear, a new thing had sprung to life
in him as if a flame had been lighted. And even in its first small
leaping he feared it.


'Twas a week later their Graces set forth upon their journey, and
though Roxholm rode with them to Dover, and saw them aboard the packet,
he always felt in after years that 'twas in the Long Gallery his mother
had bidden him farewell.

They stood at the deep window at the end which faced the west and
watched a glowing sunset of great splendour. Never had the earth spread
before them seemed more beautiful, or Heaven's self more near. All the
west was piled with heaps of stately golden cloud--great and high
clouds, which were like the mountains of the Delectable Land, and
filled one with awe whose eyes were lifted to their glories. And all
the fair land was flooded with their gold. Her Grace looked out to the
edge where moor and sky seemed one, and her violet eyes shone to
radiance.

"It is the loveliest place in all the world," she said. "It has been
the loveliest home--and I the happiest woman. There has not been an
hour I would not live again."

She turned and lifted her eyes to his face and put one hand on his
broad breast. "And you, Gerald," she said; "you have been happy. Tell
me you have been happy, too."

"For twenty-eight years," he said, and folded his hand over hers. "For
twenty-eight years."

She bent her face against his breast and kissed the hand closed over
her own.

"Yes--yes; you have been happy," she said. "You have said it often; but
before I went away I wanted to hear you say it once again," and as she
gazed up smiling, a last ray from the sinking sun shot through the
window and made a halo about her deep gold hair.




_CHAPTER XII_

_In Which is Sold a Portrait_


There are sure more forces in this Universe than Man has so far
discovered, and so, not dreaming of them, can neither protect himself
against, nor aid them in their workings if he would. Who has not
sometimes fancied he saw their mysterious movings and--if of daring
mind--been tempted to believe that in some future, even on this earth,
the science of their laws might be sought for and explained? Who has
not seen the time when his own life, or that of some other, seemed to
flow, as a current flows, either towards or away from some end, planned
or unplanned by his own mind. At one time he may plan and struggle,
and, in spite of all his efforts, the current sweeps him away from the
object he strives to attain--as though he were a mere feather floating
upon its stream; at another, the tide bears him onward as a boat is
borne by the rapids, towards a thing he had not dreamed of, nor even
vaguely wished to reach. At such hours, resistance seems useless. We
seize an oar, it breaks in the flood; we snatch at an overhanging
bough, it snaps or slips our grasp; we utter cries for help, those on
the bank pass by not hearing, or cast to us a rope the current bears
out of reach. Then we cry "Fate!" and either wring our hands, or curse,
or sit and gaze straight before us, while we are swept on--either over
the cataract's edge and dashed to fragments, or out to the trackless
ocean, to be tossed by wind and wave till some bark sees and saves
us--or we sink.

From the time of his mother's speech with him after her return from
Gloucestershire, thoughts such as these passed often through Roxholm's
mind. "It might have been; it might have been," she had said, and the
curious leap of blood and pulse he had felt had vaguely shocked him. It
scarcely seemed becoming that so young a creature as this lovely hoyden
should so move a man. 'Twas the fashion that girl beauties should be
women early, and at Court he had seen young things, wives and mothers
when they were scarce older; but this one seemed more than half a boy
and--and--! Yet he knew that he had been in earnest when he had said,
"I would keep away."

"I _know_," he had said to himself when he had been alone later; "I
_know_ that if the creature were a woman, 'twould be best that I should
keep away--'twould be best for any man to keep away from her, who was
not free to bear any suffering his passion for her might bring him. The
man who will be chief of a great house--whose actions affect the lives
of hundreds--is not free, even to let himself be put to the
torture"--and he smiled unconsciously the smile which was a little
grim.

He had seen and studied many women, and in studying them had learned to
know much of himself. He had not been so unconscious of them as he had
seemed. Such a man must meet with adventures at any time, and at a
period still tainted by the freedom of a dissolute reign, even though
'tis near twenty years past, his life, in his own despite, must contain
incidents which would reveal much to the world, if related to it.
Roxholm had met with such adventures, little as they were to his taste,
and had found at both foreign and English Courts that all women were
not non-attacking creatures, and in discovering this had learned that a
man must be a stone to resist the luring of some lovely eyes.

"I need not think myself invulnerable," he had thought often. "I can
resist because I have loved none of them. Had it chanced otherwise--God
have mercy on my soul!"

And now the current of his life for weeks seemed strangely set towards
one being. When he returned to London after seeing his parents depart
for Italy, he met in his first walk in the city streets his erst
fellow-collegian and officer, Lieutenant Thomas Tantillion, in England
on leave, who almost hallooed with joy at sight of him, shaking him by
the hand as if his arm had been a pump-handle, and then thrusting his
own arm through it, and insisting affectionately on dragging him along
the street that he might pour forth his renewed protestations of
affection and the story of his adventures.

"Never was I more glad to see a man," he said. "I'm damned if we
scapegraces have not missed thy good-looking face. Thou art a fine
fellow, Roxholm--and good-natured--ay, and modest, too--for all thy
beauty and learning. Many a man, with half thou hast, would wear grand
Court airs to a rattle-pated rascal like Tom Tantillion. Wilford does
it--and he is but a Viscount, and for all his straight nose and fine
eyes but five feet ten. Good Lord! he looks down on us who did not pass
well at the University, like a cock on a dunghill."
