  And keep ye vigilant guard. At early dawn                      440
  We will dispatch Idaeus to the fleet,
  Who shall inform the Atridae of this last
  Resolve of Paris, author of the war.
  Discreet Idaeus also shall propose
  A respite (if the Atridae so incline)                           445
  From war's dread clamor, while we burn the dead.
  Then will we clash again, till heaven at length
  Shall part us, and the doubtful strife decide.
    He ceased, whose voice the assembly pleased, obey'd.
  Then, troop by troop, the army took repast,                    450
  And at the dawn Idaeus sought the fleet.
  He found the Danai, servants of Mars,
  Beside the stern of Agamemnon's ship
  Consulting; and amid the assembled Chiefs
  Arrived, with utterance clear them thus address'd.             455
    Ye sons of Atreus, and ye Chiefs, the flower
  Of all Achaia! Priam and the Chiefs
  Of Ilium, bade me to your ear impart
  (If chance such embassy might please your ear)
  The mind of Paris, author of the war.                          460
  The treasures which on board his ships he brought
  From Argos home (oh, had he perish'd first!)
  He yields them with addition from his own.
  Not so the consort of the glorious prince
  Brave Menelaus; her (although in Troy                          465
  All counsel otherwise) he still detains.
  Thus too I have in charge. Are ye inclined
  That the dread sounding clamors of the field
  Be caused to cease till we shall burn the dead?
  Then will we clash again, 'till heaven at length               470
  Shall part us, and the doubtful strife decide.
    So spake Idaeus, and all silent sat;
  Till at the last brave Diomede replied.
    No. We will none of Paris' treasures now,
  Nor even Helen's self. A child may see                         475
  Destruction winging swift her course to Troy.
    He said. The admiring Greeks with loud applause
  All praised the speech of warlike Diomede,
  And answer thus the King of men return'd.
    Idaeus! thou hast witness'd the resolve                       480
  Of the Achaian Chiefs, whose choice is mine.
  But for the slain, I shall not envy them
  A funeral pile; the spirit fled, delay
  Suits not. Last rites can not too soon be paid.
  Burn them. And let high-thundering Jove attest                 485
  Himself mine oath, that war shall cease the while.
    So saying, he to all the Gods upraised
  His sceptre, and Idaeus homeward sped
  To sacred Ilium. The Dardanians there
  And Trojans, all assembled, his return                         490
  Expected anxious. He amid them told
  Distinct his errand, when, at once dissolved,
  The whole assembly rose, these to collect
  The scatter'd bodies, those to gather wood;
  While on the other side, the Greeks arose                      495
  As sudden, and all issuing from the fleet
  Sought fuel, some, and some, the scatter'd dead.
    Now from the gently-swelling flood profound
  The sun arising, with his earliest rays
  In his ascent to heaven smote on the fields.                   500
  When Greeks and Trojans met. Scarce could the slain
  Be clear distinguish'd, but they cleansed from each
  His clotted gore with water, and warm tears
  Distilling copious, heaved them to the wains.
  But wailing none was heard, for such command                   505
  Had Priam issued; therefore heaping high
  The bodies, silent and with sorrowing hearts
  They burn'd them, and to sacred Troy return'd.
  The Grecians also, on the funeral pile
  The bodies heaping sad, burn'd them with fire                  510
  Together, and return'd into the fleet.
  Then, ere the peep of dawn, and while the veil
  Of night, though thinner, still o'erhung the earth,
  Achaians, chosen from the rest, the pile
  Encompass'd. With a tomb (one tomb for all)                    515
  They crown'd the spot adust, and to the tomb
  (For safety of their fleet and of themselves)
  Strong fortress added of high wall and tower,
  With solid gates affording egress thence
  Commodious to the mounted charioteer;                          520
  Deep foss and broad they also dug without,
  And planted it with piles. So toil'd the Greeks.
    The Gods, that mighty labor, from beside
  The Thunderer's throne with admiration view'd,
  When Neptune, shaker of the shores, began.                     525
    Eternal father! is there on the face
  Of all the boundless earth one mortal man
  Who will, in times to come, consult with heaven?
  See'st thou yon height of wall, and yon deep trench
  With which the Grecians have their fleet inclosed,             530
  And, careless of our blessing, hecatomb
  Or invocation have presented none?
  Far as the day-spring shoots herself abroad,
  So far the glory of this work shall spread,
  While Phoebus and myself, who, toiling hard,                   535
  Built walls for king Laomedon, shall see
  Forgotten all the labor of our hands.
    To whom, indignant, thus high-thundering Jove.
  Oh thou, who shakest the solid earth at will,
  What hast thou spoken? An inferior power,                      540
  A god of less sufficiency than thou,
  Might be allowed some fear from such a cause.
  Fear not. Where'er the morning shoots her beams,
  Thy glory shall be known; and when the Greeks
  Shall seek their country through the waves again,              545
  Then break this bulwark down, submerge it whole,
  And spreading deep with sand the spacious shore
  As at the first, leave not a trace behind.
    Such conference held the Gods; and now the sun
  Went down, and, that great work perform'd, the Greeks          550
  From tent to tent slaughter'd the fatted ox
  And ate their evening cheer. Meantime arrived
  Large fleet with Lemnian wine; Euneus, son
  Of Jason and Hypsipile, that fleet
  From Lemnos freighted, and had stow'd on board                 555
  A thousand measures from the rest apart
  For the Atridae; but the host at large
  By traffic were supplied; some barter'd brass,
  Others bright steel; some purchased wine with hides,
  These with their cattle, with their captives those,            560
  And the whole host prepared a glad regale.
  All night the Grecians feasted, and the host
  Of Ilium, and all night deep-planning Jove
  Portended dire calamities to both,
  Thundering tremendous!--Pale was every cheek;                  565
  Each pour'd his goblet on the ground, nor dared
  The hardiest drink, 'till he had first perform'd
  Libation meet to the Saturnian King
  Omnipotent; then, all retiring, sought
  Their couches, and partook the gift of sleep.                  570




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK VIII.




                     ARGUMENT OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.


Jove calls a council, in which he forbids all interference of the Gods
between the Greeks and Trojans. He repairs to Ida, where, having
consulted the scales of destiny, he directs his lightning against the
Grecians. Nestor is endangered by the death of one of his horses.
Diomede delivers him. In the chariot of Diomede they both hasten to
engage Hector, whose charioteer is slain by Diomede. Jupiter again
interposes by his thunders, and the whole Grecian host, discomfited,
is obliged to seek refuge within the rampart. Diomede, with others, at
sight of a favorable omen sent from Jove in answer to Agamemnon's
prayer, sallies. Teucer performs great exploits, but is disabled by
Hector. Juno and Pallas set forth from Olympus in aid of the Grecians,
but are stopped by Jupiter, who reascends from Ida, and in heaven
foretells the distresses which await the Grecians.

Hector takes measures for the security of Troy during the night, and
prepares his host for an assault to be made on the Grecian camp in the
morning.




                              BOOK VIII.


  The saffron-mantled morning[1] now was spread
  O'er all the nations, when the Thunderer Jove
  On the deep-fork'd Olympian topmost height
  Convened the Gods in council, amid whom
  He spake himself; they all attentive heard.                      5
    Gods! Goddesses! Inhabitants of heaven!
  Attend; I make my secret purpose known.
  Let neither God nor Goddess interpose
  My counsel to rescind, but with one heart
  Approve it, that it reach, at once, its end.                    10
  Whom I shall mark soever from the rest
  Withdrawn, that he may Greeks or Trojans aid,
  Disgrace shall find him; shamefully chastised
  He shall return to the Olympian heights,
  Or I will hurl him deep into the gulfs                          15
  Of gloomy Tartarus, where Hell shuts fast
  Her iron gates, and spreads her brazen floor,
  As far below the shades, as earth from heaven.
  There shall he learn how far I pass in might
  All others; which if ye incline to doubt,                       20
  Now prove me. Let ye down the golden chain[2]
  From heaven, and at its nether links pull all,
  Both Goddesses and Gods. But me your King,
  Supreme in wisdom, ye shall never draw
  To earth from heaven, toil adverse as ye may.                   25
  Yet I, when once I shall be pleased to pull,
  The earth itself, itself the sea, and you
  Will lift with ease together, and will wind
  The chain around the spiry summit sharp
  Of the Olympian, that all things upheaved                       30
  Shall hang in the mid heaven. So far do I,
  Compared with all who live, transcend them all.
    He ended, and the Gods long time amazed
  Sat silent, for with awful tone he spake:
  But at the last Pallas blue-eyed began.                         35
    Father! Saturnian Jove! of Kings supreme!
  We know thy force resistless; but our hearts
  Feel not the less, when we behold the Greeks
  Exhausting all the sorrows of their lot.
  If thou command, we, doubtless, will abstain                    40
  From battle, yet such counsel to the Greeks
  Suggesting still, as may in part effect
  Their safety, lest thy wrath consume them all.
    To whom with smiles answer'd cloud-gatherer Jove.
  Fear not, my child! stern as mine accent was,                   45
  I forced a frown--no more. For in mine heart
  Nought feel I but benevolence to thee.
    He said, and to his chariot join'd his steeds
  Swift, brazen-hoof'd, and mailed with wavy gold;
  He put on golden raiment, his bright scourge                    50
  Of gold receiving rose into his seat,
  And lash'd his steeds; they not unwilling flew
  Midway the earth between and starry heaven.
  To spring-fed Ida, mother of wild beasts,
  He came, where stands in Gargarus[3] his shrine                 55
  Breathing fresh incense! there the Sire of all
  Arriving, loosed his coursers, and around
  Involving them in gather'd clouds opaque,
  Sat on the mountain's head, in his own might
  Exulting, with the towers of Ilium all                          60
  Beneath his eye, and the whole fleet of Greece.
    In all their tents, meantime, Achaia's sons
  Took short refreshment, and for fight prepared.
  On the other side, though fewer, yet constrain'd
  By strong necessity, throughout all Troy,                       65
  In the defence of children and wives
  Ardent, the Trojans panted for the field.
  Wide flew the city gates: forth rush'd to war
  Horsemen and foot, and tumult wild arose.
  They met, they clash'd; loud was the din of spears              70
  And bucklers on their bosoms brazen-mail'd
  Encountering, shields in opposition from
  Met bossy shields, and tumult wild arose.[4]
    There many a shout and many a dying groan
  Were heard, the slayer and the maim'd aloud                     75
  Clamoring, and the earth was drench'd with blood.
  'Till sacred morn[5] had brighten'd into noon,
  The vollied weapons on both sides their task
  Perform'd effectual, and the people fell.
  But when the sun had climb'd the middle skies,                  80
  The Sire of all then took his golden scales;[6]
  Doom against doom he weigh'd, the eternal fates
  In counterpoise, of Trojans and of Greeks.
  He rais'd the beam; low sank the heavier lot
  Of the Achaians; the Achaian doom                               85
  Subsided, and the Trojan struck the skies.
    Then roar'd the thunders from the summit hurl'd
  of Ida, and his vivid lightnings flew
  Into Achaia's host. They at the sight
  Astonish'd stood; fear whiten'd every cheek.[7]                 90
  Idomeneus dared not himself abide
  That shock, nor Agamemnon stood, nor stood
  The heroes Ajax, ministers of Mars.
  Gerenian Nestor, guardian of the Greeks,
  Alone fled not, nor he by choice remain'd,                      95
  But by his steed retarded, which the mate
  Of beauteous Helen, Paris, with a shaft
  Had stricken where the forelock grows, a part
  Of all most mortal. Tortured by the wound
  Erect he rose, the arrow in his brain,                         100
  And writhing furious, scared his fellow-steeds.
  Meantime, while, strenuous, with his falchion's edge
  The hoary warrior stood slashing the reins,
  Through multitudes of fierce pursuers borne
  On rapid wheels, the dauntless charioteer                      105
  Approach'd him, Hector. Then, past hope, had died
  The ancient King, but Diomede discern'd
  His peril imminent, and with a voice
  Like thunder, called Ulysses to his aid.
    Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!                      110
  Art thou too fugitive, and turn'st thy back
  Like the base multitude? Ah! fear a lance
  Implanted ignominious in thy spine.
  Stop--Nestor dies. Fell Hector is at hand.
    So shouted Diomede, whose summons loud,                      115
  Ulysses yet heard not, but, passing, flew
  With headlong haste to the Achaian fleet.
  Then, Diomede, unaided as he was,
  Rush'd ardent to the vanward, and before
  The steeds of the Neleian sovereign old                        120
  Standing, in accents wing'd, him thus address'd.
    Old Chief! these youthful warriors are too brisk
  For thee, press'd also by encroaching age,
  Thy servant too is feeble, and thy steeds
  Are tardy. Mount my chariot. Thou shalt see                    125
  With what rapidity the steeds of Troy,
  Pursuing or retreating, scour the field.
  I took them from that terror of his foes,
  AEneas. Thine to our attendants leave,
  While these against the warlike powers of Troy                 130
  We push direct; that Hector's self may know
  If my spear rage not furious as his own.
    He said, nor the Gerenian Chief refused.
  Thenceforth their servants, Sthenelus and good
  Eurymedon, took charge of Nestor's steeds,                     135
  And they the chariot of Tydides both
  Ascended; Nestor seized the reins, plied well
  The scourge, and soon they met. Tydides hurl'd
  At Hector first, while rapid he advanced;
  But missing Hector, wounded in the breast                      140
  Eniopeus his charioteer, the son
  Of brave Thebaeus, managing the steeds.
  He fell; his fiery coursers at the sound
  Startled, recoil'd, and where he fell he died.
  Deep sorrow for his charioteer o'erwhelm'd                     145
  The mind of Hector; yet, although he mourn'd
  He left him, and another sought as brave.
  Nor wanted long his steeds a charioteer,
  For finding soon the son of Iphitus,
  Bold Archeptolemus, he bade him mount                          150
  His chariot, and the reins gave to his hand.
  Then deeds of bloodiest note should have ensued,
  Penn'd had the Trojans been, as lambs, in Troy,
  But for quick succor of the sire of all.
  Thundering, he downward hurled his candent bolt                155
  To the horse-feet of Diomede; dire fumed
  The flaming sulphur, and both horses drove
  Under the axle, belly to the ground.
  Forth flew the splendid reins from Nestor's hand,
  And thus to Diomede, appall'd, he spake.                       160
    Back to the fleet, Tydides! Can'st not see
  That Jove ordains not, now, the victory thine?
  The son of Saturn glorifies to-day
  This Trojan, and, if such his will, can make
  The morrow ours; but vain it is to thwart                      165
  The mind of Jove, for he is Lord of all.
    To him the valiant Diomede replied.
  Thou hast well said, old warrior! but the pang
  That wrings my soul, is this. The public ear
  In Ilium shall from Hector's lips be told--                    170
  I drove Tydides--fearing me he fled.
  So shall he vaunt, and may the earth her jaws
  That moment opening swallow me alive!
    Him answer'd the Gerenian warrior old.
  What saith the son of Tydeus, glorious Chief?                  175
  Should Hector so traduce thee as to call
  Thee base and timid, neither Trojan him
  Nor Dardan would believe, nor yet the wives
  Of numerous shielded warriors brave of Troy,
  Widow'd by thy unconquerable arm.                              180
    So saying, he through the fugitives his steeds
  Turn'd swift to flight. Then Hector and his host
  With clamor infinite their darts wo-wing'd
  Shower'd after them, and Hector, mighty Chief
  Majestic, from afar, thus call'd aloud.                        185
    Tydides! thee the Danai swift-horsed
  Were wont to grace with a superior seat,
  The mess of honor, and the brimming cup,
  But now will mock thee. Thou art woman now.
  Go, timorous girl! Thou never shalt behold                     190
  Me flying, climb our battlements, or lead
  Our women captive. I will slay thee first.
    He ceased. Then Diomede in dread suspense
  Thrice purposed, turning, to withstand the foe,
  And thrice in thunder from the mountain-top                    195
  Jove gave the signal of success to Troy.
  When Hector thus the Trojans hail'd aloud.
    Trojans and Lycians, and close-warring sons
  Of Dardanus, oh summon all your might,
  Now, now be men! I know that from his heart                    200
  Saturnian Jove glory and bright success
  For me prepares, but havoc for the Greeks.
  Fools! they shall find this wall which they have raised
  Too weak to check my course, a feeble guard
  Contemptible; such also is the trench;                         205
  My steeds shall slight it with an easy leap.
  But when ye see me in their fleet arrived,
  Remember fire. Then bring me flaming brands
  That I may burn their galleys and themselves
  Slaughter beside them, struggling in the smoke.[8]             210
    He spake, and thus encouraged next his steeds.
  Xanthus! Podargus! and ye generous pair
  AEthon and glossy Lampus! now requite
  Mine, and the bounty of Andromache,
  Far-famed Eetion's daughter; she your bowl                     215
  With corn fresh-flavor'd and with wine full oft
  Hath mingled, your refreshment seeking first
  Ere mine, who have a youthful husband's claim.[9]
  Now follow! now be swift; that we may seize
  The shield of Nestor, bruited to the skies                     220
  As golden all, trappings and disk alike.
  Now from the shoulders of the equestrian Chief
  Tydides tear we off his splendid mail,
  The work of Vulcan.[10] May we take but these,
  I have good hope that, ere this night be spent,                225
  The Greeks shall climb their galleys and away.
    So vaunted he, but Juno with disdain
  His proud boast heard, and shuddering in her throne,
  Rock'd the Olympian; turning then toward
  The Ocean's mighty sovereign, thus she spake.                  230
    Alas! earth-shaking sovereign of the waves,
  Feel'st thou no pity of the perishing Greeks?
  Yet Greece, in Helice, with gifts nor few
  Nor sordid, and in AEgae, honors thee,
  Whom therefore thou shouldst prosper. Would we all             235
  Who favor Greece associate to repulse
  The Trojans, and to check loud-thundering Jove,
  On Ida seated he might lour alone.
    To whom the Sovereign, Shaker of the Shores,
  Indignant. Juno! rash in speech! what word                     240
  Hath 'scaped thy lips? never, with my consent,
  Shall we, the powers subordinate, in arms
  With Jove contend. He far excels us all.
    So they. Meantime, the trench and wall between,[11]
  The narrow interval with steeds was fill'd                     245
  Close throng'd and shielded warriors. There immew'd
  By Priameian Hector, fierce as Mars,
  They stood, for Hector had the help of Jove.
  And now with blazing fire their gallant barks
  He had consumed, but Juno moved the mind                       250
  Of Agamemnon, vigilant himself,
  To exhortation of Achaia's host.
  Through camp and fleet the monarch took his way,
  And, his wide robe imperial in his hand,
  High on Ulysses' huge black galley stood,                      255
  The central ship conspicuous; thence his voice
  Might reach the most remote of all the line
  At each extreme, where Ajax had his tent
  Pitch'd, and Achilles, fearless of surprise.
  Thence, with loud voice, the Grecians thus he hail'd.          260
    Oh shame to Greece! Warriors in show alone!
  Where is your boasted prowess? Ye profess'd
  Vain-glorious erst in Lemnos, while ye fed
  Plenteously on the flesh of beeves full-grown,
  And crown'd your beakers high, that ye would face              265
  Each man a hundred Trojans in the field--
  Ay, twice a hundred--yet are all too few
  To face one Hector now; nor doubt I aught
  But he shall soon fire the whole fleet of Greece.
  Jove! Father! what great sovereign ever felt                   270
  Thy frowns as I? Whom hast thou shamed as me?
  Yet I neglected not, through all the course
  Of our disasterous voyage (in the hope
  That we should vanquish Troy) thy sacred rites,
  But where I found thine altar, piled it high                   275
  With fat and flesh of bulls, on every shore.
  But oh, vouchsafe to us, that we at least
  Ourselves, deliver'd, may escape the sword,
  Nor let their foes thus tread the Grecians down!
    He said. The eternal father pitying saw                      280
  His tears, and for the monarch's sake preserved
  The people. Instant, surest of all signs,
  He sent his eagle; in his pounces strong
  A fawn he bore, fruit of the nimble hind,
  Which fast beside the beauteous altar raised                   285
  To Panomphaean[12] Jove sudden he dropp'd.[13]
    They, conscious, soon, that sent from Jove he came,
  More ardent sprang to fight. Then none of all
  Those numerous Chiefs could boast that he outstripp'd
  Tydides, urging forth beyond the foss                          290
  His rapid steeds, and rushing to the war.
  He, foremost far, a Trojan slew, the son
  Of Phradmon, Agelaeus; as he turn'd
  His steeds to flight, him turning with his spear
  Through back and bosom Diomede transpierced.                   295
  And with loud clangor of his arms he fell.
  Then, royal Agamemnon pass'd the trench
  And Menelaus; either Ajax, then,
  Clad with fresh prowess both; them follow'd, next,
  Idomeneus, with his heroic friend                              300
  In battle dread as homicidal Mars,
  Meriones; Evaemon's son renown'd
  Succeeded, bold Eurypylus; and ninth
  Teucer, wide-straining his impatient bow.
  He under covert fought of the broad shield                     305
  Of Telamonian Ajax; Ajax high
  Upraised his shield; the hero from beneath
  Took aim, and whom his arrow struck, he fell;
  Then close as to his mother's side a child
  For safety creeps, Teucer to Ajax' side                        310
  Retired, and Ajax shielded him again.
  Whom then slew Teucer first, illustrious Chief?
  Orsilochus, and Ophelestes, first,
  And Ormenus he slew, then Daetor died,
  Chromius and Lycophontes brave in fight                        315
  With Amopaon Polyaemon's son,
  And Melanippus. These, together heap'd,
  All fell by Teucer on the plain of Troy.
  The Trojan ranks thinn'd by his mighty bow
  The King of armies Agamemnon saw                               320
  Well-pleased, and him approaching, thus began.
    Brave Telamonian Teucer, oh, my friend,
  Thus shoot, that light may visit once again
  The Danai, and Telamon rejoice!
  Thee Telamon within his own abode                              325
  Rear'd although spurious; mount him, in return,
  Although remote, on glory's heights again.
  I tell thee, and the effect shall follow sure,
  Let but the Thunderer and Minerva grant
  The pillage of fair Ilium to the Greeks,                       330
  And I will give to thy victorious hand,
  After my own, the noblest recompense,
  A tripod or a chariot with its steeds,
  Or some fair captive to partake thy bed.
    To whom the generous Teucer thus replied.                    335
  Atrides! glorious monarch! wherefore me
  Exhortest thou to battle? who myself
  Glow with sufficient ardor, and such strength
  As heaven affords me spare not to employ.
  Since first we drove them back, with watchful eye              340
  Their warriors I have mark'd; eight shafts my bow
  Hath sent long-barb'd, and every shaft, well-aim'd.
  The body of some Trojan youth robust
  Hath pierced, but still you ravening wolf escapes.
    He said, and from the nerve another shaft                    345
  Impatient sent at Hector; but it flew
  Devious, and brave Gorgythion struck instead.
  Him beautiful Castianira, brought
  By Priam from AEsyma, nymph of form
  Celestial, to the King of Ilium bore.                          350
  As in the garden, with the weight surcharged
  Of its own fruit, and drench'd by vernal rains
  The poppy falls oblique, so he his head
  Hung languid, by his helmet's weight depress'd.[14]
  Then Teucer yet an arrow from the nerve                        355
  Dispatch'd at Hector, with impatience fired
  To pierce him; but again his weapon err'd
  Turn'd by Apollo, and the bosom struck
  Of Archeptolemus, his rapid steeds
  To battle urging, Hector's charioteer.                         360
  He fell, his fiery coursers at the sound
  Recoil'd, and lifeless where he fell he lay.
  Deep sorrow for his charioteer the mind
  O'erwhelm'd of Hector, yet he left the slain,
  And seeing his own brother nigh at hand,                       365
  Cebriones, him summon'd to the reins,
  Who with alacrity that charge received.
  Then Hector, leaping with a dreadful shout
  From his resplendent chariot, grasp'd a stone,
  And rush'd on Teucer, vengeance in his heart.                  370
  Teucer had newly fitted to the nerve
  An arrow keen selected from the rest,
  And warlike Hector, while he stood the cord
  Retracting, smote him with that rugged rock
  Just where the key-bone interposed divides                     375
  The neck and bosom, a most mortal part.
  It snapp'd the bow-string, and with numbing force
  Struck dead his hand; low on his knees he dropp'd,
  And from his opening grasp let fall the bow.
  Then not unmindful of a brother fallen                         380
  Was Ajax, but, advancing rapid, stalk'd
  Around him, and his broad shield interposed,
  Till brave Alaster and Mecisteus, son
  Of Echius, friends of Teucer, from the earth
  Upraised and bore him groaning to the fleet.                   385
  And now again fresh force Olympian Jove
  Gave to the Trojans; right toward the foss
  They drove the Greeks, while Hector in the van
  Advanced, death menacing in every look.
    As some fleet hound close-threatening flank or haunch        390
  Of boar or lion, oft as he his head
  Turns flying, marks him with a steadfast eye,
  So Hector chased the Grecians, slaying still
  The hindmost of the scatter'd multitude.
  But when, at length, both piles and hollow foss                395
  They had surmounted, and no few had fallen
  By Trojan hands, within their fleet they stood
  Imprison'd, calling each to each, and prayer
  With lifted hands, loud offering to the Gods.
  With Gorgon looks, meantime, and eyes of Mars,                 400
  Hector impetuous his mane-tossing steeds
  From side to side before the rampart drove,
  When white-arm'd Juno pitying the Greeks,
  In accents wing'd her speech to Pallas turn'd.
    Alas, Jove's daughter! shall not we at least                 405
  In this extremity of their distress
  Care for the Grecians by the fatal force
  Of this one Chief destroy'd? I can endure
  The rage of Priameian Hector now
  No longer; such dire mischiefs he hath wrought.                410
    Whom answer'd thus Pallas, caerulean-eyed.
  --And Hector had himself long since his life
  Resign'd and rage together, by the Greeks
  Slain under Ilium's walls, but Jove, my sire,
  Mad counsels executing and perverse,                           415
  Me counterworks in all that I attempt,
  Nor aught remembers how I saved ofttimes
  His son enjoin'd full many a task severe
  By King Eurystheus; to the Gods he wept,
  And me Jove sent in haste to his relief.                       420
  But had I then foreseen what now I know,
  When through the adamantine gates he pass'd
  To bind the dog of hell, by the deep floods
  Hemm'd in of Styx, he had return'd no more.
  But Thetis wins him now; her will prevails,                    425
  And mine he hates; for she hath kiss'd his knees
  And grasp'd his beard, and him in prayer implored
  That he would honor her heroic son
  Achilles, city-waster prince renown'd.
  'Tis well--the day shall come when Jove again                  430
  Shall call me darling, and his blue-eyed maid
  As heretofore;--but thou thy steeds prepare,
  While I, my father's mansion entering, arm
  For battle. I would learn by trial sure,
  If Hector, Priam's offspring famed in fight                    435
  (Ourselves appearing in the walks of war)
  Will greet us gladly. Doubtless at the fleet
  Some Trojan also, shall to dogs resign
  His flesh for food, and to the fowls of heaven.
    So counsell'd Pallas, nor the daughter dread                 440
  Of mighty Saturn, Juno, disapproved,
  But busily and with dispatch prepared
  The trappings of her coursers golden-rein'd.
  Meantime, Minerva progeny of Jove,
  On the adamantine floor of his abode                           445
  Let fall profuse her variegated robe,
  Labor of her own hands. She first put on
  The corslet of the cloud-assembler God,
  Then arm'd her for the field of wo, complete.
  Mounting the fiery chariot, next she seized                    450
  Her ponderous spear, huge, irresistible,
  With which Jove's awful daughter levels ranks
  Of heroes against whom her anger burns.
  Juno with lifted lash urged on the steeds.
  At their approach, spontaneous roar'd the wide-                455
  Unfolding gates of heaven; the heavenly gates
  Kept by the watchful Hours, to whom the charge
  Of the Olympian summit appertains,
  And of the boundless ether, back to roll,
  And to replace the cloudy barrier dense.                       460
  Spurr'd through the portal flew the rapid steeds:
  Which when the Eternal Father from the heights
  Of Ida saw, kindling with instant ire
  To golden-pinion'd Iris thus he spake.
    Haste, Iris, turn them thither whence they came;             465
  Me let them not encounter; honor small
  To them, to me, should from that strife accrue.
  Tell them, and the effect shall sure ensue,
  That I will smite their steeds, and they shall halt
  Disabled; break their chariot, dash themselves                 470
  Headlong, and ten whole years shall not efface
  The wounds by my avenging bolts impress'd.
  So shall my blue-eyed daughter learn to dread
  A father's anger; but for the offence
  Of Juno, I resent it less; for she                             475
  Clashes[15] with all my counsels from of old.
  He ended; Iris with a tempest's speed
  From the Idaean summit soar'd at once
  To the Olympian; at the open gates
  Exterior of the mountain many-valed                            480
  She stayed them, and her coming thus declared.
    Whither, and for what cause? What rage is this?
  Ye may not aid the Grecians; Jove forbids;
  The son of Saturn threatens, if ye force
  His wrath by perseverance into act,                            485
  That he will smite your steeds, and they shall halt
  Disabled; break your chariot, dash yourselves
  Headlong, and ten whole years shall not efface
  The wounds by his avenging bolts impress'd.
  So shall his blue-eyed daughter learn to dread                 490
  A father's anger; but for the offence
  Of Juno, he resents it less; for she
  Clashes with all his counsels from of old.
  But thou, Minerva, if thou dare indeed
  Lift thy vast spear against the breast of Jove,                495
  Incorrigible art and dead to shame.
    So saying, the rapid Iris disappear'd,
  And thus her speech to Pallas Juno turn'd.
    Ah Pallas, progeny of Jove! henceforth
  No longer, in the cause of mortal men,                         500
  Contend we against Jove. Perish or live
  Grecians or Trojans as he wills; let him
  Dispose the order of his own concerns,
  And judge between them, as of right he may.
    So saying, she turn'd the coursers; them the Hours           505
  Released, and to ambrosial mangers bound,
  Then thrust their chariot to the luminous wall.
  They, mingling with the Gods, on golden thrones
  Dejected sat, and Jove from Ida borne
  Reach'd the Olympian heights, seat of the Gods.                510
  His steeds the glorious King of Ocean loosed,
  And thrust the chariot, with its veil o'erspread.
  Into its station at the altar's side.
  Then sat the Thunderer on his throne of gold
  Himself, and the huge mountain shook. Meantime                 515
  Juno and Pallas, seated both apart,
  Spake not or question'd him. Their mute reserve
  He noticed, conscious of the cause, and said.
    Juno and Pallas, wherefore sit ye sad?
  Not through fatigue by glorious fight incurr'd                 520
  And slaughter of the Trojans whom ye hate.
  Mark now the difference. Not the Gods combined
  Should have constrain'd _me_ back, till all my force,
  Superior as it is, had fail'd, and all
  My fortitude. But ye, ere ye beheld                            525
  The wonders of the field, trembling retired.
  And ye did well--Hear what had else befallen.
  My bolts had found you both, and ye had reach'd,
  In your own chariot borne, the Olympian height,
  Seat of the blest Immortals, never more.                       530
    He ended; Juno and Minerva heard
  Low murmuring deep disgust, and side by side
  Devising sat calamity to Troy.
  Minerva, through displeasure against Jove,
  Nought utter'd, for her bosom boil'd with rage;                535
  But Juno check'd not hers, who thus replied.
    What word hath pass'd thy lips, Jove most severe?
  We know thy force resistless; yet our hearts
  Feel not the less when we behold the Greeks
  Exhausting all the sorrows of their lot.                       540
  If thou command, we doubtless will abstain
  From battle, yet such counsel to the Greeks
  Suggesting still, as may in part effect
  Their safety, lest thy wrath consume them all.
    Then answer, thus, cloud-gatherer Jove return'd.             545
  Look forth, imperial Juno, if thou wilt,
  To-morrow at the blush of earliest dawn,
  And thou shalt see Saturn's almighty son
  The Argive host destroying far and wide.
  For Hector's fury shall admit no pause                         550
  Till he have roused Achilles, in that day
  When at the ships, in perilous straits, the hosts
  Shall wage fierce battle for Patroclus slain.
  Such is the voice of fate. But, as for thee--
  Withdraw thou to the confines of the abyss                     555
  Where Saturn and Iaepetus retired,
  Exclusion sad endure from balmy airs
  And from the light of morn, hell-girt around,
  I will not call thee thence. No. Should thy rage
  Transport thee thither, there thou may'st abide,               560
  There sullen nurse thy disregarded spleen
  Obstinate as thou art, and void of shame.
    He ended; to whom Juno nought replied.
  And now the radiant Sun in Ocean sank,
  Drawing night after him o'er all the earth;                    565
  Night, undesired by Troy, but to the Greeks
  Thrice welcome for its interposing gloom.
    Then Hector on the river's brink fast by
  The Grecian fleet, where space he found unstrew'd
  With carcases convened the Chiefs of Troy.                     570
  They, there dismounting, listen'd to the words
  Of Hector Jove-beloved; he grasp'd a spear
  In length eleven cubits, bright its head
  Of brass, and color'd with a ring of gold.
  He lean'd on it, and ardent thus began.                        575
    Trojans, Dardanians, and allies of Troy!
  I hoped, this evening (every ship consumed,
  And all the Grecians slain) to have return'd
  To wind-swept Ilium. But the shades of night
  Have intervened, and to the night they owe,                    580
  In chief, their whole fleet's safety and their own.
  Now, therefore, as the night enjoins, all take
  Needful refreshment. Your high-mettled steeds
  Release, lay food before them, and in haste
  Drive hither from the city fatted sheep                        585
  And oxen; bring ye from your houses bread,
  Make speedy purchase of heart-cheering wine,
  And gather fuel plenteous; that all night,
  E'en till Aurora, daughter of the morn
  Shall look abroad, we may with many fires                      590
  Illume the skies; lest even in the night,
  Launching, they mount the billows and escape.
  Beware that they depart not unannoy'd,
  But, as he leaps on board, give each a wound
  With shaft or spear, which he shall nurse at home.             595
  So shall the nations fear us, and shall vex
  With ruthless war Troy's gallant sons no more.
  Next, let the heralds, ministers of Jove,
  Loud notice issue that the boys well-grown,
  And ancients silver-hair'd on the high towers                  600
  Built by the Gods, keep watch; on every hearth
  In Troy, let those of the inferior sex
  Make sprightly blaze, and place ye there a guard
  Sufficient, lest in absence of the troops
  An ambush enter, and surprise the town.                        605
  Act thus, ye dauntless Trojans; the advice
  Is wholesome, and shall serve the present need,
  And so much for the night; ye shall be told
  The business of the morn when morn appears.
  It is my prayer to Jove and to all heaven                      610
  (Not without hope) that I may hence expel
  These dogs, whom Ilium's unpropitious fates
  Have wafted hither in their sable barks.
  But we will also watch this night, ourselves,
  And, arming with the dawn, will at their ships                 615
  Give them brisk onset. Then shall it appear
