After the pestilence had subsided, it was impossible to find laborers
enough to till the soil and shear the sheep.  Those who were free now
demanded higher wages, while the villeins, or serfs (S113), and slaves
left their masters and roamed about the country asking for pay for
their work, like freemen.

It was a general agricultural strike, which lasted over thirty years.
It marks the beginning of that contest between capital and labor which
had such an important influence on the next reign, and which, after a
lapse of more than five hundred years, is not yet satisfactorily
adjusted.

Parliament endeavored to restore order.  It passed laws forbidding any
freeman to ask more for a day's work than before the plague.  It gave
the master the right to punish a serf who persisted in running away,
by branding him on the forehead with the letter F, for "fugitive."
But legislation was in vain; the movement had begun, and statutes of
Parliament could no more stop it than they could stop the rolling of
the ocean tide.  It continued to go on until it reached its climax in
the peasant insurrection led by Wat Tyler, under Edward's successor,
Richard II (S251).

246. Beginning of English Literature, 1369-1377.

During Edward's reign the first work in English prose may have been
written.  It was a volume of travels by Sir John Mandeville, who had
journeyed in the East for over thirty years.  On his return he wrote
an account of what he had heard and seen, first in Latin, that the
learned might read it; next in French, that the nobles might read it;
and lastly he, or some unknown person, translated it into English for
the common people.  He dedicated the work to the King.

Perhaps the most interesting and wonderful thing in it was the
statement of his belief that the world is a globe, and that a ship may
sail round it "above and beneath,"--an assertion which probably seemed
to many who read it then as less credible than any of the marvelous
stories in which his book abounds.

William Langland was writing rude verses (1369) about his "vision of
Piers the Plowman," contrasting "the wealth and woe" of the world, and
so helping forward that democratic outbreak which was soon to take
place among those who knew the woe and wanted the wealth.  John
Wycliffe (S254), a lecturer at Oxford, attacked the rich and indolent
churchmen in a series of tracts and sermons, while Chaucer, who had
fought on the fields of France, was preparing to bring forth the first
great poem in our language (S253).

247. The "Good Parliament" (1376); Edward's Death.

The "Good Parliament" (1376) attempted to carry through important
reforms.  It impeached (for the first time in English history)[1]
certain prominent men for fraud (S243).  But in the end its work
failed for want of a leader.  The King's last days were far from
happy.  His son, the Black Prince (S238), had died, and Edward fell
entirely into the hands of selfish favorites and ambitious schemers
like John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.  Perhaps the worst one of this
corrupt "ring" was a woman named Alice Perrers, who, after Queen
Philippa was no more (S240), got almost absolute control of the King.
She stayed with him until his last sickness.  When his eyes began to
glaze in death, she plucked the rings from his unresisting hands, and
fled from the palace.

248. Summary.

During this reign the following events deserve especial notice:

1. The acknowledgment of the independence of Scotland.
2. The establishment of the manufacture of fine woolens in England.
3. The beginning of the Hundred Years' War, with the victories of
Cre'cy and Poitiers, the Peace of Bre'tigny, and their social and
political results in England.
4. The Black Death and its results on labor.
5. Parliament enacts important laws for securing greater independence
to the English Church.
6. The rise of modern literature, represented by the works of
Mandeville, Langland, and the early writings of Wycliffe and Chaucer.

Richard II--1377-1399

249. England at Richard's Accession.

The death of the Black Prince (SS238, 241, 247) left his son Richard
heir to the crown.  As he was but eleven years old, Parliament
provided that the government during his minority should be carried on
by a council; but John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster (S247), speedily
got the control of affairs.

He was an unprincipled man, who wasted the nation's money, opposed
reform, and was especially hated by the laboring classes.  The times
were critical.  War had again broken out with both Scotland and
France, the French fleet was raiding the English coast, the national
treasury had no money to pay its troops, and the government debt was
rapidly accumulating.

250. The New Tax; the Tyler and Ball Insurrection (1381).

In order to raise money, the government resolved to levy a new form of
tax,--a poll or head tax,--which had been tried on a small scale
during the last year of the previous reign.  The apttempt had been
made to assess it on all classes, from laborers to lords.

The imposition was now renewed in a much more oppressive form.  Not
only every laborer, but every member of a laborer's family above the
age of fifteen, was required to pay what twould be eequal to the wages
of an able-bodied man for at least several days' work.[1]

[1] The tax on laborers and their families varied from four to twelve
pence each, the assessor having instructions to collect the latter
sum, if possible.  The wages of a day laborer were then about a penny,
so that the smallest tax for a family of three would represent the
entire pay for nearly a fortnight's labor.  See Pearson's "England in
the Fourteenth Century."

We have already seen that, owing to the ravages of the Black Death,
and the strikes which followed, the country was on the verge of revolt
(SS244, 245).  This new tax was the spark that caused the explosion.
The money was roughly demanded in every poor man's cottage, and its
collection caused the greatest distress.  In attempting to enforce
payment, a brutal collector shamefully insulted the young daughter of
a workman named Wat Tyler.  The indignant father, hearing the girl's
cry for help, snatched up a hammer, and rushing in, struck the ruffian
dead on the spot.

Tyler then collected a multitude of discontented laborers on
Blackheath Common, near London, with the determination of attacking
the city and overthrowing the government.

John Ball, a fanatical priest, harangued the gathering, now sixty
thousand strong, using by way of a text lines which were at that time
familiar to every workingman:

                "When Adam delved and Eve span,
                 Who was then the gentleman?"

"Good people," he cried, "things will never go well in England so long
as goods be not in common, and so long as there be villeins (S113) and
gentlemen.  They call us slaves, and beat us if we are slow to do
their bidding, but God has now given us the day to shake off our
bondage."

251. The Great Uprising of the Laboring Class, 1381.

Twenty years before, there had been similar outbreaks in Flanders and
in France.  This, therefore, was not an isolated instance of
insurrection, but rather part of a general uprising.  The rebellion
begun by Tyler and Ball (S250) spread through the southern and eastern
counties of England, taking different forms in different districts.
It was violent in St. Albans, where the peasants, and farm laborers
generally, rose against the exactions of the abbot, but it reached its
greatest height in London.

For three weeks the mob held possession of the capital.  They pillaged
and then burned John of Gaunt's palace (SS247, 249).  They seized and
beheaded the Lord Chancellor and the chief collector of the odious
poll tax (S250).  They destroyed all the law papers they could lay
hands on, and ended by murdering a number of lawyers; for the rioters
believed that the members of that profession spent their time forging
the chains which held the laboring class in subjection.

252. Demans of the Rebels; End of the Rebellion.

The insurrectionists demanded of the King that villeinage (S113)
should be abolished, and that the rent of agricultural lands should be
fixed by Parliament at a uniform rate in money.  They also insisted
that trade should be free, and that a general unconditional pardon
should be granted to all who had taken part in the rebellion.

Richard promised redress; but while negotiations were going on,
Walworth, mayor of London, struck down Wat Tyler with his dagger, and
with his death the whole movement collapsed almost as suddenly as it
arose.  Parliament now began a series of merciless executions, and
refused to consider any of the claims to which Richard had shown a
disposition to listen.  In their punishment of the rebels, the House
of Commons vied with the Lords in severity, few showing any sympathy
with the efforts of the peasants to obtain their freedom from feudal
bondage.

The uprising, however, was not in vain, for by it the old restrictions
were in some degree loosened, so that in the course of the next
century and a half, villeinage (S113) was gradually abolished, and the
English laborer acquired that greatest yet most perilous of all
rights, the complete ownership of himself.[1]

[1] In Scotland, villeinage lasted much longer, and as late as 1774,
in the reign of George III, men working in coal and salt mines were
held in a species of slavery, which was finally abolished the
following year.

So long as he was a serf, the peasant could claim assistance from his
master in sickness and old age; in attaining independence he had to
risk the danger of pauperism, which began with it,--this possibility
being part of the price which man must everywhere pay for the
inestimable privilege of freedom.

253. The New Movement in Literature, 1390 (?).

The same spirit which demanded emancipation on the part of the working
classes showed itself in literature.  We have already seen (S246) how,
in the previous reign, Langland, in his poem of "Piers Plowman," gave
bold utterance to the growing discontent of the times in his
declaration that the rich and great destroyed the poor.

In a different spirit, Chaucer, "the morning star of English song,"
now began (1390?) to write his "Canterbury Tales," a series of stories
in verse, supposed to be told by a merry band of pilgrims on their way
from the Tabard Inn in Southwark, London, to the shrine of St. Thomas
Becket in Canterbury (S170).

There is little of Langland's complaint in Chaucer, for he was
generally a favorite at court, seeing mainly the bright side of life,
and sure of his yearly allowance of money and daily pitcher of wine
from the royal bounty.  Yet, with all his mirth, there is a vein of
playful satire in his description of men and things.  His pictures of
jolly monks and easy-going churchmen, with his lines addressed to his
purse as his "saviour, as down in this world here," show that he saw
beneath the surface of things.  He too was thinking, at least at
times, of the manifold evils of poverty and of that danger springing
from religious indifference which poor Langland had taken so much to
heart.

254. Wycliffe; the First Complete English Bible, 1378.

But the real reformer of that day was John Wycliffe, rector of
Lutterworth in Leicestershire and lecturer at Oxford (S246).  He
boldly attacked the religious and the political corruption of the
age.  The "Begging Friars," who had once done such good work (S208),
had now grown too rich and lazy to be of further use.

Wycliffe, whose emaciated form concealed an unconquerable energy and
dauntless courage, organized a new band of brothers known as "Poor
Priests."  They took up and pushed forward the reforms the friars had
dropped.  Clothed in red sackcloth cloaks, barefooted, with staff in
hand, they went about from town to town[1] preaching "God's law," and
demanding that Church and State bring themselves into harmony with it.

[1] Compare Chaucer's
        "A good man ther was of religioun,
         That was a poure persone [parson] of a town."
                        Prologue to the "Canterbury Tales" (479)

The only complete Bible then in use was the Latin version.  The people
could not read a line of it, and many priests were almost as ignorant
of its contents.  To carry on the revival which he had begun, Wycliffe
now began to translate the entire Scriptures into English, 1378.  When
the great work was finished it was copied and circulated by the "Poor
Priests."

But the cost of such a book in manuscript--for the printing press had
not yet come into existence--was so high that only the rich could buy
the complete volume.  Many, however, who had no money would give a
load of farm produce for a few favorite chapters.

In this way Wycliffe's Bible was spread throughout the country among
all classes.  Later, when persecution began, men hid these precious
copies and read them with locked doors at night, or met in the forests
to hear them expounded by preachers who went about at the peril of
their lives.  These things led Wycliffe's enemies to complain "that
common men and women who could read were better acquainted with the
Scriptures than the most learned and intelligent of the clergy."

255. The Lollards; Wycliffe's Remains burned.

The followers of Wycliffe were nicknamed Lollards, a word of uncertain
meaning but apparantly used as an expression of contempt.  From having
been religious reformers denouncing the wealth and greed of a corrupt
Church, they seem, in some cases, to have degenerated into socialists
or communists.  This latter class demanded, like John Ball (S250),
--who may have been one of their number,--that all property should be
equally divided, and that all rank should be abolished.

This fact should be borne in mind with reference to the subsequent
efforts made by the government to suppress the movement.  In the eyes
of the Church, the Lollards were heretics; in the judgment of many
moderate men, they were destructionists and anarchists, as
unreasonable and as dangerous as the "dynamiters" of to-day.

More than forty years after Wycliffe's death (1384), a decree of the
Church council of Constance[1] ordered the reformer's body to be dug
up and burned (1428).  But his influence had not only permeated
England, but had passed to the Continent, and was preparing the way
for that greater movement which Luther was to inaugurate in the
sixteenth century.

[1] Constance, in southern Germany.  This council (1415) sentenced
John Huss and Jerome of Prague, both of whom may be considered
Wycliffites, to the stake.

Tradition says that the ashes of his corpse were thrown into the brook
flowing near the parsonage of Lutterworth, the object being to utterly
destroy and obliterate the remains of the arch-heretic.  Fuller says:
"This brook did conveeey his ashes into Avon, Avon into Severn, Severn
into the narrow sea, and that into the wide ocean.  And so the ashes
of Wycliffe are the emblem of his doctrine, which is now dispersed all
the world over."[2]

[2] Thomas Fuller's "Church History of Britain."  Compare also
Wordsworth's "Sonnet to Wycliffe," and the lines, attributed to an
unknown writer of Wycliffe's time:
        "The Avon to the Severn runs,
         The Severn to the sea;
         And Wycliffe's dust shall spread abroad,
         Wide as the waters be."

256. Richard's Misgovernment; the "Merciless Parliament."

Richard had the spirit of a tyrant.  He declared "that he alone could
change and frame the laws of the kingdom."[3]  His reign was unpopular
with all classes.  The people hated him for his extravagance; the
clergy, for failing to put down the Wycliffites (SS254, 255), with the
doctrines of whose founder he was believed to sympathize; while the
nobles disliked his injustice and favoritism.

[3] W. Stubb's "Constitutional History of England," II, 505.

In the "Merciless Parliament" (1388) the "Lords Appellant," that is,
the noblemen who accused Richard's counselors of treason, put to death
all of the King's ministers that they could lay hands on.  Later, that
Parliament attempted some political reforms, which were partially
successful.  But the King soon regained his power, and took summary
vengeance (1397) on the "Lords Appellant."  Two influential men were
left, Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, and Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of
Hereford, whom he had found no opportunity to punish.  After a time
they openly quarreled, and accused each other of treason.

A challenge passed between them, and they prepared to fight the matter
out in the King's presence; but when the day arrived, the King
banished both of them from England (1398).  Shortly after they had
left the country Bolingbroke's father, John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, died.  Contrary to all law, Richard now seized and
appropriated the estate, which belonged by right to the banished
nobleman.

257. Richard deposed and murdered. (1399).

When Bolingbroke, now by his father's death Duke of Lancaster, heard
of the outrage, he raised a small force and returned to England,
demanding the restitution of his lands.

Finding that the powerful family of the Percies were willing to aid
him, and that many of the common people desired a change of
government, the Duke boldly claimed the crown, on the ground that
Richard had forfeited it by his tyranny, and that he stood next in
succession through his descent from Henry III.  But in reality Henry
Bolingbroke had no claim save that given by right of conquest, since
the boy Edmund Mortimer held the direct title to the crown.[1]

[1] See Genealogical Table, under No. 3 and 4, p. 140

The King now fell into Henry's hands, and events moved rapidly to a
crisis.  Richard had rebuilt Westminster Hall (S156).  The first
Parliament which assembled there deposed him on the ground that he was
"altogether insufficient and unworthy," and they gave the throne to
the victorious Duke of Lancaster.  Shakespeare represents the fallen
monarch saying in his humiliation:

        "With mine own tears I wash away my balm,[2]
         With mine own hand I give away my crown."

[2] "Richard II," Act IV, scene i.  The balm was the sacred oil used
in anointing the King at his coronation.

After his deposition Richard was confined in Pontefract Castle,
Yorkshire, where he found, like his unfortunate ancestory, Edward II
(S233), "that in the cases of princes there is but a step from the
prison to the grave."  His death did not take place, however, until
after Henry's accession.[1]  Most historians condemn Richard as an
unscrupulous tyrant.  Froissart, who wrote in his time, says that he
ruled "fiercely," and that no one in England dared "speak against
anything the King did."  A recent writer thinks he may have been
insane, and declares that whether he "was mad or not, he, at all
events acted like a madman."  But another authority defends him,
saying that Richard was not a despot at heart, but used despotic means
hoping to effect much-needed reforms.[2]

[1] Henry of Lancaster was the son of John of Gaunt, who was the
fourth son of Edward III; but there were descendents of that King's
THIRD son (Lionel, Duke of Clarence) living, who, of course, had a
prior claim, as the following table shows:

                                Edward III
                        [Direct descendant of Henry III]
     1             2            3   |           4              5
   ---------------------------------------------------------------
   |               |            |               |                |
 Edward, the   William, d.   Lionel, Duke  John of Gaunt,     Edmund
Black Prince   in childhood. of Clarence  Duke of Lancaster  Duke of
   |                            |               |             York
 Richard II                Philippa, m.   Henry Bollinger
                        Edmund Mortimer  Duke of Lancaster,
                                |            afterward
                        Roger Mortimer       Henry IV
                         d. 1398-1399
                                |
                        Edmund Mortimer
                        (heir presumptive
                        to the crown after
                          Richard II)

[2] See Gardiner, Stubbs, and the "Dictionary of English History."

258. Summary.

Richard II's reign comprised:

1. The peasant revolt under Wat Tyler, whic hled eventually to the
emancipation of the villeins, or farm laborers.
2. Wycliffe's reformation movement and his complete translation of the
Latin Bible, with the rise of the Lollards.
3. The publication of Chaucer's "Canterbury Tales," the first great
English poem.
4. The deposition of the King, and the transfer of the crown by
Parliament to Henry, Duke of Lancaster.

General Reference Summary of the Angevin, or Plantegenet, Period
(1154-1399)

I. Government.  II. Religion.  III. Military Affairs.  IV. Literature,
Learning, and Art.  V. General Industry and Commerce.  VI. Mode of
Life, Manners, and Customs.

I. Government

259. Judicial Reforms.

In 1164 Henry II undertook, by a series of statutes called the
Constitutions of Clarendon, to bring the Church under the common law
of the land, but was only temporarily successful.  By subsequent
statutes he reorganized the administration of justice, and laid the
foundation of trial by jury.

260. Town Charters.

Under Richard I many towns secured charters giving them the control of
their own affairs in great measure.  In this way municipal
self-government arose, and a prosperous and intelligent class of
merchants and artisans grew up who eventually obtained important
political influence in the management of national affairs.

261. Magna Carta, or the Great National Charter.

This pledge, extotrted from King John in 1215, put a check to he
arbitrary power of the sovereign, and guaranteed the rights of all
classes, from the serf and the townsman to the bishop and baron
(S199).  It consisted originally of sixty-three articles, founded
mainly on the first royal charter (that of Henry I), given in 1100
(S135).

Magna Carta was not a statement of principles, but a series of
specific remedies for specific abuses, which may be summarized as
follows:

1. The Church to be free from royal interference, especially in the
election of bishops.
2. No taxes except the regular feudal dues (S150) to be levied, except
by the consent of the Great Council, or Parliament.
3. The Court of Common Pleas (see p. 73, not 1) not to follow the
King, but to remain stationary at Westminster.  Justice to be neither
sold, denied or delayed.  No man to be imprisoned, outlawed, punished,
or otherwissssse molested, save by the judgment of his equals or by
the law of the land.  The necessary implements of all freemen, and the
farming tools of villeins, or farm laborers (S113), to be exempt from
seizure.
4. Weights and measures to be kept uniform throughout the realm.  All
merchants to have the right to enter and leave the kingdom without
paying exorbitant tolls for the privilege.
5. Forest laws to be justly enforced.
6. The charter to be carried out by twenty-five barons together with
the mayor of London.

This document marks the beginning of a written constitution, and it
proved of the highest value henceforth in securing good government.
It was confirmed thirty-seven times by subsequent kings and
parliaments, the confirmation of this and previous charters by
Edward I in 1297 being of especial importance.

262. Rise of the House of Commons.

In 1265, under Henry III, through the influence of Simon de Montfort,
two representatives from each city and borough, or town, together with
two knights of the shire, or country gentlemen, were summoned to meet
with the Lords and Clergy in the Great Council, or Parliament; but the
House of Commons did not become a permanent body until the Model
Parliament of 1295 was summoned.  From that time the body of the
people began to have a permanent voice in making the laws.

Later in the period the knights of the shire joined the
representatives from the towns in forming a distinct body in
Parliament, sitting by themselves under the name of the House of
Commons.  They asserted their right to assent to legislation, and
(1376) they exercised hte right of impeaching before the House of
Lords government officers guilty of misuse of power.  Somewhat later
(1407) they obtained the sole right to originate "Money Bills," that
is, grants or appropriations of money for public purposes or for the
King's use.

263. New Class of Barons.

Under Henry III other influential men of the realm, aside from the
barons, who were tenants in chief, began to be summoned to the King's
council.  These were called "barons by writ."  Later (under Richard
II), barons were created by open letters bearing the royal seal, and
were called "barons by patent."[1]

[1] This is the modern method of raising a subject (e.g. the poet,
Alfred Tennyson) to the peerage.  It marks the fact that from the
thirteenth century the ownership of land was no longer considered a
necessary condition of nobility; and that the peerage was gradually
developing into the five degrees, which were completed in 1440, in the
following ascending order: barons, viscounts, earls, marquises, dukes.

264. Land Laws.

During this period important laws (De Donis, or Entail, and Quia
Emptores) respecting land were passed, which had the effect of keeping
estates in families, and also of preventing their possessors from
evading their feudal duties to the King.  At the same time the Statute
of Mortmain (a restriction on the acquisition of land by the Church,
which was exempt from paying certain feudal dues) was imposed to
prevent the King's revenue from being diminished.

II. Religion

265. Restriction of Papal Power.

During the Angevin period the popes endeavored to introduce the canon
law (a body of ordinances consisting mainly of the decisions of Church
councils and popes) into England, with the view of making it supreme;
but the Parliament of Merton refused to accept it, saying, "We will
not change the laws of England."

The Statute of Mortmain was also passed (SS226, 264) and other
measures (Statutes of Provisors and Statute of Praemunire) (S243),
which forbade the Pope from taking the appointment of bishops and
other ecclesiastics out of the hands of the clergy; and which
prohibited any appeal from the King's Court to the Papal Court.
Furthermore, many hundreds of parishes, formerly filled by foreigners
who could not speak English, were now given to native priests, and the
sending of money out of the country to support foreign ecclesiastics
was in great measure stopped.

During the Crusades two religious military orders had been
established, called the Knights Hospitalers and the Knights Templars.
The object of the former was, originally, to provide entertainment for
pilgrims going to Jerusalem; that of the latter, to protect them.
Both had extensive possessions in England.  In 1312 the order of
Templars was broken up on a charge of heresy and evil life, and their
property in England given to the Knights Hospitalers, who were also
called Knights of St. John.

266. Reform.

The Mendicant or "Begging Friars" began a reformatory movement in the
Church and accomplished much good.  This was followed by Wycliffe's
attack on religious abuses, by his complete translation of the Bible,
with the revival carried on by the "Poor Priests," and by the rise of
the Lollards.  Eventually severe laws were passed against the
Lollards, partly because of their heretical opinions, and partly
because they became in a measure identified with socialistic and
communistic efforts to destroy rank and equalize property.

III. Military Affairs

267. Scutage.

By a tax called scutage, or shield money, levied on all knights who
refused to serve the King in foreign wars, Henry II obtained the means
to hire soldiers.  By a law reviving the national militia, composed of
freemen below the rank of knights, the King made himself in a
considerable measure independent of the barons with respect to raising
troops.

268. Armor; Heraldry.

The linked or mail armor now began to be superseded by that made of
pieces of steel joined together so as to fit the body.  This, when it
was finally perfected, was called plate armor, and was both heavier
and stronger than mail.

With the introduction of plate armor and the closed helmet it became
the custom for each knight to wear a device, called a crest, on his
helmet, and also to have one called a coat of arms (because originally
worn on a loose coat over the armor).

The coat of arms served to distinguish the wearer from the others, and
was of practical use not only to the followers of a great lord, who
thus knew him at a glance, but it served in time of battle to prevent
the confusion of friend and foe.  Eventually, coats of arms became
hereditary, and the descent, and to some extent the history, of a
family can be traced by them.  In this way heraldry may often prove
helpful in gaining knowledge of men and events.

269. Chivalry; Tournaments.

The profession of arms was regulated by certain rules, by which each
knight solemnly bound himself to serve the cause of religion and the
King, and to be true, brace, and courteous to those of his own rank,
to protect ladies (women of gentle birth), and succor all persons in
distress.  Under Edward III the system of knighthood and chivalry
reached its culmination and began to decline.

One of the grotesque features of the attack of France was an
expedition of English knights with one eye bandaged; this half-bling
company having vowed to partially renounce their sight until they did
some glorious deed.  The chief amusement of the nobles and knights was
the tournament, a mock combat fought on horseback, in full armor,
which sometimes ended in a real battle.  At these entertainments a
lady was chosen queen, who gave prizes to the victors.

270. The Use of the Long Bow; Introduction of Cannon; Wars.

The common weapon of the yeomen, or foot soldiers, was the long bow.
It was made of yew-tree wood, and was the height of the user.  Armed
with this weapon, the English soldiers proved themselves irresistable
in the French wars, the French having no native archers of any
account.

Roger Bacon is supposed to have known the properties of gunpowder as
early as 1250, but no practical use was made of the discovery until
the battle of Cre'cy, 1346, when a few very small cannon are said to
have been employed by the English against the enemy's cavalry.  Later,
cannon were used to throw heavy stones in besieging castles.  Still
later, rude handguns came slowly into use.  From this period kings
gradually began to realize the full meaning of the harmless-looking
black grains, with whose flash and noise the Oxford monk had amused
himself.

The chief wars of the time were the contests between the kings and the
barons, Richard I's Crusade, John's war with France, resulting in the
loss of Normandy, Edward I's conquest of Wales and temporary
subjugation of Scotland, and the beginning of the Hundred Years' War
with France under Edward III.

The navy of this period was made up of small, one-masted vessels,
seldom carrying more than a hundred and fifty fighting men.  As the
mariner's compass had now come into general use, these vessels could,
if occasion required, make voyages of considerable length.

IV. Literature, Learning, and Art

271. Education.

In 1264 Walter de Merton founded the first college at Oxford, an
institution which has ever since borne his name, and which really
originated the English college system.  During the reign of Edward
III, William of Wykeham, Bishop of Winchester, gave a decided impulse
to higher education by the establishment, at his own expense, of
Winchester College, the first great public school founded in England.
Later, he built and endowed New College at Oxford to supplement it.

In Merton's and Wykeham's institutions young men of small means were
instructed, and in great measure supported, without charge.  They were
brought together under one roof, require to conform to proper
discipline, and taught by the best teachers of the day.  In this way a
general feeling of emulation was roused, and at the same time a
fraternal spirit cultivated, which had a strong influence in favor of
a broader and deeper intellectual culture than the monastic schools at
Oxford and elsewhere had encouraged.

272. Literature.

The most prominent historical work was that by Matthew Paris, a monk
of St. Alban's, written in Latin, based largely on earlier chronicles,
and covering the period from the Norman Conquest, 1066, to his death,
in 1259.  It is a work of much value, and was continued by writers of
the same abbey.

The first English prose work was a volume of travels by Sir John
Mandeville, dedicated to Edward III.  It was followed by Wycliffe's
translation of the Bible into English from the Latin version, and by
Chaucer's "Canterbury Tales," the first great English poem.

273. Architecture.

Edward I and his successors began to build structures combining the
palace with the stronghold.[1]  Conway and Carnavon Castles in Wales,
Warwich Castle, Warwickshire, and a great part of Windsor Castle on
the Thames, twenty-three miles west of London, are magnificent
examples; the last is still occupied as a royal residence.

[1] The characteristic features of the Edwardian castles are double
surrounding walls, with numerous protecting towers, and the omission
of the square Norman keep.

In churches, the massive architecture of the Normans, with its heavy
columns and round arches, was followed by the Early English style or
the first period of the Gothic, with pointed arches, slender,
clustered columns, and tapering spires.  Salisbury Cathedral is the
grandest example of the Early English style.

Later, the Decorated Style was adopted.  It was characterized by
broader windows, highly ornamented to correspond with the elaborate
decoration within, which gave this style its name; this is seen to
advantage in Exeter Cathedral, York Minster, and Merton College Chapel
at Oxford.

V. General Industry and Commerce

274. Fairs; Guilds.

The domestic trade of the country was largely carried on during this
period by great fairs held at stated times by royal license.  Bunyan,
in "Pilgrim's Progress," gives a vivid picture of one of these centers
of trade and dissipation, under the name of "Vanity Fair."  Though it
represents the great fair of Sturbridge, near Cambridge, as he saw it
in the seventeenth century, yet it undoubtably describes similar
gatherings in the time of the Plantagenets.

In all large towns the merchants had formed associations for mutual
protection and the advancement of trade, called merchant guilds.
Artisans now instituted similar societies, under the name of craft
guilds.  For a long time the merchant guilds endeavored to shut out
the craft guilds,--the men, as they said, "with dirty hands and blue
nails,"--from having any part in the government of the towns.  But
eventually the latter got their full share, and in some cases, as in
London, became the more influential party of the two.  There they
still survive under the name of the "City Companies."

275. The Wool Trade.

Under Edward III a flourishing trade in wool grew up between England
and Flanders.  The manufacture of fine woolen goods was also greatly
extended in England.  All commerce at this period was limited to
certain market towns called "staples."

