bade him saddle his horse.

"Shall I go with you, Master Rupert?" Hugh asked, for he generally
rode behind Rupert as his orderly.

Rupert did not answer for a moment. Lord Fairholm had asked him to
tell no one; but he meant, no doubt, that he should tell none of
his brother officers. On Hugh's silence, whatever happened, he
could rely, and he would be useful to hold the horses. At any rate,
if not wanted, he could return.

"Ay, Hugh, you can come; and look you, slip a brace of pistols
quietly into each of our holsters."

With a momentary look of surprise, Hugh withdrew to carry out his
instructions; and ten minutes later, Rupert, followed by his
orderly, rode out of the convent.

The mill in question lay some three miles distant, and about half a
mile beyond the little hamlet of Dettinheim. It stood some distance
from the road, up a quiet valley, and was half hidden in trees. It
had been worked by a stream that ran down the valley. It was a
dark, gloomy-looking structure; and the long green weeds that hung
from the great wheel, where the water from the overshot trough
splashed and tumbled over it, showed that it had been for some time
abandoned. These things had been noticed by Rupert when riding past
it some time before, for, struck with the appearance of the mill,
he had ridden up the valley to inspect it.

On his ride to Lord Fairholm's rendezvous, he wondered much what
could be the nature of the adventure in which they were about to
embark. He knew that both his friends were full of life and high
spirits, and his thoughts wandered between some wild attempt to
carry off a French officer of importance, or an expedition to
rescue a lovely damsel in distress. Hugh, equally wondering, but
still more ignorant of the nature of the expedition, rode quietly
on behind.

The road was an unfrequented one, and during the last two miles'
ride they did not meet a single person upon it. The hamlet of
Dettinheim contained four or five houses only, and no one seemed
about. Another five minutes' riding took them to the entrance to
the little valley in which the mill stood. They rode up to it, and
then dismounted.

"It's a lonesome dismal-looking place, Master Rupert. It doesn't
seem to bode good. Of course you know what you're come for, sir;
but I don't like the look of the place, nohow."

"It does not look cheerful, Hugh; but I am to meet Lord Fairholm
and Sir John Loveday here."

"I don't see any sign of them, Master Rupert. I'd be careful if I
were you, for it's just the sort of place for a foul deed to be
done in. It does not look safe."

"It looks old and haunted," Rupert said; "but as that is its
natural look, I don't see it can help it. The door is open, so my
friends are here."

"Look out, Master Rupert; you may be running into a snare."

Rupert paused a moment, and the thought flashed across his mind
that it might, as Hugh said, be a snare; but with Lord Fairholm's
letter in his pocket, he dismissed the idea.

"You make me nervous, Hugh, with your suggestions. Nevertheless I
will be on my guard;" and he drew his sword as he entered the mill.

As he did so, Hugh, who was holding the horses' bridles over his
arm, snatched a brace of pistols from the holsters, cocked them,
and stood eagerly listening. He heard Rupert walk a few paces
forward, and then pause, and shout "Where are you, Fairholm?"

Then he heard a rush of heavy feet, a shout from Rupert, a clash of
swords, and a scream of agony.

All this was the work of a second; and as Hugh dropped the reins
and rushed forward to his master's assistance, he heard a noise
behind him, and saw a dozen men issue from behind the trees, and
run towards him.

Coming from the light, Hugh could with difficulty see what was
taking place in the darkened chamber before him. In an instant,
however, he saw Rupert standing with his back to a wall, with a
dead man at his feet, and four others hacking and thrusting at him.
Rushing up, Hugh fired his two pistols. One of the men dropped to
the ground, the other with an oath reeled backwards.

"Quick, sir! there are a dozen men just upon us."

Rupert ran one of his opponents through the shoulder, and as the
other drew back shouted to Hugh, "Up the stairs, Hugh! Quick!"

The two lads sprang up the wide steps leading to the floor above,
just as the doorway was darkened by a mass of men. The door at the
top of the steps yielded to their rush, the rotten woodwork giving,
and the door falling to the ground. Two or three pistol bullets
whizzed by their ears, just as they leapt through the opening.

"Up another floor, Hugh; and easy with the door."

The door at the top of the next ladder creaked heavily as they
pushed it back on its hinges.

"Look about, Hugh, for something to pile against it."

The shutters of the window were closed, but enough light streamed
through the chinks and crevices for them to see dimly. There was
odd rubbish strewn all about, and in one corner a heap of decaying
sacks. To these both rushed, and threw some on the floor by the
door, placing their feet on them to keep them firm, just as with a
rush the men came against it. This door was far stronger than the
one below, but it gave before the weight.

"The hinges will give," Hugh exclaimed; but at the moment Rupert
passed his thin rapier through one of the chinks of the rough
boards which formed it, and a yell was heard on the outside. The
pressure against the door ceased instantly; and Rupert bade Hugh
run for some more sacks, while he threw himself prone on them on
the ground.

It was well he did so, for, as he expected, a half-dozen pistol
shots were heard, and the bullets crashed through the woodwork.

"Keep out of the line of fire, Hugh."

Hugh did so, and threw down the sacks close to the door. Several
times he ran backwards and forwards across the room, the assailants
still firing through the door. Then Rupert leapt up, and the pile
of sacks were rapidly heaped against the door, just as the men
outside, in hopes that they had killed the defenders, made another
rush against it.

This time, however, the pile of sacks had given it strength and
solidity, and it hardly shook under the assault. Then came volleys
of curses and imprecations, in German, from outside; and then the
lads could hear the steps descend the stairs, and a loud and angry
consultation take place below.

"Open the shutters, Hugh, and let us see where we are."

It was a chamber of some forty feet square, and, like those below
it, of considerable height. It was like the rest of the mill, built
of rough pine, black with age. It had evidently been used as a
granary.

"This is a nice trap we have fallen into, Hugh, and I doubt me if
Lord Fairholm ever saw the letter with his name upon it which lured
me here. However, that is not the question now; the thing is how we
are to get out of the trap. How many were there outside, do you
think?"

"There seemed to me about a dozen, Master Rupert, but I got merely
a blink at them."

"If it were not for their pistols we might do something, Hugh; but
as it is, it is hopeless."

Looking out from the window they saw that it was over the great
water wheel, whose top was some fifteen feet below them, with the
water running to waste from the inlet, which led from the reservoir
higher up the valley.

Presently they heard a horse gallop up to the front of the mill,
and shortly after the sound of a man's voice raised in anger. By
this time it was getting dark.

"What'll be the end of this, Master Rupert? We could stand a siege
for a week, but they'd hardly try that."

"What's that?" Rupert said. "There's some one at the door again."

They came back, but all was quiet. Listening attentively, however,
they heard a creaking, as of someone silently descending the
stairs. For some time all was quiet, except that they could hear
movements in the lower story of the mill. Presently Rupert grasped
Hugh's arm.

"Do you smell anything, Hugh?"

"Yes, sir, I smell a smoke."

"The scoundrels have set the mill on fire, Hugh."

In another minute or two the smell became stronger, and then
wreaths of smoke could be seen curling up through the crevices in
the floor.

"Run through the other rooms, Hugh; let us see if there is any
means of getting down."

There were three other rooms, but on opening the shutters they
found in each case a sheer descent of full forty feet to the
ground, there being no outhouses whose roofs would afford them a
means of descent.

"We must rush downstairs, Hugh. It is better to be shot as we go
out, than be roasted here."

Rapidly they tore away the barrier of sacks, and Rupert put his
thumb on the latch. He withdrew it with a sharp exclamation.

"They have jammed the latch, Hugh. That was what that fellow we
heard was doing."

The smoke was now getting very dense, and they could with
difficulty breathe. Rupert put his head out of the window.

"There is a little window just over the wheel," he said. "If we
could get down to the next floor we might slip out of that and get
in the wheel without being noticed.

"Look about, Hugh," he exclaimed suddenly; "there must be a
trapdoor somewhere for lowering the sacks. There is a wheel hanging
to the ceiling; the trap must be under that."

In a minute the trap was found, and raised. The smoke rushed up in
a volume, and the boys looked with dismay at the dense murk below.

"It's got to be done, Hugh. Tie that bit of sacking, quick, over
your nose and mouth, while I do the same. Now lower yourself by
your arms, and drop; it won't be above fifteen feet. Hold your
breath, and rush straight to the window. I heard them open it. Now,
both together now."

The lads fell over their feet, and were in another minute at the
window. The broad top of the great wheel stretched out level with
them, hiding the window from those who might have been standing
below. The wheel itself was some thirty feet in diameter, and was
sunk nearly half its depth in the ground, the water running off by
a deep tail race.

"We might lie flat on the top of the wheel," Hugh said.

"We should be roasted to death when the mill is fairly in flames.
No, Hugh; we must squeeze through this space between the wall and
the wheel, slip down by the framework, and keep inside the wheel.
There is no fear of that burning, and we shall get plenty of fresh
air down below the level of the mill.

"I will go first, Hugh. Mind how you go, for these beams are all
slimy; get your arm well round, and slip down as far as the axle."

It was not an easy thing to do, and Rupert lost his hold and
slipped down the last ten feet, hurting himself a good deal in his
fall. He was soon on his feet again, and helped to break the fall
of Hugh, who lost his hold and footing at the axle, and would have
hurt himself greatly, had not Rupert caught him, both boys falling
with a crash in the bottom of the wheel.

They were some little time before regaining their feet, for both
were much hurt. Their movements were, however, accelerated by the
water, which fell in a heavy shower from above, through the leaks
in the buckets of the wheel.

"Are you hurt much, Master Rupert?"

"I don't think I am broken at all, Hugh, but I am hurt all over.
How are you?"

"I am all right, I think. It's lucky the inside of this wheel is
pretty smooth, like a big drum."

The position was not a pleasant one. A heavy shower of water from
above filled the air with spray, and with their heads bent down it
was difficult to breathe. The inside planks of the wheel were so
slimy that standing was almost impossible, and at the slightest
attempt at movement they fell. Above, the flames were already
darting out through the windows and sides of the mill.

"Do you not think we might crawl out between the wheel and the
wall, and make our way down the tail race, Master Rupert? This
water is chilling me to the bones."

"I think it safer to stop where we are, Hugh. Those fellows are
sure to be on the watch. They will expect to see us jump out of the
upper window the last thing, and will wait to throw our bodies--for
of course we should be killed--into the flames, to hide all trace
of us. We have only to wait quietly here. It is not pleasant; but
after all the trouble we have had to save our lives, it would be a
pity to risk them again. And I have a very particular desire to be
even with that fellow, who is, I doubt not, at the bottom of all
this."

Soon the flames were rushing out in great sheets from the mill, and
even in the wheel the heat of the atmosphere was considerable.
Presently a great crash was heard inside.

"There is a floor fallen," Rupert said. "I think we may move now;
those fellows will have made off secure that--

"Hullo! What's that?"

The exclamation was caused by a sudden creaking noise, and the
great wheel began slowly to revolve. The fall of the floor had
broken its connection with the machinery in the mill, and left
free, it at once yielded to the weight of the water in its buckets.
The supply of water coming down was small, and the wheel stiff from
long disuse, therefore it moved but slowly. The motion, however,
threw both lads from their feet, and once down, the rotatory motion
rendered it impossible for them to regain their feet.

After the first cry of surprise, neither spoke; across both their
minds rushed the certainty of death.

How long the terrible time that followed lasted, neither of them
ever knew. The sensation was that of being pounded to death. At one
moment they were together, then separated; now rolling over and
over in a sort of ball, then lifted up and cast down into the
bottom of the wheel with a crash; now with their heads highest, now
with their feet. It was like a terrible nightmare; but gradually
the sharp pain of the blows and falls were less vivid--a dull
sensation came over them--and both lost consciousness.

Rupert was the first to open his eyes, and for a time lay but in
dreamy wonder as to where he was, and what had happened. He seemed
to be lying under a great penthouse, with a red glow pervading
everything. Gradually his thoughts took shape, and he remembered
what had passed, and struggling painfully into a sitting position,
looked round.

The wheel no longer revolved; there was no longer the constant
splash of water. Indeed the wheel existed as a wheel no longer.

As he looked round the truth lighted upon him. The burning mill had
fallen across the wheel, crushing, at the top, the sides together.
The massive timber had given no further, and the wheel formed a
sort of roof, sloping from the outer wall, built solidly up against
it, to the opposite foot. Above, the timber of this wall glared and
flickered, but the soddened timber of the wheel could have resisted
a far greater amount of heat. The leet had of course been carried
away with the fall, and the water would be flowing down the valley.
The heat was very great, but the rush of air up the deep cut of the
mill race rendered it bearable.

Having once grasped the facts--and as he doubted not the fall must
have occurred soon after he lost consciousness, and so saved him
from being bruised to death--Rupert turned to Hugh.

He was quite insensible, but his heart still beat. Rupert crawled
out of the wheel, and found pools of water in the mill race, from
which he brought double handfuls, and sprinkled Hugh's face. Then
as he himself grew stronger from fresh air and a copious dousing of
his face and head with water, he dragged Hugh out, and laying him
beside a pool dashed water on his face and chest. A deep sigh was
the first symptom of returning consciousness. He soon, to Rupert's
delight, opened his eyes.

After a time he sat up, but was too much hurt to rise. After some
consultation, Rupert left him, and went alone down to the hamlet of
Dettinheim, where, after much knocking, he roused some of the
inhabitants, who had only a short time before returned from the
burning mill. Sodden and discoloured as it was, Rupert's uniform
was still recognizable, and by the authority this conveyed, and a
promise of ample reward, four men were induced to return with him
to the mill, and carry Hugh down to the village.

This they reached just as the distant clock of Liege cathedral
struck two. A bed was given up to them, and in half an hour both
lads were sound asleep.



Chapter 9: The Duel.

Great was the excitement in the 5th Dragoons when, upon the arrival
of Rupert and Hugh--the former of whom was able to ride, but the
latter was carried by on a stretcher--they learned the attack which
had been made upon one of their officers. The "Little Cornet" was a
general favourite, short as was the time since he had joined; while
Hugh was greatly liked by the men of his own troop. Rupert's
colonel at once sent for him, to learn the particulars of the
outrage. Rupert was unable to give farther particulars as to his
assailants than that they were German soldiers; that much the dim
light had permitted him to see, but more than that he could not
say. He stated his reasons for believing Sir Richard Fulke was the
originator of the attack, since he had had a quarrel with him in
England, but owned that, beyond suspicions, he had no proof. The
colonel at once rode down to headquarters, and laid a complaint
before the Earl of Athlone, who promised that he would cause every
inquiry to be made. Then the general commanding the Hesse
contingent was communicated with, and the colonel of the cavalry
regiment to which Sir Richard Fulke belonged was sent for.

He stated that Captain Fulke had been away on leave of absence for
three days, and that he had gone to England. The regiment was,
however, paraded, and it was found that five troopers were missing.
No inquiry, however, could elicit from any of the others a
confession that they had been engaged in any fray, and as all were
reported as having been in by ten o'clock, except the five missing
men, there was no clue as to the parties engaged. The five men
might have deserted, but the grounds for suspicion were very
strong. Still, as no proof could be obtained, the matter was
suffered to drop.

The affair caused, however, much bad feeling between the two
regiments, and the men engaged in affrays when they met, until the
order was issued that they should only be allowed leave into the
town on alternate days. This ill feeling spread, however, beyond
the regiments concerned. There had already been a good deal of
jealousy upon the part of the Continental troops of the honour
gained by the British in being first in at the breaches of Venloo
and Liege, and this feeling was now much embittered. Duels between
the officers became matters of frequent occurrence, in spite of the
strict orders issued against that practice.

As Rupert had anticipated, the letter by which he had been
entrapped turned out a forgery. Lord Fairholm was extremely
indignant when he heard the use that had been made of his name, and
