CIII.

    Briefly, the sesterces all, give back, full quantity, Silo,
      Then be a bully beyond exorability, you:
    Else, if money be all, O cease so lewdly to practise
      Bawd, yet bully beyond exorability, you.


CIV.

    What? should a lover adore, yet cruelly slander adoring?
      I my lady, than eyes goodlier easily she?
    Nay, I rail not at all. How rail, so blindly desiring?
      Tappo alone dare brave all that is heinous, or you.


CV.

    Mentula toils, Pimplea, the Muses' mountain, ascending:
      They with pitchforks hurl Mentula dizzily down.


CVI.

    Walks with a salesman a beauty, your eyes that beauty discerning?
      Doubt not your eyes speak true; Sir, 'tis a beauty to sell.


CVII.

    If to delight man's wish, joy e'er unlook'd for, unhop'd for,
        Falleth, a joy were such proper, a bliss to the soul.
    Then 'tis a joy to the soul, like gold of Lydia precious,
        Lesbia mine, that thou com'st to delight me again.

    Com'st yet again long-hop'd, long-look'd for vainly, returnest     5
        Freely to me. O day white with a luckier hue!
    Lives there happier any than I, I only? a fairer
        Destiny? Life so sweet know ye, or aught parallel?


CVIII.

    Loathly Cominius, if e'er this people's voice should arraign thee,
      Hoary with all unclean infamy, worthy to die;
    First should a tongue, I doubt not, of old so deadly to goodness,
      Fall extruded, of each vulture a hungry regale;
    Gouged be the carrion eyes some crow's black maw to replenish,     5
      Stomach a dog's fierce teeth harry, a wolf the remains.


CIX.

    Think you truly, belov'd, this bond of duty between us,
      Lasteth, an ever-new jollity, ne'er to decease?
    Grant it, Gods immortal, assure her promise in earnest;
      Yea, be the lips sincere; yea, be the words from her heart.
    So still rightly remain our lovers' charter, a life-long           5
      Friendship in us, whose faith fades not away to the last.


CX.

    Aufilena, the fair, if kind, is a favourite ever;
        Asks she a price, then yields frankly? the price is her own.
    You, that agreed to be kind, now vilely the treaty dishonour,
        Give not at all, nor again take;--'tis a wrong to a wrong.

    Not to deceive were noble, a chastity ne'er had assented,          5
        Aufilena; but you--blindly to grasp at a gain,
    Yet to withhold the effects,--'tis a greed more loathly than harlot's
        Vileness, a wretch whose limbs ply to the lusts of a town.


CXI.

    One lord only to love, one, Aufilena, to live for,
      Praise can a bride nowhere goodlier any betide;
    Yet, when a niece with an uncle is even mother or even
      Cousin--of all paramours this were as heinous as all.


CXII.

    Naso, if you show much, your company shows but a very
      Little; a man you show, Naso, a woman in one.


CXIII.

    Pompey the first time consul, as yet Maecilia counted
      Two paramours; reappears Pompey a consul again,
    Two still, Cinna, remain; but grown, each unit an even
      Thousand. Truly the stock's fruitful: adultery breeds.


CXIV.

    Rightly a lordly demesne makes Firman Mentula count for
      Wealthy! the rich fine things, then the variety there!
    Game in plenty to choose, fish, field, and meadow with hunting;
      Only the waste exceeds strangely the quantity still.
    Wealthy? perhaps I grant it; if all, wealth asks for, is absent.   5
      Praise the demesne? no doubt; only be needy the man.


CXV.

    Acres thirty in all, good grass, own Mentula master;
        Forty to plough; bare seas, arid or empty, the rest.
      Poorly methinks might Croesus a man so sumptuous equal,
        Counted in one rich park owner of all he can ask.
      Grass or plough, big woods, much mountain, mighty morasses;      5
        On to the farthest North, on to the boundary main.

    Vastness is all that is here; yet Mentula reaches a vaster--
        Man? not so; 'tis a vast mountainous ominous He.


CXVI.

    Oft with a studious heart, which hunted closely, requiring
        Skill great Battiades' poesies haply to send,
    Laying thus thy rage in rest, lest everlasting
        Darts should reach me, to wound still an assailable head:

    Barren now I see that labour of any requital,                      5
        Gellius; here all prayers fall to the ground, nor avail.
    No; but a robe I carry, the barbs, thy folly, to muffle;
        Mine strike sure; thy deep injury _they_ shall atone.




FRAGMENTS.


II.

    Here I give to be thine a fair grove, an holy, Priapus,
    Where thy Lampsacus holds thee in chamber seemly, Priapus;
    God, in every city, thou, most ador'd on a sea-shore
    Hellespontian, eminent most of oystery sea-shores.


IV.

    Rapidly the spirit in an agony fled away.


V.

    Where yon lucent mast-top, a cup of silver, arises.




NOTES.


VIII. 2.

    _Lost is the lost, thou know'st it, and the past is past._

I am indebted for this expression to a translation of this poem by Dr.
J.A. Symonds, the whole of which I should have quoted here, had it not
been unfortunately mislaid.


XIV. 20.

    _Plague-prodigy._

    Proves a plague-prodigy to God and man.

BROWNING, _Ring and Book_, v. 664.


XVII. 26.

    _Rondel._

The round plate of iron which, according to Rich, Companion to the Latin
Dictionary, p. 609, formed the lower part of the sock worn by horses,
mules, &c., when on a journey, and, unlike our horse-shoes, was
removable at the end of it.


XXII. 11.

    _Looby_

a clown.

    Let me now the vices trace,
    From his father's scoundrel race.
    What could give the looby such airs?
    Were they masons? were they butchers?

TICKELL, _Theristes or the Lordling_, 23-26.


XXIII.

For a spirited, though coarse, version of this poem, see Cotton's Poems,
p. 608, ed. 1689.

    6 _Lathy._

    On a lathy horse, all legs and length.

BROWNING, _Flight of the Duchess_, v. 21.


XXIX. 8.

The connexion between Adonis and the dove is specially referred to by
Diogenianus (_Praef._ p. 180 in Leutsch and Schneidewin's
_Paroemiographi Graeci_). It formed part of the legends of Cyprus, and
was alluded to by the lyric poet Timocreon (_Bergk. Poetae Lyrici
Graeci_, p. 1203). Compare Browning:--

    Pompilia was no pigeon, Venus' Pet.

_Ring and Book_, v. 701.


XXXV. 7.

    _So he'll quickly devour the way,_

move quickly over the road. So Shakespeare:

                            Starting so
    He seem'd in running to devour the way,
    Staying no longer question.

_2nd Part of Henry IV._, Act i. sc. 1.


XXXVII. 10.

    _With scorpion I, with emblem all your haunt will scrawl._

A member of the Saraceni family at Vicenza, finding that a beautiful
widow did not favour him, scribbled filthy pictures over the door. The
affair was brought before the Council of Ten at Venice.

TROLLOPE'S _Paul the Pope_, p. 158.


XLIII. 3.

    _Mouth scarce tenible,_

easily running over.


XLV. 7.

    _A sulky lion._

Properly "green-eyed." The epithet would seem to be not merely
picturesque; the glaring of the eyes would be more marked in proportion
as the beast was in a fiercer and more excitable state.


LI. 5-12.

        I watch thy grace; and in its place
      My heart a charmed slumber keeps,
        While I muse upon thy face;
      And a languid fire creeps
        Thro' my veins to all my frame,
    Dissolvingly and slowly: soon
        From thy rose-red lips my name
    Floweth; and then, as in a swoon,
      With dinning sound my ears are rife,
        My tremulous tongue faltereth,
        I lose my colour, I lose my breath,
        I drink the cup of a costly death,
    Brimmed with delicious draughts of warmest life.

TENNYSON, _Eleaenore_.


LIV. 6.

    _Yet thou flee'st not above my keen iambics_.

This line is quoted as Catullus's by Porphyrion on Hor. c. 1. 16, 24.
His words, _Catullus cum maledicta minaretur_, compared with the last
lines of this poem, _Irascere iterum meis iambis Inmerentibus, unice
imperator_, seem to justify my view that they belong here. See my large
edition, p. 217, fragm. I. The following line, _So may destiny, &c._, is
a supplement of my own: it forms a natural introduction to the _Si non
uellem_ of v. 10.


LV.

This is the only instance where Catullus has introduced a spondee into
the second foot of the phalaecian, which then becomes decasyllabic. The
alternation of this decasyllabic rhythm with the ordinary
hendecasyllable is studiously artistic; I have retained it throughout.
In the series of dactylic lines 17-22, Catullus no doubt intended to
convey the idea of rapidity, as, in the spondaic line immediately
following, of labour.

    4 _You on Circus, in all the bills but you, Sir._

There seems to be no authority for the meaning ordinarily assigned to
_libellis_, "book-shops." I prefer to explain the word placards, either
announcing the sale of Camerius's effects, which would imply that he was
in debt, or describing him as a lost article.


LXI.

In the rhythm of this poem, I have been obliged to deviate in two points
from Catullus. (1) In him the first foot of each line is nearly always a
trochee, only rarely a spondee: the monotonous effect of a positional
trochee in English, to say nothing of the difficulty, induced me to
substitute a spondee more frequently. (2) I have been rather less
scrupulous in allowing the last foot of the glyconic lines to be a
dactyl (-uu), in place of the more correct cretic (-u-).

108. The words in italics are a supplement of my own.


LXII. 39-61.

    _Look in a garden croft, when a flower privily growing, &c._

      _Opinion._ Look how a flower that close in closes grows,
    Hid from rude cattle, bruised with no ploughs,
    Which th' air doth stroke, sun strengthen, showers shoot higher,
    It many youths and many maids desire;
    The same, when cropt by cruel hand 'tis wither'd,
    No youths at all, no maidens have desired;
    So a virgin while untouch'd she doth remain
    Is dear to hers; but when with body's stain
    Her chaster flower is lost, she leaves to appear
    Or sweet to young men or to maidens dear.

      _Truth._ Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet Hymen yield,
    For as a lone vine in a naked field
    Never extols her branches, never bears
    Ripe grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
    Her tender body, and her highest sprout
    Is quickly levell'd with her fading root;
    By whom no husbandmen, no youths will dwell;
    But if by fortune she be married well,
    To the elm her husband, many husbandmen
    And many youths inhabit by her then;
    So whilst a virgin doth untouch'd abide,
    All unmanur'd she grows old with her pride;
    But when to equal wedlock, in fit time,
    Her fortune and endeavour lets her climb,
    Dear to her love and parents she is held.
    Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet Hymen yield.

BEN JONSON, _The Barriers_.


LXIII.

In the metre of this poem Catullus observes the following general type--

--'           | --'  --
uu- u-  -u -- | uu- uuu u- (so Heyse.)
     uu       |         uu

Except in 18, _Hilarate aere citatis erroribus animum_, 53, _Et earum
omnia adirem furibunda latibula_, where the Ionic a minore, which seems
to have been the original basis of the rhythm, is preserved intact in
the former half of the line. I have followed Catullus generally with
exactness, but with an occasional resolution of one long into two short
syllables, where it has not been introduced by the poet, _e.g._ in 31,
34, 49, 64, 65, 68, 79. In v. 10 I have ventured on a license which
Catullus does not admit, but which is, I think, justified by other and
earlier specimens of the metre, an anaclasis of the original Ionic a
minore at the end of the line. In reading this poem it should never be
forgotten that there is a pause in the middle of each line, which
practically divides it into two halves. Tennyson, in his _Boadicea_,
written on the model of the _Attis_, divides each verse similarly in the
middle; but in the first half he has changed the rhythm of Catullus to a
trochaic rhythm, in the second, while producing much of the effect of
the _Attis_ by the accumulation of short syllables at the end of the
line, he has not bound himself to the same strictly defined feet as
Catullus, and generally has preferred to take from the somewhat
emasculate character of the verse by adding an unaccented syllable at
the close.


LXIII.

    8 _Taborine_

    Beat loud the tabourines, let the trumpets blow.

_Troilus and Cressida_, Act iv. sc. 5.

    16 _Aby_

abide; as, I think, in Spenser's _Faerie Queene_, vi. 2, 19.

              But he was fierce and whot,
    Ne time would give, nor any termes aby.

Below, lxiv. 297, I have used it in its more common meaning of atoning
for, _Faerie Queene_, iv. 1, 53.

    Yet thou, false Squire, his fault shalt deare aby,
    And with thy punishment his penance shalt supply.

_Midsummer Night's Dream_, iii. 2.

    Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.

    24 _Ululation._

    There sighs, complaints, and ululations loud
    Resounded through the air without a star.

LONGFELLOW'S _Dante Inf_. iii. 22.

    41 _When he smote the shadowy twilight with his healthy team sublime._

    Ere yet they blind the stars, and the wild team
    Which love thee, yearning for thy yoke, arise,
    And shake the darkness from their loosen'd manes,
    And beat the twilight into flakes of fire.

TENNYSON, _Tithonus_.

    83 _On a nervy neck._

                            Four maned lions hale
    The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws,
    Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws
    Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails
    Covering their tawny brushes.

KEATS, _Endymion_, II. ad fin.
