noted in that one look far more of love than of pity in Mademoiselle
de Verneuil's intervention; and she was right. The handsome creature
blushed beneath the other woman's gaze, understanding its meaning, and
dropped her eyelids; then, as if aware of some threatening accusation,
she raised her head proudly and defied all eyes. The commandant,
petrified, returned the paper, countersigned by ministers, which
enjoined all authorities to obey the orders of this mysterious lady.
Having done so, he drew his sword, laid it across his knees, broke the
blade, and flung away the pieces.

"Mademoiselle, you probably know what you are about; but a Republican
has his own ideas, and his own dignity. I cannot serve where women
command. The First Consul will receive my resignation to-morrow; others,
who are not of my stripe, may obey you. I do not understand my orders
and therefore I stop short,--all the more because I am supposed to
understand them."

There was silence for a moment, but it was soon broken by the young
lady, who went up to the commandant and held out her hand, saying,
"Colonel, though your beard is somewhat long, you may kiss my hand; you
are, indeed, a man!"

"I flatter myself I am, mademoiselle," he replied, depositing a kiss
upon the hand of this singular young woman rather awkwardly. "As for
you, friend," he said, threatening the young man with his finger, "you
have had a narrow escape this time."

"Commandant," said the youth, "it is time all this nonsense should
cease; I am ready to go with you, if you like, to headquarters."

"And bring your invisible owl, Marche-a-Terre?"

"Who is Marche-a-Terre?" asked the young man, showing all the signs of
genuine surprise.

"Didn't he hoot just now?"

"What did that hooting have to do with me, I should like to know? I
supposed it was your soldiers letting you know of their arrival."

"Nonsense, you did not think that."

"Yes, I did. But do drink that glass of Bordeaux; the wine is good."

Surprised at the natural behaviour of the youth and also by the
frivolity of his manners and the youthfulness of his face, made even
more juvenile by the careful curling of his fair hair, the commandant
hesitated in the midst of his suspicions. He noticed that Madame du Gua
was intently watching the glances that her son gave to Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, and he asked her abruptly: "How old are you, _citoyenne_?"

"Ah, Monsieur l'officier," she said, "the rules of the Republic are very
severe; must I tell you that I am thirty-eight?"

"May I be shot if I believe it! Marche-a-Terre is here; it was he who
gave that cry; you are Chouans in disguise. God's thunder! I'll search
the inn and make sure of it!"

Just then a hoot, somewhat like those that preceded it, came from the
courtyard; the commandant rushed out, and missed seeing the pallor that
covered Madame du Gua's face as he spoke. Hulot saw at once that the
sound came from a postilion harnessing his horses to the coach, and
he cast aside his suspicions, all the more because it seemed absurd to
suppose that the Chouans would risk themselves in Alencon. He returned
to the house confounded.

"I forgive him now, but later he shall pay dear for the anxiety he
has given us," said the mother to the son, in a low voice, as Hulot
re-entered the room.

The brave old officer showed on his worried face the struggle that went
on in his mind betwixt a stern sense of duty and the natural kindness of
his heart. He kept his gruff air, partly, perhaps, because he fancied
he had deceived himself, but he took the glass of Bordeaux, and said:
"Excuse me, comrade, but your Polytechnique does send such young
officers--"

"The Chouans have younger ones," said the youth, laughing.

"For whom did you take my son?" asked Madame du Gua.

"For the Gars, the leader sent to the Chouans and the Vendeans by the
British cabinet; his real name is Marquis de Montauran."

The commandant watched the faces of the suspected pair, who looked at
each other with a puzzled expression that seemed to say: "Do you know
that name?" "No, do you?" "What is he talking about?" "He's dreaming."

The sudden change in the manner of Marie de Verneuil, and her torpor as
she heard the name of the royalist general was observed by no one but
Francine, the only person to whom the least shade on that young face
was visible. Completely routed, the commandant picked up the bits of his
broken sword, looked at Mademoiselle de Verneuil, whose ardent beauty
was beginning to find its way to his heart, and said: "As for you,
mademoiselle, I take nothing back, and to-morrow these fragments of my
sword will reach Bonaparte, unless--"

"Pooh! what do I care for Bonaparte, or your republic, or the king,
or the Gars?" she cried, scarcely repressing an explosion of ill-bred
temper.

A mysterious emotion, the passion of which gave to her face a dazzling
color, showed that the whole world was nothing to the girl the moment
that one individual was all in all to her. But she suddenly subdued
herself into forced calmness, observing, like a trained actor, that the
spectators were watching her. The commandant rose hastily and went out.
Anxious and agitated, Mademoiselle de Verneuil followed him, stopped him
in the corridor, and said, in an almost solemn tone: "Have you any good
reason to suspect that young man of being the Gars?"

"God's thunder! mademoiselle, that fellow who rode here with you came
back to warn me that the travellers in the mail-coach had all been
murdered by the Chouans; I knew that, but what I didn't know was the
name of the murdered persons,--it was Gua de Saint-Cyr!"

"Oh! if Corentin is at the bottom of all this, nothing surprises me,"
she cried, with a gesture of disgust.

The commandant went his way without daring to look at Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, whose dangerous beauty began to affect him.

"If I had stayed two minutes longer I should have committed the folly of
taking back my sword and escorting her," he was saying to himself as he
went down the stairs.

As Madame du Gua watched the young man, whose eyes were fixed on the
door through which Mademoiselle de Verneuil had passed, she said to him
in a low voice: "You are incorrigible. You will perish through a
woman. A doll can make you forget everything. Why did you allow her
to breakfast with us? Who is a Demoiselle de Verneuil escorted by the
Blues, who accepts a breakfast from strangers and disarms an
officer with a piece of paper hidden in the bosom of her gown like a
love-letter? She is one of those contemptible creatures by whose
aid Fouche expects to lay hold of you, and the paper she showed the
commandant ordered the Blues to assist her against you."

"Eh! madame," he replied in a sharp tone which went to the lady's heart
and turned her pale; "her generous action disproves your supposition.
Pray remember that the welfare of the king is the sole bond between us.
You, who have had Charette at your feet must find the world without him
empty; are you not living to avenge him?"

The lady stood still and pensive, like one who sees from the shore the
wreck of all her treasures, and only the more eagerly longs for the
vanished property.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil re-entered the room; the young man exchanged
a smile with her and gave her a glance full of gentle meaning. However
uncertain the future might seem, however ephemeral their union, the
promises of their sudden love were only the more endearing to them.
Rapid as the glance was, it did not escape the sagacious eye of Madame
du Gua, who instantly understood it; her brow clouded, and she was
unable to wholly conceal her jealous anger. Francine was observing her;
she saw the eyes glitter, the cheeks flush; she thought she perceived
a diabolical spirit in the face, stirred by some sudden and terrible
revulsion. But lightning is not more rapid, nor death more prompt than
this brief exhibition of inward emotion. Madame du Gua recovered her
lively manner with such immediate self-possession that Francine fancied
herself mistaken. Nevertheless, having once perceived in this woman
a violence of feeling that was fully equal to that of Mademoiselle de
Verneuil, she trembled as she foresaw the clash with which such natures
might come together, and the girl shuddered when she saw Mademoiselle de
Verneuil go up to the young man with a passionate look and, taking
him by the hand, draw him close beside her and into the light, with a
coquettish glance that was full of witchery.

"Now," she said, trying to read his eyes, "own to me that you are not
the citizen du Gua Saint-Cyr."

"Yes, I am, mademoiselle."

"But he and his mother were killed yesterday."

"I am very sorry for that," he replied, laughing. "However that may be,
I am none the less under a great obligation to you, for which I shall
always feel the deepest gratitude and only wish I could prove it to
you."

"I thought I was saving an _emigre_, but I love you better as a
Republican."

The words escaped her lips as it were impulsively; she became confused;
even her eyes blushed, and her face bore no other expression than one
of exquisite simplicity of feeling; she softly released the young man's
hand, not from shame at having pressed it, but because of a thought too
weighty, it seemed, for her heart to bear, leaving him drunk with hope.
Suddenly she appeared to regret this freedom, permissible as it might
be under the passing circumstances of a journey. She recovered her
conventional manner, bowed to the lady and her son, and taking Francine
with her, left the room. When they reached their own chamber Francine
wrung her hands and tossed her arms, as she looked at her mistress,
saying: "Ah, Marie, what a crowd of things in a moment of time! who but
you would have such adventures?"

Mademoiselle de Verneuil sprang forward and clasped Francine round the
neck.

"Ah! this is life indeed--I am in heaven!"

"Or hell," retorted Francine.

"Yes, hell if you like!" cried Mademoiselle de Verneuil. "Here, give me
your hand; feel my heart, how it beats. There's fever in my veins; the
whole world is now a mere nothing to me! How many times have I not
seen that man in my dreams! Oh! how beautiful his head is--how his eyes
sparkle!"

"Will he love you?" said the simple peasant-woman, in a quivering voice,
her face full of sad foreboding.

"How can you ask me that!" cried Mademoiselle de Verneuil. "But,
Francine, tell me," she added throwing herself into a pose that was half
serious, half comic, "will it be very hard to love me?"

"No, but will he love you always?" replied Francine, smiling.

They looked at each other for a moment speechless,--Francine at
revealing so much knowledge of life, and Marie at the perception, which
now came to her for the first time, of a future of happiness in her
passion. She seemed to herself hanging over a gulf of which she had
wanted to know the depth, and listening to the fall of the stone she had
flung, at first heedlessly, into it.

"Well, it is my own affair," she said, with the gesture of a gambler. "I
should never pity a betrayed woman; she has no one but herself to blame
if she is abandoned. I shall know how to keep, either living or dead,
the man whose heart has once been mine. But," she added, with some
surprise and after a moment's silence, "where did you get your knowledge
of love, Francine?"

"Mademoiselle," said the peasant-woman, hastily, "hush, I hear steps in
the passage."

"Ah! not _his_ steps!" said Marie, listening. "But you are evading an
answer; well, well, I'll wait for it, or guess it."

Francine was right, however. Three taps on the door interrupted the
conversation. Captain Merle appeared, after receiving Mademoiselle de
Verneuil's permission to enter.

With a military salute to the lady, whose beauty dazzled him, the
soldier ventured on giving her a glance, but he found nothing better to
say than: "Mademoiselle, I am at your orders."

"Then you are to be my protector, in place of the commander, who
retires; is that so?"

"No, my superior is the adjutant-major Gerard, who has sent me here."

"Your commandant must be very much afraid of me," she said.

"Beg pardon, mademoiselle, Hulot is afraid of nothing. But women,
you see, are not in his line; it ruffled him to have a general in a
mob-cap."

"And yet," continued Mademoiselle de Verneuil, "it was his duty to obey
his superiors. I like subordination, and I warn you that I shall allow
no one to disobey me."

"That would be difficult," replied Merle, gallantly.

"Let us consult," said Mademoiselle de Verneuil. "You can get fresh
troops here and accompany me to Mayenne, which I must reach this
evening. Shall we find other soldiers there, so that I might go on at
once, without stopping at Mayenne? The Chouans are quite ignorant of
our little expedition. If we travel at night, we can avoid meeting any
number of them, and so escape an attack. Do you think this feasible?"

"Yes, mademoiselle."

"What sort of road is it between Mayenne and Fougeres?"

"Rough; all up and down, a regular squirrel-wheel."

"Well, let us start at once. As we have nothing to fear near Alencon,
you can go before me; we'll join you soon."

"One would think she had seen ten years' service," thought Merle, as he
departed. "Hulot is mistaken; that young girl is not earning her
living out of a feather-bed. Ten thousand carriages! if I want to be
adjutant-major I mustn't be such a fool as to mistake Saint-Michael for
the devil."

During Mademoiselle de Verneuil's conference with the captain, Francine
had slipped out for the purpose of examining, through a window of the
corridor, the spot in the courtyard which had excited her curiosity on
arriving at the inn. She watched the stable and the heaps of straw with
the absorption of one who was saying her prayers to the Virgin, and
she presently saw Madame du Gua approaching Marche-a-Terre with the
precaution of a cat that dislikes to wet its feet. When the Chouan
caught sight of the lady, he rose and stood before her in an attitude of
deep respect. This singular circumstance aroused Francine's curiosity;
she slipped into the courtyard and along the walls, avoiding Madame du
Gua's notice, and trying to hide herself behind the stable door. She
walked on tiptoe, scarcely daring to breathe, and succeeded in posting
herself close to Marche-a-Terre, without exciting his attention.

"If, after all this information," the lady was saying to the Chouan, "it
proves not to be her real name, you are to fire upon her without pity,
as you would on a mad dog."

"Agreed!" said Marche-a-Terre.

The lady left him. The Chouan replaced his red woollen cap upon his
head, remained standing, and was scratching his ear as if puzzled when
Francine suddenly appeared before him, apparently by magic.

"Saint Anne of Auray!" he exclaimed. Then he dropped his whip, clasped
his hands, and stood as if in ecstasy. A faint color illuminated his
coarse face, and his eyes shone like diamonds dropped on a muck-heap.
"Is it really the brave girl from Cottin?" he muttered, in a voice so
smothered that he alone heard it. "You _are_ fine," he said, after a
pause, using the curious word, "godaine," a superlative in the dialect
of those regions used by lovers to express the combination of fine
clothes and beauty.

"I daren't touch you," added Marche-a-Terre, putting out his big hand
nevertheless, as if to weigh the gold chain which hung round her neck
and below her waist.

"You had better not, Pierre," replied Francine, inspired by the
instinct which makes a woman despotic when not oppressed. She drew back
haughtily, after enjoying the Chouan's surprise; but she compensated for
the harshness of her words by the softness of her glance, saying, as she
once more approached him: "Pierre, that lady was talking to you about my
young mistress, wasn't she?"

Marche-a-Terre was silent; his face struggled, like the dawn, between
clouds and light. He looked in turn at Francine, at the whip he
had dropped, and at the chain, which seemed to have as powerful an
attraction for him as the Breton girl herself. Then, as if to put a stop
to his own uneasiness, he picked up his whip and still kept silence.

"Well, it is easy to see that that lady told you to kill my mistress,"
resumed Francine, who knew the faithful discretion of the peasant, and
wished to relieve his scruples.

Marche-a-Terre lowered his head significantly. To the Cottin girl that
was answer enough.

"Very good, Pierre," she said; "if any evil happens to her, if a hair
of her head is injured, you and I will have seen each other for the last
time; for I shall be in heaven, and you will go to hell."

The possessed of devils whom the Church in former days used to exorcise
with great pomp were not more shaken and agitated than Marche-a-Terre
at this prophecy, uttered with a conviction that gave it certainty.
His glance, which at first had a character of savage tenderness,
counteracted by a fanaticism as powerful in his soul as love, suddenly
became surly, as he felt the imperious manner of the girl he had long
since chosen. Francine interpreted his silence in her own way.

"Won't you do anything for my sake?" she said in a tone of reproach.

At these words the Chouan cast a glance at his mistress from eyes that
were black as a crow's wing.

"Are you free?" he asked in a growl that Francine alone could have
understood.

"Should I be here if I were not?" she replied indignantly. "But you,
what are you doing here? Still playing bandit, still roaming the country
like a mad dog wanting to bite. Oh! Pierre, if you were wise, you would
come with me. This beautiful young lady, who, I ought to tell you, was
nursed when a baby in our home, has taken care of me. I have two hundred
francs a year from a good investment. And Mademoiselle has bought me my
uncle Thomas's big house for fifteen hundred francs, and I have saved
two thousand beside."

But her smiles and the announcement of her wealth fell dead before the
dogged immovability of the Chouan.

"The priests have told us to go to war," he replied. "Every Blue we
shoot earns one indulgence."

"But suppose the Blues shoot you?"

He answered by letting his arms drop at his sides, as if regretting the
poverty of the offering he should thus make to God and the king.

"What will become of me?" exclaimed the young girl, sorrowfully.

Marche-a-Terre looked at her stupidly; his eyes seemed to enlarge; tears
rolled down his hairy cheeks upon the goatskin which covered him, and a
low moan came from his breast.

"Saint Anne of Auray!--Pierre, is this all you have to say to me after a
parting of seven years? You have changed indeed."

"I love you the same as ever," said the Chouan, in a gruff voice.

"No," she whispered, "the king is first."

"If you look at me like that I shall go," he said.

"Well, then, adieu," she replied, sadly.

"Adieu," he repeated.

He seized her hand, wrung it, kissed it, made the sign of the cross, and
rushed into the stable, like a dog who fears that his bone will be taken
from him.

"Pille-Miche," he said to his comrade. "Where's your tobacco-box?"

"Ho! _sacre bleu_! what a fine chain!" cried Pille-Miche, fumbling in a
pocket constructed in his goatskin.

Then he held out to Marche-a-Terre the little horn in which Bretons put
the finely powdered tobacco which they prepare themselves during the
long winter nights. The Chouan raised his thumb and made a hollow in
the palm of his hand, after the manner in which an "Invalide" takes his
