the sturdy comrade of the Campanian raid, the man who talked, now like
Ulysses, now like Thersites, but who always fought like Diomed; the
very Nisus who had saved his life.  It seemed, too, as if the others
understood the import of his glance, for Decius turned away
ostentatiously, and sought to arrange the leathern straps of his
corselet skirt, while Manlius strode over and grasped Sergius' hand.

"The butcher showed us better favour than he intended, when he put
others in our commands," he said gayly.  "We shall fight side by side,
and perhaps my sister may be pleased to play the siren no longer.
Besides, I am well satisfied to be free from any of the
responsibilities of this day."

"Marcia is no songstress of the rock, my Caius," said Sergius, half
sadly, half playfully; "unless her heart be the rock from which she
sings--a rock to me; but the gods have given men other things, when
women do not choose to love:--things that will serve to stir us today.
Afterward we shall be still."  Then, noting that the young man who had
first addressed Decius was now watching their talk with troubled face,
he raised his voice cheerfully.  "Tribune or volunteer, it is all one
to me.  Do we not serve under Aemilius Paullus and his Illyrian
auspices?  After this day, friends, we shall see no more pulse-eaters
in Italy."

Suddenly, a blast of trumpets rang clear, above the noise of
preparation; lieutenants dashed hither and thither, their legs bent
along their horses' sides; several cohorts marched past, to man the
rampart nearest the foe, while from behind came the louder rattle of
arms, and the earth shook under the tread of the legions, pressing on
through the porta dextra, and spreading out in three great columns that
plunged down the slope into the Aufidus, and rose again, and pushed out
into the plain on its southern bank.  Hastati, principes, triarii--they
marched in order of battle, ready to face about at the moment of
attack, while, as they deployed, the famished Romans across the river
swarmed down, under shelter of the protecting lines, and, lying thick
in the turbid water below, drank as if their parched tongues and lips
would never soften.

The morning mists were clearing.  Strange sounds and rumblings came
also from the south and west, and the red flag hung limp upon the spear.

Still the legions streamed on, but no orders had come to the special
volunteers, and Sergius began to wonder whether they were to be left to
guard the camp, as an added indignity to their rank.  He ascended the
rampart, with Manlius and Decius, and strove to pierce the distance in
the west.  Now and then a broad flash of light seemed to shine before
his eyes, and ever there came to his ears the rumble of tramping
thousands; the dust, too, was thickening, to take the place of the
scattered mists, and the wind blew it up in blinding clouds into the
face of Rome's battle.

"Gods! what is Terrentius Varro doing!" cried Decius suddenly, and the
three turned at his voice.  A nodding forest of crests, red and black,
rising a cubit above the uncovered helmets of the legionaries, seemed
to fill the eastern plain and extend almost to where the Adriatic beat
upon the shingle.  "Look at his front!  Look at how closely the
maniples are crushed together!  Gods! they are almost 'within the
rails' already."

Sergius looked, and the frown upon his brow deepened.

"Eighty thousand men," he muttered; "and we shall scarce outflank their
forty thousand.  Does Varro wish to cast aside every advantage!  Gods!
what gain is there in such depth? and he might--"

"Evidently you do not understand the strategy of great commanders who
have studied war."

The voice that interrupted was cynical and scornful, to a degree that
men hated the speaker even before they saw him; and, when the three
wheeled quickly, his face gave nothing to dispel the bad impression.  A
tall, gaunt man, in plain and somewhat battered armour; a face
sharp-featured, very dark, and deeply lined wherever the wrinkles lay
that expressed pride and contempt and violent passions; lowering brows
from beneath which shone little beady, cunning eyes that opponents
feared and distrusted: this was Lucius Aemilius Paullus, the conqueror
of Illyria, the man who had barely escaped conviction for his
peculations, the colleague of Varro the butcher, a patrician of the
bluest blood in Rome, a knave in pecuniary matters, selfish and
ungoverned, but a brave and wary soldier from cothurni to crest.

"You seem to be criticising a Roman consul: even my brother, Varro;" he
said again, for the three had only bowed in reply to his former speech.
"Are you not presumptuous?--you, Lucius Sergius; and you, Caius
Manlius--boys in war--and you, Decius, or whoever you may be--a man of
Varro's order, if I mistake not?"

"Yes, my father, I criticise," replied Sergius, at last, for the others
said nothing.

"Perhaps you were thinking that he has extended his front too far?"
said the consul, and there was infinite sarcasm in his tones.

Sergius grew crimson under the taunting voice and the little, shifty
eyes.

"I have ventured to say," he replied haughtily, "that the consul,
Varro, is not using our numbers as he might.  As you have noted, the
front _is_ contracted, where we might easily lash around their flank
like the thongs of a scourge.  Nevertheless had I known that the noble
colleague of the general was near me, I would have restrained my words."

"Ah! then you have doubtless grown more respectful of commanders since
you disobeyed your dictator in Campania;" but now the anger in Sergius'
face told the speaker that the limit of endurance had been reached, and
his tone became less offensive.  "That is in the old days, though, and
you _did_ run twelve miles with a broken shoulder: you see I know
all--only I am sure that you are not realizing how deeply your general
has studied the Punic wars, or perhaps you do not know how necessary is
depth to the battle that would stand against the great war-beasts.  It
is possible, barely possible, that our most scientific commander has
forgotten that the enemy has no elephants here; but what is that to a
great genius?  He has learned that Carthage wars with elephants, that
these are best met by deepening the files, and that we are about to
fight Carthage; therefore he deepens the files, though the last
elephant in Italy died two years ago in the northern marshes.  If you
are beaten, you will at least have the satisfaction of being beaten
while fighting most learnedly."

As Sergius noted the bitterness and agony in the voice that spoke, he
found his resentment giving place to pity for the hard, grim man who,
powerless to avert, yet saw clearly every cord of the snare into which
he was being driven.

"Do we guard the camp, my father?" he asked, gently, when Paullus had
finished.

The latter started from the gloomy stare with which he was regarding
the fast-forming lines.

"I have been offered the command of the camp," he said, almost
fiercely.  "I have refused it.  Escape to the north would be too
easy--and I do not wish to escape.  What do you think the centuries
would do if I came home beaten?  I who escaped so narrowly before?"  He
leered cunningly at his listeners; then his face grew set, and his
voice cold and even.  "I have solicited command of the Roman cavalry.
We shall fight on the right wing, beside the river, and I do not think
many of us will ride from the battle.  Varro commands the cavalry of
the allies on the left, and the pro-consuls"--he hesitated a
moment--"the pro-consuls market their beeves in the centre.  You will
cross with me now.  My volunteers ride about my body.  It is time.  It
is time."

The breeze from the southward freshened every minute, and the red flag
lashed out angrily toward the sea.




XIV.

CANNAE.

The cavalry trumpets rang out their clear notes, and Sergius and his
companions threw themselves upon their kneeling chargers.  Then they
rode out and down the bank, behind the consul who, with head hanging
upon his breast, had turned his rein the moment he had given the word.
What if the dust did swirl up in blinding sheets from the south?
Before them lay the Roman battle, horse and foot--such an army as the
city had never sent forth.  What if its masses were somewhat cramped?
its front narrow? its general an amateur?  They were to fight at last,
and how should a mongrel horde of barbarians, but half their number,
stand firm against the impetus of such a shock.  A moment's hush; then
measured voices rose in calm cadence--the voices of the tribunes
administering the military oath to each cohort, "Faithful to the
senate, obedient to your imperator."  What Roman could doubt that the
voice of victory spoke in the thunderous response!

And now the clangour of cymbals and the roll of drums came up on the
breezes from the south, and, with them, a strange uproar of barbarous
shouts and cries.  Then it was that the Roman legionaries began to
crash their heavy javelins against their great, oblong shields until
the din drowned everything else, and the thunder of Jove himself might
have roared in vain.

Sergius had ridden up the bank, almost at the consul's rein, and his
eyes wandered eagerly over Varro's array.  Eight full legions with
their quota of allies seemed welded into one huge column: Romans on the
right, Italians on the left.  The sun was well up, and its rays played
upon a very sea of bronze from which the feathered crests rose and
shivered like foam.  Far beyond the column, on the extreme left, he
could make out squadrons of allied horse, and then he turned to take
his place amid the cavalry of the city: young men well born, burning
with courage and ardour and wrath.  Despite himself his heart rose with
a leap of triumph.  A moment later he caught the little, beady eyes of
the consul looking through him, as it were, while the thin mouth
beneath writhed itself into a sneer.

"You hope?  That is well," said Paullus.  "Young men fight better and
die better when they hope; but I will show you how a Roman soldier can
give up his life for naught.  I would wish," he added with lowered
voice and speaking as if in self-communion, "that more of our horsemen
had adopted the Greek arms.  Reed spears and ox-hide bucklers will not
stand long against heavy cavalry.  A temple to Mars the avenger, if I
had but a front of Illyrian horse!  See now!  There are the scum!"

His voice rose eagerly at the last words, and Sergius turned from the
dark face now flashing with a sudden animation, and looked southward
over the plain.  For a moment the dust was too thick; then it seemed to
clear away, and the Carthaginian army burst into view.

Undulating like the open sea and rolling steadily on like the long,
slow sweep of billows upon a level shore, the glory of barbaric war
drew near.  On their left, resting upon the river's bank, rode the
Spanish and Gallic cavalry, strengthened here and there by a horse and
man in full armour like those of the Clinabarians; and the face of
Paullus clouded again when he noted what opponents he must meet: men,
horses, arms--all heavier than his own with the exception of a few
turmae newly equipped in the Greek fashion.  Beyond them, thrown back
in echelon, marched Africans in little squares of sixteen front.  These
had substituted for their own equipment the Roman spoils of Trasimenus
and Trebia.  Then, and again somewhat in advance, came alternate
companies of Gauls and Spaniards spread out in long thin array; the
former stripped to the navel, their hair tied up in a tufted knot, and
bearing their great swords upon their shoulders; the Spaniards
glittering in their purple-bordered tunics of snowy linen.  The waving
pikes of phalanges told of more Africans who seemed to lie in echelon
beyond, while far away, toward the low hills overgrown with copsewood
that formed the eastern horizon, clouds of swift-moving dust, amid
which shadows darted hither and thither at seeming random, marked the
presence of the wild riders of Numidia who were to face the horsemen of
Italy and of the Latin name.  In front of all, the plain was dotted
with naked men advancing at regular intervals and bearing small
bucklers of lynx-hide--the famous Balearic slingers that always opened
the day of battle for Carthage.  The heart of Sergius swelled within
him, beating hard and fast under the tension of the moment.  Only a few
minutes more, and those magnificent armies would crash together, not to
part until the plain should be heaped with corpses that were now men;
until the gods should adjudge the sovereignty of Italy.  Then he grew
calm, calm as the consul himself, and gazed enraptured upon the
picture, as if it meant no more than art and show--only the wind came
fresher from the south, and the fine dust, ground up by marching
thousands, smarted and blinded his eyes.

Nearer and nearer they drew, with steady, slow advance, while Rome
stood still and awaited their coming.  And now a commotion seemed to
start from the far distant south: the roar of voices, the blinding
flash of the sun on tossing swords, a cloud of dust distinct upon the
plain, a clump of horse-head standards rising amid it, and a group of
riders urging their galloping steeds along the invaders' front.  Rich
armour of strange pattern shone among them, and, a length ahead of the
rest, Sergius could see a white stallion with close-cropped mane, and
hoofs and fetlocks stained vermilion, that danced and curvetted and
arched its proud neck under the touch of a master.  He was not an
over-tall man, but his figure as he rode seemed well knit and graceful.
His armour was of brown-bronze scale-work, rich with gold and jewels,
while a white mantle fringed with Tyrian purple hung from his
shoulders; a helmet of burnished gold, horned and crested, gleamed like
a star upon his head, while, even at the distance, even through the
swirl, of dust, Sergius saw the crisp curled, black beard, and dreamed
that he caught the flash of dark, deep-set eyes.  There was no need of
the beating of weapons against shields, no need of the roar and howls
and shrill screaming in a score of tongues to tell the stranger's name.
Most of the soldiers kept ranks, but here and there a Gaul would bound
forward, dancing with strange leaps and whirling his sword about his
head, to throw himself prone before and beneath the vermilion hoofs
that never paused or swerved in their gallop.  Not a movement, not a
glance of the rider gave sign of acknowledgment or recognition; not a
look was cast upon the grovelling form, safe or hurt or maimed--only
the soldier's comrades howled their plaudits, mingled with laughter and
rude jeers whenever the devotee lay still or writhed or rose staggering
from some stroke of the vermilion hoofs.

But when the horseman drew bridle before the extreme left of the
centre, and, with eyes shaded by his hand, gazed long and earnestly at
the Roman array, the plaudits that had greeted his passage died away
into low murmurs and then silence.  "The general is studying the enemy.
Be silent!  Who knows but he would commune with Baal and Moloch?  Be
silent!"  So the word ran around and through the African squares.

Suddenly peals of laughter broke from the group of Carthaginian
officers that had ridden behind and who now clustered around him.  The
calm that no devotion, no suffering, no danger of men could move, was
gone; the schalischim had turned from his measuring of the enemy to
smile and jest with his friends.  Thereupon they threw back their heads
and laughed loud and long; and then the Africans noted it, and hoarse
cries of joy broke from their ranks.  "The schalischim must be sure of
victory.  Praise be to Melkarth!"  Sergius saw a captain of one of the
squares run out and touch his forehead to the earth before his
commander; but no Roman heard the man's words pregnant with fate.

"Now, my father, let The Lion's Brood lead the beasts of all the fields
to their feast.  We hunger, father, we hunger!"

And Hannibal had made answer, pointing northward toward the
plume-crested sea of blazing bronze, "Lo! friend; there are your meat
and wine."

Then a new roar of acclamation broke upward and rolled away to the
east.  Two richly armed riders parted from the group and dashed off:
Maharbal, light and slender, bending far over his horse's neck, rode
headlong in Numidian fashion to his Numidians; Hasdrubal, erect and
dignified, galloped to head the Gaulish and Spanish horse upon the
banks of Aufidus; trumpets, drums, cymbals, crashed out in mad,
barbaric discords; and, with their horse-head standards tossing amid
the forest of spears, the Carthaginian line drove forward to the attack.

Running fast before the line of battle, Sergius could still make out,
even through the dust, those same naked men with lynx-hide bucklers,
dotting the plain at regular intervals, and each man's right arm seemed
always whirling about his head.  The Roman light troops had pushed on
to skirmish, and now they began to fall back, though no arrow or
javelin could have reached them--could have flown to the foe.  Sergius
watched in surprise their confusion and terror as they sought to plunge
among the legionaries or hide themselves behind the horsemen; nor had
they fled unscathed.  Here a man ran by screaming and clasping his
shattered hand to his breast; then another staggered up, with arm
hanging broken at his side, while the big drops of blood fell slowly
from his fingers; and yet a third appeared, pale and helpless,
supported between two companions.

Sounds, too, now dull and heavy, and again ringing and metallic, seemed
to punctuate the roar of the advancing host.  Sergius saw a horseman
near him clap his hand to his forehead and plunge headlong to the
earth: horses reared and snorted, some fell with ugly, red blotches on
their breasts and throats; the clangour and the thuds came
faster--faster; for now the clay and leaden bullets of the slingers
fell in showers, like hailstones, and it was good armour that turned
them.

Manlius had leaped down to aid a friend who was reeling helplessly,
with both eyes beaten out, and, a moment later, he approached Sergius,
holding up a slinger's bullet.  The red had sunken into the lines of
the stamped inscription, and displayed them in hideous relief, "This to
your back, sheep!"

"That is always the way with barbarians," sneered Marcus Decius.  "No
blow without an insult--look!  They shall have blows themselves, soon,
that will need no insults to piece them out."

Paullus had watched with eagerness, with anxiety, for the signal to
advance.  Varro seemed to hesitate, while the great masses of Rome,
lashed by the bitter rain of the slings, writhed and groaned in anguish
and rage; the light troops had disappeared, and the Balearians, now
close at hand, leaped and slung without let or hindrance.  Then it was
that Paullus, waiting no longer, made a sign to his trumpeters.
"Scatter me that rabble!" he cried, and the cavalry clarions raised
their voices in one long, swelling peal of sound.

"Close! close!" rose the shout of battle, and the Roman horse dashed
forward into the dust cloud--forward upon the slingers that suddenly
were not there, had vanished, as it were, into the earth itself.

The straight trumpets and curved horns of the legions were ringing
behind them, stirred to life at last, but the horsemen did not hear.
What were those looming up ahead?  Not naked slingers--armoured
cavalry!  Hasdrubal with his Gauls and Spaniards were before them--upon
them; and all sense and volition were lost in the terrific shock.

Line after line went down, as if at touch, while fresh lines poured on
over the heaving mass of men and horses, until those who were face to
face seemed to fight upon a hill.  Fiercer grew the pressure, tighter
and more dense the throng; horses, crushed together, powerless to move,
snorted and tossed their heads in terror, while the riders leaned
forward and grappled with those opposite.  Weapons first, then hands
clutching at throats were doing the deadly work, and the dead, man and
horse, stood fast amid the press, unable even to fall and become merged
into the hideous, purple thing beneath their feet.

Mere weight, though, was beginning to tell.  The human ridge that had
marked the joining of battle seemed far back among the enemy, and
squadron after squadron, in close array, breasted its top and plunged
down to mingle with the living or take their places among the dead.
The Romans were giving ground, slowly, stubbornly, but unmistakably,
and still, above the shouts and shrieks, the trampling and the clash of
weapons, the groans and the hard, short breathing, they could hear the
harsh voice of the consul, Paullus, urging his men to make battle
firmly.

Backward, steadily backward; and now, in one of those mad rushes, in
which men who seemed immovably wedged were swirled about like the water
in a maelstrom, Sergius found himself close to the consul, with Manlius
but a few paces in front.  The thin, cruel lips had writhed away from
the white teeth, the helmet was gone, and the scant, black hair was
dabbled with blood that flowed from a slight cut upon the general's
brow; the snake-like eyes sought those of the young patrician with a
look wherein exultation and despair were strangely mingled.

"To the earth! to the earth, all!" he cried, at the same moment
plunging his sword into his horse's throat, and lighting firmly on his
feet, as the animal sank suddenly down.  "We _must_ stand.  Gods! where
are the legions?  Clashing shields and waving javelins, while we are
cut to pieces!  Gods! they shall pay for it!"  Then he drew close to
Sergius' ear and whispered as calmly as if in the praetorium: "Learn,
now, a lesson of war, my son.  Hannibal destroys us piecemeal, choosing
where he is strong and we are weak, while Varro allows _his_ strength
to stand and rest and wait for its turn to come.  Down! down all!"

Outnumbered, outarmed, borne down and back, the Roman cavalry still
fought, but the press had grown looser, the mass less dense; and now,
at the word of the consul, all that could hear his voice obeyed the
order of despair, ancient as the day of Lake Regillus.  Man after man
sprang to earth.  Here was freer swing for weapons, here was surer
foothold, better chance to stand fast, and, for a moment, the thronging
foe seemed to recoil before the determined onslaught.

But it was not recoil.  It was only the devouring of the foremost by
that red monster underneath.  Who could recoil, with the squadrons
still pouring on, over the hill of corpses behind?  Beaten, a man could
but die in his place, and that much they did.  Many, too, had followed
the Roman example, leaping from their steeds and fighting hand to hand,
till the cavalry battle had changed into a thousand combats of man
against man.

It was here that Caius Manlius fell.  Sergius was but a few feet from
him when he saw the youth sway gently, and, bowing his head, sink down.
He had made an effort to push to his side, and then the front of the
enemy seemed to receive some new impetus and surged forward over the
spot.  What mattered it?  He had seen the red spear point peeping out
between his friend's shoulders.  He was dead, as they would all soon
be, and the couch was purple and kinglike.  At that moment, he felt his
arm gripped hard, and turned to look into the consul's face.

"Do you not see it is over?" said Paullus, sharply.
