
"Just my luck when I come fishing," muttered Ralph, as he waded slowly
on, picking his way among the stones.  "There's always something wrong;
either it's too hot, or it's too cold, or there's too much water, or
there isn't enough, or the wind's somewhere in the wrong quarter, or I
haven't got the right bait; and so sure as I was to meet old Master
Rayburn, picking flowers on the bank, he'd say: `Ah, you should have
come yesterday, or last week, and then you'd have caught a fish at every
throw.'

"Stupid work, fishing," he said, half-aloud, when he had waded as far as
he could without getting wet, for the water had suddenly deepened and
curved round out of sight, all calm and still beneath the boughs shading
it on either side.  "Seems very easy, though, when you watch old
Rayburn.  He always knows where to throw."

For the moment, he was ready to give up, but feeling that his sister
would be disappointed if he went back empty-handed, he waded out, and
taking a short cut across the horseshoe formed by the stream, he reached
it again beyond the deeps, where it was possible to wade once more; and
before entering the bubbling waters, he stood looking upward, thinking
how beautiful it all was, with the flashing water gurgling and swirling
round the great stones which dotted the bed.  Every here and there the
sides were glowing with patches of the deep golden, yellow globe-flower;
a little farther on, there was a deeper spot with a patch of the great
glistening leaves of the water-lily, not yet in bloom; and as he stepped
down into the water, there was a flutter from a bird seated on a dead
twig, and a flash of azure light gleamed over the river, as the
disturbed kingfisher darted upstream, to be watched till it disappeared.

Flies danced up and down above the water, and every now and then one
dropped on the surface, with its wings closed, and sailed downward like
a tiny boat.  Bees swept by with a humming, slumberous sound; and among
the sedges at the sides, where the golden irises displayed their lovely
blossoms, the thin-bodied dragon-flies, steel-blue or green, darted on
transparent wing, pairs every now and then encountering fiercely with a
faint rustling of wings, and battling for a few seconds, when one would
dart away with the other in pursuit.

Ralph waded on, catching nothing; but the beauties of the place
increased, and satisfied him so that he began to forget his mission, and
paused now to listen to the soft coo of the wood-pigeon in the grove, to
the quick sharp _tah_! of the jackdaws sailing about high up, where they
nested in the bare face of the creviced cliffs.  Then on and on again,
in sunshine or in shade, for quite a couple of hours, fishing in a
desultory way, but with not the slightest result.  Then his luck turned.

He had been driven ashore several times by the deep water, but always
returned to the bed of the river where it shallowed, for it was easier
going than forcing his way amidst the stones, bushes, and trees at the
side; and now, as he was wading up toward where the water came over a
ridge in a cascade, a little shoal of half-a-dozen fish darted upward,
and he followed them, with the water growing more and more shallow, till
his pulses beat with satisfaction, for a little investigation showed him
that he would be able to drive the slippery prey right into a broad
stretch where the water was but an inch or two deep, and dotted
everywhere with shoals that were nearly dry.

Fishing was out of the question in a place like that, so twisting his
line round his rod, he used the latter as a walking-staff, and followed
till the prey he sought were compelled to flap themselves along upon
their sides; two trout on finding themselves in such straits leaping
right on to one of the half-dried pebbly shoals.  Here Ralph pounced
upon one after the other, and transferred them to his creel, after first
taking out his shoes and hose, which had been reclining there, at rest
from their ordinary avocation of protecting his feet.

"Queer fishing," muttered the lad; "but I've caught them.  Now for you."

This to the rest of the shoal, which he chased so perseveringly that he
caught four more by driving them into the shallowest water, the two
largest succeeding by desperate rushes in getting through the
treacherous part, and disappearing in the deeps toward the cascade.

"All too big to go in the little can," thought Ralph.  "Never mind; they
will make a fry.  Perhaps I can catch some smaller ones the same way."

He tied his shoes together by the strings, and fastened them to the
strap of his creel, tucked his hose through his belt, and went ashore
again, to make his way beyond the little cascade which fell musically
over the rocks; and as he was going on by the dammed-up deeps, there was
suddenly a rush among the sedges and rushes, followed by a splash, the
lad catching sight of a long, wet, brown body, as the animal made a
plunge and disappeared in deep water.

The next moment his eyes rested upon the remains of a feast, in the
shape of a fine trout, half-eaten, evidently quite freshly caught.

"Better fisherman than I am," said Ralph to himself, as he searched the
surface of the water to see if the otter he had disturbed would rise.
But the cunning animal had reached its hole in the bank, and was not
likely to return to its banquet: so Ralph went on beyond the deeps to
where the river ran shallow again beneath the overhanging trees, just
catching a glimpse at times of the great cliffs, whose tops often
resembled the ruins of neglected towers, so regularly were they laid in
fissured blocks.

Encouraged by his success, though conscious of the fact that it was the
work of a poacher more than an angler, Ralph was not long in finding a
suitable place for driving a few more fish.  Fate favoured him in this,
and in their being just of a suitable size for the little pool, and he
had just secured one about six inches long, and was filling his little
can with water, when he was startled by hearing a half-stifled bark
uttered, as if by a dog whose muzzle was being held.

He looked sharply round, and suddenly woke to the fact that, for how
long he could not tell, while he had been stalking the trout, he had
been stalked in turn.

For a man suddenly appeared among the bushes on the right, looked across
the river, and shouted, "Come on, now."

Three more appeared on the other side, one of whom leaped at once into
the river, while simultaneously a couple of dogs were let loose, and
dashed into the shallow water.

"Don't let him go back, lads," shouted the first man.  "Run him up: he
can't get away."

Ralph was equal to the occasion.  In a sharp glance round, while
snapping his rod in two where the butt was lashed to the thinner part,
he saw that his retreat was cut off down the river, and that his only
chance of escape was to go forward, right and left being sheer wall,
twenty feet on one side, two hundred, at least, on the other.  He
grasped, too, the fact that the men about to attack him were evidently
lead-miners, and the thought flashed upon him that he had inadvertently
come higher till, after a fashion, he was occupying Mark Eden's
position, trespassing upon an enemy's ground.

These thoughts were lightning-like, as he swung his rod-butt round, and
brought it down heavily upon a big mongrel dog that splashed through the
shallows, knocked it right over, to lie yelping and whining as it tore
up water and sand, the second dog contenting itself with yapping,
snarling, and making little charges, till a lucky blow caught it upon
the leg, and sent it howling back.

This was sufficient for the moment, and Ralph began to retreat, with the
men following him.

"There," shouted the one who seemed to be the leader.  "It's of no use,
so you may give in.  We know you, so come out, fish and all.  You
haven't no right up here."

Ralph made no reply, but flushing with anger and annoyance, he hurried
on over the shallows, with the men now in full pursuit, shouting, too,
at the dogs, and urging them to renew their attack.

"What an idiot I have been!" muttered the lad, as he splashed on,
wishing that he was on open ground, so that he could run; but wishing
was in vain.  He was unarmed, too, save for the stout ash-butt of his
spliced rod, and he knew that it would be impossible to defend himself
with that for long against four strong men, who were apparently only too
eager to get hold of the heir of the rival house, and drag him before
their lord.  For that they were Sir Edward Eden's men the lad had not a
doubt.

But Ralph had little time for thought; action was the thing, and he
splashed on, glancing from right to left to find a spot where he could
land and take to his heels--an impossibility there, for he soon saw that
his only chance was to climb, and that chance was small.

Then, as the men followed some forty yards behind, he saw the light of
hope.  Not far ahead, the water looked black and still, as it glided
through a narrow defile, shut in by the rocks.  That meant deep water;
but if he could reach that, he would have to swim, and the men probably
would not dare to follow.

Already the shallows were coming to an end, the water reaching to his
knees; and it was here that, encouraged and bullied into making a fresh
attack, the dogs overtook him once more, and half swimming, half making
leaps, they came at him, the bigger avoiding a blow, and seizing him by
the left, fortunately without hurt, the animal's teeth meeting only in
the padding of the short breeches of the period; but it held on,
growling, and shaking its head violently, while its companion, after a
deal of barking, dashed in on the right.

This time Ralph's aim was surer and quicker, the dog receiving a sharp
cut across the ear from the butt of the rod, and going down at once, to
begin howling, and swimming in a circle.

Rid thus of one enemy, the lad proceeded to get rid of the second by a
very simple plan.  Lowering his left hand, he got hold of the strap
which formed the dog's collar, and in spite of its struggles and
worryings, went on as fast as he could go--slowly enough, all the same--
to where the water deepened; and as it reached his thigh, he bent his
knees, with the natural result that as the dog held tenaciously to its
mouthful of cloth and padding, its head was beneath the water.

A few seconds were sufficient to make it quit its hold, and come up
choking and barking; but in obedience to the urging on of one of the
men, to pluckily renew the attack.

A sharp crack from the butt knocked all the remaining courage out of its
head, and it turned, howling, to swim back toward its masters.

"Here, it's no good, young Darley," yelled one of the men.  "You may
give up now.  We've got you fast."

"And it'll be the worst for you, if you don't.  We have got you now."

"Hold me tight, then," muttered the lad, with a triumphant feeling at
his chances of escape beginning to make him glow.

"You mustn't go there," shouted another.  "It's woundy deep, and you'll
get sucked down."

"Come and be sucked down after me," muttered Ralph, as the dogs began
barking again furiously, but refused to follow and attack, keeping close
to the men, who were all now in the river, wading slowly, the walls
having grown too precipitous for them to keep on the sides.

Ralph's progress was slow enough too, for the water had deepened till it
was above his waist, and the next minute was nearly to his armpits,
while the river having narrowed now to half its width, the stream though
deep came faster, and grew harder to stem.

"D'you hear, youngster!" roared the leader.  "You'll be drownded."

"Better that than be caught and dragged up to the Black Tor for that
wretched boor, Mark Eden, to triumph over me," thought Ralph; and he
pushed boldly on, forced his way a dozen yards, and then made a step, to
find no bottom, and going down over his head.

"Told you so," rang in his ears, as he struck out and rose, to find
himself being borne back; but a few strokes took him to the right side,
where he snatched at some overhanging ferns rooted in the perpendicular
wall of rock, checked himself for a few moments, and looked back, to see
the four men, nearly breast-deep, a dozen yards behind, waiting for him
to be swept down to their grasp.

"There, give up!" cried another, "for you're drownded.  You don't know
the waters here, like we do.  Some o' that goes right down into the
mine."

To the astonishment of the men, who did not dare to venture farther, the
lad did not surrender, but looked sharply about to try and fully grasp
his position and his chances of escape.  Ahead the water certainly
appeared deeper, for it glided on towards him, looking black, oily, and
marked with sinuous lines.  There was no ripple to indicate a shallow,
and he could feel, from the pressure against him, that it would be
impossible to stem it in swimming; while most ominous of all, right in
the centre, a little way ahead, there was a spot where the water was a
little depressed.  It kept circling round every now and then, forming a
funnel-shaped opening about a foot across, showing plainly enough that
the men were right, and that a portion of the stream passed down there
into some hole in the rock, to form one of the subterranean courses of
which there were several in the district, as he knew both where rivulets
disappeared, and also suddenly gushed out into the light of day.

Ralph grasped then at once that it would be impossible to escape by
swimming against such a stream; that if he could have done so, there was
the horrible risk of being sucked down into some awful chasm to instant
death; that he could not climb up the wall of rock where he hung on
then; and that, if he let go, he would be borne along in a few moments
to the men's hands; and then, that he would be bound, and dragged away a
prisoner, to his shame, and all through trying to get those unfortunate
fish.

"It's of no use," he muttered despairingly, as he looked above him
again, and, as he did so, saw that the men were laughing at his
predicament, for, as Touchstone the clown told the shepherd, he was "in
a parlous case."

But hope is a fine thing, and gives us rays of light even in the darkest
places.  Just when Ralph felt most despondent, it occurred to him that
there was another way out of the difficulty, and he proceeded to put it
in force by looking straight ahead, along the wall of rock, which ran
down into the water, and there, just beyond the tuft by which he held
on, and certainly within reach, was one of the perpendicular cracks
which divided the stone into blocks.  In an instant he had stretched out
his left hand, forced it in there, drawn himself along till he could get
the other hand in, and was safe so far; and to his great joy found, by a
little searching, that he could find foot-hold, for the horizontal crack
ran some four feet below the surface, and afforded him sufficient
standing room, if he could only find something to hold on by above.

For the moment he was safe, but his object was to get along the wall,
till he could find a place where he could climb the rocky side of the
river; and once clear of the water, he felt that it would go hard if he
could not find some way to the top, the more easily from the fact that
above the steep piece of wall down into the water the trees grew so
abundantly that a climber would for a certainty find plenty of help.

The men remained motionless in the water, watching in the full
expectation of seeing the lad swept down to them; but he held fast, and
once more reaching forward, he strained outward till he caught a tuft of
grass, crept on along the submerged ledge to that, and from there gained
a large patch of tough broom.  Then came two or three easy movements
onward, bringing the fugitive abreast of the sink, which was larger than
it had appeared from below, and Ralph shuddered as he felt that any one
who approached the vortex would for a certainty be dragged down.

For a few moments he clung there, the nervous thoughts of what might be
if he slipped and were caught in the whirlpool being sufficient to half
paralyse him; then turning angry at his feeling of cowardice, he reached
boldly out again, found fresh hand-hold, and did the same again and
again, till he was a dozen yards beyond the sink-hole, and had to stop
and think.  For the wall was smoother than ever; the stream ran
stronger; the distance between the two sides being less, it looked
deeper; and the next place where he could find hand-hold was apparently
too far to reach.

Still, it was his only chance, and taking fast hold with his right, and
somehow thinking the while of Mark's passage along the surface of the
High Cliff, he reached out farther and farther, pressing his breast
against the rock, edging his feet along, and then stopping at his
fullest stretch, to find the little root of ivy he aimed at grasping
still six or seven inches away.

The dead silence preserved by the men below was broken by the barking of
one of the dogs.  Then all was still again, and Ralph felt that his only
chance was to steady himself for a moment with his feet, loosen his hold
with his right hand, and let himself glide along the face of the rock
forward till his left touched the ivy, and then hold on.

If he missed catching hold--?

"I mustn't think of such a thing," he muttered; and he at once put his
plan into action, letting himself glide forward.

As a scholar, fresh from a big school, he ought to have been more
mathematically correct, and known that in describing the arc of a circle
his left hand would go lower; but he did not stop to think.  The
consequence was that as his fingers glided over the rough stone, they
passed a few inches beneath the tough stem he sought to grasp, and once
in motion, he could not stop himself.  He clutched at the stone with his
right hand, and his nails scratched over it, as he vainly strove to find
a prominence or crevice to check him; but all in vain; the pressure of
the running water on the lower part of his body helped to destroy his
balance, and with a faint cry, he went headlong into the gliding stream,
the men simultaneously giving vent to a yell, half of horror, half of
satisfaction.

"The sink-hole!  Shall I be sucked down?" was the thought that flashed
across the lad's brain, like a lurid light, as he went under; then he
struck out vigorously for the side, and as he rose to the surface saw
that he was being drawn toward the hole where it gaped horribly, and
closed, and gaped again, a few yards away.

If any boy who reads this cannot swim, let him feel that he is sinning
against himself, and neglecting a great duty, till he can plunge without
a trace of nervousness into deep water, and make his way upon the
surface easily and well.  Fortunately for Ralph Darley, he was quite at
home in the water, and the strong firm strokes he took were sufficient
to carry him well in toward the side, so that he passed the little
whirlpool where its force was weakest; and as the men below closed
together, and waded a couple of steps to meet him, they had the
mortification of seeing him clinging to the wall of rock, half-a-dozen
yards above them, and then creeping forward again, step by step, till he
reached the point from which he had been swept, and held on there once
more.

Here, as they watched him curiously, they saw that he remained
motionless, as if thinking what to do next, as was the case; and coming
to the conclusion that he must manage somehow to grasp that tuft of ivy,
he tried again, with the dread of the consequences the less from the
experience he had gone through.

Coming to the conclusion that the only way was to raise himself upon his
toes at the last moment, and jerk himself forward, he drew in a deep
breath, reached out to the utmost, but raised his left hand more, then
loosened his grasp with his right, and when he thought the moment had
come, gave a slight bound.

That did it.  He caught at the ivy, his fingers closed upon it tightly,
and he tried hard to keep his feet upon the ledge below water.  But this
effort failed, his balance was gone, his feet glided from the ledge, and
he swung round, holding on to the ivy, which seemed to be giving way at
its roots.

But as Ralph fell, his hand slipped quite a foot down the ivy, and the
water took a good deal of his weight, so that, though the strain upon
the feeble growth was great, it remained firm enough to hold him; and he
hung half in, half out of the water for some time, afraid to stir, but
all the time energetically using his eyes, to seek for a way out of his
perilous position.

He was not long in coming to a decision.  Above the ivy there was one of
the cracks, and he saw that if he could reach that, he could climb to
the one above, and from there gain the roots of a gnarled hawthorn,
whose seed had been dropped in a fissure by a bird generations back, the
dryness of the position and want of root-food keeping the tree stunted
and dwarfed.  Once up there, another ten or twelve feet would take him
to the top of the lower wall, and then he felt that it would go hard if
he could not climb and hide, or escape up the cliff; so he set to at
once to try.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

RALPH GETS TIT FOR TAT.

Ralph Darley's first step was to get his right hand beside his left, and
