They all held their peace, but presently Diomed of the loud war-cry
spoke, saying, "Let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet
Helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the Trojans is at
hand."

The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words that Diomed had
spoken, and thereon King Agamemnon said to Idaeus, "Idaeus, you have
heard the answer the Achaeans make you-and I with them. But as
concerning the dead, I give you leave to burn them, for when men are
once dead there should be no grudging them the rites of fire. Let Jove
the mighty husband of Juno be witness to this covenant."

As he spoke he upheld his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
Idaeus went back to the strong city of Ilius. The Trojans and
Dardanians were gathered in council waiting his return; when he came,
he stood in their midst and delivered his message. As soon as they
heard it they set about their twofold labour, some to gather the
corpses, and others to bring in wood. The Argives on their part also
hastened from their ships, some to gather the corpses, and others to
bring in wood.

The sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh risen into the
vault of heaven from the slow still currents of deep Oceanus, when the
two armies met. They could hardly recognise their dead, but they washed
the clotted gore from off them, shed tears over them, and lifted them
upon their waggons. Priam had forbidden the Trojans to wail aloud, so
they heaped their dead sadly and silently upon the pyre, and having
burned them went back to the city of Ilius. The Achaeans in like manner
heaped their dead sadly and silently on the pyre, and having burned
them went back to their ships.

Now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn, chosen bands of the
Achaeans were gathered round the pyre and built one barrow that was
raised in common for all, and hard by this they built a high wall to
shelter themselves and their ships; they gave it strong gates that
there might be a way through them for their chariots, and close outside
it they dug a trench deep and wide, and they planted it within with
stakes.

Thus did the Achaeans toil, and the gods, seated by the side of Jove
the lord of lightning, marvelled at their great work; but Neptune, lord
of the earthquake, spoke, saying, "Father Jove, what mortal in the
whole world will again take the gods into his counsel? See you not how
the Achaeans have built a wall about their ships and driven a trench
all round it, without offering hecatombs to the gods? The fame of this
wall will reach as far as dawn itself, and men will no longer think
anything of the one which Phoebus Apollo and myself built with so much
labour for Laomedon."

Jove was displeased and answered, "What, O shaker of the earth, are you
talking about? A god less powerful than yourself might be alarmed at
what they are doing, but your fame reaches as far as dawn itself.
Surely when the Achaeans have gone home with their ships, you can
shatter their wall and fling it into the sea; you can cover the beach
with sand again, and the great wall of the Achaeans will then be
utterly effaced."

Thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the Achaeans was
completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got their
supper. Many ships had come with wine from Lemnos, sent by Euneus the
son of Jason, born to him by Hypsipyle. The son of Jason freighted them
with ten thousand measures of wine, which he sent specially to the sons
of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus. From this supply the Achaeans bought
their wine, some with bronze, some with iron, some with hides, some
with whole heifers, and some again with captives. They spread a goodly
banquet and feasted the whole night through, as also did the Trojans
and their allies in the city. But all the time Jove boded them ill and
roared with his portentous thunder. Pale fear got hold upon them, and
they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground, nor did any
dare drink till he had made offerings to the most mighty son of Saturn.
Then they laid themselves down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.



BOOK VIII

  Jove forbids the gods to interfere further--There is an even
  fight till midday, but then Jove inclines the scales of victory
  in favour of the Trojans, who eventually chase the Achaeans
  within their wall--Juno and Minerva set out to help the
  Trojans: Jove sends Iris to turn them back, but later on
  he promises Juno that she shall have her way in the end--Hector's
  triumph is stayed by nightfall--The Trojans bivouac on the plain.

NOW when Morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to suffuse
light over the earth, Jove called the gods in council on the topmost
crest of serrated Olympus. Then he spoke and all the other gods gave
ear. "Hear me," said he, "gods and goddesses, that I may speak even as
I am minded. Let none of you neither goddess nor god try to cross me,
but obey me every one of you that I may bring this matter to an end. If
I see anyone acting apart and helping either Trojans or Danaans, he
shall be beaten inordinately ere he come back again to Olympus; or I
will hurl him down into dark Tartarus far into the deepest pit under
the earth, where the gates are iron and the floor bronze, as far
beneath Hades as heaven is high above the earth, that you may learn how
much the mightiest I am among you. Try me and find out for yourselves.
Hangs me a golden chain from heaven, and lay hold of it all of you,
gods and goddesses together--tug as you will, you will not drag Jove
the supreme counsellor from heaven to earth; but were I to pull at it
myself I should draw you up with earth and sea into the bargain, then
would I bind the chain about some pinnacle of Olympus and leave you all
dangling in the mid firmament. So far am I above all others either of
gods or men."

They were frightened and all of them of held their peace, for he had
spoken masterfully; but at last Minerva answered, "Father, son of
Saturn, king of kings, we all know that your might is not to be
gainsaid, but we are also sorry for the Danaan warriors, who are
perishing and coming to a bad end. We will, however, since you so bid
us, refrain from actual fighting, but we will make serviceable
suggestions to the Argives that they may not all of them perish in your
displeasure."

Jove smiled at her and answered, "Take heart, my child, Trito-born; I
am not really in earnest, and I wish to be kind to you."

With this he yoked his fleet horses, with hoofs of bronze and manes of
glittering gold. He girded himself also with gold about the body,
seized his gold whip and took his seat in his chariot. Thereon he
lashed his horses and they flew forward nothing loth midway twixt earth
and starry heaven. After a while he reached many-fountained Ida, mother
of wild beasts, and Gargarus, where are his grove and fragrant altar.
There the father of gods and men stayed his horses, took them from the
chariot, and hid them in a thick cloud; then he took his seat all
glorious upon the topmost crests, looking down upon the city of Troy
and the ships of the Achaeans.

The Achaeans took their morning meal hastily at the ships, and
afterwards put on their armour. The Trojans on the other hand likewise
armed themselves throughout the city, fewer in numbers but nevertheless
eager perforce to do battle for their wives and children. All the gates
were flung wide open, and horse and foot sallied forth with the tramp
as of a great multitude.

When they were got together in one place, shield clashed with shield,
and spear with spear, in the conflict of mail-clad men. Mighty was the
din as the bossed shields pressed hard on one another--death--cry and
shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with blood.

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning their weapons
beat against one another, and the people fell, but when the sun had
reached mid-heaven, the sire of all balanced his golden scales, and put
two fates of death within them, one for the Trojans and the other for
the Achaeans. He took the balance by the middle, and when he lifted it
up the day of the Achaeans sank; the death-fraught scale of the
Achaeans settled down upon the ground, while that of the Trojans rose
heavenwards. Then he thundered aloud from Ida, and sent the glare of
his lightning upon the Achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear fell
upon them and they were sore afraid.

Idomeneus dared not stay nor yet Agamemnon, nor did the two Ajaxes,
servants of Mars, hold their ground. Nestor knight of Gerene alone
stood firm, bulwark of the Achaeans, not of his own will, but one of
his horses was disabled. Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen had hit it
with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow
away from the skull, a very deadly place. The horse bounded in his
anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others
into confusion. The old man instantly began cutting the traces with his
sword, but Hector's fleet horses bore down upon him through the rout
with their bold charioteer, even Hector himself, and the old man would
have perished there and then had not Diomed been quick to mark, and
with a loud cry called Ulysses to help him.

"Ulysses," he cried, "noble son of Laertes where are you flying to,
with your back turned like a coward? See that you are not struck with a
spear between the shoulders. Stay here and help me to defend Nestor
from this man's furious onset."

Ulysses would not give ear, but sped onward to the ships of the
Achaeans, and the son of Tydeus flinging himself alone into the thick
of the fight took his stand before the horses of the son of Neleus.
"Sir," said he, "these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force
is spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your
horses are slow to move. Mount my chariot and see what the horses of
Tros can do--how cleverly they can scud hither and thither over the
plain either in flight or in pursuit. I took them from the hero Aeneas.
Let our squires attend to your own steeds, but let us drive mine
straight at the Trojans, that Hector may learn how furiously I too can
wield my spear."

Nestor knight of Gerene hearkened to his words. Thereon the doughty
squires, Sthenelus and kind-hearted Eurymedon, saw to Nestor's horses,
while the two both mounted Diomed's chariot. Nestor took the reins in
his hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with
Hector, and the son of Tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging
full speed towards them. He missed him, but struck his charioteer and
squire Eniopeus son of noble Thebaeus in the breast by the nipple while
the reins were in his hands, so that he died there and then, and the
horses swerved as he fell headlong from the chariot. Hector was greatly
grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but let him lie for all his
sorrow, while he went in quest of another driver; nor did his steeds
have to go long without one, for he presently found brave Archeptolemus
the son of Iphitus, and made him get up behind the horses, giving the
reins into his hand.

All had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have been
penned up in Ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and men been
quick to mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderbolt which fell just
in front of Diomed's horses with a flare of burning brimstone. The
horses were frightened and tried to back beneath the car, while the
reins dropped from Nestor's hands. Then he was afraid and said to
Diomed, "Son of Tydeus, turn your horses in flight; see you not that
the hand of Jove is against you? To-day he vouchsafes victory to
Hector; to-morrow, if it so please him, he will again grant it to
ourselves; no man, however brave, may thwart the purpose of Jove, for
he is far stronger than any."

Diomed answered, "All that you have said is true; there is a grief
however which pierces me to the very heart, for Hector will talk among
the Trojans and say, 'The son of Tydeus fled before me to the ships.'
This is the vaunt he will make, and may earth then swallow me."

"Son of Tydeus," replied Nestor, "what mean you? Though Hector say that
you are a coward the Trojans and Dardanians will not believe him, nor
yet the wives of the mighty warriors whom you have laid low."

So saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the battle,
and with a cry that rent the air the Trojans and Hector rained their
darts after them. Hector shouted to him and said, "Son of Tydeus, the
Danaans have done you honour hitherto as regards your place at table,
the meals they give you, and the filling of your cup with wine.
Henceforth they will despise you, for you are become no better than a
woman. Be off, girl and coward that you are, you shall not scale our
walls through any flinching upon my part; neither shall you carry off
our wives in your ships, for I shall kill you with my own hand."

The son of Tydeus was in two minds whether or no to turn his horses
round again and fight him. Thrice did he doubt, and thrice did Jove
thunder from the heights of Ida in token to the Trojans that he would
turn the battle in their favour. Hector then shouted to them and said,
"Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians, lovers of close fighting, be men, my
friends, and fight with might and with main; I see that Jove is minded
to vouchsafe victory and great glory to myself, while he will deal
destruction upon the Danaans. Fools, for having thought of building
this weak and worthless wall. It shall not stay my fury; my horses will
spring lightly over their trench, and when I am at their ships forget
not to bring me fire that I may burn them, while I slaughter the
Argives who will be all dazed and bewildered by the smoke."

Then he cried to his horses, "Xanthus and Podargus, and you Aethon and
goodly Lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all the honey-sweet
corn with which Andromache daughter of great Eetion has fed you, and
for she has mixed wine and water for you to drink whenever you would,
before doing so even for me who am her own husband. Haste in pursuit,
that we may take the shield of Nestor, the fame of which ascends to
heaven, for it is of solid gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may
strip from the shoulders of Diomed the cuirass which Vulcan made him.
Could we take these two things, the Achaeans would set sail in their
ships this self-same night."

Thus did he vaunt, but Queen Juno made high Olympus quake as she shook
with rage upon her throne. Then said she to the mighty god of Neptune,
"What now, wide ruling lord of the earthquake? Can you find no
compassion in your heart for the dying Danaans, who bring you many a
welcome offering to Helice and to Aegae? Wish them well then. If all of
us who are with the Danaans were to drive the Trojans back and keep
Jove from helping them, he would have to sit there sulking alone on
Ida."

King Neptune was greatly troubled and answered, "Juno, rash of tongue,
what are you talking about? We other gods must not set ourselves
against Jove, for he is far stronger than we are."

Thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the ditch, from
the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses and warriors, who
were pent up there by Hector son of Priam, now that the hand of Jove
was with him. He would even have set fire to the ships and burned them,
had not Queen Juno put it into the mind of Agamemnon, to bestir himself
and to encourage the Achaeans. To this end he went round the ships and
tents carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge
black hull of Ulysses' ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from
this place that his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand towards
the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other towards those of
Achilles--for these two heroes, well assured of their own strength, had
valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the line. From this
spot then, with a voice that could be heard afar, he shouted to the
Danaans, saying, "Argives, shame on you cowardly creatures, brave in
semblance only; where are now our vaunts that we should prove
victorious--the vaunts we made so vaingloriously in Lemnos, when we ate
the flesh of horned cattle and filled our mixing-bowls to the brim? You
vowed that you would each of you stand against a hundred or two hundred
men, and now you prove no match even for one--for Hector, who will be
ere long setting our ships in a blaze. Father Jove, did you ever so
ruin a great king and rob him so utterly of his greatness? Yet, when to
my sorrow I was coming hither, I never let my ship pass your altars
without offering the fat and thigh-bones of heifers upon every one of
them, so eager was I to sack the city of Troy. Vouchsafe me then this
prayer--suffer us to escape at any rate with our lives, and let not the
Achaeans be so utterly vanquished by the Trojans."

Thus did he pray, and father Jove pitying his tears vouchsafed him that
his people should live, not die; forthwith he sent them an eagle, most
unfailingly portentous of all birds, with a young fawn in its talons;
the eagle dropped the fawn by the altar on which the Achaeans
sacrificed to Jove the lord of omens; when, therefore, the people saw
that the bird had come from Jove, they sprang more fiercely upon the
Trojans and fought more boldly.

There was no man of all the many Danaans who could then boast that he
had driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner
than the son of Tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew an
armed warrior of the Trojans, Agelaus the son of Phradmon. He had
turned his horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back
midway between his shoulders and went right through his chest, and his
armour rang rattling round him as he fell forward from his chariot.

After him came Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus, the two Ajaxes
clothed in valour as with a garment, Idomeneus and his companion in
arms Meriones, peer of murderous Mars, and Eurypylus the brave son of
Euaemon. Ninth came Teucer with his bow, and took his place under cover
of the shield of Ajax son of Telamon. When Ajax lifted his shield
Teucer would peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng, the
man would fall dead; then Teucer would hie back to Ajax as a child to
its mother, and again duck down under his shield.

Which of the Trojans did brave Teucer first kill? Orsilochus, and then
Ormenus and Ophelestes, Daetor, Chromius, and godlike Lycophontes,
Amopaon son of Polyaemon, and Melanippus. All these in turn did he lay
low upon the earth, and King Agamemnon was glad when he saw him making
havoc of the Trojans with his mighty bow. He went up to him and said,
"Teucer, man after my own heart, son of Telamon, captain among the
host, shoot on, and be at once the saving of the Danaans and the glory
of your father Telamon, who brought you up and took care of you in his
own house when you were a child, bastard though you were. Cover him
with glory though he is far off; I will promise and I will assuredly
perform; if aegis-bearing Jove and Minerva grant me to sack the city of
Ilius, you shall have the next best meed of honour after my own--a
tripod, or two horses with their chariot, or a woman who shall go up
into your bed."

And Teucer answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, you need not urge me;
from the moment we began to drive them back to Ilius, I have never
ceased so far as in me lies to look out for men whom I can shoot and
kill; I have shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them have been buried
in the flesh of warlike youths, but this mad dog I cannot hit."

As he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at Hector, for he was bent
on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit Priam's
brave son Gorgythion in the breast. His mother, fair Castianeira,
lovely as a goddess, had been married from Aesyme, and now he bowed his
head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by showers
in spring--even thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight of his
helmet.

Again he aimed at Hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again his
arrow missed, for Apollo turned it aside; but he hit Hector's brave
charioteer Archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he was
driving furiously into the fight. The horses swerved aside as he fell
headlong from the chariot, and there was no life left in him. Hector
was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but for all his
sorrow he let him lie where he fell, and bade his brother Cebriones,
who was hard by, take the reins. Cebriones did as he had said. Hector
thereon with a loud cry sprang from his chariot to the ground, and
seizing a great stone made straight for Teucer with intent to kill him.
Teucer had just taken an arrow from his quiver and had laid it upon the
bow-string, but Hector struck him with the jagged stone as he was
taking aim and drawing the string to his shoulder; he hit him just
where the collar-bone divides the neck from the chest, a very deadly
place, and broke the sinew of his arm so that his wrist was less, and
the bow dropped from his hand as he fell forward on his knees. Ajax saw
that his brother had fallen, and running towards him bestrode him and
sheltered him with his shield. Meanwhile his two trusty squires,
Mecisteus son of Echius, and Alastor, came up and bore him to the ships
groaning in his great pain.

Jove now again put heart into the Trojans, and they drove the Achaeans
to their deep trench with Hector in all his glory at their head. As a
hound grips a wild boar or lion in flank or buttock when he gives him
chase, and watches warily for his wheeling, even so did Hector follow
close upon the Achaeans, ever killing the hindmost as they rushed
panic-stricken onwards. When they had fled through the set stakes and
trench and many Achaeans had been laid low at the hands of the Trojans,
they halted at their ships, calling upon one another and praying every
man instantly as they lifted up their hands to the gods; but Hector
wheeled his horses this way and that, his eyes glaring like those of
Gorgo or murderous Mars.

Juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to Minerva,
"Alas, child of aegis-bearing Jove, shall you and I take no more
thought for the dying Danaans, though it be the last time we ever do
so? See how they perish and come to a bad end before the onset of but a
single man. Hector the son of Priam rages with intolerable fury, and
has already done great mischief."

Minerva answered, "Would, indeed, this fellow might die in his own
land, and fall by the hands of the Achaeans; but my father Jove is mad
with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. He forgets
how often I saved his son when he was worn out by the labours
Eurystheus had laid on him. He would weep till his cry came up to
heaven, and then Jove would send me down to help him; if I had had the
sense to foresee all this, when Eurystheus sent him to the house of
Hades, to fetch the hell-hound from Erebus, he would never have come
back alive out of the deep waters of the river Styx. And now Jove hates
me, while he lets Thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and
took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to
Achilles. I shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his
grey-eyed darling. Get our horses ready, while I go within the house of
aegis-bearing Jove and put on my armour; we shall then find out whether
Priam's son Hector will be glad to meet us in the highways of battle,
or whether the Trojans will glut hounds and vultures with the fat of
their flesh as they be dead by the ships of the Achaeans."

Thus did she speak and white-armed Juno, daughter of great Saturn,
obeyed her words; she set about harnessing her gold-bedizened steeds,
while Minerva daughter of aegis-bearing Jove flung her richly vesture,
made with her own hands, on to the threshold of her father, and donned
the shirt of Jove, arming herself for battle. Then she stepped into her
flaming chariot, and grasped the spear so stout and sturdy and strong
with which she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno
lashed her horses, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew open
of their own accord--gates over which the Hours preside, in whose hands
are heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud that hides them
or to close it. Through these the goddesses drove their obedient steeds.

But father Jove when he saw them from Ida was very angry, and sent
winged Iris with a message to them. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, turn
them back, and see that they do not come near me, for if we come to
fighting there will be mischief. This is what I say, and this is what I
mean to do. I will lame their horses for them; I will hurl them from
their chariot, and will break it in pieces. It will take them all ten
years to heal the wounds my lightning shall inflict upon them; my
grey-eyed daughter will then learn what quarrelling with her father
means. I am less surprised and angry with Juno, for whatever I say she
always contradicts me."

With this Iris went her way, fleet as the wind, from the heights of Ida
to the lofty summits of Olympus. She met the goddesses at the outer
gates of its many valleys and gave them her message. "What," said she,
"are you about? Are you mad? The son of Saturn forbids going. This is
what he says, and this is what he means to do, he will lame your horses for
you, he will hurl you from your chariot, and will break it in pieces.
It will take you all ten years to heal the wounds his lightning will
inflict upon you, that you may learn, grey-eyed goddess, what
quarrelling with your father means. He is less hurt and angry with
Juno, for whatever he says she always contradicts him but you, bold
hussy, will you really dare to raise your huge spear in defiance of
Jove?"

With this she left them, and Juno said to Minerva, "Of a truth, child
of aegis-bearing Jove, I am not for fighting men's battles further in
defiance of Jove. Let them live or die as luck will have it, and let
Jove mete out his judgements upon the Trojans and Danaans according to
his own pleasure."

She turned her steeds; the Hours presently unyoked them, made them fast
to their ambrosial mangers, and leaned the chariot against the end wall
of the courtyard. The two goddesses then sat down upon their golden
thrones, amid the company of the other gods; but they were very angry.

Presently father Jove drove his chariot to Olympus, and entered the
assembly of gods. The mighty lord of the earthquake unyoked his horses
for him, set the car upon its stand, and threw a cloth over it. Jove
then sat down upon his golden throne and Olympus reeled beneath him.
Minerva and Juno sat alone, apart from Jove, and neither spoke nor
asked him questions, but Jove knew what they meant, and said, "Minerva
and Juno, why are you so angry? Are you fatigued with killing so many
of your dear friends the Trojans? Be this as it may, such is the might
of my hands that all the gods in Olympus cannot turn me; you were both
of you trembling all over ere ever you saw the fight and its terrible
