to be picking and waling your steps.' And on he passed with long and
determined strides, dragging me along with him.

I was not quite easy in his company; for, now that his minstrel pride
was hurt, the man had changed from the quiet, decorous, I might almost
say respectable person, which he seemed while he told his tale, into the
appearance of a fierce, brawling, dissolute stroller. So that when he
entered the large hut, where a great number of fishers, with their wives
and daughters, were engaged in eating, drinking, and dancing, I was
somewhat afraid that the impatient violence of my companion might
procure us an indifferent reception.

But the universal shout of welcome with which Wandering Willie was
received--the hearty congratulations--the repeated 'Here's t' ye,
Willie!'--'Where hae ya been, ye blind deevil?' and the call upon him
to pledge them--above all, the speed with which the obnoxious pipe and
tabor were put to silence, gave the old man such effectual assurance of
undiminished popularity and importance, as at once put his jealousy to
rest, and changed his tone of offended dignity into one better fitted
to receive such cordial greetings. Young men and women crowded round, to
tell how much they were afraid some mischance had detained him, and how
two or three young fellows had set out in quest of him.

'It was nae mischance, praised be Heaven,' said Willie, 'but the absence
of the lazy loon Rob the Rambler, my comrade, that didna come to meet
me on the Links; but I hae gotten a braw consort in his stead, worth a
dozen of him, the unhanged blackguard.'

'And wha is't tou's gotten, Wullie, lad?' said half a score of voices,
while all eyes were turned on your humble servant, who kept the best
countenance he could, though not quite easy at becoming the centre to
which all eyes were pointed.

'I ken him by his hemmed cravat,' said one fellow; 'it's Gil Hobson, the
souple tailor frae Burgh. Ye are welcome to Scotland, ye prick-the-clout
loon,' he said, thrusting forth a paw; much the colour of a badger's
back, and of most portentous dimensions.

'Gil Hobson? Gil whoreson!' exclaimed Wandering Willie; 'it's a gentle
chap that I judge to be an apprentice wi' auld Joshua Geddes, to the
quaker-trade.'

'What trade be's that, man?' said he of the badger-coloured fist.

'Canting and lying,'--said Willie, which produced a thundering laugh;
'but I am teaching the callant a better trade, and that is, feasting and
fiddling.'

Willie's conduct in thus announcing something like my real character,
was contrary to compact; and yet I was rather glad he did so, for the
consequence of putting a trick upon these rude and ferocious men, might,
in case of discovery, have been dangerous to us both, and I was at the
same time delivered from the painful effort to support a fictitious
character. The good company, except perhaps one or two of the young
women whose looks expressed some desire for better acquaintance, gave
themselves no further trouble about me; but, while the seniors resumed
their places near an immense bowl or rather reeking cauldron of
brandy-punch, the younger arranged themselves on the floor and called
loudly on Willie to strike up.

With a brief caution to me, to 'mind my credit, for fishers have ears,
though fish have none,' Willie led off in capital style, and I followed,
certainly not so as to disgrace my companion, who, every now and then,
gave me a nod of approbation. The dances were, of course, the Scottish
jigs, and reels, and 'twasome dances', with a strathspey or hornpipe for
interlude; and the want of grace on the part of the performers was amply
supplied by truth of ear, vigour and decision of step, and the agility
proper to the northern performers. My own spirits rose with the mirth
around me, and with old Willie's admirable execution, and frequent 'weel
dune, gentle chap, yet;'--and, to confess the truth, I felt a great deal
more pleasure in this rustic revel, than I have done at the more formal
balls and concerts in your famed city, to which I have sometimes made my
way. Perhaps this was because I was a person of more importance to the
presiding matron of Brokenburn-foot, than I had the means of rendering
myself to the far-famed Miss Nickie Murray, the patroness of your
Edinburgh assemblies. The person I mean was a buxom dame of about
thirty, her fingers loaded with many a silver ring, and three or four
of gold; her ankles liberally displayed from under her numerous blue,
white, and scarlet; short petticoats, and attired in hose of the finest
and whitest lamb's-wool, which arose from shoes of Spanish cordwain,
fastened with silver buckles. She took the lead in my favour, and
declared, 'that the brave young gentleman should not weary himself to
death wi' playing, but take the floor for a dance or twa.'

'And what's to come of me, Dame Martin?' said Willie.

'Come o' thee?' said the dame; 'mishanter on the auld beard o' ye! ye
could play for twenty hours on end, and tire out the haill countryside
wi' dancing before ye laid down your bow, saving for a by-drink or the
like o' that.'

'In troth, dame,' answered Willie, 'ye are no sae far wrang; sae if my
comrade is to take his dance, ye maun gie me my drink, and then bob it
away like Madge of Middlebie.'

The drink was soon brought; but while Willie was partaking of it,
a party entered the hut, which arrested my attention at once, and
intercepted the intended gallantry with which I had proposed to present
my hand to the fresh-coloured, well-made, white-ankled Thetis, who had
obtained me manumission from my musical task.

This was nothing less than the sudden appearance of the old woman whom
the laird had termed Mabel; Cristal Nixon, his male attendant; and the
young person who had said grace to us when I supped with him.

This young person--Alan, thou art in thy way a bit of a conjurer--this
young person whom I DID NOT describe, and whom you, for that very
reason, suspected was not an indifferent object to me--is, I am sorry to
say it, in very fact not so much so as in prudence she ought. I will not
use the name of love on this occasion; for I have applied it too often
to transient whims and fancies to escape your satire, should I venture
to apply it now. For it is a phrase, I must confess, which I have
used--a romancer would say, profaned--a little too often, considering
how few years have passed over my head. But seriously, the fair chaplain
of Brokenburn has been often in my head when she had no business
there; and if this can give thee any clue for explaining my motives
in lingering about the country, and assuming the character of Willie's
companion, why, hang thee, thou art welcome to make use of it--a
permission for which thou need'st not thank me much, as thou wouldst not
have failed to assume it whether it were given or no.

Such being my feelings, conceive how they must have been excited, when,
like a beam upon a cloud, I saw this uncommonly beautiful girl enter the
apartment in which they were dancing; not, however, with the air of
an equal, but that of a superior, come to grace with her presence the
festival of her dependants. The old man and woman attended, with looks
as sinister as hers were lovely, like two of the worst winter months
waiting upon the bright-eyed May.

When she entered--wonder if thou wilt--she wore A GREEN MANTLE, such as
thou hast described as the garb of thy fair client, and confirmed what
I had partly guessed from thy personal description, that my chaplain and
thy visitor were the same person. There was an alteration on her
brow the instant she recognized me. She gave her cloak to her female
attendant, and, after a momentary hesitation, as if uncertain whether to
advance or retire, she walked into the room with dignity and
composure, all making way, the men unbonneting, and the women curtsying
respectfully, as she assumed a chair which was reverently placed for her
accommodation, apart from others.

There was then a pause, until the bustling mistress of the ceremonies,
with awkward but kindly courtesy, offered the young lady a glass of
wine, which was at first declined, and at length only thus far accepted,
that, bowing round to the festive company, the fair visitor wished them
all health and mirth, and just touching the brim with her lip, replaced
it on the salver. There was another pause; and I did not immediately
recollect, confused as I was by this unexpected apparition, that it
belonged to me to break it. At length a murmur was heard around me,
being expected to exhibit,--nay, to lead down the dance,--in consequence
of the previous conversation.

'Deil's in the fiddler lad,' was muttered from more quarters than
one--'saw folk ever sic a thing as a shame-faced fiddler before?'

At length a venerable Triton, seconding his remonstrances with a hearty
thump on my shoulder, cried out, 'To the floor--to the floor, and let us
see how ye can fling--the lasses are a' waiting.'

Up I jumped, sprang from the elevated station which constituted our
orchestra, and, arranging my ideas as rapidly as I could, advanced
to the head of the room, and, instead of offering my hand to the
white-footed Thetis aforesaid, I venturously made the same proposal to
her of the Green Mantle.

The nymph's lovely eyes seemed to open with astonishment at the
audacity of this offer; and, from the murmurs I heard around me, I also
understood that it surprised, and perhaps offended, the bystanders. But
after the first moment's emotion, she wreathed her neck, and drawing
herself haughtily up, like one who was willing to show that she was
sensible of the full extent of her own condescension, extended her hand
towards me, like a princess gracing a squire of low degree.

There is affectation in all this, thought I to myself, if the Green
Mantle has borne true evidence--for young ladies do not make visits, or
write letters to counsel learned in the law, to interfere in the motions
of those whom they hold as cheap as this nymph seems to do me; and if
I am cheated by a resemblance of cloaks, still I am interested to show
myself, in some degree, worthy of the favour she has granted with so
much state and reserve. The dance to be performed was the old Scots Jig,
in which you are aware I used to play no sorry figure at La Pique's,
when thy clumsy movements used to be rebuked by raps over the knuckles
with that great professor's fiddlestick. The choice of the tune was left
to my comrade Willie, who, having finished his drink, feloniously struck
up the well-known and popular measure,

  Merrily danced the Quaker's wife,
  And merrily danced the Quaker.

An astounding laugh arose at my expense, and I should have been
annihilated, but that the smile which mantled on the lip of my partner,
had a different expression from that of ridicule, and seemed to say,
'Do not take this to heart.' And I did not, Alan--my partner danced
admirably, and I like one who was determined, if outshone, which I could
not help, not to be altogether thrown into the shade.

I assure you our performance, as well as Willie's music, deserved
more polished spectators and auditors; but we could not then have been
greeted with such enthusiastic shouts of applause as attended while I
handed my partner to her seat, and took my place by her side, as one who
had a right to offer the attentions usual on such an occasion. She was
visibly embarrassed, but I was determined not to observe her confusion,
and to avail myself of the opportunity of learning whether this
beautiful creature's mind was worthy of the casket in which nature had
lodged it.

Nevertheless, however courageously I formed this resolution, you cannot
but too well guess the difficulties I must needs have felt in carrying
it into execution; since want of habitual intercourse with the charmers
of the other sex has rendered me a sheepish cur, only one grain less
awkward than thyself. Then she was so very beautiful, and assumed an
air of so much dignity, that I was like to fall under the fatal error of
supposing she should only be addressed with something very clever; and
in the hasty raking which my brains underwent in this persuasion, not a
single idea occurred that common sense did not reject as fustian on the
one hand, or weary, flat, and stale triticism on the other. I felt as
if my understanding were no longer my own, but was alternately under the
dominion of Aldeborontiphoscophornio, and that of his facetious friend
Rigdum-Funnidos. How did I envy at that moment our friend Jack Oliver,
who produces with such happy complacence his fardel of small talk, and
who, as he never doubts his own powers of affording amusement, passes
them current with every pretty woman he approaches, and fills up the
intervals of chat by his complete acquaintance with the exercise of the
fan, the FLACON, and the other duties of the CAVALIERE SERVENTE. Some
of these I attempted, but I suppose it was awkwardly; at least the Lady
Green Mantle received them as a princess accepts the homage of a clown.

Meantime the floor remained empty, and as the mirth of the good meeting
was somewhat checked, I ventured, as a DERNIER RESSORT, to propose a
minuet. She thanked me, and told me haughtily enough, 'she was here
to encourage the harmless pleasures of these good folks, but was not
disposed to make an exhibition of her own indifferent dancing for their
amusement.'

She paused a moment, as if she expected me to suggest something; and as
I remained silent and rebuked, she bowed her head more graciously, and
said, 'Not to affront you, however, a country-dance, if you please.'

What an ass was I, Alan, not to have anticipated her wishes! Should I
not have observed that the ill-favoured couple, Mabel and Cristal, had
placed themselves on each side of her seat, like the supporters of the
royal arms? the man, thick, short, shaggy, and hirsute, as the lion; the
female, skin-dried, tight-laced, long, lean, and hungry-faced, like the
unicorn. I ought to have recollected, that under the close inspection
of two such watchful salvages, our communication, while in repose, could
not have been easy; that the period of dancing a minuet was not the very
choicest time for conversation; but that the noise, the exercise,
and the mazy confusion of a country-dance, where the inexperienced
performers were every now and then running against each other, and
compelling the other couples to stand still for a minute at a time,
besides the more regular repose afforded by the intervals of the dance
itself, gave the best possible openings for a word or two spoken in
season, and without being liable to observation.

We had but just led down, when an opportunity of the kind occurred, and
my partner said, with great gentleness and modesty, 'It is not perhaps
very proper in me to acknowledge an acquaintance that is not claimed;
but I believe I speak to Mr. Darsie Latimer?'

'Darsie Latimer was indeed the person that had now the honour and
happiness'--

I would have gone on in the false gallop of compliment, but she cut me
short. 'And why,' she said, 'is Mr. Latimer here, and in disguise, or at
least assuming an office unworthy of a man of education?--I beg pardon,'
she continued,--'I would not give you pain, but surely making, an
associate of a person of that description'--

She looked towards my friend Willie, and was silent. I felt heartily
ashamed of myself, and hastened to say it was an idle frolic, which want
of occupation had suggested, and which I could not regret, since it had
procured me the pleasure I at present enjoyed.

Without seeming to notice my compliment, she took the next opportunity
to say, 'Will Mr. Latimer permit a stranger who wishes him well to ask,
whether it is right that, at his active age, he should be in so far void
of occupation, as to be ready to adopt low society for the sake of idle
amusement?'

'You are severe, madam,' I answered; 'but I cannot think myself degraded
by mixing with any society where I meet'--

Here I stopped short, conscious that I was giving my answer an
unhandsome turn. The ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM, the last to which a polite
man has recourse, may, however, be justified by circumstances, but
seldom or never the ARGUMENTUM AD FOEMINAM.

She filled up the blank herself which I had left. 'Where you meet ME, I
suppose you would say? But the case is different. I am, from my unhappy
fate, obliged to move by the will of others, and to be in places which
I would by my own will gladly avoid. Besides, I am, except for these few
minutes, no participator of the revels--a spectator only, and attended
by my servants. Your situation is different--you are here by choice,
the partaker and minister of the pleasures of a class below you in
education, birth, and fortunes. If I speak harshly, Mr. Latimer,' she
added, with much sweetness of manner, 'I mean kindly.'

I was confounded by her speech, 'severe in youthful wisdom'; all
of naive or lively, suitable to such a dialogue, vanished from my
recollection, and I answered with gravity like her own, 'I am, indeed,
better educated than these poor people; but you, madam, whose kind
admonition I am grateful for, must know more of my condition than I
do myself--I dare not say I am their superior in birth, since I know
nothing of my own, or in fortunes, over which hangs an impenetrable
cloud.'

'And why should your ignorance on these points drive you into low
society and idle habits?' answered my female monitor. 'Is it manly to
wait till fortune cast her beams upon you, when by exertion of your own
energy you might distinguish yourself? Do not the pursuits of learning
lie open to you--of manly ambition--of war? But no--not of war, that has
already cost you too dear.'

'I will be what you wish me to be,' I replied with eagerness--'You have
but to choose my path, and you shall see if I do not pursue it with
energy, were it only because you command me.'

'Not because I command you,' said the maiden, 'but because reason,
common sense, manhood, and, in one word, regard for your own safety,
give the same counsel.'

'At least permit me to reply, that reason and sense never assumed
a fairer form--of persuasion,' I hastily added; for she turned from
me--nor did she give me another opportunity of continuing what I had
to say till the next pause of the dance, when, determined to bring our
dialogue to a point, I said, 'You mentioned manhood also, and in the
same breath, personal danger. My ideas of manhood suggest that it is
cowardice to retreat before dangers of a doubtful character. You, who
appear to know so much of my fortunes that I might call you my guardian
angel, tell me what these dangers are, that I may judge whether manhood
calls on me to face or to fly them.'

She was evidently perplexed by this appeal.

'You make me pay dearly for acting as your humane adviser,' she replied
at last: 'I acknowledge an interest in your fate, and yet I dare not
tell you whence it arises; neither am I at liberty to say why, or from
whom, you are in danger; but it is not less true that danger is near
and imminent. Ask me no more, but, for your own sake, begone from this
country. Elsewhere you are safe--here you do but invite your fate.'

'But am I doomed to bid thus farewell to almost the only human being who
has showed an interest in my welfare? Do not say so--say that we shall
meet again, and the hope shall be the leading star to regulate my
course!'

'It is more than probable,' she said--'much more than probable, that we
may never meet again. The help which I now render you is all that may be
in my power; it is such as I should render to a blind man whom I might
observe approaching the verge of a precipice; it ought to excite no
surprise, and requires no gratitude.'

So saying, she again turned from me, nor did she address me until the
dance was on the point of ending, when she said, 'Do not attempt to
speak to or approach me again in the course of the night; leave the
company as soon as you can, but not abruptly, and God be with you.'

I handed her to her seat, and did not quit the fair palm I held, without
expressing my feelings by a gentle pressure. She coloured slightly, and
withdrew her hand, but not angrily. Seeing the eyes of Cristal and Mabel
sternly fixed on me, I bowed deeply, and withdrew from her; my heart
saddening, and my eyes becoming dim in spite of me, as the shifting
crowd hid us from each other.

It was my intention to have crept back to my comrade Willie, and resumed
my bow with such spirit as I might, although, at the moment, I would
have given half my income for an instant's solitude. But my retreat was
cut off by Dame Martin, with the frankness--if it is not an inconsistent
phrase-of rustic coquetry, that goes straight up to the point.

'Aye, lad, ye seem unco sune weary, to dance sae lightly? Better the nag
that ambles a' the day, than him that makes a brattle for a mile, and
then's dune wi' the road.'

This was a fair challenge, and I could not decline accepting it.
Besides, I could see Dame Martin was queen of the revels; and so many
were the rude and singular figures about me, that I was by no means
certain whether I might not need some protection. I seized on her
willing hand, and we took our places in the dance, where, if I did not
acquit myself with all the accuracy of step and movement which I had
before attempted, I at least came up to the expectations of my partner,
who said, and almost swore, 'I was prime at it;' while, stimulated
to her utmost exertions, she herself frisked like a kid, snapped her
fingers like castanets, whooped like a Bacchanal, and bounded from the
floor like a tennis-ball,--aye, till the colour of her garters was no
particular mystery. She made the less secret of this, perhaps, that they
were sky-blue, and fringed with silver.

The time has been that this would have been special fun; or rather, last
night was the only time I can recollect these four years when it would
not have been so; yet, at this moment, I cannot tell you how I longed
to be rid of Dame Martin. I almost wished she would sprain one of those
'many-twinkling' ankles, which served her so alertly; and when, in the
midst of her exuberant caprioling, I saw my former partner leaving
the apartment, and with eyes, as I thought, turning towards me, this
unwillingness to carry on the dance increased to such a point, that I
was almost about to feign a sprain or a dislocation myself, in order to
put an end to the performance. But there were around me scores of old
women, all of whom looked as if they might have some sovereign recipe
for such an accident; and, remembering Gil Blas, and his pretended
disorder in the robber's cavern, I thought it as wise to play Dame
Martin fair, and dance till she thought proper to dismiss me. What I did
I resolved to do strenuously, and in the latter part of the exhibition
I cut and sprang from the floor as high and as perpendicularly as Dame
Martin herself; and received, I promise you, thunders of applause, for
the common people always prefer exertion and agility to grace. At length
Dame Martin could dance no more, and, rejoicing at my release, I led her
to a seat, and took the privilege of a partner to attend her.

'Hegh, sirs,' exclaimed Dame Martin, 'I am sair forfoughen! Troth!
callant, I think ye hae been amaist the death o' me.'

I could only atone for the alleged offence by fetching her some
refreshment, of which she readily partook.

'I have been lucky in my partners,' I said, 'first that pretty young
lady, and then you, Mrs. Martin.'

'Hout wi' your fleeching,' said Dame Martin. 'Gae wa--gae wa, lad; dinna
blaw in folk's lugs that gate; me and Miss Lilias even'd thegither! Na,
na, lad--od, she is maybe four or five years younger than the like o'
me,--bye and attour her gentle havings.'

'She is the laird's daughter?' said I, in as careless a tone of inquiry
as I could assume.

'His daughter, man? Na, na, only his niece--and sib aneugh to him, I
think.'

'Aye, indeed,' I replied; 'I thought she had borne his name?'

'She bears her ain name, and that's Lilias.'

'And has she no other name?' asked I.

'What needs she another till she gets a gudeman?' answered my Thetis,
a little miffed perhaps--to use the women's phrase--that I turned
the conversation upon my former partner, rather than addressed it to
herself.

There was a little pause, which was interrupted by Dame Martin
observing, 'They are standing up again.'

'True,' said I, having no mind to renew my late violent CAPRIOLE, and I
must go help old Willie.'

Ere I could extricate myself, I heard poor Thetis address herself to
a sort of merman in a jacket of seaman's blue, and a pair of trousers
(whose hand, by the way, she had rejected at an earlier part of the
evening) and intimate that she was now disposed to take a trip.

'Trip away, then, dearie,' said the vindictive man of the waters,
without offering his hand; 'there,' pointing to the floor, 'is a roomy
berth for you.'

Certain I had made one enemy, and perhaps two, I hastened to my original
seat beside Willie, and began to handle my bow. But I could see that my
conduct had made an unfavourable impression; the words, 'flory conceited
chap,'--'hafflins gentle,' and at length, the still more alarming
epithet of 'spy,' began to be buzzed about, and I was heartily glad when
the apparition of Sam's visage at the door, who was already possessed of
and draining a can of punch, gave me assurance that my means of retreat
were at hand. I intimated as much to Willie, who probably had heard
more of the murmurs of the company than I had, for he whispered, 'Aye,
aye,--awa wi' ye--ower lang here--slide out canny--dinna let them see ye
are on the tramp.'

I slipped half a guinea into the old man's hand, who answered, 'Truts
pruts! nonsense but I 'se no refuse, trusting ye can afford it. Awa wi'
ye--and if ony body stops ye, cry on me.'

I glided, by his advice, along the room as if looking for a partner,
joined Sam, whom I disengaged with some difficulty from his can, and
we left the cottage together in a manner to attract the least possible
observation. The horses were tied in a neighbouring shed, and as
the moon was up, and I was now familiar with the road, broken and
complicated as it is, we soon reached the Shepherd's Bush, where the old
landlady was sitting up waiting for us, under some anxiety of mind, to
account for which she did not hesitate to tell me that some folks had
gone to Brokenburn from her house, or neighbouring towns, that did not
come so safe back again. 'Wandering Willie,' she said, 'was doubtless a
kind of protection.'

Here Willie's wife, who was smoking in the chimney corner, took up the
praises of her 'hinnie,' as she called him, and endeavoured to awaken
my generosity afresh, by describing the dangers from which, as she was
pleased to allege, her husband's countenance had assuredly been the
means of preserving me. I was not, however, to be fooled out of
more money at this time, and went to bed in haste, full of vanous
cogitations.

I have since spent a couple of days betwixt Mount Sharon and this place,
and betwixt reading, writing to thee this momentous history, forming
plans for seeing the lovely Lilias, and--partly, I think, for the sake
of contradiction--angling a little in spite of Joshua'a scruples--though
I am rather liking the amusement better as I begin to have some success
in it.

And now, my dearest Alan, you are in full possession of my secret--let
me as frankly into the recesses of your bosom. How do you feel towards
this fair ignis fatuus, this lily of the desert? Tell me honestly; for
however the recollection of her may haunt my own mind, my love for Alan
Fairford surpasses the love of woman, I know, too, that when you DO
love, it will be to

  Love once and love no more.

A deep-consuming passion, once kindled in a breast so steady as yours,
would never be extinguished but with life. I am of another and more
volatile temper, and though I shall open your next with a trembling hand
and uncertain heart, yet let it bring a frank confession that this fair
unknown has made a deeper impression on your gravity than you reckoned
for, and you will see I can tear the arrow from my own wound, barb and
all. In the meantime, though I have formed schemes once more to see her,
I will, you may rely on it, take no step for putting them into practice.
I have refrained from this hitherto, and I give you my word of honour,
I shall continue to do so; yet why should you need any further assurance
from one who is so entirely yours as D.L.

PS.--I shall be on thorns till I receive your answer. I read, and
re-read your letter, and cannot for my soul discover what your real
sentiments are. Sometimes I think you write of her as one in jest--and
sometimes I think that cannot be. Put me at ease as soon as possible.




LETTER XIII

ALAN FAIRFORD TO DARSIE LATIMER

I write on the instant, as you direct; and in a tragi-comic humour, for
I have a tear in my eye and a smile on my cheek. Dearest Darsie, sure
never a being but yourself could be so generous--sure never a being but
yourself could be so absurd! I remember when you were a boy you wished
to make your fine new whip a present to old Aunt Peggy, merely because
she admired it; and now, with like unreflecting and inappropriate
liberality, you would resign your beloved to a smoke-dried young
sophister, who cares not one of the hairs which it is his occupation to
split, for all the daughters of Eve. I in love with your Lilias--your
Green Mantle--your unknown enchantress!--why I scarce saw her for five
minutes, and even then only the tip of her chin was distinctly visible.
She was well made, and the tip of her chin was of a most promising cast
for the rest of the face; but, Heaven save you! she came upon business!
and for a lawyer to fall in love with a pretty client on a single
consultation, would be as wise as if he became enamoured of a
particularly bright sunbeam which chanced for a moment to gild his
bar-wig. I give you my word I am heart-whole and moreover, I assure you,
that before I suffer a woman to sit near my heart's core, I must see her
full face, without mask or mantle, aye, and know a good deal of her
mind into the bargain. So never fret yourself on my account, my kind and
generous Darsie; but, for your own sake, have a care and let not an idle
attachment, so lightly taken up, lead you into serious danger.

On this subject I feel so apprehensive, that now when I am decorated
with the honours of the gown, I should have abandoned my career at the
very starting to come to you, but for my father having contrived to
clog my heels with fetters of a professional nature. I will tell you the
matter at length, for it is comical enough; and why should not you
list to my juridical adventures, as well as I to those of your fiddling
knight-errantry?

It was after dinner, and I was considering how I might best introduce
to my father the private resolution I had formed to set off for
Dumfriesshire, or whether I had not better run away at once, and plead
my excuse by letter, when, assuming the peculiar look with which he
communicates any of his intentions respecting me, that he suspects may
not be altogether acceptable, 'Alan,' he said, 'ye now wear a gown--ye
have opened shop, as we would say of a more mechanical profession; and,
doubtless, ye think the floor of the courts is strewed with guineas, and
that ye have only to stoop down to gather them?'

'I hope I am sensible, sir,' I replied, 'that I have some knowledge and
practice to acquire, and must stoop for that in the first place.'

'It is well said,' answered my father; and, always afraid to give too
much encouragement, added, 'Very well said, if it be well acted up
to--Stoop to get knowledge and practice is the very word. Ye know very
well, Alan, that in the other faculty who study the ARS MEDENDI, before
the young doctor gets to the bedsides of palaces, he must, as they call
it, walk the hospitals; and cure Lazarus of his sores, before he be
admitted to prescribe for Dives, when he has gout or indigestion'--

'I am aware, sir, that'--

'Whisht--do not interrupt the court. Well--also the chirurgeons have
a useful practice, by which they put their apprentices and tyrones to
work; upon senseless dead bodies, to which, as they can do no good, so
they certainly can do as little harm; while at the same time the tyro,
or apprentice, gains experience, and becomes fit to whip off a leg or
arm from a living subject, as cleanly as ye would slice an onion.'

'I believe I guess your meaning, sir,' answered I; 'and were it not for
a very particular engagement'--

'Do not speak to me of engagements; but whisht--there is a good lad--and
do not interrupt the court.'

My father, you know, is apt--be it said with all filial duty--to be a
little prolix in his harangues. I had nothing for it but to lean back
and listen.

'Maybe you think, Alan, because I have, doubtless, the management of
some actions in dependence, whilk my worthy clients have intrusted
me with, that I may think of airting them your way INSTANTER; and so
setting you up in practice, so far as my small business or influence may
go; and, doubtless, Alan, that is a day whilk I hope may come round. But
then, before I give, as the proverb hath it, "My own fish-guts to my own
sea-maws," I must, for the sake of my own character, be very sure that
my sea-maw can pick them to some purpose. What say ye?'

'I am so far,' answered I, 'from wishing to get early into practice,
sir, that I would willingly bestow a few days'--

'In further study, ye would say, Alan. But that is not the way
either--ye must walk the hospitals--ye must cure Lazarus--ye must cut
and carve on a departed subject, to show your skill.'

'I am sure,' I replied, 'I will undertake the cause of any poor man with
pleasure, and bestow as much pains upon it as if it were a duke's; but
for the next two or three days'--

'They must be devoted to close study, Alan--very close study indeed; for
ye must stand primed for a hearing, IN PRESENTIA DOMINORUM, upon Tuesday
next.'

'I, sir?' I replied in astonishment--'I have not opened my mouth in the
Outer House yet!'

'Never mind the court of the Gentiles, man,' said my father; 'we will
have you into the Sanctuary at once--over shoes, over boots.'

'But, sir, I should really spoil any cause thrust on me so hastily.'

'Ye cannot spoil it, Alan,' said my father, rubbing his hands with much
complacency; 'that is the very cream of the business, man--it is just,
as I said before, a subject upon whilk all the TYRONES have been trying
their whittles for fifteen years; and as there have been about ten or a
dozen agents concerned, and each took his own way, the case is come to
that pass, that Stair or Amiston could not mend it; and I do not think
even you, Alan, can do it much harm--ye may get credit by it, but ye can
lose none.'

'And pray what is the name of my happy client, sir?' said I,
ungraciously enough, I believe.

'It is a well-known name in the Parliament House,' replied my father.
'To say the truth, I expect him every moment; it is Peter Peebles.' [See
Note 4.]

'Peter Peebles!' exclaimed I, in astonishment; 'he is an insane
beggar--as poor as Job, and as mad as a March hare!'

'He has been pleaing in the court for fifteen years,' said my father, in
a tone of commiseration, which seemed to acknowledge that this fact
was enough to account for the poor man's condition both in mind and
circumstances.

'Besides, sir,' I added, 'he is on the Poor's Roll; and you know there
are advocates regularly appointed to manage those cases; and for me to
