"I am listening."

"Kings are not so thickly sown upon the earth, that people can find them
whenever they want them. Now, this king without a kingdom is, in my
opinion, a grain of seed which will blossom in some season or other,
provided a skillful, discreet, and vigorous hand sow it duly and truly,
selecting soil, sky, and time."

Planchet still approved by a nod of his head, which showed that he did
not perfectly comprehend all that was said.

"'Poor little seed of a king,' said I to myself, and really I was
affected, Planchet, which leads me to think I am entering upon a foolish
business. And that is why I wished to consult you, my friend."

Planchet colored with pleasure and pride.

"'Poor little seed of a king! I will pick you up and cast you into good
ground.'"

"Good God!" said Planchet, looking earnestly at his old master, as if in
doubt as to the state of his reason.

"Well, what is it?" said D'Artagnan; "who hurts you?"

"Me! nothing, monsieur."

"You said, 'Good God!'"

"Did I?"

"I am sure you did. Can you already understand?"

"I confess, M. d'Artagnan, that I am afraid--"

"To understand?"

"Yes."

"To understand that I wish to replace upon his throne this King Charles
II., who has no throne? Is that it?"

Planchet made a prodigious bound in his chair. "Ah, ah!" said he, in
evident terror, "that is what you call a restoration!"

"Yes, Planchet; is it not the proper term for it?"

"Oh, no doubt, no doubt! But have you reflected seriously?"

"Upon what?"

"Upon what is going on yonder."

"Where?"

"In England."

"And what is that? Let us see, Planchet."

"In the first place, monsieur, I ask you pardon for meddling in these
things, which have nothing to do with my trade; but since it is an
affair that you propose to me--for you are proposing an affair, are you
not?--"

"A superb one, Planchet."

"But as it is business you propose to me, I have the right to discuss
it."

"Discuss it, Planchet; out of discussion is born light."

"Well, then, since I have monsieur's permission, I will tell him that
there is yonder, in the first place, the parliament."

"Well, next?"

"And then the army."

"Good! Do you see anything else?"

"Why, then the nation."

"Is that all?"

"The nation which consented to the overthrow and death of the late king,
the father of this one, and which will not be willing to belie its
acts."

"Planchet," said D'Artagnan, "you argue like a cheese! The nation--the
nation is tired of these gentlemen who give themselves such barbarous
names, and who sing songs to it. Chanting for chanting, my dear
Planchet; I have remarked that nations prefer singing a merry chant to
the plain chant. Remember the Fronde; what did they sing in those times?
Well, those were good times."

"Not too good, not too good! I was near being hung in those times."

"Well, but you were not."

"No."

"And you laid the foundations of your fortune in the midst of all those
songs?"

"That is true."

"Then you have nothing to say against them."

"Well, I return, then, to the army and parliament."

"I say that I borrow twenty thousand livres of M. Planchet, and that I
put twenty thousand livres of my own to it; and with these forty
thousand livres I raise an army."

Planchet clasped his hands; he saw that D'Artagnan was in earnest, and,
in good truth, he believed his master had lost his senses.

"An army!--ah, monsieur," said he, with his most agreeable smile, for
fear of irritating the madman, and rendering him furious,--"an
army!--how many?"

"Of forty men," said D'Artagnan.

"Forty against forty thousand! that is not enough. I know very well that
you, M. d'Artagnan, alone, are equal to a thousand men; but where are we
to find thirty-nine men equal to you? Or, if we could find them, who
would furnish you with money to pay them?"

"Not bad, Planchet. Ah, the devil! you play the courtier."

"No, monsieur, I speak what I think, and that is exactly why I say that,
in the first pitched battle you fight with your forty men, I am very
much afraid--"

"Therefore I shall fight no pitched battles, my dear Planchet," said the
Gascon, laughing. "We have very fine examples in antiquity of skillful
retreats and marches, which consisted in avoiding the enemy instead of
attacking them. You should know that, Planchet, you who commanded the
Parisians the day on which they ought to have fought against the
musketeers, and who so well calculated marches and countermarches, that
you never left the Palais Royal."

Planchet could not help laughing. "It is plain," replied he, "that if
your forty men conceal themselves, and are not unskillful, they may hope
not to be beaten: but you propose obtaining some result, do you not?"

"No doubt. This, then, in my opinion, is the plan to be proceeded upon
in order quickly to replace his majesty Charles II. on his throne."

"Good!" said Planchet, increasing his attention; "let us see your plan.
But in the first place it seems to me we are forgetting something."

"What is that?"

"We have set aside the nation, which prefers singing merry songs to
psalms, and the army, which we will not fight; but the parliament
remains, and that seldom sings."

"Nor does it fight. How is it, Planchet, that an intelligent man like
yourself should take any heed of a set of brawlers who call themselves
Rumps and Barebones? The parliament does not trouble me at all,
Planchet."

"As soon as it ceases to trouble you, monsieur, let us pass on."

"Yes, and arrive at the result. You remember Cromwell, Planchet?"

"I have heard a great deal of talk about him.

"He was a rough soldier."

"And a terrible eater, moreover."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Why, at one gulp he swallowed all England."

"Well, Planchet, the evening before the day on which he swallowed
England, if any one had swallowed M. Cromwell?"

"Oh, monsieur, it is one of the axioms of mathematics that the container
must be greater than the contained."

"Very well! That is our affair, Planchet."

"But M. Cromwell is dead, and his container is now the tomb."

"My dear Planchet, I see with pleasure that you have not only become a
mathematician, but a philosopher."

"Monsieur, in my grocery business I use much printed paper, and that
instructs me."

"Bravo! You know then, in that case--for you have not learnt mathematics
and philosophy without a little history--that after this Cromwell so
great, there came one who was very little."

"Yes; he was named Richard, and he as done as you have, M.
d'Artagnan--he has tendered his resignation."

"Very well said--very well! After the great man who is dead, after the
little one who tendered his resignation, there came a third. This one is
named Monk; he is an able general, considering he has never fought a
battle; he is a skillful diplomatist, considering that he never speaks
in public, and that having to say 'good-day' to a man, he meditates
twelve hours, and ends by saying 'good night;' which makes people
exclaim 'miracle!' seeing that it falls out correctly."

"That is rather strong," said Planchet; "but I know another political
man who resembles him very much."

"M. Mazarin you mean?"

"Himself."

"You are right, Planchet; only M. Mazarin does not aspire to the throne
of France; and that changes everything. Do you see? Well, this M. Monk,
who has England ready-roasted in his plate, and who is already opening
his mouth to swallow it--this M. Monk, who says to the people of Charles
II., and to Charles II. himself, 'Nescio vos'--"

"I don't understand English," said Planchet.

"Yes, but I understand it," said D'Artagnan. "'Nescio vos' means 'I do
not know you.' This M. Monk, the most important man in England, when he
shall have swallowed it--"

"Well?" asked Planchet.

"Well, my friend, I shall go over yonder, and with my forty men I shall
carry him off, pack him up, and bring him into France, where two modes
of proceeding present themselves to my dazzled eyes."

"Oh! and to mine too," cried Planchet, transported with enthusiasm. "We
will put him in a cage and show him for money."

"Well, Planchet, that is a third plan, of which I had not thought."

"Do you think it a good one?"

"Yes, certainly, but I think mine better."

"Let us see yours, then."

"In the first place, I shall set a ransom on him."

"Of how much?"

"Peste! a fellow like that must be well worth a hundred thousand
crowns."

"Yes, yes!"

"You see, then--in the first place, a ransom of a hundred thousand
crowns."

"Or else--"

"Or else, what is much better, I deliver him up to King Charles, who,
having no longer either a general or an army to fear, nor a diplomatist
to trick him, will restore himself, and when once restored, will pay
down to me the hundred thousand crowns in question. That is the idea I
have formed; what do you say to it, Planchet?"

"Magnificent, monsieur!" cried Planchet, trembling with emotion. "How
did you conceive that idea?"

"It came to me one morning on the banks of the Loire, whilst our beloved
king, Louis XIV., was pretending to weep upon the hand of Mademoiselle
de Mancini."

"Monsieur, I declare the idea is sublime. But--"

"Ah! is there a but?"

"Permit me! But this is a little like the skin of that fine bear--you
know--that they were about to sell, but which it was necessary to take
from the back of the living bear. Now, to take M. Monk, there will be a
bit of a scuffle, I should think."

"No doubt; but as I shall raise an army to--"

"Yes, yes--I understand, parbleu!--a coup-de-main. Yes, then, monsieur,
you will triumph, for no one equals you in such sorts of encounters."

"I certainly am lucky in them," said D'Artagnan, with a proud
simplicity. "You know that if for this affair I had my dear Athos, my
brave Porthos, and my cunning Aramis, the business would be settled; but
they are all lost, as it appears, and nobody knows where to find them. I
will do it, then, alone. Now, do you find the business good, and the
investment advantageous?"

"Too much so--too much so."

"How can that be?"

"Because fine things never reach the expected point."

"This is infallible, Planchet, and the proof is that I undertake it. It
will be for you a tolerably pretty gain, and for me a very interesting
stroke. It will be said, 'Such was the old age of M. d'Artagnan,' and I
shall hold a place in tales and even in history itself, Planchet. I am
greedy of honor."

"Monsieur," cried Planchet, "when I think that it is here, in my home,
in the midst of my sugar, my prunes, and my cinnamon, that this gigantic
project is ripened, my shop seems a palace to me."

"Beware, beware, Planchet! If the least report of this escapes, there is
the Bastile for both of us. Beware, my friend, for this is a plot we are
hatching. M. Monk is the ally of M. Mazarin--beware!"

"Monsieur, when a man has had the honor to belong to you, he knows
nothing of fear; and when he has had the advantage of being bound up in
interests with you, he holds his tongue."

"Very well; that is more your affair than mine, seeing that in a week I
shall be in England."

"Depart, monsieur, depart--the sooner the better."

"Is the money, then, ready?"

"It will be to-morrow; to-morrow you shall receive it from my own hands.
Will you have gold or silver?"

"Gold; that is most convenient. But how are we going to arrange this?
Let us see."

"Oh, good Lord! in the simplest way possible. You shall give me a
receipt, that is all."

"No, no," said D'Artagnan, warmly; "we must preserve order in all
things."

"That is likewise my opinion; but with you, M. d'Artagnan--"

"And if I should die yonder--if I should be killed by a musket-ball--if
I should burst from drinking beer?"

"Monsieur, I beg you to believe that in that case I should be so much
afflicted at your death, that I should not think about the money."

"Thank you, Planchet; but no matter. We shall, like two lawyers' clerks,
draw up together an agreement, a sort of act, which may be called a deed
of company."

"Willingly, monsieur."

"I know it is difficult to draw such a thing up, but we can try."

"Let us try, then." And Planchet went in search of pens, ink, and paper.
D'Artagnan took the pen and wrote:--"Between Messire d'Artagnan,
ex-lieutenant of the king's musketeers, at present residing in the Rue
Tiquetonne, Hotel de la Chevrette; and the Sieur Planchet, grocer,
residing in the Rue des Lombards, at the sign of the Pilon d'Or, it has
been agreed as follows:--A company, with a capital of forty thousand
livres, and formed for the purpose of carrying out an idea conceived by
M. d'Artagnan, and the said Planchet approving of it in all points, will
place twenty thousand livres in the hands of M. d'Artagnan. He will
require neither repayment nor interest before the return of M.
d'Artagnan from a journey he is about to take into England. On his part,
M. d'Artagnan undertakes it to find twenty thousand livres, which he
will join to the twenty thousand already laid down by the Sieur
Planchet. He will employ the said sum of forty thousand livres according
to his judgment in an undertaking which is described below. On the day
when M. d'Artagnan shall have re-established, by whatever means, his
majesty King Charles II. upon the throne of England, he will pay into
the hands of M. Planchet the sum of--"

"The sum of a hundred and fifty thousand livres," said Planchet,
innocently, perceiving that D'Artagnan hesitated.

"Oh, the devil, no!" said D'Artagnan, "the division cannot be made by
half; that would not be just."

"And yet, monsieur, we each lay down half," objected Planchet, timidly.

"Yes; but listen to this clause, my dear Planchet, and if you do not
find if equitable in every respect when it is written, well, we can
scratch it out again:--'Nevertheless, as M. d'Artagnan brings to the
association, besides his capital of twenty thousand livres, his time,
his idea, his industry, and his skin,--things which he appreciates
strongly, particularly the last,--M. d'Artagnan will keep, of the three
hundred thousand livres, two hundred thousand livres for himself, which
will make his share two-thirds."

"Very well," said Planchet.

"Is it just?" asked D'Artagnan.

"Perfectly just, monsieur."

"And you will be contented with a hundred thousand livres?"

"Peste! I think so. A hundred thousand for twenty thousand!"

"And in a month, understand."

"How, in a month?"

"Yes, I only ask one month."

"Monsieur," said Planchet, generously, "I give you six weeks."

"Thank you," replied the musketeer, politely; after which the two
partners reperused their deed.

"That is perfect, monsieur," said Planchet; "and the late M. Coquenard,
the first husband of Madame la Baronne du Vallon, could not have done it
better."

"Do you find it so? Let us sign it then." And both affixed their
signatures.

"In this fashion," said D'Artagnan, "I shall be under obligations to no
one."

"But I shall be under obligations to you," said Planchet.

"No; for whatever store I set by it, Planchet, I may lose my skin
yonder, and you will lose all. A propos--peste!--that makes me think of
the principal, an indispensable clause. I shall write it:--'In case of
M. d'Artagnan dying in this enterprise, liquidation will be considered
made, and the Sieur Planchet will give quittance from that moment to the
shade of Messire d'Artagnan for the twenty thousand livres paid by him
into the hands of the said company.'"

This last clause made Planchet knit his brows a little, but when he saw
the brilliant eye, the muscular hand, the supple and strong back of his
associate, he regained his courage, and, without regret, he at once
added another stroke to his signature. D'Artagnan did the same. Thus was
drawn the first known company contract; perhaps such things have been
abused a little since, both in form and principle.

"Now," said Planchet, pouring out the last glass of Anjou wine for
D'Artagnan,--"now go to sleep, my dear master."

"No," replied D'Artagnan; "for the most difficult part now remains to be
done, and I will think over that difficult part."

"Bah!" said Planchet; "I have such great confidence in you, M.
d'Artagnan, that I would not give my hundred thousand livres for ninety
thousand livres down."

"And devil take me if I don't think you are right!" Upon which
D'Artagnan took a candle and went up to his bedroom.




Chapter XXI. In which D'Artagnan prepares to travel.


D'Artagnan reflected to such good purpose during the night that his plan
was settled by morning. "This is it," said he, sitting up in bed,
supporting his elbow on his knee, and his chin in his hand;--"this is
it. I shall seek out forty steady, firm men, recruited among people a
little compromised, but having habits of discipline. I shall promise
them five hundred livres for a month if they return; nothing if they do
not return, or half for their kindred. As to food and lodging, that
concerns the English, who have cattle in their pastures, bacon in their
bacon-racks, fowls in their poultry-yards, and corn in their barns. I
will present myself to General Monk with my little body of troops. He
will receive me. I shall win his confidence, and take advantage of it,
as soon as possible."

But without going further, D'Artagnan shook his head and interrupted
himself. "No," said he; "I should not dare to relate this to Athos; the
way is therefore not honorable. I must use violence," continued
he,--"very certainly I must, but without compromising my loyalty. With
forty men I will traverse the country as a partisan. But if I fall in
with, not forty thousand English, as Planchet said, but purely and
simply with four hundred, I shall be beaten. Supposing that among my
forty warriors there should be found at least ten stupid ones--ten who
will allow themselves to be killed one after the other, from mere folly?
No; it is, in fact, impossible to find forty men to be depended
upon--they do not exist. I must learn how to be contented with thirty.
With ten men less I should have the right of avoiding any armed
encounter, on account of the small number of my people; and if the
encounter should take place, my chance is better with thirty men than
forty. Besides, I should save five thousand francs; that is to say, the
eighth of my capital; that is worth the trial. This being so, I should
have thirty men. I shall divide them into three bands,--we will spread
ourselves about over the country, with an injunction to reunite at a
given moment; in this fashion, ten by ten, we should excite no
suspicion--we should pass unperceived. Yes, yes, thirty--that is a magic
number. There are three tens--three, that divine number! And then,
truly, a company of thirty men, when all together, will look rather
imposing. Ah! stupid wretch that I am!" continued D'Artagnan, "I want
thirty horses. That is ruinous. Where the devil was my head when I
forgot the horses? We cannot, however, think of striking such a blow
without horses. Well, so be it, that sacrifice must be made; we can get
the horses in the country--they are not bad, besides. But I
forgot--peste! Three bands--that necessitates three leaders; there is
the difficulty. Of the three commanders I have already one--that is
myself;--yes, but the two others will of themselves cost almost as much
money as all the rest of the troop. No; positively I must have but one
lieutenant. In that case, then, I should reduce my troop to twenty men.
I know very well that twenty men is but very little; but since with
thirty I was determined not to seek to come to blows, I should do so
more carefully still with twenty. Twenty--that is a round number; that,
besides, reduces the number of the horses by ten, which is a
consideration; and then, with a good lieutenant--Mordioux! what things
patience and calculation are! Was I not going to embark with forty men,
and I have now reduced them to twenty for an equal success? Ten thousand
livres saved at one stroke, and more safety; that is well! Now, then,
let us see; we have nothing to do but to find this lieutenant--let him
be found, then; and after--That is not so easy; he must be brave and
good, a second myself. Yes, but a lieutenant must have my secret, and as
that secret is worth a million, and I shall only pay my man a thousand
livres, fifteen hundred at the most, my man will sell the secret to
Monk. Mordioux! no lieutenant. Besides, this man, were he as mute as a
disciple of Pythagoras,--this man would be sure to have in the troop
some favorite soldier, whom he would make his sergeant; the sergeant
would penetrate the secret of the lieutenant, in case the latter should
be honest and unwilling to sell it. Then the sergeant, less honest and
less ambitious, will give up the whole for fifty thousand livres. Come,
come! that is impossible. The lieutenant is impossible. But then I must
have no fractions; I cannot divide my troop in two, and act upon two
points, at once, without another self, who--But what is the use of
acting upon two points, as we have only one man to take? What can be the
use of weakening a corps by placing the right here, and the left there?
A single corps--Mordioux! a single one, and that commanded by
D'Artagnan. Very well. But twenty men marching in one band are suspected
by everybody; twenty horsemen must not be seen marching together, or a
company will be detached against them and the password will be required;
the which company, upon seeing them embarrassed to give it, would shoot
M. d'Artagnan and his men like so many rabbits. I reduce myself then to
ten men; in this fashion I shall act simply and with unity; I shall be
forced to be prudent, which is half the success in an affair of the kind
I am undertaking; a greater number might, perhaps, have drawn me into
some folly. Ten horses are not many, either, to buy or take. A capital
idea; what tranquillity it infuses into my mind! no more suspicions--no
passwords--no more dangers! Ten men, they are valets or clerks. Ten men,
leading ten horses laden with merchandise of whatever kind, are
tolerated, well received everywhere. Ten men travel on account of the
house of Planchet & Co., of France,--nothing can be said against that.
These ten men, clothed like manufacturers, have a good cutlass or a good
musket at their saddle-bow, and a good pistol in the holster. They never
allow themselves to be uneasy, because they have no evil designs. They
are, perhaps, in truth, a little disposed to be smugglers, but what harm
is in that? Smuggling is not, like polygamy, a hanging offense. The
worst that can happen to us is the confiscation of our merchandise. Our
merchandise confiscated--a fine affair that! Come, come! it is a superb
plan. Ten men only--ten men, whom I will engage for my service; ten men
who shall be as resolute as forty, who would cost me four times as much,
and to whom, for greater security, I will never open my mouth as to my
designs, and to whom I shall only say 'My friends, there is a blow to be
struck.' Things being after this fashion, Satan will be very malicious
if he plays me one of his tricks. Fifteen thousand livres saved--that's
superb--out of twenty!"

Thus fortified by his laborious calculations, D'Artagnan stopped at this
plan, and determined to change nothing in it. He had already on a list
furnished by his inexhaustible memory, ten men illustrious amongst the
seekers of adventure, ill-treated by fortune, and not on good terms with
justice. Upon this D'Artagnan rose, and instantly set off on the search,
telling Planchet not to expect him to breakfast, and perhaps not to
dinner. A day and a half spent in rummaging amongst certain dens of
Paris sufficed for his recruiting; and, without allowing his adventurers
to communicate with each other, he had picked up and got together, in
less than thirty hours, a charming collection of ill-looking faces,
speaking a French less pure than the English they were about to attempt.
These men were, for the most part, guards, whose merit D'Artagnan had
had an opportunity of appreciating in various encounters, whom
drunkenness, unlucky sword-thrusts, unexpected winnings at play, or the
economical reforms of Mazarin, had forced to seek shade and solitude,
those two great consolers of irritated and chafing spirits. They bore
upon their countenances and in their vestments the traces of the
heartaches they had undergone. Some had their visages scarred,--all had
their clothes in rags. D'Artagnan comforted the most needy of these
brotherly miseries by a prudent distribution of the crowns of the
company; then, having taken care that these crowns should be employed in
the physical improvement of the troop, he appointed a trysting place in
the north of France, between Bergues and Saint Omer. Six days were
allowed as the utmost term, and D'Artagnan was sufficiently acquainted
with the good-will, the good-humor, and the relative probity of these
illustrious recruits, to be certain that not one of them would fail in
his appointment. These orders given, this rendezvous fixed, he went to
bid farewell to Planchet, who asked news of his army. D'Artagnan did not
think it proper to inform him of the reduction he had made in his
personnel. He feared that the confidence of his associate would be
abated by such an avowal. Planchet was delighted to learn that the army
was levied, and that he (Planchet) found himself a kind of half king,
who from his throne-counter kept in pay a body of troops destined to
make war against perfidious Albion, that enemy of all true French
hearts. Planchet paid down in double louis, twenty thousand livres to
D'Artagnan, on the part of himself (Planchet), and twenty thousand
livres, still in double louis, in account with D'Artagnan. D'Artagnan
placed each of the twenty thousand francs in a bag, and weighing a bag
in each hand,--"This money is very embarrassing, my dear Planchet," said
he. "Do you know this weighs thirty pounds?"

"Bah! your horse will carry that like a feather."

D'Artagnan shook his head. "Don't tell me such things, Planchet: a horse
overloaded with thirty pounds, in addition to the rider and his
portmanteau, cannot cross a river so easily--cannot leap over a wall or
ditch so lightly; and the horse failing, the horseman fails. It is true
that you, Planchet, who have served in the infantry, may not be aware of
all that."

"Then what is to be done, monsieur?" said Planchet, greatly embarrassed.

"Listen to me," said D'Artagnan. "I will pay my army on its return home.
Keep my half of twenty thousand livres, which you can use during that
time."

"And my half?" said Planchet.

"I shall take that with me."

"Your confidence does me honor," said Planchet: "but supposing you
should not return?"

"That is possible, though not very probable. Then, Planchet, in case I
should not return--give me a pen; I will make my will." D'Artagnan took
a pen and some paper, and wrote upon a plain sheet,--"I, D'Artagnan,
possess twenty thousand livres, laid up cent per cent during thirty
years that I have been in the service of his majesty the king of France.
I leave five thousand to Athos, five thousand to Porthos, and five
thousand to Aramis, that they may give the said sums in my name and
their own to my young friend Raoul, Vicomte de Bragelonne. I give the
remaining five thousand to Planchet, that he may distribute the fifteen
thousand with less regret among my friends. With which purpose I sign
these presents.--D'ARTAGNAN."

Planchet appeared very curious to know what D'Artagnan had written.

"Here," said the musketeer, "read it."

On reading the last lines the tears came into Planchet's eyes. "You
think, then, that I would not have given the money without that? Then I
will have none of your five thousand francs."

D'Artagnan smiled. "Accept it, accept it, Planchet; and in that way you
will only lose fifteen thousand francs instead of twenty thousand, and
you will not be tempted to disregard the signature of your master and
friend, by losing nothing at all."

How well that dear Monsieur d'Artagnan knew the hearts of men and
grocers! They who have pronounced Don Quixote mad because he rode out to
the conquest of an empire with nobody but Sancho his squire, and they
who have pronounced Sancho mad because he accompanied his master in his
attempt to conquer the said empire,--they certainly will have no
hesitation in extending the same judgment to D'Artagnan and Planchet.
And yet the first passed for one of the most subtle spirits among the
astute spirits of the court of France. As to the second, he had acquired
by good right the reputation of having one of the longest heads among
the grocers of the Rue des Lombards; consequently of Paris, and
consequently of France. Now, to consider these two men from the point of
view from which you would consider other men, and the means by the aid
of which they contemplated to restore a monarch to his throne, compared
with other means, the shallowest brains of the country where brains are
most shallow must have revolted against the presumptuous madness of the
lieutenant and the stupidity of his associate. Fortunately, D'Artagnan
was not a man to listen to the idle talk of those around him, or to the
comments that were made on himself. He had adopted the motto, "Act well,
and let people talk." Planchet, on his part had adopted this, "Act and
say nothing." It resulted from this, that, according to the custom of
all superior geniuses, these two men flattered themselves, intra pectus,
with being in the right against all who found fault with them.

As a beginning, D'Artagnan set out in the finest of possible weather,
without a cloud in the heavens--without a cloud on his mind, joyous and
strong, calm and decided, great in his resolution, and consequently
carrying with him a tenfold dose of that potent fluid which the shocks
of mind cause to spring from the nerves, and which procure for the human
machine a force and an influence of which future ages will render,
according to all probability, a more arithmetical account than we can
possibly do at present. He was again, as in times past, on that same
road of adventures which had led him to Boulogne, and which he was now
traveling for the fourth time. It appeared to him that he could almost
recognize the trace of his own steps upon the road, and that of his fist
upon the doors of the hostelries;--his memory, always active and
present, brought back that youth which neither thirty years later his
great heart nor his wrist of steel would have belied. What a rich nature
was that of this man! He had all the passions, all the defects, all the
weaknesses, and the spirit of contradiction familiar to his
understanding changed all these imperfections into corresponding
qualities. D'Artagnan, thanks to his ever active imagination, was afraid
of a shadow, and ashamed of being afraid, he marched straight up to that
shadow, and then became extravagant in his bravery, if the danger proved
to be real. Thus everything in him was emotion, and therefore enjoyment.
He loved the society of others, but never became tired of his own; and
more than once, if he could have been heard when he was alone, he might
have been seen laughing at the jokes he related to himself or the tricks
his imagination created just five minutes before ennui might have been
looked for. D'Artagnan was not perhaps so gay this time as he would have
been with the prospect of finding some good friends at Calais, instead
of joining the ten scamps there; melancholy, however, did not visit him
more than once a day, and it was about five visits that he received from
that somber deity before he got sight of the sea at Boulogne, and then
these visits were indeed but short. But when once D'Artagnan found
himself near the field of action, all other feelings but that of
confidence disappeared never to return. From Boulogne he followed the
coast to Calais. Calais was the place of general rendezvous, and at
Calais he had named to each of his recruits the hostelry of "Le Grande
Monarque," where living was not extravagant, where sailors messed, and
where men of the sword, with sheath of leather, be it understood, found
lodging, table, food, and all the comforts of life, for thirty sous per
diem. D'Artagnan proposed to himself to take them by surprise in
flagrante delicto of wandering life, and to judge by the first
appearance if he could count on them as trusty companions.

He arrived at Calais at half past four in the afternoon.




Chapter XXII. D'Artagnan travels for the House of Planchet and Company.


The hostelry of "Le Grand Monarque" was situated in a little street
parallel to the port without looking out upon the port itself. Some
lanes cut--as steps cut the two parallels of the ladder--the two great
straight lines of the port and the street. By these lanes passengers
came suddenly from the port into the street, or from the street on to
the port. D'Artagnan, arrived at the port, took one of these lanes, and
came out in front of the hostelry of "Le Grand Monarque." The moment was
well chosen and might remind D'Artagnan of his start in life at the
hostelry of the "Franc-Meunier" at Meung. Some sailors who had been
playing at dice had started a quarrel, and were threatening each other
furiously. The host, hostess, and two lads were watching with anxiety
the circle of these angry gamblers, from the midst of which war seemed
ready to break forth, bristling with knives and hatchets. The play,
nevertheless, was continued. A stone bench was occupied by two men, who
appeared thence to watch the door; four tables, placed at the back of
the common chamber, were occupied by eight other individuals. Neither
the men at the door, nor those at the tables took any part in the play
or the quarrel. D'Artagnan recognized his ten men in these cold,
indifferent spectators. The quarrel went on increasing. Every passion
has, like the sea, its tide which ascends and descends. Reaching the
climax of passion, one sailor overturned the table and the money which
was upon it. The table fell, and the money rolled about. In an instant
all belonging to the hostelry threw themselves upon the stakes, and many
a piece of silver was picked up by people who stole away whilst the
sailors were scuffling with each other.

The two men on the bench and the eight at the tables, although they
seemed perfect strangers to each other, these ten men alone, we say,
appeared to have agreed to remain impassible amidst the cries of fury
and the chinking of money. Two only contented themselves with pushing
with their feet combatants who came under their table. Two others,
rather than take part in this disturbance, buried their hands in their
pockets; and another two jumped upon the table they occupied, as people
do to avoid being submerged by overflowing water.

"Come, come," said D'Artagnan to himself, not having lost one of the
details we have related, "this is a very fair gathering--circumspect,
calm, accustomed to disturbance, acquainted with blows! Peste! I have
been lucky."

All at once his attention was called to a particular part of the room.
The two men who had pushed the strugglers with their feet, were assailed
with abuse by the sailors, who had become reconciled. One of them, half
drunk with passion, and quite drunk with beer, came, in a menacing
manner, to demand of the shorter of these two sages by what right he had
touched with his foot creatures of the good God, who were not dogs. And
whilst putting this question, in order to make it more direct, he
applied his great fist to the nose of D'Artagnan's recruit.

This man became pale, without its being to be discerned whether his
pallor arose from anger or fear; seeing which, the sailor concluded it
was from fear, and raised his fist with the manifest intention of
letting it fall upon the head of the stranger. But though the threatened
man did not appear to move, he dealt the sailor such a severe blow in
the stomach that he sent him rolling and howling to the other side of
the room. At the same instant, rallied by the espirit de corps, all the
comrades of the conquered man fell upon the conqueror.

The latter, with the same coolness of which he had given proof, without
committing the imprudence of touching his weapons, took up a beer-pot
with a pewter-lid, and knocked down two or three of his assailants;
then, as he was about to yield to numbers, the seven other silent men at
the tables, who had not yet stirred, perceived that their cause was at
stake, and came to the rescue. At the same time, the two indifferent
spectators at the door turned round with frowning bows, indicating their
evident intention of taking the enemy in the rear, if the enemy did not
cease their aggressions.

The host, his helpers, and two watchmen who were passing, and who from
the curiosity had penetrated too far into the room, were mixed up in the
tumult and showered with blows. The Parisians hit like Cyclops, with an
ensemble and a tactic delightful to behold. At length, obliged to beat a
retreat before superior numbers, they formed an intrenchment behind the
large table, which they raised by main force; whilst the two others,
arming themselves each with a trestle, and using it like a great
sledge-hammer, knocked down at a blow eight sailors upon whose heads
they had brought their monstrous catapult in play. The floor was already
strewn with wounded, and the room filled with cries and dust, when
D'Artagnan, satisfied with the test, advanced, sword in hand, and
striking with the pommel every head that came in his way, he uttered a
vigorous hola! which put an instantaneous end to the conflict. A great
back-flood directly took place from the center to the sides of the room,
so that D'Artagnan found himself isolated and dominator.

"What is this all about?" then demanded he of the assembly, with the
majestic tone of Neptune pronouncing the Quos ego.

At the very instant, at the first sound of his voice, to carry on the
Virgilian metaphor, D'Artagnan's recruits, recognizing each his
sovereign lord, discontinued their plank-fighting and trestle blows. On
their side, the sailors, seeing that long naked sword, that martial air,
and the agile arm which came to the rescue of their enemies, in the
person of a man who seemed accustomed to command, the sailors picked up
their wounded and their pitchers. The Parisians wiped their brows, and
viewed their leader with respect. D'Artagnan was loaded with thanks by
the host of "Le Grand Monarque." He received them like a man who knows
that nothing is being offered that does not belong to him, and then said
he would go and walk upon the port till supper was ready. Immediately
each of the recruits, who understood the summons, took his hat, brushed
the dust off his clothes, and followed D'Artagnan. But D'Artagnan,
whilst walking and observing, took care not to stop; he directed his
course towards the downs, and the ten men--surprised at finding
themselves going in the track of each other, uneasy at seeing on their
right, on their left, and behind them, companions upon whom they had not
reckoned--followed him, casting furtive glances at each other. It was
not till he had arrived at the hollow part of the deepest down that
D'Artagnan, smiling to see them outdone, turned towards them, making a
friendly sign with his hand.

"Eh! come, come, gentlemen," said he, "let us not devour each other; you
are made to live together, to understand each other in all respects, and
not to devour one another."

Instantly all hesitation ceased; the men breathed as if they had been
taken out of a coffin, and examined each other complacently. After this
examination they turned their eyes towards their leader, who had long
been acquainted with the art of speaking to men of that class, and who
improvised the following little speech, pronounced with an energy truly
Gascon:

"Gentlemen, you all know who I am. I have engaged you from knowing you
to be brave, and willing to associate you with me in a glorious
enterprise. Imagine that in laboring for me you labor for the king. I
only warn you that if you allow anything of this supposition to appear,
I shall be forced to crack your skulls immediately, in the manner most
convenient to me. You are not ignorant, gentlemen, that state secrets
are like a mortal poison: as long as that poison is in its box and the
box is closed, it is not injurious; out of the box, it kills. Now draw
near, and you shall know as much of this secret as I am able to tell
you." All drew close to him with an expression of curiosity. "Approach,"
continued D'Artagnan, "and let not the bird which passes over our heads,
the rabbit which sports on the downs, the fish which bounds from the
waters, hear us. Our business is to learn and to report to monsieur le
surintendant of the finances to what extent English smuggling is
injurious to the French merchants. I shall enter every place, and see
everything. We are poor Picard fishermen, thrown upon the coast by a
storm. It is certain that we must sell fish, neither more nor less, like
true fishermen. Only people might guess who we are, and might molest us;
it is therefore necessary that we should be in a condition to defend
ourselves. And this is why I have selected men of spirit and courage. We
shall lead a steady life, and not incur much danger, seeing that we have
behind us a powerful protector, thanks to whom no embarrassment is
possible. One thing alone puzzles me; but I hope that after a short
explanation, you will relieve me from that difficulty. The thing which
