had on the whole done well for Virginia. He was, as far as is known,
the first person actually to propose a federation or union of all
those English-speaking political divisions, royal provinces, dominions,
palatinates, or what not, that had been hewed away from the vast
original Virginia. He did what he could to forward the movement for
education and the fortunes of the William and Mary College. But he is
quoted as having on one occasion informed the body of the people that
"the gentlemen imposed upon them." Again, he is said to have remarked of
the servant population that they had all been kidnapped and had a lawful
action against their masters. "Sir," he stated to President Blair, who
would have given him advice from the Bishop of London, "Sir, I know how
to govern Virginia and Maryland better than all the bishops in England!
If I had not hampered them in Maryland and kept them under, I should
never have been able to govern them!" To which Blair had to say, "Sir,
if I know anything of Virginia, they are a good-natured, tractable
people as any in the world, and you may do anything with them by way
of civility, but you will never be able to manage them in that way you
speak of, by hampering and keeping them under!"*

     * William and Mary College Quarterly, vol. I, p. 66.

About this time arrived Claude de Richebourg with a number of Huguenots
who settled above the Falls. First and last, Virginia received many of
this good French strain. The Old Dominion had now a population of
over eighty thousand persons--whites, Indians in no great number, and
negroes. The red men are mere scattered dwellers in the land east of the
mountains. There are Indian villages, but they are far apart. Save upon
the frontier fringe, the Indian attacks no more. But the African is here
to stay.

"The Negroes live in small Cottages called Quarters... under the
direction of an Overseer or Bailiff; who takes care that they tend such
Land as the Owner allots and orders, upon which they raise Hogs
and Cattle and plant Indian Corn, and Tobacco for the Use of their
Master.... The Negroes are very numerous, some Gentlemen having Hundreds
of them of all Sorts, to whom they bring great Profitt; for the Sake of
which they are obliged to keep them well, and not over-work, starve or
famish them, besides other Inducements to favour them; which is done
in a great Degree, to such especially that are laborious, careful and
honest; tho' indeed some Masters, careless of their own Interest or
deputation, are too cruel and negligent. The Negroes are not only
encreased by fresh supplies from Africa and the West India Islands, but
also are very prolific among themselves; and they that are born here
talk good English and affect our Language, Habits and Customs.... Their
work or Chimerical (hard Slavery) is not very laborious; their greatest
Hardship consisting in that they and their Posterity are not at their
own Liberty or Disposal, but are the Property of their Owners; and
when they are free they know not how to provide so well for themselves
generally; neither did they live so plentifully nor (many of them) so
easily in their own Country where they are made Slaves to one another,
or taken Captive by their Ennemies."*

     * It is an English clergyman, the Reverend Hugh Jones, who
     is writing ("The Present State of Virginia") in the year
     1724. He writes and never sees that, though every
     amelioration be true, yet there is here old Inequity.

The white Virginians lived both after the fashion of England and after
fashions made by their New World environment. They are said to have
been in general a handsome folk, tall, well-formed, and with a ready and
courteous manner. They were great lovers of riding, and of all country
life, and few folk in the world might overpass them in hospitality. They
were genial, they liked a good laugh, and they danced to good music.
They had by nature an excellent understanding. Yet, thinks at least
the Reverend Hugh Jones, they "are generally diverted by Business
or Inclination from profound Study, and prying into the Depth of
Things....They are more inclinable to read Men by Business and
Conversation, than to dive into Books... they are apt to learn, yet they
are fond of and will follow their own Ways, Humours and Notions, being
not easily brought to new Projects and Schemes."

It was as Governor of these people that, in succession to Nicholson,
Edward Nott came to Virginia, the deputy of my Lord Orkney. Nott
died soon afterward, and in 1710 Orkney sent to Virginia in his stead
Alexander Spotswood. This man stands in Virginia history a manly,
honorable, popular figure. Of Scotch parentage, born in Morocco, soldier
under Marlborough, wounded at Blenheim, he was yet in his thirties when
he sailed across the Atlantic to the river James. Virginia liked him,
and he liked Virginia. A man of energy and vision, he first made himself
at home with all, and then after his own impulses and upon his own lines
went about to develop and to better the colony. He had his projects and
his hobbies, mostly useful, and many sounding with a strong modern tone.
Now and again he quarreled with the Assembly, and he made it many a
cutting speech. But it, too, and all Virginia and the world were growing
modern. Issues were disengaging themselves and were becoming distinct.
In these early years of the eighteenth century, Whig and Tory in England
drew sharply over against each other. In Virginia, too, as in Maryland,
the Carolinas, and all the rest of England-in-America, parties were
emerging. The Virginian flair for political life was thus early in
evidence. To the careless eye the colony might seem overwhelmingly for
King and Church. "If New England be called a Receptacle of Dissenters,
and an Amsterdam of Religion, Pennsylvania the Nursery of Quakers;
Maryland the Retirement of Roman Catholicks, North Carolina the Refuge
of Runaways and South Carolina the Delight of Buccaneers and Pyrates,
Virginia may be justly esteemed the happy Retreat of true Britons and
true Churchmen for the most Part." This "for the most part" paints the
situation, for there existed an opposition, a minority, which might grow
to balance, and overbalance. In the meantime the House of Burgesses at
Williamsburg provided a School for Discussion.

At the time when Parson Jones with his shrewd eyes was observing society
in the Old Dominion, Williamsburg was still a small village, even though
it was the capital. Towns indeed, in any true sense, were nowhere to be
found in Virginia. Yet Williamsburg had a certain distinction. Within
it there arose, beneath and between old forest trees, the college, an
admirable church--Bruton Church--the capitol, the Governor's house or
"palace," and many very tolerable dwelling-houses of frame and brick.
There were also taverns, a marketplace, a bowling-green, an arsenal, and
presently a playhouse. The capitol at Williamsburg was a commodious
one, able to house most of the machinery of state. Here were the Council
Chamber, "where the Governor and Council sit in very great state, in
imitation of the King and Council, or the Lord Chancellor and House of
Lords," and the great room of the House of Burgesses, "not unlike the
House of Commons." Here, at the capitol, met the General Courts in April
and October, the Governor and Council acting as judges. There were also
Oyer and Terminer and Admiralty Courts. There were offices and committee
rooms, and on the cupola a great clock, and near the capitol was "a
strong, sweet Prison for Criminals; and on the other side of an open
Court another for Debtors... but such Prisoners are very rare, the
Creditors being generally very merciful.... At the Capitol, at publick
Times, may be seen a great Number of handsome, well-dressed, compleat
Gentlemen. And at the Governor's House upon Birth-Nights, and at Balls
and Assemblies, I have seen as fine an Appearance, as good Diversion,
and as splendid Entertainments, in Governor Spotswood's Time, as I have
seen anywhere else."

It is a far cry from the Susan Constant, the Goodspeed, and the
Discovery, from those first booths at Jamestown, from the Starving Time,
from Christopher Newport and Edward-Maria Wingfield and Captain John
Smith to these days of Governor Spotswood. And yet, considering the
changes still to come, a century seems but a little time and the far cry
not so very far.


Though the Virginians were in the mass country folk, yet villages or
hamlets arose, clusters of houses pressing about the Court House of each
county. There were now in the colony over a score of settled counties.
The westernmost of these, the frontier counties, were so huge that they
ran at least to the mountains, and, for all one knew to the contrary,
presumably beyond. But "beyond" was a mysterious word of unknown
content, for no Virginian of that day had gone beyond. All the way from
Canada into South Carolina and the Florida of that time stretched the
mighty system of the Appalachians, fifteen hundred miles in length and
three hundred in breadth. Here was a barrier long and thick, with
ridge after ridge of lifted and forested earth, with knife-blade
vales between, and only here and there a break away and an encompassed
treasure of broad and fertile valley. The Appalachians made a true
Chinese Wall, shutting all England-in-America, in those early days, out
from the vast inland plateau of the continent, keeping upon the seaboard
all England-in-America, from the north to the south. To Virginia these
were the mysterious mountains just beyond which, at first, were held
to be the South Sea and Cathay. Now, men's knowledge being larger by a
hundred years, it was known that the South Sea could not be so near.
The French from Canada, going by way of the St. Lawrence and the Great
Lakes, had penetrated very far beyond and had found not the South Sea
but a mighty river flowing into the Gulf of Mexico. What was the real
nature of this world which had been found to lie over the mountains?
More and more Virginians were inclined to find out, foreseeing that they
would need room for their growing population. Continuously came in folk
from the Old Country, and continuously Virginians were born. Maryland
dwelt to the north, Carolina to the south. Virginia, seeking space, must
begin to grow westward.

There were settlements from the sea to the Falls of the James, and
upon the York, the Rappahannock, and the Potomac. Beyond these, in the
wilderness, might be found a few lonely cabins, a scattered handful of
pioneer folk, small blockhouses, and small companies of rangers charged
with protecting all from Indian foray. All this country was rolling and
hilly, but beyond it stood the mountains, a wall of enchantment, against
the west.

Alexander Spotswood, hardy Scot, endowed with a good temperamental blend
of the imaginative and the active, was just the man, the time being
ripe, to encounter and surmount that wall. Fortunately, too, the
Virginians were horsemen, man and horse one piece almost, New World
centaurs. They would follow the bridle-tracks that pierced to the hilly
country, and beyond that they might yet make way through the primeval
forest. They would encounter dangers, but hardly the old perils of
seacoast and foothills. Different, indeed, is this adventure of the
Governor of Virginia and his chosen band from the old push afoot into
frowning hostile woods by the men of a hundred and odd years before!

Spotswood rode westward with a company drawn largely from the colonial
gentry, men young in body or in spirit, gay and adventurous. The
whole expedition was conceived and executed in a key both humorous and
knightly. These "Knights"* set face toward the mountains in August,
1716. They had guides who knew the upcountry, a certain number of
rangers used to Indian ways, and servants with food and much wine in
their charge. So out of settled Virginia they rode, and up the long,
gradual lift of earth above sea-level into a mountainous wilderness,
where before them the Aryan had not come. By day they traveled, and
bivouacked at night.

     * On the sandy roads of settled Virginia horses went unshod,
     but for the stony hills and the ultimate cliffs they must
     have iron shoes. After the adventure and when the party had
     returned to civilization, the Governor, bethinking himself
     that there should be some token and memento of the exploit,
     had made in London a number of small golden horseshoes, set
     as pins to be worn in the lace cravats of the period. Each
     adventurer to the mountains received one, and the band has
     kept, in Virginian lore, the title of the Knights of the
     Golden Horseshoe.

Higher and more rugged grew the mountains. Some trick of the light made
them show blue, so that they presently came to be called the Blue Ridge,
in contradistinction to the westward lying, gray Alleghanies. They were
like very long ocean combers, with at intervals an abrupt break, a gap,
cliff-guarded, boulder-strewn, with a narrow rushing stream making way
between hemlocks and pines, sycamore, ash and beech, walnut and linden.

Towards these blue mountains Spotswood and his knights rode day after
day and came at last to the foot of the steep slope. The long ridges
were high, but not so high but that horse and man might make shift to
scramble to the crest. Up they climbed and from the heights they looked
across and down into the Valley of Virginia, twenty miles wide, a
hundred and twenty long--a fertile garden spot. Across the shimmering
distances they saw the gray Alleghanies, fresh barrier to a fresh west.
Below them ran a clear river, afterwards to be called the Shenandoah.
They gazed--they predicted colonists, future plantations, future towns,
for that great valley, large indeed as are some Old World kingdoms.
They drank the health of England's King, and named two outstanding
peaks Mount George and Mount Alexander; then, because their senses were
ravished by the Eden before them, they dubbed the river Euphrates. They
plunged and scrambled down the mountain side to the Euphrates, drank
of it, bathed in it, rested, ate, and drank again. The deep green woods
were around them; above them they could see the hawk, the eagle, and the
buzzard, and at their feet the bright fish of the river.

At last they reclimbed the Blue Ridge, descended its eastern face, and,
leaving the great wave of it behind them, rode homeward to Williamsburg
in triumph.

We are thus, with Spotswood and his band, on the threshold of expanding
American vistas. This Valley of Virginia, first a distant Beulah land
for the eye of the imagination only, presently became a land of pioneer
cabins, far apart--very far apart--then a settled land, of farms,
hamlets, and market towns. Nor did the folk come only from that elder
Virginia of tidal waters and much tobacco, of "compleat gentlemen" at
the capital, and of many slaves in the fields. But downward from
the Potomac, they came south into this valley, from Pennsylvania and
Maryland, many of them Ulster Scots who had sailed to the western
world. In America they are called the Scotch Irish, and in the main
they brought stout hearts, long arms, and level heads. With these they
brought in as luggage the dogmas of Calvin. They permeated the Valley
of Virginia; many moved on south into Carolina; finally, in large
part, they made Kentucky and Tennessee. Germans, too, came into the
valley--down from Pennsylvania--quiet, thrifty folk, driven thus far
westward from a war-ravished Rhine.

Shrewd practicality trod hard upon the heels of romantic fancy in the
mind of Spotswood. His Order of the Knights of the Horseshoe had a
fleeting existence, but the Vision of the West lived on. Frontier folk
in growing numbers were encouraged to make their way from tidewater
to the foot of the Blue Ridge. Spotsylvania and King George were names
given to new counties in the Piedmont in honor of the Governor and
the sovereign. German craftsmen, who had been sent over by Queen
Anne--vine-dressers and ironworkers--were settled on Spotswood's own
estate above the falls of the Rapidan. The little town of Germanna
sprang up, famous for its smelting furnaces.

To his country seat in Spotsylvania, Alexander Spotswood retired when
he laid down the office of Governor in 1722. But his talents were too
valuable to be allowed to rust in inactivity. He was appointed deputy
Postmaster-General for the English colonies, and in the course of his
administration made one Benjamin Franklin Postmaster for Philadelphia.
He was on the point of sailing with Admiral Vernon on the expedition
against Cartagena in 1740, when he was suddenly stricken and died. He
was buried at Temple Farm by Yorktown. On the expedition to Cartagena
went one Lawrence Washington, who named his country seat after the
Admiral and whose brother George many years later was to receive the
surrender of Cornwallis and his army hard by the resting-place of
Alexander Spotswood. Colonial Virginia lies behind us. The era of
revolution and statehood beckons us on.



CHAPTER XVI. GEORGIA

Below Charleston in South Carolina, below Cape Fear, below Port Royal, a
great river called the Savannah poured into the sea. Below the Savannah,
past the Ogeechee, sailing south between the sandy islands and the main,
ships came to the mouth of the river Altamaha. Thus far was Carolina.
But below Altamaha the coast and the country inland became debatable,
probably Florida and Spanish, liable at any rate to be claimed as such,
and certainly open to attack from Spanish St. Augustine.

Here lay a stretch of seacoast and country within hailing distance of
semi-tropical lands. It was low and sandy, with innumerable slow-flowing
watercourses, creeks, and inlets from the sea. The back country, running
up to hills and even mountains stuffed with ores, was not known--though
indeed Spanish adventurers had wandered there and mined for gold. But
the lowlands were warm and dense with trees and wild life. The Huguenot
Ribault, making report of this region years and years before, called it
"a fayre coast stretching of a great length, covered with an infinite
number of high and fayre trees," and he described the land as the
"fairest, fruitfullest, and pleasantest of all the world, abounding in
hony, venison, wilde fowle, forests, woods of all sorts, Palm-trees,
Cypresse and Cedars, Bayes ye highest and greatest; with also the
fayrest vines in all the world.... And the sight of the faire medows
is a pleasure not able to be expressed with tongue; full of Hernes,
Curlues, Bitters, Mallards, Egrepths, Woodcocks, and all other kind
of small birds; with Harts, Hindes, Buckes, wilde Swine, and all other
kindes of wilde beastes, as we perceived well, both by their footing
there and... their crie and roaring in the night."* This is the country
of the liveoak and the magnolia, the gray, swinging moss and the yellow
jessamine, the chameleon and the mockingbird.

     * Winsor's "Narrative and Critical History of America", vol.
     V, p. 357.

The Savannah and Altamaha rivers and the wide and deep lands between
fell in that grant of Charles II's to the eight Lords Proprietors of
Carolina--Albemarle, Clarendon, and the rest. But this region remained
as yet unpeopled save by copper-hued folk. True, after the "American
Treaty" of 1670 between England and Spain, the English built a small
fort upon Cumberland Island, south of the Altamaha, and presently
another Fort George--to the northwest of the first, at the confluence of
the rivers Oconee and Oemulgee. There were, however, no true colonists
between the Savannah and the Altamaha.

In the year 1717--the year after Spotswood's Expedition--the Carolina
Proprietaries granted to one Sir Robert Mountgomery all the land
between the rivers Savannah and Altamaha, "with proper jurisdictions,
privileges, prerogatives, and franchises." The arrangement was feudal
enough. The new province was to be called the Margravate of Azilia.
Mountgomery, as Margrave, was to render to the Lords of Carolina an
annual quitrent and one-fourth part of all gold and silver found in
Azilia. He must govern in accordance with the laws of England, must
uphold the established religion of England, and provide by taxation for
the maintenance of the clergy. In three years' time the new Margrave
must colonize his Margravate, and if he failed to do so, all his rights
would disappear and Azilia would again dissolve into Carolina.

This was what happened. For whatever reason, Mountgomery could not
obtain his colonists. Azilia remained a paper land. The years went
by. The country, unsettled yet, lapsed into the Carolina from which so
tentatively it had been parted. Over its spaces the Indian still roved,
the tall forests still lifted their green crowns, and no axe was heard
nor any English voice.

In the decade that followed, the Lords Proprietors of Carolina ceased
to be Lords Proprietors. Their government had been, save at exceptional
moments, confused, oppressive, now absent-minded, and now mistaken and
arbitrary. They had meant very well, but their knowledge was not exact,
and now virtual revolution in South Carolina assisted their demise.
After lengthy negotiations, at last, in 1729, all except Lord Granville
surrendered to the Crown, for a considerable sum, their rights and
interests. Carolina, South and North, thereupon became royal colonies.

In England there dwelled a man named James Edward Oglethorpe, son of Sir
Theophilus Oglethorpe of Godalming in Surrey. Though entered at Oxford,
he soon left his books for the army and was present at the siege and
taking of Belgrade in 1717. Peace descending, the young man returned to
England, and on the death of his elder brother came into the estate, and
was presently made Member of Parliament for Haslemere in Surrey.

His character was a firm and generous one; his bent, markedly humane.
"Strong benevolence of soul," Pope says he had. His century, too, was
becoming humane, was inquiring into ancient wrongs. There arose, among
other things, a belated notion of prison reform. The English Parliament
undertook an investigation, and Oglethorpe was of those named to
examine conditions and to make a report. He came into contact with the
incarcerated--not alone with the law-breaker, hardened or yet to be
hardened, but with the wrongfully imprisoned and with the debtor. The
misery of the debtor seems to have struck with insistent hand upon his
heart's door. The parliamentary inquiry was doubtless productive of some
good, albeit evidently not of great good. But though the inquiry was
over, Oglethorpe's concern was not over. It brooded, and, in the inner
clear light where ideas grow, eventually brought forth results.

Numbers of debtors lay in crowded and noisome English prisons, there
often from no true fault at all, at times even because of a virtuous
action, oftenest from mere misfortune. If they might but start again, in
a new land, free from entanglements! Others, too, were in prison, whose
crimes were negligible, mere mistaken moves with no evil will behind
them--or, if not so negligible, then happening often through that misery
and ignorance for which the whole world was at fault. There was also the
broad and well-filled prison of poverty, and many of the prisoners there
needed only a better start. James Edward Oglethorpe conceived another
settlement in America, and for colonists he would have all these
down-trodden and oppressed. He would gather, if he might, only those who
when helped would help themselves--who when given opportunity would rise
out of old slough and briar. He was personally open to the appeal of
still another class of unfortunate men. He had seen upon the Continent
the distress of the poor and humble Protestants in Catholic countries.
Folk of this kind--from France, from Germany--had been going in a thin
stream for years to the New World. But by his plan more might be enabled
to escape petty tyranny or persecution. He had influence, and his
scheme appealed to the humane thought of his day--appealed, too, to the
political thought. In America there was that debatable and unoccupied
land south of Charles Town in South Carolina. It would be very good to
settle it, and none had taken up the idea with seriousness since Azilia
had failed. Such a colony as was now contemplated would dispose of
Spanish claims, serve as a buffer colony between Florida and South
Carolina, and establish another place of trade. The upshot was that the
Crown granted to Oglethorpe and twenty associates the unsettled land
between the Savannah and the Altamaha, with a westward depth that
was left quite indefinite. This territory, which was now severed from
Carolina, was named Georgia after his Majesty King George II, and
Oglethorpe and a number of prominent men became the trustees of the new
colony. They were to act as such for twenty-one years, at the end of
which time Georgia should pass under the direct government of the Crown.
Parliament gave to the starting of things ten thousand pounds, and
wealthy philanthropic individuals followed suit with considerable
donations. The trustees assembled, organized, set to work. A
philanthropic body, they drew from the like minded far and near. Various
agencies worked toward getting together and sifting the colonists for
Georgia. Men visited the prisons for debtors and others. They did
not choose at random, but when they found the truly unfortunate and
undepraved in prison they drew them forth, compounded with their
creditors, set the prisoners free, and enrolled them among the
emigrants. Likewise they drew together those who, from sheer poverty,
welcomed this opportunity. And they began a correspondence with
distressed Protestants on the Continent. They also devised and used all
manner of safeguards against imposition and the inclusion of any who
would be wholly burdens, moral or physical. So it happened that, though
misfortune had laid on almost all a heavy hand, the early colonists to
Georgia were by no means undesirable flotsam and jetsam. The plans
for the colony, the hopes for its well-being, wear a tranquil and fair
countenance.

Oglethorpe himself would go with the first colonists. His ship was the
Anne of two hundred tons burden--the last English colonizing ship with
which this narrative has to do--and to her weathered sails there still
clings a fascination. On board the Anne, beside the crew and master, are
Oglethorpe himself and more than a hundred and twenty Georgia
settlers, men, women, and children. The Anne shook forth her sails in
mid-November, 1732, upon the old West Indies sea road, and after two
months of prosperous faring, came to anchor in Charles Town harbor.

South Carolina, approving this Georgia settlement which was to open the
country southward and be a wall against Spain, received the colonists
with hospitality. Oglethorpe and the weary colonists rested from long
travel, then hoisted sail again and proceeded on their way to Port
Royal, and southward yet to the mouth of the Savannah. Here there was
further tarrying while Oglethorpe and picked men went in a small boat up
the river to choose the site where they should build their town.

Here, upon the lower reaches, there lay a fair plateau, a mile
long, rising forty feet above the stream. Near by stood a village of
well-inclined Indians--the Yamacraws. Ships might float upon the
river, close beneath the tree-crowned bluff. It was springtime now and
beautiful in the southern land--the sky azure, the air delicate, the
earth garbed in flowers. Little wonder then that Oglethorpe chose
Yamacraw Bluff for his town.

A trader from Carolina was found here, and the trader's wife, a
half-breed, Mary Musgrove by name, did the English good service. She
made her Indian kindred friends with the newcomers. From the first
Oglethorpe dealt wisely with the red men. In return for many coveted
goods, he procured within the year a formal cession of the land between
the two rivers and the islands off the coast. He swore friendship and
promised to treat the Indians justly, and he kept his oath. The site
chosen, he now returned to the Anne and presently brought his colonists
up the river to that fair place. As soon as they landed, these first
Georgians began immediately to build a town which they named Savannah.

Ere long other emigrants arrived. In 1734 came seventy-eight German
Protestants from Salzburg, with Baron von Reck and two pastors for
leaders. The next year saw fifty-seven others added to these. Then came
Moravians with their pastor. All these strong, industrious, religious
folk made settlements upon the river above Savannah. Italians came,
Piedmontese sent by the trustees to teach the coveted silk-culture.
Oglethorpe, when he sailed to England in 1734, took with him
Tomochi-chi, chief of the Yamacraws, and other Indians. English interest
in Georgia increased. Parliament gave more money--26,000 pounds.
Oglethorpe and the trustees gathered more colonists. The Spanish cloud
seemed to be rolling up in the south, and it was desirable to have in
Georgia a number of men who were by inheritance used to war. Scotch
Highlanders--there would be the right folk! No sooner said than
gathered. Something under two hundred, courageous and hardy, were
enrolled from the Highlands. The majority were men, but there were fifty
women and children with them. All went to Georgia, where they settled
to the south of Savannah, on the Altamaha, near the island of St. Simon.
Other Highlanders followed. They had a fort and a town which they named
New Inverness, and the region that they peopled they called Darien.

Oglethorpe himself left England late in 1735, with two ships, the Symond
and the London Merchant, and several hundred colonists aboard. Of these
folk doubtless a number were of the type the whole enterprise had been
planned to benefit. Others were Protestants from the Continent. Yet
others--notably Sir Francis Bathurst and his family--went at their own
charges. After Oglethorpe himself, most remarkable perhaps of those
going to Georgia were the brothers John and Charles Wesley. Not
precisely colonists are the Wesleys, but prospectors for the souls of
the colonists, and the souls of the Indians--Yamacraws, Uchees, and
Creeks.

They all landed at Savannah, and now planned to make a settlement south
of their capital city, by the mouth of Altamaha. Oglethorpe chose St.
Simon's Island, and here they built, and called their town Frederica.

"Each Freeholder had 60 Feet in Front by 90 Feet in depth upon the high
Street for House and Garden; but those which fronted the River had but
30 in Front, by 60 Feet in depth. Each Family had a Bower of Palmetto
Leaves finished upon the back Street in their own Lands. The side toward
the front Street was set out for their Houses. These Palmetto Bowers
were very convenient shelters, being tight in the hardest Rains; they
were about 20 Feet long and 14 Feet wide, and in regular Rows looked
very pretty, the Palmetto Leaves lying smooth and handsome, and of a
good Colour. The whole appeared something like a Camp; for the Bowers
looked like Tents, only being larger and covered with Palmetto Leaves."*

     * Moore's "Voyage to Georgia". Quoted in Winsor's "Narrative
     and Critical History of America", vol. V, p. 378.

Their life sounds idyllic, but it will not always be so. Thunders will
arise; serpents be found in Eden. But here now we leave them--in infant
Savannah--in the Salzburgers' village of Ebenezer and in the Moravian
village nearby--in Darien of the Highlanders--and in Frederica, where
until houses are built they will live in palmetto bowers.

Virginia, Maryland, the two Carolinas, Georgia--the southern sweep of
England-in-America--are colonized. They have communication with one
another and with middle and northern England-in-America. They also have
communication with the motherland over the sea. The greetings of kindred
and the fruits of labor travel to and fro: over the salt, tumbling
waves. But also go mutual criticism and complaint. "Each man," says
Goethe, "is led and misled after a fashion peculiar to himself." So with
those mass persons called countries. Tension would come about, tension
would relax, tension would return and increase between Mother England
and Daughter America. In all these colonies, in the year with which this
narrative closes, there were living children and young persons who
would see the cord between broken, would hear read the Declaration of
Independence. So--but the true bond could never be broken, for mother
and daughter after all are one.




THE NAVIGATION LAWS
