but Sir Eric little knew how tender the French Princes were.

So Richard crept down in the dark, slid back the bolt, and called,
"Prince, Prince, I am sorry I was angry.  Come out, and let us try to be
friends."

"What do you mean?" said Lothaire.

"Come out of the cold and dark.  Here am I.  I will show you the way.
Where is your hand?  Oh, how cold it is.  Let me lead you down to the
hall fire."

Lothaire was subdued by fright, cold, and darkness, and quietly allowed
Richard to lead him down.  Round the fire, at the lower end of the hall,
snored half-a-dozen men-at-arms; at the upper hearth there was only
Hardigras, who raised his head as the boys came in.  Richard's whisper
and soft pat quieted him instantly, and the two little Princes sat on the
hearth together, Lothaire surprised, but sullen.  Richard stirred the
embers, so as to bring out more heat, then spoke: "Prince, will you let
us be friends?"

"I must, if I am in your power."

"I wish you would be my guest and comrade."

"Well, I will; I can't help it."

Richard thought his advances might have been more graciously met, and,
having little encouragement to say more, took Lothaire to bed, as soon as
he was warm.




CHAPTER XI


As the Baron had said, there was more peace now that Lothaire had learnt
to know that he must submit, and that no one cared for his threats of his
father's or his mother's vengeance.  He was very sulky and disagreeable,
and severely tried Richard's forbearance; but there were no fresh
outbursts, and, on the whole, from one week to another, there might be
said to be an improvement.  He could not always hold aloof from one so
good-natured and good-humoured as the little Duke; and the fact of being
kept in order could not but have some beneficial effect on him, after
such spoiling as his had been at home.

Indeed, Osmond was once heard to say, it was a pity the boy was not to be
a hostage for life; to which Sir Eric replied, "So long as we have not
the training of him."

Little Carloman, meanwhile, recovered from his fears of all the inmates
of the Castle excepting Hardigras, at whose approach he always shrank and
trembled.

He renewed his friendship with Osmond, no longer started at the entrance
of Sir Eric, laughed at Alberic's merry ways, and liked to sit on Fru
Astrida's lap, and hear her sing, though he understood not one word; but
his especial love was still for his first friend, Duke Richard.
Hand-in-hand they went about together, Richard sometimes lifting him up
the steep steps, and, out of consideration for him, refraining from rough
play; and Richard led him to join with him in those lessons that Father
Lucas gave the children of the Castle, every Friday and Sunday evening in
the Chapel.  The good Priest stood on the Altar steps, with the children
in a half circle round him--the son and daughter of the armourer, the
huntsman's little son, the young Baron de Montemar, the Duke of Normandy,
and the Prince of France, all were equal there--and together they learnt,
as he explained to them the things most needful to believe; and thus
Carloman left off wondering why Richard thought it right to be good to
his enemies; and though at first he had known less than even the little
leather-coated huntsman, he seemed to take the holy lessons in faster
than any of them--yes, and act on them, too.  His feeble health seemed to
make him enter into their comfort and meaning more than even Richard; and
Alberic and Father Lucas soon told Fru Astrida that it was a
saintly-minded child.

Indeed, Carloman was more disposed to thoughtfulness, because he was
incapable of joining in the sports of the other boys.  A race round the
court was beyond his strength, the fresh wind on the battlements made him
shiver and cower, and loud shouting play was dreadful to him.  In old
times, he used to cry when Lothaire told him he must have his hair cut,
and be a priest; now, he only said quietly, he should like it very much,
if he could be good enough.

Fru Astrida sighed and shook her head, and feared the poor child would
never grow up to be anything on this earth.  Great as had been the
difference at first between him and Richard, it was now far greater.
Richard was an unusually strong boy for ten years old, upright and
broad-chested, and growing very fast; while Carloman seemed to dwindle,
stooped forward from weakness, had thin pinched features, and sallow
cheeks, looking like a plant kept in the dark.

The old Baron said that hardy, healthy habits would restore the puny
children; and Lothaire improved in health, and therewith in temper; but
his little brother had not strength enough to bear the seasoning.  He
pined and drooped more each day; and as the autumn came on, and the wind
was chilly, he grew worse, and was scarcely ever off the lap of the kind
Lady Astrida.  It was not a settled sickness, but he grew weaker, and
wasted away.  They made up a little couch for him by the fire, with the
high settle between it and the door, to keep off the draughts; and there
he used patiently to lie, hour after hour, speaking feebly, or smiling
and seeming pleased, when any one of those he loved approached.  He liked
Father Lucas to come and say prayers with him; and he never failed to
have a glad look, when his dear little Duke came to talk to him, in his
cheerful voice, about his rides and his hunting and hawking adventures.
Richard's sick guest took up much of his thoughts, and he never willingly
spent many hours at a distance from him, softening his step and lowering
his voice, as he entered the hall, lest Carloman should be asleep.

"Richard, is it you?" said the little boy, as the young figure came round
the settle in the darkening twilight.

"Yes.  How do you feel now, Carloman; are you better?"

"No better, thanks, dear Richard;" and the little wasted fingers were put
into his.

"Has the pain come again?"

"No; I have been lying still, musing; Richard, I shall never be better."

"Oh, do not say so!  You will, indeed you will, when spring comes."

"I feel as if I should die," said the little boy; "I think I shall.  But
do not grieve, Richard.  I do not feel much afraid.  You said it was
happier there than here, and I know it now."

"Where my blessed father is," said Richard, thoughtfully.  "But oh,
Carloman, you are so young to die!"

"I do not want to live.  This is a fighting, hard world, full of cruel
people; and it is peace there.  You are strong and brave, and will make
them better; but I am weak and fearful--I could only sigh and grieve."

"Oh, Carloman!  Carloman!  I cannot spare you.  I love you like my own
brother.  You must not die--you must live to see your father and mother
again!"

"Commend me to them," said Carloman.  "I am going to my Father in heaven.
I am glad I am here, Richard; I never was so happy before.  I should have
been afraid indeed to die, if Father Lucas had not taught me how my sins
are pardoned.  Now, I think the Saints and Angels are waiting for me."

He spoke feebly, and his last words faltered into sleep.  He slept on;
and when supper was brought, and the lamps were lighted, Fru Astrida
thought the little face looked unusually pale and waxen; but he did not
awake.  At night, they carried him to his bed, and he was roused into a
half conscious state, moaning at being disturbed.  Fru Astrida would not
leave him, and Father Lucas shared her watch.

At midnight, all were wakened by the slow notes, falling one by one on
the ear, of the solemn passing-bell, calling them to waken, that their
prayers might speed a soul on its way.  Richard and Lothaire were soon at
the bedside.  Carloman lay still asleep, his hands folded on his breast,
but his breath came in long gasps.  Father Lucas was praying over him,
and candles were placed on each side of the bed.  All was still, the boys
not daring to speak or move.  There came a longer breath--then they heard
no more.  He was, indeed, gone to a happier home--a truer royalty than
ever had been his on earth.

Then the boys' grief burst out.  Lothaire screamed for his mother, and
sobbed out that he should die too--he must go home.  Richard stood by the
bed, large silent tears rolling down his cheeks, and his chest heaving
with suppressed sobs.

Fru Astrida led them from the room, back to their beds.  Lothaire soon
cried himself to sleep.  Richard lay awake, sorrowful, and in deep
thought; while that scene in St. Mary's, at Rouen, returned before his
eyes, and though it had passed nearly two years ago, its meaning and its
teaching had sunk deep into his mind, and now stood before him more
completely.

"Where shall I go, when I come to die, if I have not returned good for
evil?"  And a resolution was taken in the mind of the little Duke.

Morning came, and brought back the sense that his gentle little companion
was gone from him; and Richard wept again, as if he could not be
consoled, as he beheld the screened couch where the patient smile would
never again greet him.  He now knew that he had loved Carloman all the
more for his weakness and helplessness; but his grief was not like
Lothaire's, for with the Prince's was still joined a selfish fear: his
cry was still, that he should die too, if not set free, and violent
weeping really made him heavy and ill.

The little corpse, embalmed and lapped in lead, was to be sent back to
France, that it might rest with its forefathers in the city of Rheims;
and Lothaire seemed to feel this as an additional stroke of desertion.
He was almost beside himself with despair, imploring every one, in turn,
to send him home, though he well knew they were unable to do so.




CHAPTER XII


"Sir Eric," said Richard, "you told me there was a Parlement to be held
at Falaise, between Count Bernard and the King of Denmark.  I mean to
attend it.  Will you come with me, or shall Osmond go, and you remain in
charge of the Prince?"

"How now, Lord Richard, you were not wont to love a Parlement?"

"I have something to say," replied Richard.  The Baron made no objection,
only telling his mother that the Duke was a marvellous wise child, and
that he would soon be fit to take the government himself.

Lothaire lamented the more when he found that Richard was going away; his
presence seemed to him a protection, and he fancied, now Carloman was
dead, that his former injuries were about to be revenged.  The Duke
assured him, repeatedly, that he meant him nothing but kindness, adding,
"When I return, you will see, Lothaire;" then, commending him to the care
and kindness of Fru Astrida, Osmond, and Alberic, Richard set forth upon
his pony, attended by Sir Eric and three men-at-arms.

Richard felt sad when he looked back at Bayeux, and thought that it no
longer contained his dear little friend; but it was a fresh bright frosty
morning, the fields were covered with a silvery-white coating, the flakes
of hoar-frost sparkled on every bush, and the hard ground rung cheerily
to the tread of the horses' feet.  As the yellow sun fought his way
through the grey mists that dimmed his brightness, and shone out merrily
in the blue heights of the sky, Richard's spirits rose, and he laughed
and shouted, as hare or rabbit rushed across the heath, or as the plover
rose screaming above his head, flapping her broad wings across the wintry
sky.

One night they slept at a Convent, where they heard that Hugh of Paris
had passed on to join the conference at Falaise.  The next day they rode
on, and, towards the afternoon, the Baron pointed to a sharp rocky range
of hills, crowned by a tall solid tower, and told Richard, yonder was his
keep of Falaise, the strongest Castle in Normandy.

The country was far more broken as they advanced--narrow valleys and
sharp hills, each little vale full of wood, and interspersed with rocks.
"A choice place for game," Sir Eric said and Richard, as he saw a herd of
deer dash down a forest glade, exclaimed, "that they must come here to
stay, for some autumn sport."

There seemed to be huntsmen abroad in the woods; for through the frosty
air came the baying of dogs, the shouts and calls of men, and, now and
then, the echoing, ringing notes of a bugle.  Richard's eyes and cheeks
glowed with excitement, and he pushed his brisk little pony on faster and
faster, unheeding that the heavier men and horses of his suite were not
keeping pace with him on the rough ground and through the tangled boughs.

Presently, a strange sound of growling and snarling was heard close at
hand: his pony swerved aside, and could not be made to advance; so
Richard, dismounting, dashed through some briars, and there, on an open
space, beneath a precipice of dark ivy-covered rock, that rose like a
wall, he beheld a huge grey wolf and a large dog in mortal combat.  It
was as if they had fallen or rolled down the precipice together, not
heeding it in their fury.  Both were bleeding, and the eyes of both
glared like red fiery glass in the dark shadow of the rock.  The dog lay
undermost, almost overpowered, making but a feeble resistance; and the
wolf would, in another moment, be at liberty to spring on the lonely
child.

But not a thought of fear passed through his breast; to save the dog was
Richard's only idea.  In one moment he had drawn the dagger he wore at
his girdle, ran to the two struggling animals, and with all his force,
plunged it into the throat of the wolf, which, happily, was still held by
the teeth of the hound.

The struggles relaxed, the wolf rolled heavily aside, dead; the dog lay
panting and bleeding, and Richard feared he was cruelly torn.  "Poor
fellow! noble dog! what shall I do to help you?" and he gently smoothed
the dark brindled head.

A voice was now heard shouting aloud, at which the dog raised and crested
his head, as a figure in a hunting dress was coming down a rocky pathway,
an extremely tall, well-made man, of noble features.  "Ha! holla!  Vige!
Vige!  How now, my brave hound?" he said in the Northern tongue, though
not quite with the accent Richard was accustomed to hear "Art hurt?"

"Much torn, I fear," Richard called out, as the faithful creature wagged
his tail, and strove to rise and meet his master.

"Ha, lad! what art thou?" exclaimed the hunter, amazed at seeing the boy
between the dead wolf and wounded dog.  "You look like one of those
Frenchified Norman gentilesse, with your smooth locks and gilded
baldrick, yet your words are Norse.  By the hammer of Thor! that is a
dagger in the wolf's throat!"

"It is mine," said Richard.  "I found your dog nearly spent, and I made
in to the rescue."

"You did?  Well done!  I would not have lost Vige for all the plunder of
Italy.  I am beholden to you, my brave young lad," said the stranger, all
the time examining and caressing the hound.  "What is your name?  You
cannot be Southern bred?"

As he spoke, more shouts came near; and the Baron de Centeville rushed
through the trees holding Richard's pony by the bridle.  "My Lord, my
Lord!--oh, thank Heaven, I see you safe!"  At the same moment a party of
hunters also approached by the path, and at the head of them Bernard the
Dane.

"Ha!" exclaimed he, "what do I see?  My young Lord! what brought you
here?"  And with a hasty obeisance, Bernard took Richard's outstretched
hand.

"I came hither to attend your council," replied Richard.  "I have a boon
to ask of the King of Denmark."

"Any boon the King of Denmark has in his power will be yours," said the
dog's master, slapping his hand on the little Duke's shoulder, with a
rude, hearty familiarity, that took him by surprise; and he looked up
with a shade of offence, till, on a sudden flash of perception, he took
off his cap, exclaiming, "King Harald himself!  Pardon me, Sir King!"

"Pardon, Jarl Richart!  What would you have me pardon?--your saving the
life of Vige here?  No French politeness for me.  Tell me your boon, and
it is yours.  Shall I take you a voyage, and harry the fat monks of
Ireland?"

Richard recoiled a little from his new friend.

"Oh, ha!  I forgot.  They have made a Christian of you--more's the pity.
You have the Northern spirit so strong.  I had forgotten it.  Come, walk
by my side, and let me hear what you would ask.  Holla, you Sweyn! carry
Vige up to the Castle, and look to his wounds.  Now for it, young Jarl."

"My boon is, that you would set free Prince Lothaire."

"What?--the young Frank?  Why they kept you captive, burnt your face, and
would have made an end of you but for your clever Bonder."

"That is long past, and Lothaire is so wretched.  His brother is dead,
and he is sick with grief, and he says he shall die, if he does not go
home."

"A good thing too for the treacherous race to die out in him!  What
should you care for him? he is your foe."

"I am a Christian," was Richard's answer.

"Well, I promised you whatever you might ask.  All my share of his
ransom, or his person, bond or free, is yours.  You have only to prevail
with your own Jarls and Bonders."

Richard feared this would be more difficult; but Abbot Martin came to the
meeting, and took his part.  Moreover, the idea of their hostage dying in
their hands, so as to leave them without hold upon the King, had much
weight with them; and, after long deliberation, they consented that
Lothaire should be restored to his father, without ransom but only on
condition that Louis should guarantee to the Duke the peaceable
possession of the country, as far as St. Clair sur Epte, which had been
long in dispute; so that Alberic became, indisputably, a vassal of
Normandy.

Perhaps it was the happiest day in Richard's life when he rode back to
Bayeux, to desire Lothaire to prepare to come with him to St. Clair,
there to be given back into the hands of his father.

And then they met King Louis, grave and sorrowful for the loss of his
little Carloman, and, for the time, repenting of his misdeeds towards the
orphan heir of Normandy.

He pressed the Duke in his arms, and his kiss was a genuine one as he
said, "Duke Richard, we have not deserved this of you.  I did not treat
you as you have treated my children.  We will be true lord and vassal
from henceforth."

Lothaire's last words were, "Farewell, Richard.  If I lived with you, I
might be good like you.  I will never forget what you have done for me."

When Richard once more entered Rouen in state, his subjects shouting
round him in transports of joy, better than all his honour and glory was
the being able to enter the Church of our Lady, and kneel by his father's
grave, with a clear conscience, and the sense that he had tried to keep
that last injunction.




CONCLUSION


Years had passed away.  The oaths of Louis, and promises of Lothaire, had
been broken; and Arnulf of Flanders, the murderer of Duke William, had
incited them to repeated and treacherous inroads on Normandy; so that
Richard's life, from fourteen to five or six-and-twenty, had been one
long war in defence of his country.  But it had been a glorious war for
him, and his gallant deeds had well earned for him the title of "Richard
the Fearless"--a name well deserved; for there was but one thing he
feared, and that was, to do wrong.

By and by, success and peace came; and then Arnulf of Flanders, finding
open force would not destroy him, three times made attempts to
assassinate him, like his father, by treachery.  But all these had
failed; and now Richard had enjoyed many years of peace and honour,
whilst his enemies had vanished from his sight.

King Louis was killed by a fall from his horse; Lothaire died in early
youth, and in him ended the degenerate line of Charlemagne; Hugh Capet,
the son of Richard's old friend, Hugh the White, was on the throne of
France, his sure ally and brother-in-law, looking to him for advice and
aid in all his undertakings.

Fru Astrida and Sir Eric had long been in their quiet graves; Osmond and
Alberic were among Richard's most trusty councillors and warriors; Abbot
Martin, in extreme old age, still ruled the Abbey of Jumieges, where
Richard, like his father, loved to visit him, hold converse with him, and
refresh himself in the peaceful cloister, after the affairs of state and
war.

And Richard himself was a grey-headed man, of lofty stature and majestic
bearing.  His eldest son was older than he had been himself when he
became the little Duke, and he had even begun to remember his father's
project, of an old age to be spent in retirement and peace.

It was on a summer eve, that Duke Richard sat beside the white-bearded
old Abbot, within the porch, looking at the sun shining with soft
declining beams on the arches and columns.  They spoke together of that
burial at Rouen, and of the silver key; the Abbot delighting to tell,
over and over again, all the good deeds and good sayings of William
Longsword.

As they sat, a man, also very old and shrivelled and bent, came up to the
cloister gate, with the tottering, feeble step of one pursued beyond his
strength, coming to take sanctuary.

"What can be the crime of one so aged and feeble?" said the Duke, in
surprise.

At the sight of him, a look of terror shot from the old man's eye.  He
clasped his hands together, and turned as if to flee; then, finding
himself incapable of escape, he threw himself on the ground before him.

"Mercy, mercy! noble, most noble Duke!" was all he said.

"Rise up--kneel not to me.  I cannot brook this from one who might be my
father," said Richard, trying to raise him; but at those words the old
man groaned and crouched lower still.

"Who art thou?" said the Duke.  "In this holy place thou art secure, be
thy deed what it may.  Speak!--who art thou?"

"Dost thou not know me?" said the suppliant.  "Promise mercy, ere thou
dost hear my name."

"I have seen that face under a helmet," said the Duke.  "Thou art Arnulf
of Flanders!"

There was a deep silence.

"And wherefore art thou here?"

"I delayed to own the French King Hugh.  He has taken my towns and
ravaged my lands.  Each Frenchman and each Norman vows to slay me, in
revenge for your wrongs, Lord Duke.  I have been driven hither and
thither, in fear of my life, till I thought of the renown of Duke
Richard, not merely the most fearless, but the most merciful of Princes.
I sought to come hither, trusting that, when the holy Father Abbot beheld
my bitter repentance, he would intercede for me with you, most noble
Prince, for my safety and forgiveness.  Oh, gallant Duke, forgive and
spare!"

"Rise up, Arnulf," said Richard.  "Where the hand of the Lord hath
stricken, it is not for man to exact his own reckoning.  My father's
death has been long forgiven, and what you may have planned against
myself has, by the blessing of Heaven, been brought to nought.  From
Normans at least you are safe; and it shall be my work to ensure your
pardon from my brother the King.  Come into the refectory: you need
refreshment.  The Lord Abbot makes you welcome." {17}

Tears of gratitude and true repentance choked Arnulf's speech, and he
allowed himself to be raised from the ground, and was forced to accept
the support of the Duke's arm.

The venerable Abbot slowly rose, and held up his hand in an attitude of
blessing: "The blessing of a merciful God be upon the sinner who turneth
from his evil way; and ten thousand blessings of pardon and peace are
already on the head of him who hath stretched out his hand to forgive and
aid him who was once his most grievous foe!"




