"concert of the western world."

While far from exercising full control throughout Mexico, the "first
chief" of the Constitutionalists was easily the dominant figure in
the situation. At home a ranchman, in public affairs a statesman of
considerable ability, knowing how to insist and yet how to temporize,
Carranza carried on a struggle, both in arms and in diplomacy, which
singled him out as a remarkable character. Shrewdly aware of the
advantageous circumstances afforded him by the war in Europe, he turned
them to account with a degree of skill that blocked every attempt at
defeat or compromise. No matter how serious the opposition to him in
Mexico itself, how menacing the attitude of the United States, or how
persuasive the conciliatory disposition of Hispanic American nations, he
clung stubbornly and tenaciously to his program.

Even after Huerta had been eliminated, Carranza's position was not
assured, for Francisco, or "Pancho," Villa, a chieftain whose personal
qualities resembled those of the fallen dictator, was equally determined
to eliminate him. For a brief moment, indeed, peace reigned. Under
an alleged agreement between them, a convention of Constitutionalist
officers was to choose a provisional President, who should be ineligible
as a candidate for the permanent presidency at the regular elections.
When Carranza assumed both of these positions, Villa declared his act
a violation of their understanding and insisted upon his retirement.
Inasmuch as the convention was dominated by Villa, the "first chief"
decided to ignore its election of a provisional President.

The struggle between the Conventionalists headed by Villa and the
Constitutionalists under Carranza plunged Mexico into worse discord and
misery than ever. Indeed it became a sort of three-cornered contest. The
third party was Emiliano Zapata, an Indian bandit, nominally a supporter
of Villa but actually favorable to neither of the rivals. Operating near
the capital, he plundered Conventionalists and Constitutionalists with
equal impartiality, and as a diversion occasionally occupied the city
itself. These circumstances gave force to the saying that Mexico was a
"land where peace breaks out once in a while!"

Early in 1915 Carranza proceeded to issue a number of radical decrees
that exasperated foreigners almost beyond endurance. Rather than resort
to extreme measures again, however, the United States invoked the
cooperation of the Hispanic republics and proposed a conference to
devise some solution of the Mexican problem. To give the proposed
conference a wider representation, it invited not only the "A B C"
powers, but Bolivia, Uruguay, and Guatemala to participate. Meeting
at Washington in August, the mediators encountered the same difficulty
which had confronted their predecessors at Niagara Falls. Though the
other chieftains assented, Carranza, now certain of success, declined to
heed any proposal of conciliation. Characterizing efforts of the kind as
an unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of a sister nation,
he warned the Hispanic republics against setting up so dangerous a
precedent. In reply Argentina stated that the conference obeyed a "lofty
inspiration of Pan-American solidarity, and, instead of finding any
cause for alarm, the Mexican people should see in it a proof of their
friendly consideration that her fate evokes in us, and calls forth our
good wishes for her pacification and development." However, as the only
apparent escape from more watchful waiting or from armed intervention on
the part of the United States, in October the seven Governments decided
to accept the facts as they stood, and accordingly recognized Carranza
as the de facto ruler of Mexico.

Enraged at this favor shown to his rival, Villa determined deliberately
to provoke American intervention by a murderous raid on a town in New
Mexico in March, 1916. When the United States dispatched an expedition
to avenge the outrage, Carranza protested energetically against its
violation of Mexican territory and demanded its withdrawal. Several
clashes, in fact, occurred between American soldiers and Carranzistas.
Neither the expedition itself, however, nor diplomatic efforts to find
some method of cooperation which would prevent constant trouble along
the frontier served any useful purpose, since Villa apparently could
not be captured and Carranza refused to yield to diplomatic persuasion.
Carranza then proposed that a joint commission be appointed to settle
these vexed questions. Even this device proved wholly unsatisfactory.
The Mexicans would not concede the right of the United States to send
an armed expedition into their country at any time, and the Americans
refused to accept limitations on the kind of troops that they might
employ or on the zone of their operations. In January, 1917, the joint
commission was dissolved and the American soldiers were withdrawn. Again
the "first chief" had won!

On the 5th of February a convention assembled at Queretaro promulgated
a constitution embodying substantially all of the radical program
that Carranza had anticipated in his decrees. Besides providing for an
elaborate improvement in the condition of the laboring classes and
for such a division of great estates as might satisfy their particular
needs, the new constitution imposed drastic restrictions upon foreigners
and religious bodies. Under its terms, foreigners could not acquire
industrial concessions unless they waived their treaty rights and
consented to regard themselves for the purpose as Mexican citizens.
In all such cases preference was to be shown Mexicans over foreigners.
Ecclesiastical corporations were forbidden to own real property. No
primary school and no charitable institution could be conducted by
any religious mission or denomination, and religious publications must
refrain from commenting on public affairs. The presidential term was
reduced from six years to four; reelection was prohibited; and the
office of Vice President was abolished.

When, on the 1st of May, Venustiano Carranza was chosen President,
Mexico had its first constitutional executive in four years. After
a cruel and obstinately intolerant struggle that had occasioned
indescribable suffering from disease and starvation, as well as the
usual slaughter and destruction incident to war, the country began to
enjoy once more a measure of peace. Financial exhaustion, however, had
to be overcome before recuperation was possible. Industrial progress had
become almost paralyzed; vast quantities of depreciated paper money had
to be withdrawn from circulation; and an enormous array of claims for
the loss of foreign life and property had rolled up.



CHAPTER XI. THE REPUBLICS OF THE CARIBBEAN

The course of events in certain of the republics in and around the
Caribbean Sea warned the Hispanic nations that independence was a
relative condition and that it might vary in direct ratio with nearness
to the United States. After 1906 this powerful northern neighbor showed
an unmistakable tendency to extend its influence in various ways. Here
fiscal and police control was established; there official recognition
was withheld from a President who had secured office by unconstitutional
methods. Nonrecognition promised to be an effective way of maintaining
a regime of law and order, as the United States understood those terms.
Assurances from the United States of the full political equality of all
republics, big or little, in the western hemisphere did not always carry
conviction to Spanish American ears. The smaller countries in and around
the Caribbean Sea, at least, seemed likely to become virtually American
protectorates.

Like their Hispanic neighbor on the north, the little republics of
Central America were also scenes of political disturbance. None of them
except Panama escaped revolutionary uprisings, though the loss of life
and property was insignificant. On the other hand, in these early years
of the century the five countries north of Panama made substantial
progress toward federation. As a South American writer has expressed
it, their previous efforts in that direction "amid sumptuous festivals,
banquets and other solemn public acts" at which they "intoned in
lyric accents daily hymns for the imperishable reunion of the isthmian
republics," had been as illusory as they were frequent. Despite the
mediation of the United States and Mexico in 1906, while the latter
was still ruled by Diaz, the struggle in which Nicaragua, Honduras,
Guatemala, and Salvador had been engaged was soon renewed between
the first two belligerents. Since diplomatic interposition no longer
availed, American marines were landed in Nicaragua, and the bumptious
Zelaya was induced to have his country meet its neighbors in a
conference at Washington. Under the auspices of the United States and
Mexico, in December, 1907, representatives of the five republics signed
a series of conventions providing for peace and cooperation. An arbitral
court of justice, to be erected in Costa Rica and composed of one judge
from each nation, was to decide all matters of dispute which could not
be adjusted through ordinary diplomatic means. Here, also, an institute
for the training of Central American teachers was to be established.
Annual conferences were to discuss, and an office in Guatemala was to
record, measures designed to secure uniformity in financial, commercial,
industrial, sanitary, and educational regulations. Honduras, the storm
center of weakness, was to be neutralized. None of the States was
thereafter to recognize in any of them a government which had been set
up in an illegal fashion. A "Constitutional Act of Central American
Fraternity," moreover, was adopted on behalf of peace, harmony, and
progress. Toward a realization of the several objects of the conference,
the Presidents of the five republics were to invite their colleagues
of the United States and Mexico, whenever needful, to appoint
representatives, to "lend their good offices in a purely friendly way."

Though most of these agencies were promptly put into operation, the
results were not altogether satisfactory. Some discords, to be sure,
were removed by treaties settling boundary questions and providing for
reciprocal trade advantages; but it is doubtful whether the arrangements
devised at Washington would have worked at all if the United States had
not kept the little countries under a certain amount of observation.
What the Central Americans apparently preferred was to be left alone,
some of them to mind their own business, others to mind their neighbor's
affairs.

Of all the Central American countries Honduras was, perhaps, the one
most afflicted with pecuniary misfortunes. In 1909 its foreign debt,
along with arrears of interest unpaid for thirty-seven years, was
estimated at upwards of $110,000,000. Of this amount a large part
consisted of loans obtained from foreign capitalists, at more or less
extortionate rates, for the construction of a short railway, of which
less than half had been built. That revolutions should be rather
chronic in a land where so much money could be squandered and where
the temperaments of Presidents and ex-Presidents were so bellicose,
was natural enough. When the United States could not induce the warring
rivals to abide by fair elections, it sent a force of marines to overawe
them and gave warning that further disturbances would not be allowed.

In Nicaragua the conditions were similar. Here Zelaya, restive under the
limitations set by the conference at Washington, yearned to become the
"strong man" of Central America, who would teach the Yankees to stop
their meddling. But his downfall was imminent. In 1909, as the result of
his execution of two American soldiers of fortune who had taken part in
a recent insurrection, the United States resolved to tolerate Zelaya no
longer. Openly recognizing the insurgents, it forced the dictator out of
the country. Three years later, when a President-elect started to assume
office before the legally appointed time, a force of American marines
at the capital convinced him that such a procedure was undesirable. The
"corrupt and barbarous" conditions prevailing in Zelaya's time, he was
informed, could not be tolerated. The United States, in fact, notified
all parties in Nicaragua that, under the terms of the Washington
conventions, it had a "moral mandate to exert its influence for the
preservation of the general peace of Central America." Since those
agreements had vested no one with authority to enforce them, such an
interpretation of their language, aimed apparently at all disturbances,
foreign as well as domestic, was rather elastic! At all events, after
1912, when a new constitution was adopted, the country became relatively
quiet and somewhat progressive. Whenever a political flurry did take
place, American marines were employed to preserve the peace. Many
citizens, therefore, declined to vote, on the ground that the moral and
material support thus furnished by the great nation to the northward
rendered it futile for them to assume political responsibilities.

Meanwhile negotiations began which were ultimately to make Nicaragua a
fiscal protectorate of the United States. American officials were chosen
to act as financial advisers and collectors of customs, and favorable
arrangements were concluded with American bankers regarding the monetary
situation; but it was not until 1916 that a treaty covering this
situation was ratified. According to its provisions, in return for a
stipulated sum to be expended under American direction, Nicaragua was
to grant to the United States the exclusive privilege of constructing a
canal through the territory of the republic and to lease to it the Corn
Islands and a part of Fonseca Bay, on the Pacific coast, for use as
naval stations. The prospect of American intervention alarmed the
neighboring republics. Asserting that the treaty infringed upon their
respective boundaries, Costa Rica, and Salvador brought suit against
Nicaragua before the Central American Court. With the exception of
the Nicaraguan representative, the judges upheld the contention of the
plaintiffs that the defendant had no right to make any such concessions
without previous consultation with Costa Rica, Salvador, and Honduras,
since all three alike were affected by them. The Court observed,
however, that it could not declare the treaty void because the
United States, one of the parties concerned, was not subject to its
jurisdiction. Nicaragua declined to accept the decision; and the United
States, the country responsible for the existence of the Court and
presumably interested in helping to enforce its judgment, allowed it to
go out of existence in 1918 on the expiration of its ten-year term.

The economic situation of Costa Rica brought about a state of affairs
wholly unusual in Central American politics. The President, Alfredo
Gonzalez, wished to reform the system of taxation so that a fairer share
of the public burdens should fall on the great landholders who, like
most of their brethren in the Hispanic countries, were practically
exempt. This project, coupled with the fact that certain American
citizens seeking an oil concession had undermined the power of the
President by wholesale bribery, induced the Minister of War, in 1917,
to start a revolt against him. Rather than shed the blood of his fellow
citizens for mere personal advantages, Gonzalez sustained the good
reputation of Costa Rica for freedom from civil commotions by quietly
leaving the country and going to the United States to present his case.
In consequence, the American Government declined to recognize the de
facto ruler.

Police and fiscal supervision by the United States has characterized
the recent history of Panama. Not only has a proposed increase in the
customs duties been disallowed, but more than once the unrest attending
presidential elections has required the calming presence of American
officials. As a means of forestalling outbreaks, particularly in view
of the cosmopolitan population resident on the Isthmus, the republic
enacted a law in 1914 which forbade foreigners to mix in local politics
and authorized the expulsion of naturalized citizens who attacked the
Government through the press or otherwise. With the approval of the
United States, Panama entered into an agreement with American financiers
providing for the creation of a national bank, one-fourth of the
directors of which should be named by the Government of the republic.

The second period of American rule in Cuba lasted till 1909. Control of
the Government was then formally transferred to Jose Miguel Gomez, the
President who had been chosen by the Liberals at the elections held in
the previous year; but the United States did not cease to watch over its
chief Caribbean ward. A bitter controversy soon developed in the Cuban
Congress over measures to forbid the further purchase of land by aliens,
and to insure that a certain percentage of the public offices should
be held by colored citizens. Though both projects were defeated, they
revealed a strong antiforeign sentiment and much dissatisfaction on the
part of the negro population. It was clear also that Gomez, intended to
oust all conservatives from office, for an obedient Congress passed a
bill suspending the civil service rules.

The partisanship of Gomez, and his supporters, together with the
constant interference of military veterans in political affairs,
provoked numerous outbreaks, which led the United States, in 1912, to
warn Cuba that it might again be compelled to intervene. Eventually,
when a negro insurrection in the eastern part of the island menaced the
safety of foreigners, American marines were landed. Another instance
of intervention was the objection by the United States to an employers'
liability law that would have given a monopoly of the insurance business
to a Cuban company to the detriment of American firms.

After the election of Mario Menocal, the Conservative candidate, to the
presidency in 1912, another occasion for intervention presented itself.
An amnesty bill, originally drafted for the purpose of freeing the
colored insurgents and other offenders, was amended so as to empower
the retiring President to grant pardon before trial to persons whom
his successor wished to prosecute for wholesale corruption in financial
transactions. Before the bill passed, however, notice was sent from
Washington that, since the American Government had the authority to
supervise the finances of the republic, Gomez would better veto the
bill, and this he accordingly did.

A sharp struggle arose when it became known that Menocal would be a
candidate for reelection. The Liberal majority in the Congress passed
a bill requiring that a President who sought to succeed himself should
resign two months before the elections. When Menocal vetoed this
measure, his opponents demanded that the United States supervise the
elections. As the result of the elections was doubtful, Gomez and his
followers resorted in 1917 to the usual insurrection; whereupon the
American Government warned the rebels that it would not recognize their
claims if they won by force. Active aid from that quarter, as well as
the capture of the insurgent leader, caused the movement to collapse
after the electoral college had decided in favor of Menocal.

In the Dominican Republic disturbances were frequent, notwithstanding
the fact that American officials were in charge of the customhouses and
by their presence were expected to exert a quieting influence. Even
the adoption, in 1908, of a new constitution which provided for the
prolongation of the presidential term to six years and for the abolition
of the office of Vice President--two stabilizing devices quite common
in Hispanic countries where personal ambition is prone to be a source of
political trouble--did not help much to restore order. The assassination
of the President and the persistence of age-long quarrels with Haiti
over boundaries made matters worse. Thereupon, in 1913, the United
States served formal notice on the rebellious parties that it would
not only refuse to recognize any Government set up by force but would
withhold any share in the receipts from the customs. As this procedure
did not prevent a revolutionary leader from demanding half a million
dollars as a financial sedative for his political nerves and from
creating more trouble when the President failed to dispense it, the
heavy hand of an American naval force administered another kind
of specific, until commissioners from Porto Rico could arrive to
superintend the selection of a new chief magistrate. Notwithstanding the
protest of the Dominican Government, the "fairest and freest" elections
ever known in the country were held under the direction of those
officials--as a "body of friendly observers"!

However amicable this arrangement seemed, it did not smother the flames
of discord. In 1916, when an American naval commander suggested that a
rebellious Minister of War leave the capital, he agreed to do so if the
"fairest and freest" of chosen Presidents would resign. Even after both
of them had complied with the suggestions, the individuals who assumed
their respective offices were soon at loggerheads. Accordingly the
United States placed the republic under military rule, until a President
could be elected who might be able to retain his post without too much
"friendly observation" from Washington, and a Minister of War could be
appointed who would refrain from making war on the President! Then the
organization of a new party to combat the previous inordinate display
of personalities in politics created some hope that the republic would
accomplish its own redemption.

Only because of its relation to the wars of emancipation and to the
Dominican Republic, need the negro state of Haiti, occupying the western
part of the Caribbean island, be mentioned in connection with the story
of the Hispanic nations. Suffice it to say that the fact that their
color was different and that they spoke a variant of French instead of
Spanish did not prevent the inhabitants of this state from offering a
far worse spectacle of political and financial demoralization than
did their neighbors to the eastward. Perpetual commotions and repeated
interventions by American and European naval forces on behalf of the
foreign residents, eventually made it imperative for the United States
to take direct charge of the republic. In 1916, by a convention
which placed the finances under American control, created a native
constabulary under American officers, and imposed a number of other
restraints, the United States converted Haiti into what is practically a
protectorate.



CHAPTER XII. PAN-AMERICANISM AND THE GREAT WAR

While the Hispanic republics were entering upon the second century of
their independent life, the idea of a certain community of interests
between themselves and the United States began to assume a fairly
definite form. Though emphasized by American statesmen and publicists
in particular, the new point of view was not generally understood or
appreciated by the people of either this country or its fellow nations
to the southward. It seemed, nevertheless, to promise an effective
cooperation in spirit and action between them and came therefore to be
called "Pan-Americanism."

This sentiment of inter-American solidarity sprang from several sources.
The periodical conferences of the United States and its sister republics
gave occasion for an interchange of official courtesies and expressions
of good feeling. Doubtless, also, the presence of delegates from the
Hispanic countries at the international gatherings at The Hague served
to acquaint the world at large with the stability, strength, wealth, and
culture of their respective lands. Individual Americans took an active
interest in their fellows of Hispanic stock and found their interest
reciprocated. Motives of business or pleasure and a desire to obtain
personal knowledge about one another led to visits and countervisits
that became steadily more frequent. Societies were created to encourage
the friendship and acquaintance thus formed. Scientific congresses were
held and institutes were founded in which both the United States and
Hispanic America were represented. Books, articles, and newspaper
accounts about one another's countries were published in increasing
volume. Educational institutions devoted a constantly growing attention
to inter-American affairs. Individuals and commissions were dispatched
by the Hispanic nations and the United States to study one another's
conditions and to confer about matters of mutual concern. Secretaries of
State, Ministers of Foreign Affairs, and other distinguished personages
interchanged visits. Above all, the common dangers and responsibilities
falling upon the Americas at large as a consequence of the European war
seemed likely to bring the several nations into a harmony of feeling and
relationship to which they had never before attained.

Pan-Americanism, however, was destined to remain largely a generous
ideal. The action of the United States in extending its direct influence
over the small republics in and around the Caribbean aroused
the suspicion and alarm of Hispanic Americans, who still feared
imperialistic designs on the part of that country now more than ever the
Colossus of the North. "The art of oratory among the Yankees," declared
a South American critic, "is lavish with a fraternal idealism; but
strong wills enforce their imperialistic ambitions." Impassioned
speakers and writers adjured the ghost of Hispanic confederation to rise
and confront the new northern peril. They even advocated an appeal
to Great Britain, Germany, or Japan, and they urged closer economic,
social, and intellectual relations with the countries of Europe.

It was while the United States was thus widening the sphere of its
influence in the Caribbean that the "A B C" powers--Argentina, Brazil,
and Chile--reached an understanding which was in a sense a measure of
self-defense. For some years cordial relations had existed among these
three nations which had grown so remarkably in strength and prestige.
It was felt that by united action they might set up in the New World
the European principle of a balance of power, assume the leadership
in Hispanic America, and serve in some degree as a counterpoise to the
United States. Nevertheless they were disposed to cooperate with their
northern neighbor in the peaceable adjustment of conflicts in which
other Hispanic countries were concerned, provided that the mediation
carried on by such a "concert of the western world" did not include
actual intervention in the internal affairs of the countries involved.

With this attitude of the public mind, it is not strange that the
Hispanic republics at large should have been inclined to look with scant
favor upon proposals made by the United States, in 1916, to render the
spirit of Pan-Americanism more precise in its operation. The proposals
in substance were these: that all the nations of America "mutually agree
to guarantee the territorial integrity" of one another; to "maintain a
republican form of government"; to prohibit the "exportation of arms
to any but the legally constituted governments"; and to adopt laws of
neutrality which would make it "impossible to filibustering expeditions
to threaten or carry on revolutions in neighboring republics." These
proposals appear to have received no formal approval beyond what is
signified by the diplomatic expression "in principle." Considering the
disparity in strength, wealth, and prestige between the northern
country and its southern fellows, suggestions of the sort could be made
practicable only by letting the United States do whatever it might
think needful to accomplish the objects which it sought. Obviously the
Hispanic nations, singly or collectively, would hardly venture to take
any such action within the borders of the United States itself, if, for
example, it failed to maintain what, in their opinion, was "a republican
form of government." A full acceptance of the plan accordingly would
have amounted to a recognition of American overlordship, and this they
were naturally not disposed to admit.

The common perils and duties confronting the Americas as a result of
the Great War, however, made close cooperation between the Hispanic
republics and the United States up to a certain point indispensable.
Toward that transatlantic struggle the attitude of all the nations of
the New World at the outset was substantially the same. Though strongly
sympathetic on the whole with the "Allies" and notably with France, the
southern countries nevertheless declared their neutrality. More than
that, they tried to convert neutrality into a Pan-American policy,
instead of regarding it as an official attitude to be adopted by the
republics separately. Thus when the conflict overseas began to injure
the rights of neutrals, Argentina and other nations urged that the
countries of the New World jointly agree to declare that direct maritime
commerce between American lands should be considered as "inter-American
coastwise trade," and that the merchant ships engaged in it, whatever
the flag under which they sailed, should be looked upon as neutral.
Though the South American countries failed to enlist the support of
their northern neighbor in this bold departure from international
precedent, they found some compensation for their disappointment in the
closer commercial and financial relations which they established with
the United States.

Because of the dependence of the Hispanic nations, and especially those
of the southern group, on the intimacy of their economic ties with the
belligerents overseas, they suffered from the ravages of the struggle
more perhaps than other lands outside of Europe. Negotiations for
prospective loans were dropped. Industries were suspended, work on
public improvements was checked, and commerce brought almost to a
standstill. As the revenues fell off and ready money became scarce,
drastic measures had to be devised to meet the financial strain. For the
protection of credit, bank holidays were declared, stock exchanges were
closed, moratoria were set up in nearly all the countries, taxes
and duties were increased, radical reductions in expenditure were
undertaken, and in a few cases large quantities of paper money were
issued.

With the European market thus wholly or partially cut off, the
Hispanic republics were forced to supply the consequent shortage with
manufactured articles and other goods from the United States and to send
thither their raw materials in exchange. To their northern neighbor they
had to turn also for pecuniary aid. A Pan-American financial conference
was held at Washington in 1915, and an international high commission was
appointed to carry its recommendations into effect. Gradually most of
the Hispanic countries came to show a favorable trade balance. Then, as
the war drew into its fourth year, several of them even began to enjoy
great prosperity. That Pan-Americanism had not meant much more than
cooperation for economic ends seemed evident when, on April 6, 1917,
the United States declared war on Germany. Instead of following
spontaneously in the wake of their great northern neighbor, the Hispanic
republics were divided by conflicting currents of opinion and hesitated
as to their proper course of procedure. While a majority of them
expressed approval of what the United States had done, and while Uruguay
for its part asserted that "no American country, which in defense of its
own rights should find itself in a state of war with nations of other
continents, would be treated as a belligerent," Mexico veered almost to
the other extreme by proposing that the republics of America agree to
lay an embargo on the shipment of munitions to the warring powers.

As a matter of fact, only seven out of the nineteen Hispanic nations saw
fit to imitate the example set by their northern neighbor and to declare
war on Germany. These were Cuba--in view of its "duty toward the United
