

BOOK VI.

    How Diomedes and Glaukos, being about to fight, were known
    to each other, and parted in friendliness. And how Hector
    returning to the city bade farewell to Andromache his wife.

So was the dread fray of Trojans and Achaians left to itself, and the
battle swayed oft this way and that across the plain, as they aimed
against each other their bronze-shod javelins, between Simoeis and the
streams of Xanthos.

Now had the Trojans been chased again by the Achaians, dear to Ares, up
into Ilios, in their weakness overcome, but that Prism's son Helenos,
far best of augurs, stood by Aineias' side and Hector's, and spake to
them: "Aineias and Hector, seeing that on you lieth the task of war in
chief of Trojans and Lykians, because for every issue ye are foremost
both for fight and counsel, stand ye your ground, and range the host
everywhither to rally them before the gates, ere yet they fall fleeing
in their women's arms, and be made a rejoicing to the foe. Then when ye
have aroused all our battalions we will abide here and fight the
Danaans, though in sore weariness; for necessity presseth us hard: but
thou, Hector, go into the city, and speak there to thy mother and mine;
let her gather the aged wives to bright-eyed Athene's temple in the
upper city, and with her key open the doors of the holy house; and let
her lay the robe, that seemeth to her the most gracious and greatest in
her hall and far dearest unto herself, upon the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene; and vow to her to sacrifice in her temple
twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will have mercy
on the city and the Trojans' wives and little children. So may she
perchance hold back Tydeus' son from holy Ilios, the furious spearman,
the mighty deviser of rout, whom in good sooth I deem to have proved
himself mightiest of the Achaians. Never in this wise feared we
Achilles, prince of men, who they say is born of a goddess; nay, but he
that we see is beyond measure furious; none can match him for might."

So spake he, and Hector disregarded not his brother's word, but leapt
forthwith from his chariot in his armour to earth, and brandishing two
sharp spears passed everywhere through the host, rousing them to battle,
and stirred the dread war-cry. So they were rallied and stood to face
the Achaians, and the Argives gave ground and ceased from slaughter, and
deemed that some immortal had descended from starry heaven to bring the
Trojans succour, in such wise rallied they. Then Hector called to the
Trojans with far-reaching shout: "O high-souled Trojans and ye far-famed
allies, quit you like men, my friends, and take thought of impetuous
courage, while I depart to Ilios and bid the elders of the council and
our wives pray to the gods and vow them hecatombs."

So saying Hector of the glancing helm departed, and the black hide beat
on either side against his ankles and his neck, even the rim that ran
uttermost about his bossed shield.

Now Glaukos son of Hippolochos and Tydeus' son met in the mid-space of
the foes, eager to do battle. Thus when the twain were come nigh in
onset on each other, to him first spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry:
"Who art thou, noble sir, of mortal men? For never have I beheld thee in
glorious battle ere this, yet now hast thou far outstripped all men in
thy hardihood, seeing thou abidest my far-shadowing spear. Luckless are
the fathers whose children face my might. But if thou art some immortal
come down from heaven, then will not I fight with heavenly gods. But if
thou art of men that eat the fruit of the field, come nigh, that anon
thou mayest enter the toils of destruction."

Then Hippolochos' glorious son made answer to him: "Great-hearted
Tydeides, why enquirest thou of my generation? Even as are the
generations of leaves such are those likewise of men; the leaves that be
the wind scattereth on the earth, and the forest buddeth and putteth
forth more again, when the season of spring is at hand; so of the
generations of men one putteth forth and another ceaseth. Yet if thou
wilt, have thine answer, that thou mayest well know our lineage, whereof
many men have knowledge. Hippolochos, son of Bellerophon, begat me, and
of him do I declare me to be sprung; he sent me to Troy and bade me very
instantly to be ever the best and to excel all other men, nor put to
shame the lineage of my fathers that were of noblest blood in Ephyre and
in wide Lykia. This is the lineage and blood whereof I avow myself to
be."

So said he, and Diomedes of the loud war-cry was glad. He planted his
spear in the bounteous earth and with soft words spake to the shepherd
of the host: "Surely then thou art to me a guest-friend of old times
through my father: for goodly Oineus of yore entertained noble
Bellerophon in his halls and kept him twenty days. Moreover they gave
each the other goodly gifts of friendship; Oineus gave a belt bright
with purple, and Bellerophon a gold two-handled cup. Therefore now am I
to thee a dear guest-friend in midmost Argos, and thou in Lykia,
whene'er I fare to your land. So let us shun each other's spears, even
amid the throng; Trojans are there in multitudes and famous allies for
me to slay, whoe'er it be that God vouchsafeth me and my feet overtake;
and for thee are there Achaians in multitude, to slay whome'er thou
canst. But let us make exchange of arms between us, that these also may
know how we avow ourselves to be guest-friends by lineage."

So spake the twain, and leaping from their cars clasped each the other
by his hand, and pledged their faith. But now Zeus son of Kronos took
from Glaukos his wits, in that he made exchange with Diomedes Tydeus'
son of golden armour for bronze, the price of five score oxen for the
price of nine.

Now when Hector came to the Skaian gates and to the oak tree, there came
running round about him the Trojans' wives and daughters, enquiring of
sons and brethren and friends and husbands. But he bade them thereat all
in turn pray to the gods; but sorrow hung over many.

But when he came to Priam's beautiful palace, adorned with polished
colonnades--and in it were fifty chambers of polished stone, builded
hard by one another, wherein Priam's sons slept beside their wedded
wives; and for his daughters over against them on the other side within
the courtyard were twelve roofed chambers of polished stone builded hard
by one another, wherein slept Priam's sons-in-law beside their chaste
wives--then came there to meet him his bountiful mother, leading with
her Laodike, fairest of her daughters to look on; and she clasped her
hand in his, and spake, and called upon his name: "My son, why hast thou
left violent battle to come hither. Surely the sons of the
Achaians--name of evil!--press thee hard in fight about thy city, and so
thy spirit hath brought thee hither, to come and stretch forth thy hands
to Zeus from the citadel. But tarry till I bring thee honey-sweet wine,
that thou mayest pour libation to Zeus and all the immortals first, and
then shalt thou thyself also be refreshed if thou wilt drink. When a man
is awearied wine greatly maketh his strength to wax, even as thou art
awearied in fighting for thy fellows."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: "Bring me no
honey-hearted wine, my lady mother, lest thou cripple me of my courage
and I be forgetful of my might. But go thou to the temple of Athene,
driver of the spoil, with offerings, and gather the aged wives together;
and the robe that seemeth to thee the most gracious and greatest in thy
palace, and dearest unto thyself, that lay thou upon the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene, and vow to her to sacrifice in her temple
twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will have mercy
on the city and the Trojans' wives and little children. So go thou to
the temple of Athene, driver of the spoil; and I will go after Paris, to
summon him, if perchance he will hearken to my voice. Would that the
earth forthwith might swallow him up! The Olympian fostered him to be a
sore bane to the Trojans and to great-hearted Priam, and to Priam's
sons. If I but saw him going down to the gates of death, then might I
deem that my heart had forgotten its sorrows."

So said he, and she went unto the hall, and called to her handmaidens,
and they gathered the aged wives throughout the city. Then she herself
went down to her fragrant chamber where were her embroidered robes, the
work of Sidonian women, whom godlike Alexandros himself brought from
Sidon, when he sailed over the wide sea, that journey wherein he brought
home high-born Helen. Of these Hekabe took one to bear for an offering
to Athene, the one that was fairest for adornment and greatest, and
shone like a star, and lay nethermost of all. Then went she her way and
the multitude of aged wives hasted after her. And Hector was come to
Alexandros' fair palace, that himself had builded with them that were
most excellent carpenters then in deep-soiled Troy-land; these made him
his chamber and hall and courtyard hard by to Priam and Hector, in the
upper city. There entered in Hector dear to Zeus, and his hand bare his
spear, eleven cubits long: before his face glittered the bronze
spear-point, and a ring of gold ran round about it. And he found Paris
in his chamber busied with his beauteous arms, his shield and
breastplate, and handling his curved bow; and Helen of Argos sate among
her serving-women and appointed brave handiwork for her handmaidens.
Then when Hector saw him he rebuked him with scornful words: "Good sir,
thou dost not well to cherish this rancour in thy heart. The folk are
perishing about the city and high wall in battle, and for thy sake the
battle-cry is kindled and war around this city; yes thyself wouldest
thou fall out with another, didst thou see him shrinking from hateful
war. Up then, lest the city soon be scorched with burning fire."

And godlike Alexandros answered him: "Hector, since in measure thou
chidest me and not beyond measure, therefore will I tell thee; lay thou
it to thine heart and hearken to me. Not by reason so much of the
Trojans, for wrath and indignation, sate I me in my chamber, but fain
would I yield me to my sorrow. Even now my wife hath persuaded me with
soft words, and urged me into battle; and I moreover, even I, deem that
it will be better so; for victory shifteth from man to man. Go to then,
tarry awhile, let me put on my armour of war; or else fare thou forth,
and I will follow; and I think to overtake thee."

So said he, but Hector of the glancing helm answered him not a word. But
Helen spake to him with gentle words: "My brother, even mine that am a
dog, mischievous and abominable, would that on the day when my mother
bare me at the first, an evil storm-wind had caught me away to a
mountain or a billow of the loud-sounding sea, where the billow might
have swept me away before all these things came to pass. Howbeit, seeing
the gods devised all these ills in this wise, would that then I had been
mated with a better man, that felt dishonour and the multitude of men's
reproachings. But as for him, neither hath he now sound heart, nor ever
will have; thereof deem I moreover that he will reap the fruit. But now
come, enter in and sit thee here upon this bench, my brother, since thy
heart chiefly trouble hath encompassed, for the sake of me, that am a
dog, and for Alexandros' sin; on whom Zeus bringeth evil doom, that even
in days to come we may be a song in the ears of men that shall be
hereafter."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: "Bid me not sit,
Helen, of thy love; thou wilt not persuade me. Already my heart is set
to succour the men of Troy, that have great desire for me that am not
with them. But rouse thou this fellow, yea let himself make speed, to
overtake me yet within the city. For I shall go into mine house to
behold my housefolk and my dear wife, and infant boy; for I know not if
I shall return home to them again, or if the gods will now overthrow me
at the hands of the Achaians."

So spake Hector of the glancing helm and departed; and anon he came to
his well-stablished house. But he found not white-armed Andromache in
the halls; she with her boy and fair-robed handmaiden had taken her
stand upon the tower, weeping and wailing. And when Hector found not his
noble wife within, he came and stood upon the threshold and spake amid
the serving women: "Come tell me now true, my serving women. Whither
went white-armed Andromache forth from the hall? Hath she gone out to my
sisters or unto my brothers' fair-robed wives, or to Athene's temple,
where all the fair-tressed Trojan women propitiate the awful goddess?"

Then a busy housedame spake in answer to him: "Hector, seeing thou
straitly chargest us tell thee true, neither hath she gone out to any of
thy sisters or thy brothers' fair-robed wives, neither to Athene's
temple, where all the fair-tressed Trojan women are propitiating the
awful goddess; but she went to the great tower of Ilios, because she
heard the Trojans were hard pressed, and great victory was for the
Achaians. So hath she come in haste to the wall, like unto one frenzied;
and the nurse with her beareth the child."

So spake the housedame, and Hector hastened from his house back by the
same way down the well-builded streets. When he had passed through the
great city and was come to the Skaian gates, whereby he was minded to
issue upon the plain, then came his dear-won wife, running to meet him,
even Andromache daughter of great-hearted Eetion. So she met him now,
and with her went the handmaid bearing in her bosom the tender boy, the
little child, Hector's loved son, like unto a beautiful star. Him Hector
called Skamandrios, but all the folk Astyanax [Astyanax = "City King."];
for only Hector guarded Ilios. So now he smiled and gazed at his boy
silently, and Andromache stood by his side weeping, and clasped her hand
in his, and spake and called upon his name. "Dear my lord, this thy
hardihood will undo thee, neither hast thou any pity for thine infant
boy, nor for me forlorn that soon shall be thy widow; for soon will the
Achaians all set upon thee and slay thee. But it were better for me to
go down to the grave if I lose thee; for never more will any comfort be
mine, when once thou, even thou, hast met thy fate, but only sorrow.
Nay, Hector, thou art to me father and lady mother, yea and brother,
even as thou art my goodly husband. Come now, have pity and abide here
upon the tower, lest thou make thy child an orphan and thy wife a
widow."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: "Surely I take
thought for all these things, my wife; but I have very sore shame of the
Trojans and Trojan dames with trailing robes, if like a coward I shrink
away from battle. Moreover mine own soul forbiddeth me, seeing I have
learnt ever to be valiant and fight in the forefront of the Trojans,
winning my father's great glory and mine own. Yea of a surety I know
this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy Ilios to be laid
low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear. Yet doth
the anguish of the Trojans hereafter not so much trouble me, neither
Hekabe's own, neither king Priam's, neither my brethren's, the many and
brave that shall fall in the dust before their foemen, as doth thine
anguish in the day when some mail-clad Achaian shall lead thee weeping
and rob thee of the light of freedom. So shalt thou abide in Argos and
ply the loom at another woman's bidding, and bear water from fount
Messeis or Hypereia, being grievously entreated, and sore constraint
shall be laid upon thee. And then shall one say that beholdeth thee
weep: 'This is the wife of Hector, that was foremost in battle of the
horse-taming Trojans when men fought about Ilios.' Thus shall one say
hereafter, and fresh grief will be thine for lack of such an husband as
thou hadst to ward off the day of thraldom. But me in death may the
heaped-up earth be covering, ere I hear thy crying and thy carrying into
captivity."

So spake glorious Hector, and stretched out his arm to his boy. But the
child shrunk crying to the bosom of his fair-girdled nurse, dismayed at
his dear father's aspect, and in dread at the bronze and horse-hair
crest that he beheld nodding fiercely from the helmet's top. Then his
dear father laughed aloud, and his lady mother; forthwith glorious
Hector took the helmet from his head, and laid it, all gleaming, upon
the earth; then kissed he his dear son and dandled him in his arms, and
spake in prayer to Zeus and all the gods, "O Zeus and all ye gods,
vouchsafe ye that this my son may likewise prove even as I, pre-eminent
amid the Trojans, and as valiant in might, and be a great king of Ilios.
Then may men say of him, 'Far greater is he than his father' as he
returneth home from battle; and may he bring with him blood-stained
spoils from the foeman he hath slain, and may his mother's heart be
glad."

So spake he, and laid his son in his dear wife's arms; and she took him
to her fragrant bosom, smiling tearfully. And her husband had pity to
see her, and caressed her with his hand, and spake and called upon her
name: "Dear one, I pray thee be not of oversorrowful heart; no man
against my fate shall hurl me to Hades; only destiny, I ween, no man
hath escaped, be he coward or be he valiant, when once he hath been
born. But go thou to thine house and see to thine own tasks, the loom
and distaff, and bid thine handmaidens ply their work; but for war shall
men provide, and I in chief of all men that dwell in Ilios."

So spake glorious Hector, and took up his horse-hair crested helmet; and
his dear wife departed to her home, oft looking back, and letting fall
big tears. Anon she came to the well-stablished house of man-slaying
Hector, and found therein her many handmaidens, and stirred lamentation
in them all. So bewailed they Hector, while yet he lived, within his
house: for they deemed that he would no more come back to them from
battle, nor escape the fury of the hands of the Achaians.

Neither lingered Paris long in his lofty house, but clothed on him his
brave armour, bedight with bronze, and hasted through the city, trusting
to his nimble feet. Even as when a stalled horse, full-fed at the
manger, breaketh his tether and speedeth at the gallop across the plain,
being wont to bathe him in the fair-flowing stream, exultingly; and
holdeth his head on high, and his mane floateth about his shoulders, and
he trusteth in his glory, and nimbly his limbs bear him to the haunts
and pasturages of mares; even so Priam's son Paris, glittering in his
armour like the shining sun, strode down from high Pergamos laughingly,
and his swift feet bare him. Forthwith he overtook his brother noble
Hector, even as he was on the point to turn him away from the spot where
he had dallied with his wife. To him first spake godlike Alexandros:
"Sir, in good sooth I have delayed thee in thine haste by my tarrying,
and came not rightly as thou badest me."

And Hector of the glancing helm answered him and said: "Good brother, no
man that is rightminded could make light of thy doings in fight, seeing
thou art strong: but thou art wilfully remiss and hast no care; and for
this my heart is grieved within me, that I hear shameful words
concerning thee in the Trojans' mouths, who for thy sake endure much
toil. But let us be going; all this will we make good hereafter, if Zeus
ever vouchsafe us to set before the heavenly gods that are for
everlasting the cup of deliverance in our halls, when we have chased out
of Troy-land the well-greaved Achaians."



BOOK VII.

    Of the single combat between Aias and Hector, and of the
    burying of the dead, and the building of a wall about the
    Achaian ships.

So spake glorious Hector and issued from the gates, and with him went
his brother Alexandros; and both were eager of soul for fight and
battle. Even as God giveth to longing seamen fair wind when they have
grown weary of beating the main with polished oars, and their limbs are
fordone with toil, even so appeared these to the longing Trojans.

Now when the goddess bright-eyed Athene marked them making havoc of the
Argives in the press of battle, she darted down from the crests of
Olympus to holy Ilios. But Apollo rose to meet her, for he beheld her
from Pergamos, and would have victory for the Trojans. So the twain met
each the other by the oak-tree. To her spake first king Apollo son of
Zeus: "Why now art thou come thus eagerly from Olympus, thou daughter of
great Zeus, and why hath thy high heart sent thee? Surely it is to give
the Danaans unequal victory in battle! seeing thou hast no mercy on the
Trojans, that perish. But if thou wouldest hearken to me--and it were
far better so--let us now stay battle and warring for the day; hereafter
shall they fight again, till they reach the goal of Ilios, since thus it
seemeth good to your hearts, goddesses immortal, to lay waste this
city."

And the goddess bright-eyed Athene made answer to him: "So be it,
Far-darter; in this mind I likewise came from Olympus to the midst of
Trojans and Achaians. But come, how thinkest thou to stay the battle of
the warriors?"

And king Apollo, son of Zeus, made answer to her: "Let us arouse the
stalwart spirit of horse-taming Hector, if so be he will challenge some
one of the Danaans in single fight man to man to meet him in deadly
combat. So shall the bronze-greaved Achaians be jealous and stir up one
to fight singly with goodly Hector." So spake he and the bright-eyed
goddess Athene disregarded not. Now Helenos Priam's dear son understood
in spirit their resolve that the gods in counsel had approved; and he
went to Hector and stood beside him, and spake a word to him: "Hector
son of Priam, peer of Zeus in counsel, wouldest thou now hearken at all
to me? for I am thy brother. Make the other Trojans sit, and all the
Achaians, and thyself challenge him that is best of the Achaians to meet
thee man to man in deadly combat. It is not yet thy destiny to die and
meet thy doom; for thus heard I the voice of the gods that are from
everlasting." So said he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his
saying, and went into the midst and refrained the battalions of the
Trojans with his spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them
down: and Agamemnon made the well-greaved Achaians sit. And Athene
withal and Apollo of the silver bow, in the likeness of vulture birds,
sate them upon a tall oak holy to aegis-bearing father Zeus, rejoicing
in their warriors; and the ranks of all of them sate close together,
bristling with shields and plumes and spears. Even as there spreadeth
across the main the ripple of the west wind newly risen, and the sea
grows black beneath it, so sate the ranks of Achaians and Trojans upon
the plain. And Hector spake between both hosts: "Hearken to me, Trojans
and well-greaved Achaians, that I may speak what my mind within my
breast biddeth me. Our oaths of truce Kronos' son, enthroned on high,
accomplished not; but evil is his intent and ordinance for both our
hosts, until either ye take fair-towered Troy or yourselves be
vanquished beside your seafaring ships. But in the midst of you are the
chiefest of all the Achaians; therefore now let the man whose heart
biddeth him fight with me come hither from among you all to be your
champion against goodly Hector. And this declare I, and be Zeus our
witness thereto; if that man slay me with the long-edged sword, let him
spoil me of my armour and bear it to the hollow ships, but give back my
body to my home, that Trojans and Trojans' wives may give me my due of
burning in my death. But if I slay him and Apollo vouchsafe me glory, I
will spoil him of his armour and bear it to holy Ilios and hang it upon
the temple of far-darting Apollo, but his corpse will I render back to
the well-decked ships, that the flowing-haired Achaians may entomb him,
and build him a barrow beside wide Hellespont. So shall one say even of
men that be late born, as he saileth in his benched ship over the
wine-dark sea: 'This is the barrow of a man that died in days of old, a
champion whom glorious Hector slew.' So shall a man say hereafter, and
this my glory shall never die."

So spake he and they all were silent and held their peace; to deny him
they were ashamed, and feared to meet him. But at the last stood up
Menelaos and spake amid them and chiding upbraided them, and groaned
deep at heart: "Ah me, vain threateners, ye women of Achaia and no more
men, surely all this shall be a shame, evil of evil, if no one of the
Danaans now goeth to meet Hector. Nay, turn ye all to earth and water,
sitting there each man disheartened, helplessly inglorious; against him
will I myself array me; and from on high the threads of victory are
guided of the immortal gods."

So spake he and donned his fair armour. And now, O Menelaos, had the end
of life appeared for thee at Hector's hands, seeing he was stronger far,
but that the princes of the Achaians started up and caught thee. And
Atreus' son himself, wide-ruling Agamemnon, took him by his right hand
and spake a word and called upon his name: "Thou doest madly, Menelaos
fosterling of Zeus; yet is it no time for this thy madness. Draw back,
though it be with pain, nor think for contention's sake to fight with
one better than thou, with Hector Priam's son, whom others beside thee
abhor. Yea, this man even Achilles dreadeth to meet in battle, wherein
