Still in spite of the King's anger the company decided to go its
own way.  They had their charter sealed with the King's seal, signed
with the King's name, which gave them the right of freely electing
their own officers, and not even the King should be allowed to
interfere with that right.

On the day of the election nearly five hundred of the "adventurers"
gathered together.  Three names were put up for election, Sir
Edwin's heading the list.  But just as the voting was about to begin
a messenger from the King arrived.

"It is not the King's pleasure that Sir Edward Sandys should be
chosen," he said, "so he has sent to you a list of four, one of
which you may choose."

At this, dead silence fell upon the company, every man lost in
amazement at this breach of their charter.  For minutes the heavy
silence lasted.  Then there arose murmurs which grew ever louder until
amid cries of anger it was proposed to turn the King's messengers
out.

"No," said the Earl of Southampton, "let the noble gentlemen keep
their places.  Let them stay and see that we do everything in a
manner which is fair and above board.  For this business is of so
great concernment that it can never be too solemnly, too thoroughly
or too publicly examined."

Others agreed that this was right.  So the messengers stayed.  Then
there came impatient cries from every part of the hall, "The Charter!
The Charter! God save the King!"

So the charter was brought and solemnly read.

Then the secretary stood up. "I pray you, gentlemen," he said, "to
observe well the words of the charter on the point of electing a
Governor.  You see it is thereby left to your own free choice.  This
I take it is so very plain that we shall not need to say anything
more about it.  And no doubt these gentlemen when they depart will
give his Majesty a just information of the case."

This speech was received with great noise and cheering.  In the midst
of it a friend of Sir Edwin's stood up and begged for silence.  And
when the noise had abated a little he said, "Sir Edwin asks me to
say that he withdraws his name for election.  I therefore propose
that the King's messengers choose two names and that we choose
a third.  Then let all these three names be set upon the balloting
box.  And so go to the election in God's name.  And let His will be
done."

Thereupon with one voice the whole assembly cried out, "Southampton!
Southampton!"

The King's messengers then pretended that they were quite pleased.
"The King," they said, "had no desire to infringe their rights.  He
desired no more than that Sir Edwin Sandys should not be chosen."

Then they named two from the King's list, and the ballot was
immediately taken; the result being that one of the King's men had
two votes, the other but one, and the Earl of Southampton all the
rest.

When the King heard of this result he was a little anxious and
apologetic.  The messengers, he said, had mistaken his intention.
He had only meant to recommend his friends, and not to forbid the
company to elect any other.  But once again Englishmen had fought
a duel with tyranny, and won.

From this day, however, the King's hatred of the company became
deadly.  He harassed it in every way and at last in 1624 took its
charter away, and made Virginia a Crown Colony.  Henceforth in theory
at least self-government was taken away from Virginia, and to the
King alone belonged the right of appointing the Governor and Council.
But in fact the change made little difference to the colony.  For
in the spring of 1625 King James died, and his son Charles I, who
succeeded him upon the throne, had so much else to trouble him that
he paid little heed to Virginia.

__________





Chapter 19 - The Coming of the Cavaliers




With a new King on the throne life in Virginia went on much as
it had done.  Governors came and went, were good or bad, strong or
weak.  There were troubles with the Indians, and troubles at home
about the sale of tobacco; still the colony lived and prospered.
The early days of struggle were over.

Virginia now was no longer looked upon as a place of exile where with
luck one could make a fortune and return home to England to enjoy
it.  Men now began to find Virginia a pleasant place, and look upon
it as their home.  The great woods were full of game, the streams
were full of fish, so that the Englishman could shoot and angle to
his heart's content.  The land was so fertile that he did not need
to work half so hard to earn a living as he had to do at home;
while the climate was far kindlier.

So the colony prospered.  And it was to this prosperous colony
that in 1642 Sir William Berkeley was appointed Governor.  He was
a courtly, hot-tempered, imperious gentleman, a thorough cavalier
who dressed in satin and lace and ruled like a tyrant.  He did not
believe in freedom of thought, and he spent a good deal of time
persecuting the Puritans who had found refuge in Virginia.

For just about the time of Berkeley's appointment a fierce religious
war between Cavalier and Puritan was beginning in England, and
already some Puritans had fled to Virginia to escape persecution
at home.  But Berkeley soon showed them that they had come to the
wrong place and bade them "depart the Colony with all convenience."

Berkeley did not believe in freedom of thought, and he disapproved
just as much of education, for that had encouraged freedom of
thought. "I thank God," he said some years later, "there are no
free schools in Virginia or printing, and I hope we shall not have
them these hundred years.  For learning has brought disobedience and
heresy, and sects into the world, and printing has divulged them,
and libels against the best government.  God keep us from both."

In England the quarrel between King and people grew ever fiercer
and more bitter.  Virginia so far away heard the echo of it, and
there, as in England, men took sides.  The men in Virginia were
ready enough to stand up to the King and speak their mind when he
threatened their liberties.  But when they heard that the people in
England had taken the King prisoner and were talking of beheading
him they were horrified.  To lay bands upon his person, to lead him
to the block, to take his life! That seemed to them very terrible.
And when at length the news of the King's death reached Virginia
the Virginians forgot their grievances, they became King's men.
And Berkeley, a fervent Royalist, wrote to his brother Royalists at
home asking them to come out to Virginia, there to find new homes
far from the rule of the hated "usurper" Cromwell.

Many came, fleeing from their native land "in horror and despairs
at the bloody and bitter stroke." Before the year was out at least
a thousand Cavaliers had found a home in Virginia.  They were kindly,
even affectionately, received.  Every house was open to them, every
hand stretched out to help.

In October the House of Burgesses met and at once declared that the
beheading of "the late most excellent and now undoubtedly sainted
King" was treason.  And if any one in Virginia dared to defend "the
late traitorous proceedings against the aforesaid King of most
happy memory" they too would be found guilty of treason and worthy
of death.  Worthy of death too should be any one who seemed by word
or deed to doubt the right of "his Majesty that now is" to the Colony
of Virginia.  Thus Charles II, a homeless wanderer, was acknowledged
King of Virginia.

In this manner did little Virginia fling down the gauntlet to Great
Britain.  It was a daring deed, and one not likely to go unheeded by
the watchful Cromwell.  Yet two years and more passed.  Then British
ships appeared off Jamestown.  At once the Virginians made ready to
resist; cannon were mounted; the gay Cavaliers turned out in force,
sword by side, gun in hand.  Then a little boat flying a white flag
was seen to put off for the shore.  It was a messenger from the
British captain.

It would be much better for them, he said, to yield peacefully than
to fight and be beaten.  For hold out against the great strength of
Britain they could not.  His words had weight with the Virginians.
Yet long and seriously they debated.  Some would have held out,
but others saw only misery and destruction in such a course.  So at
length they surrendered to the might of Cromwell.

The conditions were not severe.  They had to submit, and take the
oath of allegiance to the British Parliament.  Those who refused
were given a year's time in which to leave the colony.  And as for
their love of the King? Why, they might pray for him, and drink
his health in private, and no man would hinder them.  Only in public
such things would not be tolerated.

In bitterness of heart the Cavalier Governor gave up his post, sold
his house in Jamestown, and went away to live in his great country
house at Green Spring.  Here amid his apple-trees and orchards he
lived in a sort of rural state, riding forth in his great coach,
and welcoming with open arms the Cavaliers who came to him for aid
and comfort in those evil times.

These Cavaliers were men and women of good family.  They came from
the great houses of England, and in their new homes they continued to
lead much the same life as they had done at home.  So in Virginia.
there grew up a Cavalier society, a society of men and women
accustomed to command, accustomed to be waited upon; who drove
about in gilded coaches, and dressed in silks and velvets.  Thus the
plain Virginian farmer became a country squire.  From these Cavalier
families were descended George Washington, James Madison and other
great men who helped to make America.

The years of the Commonwealth passed quietly in Virginia.  Having
made the colonists submit, the Parliament left them to themselves,
and Virginia for the first time was absolutely self-governing.
But the great Protector died, the Restoration followed, when the
careless, pleasure-loving King, Charles II was set upon the throne.

In Virginia too there was a little Restoration.  When the news was
brought the Cavaliers flung up their caps and shouted for joy.
Bonfires were lit, bells were rung and guns fired, and to the sound
of drum and trumpet Charles by the Grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France, Ireland and Virginia was proclaimed to all the
winds of heaven.  A new seal was made upon which were the words
"En dat Virginia quintum" meaning "Behold Virginia gives the fifth
(dominion)." Henceforth Virginia was often called by the name of
the "Old Dominion."

Nor was that all.  For with the Restoration of the Stuarts Berkeley
too was restored.  The haughty Cavalier left his country manor
house and came back to rule at Jamestown once more, as Governor
and Captain General of Virginia.

During the Commonwealth there had been little change made in the
government of Virginia, except that the right of voting for the
Burgesses had been given to a much larger number of people.

That did not please Sir William Berkeley at all.  He took away the
right from a good many people.  When he came back to power too he
found the House of Burgesses much to his liking.  So instead of having
it re-elected every year he kept the same members for fourteen years
lest the people should elect others who would not do his bidding.

This made the people discontented.  But they soon had greater causes
for discontent.  First there was the Navigation Law.  This Law had
been passed ten years before, but had never really been put in
force in America.  By this Law it was ordered that no goods should
be exported from the colonies in America except in British ships.
Further it was ordered that the colonies should not trade with any
country save England and Ireland or "some other of His Majesty's
said plantations." It was a foolish law, meant to hurt the Dutch,
and put gold into the pockets of British merchants.  Instead it
drove the colonies to rebellion.

Virginia had yet another grievance.  Virginia, which for eight years
had been self-governing, Virginia which had begun to feel that
she had a life of her own, a place of her own among the nations,
suddenly found herself given away like some worthless chattel to two
of the King's favourites -the Earl of Arlington and Lord Culpeper.

The careless, laughter-loving King owed much to his friends who
had rescued him from beggary, and set him upon his father's throne.
Here was an easy way of repaying two of them.  If they really
desired that wild land beyond the seas, where only savages lived,
and where the weed which his pompous grandfather had disliked so much
grew, why they should have it! So he carelessly signed his royal
name and for a yearly rent of forty shillings "all that dominion of
land and water commonly called Virginia" was theirs for the space
of thirty-one years.

It was but a scratch of the pen to the King.  It was everything to
the Virginians, and when news of it reached them all Virginia was
ablaze.  They who had clung to the King in his evil days, they who
had been the last people belonging to England to submit to the
Commonwealth to be thus tossed to his favourites like some useless
toy, without so much as a by your leave! They would not suffer it.
And they sent a messenger to England to lay their case before the
King.

As to Charles, he was lazily astonished to find that any one
objected to such a little trifle.  And with his usual idle good nature
he promised that it should be altered.  But he had no intention of
hurrying.  Meanwhile out in Virginia events were hastening.

__________





Chapter 20 - Bacon's Rebellion




For some time now the Indians had been an increasing terror to
the white men.  They had grown restless and uneasy at the constantly
widening borders of the settlements.  Day by day the forest
was cleared, the cornfields stretched farther and farther inland,
and the Redman saw himself driven farther and farther from his
hunting-ground.

So anger arose in the Redman's heart.  He lurked in the forests
which girded the lonely farms and, watching his opportunity, crept
stealthily forth to slay and burn.  Settler after settler was slain
in cold blood, or done to death with awful tortures, and his pleasant
homestead was given to the flames.  Day by day the tale of horror
grew, till it seemed at length that no farm along the borders of
the colony was safe from destruction.  Yet the Governor did nothing.

Helplessly the Virginians raged against his sloth and tyranny.  He
was a traitor to his trust, they declared, and feared to wage war
on the Indians lest it should spoil his fur trade with them.  But
that was not so.  A deadlier fear than that kept Berkeley idle.  He
knew how his tyranny had made the people hate him, and he feared
to arm them and lead them against the Indians, lest having subdued
these foes they should turn their arms against him.

But the men of Virginia were seething with discontent and ripe for
rebellion.  All they wanted was a leader, and soon they found one.
This leader was Nathaniel Bacon, a young Englishman who had but
lately come to the colony.  He was dashing and handsome, had winning
ways and a persuasive tongue.  He was the very man for a popular
leader, and soon at his back he had an army of three hundred armed
settlers, "one and all at his devotion."

Bacon then sent to the Governor asking for a commission to go
against the Indians.  But Berkeley put him off with one excuse after
another; until at length goaded into rebellion Bacon and his men
determined to set out, commission or no commission.

But they had not gone far when a messenger came spurring behind
them in hot haste.  He came with a proclamation from the Governor
denouncing them all as rebels, and bidding them disperse at once
on pain of forfeiting their lands and goods.  Some obeyed, but the
rest went on with Bacon, and only returned after having routed the
Indians.  Their defeat was so severe that the battle is known as the
Battle of Bloody Run, because it was said the blood of the Indians
made red the stream which flowed near the battlefield.

The Indians for the time were cowed, and Bacon marched slowly home
with his men.

Meanwhile Berkeley had gathered horses and men and had ridden out
to crush this turbulent youth.  But hearing suddenly that the people
had risen in revolt, he hastened back to Jamestown with all speed.
He saw he must do something to appease the people.  So he dissolved
the House of Burgesses which for fourteen years had done his bidding,
and ordered a new election.  This pacified the people somewhat.  But
they actually elected the rebel Bacon as one of the members of the
House.

Bacon was not, however, altogether to escape the consequences of
his bold deeds.  As soon as he returned he was taken prisoner and
led before the Governor.  The stern old Cavalier received this rebel
with cool civility.

"Mr.  Bacon," he said, "have you forgot to be a gentleman?"

"No, may it please your honour," answered Bacon,

"Then," said the Governor, "I will take your parole."

So Bacon was set free until the House of Burgesses should meet.
Meantime he was given to understand that if he made open confession
of his misdeeds in having marched against the Indians without a
commission, he would be forgiven, receive his commission, and be
allowed to fight the Indians.  It was not easy to make this proud
young man bend his knee.  But to gain his end Bacon consented to
beg forgiveness for what he deemed no offence.  The Governor meant
it to be a solemn occasion, one not lightly to be forgotten.  So when
the burgesses and council were gathered the Governor stood up.

"If there be joy in the presence of the angels over one sinner
that repenteth," he said, "there is joy now, for we have a penitent
sinner come before us.  Call Mr.  Bacon."

The doors were thrown wide open and in marched Bacon, tall and
proud, looking grave indeed but little like a repentant sinner.
At the bar of the House he knelt on one knee, and reading from a
paper written out for him confessed his crimes, begging pardon from
God, the King, and the Governor.

When his clear young voice ceased the old Governor spoke.

"God forgive you," he said, solemnly. "I forgive you." Three times
he repeated the words and was silent.

"And all that were with him?" asked one of the council.

"Yea," said the Governor, "and all that were with him."

Thus the matter seemed ended.  There was peace again and the House
could now proceed to further business.

Part of that business was to settle what was to be done about the
Indian war.  Some of the people hoped that they might get help from
friendly Indians.  So the Indian Queen, Pamunky, had been asked to
come to the Assembly and say what help she would give.  Her tribe
was the same as that over which the Powhatan had ruled so long
ago.  And although it was now but a shadow of its former self she
had still about a hundred and fifty braves at command whose help
the Englishmen were anxious to gain.

Queen Pamunky entered the Assembly with great dignity, and with
an air of majesty walked slowly up the long room.  Her walk was so
graceful, her gestures so courtly, that every one looked at her
in admiration.  Upon her head she wore a crown of black and white
wampum.  Her robe was made of deer skin and covered her from shoulders
to feet, the, edges of it being slit into fringes six inches deep.
At her right hand walked an English interpreter, at her left her
son, a youth of twenty.

When Queen Pamunky reached the table she stood still looking at
the members coldly and gravely, and only at their urgent request
did she sit down.  Beside her, as they had entered the room, stood
her son and interpreter on either hand.

When she was seated the chairman asked her how many men she would
send to help them against the enemy Indians.  All those present were
quite sure that she understood English, but she would not speak
to the chairman direct, and answered him through her interpreter,
bidding him speak to her son.

The young Indian chieftain however also refused to reply.  So again
the Queen was urged to say how many men she could send.

For some minutes she sat still, as if in deep thought.  Then in a
shrill high voice full of passionate fervour, and trembling as if
with tears, she spoke in her own tongue, and ever and anon amid the
tragic torrent of sound the words "Tatapatamoi chepiack, Tatapatamoi
chepiack" could be heard.

Few present understood her.  But one of the members did, and shook
his head sadly.

"What she says is too true, to our shame be it said," he sighed. "My
father was general in that battle of which she speaks.  Tatapatamoi
was her husband, and he led a hundred men against our enemies,
and was there slain with most of his company.  And from that day to
this no recompense has been given to her.  Therefore she upbraids
us, and cries, 'Tatapatamoi is dead.'"

When they heard the reason for the Indian Queen's anger many were
filled with sympathy for her.

The chairman however was a crusty old fellow, and he was quite
unmoved by the poor Queen's passion of grief and anger.  Never a word
did he say to comfort her distress, not a sign of sympathy did he
give.  He rudely brushed aside her vehement appeal, and repeated
his question.

"What men will you give to help against the enemy Indians?"

With quivering nostrils, and flashing eyes, the Indian Queen drew
herself up scornfully, she looked at him, then turned her face
away, and sat mute.

Three times he repeated his question.

Then in a low disdainful voice, her head still turned away, she
muttered in her own language "Six."

This would never do.  The lumbering old chairman argued and persuaded,
while the dusky Queen sat sullenly silent.  At length she uttered
one word as scornfully as the last. "Twelve," she said.  Then rising,
she walked proudly and gravely from the hall.

Thus did the blundering old fellow of a chairman, for the lack of
a few kindly words, turn away the hearts of the Indians, and lose
their help at a moment when it was sorely needed.

The new House had many other things to discuss besides the Indian
wars, and the people, who had been kept out of their rights for
so long, now made up for lost time.  They passed laws with feverish
haste.  They restored manhood suffrage, did away with many class
privileges, and in various ways instituted reforms.  Afterwards
these laws were known as Bacon's Laws.

But meanwhile Bacon was preparing a new surprise for every one.

One morning the town was agog with news. "Bacon has fled, Bacon
has fled!" cried every one.

It was true.  Bacon had grown tired of waiting for the commission
which never came.  So he was off to raise the country.  A few days
later he marched back again at the head of six hundred men.

At two o'clock one bright June day the sounds of drum and trumpet
were heard mingled with the tramp of feet and the clatter of horses'
hoofs; and General Bacon, as folk began to call him now, drew up
his men not an arrow's flight from the State House.

The people of Jamestown rushed to the spot.  Every window and balcony
was crowded with eager excited people.  Men, women and children
jostled each other on the green, as Bacon, with a file of soldiers
on either hand, marched to the State House.

The white-haired old Governor, shaking with anger, came out to
meet the insolent young rebel.  With trembling fingers he tore at
the fine lace ruffles of his shirt, baring his breast.

"Here I am!" He cried. "Shoot me! 'Fore God 'tis a fair mark.  Shoot
me! Shoot me!" he repeated in a frenzy.

But Bacon answered peaceably enough. "No, may it please your honour,"
he said, "we will not hurt a hair of your head, nor of any other
man's.  We are come for a commission to save our lives from the
Indians which you have so often promised.  And now we will have it
before we go."

But when the stern old Cavalier refused to listen to him, Bacon too
lost his temper, and laying his hand on his sword, swore he would
kill the Governor, Council, Assembly and all, rather than forego
his commission.  His men, too, grew impatient and filled the air
with their shouts.

"We will have it, we will have it!" they cried, at the same time
pointing their loaded guns at the windows of the State House.

Minute by minute the uproar increased, till at length one of the
Burgesses, going to a window, waved his handkerchief ("a pacifeck
handkercher" a quaint old record calls it) and shouted, "You shall
have it, you shall have it."

So the tumult was quieted.  A commission was drawn up making Bacon
Commander-in-Chief of the army against the Indians, and a letter
was written to the King praising him for what he had done against
them.  But the stern old Governor was still unbending, and not till
next day was he browbeaten into signing both papers.

The young rebel had triumphed.  But Berkeley was not yet done with
him, for the same ship which carried the letter of the Burgesses
to the King also carried a private letter from Berkeley in which
he gave his own account of the business. "I have for above thirty
years governed the most flourishing country the sun ever shone
over," he wrote, "but am now encompassed with rebellion like waters."

And as soon as Bacon was safely away, and at grips once more with
the Indians, the Governor again proclaimed him and his followers
to be rebels and traitors.

Bacon had well-nigh crushed the Indian foe when this news was
brought to him.  He was cut to the quick by the injustice.

"I am vexed to the heart," he said, "for to think that while I am
hunting Indian wolves, tigers, and foxes which daily destroy our
harmless sheep and lambs, that I, and those with me, should be pursued
with a full cry, as a more savage and no less ravenous beast."

So now in dangerous mood he marched back to Jamestown.  Things were
looking black for him, but his men were with him heart and soul.
When one of them, a Scotsman named Drummond, was warned that this
was rebellion he replied recklessly, "I am in over shoes, I will
be in over boots."

His wife was even more bold. "This is dangerous work," said some
one, "and England will have something to say to it."

Then Sarah Drummond picked up a twig, and snapping it in two, threw
it down again. "I fear the power of England no more than that broken
straw," she cried.

Bacon now issued a manifesto in reply to Berkeley's proclamation,
declaring that he and his followers could not find in their hearts
one single spot of rebellion or treason. "Let Truth be bold," he
cried, "and let all the world know the real facts of this matter."
He appealed to the King against Sir William, who had levied unjust
taxes, who had failed to protect the people against the Indians, who
had traded unjustly with them, and done much evil to his Majesty's
true subjects.

So far there had only been bitter words between the old Governor and
the young rebel, and Bacon had never drawn his sword save against
the Indians.  Now he turned it against the Governor, and, marching
on Jamestown, burned it to the ground, and Berkeley, defeated, fled
to Accomac.

Everywhere Bacon seemed successful, and from Jamestown he marched
northward to settle affairs there also "after his own measures."
But a grim and all-conquering captain had now taken up arms against
this victorious rebel-Captain Death, whom even the greatest soldier
must obey.  And on October 1st, 1676, Bacon laid down his sword for
ever.  He had been the heart and soul of the rebellion, and with
his death it collapsed swiftly and completely.

Bacon was now beyond the Governor's wrath, but he wreaked his
vengeance on those who had followed him.  For long months the rebels
were hunted and hounded, and when caught they were hanged without
mercy.  The first to suffer was Colonel Thomas Hansford.  He was a
brave man and a gentleman, and all he asked was that he might be
shot like a soldier, and not hanged like a dog.  But the wrathful
Governor would not listen to his appeal, and he was hanged.  On the
scaffold he spoke to those around, praying them to remember that
he died a loyal subject of the King, and a lover of his country.
He has been called the first martyr to American liberty.

Another young Major named Cheesman was condemned to death, but died
in prison, some say by poison.

The Governor, when he was brought before him, asked fiercely: "What
reason had you for rebellion?"

But before the Major could reply his young wife stepped from the
surrounding crowd, and threw herself upon her knees before the
Governor. "It was my doing," she cried. " I persuaded him, and but
for me he would never have done it.  I am guilty, not he.  I pray
you therefore let me be hanged, and he be pardoned."

But the old Cavalier's heart was filled to overflowing with a
frenzy of hate.  He was utterly untouched by the poor lady's brave
and sad appeal, and answered her only with bitter, insulting words.

Drummond too was taken.  He was indeed "in over boots" and fearless
to the last.  The Governor was overjoyed at his capture, and with
mocking ceremony swept his hat from his head, and, bowing low,
cried exultantly, "Mr.  Drummond, you are very welcome.  I am more
glad to see you than any man in Virginia.  Mr.  Drummond, you shall
be hanged in half an hour."

"What your honour pleases," calmly replied Drummond.  And so he
died.

It seemed as if the Governor's vengeance would never be satisfied.
But at length the House met, and petitioned him to spill no more
blood. "For," said one of the members, "had we let him alone he
would have hanged half the country."

News of his wild doings, too, were carried home, and reached even
the King's ears. "The old fool," cried he, "has hanged more men
in that naked country than I did for the murder of my father." So
Berkeley was recalled.

At his going the whole colony rejoiced.  Guns were fired and bonfires
lit to celebrate the passing of the tyrant.

Berkeley did not live long after his downfall.  He had hoped that
when he saw the King, and explained to him his cause, that he would
be again received into favour.  But his hopes were vain.  The King
refused to see him, and he who had given up everything, even good
name and fame, in his King's cause died broken-hearted, a few months
later.

__________





Chapter 21 - The Story of the Knights of the Golden Horseshoe




Bacon was driven into rebellion by evil government and tyranny.
But the rising did little good.  Bacon's Laws were done away with
and Lord Culpeper, one of the two nobles to whom Charles II had
given Virginia, came out as Governor.  He soon showed himself a
greedy tyrant, caring nothing for the happiness of his people, and
bent only on making money for himself.

Other governors followed him, many of them worthless, some never
taking the trouble to come to Virginia at all.  They stayed at
home, accepting large sums of money, and letting other people do
the work.  But they were not all worthless and careless.  Some were
good, and one of the best was a Scotsman, Alexander Spotswood.  He
was a lieutenant governor.  That is, the Governor in name was the
Earl of Orkney, who was given the post as a reward for his great
services as a soldier.  But he never crossed the Atlantic to visit
his noble province.  Instead he sent others to rule for him.  They
were in fact the real governors, although they were called lieutenant
governors.

Spotswood loved Virginia, and he did all he could to make the
colony prosperous.  He saw that the land was rich in minerals, and
that much could be done with iron ore.  So he built smelting furnaces,
and altogether was so eager over it that he was called the Tubal
Cain of Virginia.  For Tubal Cain, you remember, "was an instructor
of every artificer in brass and iron."

Spotswood also planted vines, and brought over a colony of Germans
to teach the people how to grow them properly, and make wine.  It
was he, too, who first explored "the West."

Virginia up till now had lain between the sea and the blue range
of mountains which cut it off from the land behind.  To the English
that was a land utterly unknown.  All they knew was that the French
were claiming it.  But Governor Spotswood wanted to know more.  So
one August he gathered a company of friends, and set forth on an
exploring expedition.  With servants and Indian guides they made
a party of about fifty or so, and a jolly company they were.  They
hunted by the way, and camped beneath the stars.  There was no lack
of food and drink, and it was more like a prolonged picnic than an
exploring expedition.

The explorers reached the Blue Ridge, and, climbing to the top of
a pass, looked down upon the beautiful wild valley beyond, through
which wound a shining river.  Spotswood called the river the Euphrates.
But fortunately the name did not stick, and it is still called by
its beautiful Indian name of Shenandoah.

Spotswood named the highest peak he saw Mount George in honour of
the King, and his companions gave the next highest peak the name
of Mount Alexander in honour of the Governor whose Christian name
