
Vittoria had rather to receive their excuses than to proffer her own.
They were mostly youths dressed like the better class of peasantry.  They
laughed at the incident, stating how glad they would have been to behold
the heights all across the lakes ablaze and promising action for the
morrow.  One square-shouldered fellow raised her lightly from the ground.
She felt herself to be a creature for whom circumstance was busily
plotting, so that it was useless to exert her mind in thought.  The long
procession sank down the darkness, leaving the low red fire to die out
behind them.

Next morning she awoke in a warm bed, possessed by odd images of flames
that stood up like crowing cocks, and cowered like hens above the brood.
She was in the house of one of their new friends, and she could hear
Angelo talking in the adjoining room.  A conveyance was ready to take her
on to Bormio.  A woman came to her to tell her this, appearing to have a
dull desire to get her gone.  She was a draggled woman, with a face of
slothful anguish, like one of the inner spectres of a guilty man.  She
said that her husband was willing to drive the lady to Bormio for a sum
that was to be paid at once into his wife's hand; and little enough it
was which poor persons could ever look for from your patriots and
disturbers who seduced orderly men from their labour, and made widows and
ruined households.  This was a new Italian language to Vittoria, and when
the woman went on giving instances of households ruined by a husband's
vile infatuation about his country, she did not attempt to defend the
reckless lord, but dressed quickly that she might leave the house as soon
as she could.  Her stock of money barely satisfied the woman's demand.
The woman seized it, and secreted it in her girdle.  When they had passed
into the sitting-room, her husband, who was sitting conversing with
Angelo, stretched out his hand and knocked the girdle.

'That's our trick,' he said.  'I guessed so.  Fund up, our little Maria
of the dirty fingers'-ends!  We accept no money from true patriots.  Grub
in other ground, my dear!'

The woman stretched her throat awry, and set up a howl like a dog; but
her claws came out when he seized her.

'Would you disgrace me, old fowl?'

'Lorenzo, may you rot like a pumpkin!'

The connubial reciprocities were sharp until the money lay on the table,
when the woman began whining so miserably that Vittoria's sensitive
nerves danced on her face, and at her authoritative interposition,
Lorenzo very reluctantly permitted his wife to take what he chose to
reckon a fair portion of the money, and also of his contempt.  She seemed
to be licking the money up, she bent over it so greedily.

'Poor wretch!' he observed; 'she was born on a hired bed.'

Vittoria felt that the recollection of this woman would haunt her.  It
was inconceivable to her that a handsome young man like Lorenzo should
ever have wedded the unsweet creature, who was like a crawling image of
decay; but he, as if to account for his taste, said that they had been of
a common age once, when he married her; now she had grown old.  He
repeated that she 'was born on a hired bed.' They saw nothing further of
her.

Vittoria's desire was to get to Meran speedily, that she might see her
friends, and have tidings of her lover and the city.  Those baffled
beacon-flames on the heights had become an irritating indicative vision:
she thirsted for the history.  Lorenzo offered to conduct her over the
Tonale Pass into the Val di Sole, or up the Val Furva, by the pass of the
Corno dei Tre Signori, into the Val del Monte to Pejo, thence by Cles, or
by Bolzano, to Meran.  But she required shoeing and refitting; and for
other reasons also, she determined to go on to Bormio.  She supposed that
Angelo had little money, and that in a place such as Bormio sounded to
her ears she might possibly obtain the change for the great money-order
which the triumph of her singing had won from Antonio-Pericles.  In spite
of Angelo's appeals to her to hurry on to the end of her journey without
tempting chance by a single pause, she resolved to go to Bormio.  Lorenzo
privately assured her that there were bankers in Bormio.  Many bankers,
he said, came there from Milan, and that fact she thought sufficient for
her purpose.  The wanderers parted regretfully.  A little chapel, on a
hillock off the road, shaded by chestnuts, was pointed out to Lorenzo
where to bring a letter for Angelo.  Vittoria begged Angelo to wait till
he heard from her; and then, with mutual wavings of hands, she was driven
out of his sight.




CHAPTER XXV

ACROSS THE MOUNTAINS

After parting from Vittoria, Angelo made his way to an inn, where he ate
and drank like a man of the fields, and slept with the power of one from
noon till after morning.  The innkeeper came up to his room, and, finding
him awake, asked him if he was disposed to take a second holiday in bed.
Angelo jumped up; as he did so, his stiletto slipped from under his
pillow and flashed.

'That's a pretty bit of steel,' said the innkeeper, but could not get a
word out of him.  It was plain to Angelo that this fellow had suspicions.
Angelo had been careful to tie up his clothes in a bundle; there was
nothing for the innkeeper to see, save a young man in bed, who had a
terrible weapon near his hand, and a look in his eyes of wary indolence
that counselled prudent dealings.  He went out, and returned a second and
a third time, talking more and more confusedly and fretfully; but as he
was again going to leave, 'No, no,' said Angelo, determined to give him a
lesson, 'I have taken a liking to your company.  Here, come here; I will
show you a trick.  I learnt it from the Servians when I was three feet
high.  Look; I lie quite still, you observe.  Try to get on the other
side of that door and the point of this blade shall scratch you through
it.'

Angelo laid the blue stilet up his wrist, and slightly curled his arm.
'Try,' he repeated, but the innkeeper had stopped short in his movement
to the door.  'Well, then, stay where you are,' said Angelo, 'and look;
I'll be as good as my word.  There's the point I shall strike.' With that
he gave the peculiar Servian jerk of the muscles, from the wrist up to
the arm, and the blade quivered on the mark.  The innkeeper fell back in
admiring horror.  'Now fetch it to me,' said Angelo, putting both hands
carelessly under his head.  The innkeeper tugged at the blade.
'Illustrious signore, I am afraid of breaking it,' he almost whimpered;
'it seems alive, does it not?'

'Like a hawk on a small bird,' said Angelo; 'that's the beauty of those
blades.  They kill, and put you to as little pain as a shot; and it 's
better than a shot in your breast--there's something to show for it.
Send up your wife or your daughter to take orders about my breakfast.
It 's the breakfast of five mountaineers; and don't "Illustrious signore"
me, sir, either in my hearing or out of it.  Leave the knife sticking.'

The innkeeper sidled out with a dumb salute.  'I can count on his
discretion for a couple of hours,' Angelo said to himself.  He knew the
effect of an exhibition of physical dexterity and strength upon a coward.
The landlord's daughter came and received his orders for breakfast.
Angelo inquired whether they had been visited by Germans of late.  The
girl told him that a German chasseur with a couple of soldiers had called
them up last night.

'Wouldn't it have been a pity if they had dragged me out and shot me?'
said Angelo.

'But they were after a lady,' she explained; 'they have gone on to
Bormio, and expect to catch her there or in the mountains.'

'Better there than in the mountains, my dear; don't you think so?'

The girl said that she would not like to meet those fellows among the
mountains.

'Suppose you were among the mountains, and those fellows came up with
you; wouldn't you clap your hands to see me jumping down right in front
of you all?' said Angelo.

'Yes, I should,' she admitted.  'What is one man, though!'

'Something, if he feeds like five.  Quick!  I must eat.  Have you a
lover?'

'Yes.'

'Fancy you are waiting on him.'

'He's only a middling lover, signore.  He lives at Cles, over Val Pejo,
in Val di Non, a long way, and courts me twice a year, when he comes over
to do carpentering.  He cuts very pretty Madonnas.  He is a German.'

'Ha! you kneel to the Madonna, and give your lips to a German?  Go.'

'But I don't like him much, signore; it's my father who wishes me to have
him; he can make money.'

Angelo motioned to her to be gone, saying to himself, 'That father of
hers would betray the Saints for a handful of florins.'

He dressed, and wrenched his knife from the door.  Hearing the clatter of
a horse at the porch, he stopped as he was descending the stairs.  A
German voice said, 'Sure enough, my jolly landlord, she's there, in Worms
--your Bormio.  Found her at the big hotel: spoke not a syllable; stole
away, stole away.  One chopin of wine!  I'm off on four legs to the
captain.  Those lads who are after her by Roveredo and Trent have bad
noses.  "Poor nose--empty belly."  Says the captain, "I stick at the
point of the cross-roads."  Says I, "Herr Captain, I'm back to you first
of the lot."  My business is to find the runaway lady-pretty Fraulein!
pretty Fraulein!  lai-ai!  There's money on her servant, too; he's a
disguised Excellency--a handsome boy; but he has cut himself loose, and
he go hang.  Two birds for the pride of the thing; one for satisfaction--
I 'm satisfied.  I've killed chamois in my time.  Jacob, I am;
Baumwalder, I am; Feckelwitz, likewise; and the very devil for following
a track.  Ach!  the wine is good.  You know the song?

              "He who drinks wine, he may cry with a will,
               Fortune is mine, may she stick to me still."

'I give it you in German--the language of song! my own, my native 'lai-ai-
lai-ai-la-la-lai-ai-i-ie!

                   "While stars still sit
                    On mountain tops,
                    I take my gun,
                    Kiss little one
                         On mother's breast.
                              Ai-iu-e!

                    My pipe is lit,
                    I climb the slopes,
                    I meet the dawn
                    A little one
                         On mother's breast.
                         Ai-aie: ta-ta-tai: iu-iu-iu-e!"

'Another chopin, my jolly landlord.  What's that you're mumbling?  About
the servant of my runaway young lady?  He go hang!  What----?'

Angelo struck his foot heavily on the stairs; the innkeeper coughed and
ran back, bowing to his guest.  The chasseur cried, 'I 'll drink farther
on-wine between gaps!'  A coin chinked on the steps in accompaniment to
the chasseur's departing gallop.  'Beast of a Tedesco,' the landlord
exclaimed as he picked up the money; 'they do the reckoning--not we.
If I had served him with the worth of this, I should have had the bottle
at my head.  What a country ours is!  We're ridden over, ridden over!'
Angelo compelled the landlord to sit with him while he ate like five
mountaineers.  He left mere bones on the table.  'It's wonderful,' said
the innkeeper; 'you can't know what fear is.'

'I think I don't,' Angelo replied; 'you do; cowards have to serve every
party in turn.  Up, and follow at my heels till I dismiss you.  You know
the pass into the Val Pejo and the Val di Sole.' The innkeeper stood
entrenched behind a sturdy negative.  Angelo eased him to submission by
telling him that he only wanted the way to be pointed out.  'Bring
tobacco; you're going to have an idle day,' said Angelo: 'I pay you when
we separate.'  He was deaf to entreaties and refusals, and began to look
mad about the eyes; his poor coward plied him with expostulations,
offered his wife, his daughter, half the village, for the service: he had
to follow, but would take no cigars.  Angelo made his daughter fetch
bread and cigars, and put a handful in his pocket, upon which, after two
hours of inactivity at the foot of the little chapel, where Angelo waited
for the coming of Vittoria's messenger, the innkeeper was glad to close
his fist.  About noon Lorenzo came, and at once acted a play of eyes for
Angelo to perceive his distrust of the man and a multitude of bad things
about him he was reluctant, notwithstanding Angelo's ready nod, to bring
out a letter; and frowned again, for emphasis to the expressive comedy.
The letter said:

'I have fallen upon English friends.  They lend me money.  Fly to Lugano
by the help of these notes: I inclose them, and will not ask pardon for
it.  The Valtellina is dangerous; the Stelvio we know to be watched.
Retrace your way, and then try the Engadine.  I should stop on a breaking
bridge if I thought my companion, my Carlo's cousin, was near capture.
I am well taken care of: one of my dearest friends, a captain in the
English army, bears me company across.  I have a maid from one of the
villages, a willing girl.  We ride up to the mountains; to-morrow we
cross the pass; there is a glacier.  Val di Non sounds Italian, but I am
going into the enemy's land.  You see I am well guarded.  My immediate
anxiety concerns you; for what will our Carlo ask of me?  Lose not one
moment.  Away, and do not detain Lorenzo.  He has orders to meet us up
high in the mountain this evening.  He is the best of servants but
I always meet the best everywhere--that is, in Italy.  Leaving it,
I grieve.  No news from Milan, except of great confusion there.  I judge
by the quiet of my sleep that we have come to no harm there.

                         'Your faithfullest

                                             'VITTORIA.'

Lorenzo and the innkeeper had arrived at an altercation before Angelo
finished reading.  Angelo checked it, and told Lorenzo to make speed: he
sent no message.

'My humanity,' Angelo then addressed his craven associate, 'counsels me
that it's better to drag you some distance on than to kill you.  You 're
a man of intelligence, and you know why I have to consider the matter.
I give you guide's pay up to the glacier, and ten florins buon'mano.
Would you rather earn it with the blood of a countryman?  I can't let
that tongue of yours be on the high-road of running Tedeschi: you know
it.

'Illustrious signore, obedience oils necessity,' quoth the innkeeper.
'If we had but a few more of my cigars!'

'Step on,' said Angelo sternly.

They walked till dark and they were in keen air.  A hut full of recent
grass-cuttings, on the border of a sloping wood, sheltered them.  The
innkeeper moaned for food at night and in the morning, and Angelo tossed
him pieces of bread.  Beyond the wood they came upon bare crag and
commenced a sharper ascent, reached the height, and roused an eagle.
The great bird went up with a sharp yelp, hanging over them with knotted
claws.  Its shadow stretched across sweeps of fresh snow.  The innkeeper
sent a mocking yelp after the eagle.

'Up here, one forgets one is a father--what's more, a husband,' he said,
striking a finger on the side of his nose.

'And a cur, a traitor, carrion,' said Angelo.

'Ah, signore, one might know you were a noble.  You can't understand our
troubles, who carry a house on our heads, and have to fill mouths agape.'

'Speak when you have better to say,' Angelo replied.

'Padrone, one would really like to have your good opinion; and I'm lean
as a wolf for a morsel of flesh.  I could part with my buon'mano for a
sight of red meat--oh! red meat dripping.'

'If,' cried Angelo, bringing his eyebrows down black on the man, 'if I
knew that you had ever in your life betrayed one of us look below; there
you should lie to be pecked and gnawed at.'

'Ah, Jacopo Cruchi, what an end for you when you are full of good
meanings!' the innkeeper moaned.  'I see your ribs, my poor soul!'

Angelo quitted him.  The tremendous excitement of the Alpine solitudes
was like a stringent wine to his surcharged spirit.  He was one to whom
life and death had become as the yes and no of ordinary men: not more
than a turning to the right or to the left.  It surprised him that this
fellow, knowing his own cowardice and his conscience, should consent to
