Georgiana Ford, the half-sister of Merthyr Powys, who told her that
Merthyr and Augustus Gambier were in the ranks of a volunteer contingent
in the king's army, and might have been present at Pastrengo.  Georgiana
held aloof from battle-fields, her business being simply to serve as
Merthyr's nurse in case of wounds, or to see the last of him in case of
death.  She appeared to have no enthusiasm.  She seconded strongly the
vehement persuasions addressed by Pericles to Vittoria.  Her disapproval
of the presence of her sex on fields of battle was precise.  Pericles had
followed the army to give Vittoria one last chance, he said, and drag her
away from this sick country, as he called it, pointing at the dusty land
from the windows of the inn.  On first seeing her he gasped like one who
has recovered a lost thing.  To Laura he was a fool; but Vittoria enjoyed
his wildest outbursts, and her half-sincere humility encouraged him to
think that he had captured her at last.  He enlarged on the perils
surrounding her voice in dusty bellowing Lombardy, and on the ardour of
his friendship in exposing himself to perils as tremendous, that he might
rescue her.  While speaking he pricked a lively ear for the noise of
guns, hearing a gun in everything, and jumping to the window with horrid
imprecations.  His carriage was horsed at the doors below.  Let the
horses die, he said, let the coachman have sun-stroke.  Let hundreds
perish, if Vittoria would only start in an hour-in two--to-night--to-
morrow.

"Because, do you see,"--he turned to Laura and Georgiana, submitting to
the vexatious necessity of seeming reasonable to these creatures,--"she
is a casket for one pearl.  It is only one, but it is ONE, mon Dieu! and
inscrutable heaven, mesdames, has made the holder of it mad.  Her voice
has but a sole skin; it is not like a body; it bleeds to death at a
scratch.  A spot on the pearl, and it is perished--pfoof!  Ah, cruel
thing!  impious, I say.  I have watched, I have reared her.  Speak to me
of mothers!  I have cherished her for her splendid destiny--to see it go
down, heels up, among quarrels of boobies!  Yes; we have war in Italy.
Fight!  Fight in this beautiful climate that you may be dominated by a
blue coat, not by a white coat.  We are an intelligent race; we are a
civilized people; we will fight for that.  What has a voice of the very
heavens to do with your fighting?  I heard it first in England, in a
firwood, in a month of Spring, at night-time, fifteen miles and a quarter
from the city of London--oh, city of peace!  Sandra you will come there.
I give you thousands additional to the sum stipulated.  You have no
rival.  Sandra Belloni!  no rival, I say"--he invoked her in English,
"and you hear--you, to be a draggle-tail vivandiere wiz a brandy-bottle
at your hips and a reputation going like ze brandy.  Ah! pardon,
mesdames; but did mankind ever see a frenzy like this girl's?  Speak,
Sandra.  I could cry it like Michiella to Camilla--Speak!"

Vittoria compelled him to despatch his horses to stables.  He had relays
of horses at war-prices between Castiglione and Pavia, and a retinue of
servants; nor did he hesitate to inform the ladies that, before
entrusting his person to the hazards of war, he had taken care to be
provided with safe-conduct passes for both armies, as befitted a prudent
man of peace--"or sense; it is one, mesdames."

Notwithstanding his terror at the guns, and disgust at the soldiery and
the bad fare at the inn, Vittoria's presence kept him lingering in this
wretched place, though he cried continually, "I shall have heart-
disease."  He believed at first that he should subdue her; then it became
his intention to carry her off.

It was to see Merthyr that she remained.  Merthyr came there the day
after the engagement at Santa Lucia.  They had not met since the days at
Meran.  He was bronzed, and keen with strife, and looked young, but spoke
not over-hopefully.  He scolded her for wishing to taste battle, and
compared her to a bad swimmer on deep shores.  Pericles bounded with
delight to hear him, and said he had not supposed there was so much sense
in Powys.  Merthyr confessed that the Austrians had as good as beaten
them at Santa Lucia.  The tactical combinations of the Piedmontese were
wretched.  He was enamoured of the gallantly of the Duke of Savoy, who
had saved the right wing of the army from rout while covering the
backward movement.  Why there had been any fight at all at Santa Lucia,
where nothing was to be gained, much to be lost, he was incapable of
telling; but attributed it to an antique chivalry on the part of the
king, that had prompted the hero to a trial of strength, a bout of blood-
letting.

"You do think he is a hero?" said Vittoria.

"He is; and he will march to Venice."

"And open the opera at Venice," Pericles sneered.  "Powys, mon cher, cure
her of this beastly dream.  It is a scandal to you to want a woman's
help.  You were defeated at Santa Lucia.  I say bravo to anything that
brings you to reason.  Bravo!  You hear me."

The engagement at Santa Lucia was designed by the king to serve as an
instigating signal for the Veronese to rise in revolt; and this was the
secret of Charles Albert's stultifying manoeuvres between Peschiera and
Mantua.  Instead of matching his military skill against the wary old
Marshal's, he was offering incentives to conspiracy.  Distrusting the
revolution, which was a force behind him, he placed such reliance on its
efforts in his front as to make it the pivot of his actions.

"The volunteers North-east of Vicenza are doing the real work for us, I
believe," said Merthyr; and it seemed so then, as it might have been
indeed, had they not been left almost entirely to themselves to do it.

These tidings of a fight lost set Laura and Vittoria quivering with
nervous irritation.  They had been on the field of Pastrengo, and it was
won.  They had been absent from Santa Lucia.  What was the deduction?
Not such as reason would have made for them; but they were at the mercy
of the currents of the blood.  "Let us go on," said Laura.  Merthyr
refused to convoy them.  Pericles drove with him an hour on the road, and
returned in glee, to find Vittoria and Laura seated in their carriage,
and Luigi scuffling with Beppo.

"Padrone, see how I assist you," cried Luigi.

Upon this Beppo instantly made a swan's neck of his body and trumpeted:
"A sally from the fortress for forage."

"Whip!  whip!" Pericles shouted to his coachman, and the two carriages
parted company at the top of their speed.

Pericles fell a victim to a regiment of bersaglieri that wanted horses,
and unceremoniously stopped his pair and took possession of them on the
route for Peschiera.  He was left in a stranded carriage between a dusty
ditch and a mulberry bough.  Vittoria and Laura were not much luckier.
They were met by a band of deserters, who made no claim upon the horses,
but stood for drink, and having therewith fortified their fine opinion of
themselves, petitioned for money.  A kiss was their next demand.  Money
and good humour saved the women from indignity.  The band of rascals went
off with a 'Viva l'Italia.'  Such scum is upon every popular rising, as
Vittoria had to learn.  Days of rain and an incomprehensible inactivity
of the royal army kept her at a miserable inn, where the walls were bare,
the cock had crowed his last.  The guns of Peschiera seemed to roam over
the plain like an echo unwillingly aroused that seeks a hollow for its
further sleep.  Laura sat pondering for hours, harsh in manner, as if she
hated her.  "I think," she said once, "that women are those persons who
have done evil in another world: "The "why?" from Vittoria was uttered
simply to awaken friendly talk, but Laura relapsed into her gloom.  A
village priest, a sleek gentle creature, who shook his head to earth when
he hoped, and filled his nostrils with snuff when he desponded, gave them
occasional companionship under the title of consolation.  He wished the
Austrians to be beaten, remarking, however, that they were good
Catholics, most fervent Catholics.  As the Lord decided, so it would end!
"Oh, delicious creed!"  Laura broke out: "Oh, dear and sweet doctrine!
that results and developments in a world where there is more evil than
good are approved by heaven."  She twisted the mild man in supple steel
of her irony so tenderly that Vittoria marvelled to hear her speak of him
in abhorrence when they quitted the village.  "Not to be born a woman,
and voluntarily to be a woman!" ejaculated Laura.  "How many, how many
are we to deduct from the male population of Italy?  Cross in hand, he
should be at the head of our arms, not whimpering in a corner for white
bread.  Wretch! he makes the marrow in my bones rage at him.  He
chronicled pig that squeaked."

"Why had she been so gentle with him?"

"Because, my dear, when I loathe a thing I never care to exhaust my
detestation before I can strike it," said the true Italian.

They were on the field of Goito; it was won.  It was won against odds.
At Pastrengo they witnessed an encounter; this was a battle.  Vittoria
perceived that there was the difference between a symphony and a lyric
song.  The blessedness of the sensation that death can be light and easy
dispossessed her of the meaner compassion, half made up of cowardice,
which she had been nearly borne down by on the field of Pastrengo.  At an
angle on a height off the left wing of the royal army the face of the
battle was plain to her: the movements of the troops were clear as
strokes on a slate.  Laura flung her life into her eyes, and knelt and
watched, without summing one sole thing from what her senses received.

Vittoria said, "We are too far away to understand it."

"No," said Laura, "we are too far away to feel it."

The savage soul of the woman was robbed of its share of tragic emotion by
having to hold so far aloof.  Flashes of guns were but flashes of guns up
there where she knelt.  She thirsted to read the things written by them;
thirsted for their mystic terrors, somewhat as souls of great prophets
have craved for the full revelation of those fitful underlights which
inspired their mouths.

Charles Albert's star was at its highest when the Piedmontese drums beat
for an advance of the whole line at Goito.

Laura stood up, white as furnace-fire.  "Women can do some good by
praying," she said.  She believed that she had been praying.  That was
her part in the victory.

Rain fell as from the forehead of thunder.  From black eve to black dawn
the women were among dead and dying men, where the lanterns trailed a
slow flame across faces that took the light and let it go.  They returned
to their carriage exhausted.  The ways were almost impassable for
carriage-wheels.  While they were toiling on and exchanging their
drenched clothes, Vittoria heard Merthyr's voice speaking to Beppo on the
box.  He was saying that Captain Gambier lay badly wounded; brandy was
wanted for him.  She flung a cloak over Laura, and handed out the flask
with a naked arm.  It was not till she saw him again that she remembered
or even felt that he had kissed the arm.  A spot of sweet fire burned on
it just where the soft fulness of a woman's arm slopes to the bend.  He
chid her for being on the field and rejoiced in a breath, for the
carriage and its contents helped to rescue his wounded brother in arms
from probable death.  Gambier, wounded in thigh and ankle by rifle-shot,
was placed in the carriage.  His clothes were saturated with the soil of
Goito; but wounded and wet, he smiled gaily, and talked sweet boyish
English.  Merthyr gave the driver directions to wind along up the Mincio.
"Georgiana will be at the nearest village--she has an instinct for
battle-fields, or keeps spies in her pay," he said.

"Tell her I am safe.  We march to cut them (the enemy) off from Verona,
and I can't leave.  The game is in our hands.  We shall give you Venice."

Georgiana was found at the nearest village.  Gambier's wounds had been
dressed by an army-surgeon.  She looked at the dressing, and said that it
would do for six hours.  This singular person had fully qualified herself
to attend on a soldier-brother.  She had studied medicine for that
purpose, and she had served as nurse in a London hospital.  Her nerves
were completely under control.  She could sit in attendance by a sick-bed
for hours, hearing distant cannon, and the brawl of soldiery and
vagabonds in the street, without a change of countenance.  Her dress was
plain black from throat to heel, with a skull cap of white, like a
Moravian sister.  Vittoria reverenced her; but Georgiana's manner in
return was cold aversion, so much more scornful than disdain that it
offended Laura, who promptly put her finger on the blot in the fair
character with the word 'Jealousy;' but a single word is too broad a mark
to be exactly true.  "She is a perfect example of your English," Laura
said.  "Brave, good, devoted, admirable--ice at the heart.  The judge of
others, of course.  I always respected her; I never liked her; and I
should be afraid of a comparison with her.  Her management of the
household of this inn is extraordinary."

Georgiana condescended to advise Vittoria once more not to dangle after
armies.

"I wish to wait here to assist you in nursing our friend," said Vittoria.

Georgiana replied that her strength was unlikely to fail.

After two days of incessant rain, sunshine blazed over 'the watery
Mantuan flats.  Laura drove with Beppo to see whether the army was in
motion, for they were distracted by rumours.  Vittoria clung to her
wounded friend, whose pleasure was the hearing her speak.  She expected
Laura's return by set of sun.  After dark a messenger came to her, saying
that the signora had sent a carriage to fetch her to Valeggio.  Her
immediate supposition was that Merthyr might have fallen.  She found
Luigi at the carriage-door, and listened to his mysterious directions and
remarks that not a minute must be lost, without suspicion.  He said that
the signora was in great trouble, very anxious to see the signorina
instantly; there was but a distance of five miles to traverse.

She thought it strange that the carriage should be so luxuriously fitted
with lights and silken pillows, but her ideas were all of Merthyr, until
she by chance discovered a packet marked I chocolate, which told her at
once that she was entrapped by Antonio-Pericles.  Luigi would not answer
her cry to him.  After some fruitless tremblings of wrath, she lay back
relieved by the feeling that Merthyr was safe, come what might come to
herself.  Things could lend to nothing but an altercation with Pericles,
and for this scene she prepared her mind.  The carriage stopped while she
was dozing.  Too proud to supplicate in the darkness, she left it to the
horses to bear her on, reserving her energies for the morning's
interview, and saying, "The farther he takes me the angrier I shall be."
She dreamed of her anger while asleep, but awakened so frequently during
the night that morning was at her eyelids before they divided.  To her
amazement, she saw the carriage surrounded by Austrian troopers.
Pericles was spreading cigars among them, and addressing them affably.
The carriage was on a good road, between irrigated flats, that flashed
a lively green and bright steel blue for miles away.  She drew down the
blinds to cry at leisure; her wings were clipped, and she lost heart.
Pericles came round to her when the carriage had drawn up at an inn.
He was egregiously polite, but modestly kept back any expressions of
triumph.  A body of Austrians, cavalry and infantry, were breaking camp.
Pericles accorded her an hour of rest.  She perceived that he was
anticipating an outbreak of the anger she had nursed overnight, and
baffled him so far by keeping dumb.  Luigi was sent up to her to announce
the expiration of her hour of grace.

"Ah, Luigi!"  she said.  "Signorina, only wait, and see how Luigi can
serve two," he whispered, writhing under the reproachfulness of her eyes.
At the carriage-door she asked Pericles whither he was taking her.  "Not
to Turin, not to London, Sandra Belloni!"  he replied; "not to a place
where you are wet all night long, to wheeze for ever after it.  Go in."
