horsemen, and needs quiet and rest."

"Turenne has told me all about it," the duchess said. "I welcome you
very heartily, monsieur. My brother says that he has great affection for
you, and believes you will some day become a master in the art of war.
He says you have rendered him most valuable services, which is strange
indeed, seeing that you are as yet very young."

"I was sixteen the other day, madam."

"Only sixteen, and already a captain!" she exclaimed.

"I was made a captain nine months ago," he said, "for a little service
that I performed to his satisfaction."

"Turenne would not have promoted you unless it had been an important
service, I am sure," she said with a smile. "He does great things
himself, and expects great things from others."

"It was the affair of carrying the message to the garrison of the
citadel of Turin urging them to hold out, as he would come to their
relief soon," the duke said. "Do you not remember that he wrote us an
account of it?"

"I remember it perfectly. Turenne said a young officer, but I did not
imagine that it could have been but a lad. However, Captain Campbell, I
will not detain you here talking, or you will begin by considering me to
be a very bad nurse. Directly I received the letter I ordered a chamber
to be prepared for you. By this time all will be in readiness, and a
lackey ready to disrobe you and assist you to bed."

"I do not need," he began, but she held up her finger.

"Please to remember, sir, that I am head nurse here. You will go to
bed at once, and will take a light repast and a glass of generous wine.
After that our surgeon will examine you, and remove your bandages, which
have been, I doubt not, somewhat disarranged on your journey; then he
will say whether it will be advisable that you should keep your bed for
a time, which will, I think, be far the best for you, for you will be
much more comfortable so than on a couch, which, however good to be sat
upon by those in health, affords but poor comfort to an invalid. Have
you brought a servant with you?"

"Yes, madam. He is a very faithful lad, and accompanied me on that
enterprise that you have been speaking of. He is a merry fellow, and
has proved himself a good and careful nurse. He sat up with me for many
nights when I was first hurt, and has ever since slept on the floor in
my room."

"I will give him in charge of my majordomo, who will see that he is well
taken care of, and we can have a pallet laid for him at night on the
floor of your room."

She herself led the way to a very comfortable apartment where a fire was
burning on the hearth; a lackey was already in waiting, and after a few
kind words she left him.

"I have fallen into good hands indeed," Hector said to himself. "What
would Sergeant MacIntosh say if he knew that I was lodged in a ducal
palace, and that the duke and duchess had both spoken to me and seen
after my comfort as if I had been a relation of their own?"

In spite of the care and attention that he received, Hector's recovery
was slow, and even when spring came the surgeon said that he was unfit
for severe work. However, the letters that he received from time to time
from de Lisle and Chavigny consoled him, for not only had the winter
passed without any incident save the capture of three or four towns
by Turenne, but it was not at all likely that any events of great
importance would take place. All accounts represented the Spaniards as
being engaged in adding to the strength of three or four towns in
the duchy of Milan, so that evidently they intended to stand upon the
defensive.

The palace of Sedan was the centre of a formidable conspiracy against
Richelieu. Messengers came and went, and Bouillon, Soissons, and the
Archbishop of Rheims were constantly closeted together. They had various
allies at court, and believed that they should be able to overthrow the
minister who had so long ruled over France in the name of the king.

As Hector was now able to move about, and was acquainted with all the
members of the duke's household, he learned much of what was going on;
and from a conversation that he accidentally overheard, he could see
that the position was an extremely serious one, as a treaty had been
signed with Ferdinand, son of the King of Spain, and the Archduke
Leopold-William, son of the Emperor of Austria, by which each agreed to
assist the duke and his friends with a large sum of money for raising
soldiers, and with seven thousand men. In order to justify themselves,
the heads of the movement issued a manifesto, in which they styled
themselves Princes of Peace. In this they rehearsed the cardinal's
various acts of tyranny and cruelty towards his rivals, the arbitrary
manner in which he carried on the government, and declared that they
were leagued solely to overthrow the power that overshadowed that of
the king, plunged France into wars, and scourged the people with heavy
taxation.

As soon as this manifesto was published in Sedan, Hector went to the
duke.

"My lord duke," he said, "I cannot sufficiently thank you for the
hospitality and kindness with which you and the duchess have treated me.
Nevertheless, I must ask you to allow me to leave at once."

"Why this sudden determination, Captain Campbell?"

"If, sir, I were but a private person I should have no hesitation,
after the kindness that you have shown me, in requesting you to give me
employment in the force that you are raising; but I am an officer of the
king, and what is of far greater importance at the present moment, an
aide-de-camp of the Viscount Turenne, your brother. Were it reported
that I was with your army, or even indeed that I was here, the cardinal
would at once conclude that I was representing the viscount, and was
perhaps the intermediary through whom communications between you
and your brother were being carried on. Therefore I should not only
compromise myself, which is of no importance, but I might excite
suspicion in Richelieu's mind against your brother, which might result
in his recall from the position in which he has so distinguished
himself, and grievously injure his prospects. The viscount himself
warned me against mixing myself with any party, saying that a soldier
should hold himself free from all entanglement, bent only on serving, to
the utmost of his power, the king and France."

"You are right," the duke said heartily. "Turenne has no grievances
against king or cardinal, and has acted wisely in holding himself aloof
from any party; and badly as I am affected towards Richelieu, I will
own that he has never allowed my brother's relationship towards me to
prevent his employing him in posts of honour. I have never sought to
influence him in the slightest, and am far too proud of the credit and
honour he has gained to do aught that would in any way cause a breach
between him and the cardinal. What you have said is very right and true.
Doubtless Richelieu has spies in this town, as he has elsewhere, and may
have learned that a young officer on my brother's staff was brought here
last autumn grievously wounded. But it is certainly well that now, as
the time for action is at hand, you should retire. You are not thinking,
I hope, of returning at once, for it was but a day or two ago that the
surgeon assured me that it would need another three or four months of
quiet before you would be fit to resume your duties."

"I feel that myself, my lord, and moreover I think that it would be as
well that I should not join the viscount at present, for it might well
be supposed that I was the bearer of some important news from you to
him; therefore I propose to go to Geneva, and remain there until I have
completely recruited my strength. In the Swiss republic I should pass
unnoticed, even by the cardinal's agents. And the fact that, although
being but a comparatively short distance from Piedmont, I abstained from
joining the general, would, if they inquired, show that I could not have
been entrusted with any private communication from you to him."

"It could not be better," the duke said. "When you leave here you
should no longer wear that military scarf. Of course, when you enter
Switzerland there is no reason why you should disguise the fact that you
are a French officer, and having been severely wounded, have come there
to repair your health. Doubtless many others have done so; and, dressed
as a private person, you would excite no attention. But the Swiss, who
strive to hold themselves neutral and to avoid giving offence, might
raise objections to a French officer wearing military attire staying
among them."

That evening Hector bade his adieu to the duchess and to the friends he
had made during his stay, and the next morning, attended by Paolo, he
started for Geneva.

"I am glad indeed that we are off, master," the latter said. "In truth,
had I stayed here much longer I should have become useless from fat and
idleness, for I have had nothing whatever to do but to eat and sleep."

"I am glad to be off, too, Paolo. I am convinced myself, in spite of
what the surgeon says, that actual exercise will do more for me than the
doctor's potions and rich food. I am stiff still, but it is from doing
nothing, and were it not that coming from here my presence might be
inconvenient for Turenne, I would journey straight to his camp. You saw
the prince's manifesto?"

Paolo nodded. "I did, master. Not being able to read or write, I could
make nothing of it myself, but a burgher coming along read it aloud, and
it made me shake in my shoes with fright. I made my way as quickly as I
could from so dangerous a spot, for it seemed nothing short of treason
to have heard such words read against the cardinal."

"I fear that the duke has made a terrible mistake, Paolo. Hitherto all
who have ventured to measure their strength with the cardinal have
been worsted, and many have lost everything and are now fugitives from
France. Some have lost their lives as well as honours and estates.
Bouillon is an independent prince, and so was Lorraine, and although
the latter could put ten men in the field to every one the duke could
muster, he has been driven from his principality. Soissons could not
help him except with his name, nor can the Archbishop of Rheims. Not a
few of the great nobles would join the duke did they think that he had a
prospect of success. None have so far done so, though possibly some have
given him secret pledges, which will count for nothing unless it seems
that he is likely to triumph.

"It is rumoured, as you know, that he has made an alliance with Spain
and Austria. Both will use him as an arm against France, but will throw
him over and leave him to his fate whenever it suits them. Moreover,
their alliance would assuredly deter any, who might otherwise range
themselves with him, from taking up arms. No Huguenot would fight by
the side of a Spaniard; and although the Guises and the Catholic nobles
allied themselves with Spain against Henri of Navarre, it was in a
matter in which they deemed their religion in danger, while this is but
a quarrel between Bouillon and the cardinal; and with Spain fighting
against France in the Netherlands, they would not risk their lands and
titles. Bouillon had better have stood alone than have called in the
Spaniards and Austrians. We know whose doing that is, the Archbishop of
Rheims, who is a Guise, and, methinks, from what I have seen of him, a
crafty one.

"I am sure that neither the duke nor Soissons would, unless won over
by the archbishop, have ever consented to such a plan, for both are
honourable gentlemen, and Soissons at least is a Frenchman, which
can hardly be said of Bouillon, whose ancestors have been independent
princes here for centuries. However, I fear that he will rue the day
he championed the cause of Soissons. It was no affair of his, and it is
carrying hospitality too far to endanger life and kingdom rather than
tell two guests that they must seek a refuge elsewhere. All Europe was
open to them. As a Guise the archbishop would have been welcome wherever
Spain had power. With Spain, Italy, and Austria open to him, why should
he thus bring danger and misfortune upon the petty dukedom of Sedan?
The same may be said of Soissons; however reluctant Bouillon might be to
part with so dear a friend, Soissons himself should have insisted upon
going and taking up his abode elsewhere. Could he still have brought a
large force into the field, and have thus risked as much as Bouillon,
the case would be different, but his estates are confiscated, or, at any
rate, he has no longer power to summon his vassals to the field, and
he therefore risks nothing in case of defeat, while Bouillon is risking
everything."

"I daresay that that is all true, master, though in faith I know nothing
about the matter. For myself, it seems to me that when one is a noble,
and has everything that a man can want, he must be a fool to mix himself
up in troubles. I know that if the King of France were to give me a big
estate, and anyone came to me and asked me to take part in a plot, I
would, if I had the power of life and death, have him hung up over the
gate of my castle."

"That would be a short way, no doubt, Paolo, but it might not keep you
out of trouble," Hector said, smiling. "If the person who came to you
were also a noble, his family and friends would rise in arms to avenge
his death, and instead of avoiding trouble you would bring it at once
upon your head."

"I suppose that would be so, master," Paolo said thoughtfully; "so I
think that it would be best for me that the king should not take it into
his head to give me that estate. And so we are going to Geneva, master?"

"Yes."

"That pleases me not," the other one said, "for I have heard of it as
a terribly serious place, where a man dares not so much as smile, and
where he has to listen to sermons and exhortations lasting half a day.
My father was a Huguenot, and I suppose that I am, too, though I never
inquired very closely into the matter; but as for exhortations of four
hours in length, methinks I would rather swim those moats again, master,
and to go all day without smiling would be a worse penance than the
strictest father confessor could lay upon me."

"I own that I am somewhat of your opinion, Paolo. My father brought me
up a Protestant like yourself, and when I was quite young I had a very
dreary time of it while he was away, living as I did in the house of a
Huguenot pastor. After that I attended the Protestant services in the
barracks, for all the officers and almost all the men are Protestants,
and, of course, were allowed to have their own services; but the
minister, who was a Scotchman, knew better than to make his discourses
too lengthy; for if he did, there was a shuffling of jackboots on the
stone floor and a clanking of sabres that warned him that the patience
of the soldiers was exhausted. In our own glen my father has told me
that the ministers are as long winded as those of Geneva; but, as he
said, soldiers are a restless people, and it is one thing for men who
regard their Sunday gathering as the chief event in the week to listen
to lengthy discourses, but quite another for soldiers, either in the
field or a city like Paris, to do so. However, if we do not find Geneva
to our taste, there is no reason why we should tarry there, as Zurich
lies on the other end of the lake, and Zurich is Catholic, or at any
rate largely so, and Calvinist doctrines have never flourished there.
But, on the other hand, the sympathies of Geneva have generally been
with France, while those of Zurich are with Austria; therefore I think
that if we like not Geneva we will go to Lyons, where, as an officer of
Viscount Turenne's, I am sure to be well received."

"Why not go there at once, master?"

"Because I think that the fresh air of the lake will brace me up, and
maybe if I find the people too sober minded for me we will go up into
the mountains and lodge there in some quiet village. I think that would
suit both of us."

"It would suit me assuredly," Paolo said joyfully. "I love the
mountains."

Such was indeed the course eventually taken. The strict Calvinism of
Geneva suited neither of them; and after a fortnight's stay there they
went up among the hills, and in the clear brisk air Hector found his
blood begin to run more rapidly through his veins, and his strength and
energy fast returning. Sometimes he rode, but soon found more pleasure
in climbing the hills around on foot, for the mountain paths were so
rough that it was seldom indeed that his horse could break into a trot.



CHAPTER VII: THE DUC D'ENGHIEN


From time to time news came up of what was passing in the world. The
Spaniards had afforded no assistance in men to the duke, for Richelieu
had sent a powerful army into the heart of Flanders, and so kept them
fully occupied. An Austrian force, however, joined that of the duke, and
a battle was fought with the royal army which, under Marshal Chatillon,
lay encamped a league from Sedan. The Austrian general commanded the
main body, the Duc de Bouillon the cavalry, while the Count de Soissons
was with the reserve. At first Chatillon's army had the advantage, but
Bouillon charged with such vehemence that he drove the cavalry of the
royalists down upon their infantry, which fell into confusion, most of
the French officers being killed or made prisoners, and the rest put to
rout. The duke, after the victory, rode to congratulate Soissons, whose
force had not been engaged. He found the count dead, having accidentally
shot himself while pushing up the visor of his helmet with the muzzle of
his pistol.

Bouillon soon learned the hollowness of the promises of his allies.
The Spaniards sent neither money nor men, while the Austrians received
orders to march away from Sedan and to join the Spaniards, who were
marching to the relief of Arras.

The duke, deserted by his allies, prepared to defend Sedan till the
last. Fortunately for him, however, the position of the French at Arras
was critical. The place was strong, two armies were marching to its
relief, and it would therefore have been rash to have attempted at
the same time the siege of Sedan. The king himself had joined the army
advancing against Bouillon, while the cardinal remained in Paris. Many
of those round the person of the king, foremost among whom was the
Marquis of Cinq-Mars, his master of horse, spoke very strongly in favour
of the duke, and represented that he had been driven to take up arms
by the persecution of the cardinal. The king was moved by their
representations, and gave a complete pardon to Bouillon, who was
restored to the full possession of all his estates in France, while on
his part he released the prisoners, baggage, and standards taken in the
late battle.

This was welcome news to Hector, who at once prepared to cross into
Italy; but when they reached Chambery he heard that Turenne had been
ordered to join the army that was collected near the Spanish frontier,
in order to conquer Roussillon, which lay between Languedoc and
Catalonia. The latter province had been for three years in a state of
insurrection against Spain, and had besought aid from France. This,
however, could not easily be afforded them so long as the fortress of
Perpignan guarded the way, and with other strongholds prevented all
communication between the south of France and Catalonia. As it was
uncertain whether Turenne would follow the coast route or cross the
passes, Hector and his companion rode forward at once, and arrived at
Turin before he left.

"I am glad to see you back again," the general said as Hector entered
his room, "and trust that you are now strong again. Your letter, giving
me your reasons for leaving Sedan, was forwarded to me by a messenger,
with others from my brother and his wife. He speaks in high terms of
you, and regretted your leaving them; but the reason you gave for so
doing in your letter to me more than justified the course you took,
and showed that you were thoughtful in other than military matters. You
served me better by leaving Sedan than you could have done in any other
way. In these unhappy disputes with my brother, the cardinal has never
permitted my relationship to Bouillon to shake his confidence in me. But
after being engaged for many years in combating plots against him, he
cannot but be suspicious of all, and that an officer of my staff should
be staying at Sedan when the dispute was going to end in open warfare
might well have excited a doubt of me while, had you traveled direct
here at that moment, it might, as you said, have been considered that
you were the bearer of important communications between my brother and
myself.

"Now, I hope that you are completely restored to health; you are looking
well, and have grown a good deal, the consequence, no doubt, of your
being so long in bed. You have heard that I am ordered to Roussillon,
of which I am glad, for the war languishes here. The king, I hear, will
take up his headquarters at Narbonne, and Richelieu is coming down to
look after matters as he did at Rochelle. So I expect that things will
move quickly there. They say the king is not in good health, and that
the cardinal himself is failing. Should he die it will be a grievous
loss for France, for there is no one who could in any way fill his
place. It has been evident for some time that the king has been in weak
health. The dauphin is but a child. A regency with the queen as its
nominal head, and Richelieu as its staff and ruler, would be possible;
but without Richelieu the prospect would be a very dark one, and I
cannot think of it without apprehension. However, I must continue to do
as I have been doing ever since Bouillon fell out with the court; I
must think only that I am a soldier, prepared to strike where ordered,
whether against a foreign foe or a rebellious subject.

"Happily my family troubles are over. I hear that there is a probability
that, now Bouillon has been restored to favour, he will obtain the
command of the army in Italy, which will just suit his active spirit."

Three days later Turenne with his staff crossed the Alps, and journeying
across the south of France reached Perpignan. The Marquis of Mielleraye
was in supreme command, and Turenne was to act as his lieutenant; the
latter at once took charge of the operations of the siege of Perpignan,
which had already been beleaguered for some months by the French. The
fortress was a very strong one, but as the efforts of the Spanish
to reinforce the garrison by a landing effected on the coast failed
altogether, and as the operations of Mielleraye in the field were
successful, and there was no chance of any relief being afforded to
the besieged town by a Spanish army advancing through Catalonia, it was
certain that the fortress must in time surrender by hunger. As it could
not be captured by assault unless with a very heavy loss indeed, Turenne
contented himself with keeping up so vigilant a watch round it that its
communications were altogether cut off, and the garrison knew nothing
whatever of what was passing around them.

The Duc de Bouillon had received the command of the army in Italy, and
Turenne hoped that henceforth his mind would be free from the family
trouble that had for the past four years caused him great pain and
anxiety. Unfortunately, however, Cinq-Mars, the king's master of horse
and personal favourite, had become embroiled with the cardinal. Rash,
impetuous, and haughty, the young favourite at once began to intrigue.
The Duke of Orleans, the king's only brother, one of the most
treacherous and unstable of men, joined him heart and soul, and Bouillon
was induced to ally himself with them, not from any political feeling,
but because Cinq-Mars had been mainly instrumental in obtaining terms
for him before, and appealed to his sense of gratitude to aid him now.
He insisted, however, that this time there should be no negotiating with
Spain and Austria, but that the movement should be entirely a French
one.

Unknown to him, however, the others entered into an alliance with Spain,
who engaged to find money and an army. The conspirators had gained the
ear of the king, Cinq-Mars representing to him that their hostility
was directed solely against the cardinal, and the latter was in great
disfavour until he obtained a copy of the treaty with Spain. The
disclosure opened the king's eyes. The Duke of Orleans, Cinq-Mars,
Monsieur de Thou, his intimate friend, and de Bouillon were at once
arrested. Orleans immediately turned traitor to his fellow conspirators,
revealed every incident of the plot, and was sentenced to exile.
Cinq-Mars and de Thou were tried and executed. De Bouillon saved his
life by relinquishing his principality to France, any hesitation there
may have been in sparing him on those terms being removed by the receipt
of a message from the duchess, that if her husband were put to death she
would at once deliver Sedan into the hands of the Spaniards. De Bouillon
was therefore pardoned, and in exchange for the surrender of his
principality, his estates in France were to be enlarged, and a
