how delighted shall I be when I can say, Come, Matilda, and be the
guest of your faithful Julia!

'I am at present the inmate of Mr. and Mrs. Mervyn, old friends of my
father. The latter is precisely a good sort of woman, ladylike and
housewifely; but for accomplishments or fancy--good lack, my dearest
Matilda, your friend might as well seek sympathy from Mrs.
Teach'em;--you see I have not forgot school nicknames. Mervyn is a
different--quite a different being from my father, yet he amuses and
endures me. He is fat and good-natured, gifted with strong shrewd sense
and some powers of humour; but having been handsome, I suppose, in his
youth, has still some pretension to be a beau garcon, as well as an
enthusiastic agriculturist. I delight to make him scramble to the tops
of eminences and to the foot of waterfalls, and am obliged in turn to
admire his turnips, his lucerne, and his timothy grass. He thinks me, I
fancy, a simple romantic Miss, with some--the word will be out--beauty
and some good-nature; and I hold that the gentleman has good taste for
the female outside, and do not expect he should comprehend my
sentiments farther. So he rallies, hands, and hobbles (for the dear
creature has got the gout too), and tells old stories of high life, of
which he has seen a great deal; and I listen, and smile, and look as
pretty, as pleasant, and as simple as I can, and we do very well.

'But, alas! my dearest Matilda, how would time pass away, even in this
paradise of romance, tenanted as it is by a pair assorting so ill with
the scenes around them, were it not for your fidelity in replying to my
uninteresting details? Pray do not fail to write three times a week at
least; you can be at no loss what to say.'

FIFTH EXTRACT

'How shall I communicate what I have now to tell! My hand and heart
still flutter so much, that the task of writing is almost impossible!
Did I not say that he lived? did I not say I would not despair? How
could you suggest, my dear Matilda, that my feelings, considering I had
parted from him so young, rather arose from the warmth of my
imagination than of my heart? O I was sure that they were genuine,
deceitful as the dictates of our bosom so frequently are. But to my
tale--let it be, my friend, the most sacred, as it is the most sincere,
pledge of our friendship.

'Our hours here are early--earlier than my heart, with its load of
care, can compose itself to rest. I therefore usually take a book for
an hour or two after retiring to my own room, which I think I have told
you opens to a small balcony, looking down upon that beautiful lake of
which I attempted to give you a slight sketch. Mervyn Hall, being
partly an ancient building, and constructed with a view to defence, is
situated on the verge of the lake. A stone dropped from the projecting
balcony plunges into water deep enough to float a skiff. I had left my
window partly unbarred, that, before I went to bed, I might, according
to my custom, look out and see the moonlight shining upon the lake. I
was deeply engaged with that beautiful scene in the "Merchant of
Venice" where two lovers, describing the stillness of a summer night,
enhance on each other its charms, and was lost in the associations of
story and of feeling which it awakens, when I heard upon the lake the
sound of a flageolet. I have told you it was Brown's favourite
instrument. Who could touch it in a night which, though still and
serene, was too cold, and too late in the year, to invite forth any
wanderer for mere pleasure? I drew yet nearer the window, and hearkened
with breathless attention; the sounds paused a space, were then
resumed, paused again, and again reached my ear, ever coming nearer and
nearer. At length I distinguished plainly that little Hindu air which
you called my favourite. I have told you by whom it was taught me; the
instrument, the tones, were his own! Was it earthly music, or notes
passing on the wind, to warn me of his death?

'It was some time ere I could summon courage to step on the balcony;
nothing could have emboldened me to do so but the strong conviction of
my mind that he was still alive, and that we should again meet; but
that conviction did embolden me, and I ventured, though with a
throbbing heart. There was a small skiff with a single person. O,
Matilda, it was himself! I knew his appearance after so long an
absence, and through the shadow of the night, as perfectly as if we had
parted yesterday, and met again in the broad sunshine! He guided his
boat under the balcony, and spoke to me; I hardly knew what he said, or
what I replied. Indeed, I could scarcely speak for weeping, but they
were joyful tears. We were disturbed by the barking of a dog at some
distance, and parted, but not before he had conjured me to prepare to
meet him at the same place and hour this evening.

'But where and to what is all this tending? Can I answer this question?
I cannot. Heaven, that saved him from death and delivered him from
captivity, that saved my father, too, from shedding the blood of one
who would not have blemished a hair of his head, that Heaven must guide
me out of this labyrinth. Enough for me the firm resolution that
Matilda shall not blush for her friend, my father for his daughter, nor
my lover for her on whom he has fixed his affection.'




CHAPTER XVIII

     Talk with a man out of a window!--a proper saying.

          Much Ado about Nothing.


We must proceed with our extracts from Miss Mannering's letters, which
throw light upon natural good sense, principle, and feelings, blemished
by an imperfect education and the folly of a misjudging mother, who
called her husband in her heart a tyrant until she feared him as such,
and read romances until she became so enamoured of the complicated
intrigues which they contain as to assume the management of a little
family novel of her own, and constitute her daughter, a girl of
sixteen, the principal heroine. She delighted in petty mystery and
intrigue and secrets, and yet trembled at the indignation which these
paltry manoeuvres excited in her husband's mind. Thus she frequently
entered upon a scheme merely for pleasure, or perhaps for the love of
contradiction, plunged deeper into it than she was aware, endeavoured
to extricate herself by new arts, or to cover her error by
dissimulation, became involved in meshes of her own weaving, and was
forced to carry on, for fear of discovery, machinations which she had
at first resorted to in mere wantonness.

Fortunately the young man whom she so imprudently introduced into her
intimate society, and encouraged to look up to her daughter, had a fund
of principle and honest pride which rendered him a safer intimate than
Mrs. Mannering ought to have dared to hope or expect. The obscurity of
his birth could alone be objected to him; in every other respect,

     With prospects bright upon the world he came,
     Pure love of virtue, strong desire of fame,
     Men watched the way his lofty mind would take,
     And all foretold the progress he would make.

But it could not be expected that he should resist the snare which Mrs.
Mannering's imprudence threw in his way, or avoid becoming attached to
a young lady whose beauty and manners might have justified his passion,
even in scenes where these are more generally met with than in a remote
fortress in our Indian settlements. The scenes which followed have been
partly detailed in Mannering's letter to Mr. Mervyn; and to expand what
is there stated into farther explanation would be to abuse the patience
of our readers.

We shall therefore proceed with our promised extracts from Miss
Mannering's letters to her friend.

SIXTH EXTRACT

'I have seen him again, Matilda--seen him twice. I have used every
argument to convince him that this secret intercourse is dangerous to
us both; I even pressed him to pursue his views of fortune without
farther regard to me, and to consider my peace of mind as sufficiently
secured by the knowledge that he had not fallen under my father's
sword. He answers--but how can I detail all he has to answer? He claims
those hopes as his due which my mother permitted him to entertain, and
would persuade me to the madness of a union without my father's
sanction. But to this, Matilda, I will not be persuaded. I have
resisted, I have subdued, the rebellious feelings which arose to aid
his plea; yet how to extricate myself from this unhappy labyrinth in
which fate and folly have entangled us both!

'I have thought upon it, Matilda, till my head is almost giddy; nor can
I conceive a better plan than to make a full confession to my father.
He deserves it, for his kindness is unceasing; and I think I have
observed in his character, since I have studied it more nearly, that
his harsher feelings are chiefly excited where he suspects deceit or
imposition; and in that respect, perhaps, his character was formerly
misunderstood by one who was dear to him. He has, too, a tinge of
romance in his disposition; and I have seen the narrative of a generous
action, a trait of heroism, or virtuous self-denial, extract tears from
him which refused to flow at a tale of mere distress. But then Brown
urges that he is personally hostile to him. And the obscurity of his
birth, that would be indeed a stumbling-block. O, Matilda, I hope none
of your ancestors ever fought at Poictiers or Agincourt! If it were not
for the veneration which my father attaches to the memory of old Sir
Miles Mannering, I should make out my explanation with half the tremor
which must now attend it.'

SEVENTH EXTRACT

'I have this instant received your letter--your most welcome letter!
Thanks, my dearest friend, for your sympathy and your counsels; I can
only repay them with unbounded confidence.

'You ask me what Brown is by origin, that his descent should be so
unpleasing to my father. His story is shortly told. He is of Scottish
extraction, but, being left an orphan, his education was undertaken by
a family of relations settled in Holland. He was bred to commerce, and
sent very early to one of our settlements in the East, where his
guardian had a correspondent. But this correspondent was dead when he
arrived in India, and he had no other resource than to offer himself as
a clerk to a counting-house. The breaking out of the war, and the
straits to which we were at first reduced, threw the army open to all
young men who were disposed to embrace that mode of life; and Brown,
whose genius had a strong military tendency, was the first to leave
what might have been the road to wealth, and to choose that of fame.
The rest of his history is well known to you; but conceive the
irritation of my father, who despises commerce (though, by the way, the
best part of his property was made in that honourable profession by my
great-uncle), and has a particular antipathy to the Dutch--think with
what ear he would be likely to receive proposals for his only child
from Vanbeest Brown, educated for charity by the house of Vanbeest and
Vanbruggen! O, Matilda, it will never do; nay, so childish am I, I
hardly can help sympathising with his aristocratic feelings. Mrs.
Vanbeest Brown! The name has little to recommend it, to be sure. What
children we are!'

EIGHTH EXTRACT

'It is all over now, Matilda! I shall never have courage to tell my
father; nay, most deeply do I fear he has already learned my secret
from another quarter, which will entirely remove the grace of my
communication, and ruin whatever gleam of hope I had ventured to
connect with it. Yesternight Brown came as usual, and his flageolet on
the lake announced his approach. We had agreed that he should continue
to use this signal. These romantic lakes attract numerous visitors, who
indulge their enthusiasm in visiting the scenery at all hours, and we
hoped that, if Brown were noticed from the house, he might pass for one
of those admirers of nature, who was giving vent to his feelings
through the medium of music. The sounds might also be my apology,
should I be observed on the balcony. But last night, while I was
eagerly enforcing my plan of a full confession to my father, which he
as earnestly deprecated, we heard the window of Mr. Mervyn's library,
which is under my room, open softly. I signed to Brown to make his
retreat, and immediately reentered, with some faint hopes that our
interview had not been observed.

'But, alas! Matilda, these hopes vanished the instant I beheld Mr.
Mervyn's countenance at breakfast the next morning. He looked so
provokingly intelligent and confidential, that, had I dared, I could
have been more angry than ever I was in my life; but I must be on good
behaviour, and my walks are now limited within his farm precincts,
where the good gentleman can amble along by my side without
inconvenience. I have detected him once or twice attempting to sound my
thoughts, and watch the expression of my countenance. He has talked of
the flageolet more than once, and has, at different times, made
eulogiums upon the watchfulness and ferocity of his dogs, and the
regularity with which the keeper makes his rounds with a loaded
fowling-piece. He mentioned even man-traps and springguns. I should be
loth to affront my father's old friend in his own house; but I do long
to show him that I am my father's daughter, a fact of which Mr. Mervyn
will certainly be convinced if ever I trust my voice and temper with a
reply to these indirect hints. Of one thing I am certain--I am grateful
to him on that account--he has not told Mrs. Mervyn. Lord help me, I
should have had such lectures about the dangers of love and the night
air on the lake, the risk arising from colds and fortune-hunters, the
comfort and convenience of sack-whey and closed windows! I cannot help
trifling, Matilda, though my heart is sad enough. What Brown will do I
cannot guess. I presume, however, the fear of detection prevents his
resuming his nocturnal visits. He lodges at an inn on the opposite
shore of the lake, under the name, he tells me, of Dawson; he has a bad
choice in names, that must be allowed. He has not left the army, I
believe, but he says nothing of his present views,

'To complete my anxiety, my father is returned suddenly, and in high
displeasure. Our good hostess, as I learned from a bustling
conversation between her housekeeper and her, had no expectation of
seeing him for a week; but I rather suspect his arrival was no surprise
to his friend Mr. Mervyn. His manner to me was singularly cold and
constrained, sufficiently so to have damped all the courage with which
I once resolved to throw myself on his generosity. He lays the blame of
his being discomposed and out of humour to the loss of a purchase in
the south-west of Scotland on which he had set his heart; but I do not
suspect his equanimity of being so easily thrown off its balance. His
first excursion was with Mr. Mervyn's barge across the lake to the inn
I have mentioned. You may imagine the agony with which I waited his
return! Had he recognized Brown, who can guess the consequence! He
returned, however, apparently without having made any discovery. I
understand that, in consequence of his late disappointment, he means
now to hire a house in the neighbourhood of this same Ellangowan, of
which I am doomed to hear so much; he seems to think it probable that
the estate for which he wishes may soon be again in the market. I will
not send away this letter until I hear more distinctly what are his
intentions.'

'I have now had an interview with my father, as confidential as, I
presume, he means to allow me. He requested me to-day, after breakfast,
to walk with him into the library; my knees, Matilda, shook under me,
and it is no exaggeration to say I could scarce follow him into the
room. I feared I knew not what. From my childhood I had seen all around
him tremble at his frown. He motioned me to seat myself, and I never
obeyed a command so readily, for, in truth, I could hardly stand. He
himself continued to walk up and down the room. You have seen my
father, and noticed, I recollect, the remarkably expressive cast of his
features. His eyes are naturally rather light in colour, but agitation
or anger gives them a darker and more fiery glance; he has a custom
also of drawing in his lips when much moved, which implies a combat
between native ardour of temper and the habitual power of self-command.
This was the first time we had been alone since his return from
Scotland, and, as he betrayed these tokens of agitation, I had little
doubt that he was about to enter upon the subject I most dreaded.

'To my unutterable relief, I found I was mistaken, and that, whatever
he knew of Mr. Mervyn's suspicions or discoveries, he did not intend to
converse with me on the topic. Coward as I was, I was inexpressibly
relieved, though, if he had really investigated the reports which may
have come to his ear, the reality could have been nothing to what his
suspicions might have conceived. But, though my spirits rose high at my
unexpected escape, I had not courage myself to provoke the discussion,
and remained silent to receive his commands.

'"Julia," he said, "my agent writes me from Scotland that he has been
able to hire a house for me, decently furnished, and with the necessary
accommodation for my family; it is within three miles of that I had
designed to purchase." Then he made a pause, and seemed to expect an
answer.

'"Whatever place of residence suits you, sir, must be perfectly
agreeable to me."

'"Umph! I do not propose, however, Julia, that you shall reside quite
alone in this house during the winter."

'"Mr. and Mrs. Mervyn," thought I to myself.--"Whatever company is
agreeable to you, sir," I answered aloud.

'"O, there is a little too much of this universal spirit of submission,
an excellent disposition in action, but your constantly repeating the
jargon of it puts me in mind of the eternal salaams of our black
dependents in the East. In short, Julia, I know you have a relish for
society, and I intend to invite a young person, the daughter of a
deceased friend, to spend a few months with us."

'"Not a governess, for the love of Heaven, papa!" exclaimed poor I, my
fears at that moment totally getting the better of my prudence.

'"No, not a governess, Miss Mannering," replied the Colonel, somewhat
sternly, "but a young lady from whose excellent example, bred as she
has been in the school of adversity, I trust you may learn the art to
govern yourself."

'To answer this was trenching upon too dangerous ground, so there was a
pause.

'"Is the young lady a Scotchwoman, papa?"

'"Yes"--drily enough.

'"Has she much of the accent, sir?"

'"Much of the devil!" answered my father hastily; "do you think I care
about a's and aa's, and i's and ee's,? I tell you, Julia, I am serious
in the matter. You have a genius for friendship, that is, for running
up intimacies which you call such." (Was not this very harshly said,
Matilda?) "Now I wish to give you an opportunity at least to make one
deserving friend, and therefore I have resolved that this young lady
shall be a member of my family for some months, and I expect you will
pay to her that attention which is due to misfortune and virtue."

'"Certainly, sir. Is my future friend red-haired?"

'He gave me one of his stern glances; you will say, perhaps, I deserved
it; but I think the deuce prompts me with teasing questions on some
occasions.

'"She is as superior to you, my love, in personal appearance as in
prudence and affection for her friends."

'"Lord, papa, do you think that superiority a recommendation? Well,
sir, but I see you are going to take all this too seriously; whatever
the young lady may be, I am sure, being recommended by you, she shall
have no reason to complain of my want of attention." After a
pause--"Has she any attendant? because you know I must provide for her
proper accommodation if she is without one."

'"N--no--no, not properly an attendant; the chaplain who lived with her
father is a very good sort of man, and I believe I shall make room for
him in the house."

"'Chaplain, papa? Lord bless us!"

'"Yes, Miss Mannering, chaplain; is there anything very new in that
word? Had we not a chaplain at the Residence, when we were in India?"

'"Yes, papa, but you was a commandant then."

'"So I will be now, Miss Mannering, in my own family at least."

'"Certainly, sir. But will he read us the Church of England service?"

'The apparent simplicity with which I asked this question got the
better of his gravity. "Come, Julia," he said, "you are a sad girl, but
I gain nothing by scolding you. Of these two strangers, the young lady
is one whom you cannot fail, I think, to love; the person whom, for
want of a better term, I called chaplain, is a very worthy, and
somewhat ridiculous personage, who will never find out you laugh at him
if you don't laugh very loud indeed."

'"Dear papa, I am delighted with that part of his character. But pray,
is the house we are going to as pleasantly situated as this?"

'"Not perhaps as much to your taste; there is no lake under the
windows, and you will be under the necessity of having all your music
within doors."

'This last coup de main ended the keen encounter of our wits, for you
may believe, Matilda, it quelled all my courage to reply.

'Yet my spirits, as perhaps will appear too manifest from this
dialogue, have risen insensibly, and, as it were, in spite of myself.
Brown alive, and free, and in England! Embarrassment and anxiety I can
and must endure. We leave this in two days for our new residence. I
shall not fail to let you know what I think of these Scotch inmates,
whom I have but too much reason to believe my father means to quarter
in his house as a brace of honourable spies; a sort of female
Rozencrantz and reverend Guildenstern, one in tartan petticoats, the
other in a cassock. What a contrast to the society I would willingly
have secured to myself! I shall write instantly on my arriving at our
new place of abode, and acquaint my dearest Matilda with the farther
fates of--her

'JULIA MANNERING.'




CHAPTER XIX

     Which sloping hills around inclose,
     Where many a beech and brown oak grows
     Beneath whose dark and branching bowers
     Its tides a far-fam'd river pours,
     By natures beauties taught to please,
     Sweet Tusculan of rural easel

          WARTON.


Woodbourne, the habitation which Mannering, by Mr. Mac-Morlan's
mediation, had hired for a season, was a large comfortable mansion,
snugly situated beneath a hill covered with wood, which shrouded the
house upon the north and east; the front looked upon a little lawn
bordered by a grove of old trees; beyond were some arable fields,
extending down to the river, which was seen from the windows of the
house. A tolerable, though old-fashioned garden, a well-stocked
dove-cot, and the possession of any quantity of ground which the
convenience of the family might require, rendered the place in every
respect suitable, as the advertisements have it, 'for the accommodation
of a genteel family.'

Here, then, Mannering resolved, for some time at least, to set up the
staff of his rest. Though an East-Indian, he was not partial to an
ostentatious display of wealth. In fact, he was too proud a man to be a
vain one. He resolved, therefore, to place himself upon the footing of
a country gentleman of easy fortune, without assuming, or permitting
his household to assume, any of the faste which then was considered as
characteristic of a nabob.

He had still his eye upon the purchase of Ellangowan, which Mac-Morlan
conceived Mr. Glossin would be compelled to part with, as some of the
creditors disputed his title to retain so large a part of the
purchase-money in his own hands, and his power to pay it was much
questioned. In that case Mac-Morlan was assured he would readily give
up his bargain, if tempted with something above the price which he had
stipulated to pay. It may seem strange that Mannering was so much
attached to a spot which he had only seen once, and that for a short
time, in early life. But the circumstances which passed there had laid
a strong hold on his imagination. There seemed to be a fate which
conjoined the remarkable passages of his own family history with those
of the inhabitants of Ellangowan, and he felt a mysterious desire to
call the terrace his own from which he had read in the book of heaven a
fortune strangely accomplished in the person of the infant heir of that
family, and corresponding so closely with one which had been strikingly
fulfilled in his own. Besides, when once this thought had got
possession of his imagination, he could not, without great reluctance,
brook the idea of his plan being defeated, and by a fellow like
Glossin. So pride came to the aid of fancy, and both combined to
fortify his resolution to buy the estate if possible.

Let us do Mannering justice. A desire to serve the distressed had also
its share in determining him. He had considered the advantage which
Julia might receive from the company of Lucy Bertram, whose genuine
prudence and good sense could so surely be relied upon. This idea had
become much stronger since Mac-Morlan had confided to him, under the
solemn seal of secrecy, the whole of her conduct towards young
Hazlewood. To propose to her to become an inmate in his family, if
distant from the scenes of her youth and the few whom she called
friends, would have been less delicate; but at Woodbourne she might
without difficulty be induced to become the visitor of a season,
without being depressed into the situation of an humble companion. Lucy
Bertram, with some hesitation, accepted the invitation to reside a few
weeks with Miss Mannering. She felt too well that, however the
Colonel's delicacy might disguise the truth, his principal motive was a
generous desire to afford her his countenance and protection, which his
high connexions, and higher character, were likely to render
influential in the neighbourhood.

About the same time the orphan girl received a letter from Mrs.
Bertram, the relation to whom she had written, as cold and comfortless
as could well be imagined. It inclosed, indeed, a small sum of money,
but strongly recommended economy, and that Miss Bertram should board
herself in some quiet family, either at Kippletringan or in the
neighbourhood, assuring her that, though her own income was very
scanty, she would not see her kinswoman want. Miss Bertram shed some
natural tears over this cold-hearted epistle; for in her mother's time
this good lady had been a guest at Ellangowan for nearly three years,
and it was only upon succeeding to a property of about L400 a year that
she had taken farewell of that hospitable mansion, which otherwise
might have had the honour of sheltering her until the death of its
owner. Lucy was strongly inclined to return the paltry donation, which,
after some struggles with avarice, pride had extorted from the old
lady. But on consideration she contented herself with writing that she
accepted it as a loan, which, she hoped in a short time to repay, and
consulted her relative upon the invitation she had received from
Colonel and Miss Mannering. This time the answer came in course of
post, so fearful was Mrs. Bertram that some frivolous delicacy, or
nonsense, as she termed it, might induce her cousin to reject such a
promising offer, and thereby at the same time to leave herself still a
burden upon her relations. Lucy, therefore, had no alternative, unless
she preferred continuing a burden upon the worthy Mac-Morlans, who were
too liberal to be rich. Those kinsfolk who formerly requested the
favour of her company had of late either silently, or with expressions
of resentment that she should have preferred Mac-Morlan's invitation to
theirs, gradually withdrawn their notice.

The fate of Dominie Sampson would have been deplorable had it depended
upon any one except Mannering, who was an admirer of originality, for a
separation from Lucy Bertram would have certainly broken his heart.
Mac-Morlan had given a full account of his proceedings towards the
daughter of his patron. The answer was a request from Mannering to know
whether the Dominie still possessed that admirable virtue of
taciturnity by which he was so notably distinguished at Ellangowan.
Mac-Morlan replied in the affirmative. 'Let Mr. Sampson know,' said the
Colonel's next letter, 'that I shall want his assistance to catalogue
and put in order the library of my uncle, the bishop, which I have
ordered to be sent down by sea. I shall also want him to copy and
arrange some papers. Fix his salary at what you think befitting. Let
the poor man be properly dressed, and accompany his young lady to
Woodbourne.'

Honest Mac-Morlan received this mandate with great joy, but pondered
much upon executing that part of it which related to newly attiring the
worthy Dominie. He looked at him with a scrutinising eye, and it was
but too plain that his present garments were daily waxing more
deplorable. To give him money, and bid him go and furnish himself,
would be only giving him the means of making himself ridiculous; for
when such a rare event arrived to Mr. Sampson as the purchase of new
garments, the additions which he made to his wardrobe by the guidance
of his own taste usually brought all the boys of the village after him
for many days. On the other hand, to bring a tailor to measure him, and
send home his clothes, as for a school-boy, would probably give
offence. At length Mac-Morlan resolved to consult Miss Bertram, and
request her interference. She assured him that, though she could not
pretend to superintend a gentleman's wardrobe, nothing was more easy
than to arrange the Dominie's.

'At Ellangowan,' she said, 'whenever my poor father thought any part of
the Dominie's dress wanted renewal, a servant was directed to enter his
room by night, for he sleeps as fast as a dormouse, carry off the old
vestment, and leave the new one; nor could any one observe that the
Dominie exhibited the least consciousness of the change put upon him on
such occasions.'

Mac-Morlan, in conformity with Miss Bertram's advice, procured a
skilful artist, who, on looking at the Dominie attentively, undertook
to make for him two suits of clothes, one black and one raven-grey, and
even engaged that they should fit him--as well at least (so the tailor
qualified his enterprise) as a man of such an out-of-the-way build
could be fitted by merely human needles and shears. When this fashioner
had accomplished his task, and the dresses were brought home,
Mac-Morlan, judiciously resolving to accomplish his purpose by degrees,
withdrew that evening an important part of his dress, and substituted
the new article of raiment in its stead. Perceiving that this passed
totally without notice, he next ventured on the waistcoat, and lastly
on the coat. When fully metamorphosed, and arrayed for the first time
in his life in a decent dress, they did observe that the Dominie seemed
to have some indistinct and embarrassing consciousness that a change
had taken place on his outward man. Whenever they observed this dubious
expression gather upon his countenance, accompanied with a glance that
fixed now upon the sleeve of his coat, now upon the knees of his
breeches, where he probably missed some antique patching and darning,
which, being executed with blue thread upon a black ground, had
somewhat the effect of embroidery, they always took care to turn his
attention into some other channel, until his garments, 'by the aid of
use, cleaved to their mould.' The only remark he was ever known to make
on the subject was, that 'the air of a town like Kippletringan seemed
favourable unto wearing apparel, for he thought his coat looked almost
as new as the first day he put it on, which was when he went to stand
trial for his license as a preacher.'

When the Dominie first heard the liberal proposal of Colonel Mannering,
he turned a jealous and doubtful glance towards Miss Bertram, as if he
suspected that the project involved their separation; but when Mr.
Mac-Morlan hastened to explain that she would be a guest at Woodbourne
for some time, he rubbed his huge hands together, and burst into a
portentous sort of chuckle, like that of the Afrite in the tale of 'The
Caliph Vathek.' After this unusual explosion of satisfaction, he
remained quite passive in all the rest of the transaction.

It had been settled that Mr. and Mrs. Mac-Morlan should take possession
of the house a few days before Mannering's arrival, both to put
everything in perfect order and to make the transference of Miss
Bertram's residence from their family to his as easy and delicate as
possible. Accordingly, in the beginning of the month of December the
party were settled at Woodbourne.




CHAPTER XX

    A gigantic genius fit to grapple with whole libraries

        --BOSWELL'S LIFE OF JOHNSON


The appointed day arrived when the Colonel and Miss Mannering were
expected at Woodbourne. The hour was fast approaching, and the little
circle within doors had each their separate subjects of anxiety.
Mac-Morlan naturally desired to attach to himself the patronage and
countenance of a person of Mannering's wealth and consequence. He was
aware, from his knowledge of mankind, that Mannering, though generous
and benevolent, had the foible of expecting and exacting a minute
compliance with his directions. He was therefore racking his
recollection to discover if everything had been arranged to meet the
Colonel's wishes and instructions, and, under this uncertainty of mind,
he traversed the house more than once from the garret to the stables.
Mrs. Mac-Morlan revolved in a lesser orbit, comprehending the
dining-parlour, housekeeper's room, and kitchen. She was only afraid
that the dinner might be spoiled, to the discredit of her housewifely
accomplishments. Even the usual passiveness of the Dominie was so far
disturbed that he twice went to the window which looked out upon the
avenue, and twice exclaimed, 'Why tarry the wheels of their chariot?'
Lucy, the most quiet of the expectants, had her own melancholy
thoughts. She was now about to be consigned to the charge, almost to
the benevolence, of strangers, with whose character, though hitherto
very amiably, displayed, she was but imperfectly acquainted. The
moments, therefore, of suspense passed anxiously and heavily.

At length the trampling of horses and the sound of wheels were heard.
The servants, who had already arrived, drew up in the hall to receive
their master and mistress, with an importance and EMPRESSEMENT which to
Lucy, who had never been accustomed to society, or witnessed what is
called the manners of the great, had something alarming. Mac-Morlan
went to the door to receive the master and mistress of the family, and
in a few moments they were in the drawing-room.

Mannering, who had travelled as usual on horseback, entered with his
daughter hanging upon his arm. She was of the middle size, or rather
less, but formed with much elegance; piercing dark eyes, and jet-black
hair of great length, corresponded with the vivacity and intelligence
of features in which were blended a little haughtiness, and a little
bashfulness, a great deal of shrewdness, and some power of humorous
sarcasm. 'I shall not like her,' was the result of Lucy Bertram's first
glance; 'and yet; I rather think I shall,' was the thought excited by
the second.

Miss Mannering was furred and mantled up to the throat against the
severity of the weather; the Colonel in his military great-coat. He
bowed to Mrs. Mac-Morlan, whom his daughter also acknowledged with a
fashionable courtesy, not dropped so low as at all to incommode her
person. The Colonel then led his daughter up to Miss Bertram, and,
taking the hand of the latter, with an air of great kindness and almost
paternal affection, he said, 'Julia, this is the young lady whom I hope
our good friends have prevailed on to honour our house with a long
