struck his brow with his clenched hand. He had fancied her walking
with gold chains on her slender wrists before the victor's four-horse
chariot, and heard the exulting shouts of the Roman populace.

That would have been the most terrible of all. To pursue this train of
thought was beyond the endurance of the faithful friend, and Dion turned
in surprise as he heard him sob and saw the tears which bedewed his
face.

His own heart was heavy enough, but he knew his companion's warm
devotion to the Queen; so, passing his arm around his shoulder, he
entreated him to maintain that peace of soul and mind which he had so
often admired. In the most critical situations he had seen him stand
high above them, as yonder man who fed the flames on the summit of the
Pharos stood above the wild surges of the sea. If he would reflect over
what had happened as dispassionately as usual, he could not fail to
see that Antony must be free and in a position to guide his own future,
since he directed the palace in the Choma to be put in order. He did
not understand about the wall, but perhaps he was bringing home some
distinguished captive whom he wished to debar from all communication
with the city. It might prove that everything was far better than they
feared, and they would yet smile at these grievous anxieties. His heart,
too, was heavy, for he wished the Queen the best fortune, not only for
her own sake, but because with her and her successful resistance to the
greed of Rome was connected the liberty of Alexandria.

"My love and anxiety, like yours," he concluded, "have ever been given
to her, the sovereign of this country. The world will be desolate, life
will no longer be worth living, if the iron foot of Rome crushes our
independence and freedom." The words had sounded cordial and sincere,
and Archibius followed Dion's counsel. Calm thought convinced him that
nothing had yet happened which compelled belief in the worst result;
and, as one who needs consolation often finds relief in comforting
another, Archibius cheered his own heart by representing to his younger
friend that, even if Octavianus were the victor and should deprive Egypt
of her independence, he would scarcely venture to take from the citizens
of Alexandria the free control of their own affairs. Then he explained
to Dion that, as a young, resolute, independent man, he might render
himself doubly useful if it were necessary to guard the endangered
liberty of the city, and told him how many beautiful things life still
held in store.

His voice expressed anxious tenderness for his young friend. No one had
spoken thus to Dion since his father's death.

The Epicurus would soon reach the mouth of the harbour, and after
landing he must again leave Archibius.

The decisive hour which often unites earnest men more firmly than many
previous years had come to both. They had opened their hearts to each
other. Dion had withheld only the one thing which, at the first sight of
the houses in the city, filled his soul with fresh uneasiness.

It was long since he had sought counsel from others. Many who had asked
his, had left him with thanks, to do exactly the opposite of what he had
advised, though it would have been to their advantage. More than once
he, too, had done the same, but now a powerful impulse urged him to
confide in Archibius. He knew Barine, and wished her the greatest
happiness. Perhaps it would be wise to let another person, who was
kindly disposed, consider what his own heart so eagerly demanded and
prudence forbade.

Hastily forming his resolution, he again turned to his friend, saying:

"You have shown yourself a father to me. Imagine that I am indeed your
son, and, as such wished to confess that a woman had become dear to my
heart, and to ask whether you would be glad to greet her as a daughter."

Here Archibius interrupted him with the exclamation: "A ray of light
amid all this gloom? Grasp what you have too long neglected as soon as
possible! It befits a good citizen to marry. The Greek does not attain
full manhood till he becomes husband and father. If I have remained
unwedded, there was a special reason for it, and how often I have envied
the cobbler whom I saw standing before his shop in the evening, holding
his child in his arms, or the pilot, to whom large and small hands were
stretched in greeting when he returned home! When I enter my dwelling
only my dogs rejoice. But you, whose beautiful palace stands empty,
to whose proud family it is due that you should provide for its
continuance--"

"That is just what brings me into a state of indecision, which is
usually foreign to my nature," interrupted Dion. "You know me and
my position in the world, and you have also known from her earliest
childhood the woman to whom I allude."

"Iras?" asked his companion, hesitatingly. His sister, Charmian, had
told him of the love felt by the Queen's younger waiting-woman.

But Dion eagerly denied this, adding I am speaking of Barine, the
daughter of your dead friend Leonax. "I love her, yet my pride is
sensitive, and I know that it will extend to my future wife. The
contemptuous glances which others might cast at her I should scorn,
for I know her worth. Surely you remember my mother: she was a very
different woman. Her house, her child, the slaves, her loom, were
everything to her. She rigidly exacted from other women the chaste
reserve which was a marked trait in her own character. Yet she was
gentle, and loved me, her only son, beyond aught else. I think she would
have opened her arms to Barine, had she believed that she was necessary
to my happiness. But would the young beauty, accustomed to gay
intercourse with distinguished men, have been able to submit to her
demands? When I consider that she cannot help taking into her married
life the habit of being surrounded and courted; when I think that the
imprudence of a woman accustomed to perfect freedom might set idle
tongues in motion, and cast a shadow upon the radiant purity of my name;
when I even--" and he raised his clenched right hand. But Archibius
answered soothingly:

"That anxiety is groundless if Barine warmly and joyfully gives you her
whole heart. It is a sunny, lovable, true woman's heart, and therefore
capable of a great love. If she bestows it on you--and I believe she
will--go and offer sacrifices in your gratitude; for the immortals
desired your happiness when they guided your choice to her and not to
Iras, my own sister's child. If you were really my son, I would now
exclaim, 'You could not bring me a dearer daughter, if--I repeat it--if
you are sure of her love.'"

Dion gazed into vacancy a short time, and then cried firmly: "I am!"




CHAPTER VIII.

The Epicurus anchored before the Temple of Poseidon. The crew had been
ordered to keep silence, though they knew nothing, except that a letter
from Antony, commanding the erection of a wall, had been found on board
the pirate. This might be regarded as a good omen, for people do not
think of building unless they anticipate a time of peace.

The light rain had ceased, but the wind blew more strongly from the
north, and the air had grown cool. A dense throng still covered the quay
from the southern end of the Heptastadium to the promontory of Lochias.
The strongest pressure was between the peninsula of the Choma and the
Sebasteum; for this afforded a view of the sea, and the first tidings
must reach the residence of the Regent, which was connected with the
palace.

A hundred contradictory rumours had been in circulation that morning;
and when, at the third hour in the afternoon, the Epicurus arrived, it
was surrounded by a dense multitude eager to hear what news the ship had
brought from without.

Other vessels shared the same fate, but none could give reliable
tidings.

Two swift galleys from the royal fleet reported meeting a Samian
trireme, which had given news of a great victory gained by Antony on
the land and Cleopatra on the sea, and, as men are most ready to believe
what they desire, throngs of exulting men and women moved to and fro
along the shore, strengthening by their confidence many a timorous
spirit. Prudent people, who had regarded the long delay of the first
ships of the fleet with anxiety, had opened their ears to the tales of
evil, and looked forward to the future with uneasiness. But they avoided
giving expression to their fears, for the overseer of an establishment
for gold embroidery, who had ventured to warn the people against
premature rejoicing, had limped home badly beaten, and two other
pessimists who had been flung in the sea had just been dragged out
dripping wet.

Nor could the multitude be blamed for this confidence; for at the
Serapeum, the theatre of Dionysus, the lofty pylons of the Sebasteum,
the main door of the museum, in front of the entrance of the palace
in the Bruchium, and before the fortress-like palaces in the Lochias,
triumphal arches had been erected, adorned with gods of victory and
trophies hastily constructed of plaster, inscriptions of congratulations
and thanks to the deities, garlands of foliage and flowers. The
wreathing of the Egyptian pylons and obelisks, the principal temple, and
the favourite statues in the city had been commenced during the night.
The last touches were now being given to the work.

Gorgias, like his friend Dion, had not closed his eyes since the night
before; for he had had charge of all the decorations of the Bruchium,
where one superb building adjoined another.

Sleep had also fled from the couches of the occupants of the Sebasteum,
the royal palace where Iras lived during the absence of the Queen, and
the practorium, facing its southern front, which contained the official
residence of the Regent.

When Archibius was conducted to the Queen's waiting-woman, her
appearance fairly startled him. She had been his guest in Kanopus only
the day before yesterday, and how great was the alteration within this
brief time! Her oval face seemed to have lengthened, the features to
have grown sharper; and this woman of seven-and-twenty years, who had
hitherto retained all the charms of youth, appeared suddenly to have
aged a decade. There was a feverish excitement in her manner, as,
holding out her hand to her uncle, in greeting, she exclaimed hastily,
"You, too, bring no good tidings?"

"Nor any evil ones," he answered quietly. "But, child, I do not like
your appearance--the dark circles under your keen eyes. You have had
news which rouses your anxiety?"

"Worse than that," she answered in a low tone.

"Well?"

"Read!" gasped Iras, her lips and nostrils quivering as she handed
Archibius a small tablet. With a gesture of haste very unusual in him,
he snatched it from her hand and, as his eyes ran over the words traced
upon it, every vestige of colour vanished from his cheeks and lips.

They were written by Cleopatra's own hand, and contained the following
lines:

"The naval battle was lost--and by my fault. The land forces might
still save us, but not under his command. He is with me, uninjured,
but apparently exhausted; like a different being, bereft of courage,
listless as if utterly crushed. I foresee the beginning of the end.
As soon as this reaches you, arrange to have some unpretending litters
ready for us every evening at sunset. Make the people believe that we
have conquered until trustworthy intelligence arrives concerning the
fate of Canidius and the army. When you kiss the children in my name,
be very tender with them. Who knows how soon they may be orphaned?
They already have an unhappy mother; may they be spared the memory of
a cowardly one! Trust no one except those whom I left in authority, and
Archibius, not even Caesarion or Antyllus. Provide for having every one
whose aid may be valuable to me within reach when I come. I cannot
close with the familiar 'Rejoice'--the 'Fresh Courage' placed on many
a tombstone seems more appropriate. You who did not envy me in my
happiness will help me to bear misfortune. Epicurus, who believes that
the gods merely watch the destiny of men inactively from their blissful
heights, is right. Were it otherwise, how could the love and loyalty
which cleave to the hapless, defeated woman, be repaid with anguish of
heart and tears? Yet continue to love her."

Archibius, pale and silent, let the tablet fall. It was long ere he
gasped hoarsely: "I foresaw it; yet now that it is here--" His voice
failed, and violent, tearless sobs shook his powerful frame.

Sinking on a couch he buried his face amid the cushions.

Iras gazed at the strong man and shook her head. She, too, loved the
Queen; the news had brought tears to her eyes also; but even while she
wept, a host of plans coping with this disaster had darted through
her restless brain. A few minutes after the arrival of the message of
misfortune she had consulted with the members of Cleopatra's council,
and adopted measures for sustaining the people's belief in the naval
victory.

What was she, the delicate, by no means courageous girl, compared
to this man of iron strength who, she was well aware, had braved the
greatest perils in the service of the Queen? Yet there he lay with his
face hidden in the pillows as if utterly overwhelmed.

Did a woman's soul rebound more quickly after being crushed beneath the
burdens of the heaviest suffering, or was hers of a special character,
and her slender body the casket of a hero's nature?

She had reason to believe so when she recalled how the Regent and the
Keeper of the Seal had received the terrible news. They had rushed
frantically up and down the vast hall as if desperate; but Mardion the
eunuch had little manhood, and Zeno was a characterless old author who
had won the Queen's esteem, and the high office which he occupied solely
by the vivid power of imagination, that enabled him constantly to devise
new exhibitions, amusements, and entertainments, and present them with
magical splendour.

But Archibius, the brave, circumspect counsellor and helper?

His shoulders again quivered as if they had received a blow, and
Iras suddenly remembered what she had long known, but never fully
realized--that yonder grey-haired man loved Cleopatra, loved her as she
herself loved Dion; and she wondered whether she would have been strong
enough to maintain her composure if she had learned that a cruel fate
threatened to rob him of life, liberty, and honour.

Hour after hour she had vainly awaited the young Alexandrian, yet he
had witnessed her anxiety the day before. Had she offended him? Was he
detained by the spell of Didymus's granddaughter?

It seemed a great wrong that, amid the unspeakably terrible misfortune
which had overtaken her mistress, she could not refrain from thinking
continually of Dion. Even as his image filled her heart, Cleopatra's
ruled her uncle's mind and soul, and she said to herself that it was not
alone among women that love paid no heed to years, or whether the locks
were brown or tinged with grey.

But Archibius now raised himself, left the couch, passed his hand across
his brow, and in the deep, calm tones natural to his voice, began with a
sorrowful smile: "A man stricken by an arrow leaves the fray to have his
wound bandaged. The surgeon has now finished his task. I ought to have
spared you this pitiable spectacle, child. But I am again ready for the
battle. Cleopatra's account of Antony's condition renders a piece of
news which we have just received somewhat more intelligible."

"We?" replied Iras. "Who was your companion?"

"Dion," answered Archibius; but when he was about to describe the
incidents of the preceding night, she interrupted him with the question
whether Barine had consented to leave the city. He assented with a curt
"Yes," but Iras assumed the manner of having expected nothing different,
and requested him to continue his story.

Archibius now related everything which they had experienced, and their
discovery in the pirate ship. Dion was even now on the way to carry
Antony's order to his friend Gorgias.

"Any slave might have attended to that matter equally well," Iras
remarked in an irritated tone. "I should think he would have more reason
to expect trustworthy tidings here. But that's the way with men!"

Here she hesitated but, meeting an inquiring glance from her uncle,
she went on eagerly; "Nothing, I believe, binds them more firmly to one
another than mutual pleasure. But that must now be over. They will seek
other amusements, whether with Heliodora or Thais I care not. If the
woman had only gone before! When she caught young Caesarion--"

"Stay, child," her uncle interrupted reprovingly. "I know how much she
would rejoice if Antyllus had never brought the boy to her house."

"Now--because the poor deluded lad's infatuation alarms her."

"No, from his first visit. Immature boys do not suit the distinguished
men whom she receives."

"If the door is always kept open, thieves will enter the house."

"She received only old acquaintances, and the friends whom they
presented. Her house was closed to all others. So there was no trouble
with thieves. But who in Alexandria could venture to refuse admittance
to a son of the Queen?"

"There is a wide difference between quiet admittance and fanning a
passion to madness. Wherever a fire is burning, there has certainly been
a spark to kindle it. You men do not detect such women's work. A glance,
a pressure of the hand, even the light touch of a garment, and the flame
blazes, where such inflammable material lies ready."

"We lament the violence of the conflagration. You are not well disposed
towards Barine."

"I care no more for her than this couch here cares for the statue of
Mercury in the street!" exclaimed Iras, with repellent arrogance. "There
could be no two things in the world more utterly alien than we. Between
the woman whose door stands open, and me, there is nothing in common
save our sex."

"And," replied Archibius reprovingly, "many a beautiful gift which the
gods bestowed upon her as well as upon you. As for the open door, it was
closed yesterday. The thieves of whom you spoke spoiled her pleasure
in granting hospitality. Antyllus forced himself with noisy impetuosity
into her house. This made her dread still more unprecedented conduct in
the future. In a few hours she will be on the way to Irenia. I am glad
for Caesarion's sake, and still more for his mother's, whom we have
wronged by forgetting so long for another."

"To think that we should be forced to do so!" cried Iras
excitedly--"now, at this hour, when every drop of blood, every thought
of this poor brain should belong to the Queen! Yet it could not be
avoided. Cleopatra is returning to us with a heart bleeding from a
hundred wounds, and it is terrible to think that a new arrow must strike
her as soon as she steps upon her native soil. You know how she loves
the boy, who is the living image of the great man with whom she shared
the highest joys of love. When she learns that he, the son of Caesar,
has given his young heart to the cast-off wife of a street orator, a
woman whose home attracted men as ripe dates lure birds, it will be--I
know--like rubbing salt into her fresh wounds. Alas! and the one sorrow
will not be all. Antony, her husband, also found the way to Barine. He
sought her more than once. You cannot know it as I do; but Charmian will
tell you how sensitive she has become since the flower of her youthful
charms--you don't perceive it--is losing one leaf after another.
Jealousy will torture her, and--I know her well--perhaps no one will
ever render the siren a greater service than I did when I compelled her
to leave the city."

The eyes of Archibius's clever niece had glittered with such hostile
feeling as she spoke that he thought with just anxiety of his dead
friend's daughter. What did not yet threaten Barine as serious danger
Iras had the power to transform into grave peril.

Dion had begged him to maintain strict secrecy; but even had he been
permitted to speak, he would not have done so now. From his knowledge of
Iras's character she might be expected, if she learned that some one had
come between her and the friend of her youth, to shrink from no means
of spoiling her game. He remembered the noble Macedonian maiden whom the
Queen had begun to favour, and who was hunted to death by Iras's hostile
intrigues. Few were more clever, and--if she once loved--more loyal and
devoted, more yielding, pliant, and in happy hours more bewitching, yet
even in childhood she had preferred a winding path to a straight one.
It seemed as if her shrewdness scorned to attain the end desired by
the simple method lying close at hand. How willingly his mother and his
younger sister Charmian had cared for the slaves and nursed them when
they were ill; nay, Charmian had gained in her Nubian maid Aniukis a
friend who would have gone to death for her sake! Cleopatra, too, when
a child, had found sincere delight in taking a bouquet to his parents'
sick old housekeeper and sitting by her bedside to shorten the time for
her with merry talk. She had gone to her unasked, while Iras had often
been punished because she had made the lives of numerous slaves in her
parents' household still harder by unreasonable harshness. This trait
in her character had roused her uncle's anxiety and, in after-years, her
treatment of her inferiors had been such that he could not number her
among the excellent of her sex. Therefore he was the more joyfully
surprised by the loyal, unselfish love with which she devoted herself
to the service of the Queen. Cleopatra had gratified Charmian's wish to
have her niece for an assistant; and Iras, who had never been a loving
daughter to her own faithful mother, had served her royal mistress with
the utmost tenderness.

Archibius valued this loyalty highly, but he knew what awaited any one
who became the object of her hatred, and the fear that it would involve
Barine in urgent peril was added to his still greater anxiety for
Cleopatra.

When about to depart, burdened by the sorrowful conviction that he was
powerless against his niece's malevolent purpose, he was detained by the
representation that every fresh piece of intelligence would first reach
the Sebasteum and her. Some question might easily arise which his calm,
prudent mind could decide far better than hers, whose troubled condition
resembled a shallow pool disturbed by stones flung into the waves.

The apartments of his sister Charmian, which were connected with his
by a corridor, were empty, and Iras begged him to remain there a short
time. The anxiety and dread that oppressed her heart would kill her. To
know that he was near would be the greatest comfort.

When Archibius hesitated because he deemed it his duty to urge
Caesarion, over whom he possessed some influence, to give up his foolish
wishes for his mother's sake, Iras assured him that he would not find
the youth. He had gone hunting with Antyllus and some other friends. She
had approved the plan, because it removed him from the city and Barine's
dangerous house.

"As the Queen does not wish him to know the terrible news yet," she
concluded, "his presence would only have caused us embarrassment. So
stay, and when it grows dark go with us to the Lochias. I think it will
please the sorrowing woman, when she lands, to see your familiar face,
which will remind her of happier days. Do me the favour to stay." She
held out both hands beseechingly as she spoke, and Archibius consented.

A repast was served, and he shared it with his niece; but Iras did not
touch the carefully chosen viands, and Archibius barely tasted them.
Then, without waiting for dessert, he rose to go to his sister's
apartments. But Iras urged him to rest on the divan in the adjoining
room, and he yielded. Yet, spite of the softness of the pillows and his
great need of sleep, he could not find it; anxiety kept him awake, and
through the curtain which divided the room in which Iras remained
from the one he occupied he sometimes heard her light footsteps pacing
restlessly to and fro, sometimes the coming and going of messengers in
quest of news.

All his former life passed before his mind. Cleopatra had been his sun,
and now black clouds were rising which would dim its light, perchance
forever. He, the disciple of Epicurus, who had not followed the
doctrines of other masters until later in life, held the same view
of the gods as his first master. To him also they had seemed immortal
beings sufficient unto themselves, dwelling free from anxiety in
blissful peace, to whom mortals must look upward on account of their
supreme grandeur, but who neither troubled themselves about the
guidance of the world, which was fixed by eternal laws, nor the fate
of individuals. Had he been convinced of the contrary, he would have
sacrificed everything he possessed in order, by lavish offerings, to
propitiate the immortals in behalf of her to whom he had devoted his
life and every faculty of his being.

Like Iras, he, too, could find no rest upon his couch, and when she
heard his step she called to him and asked why he did not recover the
sleep which he had lost. No one knew the demands the next night might
make upon him.

"You will find me awake," he answered quietly.

Then he went to the window which, above the pylons that rose before the
main front of the Sebasteum, afforded a view of the Bruchium and the
sea. The harbour was now swarming with vessels of every size, garlanded
with flowers and adorned with gay flags and streamers. The report of
the successful issue of the first naval battle was believed, and many
desired to greet the victorious fleet and hail their sovereign as she
entered the harbour.

Many people, equipages, and litters had also gathered on the shore,
between the lofty pylons and the huge door of the Sebasteum. They were
representatives of the aristocracy of the city; for the majority were
attended by richly attired slaves. Many wore costly garlands, and
numerous chariots and litters were adorned with gold or silver
ornaments, gems, and glittering paste. The stir and movement in front
of the palace were ceaseless, and Iras, who was now standing beside her
uncle, waved her hand towards it, saying: "The wind of rumour! Yesterday
only one or two came; to-day every one who belongs to the 'Inimitable
Livers' flocks hither in person to get news. The victory was proclaimed
in the market-place, at the theatre, the gymnasium, and the camp. Every
one who wears garlands or weapons heard of a battle won. Yesterday,
among all the thousands, there was scarcely a single doubter; but
to-day-how does it happen? Even among those who as 'Inimitables' have
shared all the pleasures, entertainments, and festivities of our noble
pair, faith wavers; for if they were firmly convinced of the brilliant
victory which was announced loudly enough, they would not come
themselves to watch, to spy, to listen. Just look down! There is the
litter of Diogenes--yonder that of Ammonius. The chariot beyond belongs
to Melampous. The slaves in the red bombyx garments serve Hermias. They
all belong to the society of--'Inimitables,' and shared our banquets.
That very Apollonius who, for the last half hour, has been trying to
question the palace servants, day before yesterday ordered fifty oxen
