Then, removing the diamond and ruby star from the lace at his neck, he
pinned it on Barbara's bosom, with the exclamation, "In memory of this
hour!"

He afterward added, as if in explanation, that the star might show to
those below what had detained her here, and asked earnestly whether
he might hope to see her again in an hour, if a faithful man--here he
motioned to Quijada--accompanied her hither, and later escorted her home
again?

A silent nod promised the fulfilment of this request.

The Emperor then carried on a short conversation with Quijada, which
was unintelligible to Barbara; and after he had retired to summon the
marquise, Charles profited, like an impetuous youth, by the brief period
in which he was again alone with his love, and entreated her to consider
that, if she remained absent long, the "amore langueo" would rob him of
his reason.

"Your great intellect," she replied, with a faint sigh. "My small
wits--Holy Virgin!--flew far away at the first word of love from the
lips of my royal master."

Then, drawing herself up to her full height, she passed her hand across
her brow and defiantly exclaimed: "And why should I think and ponder? I
will be happy, and make you happy also, my only love!"

As she spoke she again threw herself upon his breast, but only for a
few brief moments. Don Luis Quijada reappeared with the marquise, and
conducted both ladies out of the imperial apartment.

Outside the door the major-domo detained Barbara, and had a tolerably
long conversation with her, of which the marquise vainly endeavoured to
catch even a few words.

At last he committed the girl to the old nobleman's charge and returned
to the Emperor.

The marquise received Barbara with the assurance that she had found in
her a warm, nay, a maternal friend.

If this beautiful creature was not alreadv the object of the Emperor's
love, the experienced old woman told herself, she must very soon become
so.

Yet there had never been a favourite at this monarch's court, and she
was curious to learn what position would be assigned to her.

After accompanying the girl intrusted to her care down the stairs with
flattering kindness, she committed her to the musicians and Wolf, who,
with old Blomberg, were awaiting her in the chapel with increasing
impatience. The captain had obtained admittance through Wolf.

At her first glance at Barbara the eyes of the old marquise had rested
on the glittering star which the Emperor had fastened on the lady of his
love.

The men did not notice it until after they had congratulated the singer
upon her exquisite performance and the effect which it had produced upon
his Majesty.

Maestro Gombert perceived it before the others, and Captain Blomberg and
Wolf rejoiced with him and Appenzelder over this tangible proof of the
imperial favour.

A conversation about the Emperor's judgment and the rarity with which he
bestowed such costly tokens of his regard was commencing in the chapel,
but Barbara speedily brought it to a close by the assurance that she was
utterly exhausted and needed rest.

On the way home she said very little, but when Wolf, in the second story
of the house, held out his hand in farewell, she pressed it warmly, and
thanked him with such evident emotion that the young man entered his
rooms full of hope and deep secret satisfaction.

After Barbara had crossed the threshold of hers, she said good-night to
her father, who wished to learn all sorts of details, alleging that she
could scarcely speak from weariness.

The old gentleman went to rest grumbling over the weakness of women in
these days, to which even his sturdy lass now succumbed; but Barbara
threw herself on her knees beside the bed in her room, buried her
face in the pillows, and sobbed aloud. Another feeling, however, soon
silenced her desire to weep. Her lover's image and the memory of the
happy moments which she had just experienced returned to her mind.
Besides, she must hasten to arrange her hair again, and--this time with
her own hands--change her clothing.

While she was loosening her golden tresses and gazing into the mirror,
her eyes again sparkled with joy. The greatest, the loftiest of
mortals loved her. She belonged to him, body and soul, and she had been
permitted to call him "her own."

At this thought she drew herself up still more haughtily in proud
self-consciousness, but, as her glance fell upon the image of the Virgin
above the priedieu, she again bowed her head.

Doubtless she desired to pray, but she could not.

She need confess nothing to the august Queen of Heaven. She knew that
she had neither sought nor desired what now burdened her heart so
heavily, and yet rendered her so infinitely happy. She had obeyed the
Emperor's summons in order to win approval and applause for her art,
and to afford the monarch a little pleasure and cheer, and, instead, the
love of the greatest of all men had flamed ardently from the earth, she
had left her whole heart with him, and given herself and all that was
in her into his power. Now he summoned her--the Holy Virgin knew this,
too--and she must obey, though the pure face yonder looked so grave and
threatening.

And for what boon could she beseech the Queen of Heaven?

What more had the woman, to whom the Emperor's heart belonged, to
desire?

The calmness of her soul was at an end, and not for all the kingdoms
Charles possessed would she have exchanged the tumult and turmoil in her
breast for the peace which she had enjoyed yesterday.

Obeying a defiant impulse, she turned from the benign face, and her
hands fairly flew as, still more violently agitated, she completed the
changes in her dress.

In unfastening the star, her lover's gift, she saw upon the gold at the
back Charles's motto, "Plus ultra!"

Barbara had known it before, but had not thought of it for a long time,
and a slight tremor ran through her frame as she said to herself that,
from early childhood, though unconsciously, it had been hers also.
Heaven--she knew it now--Fate destined them for each other.

Sighing heavily, she went at last, in a street dress, to open the
bow-window which looked upon Red Cock Street.

Barbara felt as if she had outgrown herself. The pathos which she had
often expressed in singing solemn church music took possession of her,
and left no room in her soul for any frivolous emotion. Proud of the
lofty passion which drew her with such mighty power to her lover's arms,
she cast aside the remorse, the anxiety, the deep sense of wrong which
had overpowered her on her return home.

What was greater than the certainty of being beloved by the greatest of
men? It raised her far above all other women, and, since she loved him
in return, this certainty could not fail to make her happy also, when
she had once fully recovered her composure and ventured to look the
wonderful event which had happened freely in the face.

The stars themselves, following their appointed course in yonder blue
firmament--his device taught that--made her belong to him. If she could
have forced herself to silence the desire of her heart, it would have
been futile. Whoever divides two trees which have grown from a single
root, she said to herself, destroys at least one; but she would live,
would be happy on the highest summit of existence. She could not help
obeying his summons, for as soon as she listened to the warning voice
within, the "Because I long for love" with which he had clasped her in
his arms, urged her with irresistible power toward the lover who awaited
her coming.

The clock now struck two, and a tall figure in a Spanish cloak stood
outside the door of the house. It was Don Luis Quijada, the Emperor's
majordomo.

It would not do to keep him waiting, and, as she turned back into the
room to take the little lamp, her glance again fell upon the Virgin's
image above the priedieu and rested upon her head.

Then the figure of her imperial lover stood in tangible distinctness
before her mind, and she imagined that she again heard the first cry
of longing with which he clasped her in his arms, and without further
thought or consideration she kissed her hand to the image, extinguished
the little lamp, and hurried as fast as the darkness permitted into the
entry and down the stairs.

Outside the house Wolf returned to her memory a moment.

How faithfully he loved her!

Yet was it not difficult to understand how she could even think of the
poor fellow at all while hastening to the illustrious sovereign whose
heart was hers, and who had taught her with what impetuous power true
love seizes upon the soul. Barbara threw her head back proudly, and,
drawing a long breath, opened the door of the house. Outside she was
received by Quijada with a silent bend of the head; but she remembered
the far more profound bows with which he greeted the monarch, and,
to show him of how lofty a nature was also the woman whom the Emperor
Charles deemed worthy of his love, she walked with queenly dignity
through the darkness at her aristocratic companion's side without
vouchsafing him a single glance.

Two hours later old Ursula was sitting sleepless in her bed in the
second story of the cantor house. A slight noise was heard on the
stairs, and the one-eyed maid-servant who was watching beside her
exclaimed: "There it is again! just as it was striking two I said that
the rats were coming up from the cellar into the house."

"The rats," repeated the old woman incredulously; and then, without
moving her lips, thought: "Rats that shut the door behind them? My poor
Wolf!"




CHAPTER XVI.

"Poor Wolf!" old Ursel had exclaimed. But whoever had met the young
knight the following morning, as he went up the stairs to the Blombergs'
rooms, would have deemed him, like Baron Malfalconnet, the happiest of
mortals.

He had obeyed Dr. Hiltner's summons, and remained a long time with him.
Then he went home at a rapid pace, for he longed to tell Barbara how
fair a prospect for their future was opening before him.

She had showed her liking for him plainly enough yesterday when they
parted. What should prevent her from becoming his now that he could
promise an ample income?

There was some one stirring in the private chapel as he passed, but he
paid no heed; in former days many people from the neighbourhood prayed
here frequently.

He found no one in the Blombergs' home except the father.

Barbara would certainly return immediately, the old man said. She had
gone down to the chapel a short time before. She was not in the habit of
doing so at this hour, but the great favour shown her by the Emperor had
probably gone to her head, and who could wonder?

Wolf also thought it natural that so great a success should excite her
powerfully: but he, too, had a similar one to relate, and, with joyful
emotion, he now told the old gentleman what the syndic had offered.

The Council, which, by the establishment of the "Convivium," had already
provided for the fostering of the noble art of music, wished to do still
more. The project had been dear to the recently deceased Martin Luther,
and the Ratisbon syndic, who had enjoyed his friendship, thought he was
carrying out his wishes----

Here Wolf was interrupted, for the table groaned under the blow of the
old warrior's still powerful fist, coupled with the exclamation: "So
there is still to be no rest from the accursed disturber of the peace,
although he is dead! No offence, my lad; but there can be nothing
edifying to a good Christian where that Wittenberg fellow is concerned."

"Only have patience," Wolf interposed here, secure of victory, and now,
slightly vexed with himself for his imprudence in mentioning Martin
Luther's name to the old hater of Turks and heretics, he explained that
Dr. Hiltner, in the name of the Council, had offered him the position of
Damian Feys, Barbara's teacher. The Netherlander was going home, and the
magistrate was glad to have found in him, Wolf, a native of Ratisbon who
would be no less skilled in fostering music in this good city. To bind
him securely, and avoid the danger of a speedy invitation elsewhere,
the position offered was provided with an annual salary hitherto
unprecedented in this country, and which far exceeded that of many an
imperial councillor. This had been rendered possible through a bequest,
whose interest was to be devoted to the development of music, and--if he
should accept the place--to him and his future wife.

When he heard this, he would fain have instantly bestowed the most
beautiful candles upon the Holy Virgin, but the scruple concerning
religion had prevented his rejoicing fully; and when he told the syndic
that under no circumstances could he abandon the old faith, it was done
with the fear that the glittering bird would fly away from him. But the
result had been different, for Dr. Hiltner replied that religion did
not enter into the matter. He knew Wolf and his peaceful nature, and
therefore hoped that he would be advised that music was a language
equally intelligible to all persons of feeling, whatever tongue they
spoke and whatever creed they preferred. This opinion was also that of
the Catholic maestro Feys, and he had therefore escaped all difficulty.
Wolf must, of course, consider the circumstances which he would find
here. If he would accommodate himself to them, the Council would be
willing to overlook his faith; besides, Hiltner, on his own authority,
had given him the three days' time to reflect, for which he had asked on
Barbara's account.

A long-drawn "H'm" from Blomberg followed this disclosure. Then he shook
his clumsy head, and, grasping his mustache with his hand, as if he
wanted in that way to stop the motion of his head, he said thoughtfully:
"Not a whole thing, Wolf, rather a double one, or--if we look at it
differently--it is only a half, for an honest friend of our Holy Church.
The way into which they tempt you is paved with gold, but--but--I see
the snares and pitfalls----"

He rose as he spoke, muttering all sorts of unintelligible things, until
he finally exclaimed, "Yet perhaps one might----"

Then he looked impatiently toward the door, and asked: "Where is the
girl loitering? Would Eve probably bite the apple of temptation also?"

"Shall I call her?" cried Wolf eagerly.

"No, no," said the captain. "It is sinful to disturb even our nearest
relatives at prayer. Besides, you would not believe how the maestro's
praises and the imperial gift have excited the vanity in her woman's
nature. For the first time in I know not how many years, she overslept
the hour of mass. It was probably ten o'clock when I knocked at her
chamber door. Toward eleven there was a movement in her room. Then I
opened the door to bid her good-morning, but she neither heard nor saw
anything, and knelt at the priedieu as if turned to stone. Before going
to sleep and early in the morning I expect such things, but when it is
almost noon! Her porridge still stood untouched on the table here, and
to-day there is no occasion for fasting. But I did not like to disturb
her, and perhaps she would still be kneeling before the Virgin's image
if the maid-servant hadn't blundered in to carry a bouquet which Herr
Peter Schlumperger's servant had brought. Then Barbara started up as
if a hornet had stung her. And how she looked at me! Once--I knew it
instantly--I had gazed into such a marvellously beautiful face, such
helpless blue eyes. Afterward I remembered who and where it had been.
God guard me from sinning against my own child, but that was exactly the
way the young girl looked who they--it was farther back in the past than
you can remember--burned here for a witch, as the halberdiers and monks
led her to the place of execution. Susanne Schindler--that was her
name--was the daughter of a respectable notary's clerk, who was obliged
to wander about the world a great deal, and perished in Hungary just as
she reached womanhood. Her mother had died when she was born, and an old
woman had taken care of her out of friendship. People called the lass
'beautiful Susel,' and she was wonderfully charming. Pink and white,
like the maiden in the fairy tale, and with glittering golden hair just
like my Wawerl's. The old woman with whom she lived--her aunt or
some other relative--had long practised the healing of all sorts of
infirmities, and when a young Spanish count, who had come here with the
Emperor Charles to the Reichstag in the year '31, fell under his horse
in leaping a ditch, his limbs were injured so that he could not use
them. As he did not recover under the care of the Knights of St. John,
who first nursed him, he went to the herb doctress, and she took charge
of him, and cured him, too, although the skill of the most famous
doctors and surgeons had failed to help him.

"But, to make amends, Satan, who probably had the largest share in the
miracle, visited him with the sorest evil, for 'beautiful Susel,' who
was the old woman's assistant, had so bewitched the young count that
he not only fell in love with her, but actually desired to make her his
wife.

"Then all the noble relatives at home interfered. The Holy Inquisition
commanded the investigation of the case, and sent a stern vicar
general to direct the proceedings of the Dominicans, who had seized the
temptress. Then it came to light that 'beautiful Susel' had bewitched
the luckless young count and robbed him of reason by her wicked arts.

"The old woman, whom they had also examined, escaped her just punishment
because she died of the plague, which was raging here at that time, but
'beautiful Susel' was burned, and I looked on while it was done.

"When the Dominicans had led her to the stake, she turned toward the
people who had flocked here from all quarters. Many doubtless pitied her
on account of her marvellous beauty, and because the devil had given her
the mask of the most touching kindness of heart; but she gazed directly
into my face with her large, blue eyes as I stood close by, and for
years I saw the witch's look distinctly before me. Yet what do we not at
last forget? And now it must happen that what reminded me of her
again is my own innocent child! Wawerl just looked into my eyes as if
'beautiful Susel' had risen from her grave. It was not long, yet it
seemed as if she shrank in terror from me, her own clear father. She
gazed up at me in helpless despair, as if she feared God and the world.

"I have learned little about shivering, but a chill ran down my spine.
Of course, I did not let her notice anything. Poor child! after the
honour bestowed yesterday, I thought there would be nothing to-day
except laughter and loud singing. But my grandmother used to say that
the grief which tortures a young girl--she herself knows not why--is
the hardest to bear, and then Barbara must now make up her mind about
marriage, for, besides you, there are Peter Schlumperger and young
Crafft to be considered.

"I remembered all this, and so, as usual, I took her face between my
hands to give her her morning kiss. She always offers me her lips,
but to-day she turned away so that my mouth barely brushed her cheeks.
'Women's whims!' I thought, and therefore let it pass. You can imagine
how glad I should have been to hear something more about yesterday
evening, but I made no objection when she wished to go to the chapel
at once, because she had overslept the hour of mass. She would be back
again before the porridge was heated. But the little bowl has stood
there probably three quarters of an hour, and we are still waiting in
vain."

Here he paused in his voluble flow of speech, and then burst forth
angrily: "The devil may understand such a girl's soul! Usually Wawerl
does just the opposite of what one expects; but if she does accept you,
she will--as an honest man I ought not to conceal it from you--she will
give you many a riddle to guess. Whims and freaks are as plenty with her
as buttercups in spring turf; but you can't find a more pious girl in
all Ratisbon. From ancient times the motto of the Blombergs has been
'Faith, Courage, and Honour,' and for that very reason it seems to
me highly improbable that Wawerl would advise you to accept an office
which, after all, will force you to yield to the will of heretical
superiors. The high pay alone will hardly win her."

"It will not?" asked Wolf in astonishment. "It is for her alone, not for
myself, that I value the increased income."

"For her?" repeated the old man, shrugging his shoulders incredulously.
"Open your eyes, and you will see what she cares for gold and jewels."

"The splendid bouquet there--do you suppose that she even looked at it?
Bright pinks, red roses, and stately lilies in the centre. Where were
they obtained, since April is scarcely past? And yet she threw the
costly birthday gift aside as if the flowers were apple parings. It was
not she, but I, who afterward put them in the pitcher, for I can't bear
to see any of God's creatures thirst, even though it is only a flower.
Besides, we both know that the fullest purse in the city, and a man
worthy of all respect to boot, are attached to the bouquet. Yes, indeed!
For a long time she has been unwilling to share my poverty, and if Herr
Peter had remained loyal to our holy religion, I would persuade her
myself."

Here, exhausted by his eager speech, he paused with flushed cheeks--for
it was a hot day--and raised his long arm to take his hat from the hook,
to refresh his dry palate at the tavern.

But, after a brief pause for reflection, he restored it to its place.

He had remembered that he had not stirred a finger that morning, and had
promised to have an inscription on a jug completed early the next
day. Besides, the baker had not been paid for four weeks, so, sighing
heavily, he dragged himself to the workbench to move the burin with a
weary hand.

Wolf had followed him with his eyes, and the sight of the chivalrous
hero, the father of the girl whom he loved, undertaking such a wretched
occupation, in such a mood, pierced him to the heart.

"Father Blomberg," he said warmly, putting his hand on his shoulder,
"let your graver rest. I am a suitor for your child's hand. We are old
friends, and if from my abundance I offer you----"

Here the hot-blooded old man furiously exclaimed: "Don't forget to whom
you are speaking, young fellow! How important he feels because he gets
his living at court! True, there is no abundance here; but I practise
this art merely because I choose, and because it cools my hot blood
in this lukewarm time of peace. But if on that account," he added
threateningly, while his prominent eyes protruded even farther than
usual, "you ever again venture to talk to me as though I were a day
labourer or a receiver of alms----"

Here he hesitated, for in the midst of his outbreak Barbara had
noiselessly entered the room. Now she approached him, and, in a more
gentle and affectionate tone than she had ever used before, entreated
him to rest.

The captain, groaning, shook his head, but Barbara stepped lightly upon
the low wooden bench on which he sat, drew his gray head toward her, and
tenderly stroked his hair and beard, whispering: "Rise, father, and let
somebody else finish the engraving, it is so cool and shady in the green
woods where the birds are singing, and only yesterday you praised the
refreshing drink at the Red Cock."

Here he impatiently, yet with a pleased senile, endeavoured to release
himself from her arms, but she interrupted his exclamation, "Don't
you know, Miss Thoughtless," with the whispered entreaty: "Here me out
first, father! Maestro Appenzelder asked me to add my voice to the boy
choir a few times more, and yesterday evening the treasurer told me that
the Queen of Hungary had commissioned him to give me as many ducats as
the boys received pennies."

She spoke the truth; but the old man laughed heartily in his deep tones,
cast a quick glance at Wolf, who was looking up at his weapons,
and, lowering his voice, cried gaily, "That's what I call a feminine
Chrysostomus or golden mouth, and I should think----"

Here he hesitated, for a doubt arose in his chivalrous mind whether it
was seemly for a young girl who belonged to a knightly race to accept
payment for her singing. But the thought that it came from the hand of
royalty, and that even the great Duke of Alba, the renowned Granvelles,
and so many princes, counts, and barons received golden wages for their
services from the Emperor's hand, put an end to these scruples.

So, in a happier frame of mind than he had experienced for a long time,
he said in a low tone, that he might not be understood by their guest:
"Greater people than we rejoice in the gifts which emperors and kings
bestow, and--we can use them, can't we?"

Then he rubbed his hands, laughed as if he had outwitted the people of
whom he was thinking, and whispered to his daughter: "The baker will
wonder when he gets paid this time in glittering gold, and the butcher
and Master Reinhard! My boots still creak softly when I step, and you
know what that means. The soles of your little shoes probably only sing,
but they, too, are not silent."

The old man, released from a heavy burden of care, laughed merrily again
at this jest, and then, raising his voice, told his daughter and Wolf
that he would first get a cool drink and then go outside the gate
wherever his lame foot might carry him. Would not the young nobleman
accompany him?

But Wolf preferred to stay with Barbara, that he might plead his cause
in person. There was something so quiet and diffident in her manner. If
she would not listen to him to-day, she never would. In saying farewell,
the captain remarked that he would not meddle in the affair of the
Council. Wawerl alone must decide that.

"When I return home," he concluded, "you will have come to an agreement,
and, whatever the determination may be, I shall be satisfied. Perhaps
some bright idea may come to me, too, over the wine. I'll go to the
Black Bear, where I always meet fellow-soldiers."

Then he raised his hand with a gay farewell salute, and left the room.




CHAPTER XVII.

As soon as the captain's limping steps died away on the stairs, Wolf
summoned all his courage and moved nearer to Barbara.

His heart throbbed anxiously as he told himself that the next few
minutes would decide his future destiny.

As he saw her before him, fairer than ever, with downcast eyes, silent
and timid, without a trace of the triumphant self-assurance which she
had gained during his absence, he firmly believed that he had made the
right choice, and that her consent would render him the most enviable
of happy mortals. If she refused him her hand--he felt this no less
plainly--his life would be forever robbed of light and joy.

True, he was no longer as blithe and full of hope as when he entered her
plain lodgings a short time before.

The doubt of the worthy man, behind whom the house door had just closed,
had awakened his doubts also. Yet what he now had it in his power to
offer, since his conversation with the syndic, was by no means trivial.
He must hold fast to it, and as he raised his eyes more freely to her
his courage increased, for she was still gazing at the floor in silent
submission, as if ready to commit her fate into his hands; nay, in the
brief seconds during which his eyes rested upon her, he perceived an
expression which seemed wholly alien to her features, and bestowed upon
this usually alert, self-assured, vivacious creature an air of weary
helplessness.

While he was generally obliged to maintain an attitude of defence toward
her, she now seemed to need friendly consolation. So, obeying a hasty
impulse, he warmly extended both hands, and in a gentle, sympathizing
tone exclaimed, "Wawerl, my dear girl, what troubles you?"

Then her glance met his, and her blue eyes flashed upon him with an
expression of defiant resistance; but he could not help thinking of the
young witch who was said to have resembled her, and a presentiment told
him that she was lost to him.

The confirmation of this foreboding was not delayed, for in a tone whose
repellent sternness startled him, she angrily burst forth: "What should
trouble me? It as ill becomes you to question me with such looks and
queries as it pleases me." Wolf, in bewilderment, assured her that she
had seemed to him especially charming in her gracious gentleness. If
anything had happened to cloud her fearless joyousness, let her forget
it, for the matter now to be considered concerned the happiness of two
human lives.

That was what she was saying to herself, Barbara replied in a more
friendly tone, and, with newly awakened hope, the young knight informed
her that the time had now come when, without offending against modesty,
he might call himself a "made man."

With increasing eagerness and confidence he then told her what the
councillor had offered. Without concealing her father's scruples,
he added the assurance that he felt perfectly secure against the
temptations of which there would certainly be no lack while he was in
the service of a Protestant magistracy.

"And when you, devout, pure, true girl, stand by my side," he concluded
with an ardour which surprised Barbara in this quiet, reserved man,
"when you are once mine, my one love, then I shall conquer the hardest
obstacle as if it were mere pastime, then I would not change places with
the Emperor, for then my happiness would be----"

Hitherto she had silently permitted him to speak, but now her cheeks
suddenly flamed with a deep flush, and she warmly interrupted: "You
deserve to be happy, Wolf, and I could desire nothing more ardently than
to see you glad and content; but you would never become so through me.
How pale you grow! For my sake, do not take it so much to heart; it
grieves me to see you suffer. Only believe that. It cuts me to the heart
to inflict such great sorrow upon one so loyal, good, and dear, who
values me so much more than I deserve."

Here Wolf, deeply agitated, wildly called her name, and besought her
not to cast aside so harshly the wealth of love and fidelity which he
offered.

His own anguish of soul, and the pain inflicted by the cruel blow which
crushed his dearest hopes, robbed him of fortitude and calmness. With
tears in his eyes, he threw himself on his knees before her and gazed
into her face with anxious entreaty, exclaiming brokenly: "Do not--do
not inflict this suffering upon me, Wawerl! Rob me of everything except
hope. Defer your acceptance until I can offer you a still fairer future,
only be merciful and leave me hope!"

Tears now began to glitter in Barbara's eyes also, and Wolf, noticing
it, hastened with reviving courage to assure her how little it would
cost him to reject, once for all, to please her, the tempting position
offered to him here. He could soon obtain a good office elsewhere, since
their Majesties were not only favourably disposed toward him, but now
toward her also. True, to him even the most brilliant external gifts of
life would be valueless and charmless without her love.

But here Barbara imperatively commanded him to rise, and not make his
own heart and hers still heavier without avail.

Wolf pressed his hands upon his temples as violently as if he feared
losing his senses; but the young girl voluntarily put her arm around
his shoulders, and said with sincere emotion: "Poor Wolf! I know how
thoroughly in earnest you are, but I dare not even leave you hope--I
neither can nor ought. Yet you may hear this: From my childhood you have
been dearer to me than any one else, and never shall I forget how firmly
you cling to me, how hard it is for you to give me up."

Then Sir Wolf vehemently asked to know what stood between them; and
Barbara, after a brief pause for reflection, answered, "Love for
another."

The confession pierced him like a dagger thrust, and he passionately
entreated her to tell him the name of the man who had defrauded him of
the happiness to which he possessed an older and better right than any
one else.

He paced the room with long strides as he spoke, gazing around him as if
he imagined that she had his rival concealed somewhere.

In doing so his glance fell upon Herr Schlumperger's bouquet, and he
wildly cried: "He? So, after all, wealth----"

But this was too much for Barbara, and she stopped him with the
exclamation: "Fool that you are! As if You did not know that I am not to
be bought for the paltry florins of a Ratisbon moneybag!"

But the next instant she had repented her outbreak, and in words so
loving and gentle, so tender and considerate that his heart melted and
he would fain have flung himself again at her feet, she explained to
him more particularly why she was obliged to inflict this suffering upon
him.

Her heart was no longer free, and precisely because he was worthy of the
whole affection of a loyal heart she would not repay him in worthless
metal for the pure gold of his love. She was no prophetess, yet she knew
full well that some day he would bless this hour. What she concealed
from every one, even her father, as an inviolable secret, she had
confessed to him because he deserved her confidence.

Then she began to speak of Dr. Hiltner's offer, and discussed its pros
and cons with interest as warm as if her own fate was to be associated
with his.

The result was that she dissuaded him from settling in Ratisbon. She
expected higher achievements from him than he could attain here among
the Protestants, who, on account of his faith, would place many a
stumbling-block in his way.

Then, changing her businesslike tone, she went on with greater warmth to
urge him, for her sake, and that he might be the same to her as ever, to
remain loyal to the religion they both professed. She could not fulfil
his hopes, it is true, but her thoughts would often dwell with him and
her wishes would follow him everywhere. His place was at court, where
some day he would win a distinguished position, and nothing could render
her happier than the news that he had attained the highest honour,
esteem, and fame.

How gentle and kind all this sounded! Wolf had not imagined that she
could be so thoughtful, so forgetful of self, and so affectionate in
her sympathy. He hung upon her lips in silent admiration, yet it was
impossible for him to determine whether this sisterly affection from
Barbara was pouring balm or acrid lye upon his wounds.

Positively as she had refused to answer his question concerning the
happy mortal whom she preferred to him, Wolf could not help secretly
searching for him.

Agitated and tortured to the verge of despair, even the friendliness
with which she was trying to sweeten his cruel fate became unbearable,
and while she was entreating him to continue to care for her and to
remain on the same terms of intimacy with her father and herself, he
suddenly seized her hand, covered it with ardent kisses, and then,
without a farewell word, hastily left the room.

When Barbara was alone she retired into the bow-window and fell into a
silent reverie, during which she often shook her head, as if amazed at
herself, and often curled her full lips in a haughty smile.

The maid-servant brought in the modest meal.

Her father had forgotten it, but he would undoubtedly find more
substantial viands at the Black Bear. Barbara was speedily satisfied.
How poorly the food was cooked, how unappetizing was the serving! When
the maid had removed the dishes, Barbara continued her reverie, and even
her father had never gazed into vacancy with such gloomy earnestness.

What would she now have given for a mother, a reliable, faithful
confidante! But she had none; and Wolf, on whose unselfish love she
could depend, was the last person whom she could initiate into her
secret.

Her father!

If she had confided to him the matter which so deeply troubled her and
yet filled her with the greatest pride, the poor old warrior, who valued
honour far more than life, would have turned her out of the house.

Early that morning she had averted her lips from his because she felt
as if the Emperor's kiss had consecrated them. She was still under the
mastery of the feeling that some disagreeable dream had borne her back
to these miserable rooms, while her true place was in the magnificent
apartments of royalty.

She had slept too late to attend mass, and therefore went to the private
chapel, the abode of the only confidante to whom she could open her
whole heart without reserve or timidity--the Mother of God.

She had done this with entire devotion, and endeavoured to reflect upon
what had happened and what obligations she must meet. But she had had
little success, for as soon as she began to think, her august lover rose
before her eyes, she imagined that she heard his tender words, and her
mind wandered to the future.

Only she had clearly perceived that she had lost something infinitely
great, and obtained in its place something that was far more exquisite,
that she had been deemed worthy of a loftier honour, a richer happiness
than any one else.

Ah, yes, she was happy, more than happy, and yet not entirely so, for
happiness must be bright, and a dark, harassing shadow fell again and
again over the sunny enthusiasm which irradiated her nature and lent her
a haughtier bearing.

She ascribed it to the novelty of her elevation to a height of which she
had never dreamed. Eyes accustomed to twilight must also endure pain,
she told herself, ere they became used to the brilliance of the sun.

Perhaps Heaven, in return for such superabundant gifts, demanded a
