the meantime, Lord Huntinglen kneeled before James, in his turn, and
said--"May it please your Majesty to remember, that upon one certain
occasion you did promise to grant me a boon every year of your sacred
life?"

"I mind it weel, man," answered James, "I mind it weel, and good reason
why--it was when you unclasped the fause traitor Ruthven's fangs
from about our royal throat, and drove your dirk into him like a true
subject. We did then, as you remind us, (whilk was unnecessary,) being
partly beside ourselves with joy at our liberation, promise we would
grant you a free boon every year; whilk promise, on our coming
to menseful possession of our royal faculties, we did confirm,
_restrictive_ always and _conditionaliter_, that your lordship's demand
should be such as we, in our royal discretion, should think reasonable."

"Even so, gracious sovereign," said the old earl, "and may I yet
farther crave to know if I have ever exceeded the bounds of your royal
benevolence?"

"By my word, man, no!'" said the king; "I cannot remember you have asked
much for yourself, if it be not a dog or a hawk, or a buck out of our
park at Theobald's, or such like. But to what serves this preface?"

"To the boon to which I am now to ask of your Grace," said Lord
Huntinglen; "which is, that your Majesty would be pleased, on the
instant, to look at the placet of Lord Glenvarloch, and do upon it
what your own just and royal nature shall think meet and just, without
reference to your Secretary or any other of your Council."

"By my saul, my lord, this is strange," said the king; "ye are pleading
for the son of your enemy!"

"Of one who WAS my enemy till your Majesty made him my friend," answered
Lord Huntinglen.

"Weel spoken, my lord!" said the king; "and with, a true Christian
spirit. And, respecting the Supplication of this young man, I partly
guess where the matter lies; and in plain troth I had promised to George
Heriot to be good to the lad--But then, here the shoe pinches. Steenie
and Babie Charles cannot abide him--neither can your own son, my lord;
and so, methinks, he had better go down to Scotland before he comes
toill luck by them."

"My son, an it please your Majesty, so far as he is concerned, shall not
direct my doings," said the earl, "nor any wild-headed young man of them
all."

"Why, neither shall they mine," replied the monarch; "by my father's
saul, none of them all shall play Rex with me--I will do what I will,
and what I ought, like a free king."

"Your Majesty will then grant me my boon?" said the Lord Huntinglen.

"Ay, marry will I--marry will I," said the king; "but follow me this
way, man, where we may be more private."

He led Lord Huntinglen with rather a hurried step through the courtiers,
all of whom gazed earnestly on this unwonted scene, as is the fashion of
all Courts on similar occasions. The king passed into a little cabinet,
and bade, in the first moment, Lord Huntinglen lock or bar the door; but
countermanded his direction in the next, saying,--"No, no, no--bread o'
life, man, I am a free king--will do what I will and what I should--I am
_justus et tenax propositi_, man--nevertheless, keep by the door, Lord
Huntinglen, in case Steenie should come in with his mad humour."

"O my poor master!" groaned the Earl of Huntinglen. "When you were in
your own cold country, you had warmer blood in your veins."

The king hastily looked over the petition or memorial, every now and
then glancing his eye towards the door, and then sinking it hastily
on the paper, ashamed that Lord Huntinglen, whom he respected, should
suspect him of timidity.

"To grant the truth," he said, after he had finished his hasty perusal,
"this is a hard case; and harder than it was represented to me, though I
had some inkling of it before. And so the lad only wants payment of the
siller due from us, in order to reclaim his paternal estate? But then,
Huntinglen, the lad will have other debts--and why burden himsell with
sae mony acres of barren woodland? let the land gang, man, let the land
gang; Steenie has the promise of it from our Scottish Chancellor--it is
the best hunting-ground in Scotland--and Babie Charles and Steenie want
to kill a buck there this next year--they maun hae the land--they maun
hae the land; and our debt shall be paid to the young man plack and
bawbee, and he may have the spending of it at our Court; or if he has
such an eard hunger, wouns! man, we'll stuff his stomach with English
land, which is worth twice as much, ay, ten times as much, as these
accursed hills and heughs, and mosses and muirs, that he is sae keen
after."

All this while the poor king ambled up and down the apartment in a
piteous state of uncertainty, which was made more ridiculous by his
shambling circular mode of managing his legs, and his ungainly fashion
on such occasions of fiddling with the bunches of ribbons which fastened
the lower part of his dress.

Lord Huntinglen listened with great composure, and answered, "An it
please your Majesty, there was an answer yielded by Naboth when
Ahab coveted his vineyard--' The Lord forbid that I should give the
inheritance of my fathers unto thee.'"

"Ey, my lord--ey, my lord!" ejaculated James, while all the colour
mounted both to his cheek and nose; "I hope ye mean not to teach me
divinity? Ye need not fear, my lord, that I will shun to do justice to
every man; and, since your lordship will give me no help to take up
this in a more peaceful manner--whilk, methinks, would be better for the
young man, as I said before,--why--since it maun be so--'sdeath, I am
a free king, man, and he shall have his money and redeem his land, and
make a kirk and a miln of it, an he will." So saying, he hastily wrote
an order on the Scottish Exchequer for the sum in question, and then
added, "How they are to pay it, I see not; but I warrant he will find
money on the order among the goldsmiths, who can find it for every one
but me.--And now you see, my Lord of Huntinglen, that I am neither an
untrue man, to deny you the boon whilk I became bound for, nor an Ahab,
to covet Naboth's vineyard; nor a mere nose-of-wax, to be twisted this
way and that, by favourites and counsellors at their pleasure. I think
you will grant now that I am none of those?"

"You are my own native and noble prince," said Huntinglen, as he knelt
to kiss the royal hand--"just and generous, whenever you listen to the
workings of your own heart."

"Ay, ay," said the king, laughing good-naturedly, as he raised his
faithful servant from the ground, "that is what ye all say when I do any
thing to please ye. There--there, take the sign-manual, and away with
you and this young fellow. I wonder Steenie and Babie Charles have not
broken in on us before now."

Lord Huntinglen hastened from the cabinet, foreseeing a scene at which
he was unwilling to be present, but which sometimes occurred when James
roused himself so far as to exert his own free will, of which he boasted
so much, in spite of that of his imperious favourite Steenie, as he
called the Duke of Buckingham, from a supposed resemblance betwixt
his very handsome countenance, and that with which the Italian artists
represented the protomartyr Stephen. In fact, the haughty favourite,
who had the unusual good fortune to stand as high in the opinion of the
heir-apparent as of the existing monarch, had considerably diminished in
his respect towards the latter; and it was apparent, to the more
shrewd courtiers, that James endured his domination rather from habit,
timidity, and a dread of encountering his stormy passions, than from any
heartfelt continuation of regard towards him, whose greatness had been
the work of his own hands. To save himself the pain of seeing what was
likely to take place on the duke's return, and to preserve the king from
the additional humiliation which the presence of such a witness must
have occasioned, the earl left the cabinet as speedily as possible,
having first carefully pocketed the important sign-manual.

No sooner had he entered the presence-room, than he hastily sought Lord
Glenvarloch, who had withdrawn into the embrasure of one of the windows,
from the general gaze of men who seemed disposed only to afford him the
notice which arises from surprise and curiosity, and, taking him by
the arm, without speaking, led him out of the presence-chamber into the
first ante-room. Here they found the worthy goldsmith, who approached
them with looks of curiosity, which were checked by the old lord, who
said hastily, "All is well.--Is your barge in waiting?" Heriot answered
in the affirmative. "Then," said Lord Huntinglen, "you shall give me a
cast in it, as the watermen say; and I, in requital, will give you both
your dinner; for we must have some conversation together."

They both followed the earl without speaking, and were in the second
ante-room when the important annunciation of the ushers, and the hasty
murmur with which all made ample way as the company repeated to each
other,--"The Duke--the Duke!" made them aware of the approach of the
omnipotent favourite.

He entered, that unhappy minion of Court favour, sumptuously dressed
in the picturesque attire which will live for ever on the canvas of
Vandyke, and which marks so well the proud age, when aristocracy, though
undermined and nodding to its fall, still, by external show and profuse
expense, endeavoured to assert its paramount superiority over the
inferior orders. The handsome and commanding countenance, stately form,
and graceful action and manners of the Duke of Buckingham, made him
become that picturesque dress beyond any man of his time. At present,
however, his countenance seemed discomposed, his dress a little
more disordered than became the place, his step hasty, and his voice
imperative.

All marked the angry spot upon his brow, and bore back so suddenly
to make way for him, that the Earl of Huntinglen, who affected no
extraordinary haste on the occasion, with his companions, who could not,
if they would, have decently left him, remained as it were by themselves
in the middle of the room, and in the very path of the angry favourite.
He touched his cap sternly as he looked on Huntinglen, but unbonneted
to Heriot, and sunk his beaver, with its shadowy plume, as low as the
floor, with a profound air of mock respect. In returning his greeting,
which he did simply and unaffectedly, the citizen only said,--"Too much
courtesy, my lord duke, is often the reverse of kindness."

"I grieve you should think so, Master Heriot," answered the duke; "I
only meant, by my homage, to claim your protection, sir--your patronage.
You are become, I understand, a solicitor of suits--a promoter--an
undertaker--a fautor of court suitors of merit and quality, who chance
to be pennyless. I trust your bags will bear you out in your new boast."

"They will bear me the farther, my lord duke," answered the goldsmith,
"that my boast is but small."

"O, you do yourself less than justice, my good Master Heriot,"
continued the duke, in the same tone of irony; "you have a marvellous
court-faction, to be the son of an Edinburgh tinker. Have the goodness
to prefer me to the knowledge of the high-born nobleman who is honoured
and advantaged by your patronage."

"That shall be my task," said Lord Huntinglen, with emphasis. "My
lord duke, I desire you to know Nigel Olifaunt, Lord Glenvarloch,
representative of one of the most ancient and powerful baronial houses
in Scotland.--Lord Glenvarloch, I present you to his Grace the Duke of
Buckingham, representative of Sir George Villiers, Knight of Brookesby,
in the county of Leicester."

The duke coloured still more high as he bowed to Lord Glenvarloch
scornfully, a courtesy which the other returned haughtily, and with
restrained indignation. "We know each other, then," said the duke, after
a moment's pause; and as if he had seen something in the young nobleman
which merited more serious notice than the bitter raillery with which he
had commenced--"we know each other--and you know me, my lord, for your
enemy."

"I thank you for your plainness, my lord duke," replied Nigel; "an open
enemy is better than a hollow friend."

"For you, my Lord Huntinglen," said the duke, "methinks you have but now
overstepped the limits of the indulgence permitted to you, as the father
of the prince's friend, and my own."

"By my word, my lord duke," replied the earl, "it is easy for any one
to outstep boundaries, of the existence of which he was not aware. It is
neither to secure my protection nor approbation, that my son keeps such
exalted company."

"O, my lord, we know you, and indulge you," said the duke; "you are one
of those who presume for a life-long upon the merit of one good action."

"In faith, my lord, and if it be so," said the old earl, "I have at
least the advantage of such as presume more than I do, without having
done any action of merit whatever. But I mean not to quarrel with you,
my lord--we can neither be friends nor enemies--you have your path, and
I have mine."

Buckingham only replied by throwing on his bonnet, and shaking its lofty
plume with a careless and scornful toss of the head. They parted thus;
the duke walking onwards through the apartments, and the others leaving
the Palace and repairing to Whitehall Stairs, where they embarked on
board the barge of the citizen.




CHAPTER X


  Bid not thy fortune troll upon the wheels
  Of yonder dancing cubes of mottled bone;
  And drown it not, like Egypt's royal harlot,
  Dissolving her rich pearl in the brimm'd wine-cup.
  These are the arts, Lothario, which shrink acres
  Into brief yards--bring sterling pounds to farthings,
  Credit to infamy; and the poor gull,
  Who might have lived an honour'd, easy life,
  To ruin, and an unregarded grave.
              _The Changes._

When they were fairly embarked on the Thames, the earl took from his
pocket the Supplication, and, pointing out to George Heriot the royal
warrant indorsed thereon, asked him, if it were in due and regular form?
The worthy citizen hastily read it over, thrust forth his hand as if to
congratulate the Lord Glenvarloch, then checked himself, pulled out
his barnacles, (a present from old David Ramsay,) and again perused
the warrant with the most business-like and critical attention. "It
is strictly correct and formal," he said, looking to the Earl of
Huntinglen; "and I sincerely rejoice at it."

"I doubt nothing of its formality," said the earl; "the king understands
business well, and, if he does not practise it often, it is only because
indolence obscures parts which are naturally well qualified for the
discharge of affairs. But what is next to be done for our young friend,
Master Heriot? You know how I am circumstanced. Scottish lords living at
the English Court have seldom command of money; yet, unless a sum can be
presently raised on this warrant, matters standing as you hastily
hinted to me, the mortgage, wadset, or whatever it is called, will be
foreclosed."

"It is true," said Heriot, in some embarrassment; "there is a large sum
wanted in redemption--yet, if it is not raised, there will be an expiry
of the legal, as our lawyers call it, and the estate will be evicted."

"My noble--my worthy friends, who have taken up my cause so
undeservedly, so unexpectedly," said Nigel, "do not let me be a burden
on your kindness. You have already done too much where nothing was
merited."

"Peace, man, peace," said Lord Huntinglen, "and let old Heriot and I
puzzle this scent out. He is about to open--hark to him!"

"My lord," said the citizen, "the Duke of Buckingham sneers at our city
money-bags; yet they can sometimes open, to prop a falling and a noble
house."

"We know they can," said Lord Huntinglen--"mind not Buckingham, he is a
Peg-a-Ramsay--and now for the remedy."

"I partly hinted to Lord Glenvarloch already," said Heriot, "that the
redemption money might be advanced upon such a warrant as the present,
and I will engage my credit that it can. But then, in order to secure
the lender, he must come in the shoes of the creditor to whom he
advances payment."

"Come in his shoes!" replied the earl; "why, what have boots or shoes to
do with this matter, my good friend?"

"It is a law phrase, my lord. My experience has made me pick up a few of
them," said Heriot.

"Ay, and of better things along with them, Master George," replied Lord
Huntinglen; "but what means it?"

"Simply this," resumed the citizen; "that the lender of this money will
transact with the holder of the mortgage, or wadset, over the estate of
Glenvarloch, and obtain from him such a conveyance to his right as
shall leave the lands pledged for the debt, in case the warrant upon
the Scottish Exchequer should prove unproductive. I fear, in this
uncertainty of public credit, that without some such counter security,
it will be very difficult to find so large a sum."

"Ho la!" said the Earl of Huntinglen, "halt there! a thought
strikes me.--What if the new creditor should admire the estate as a
hunting-field, as much as my Lord Grace of Buckingham seems to do, and
should wish to kill a buck there in the summer season? It seems to
me, that on your plan, Master George, our new friend will be as well
entitled to block Lord Glenvarloch out of his inheritance as the present
holder of the mortgage."

The citizen laughed. "I will engage," he said, "that the keenest
sportsman to whom I may apply on this occasion, shall not have a
thought beyond the Lord Mayor's Easter-Hunt, in Epping Forest. But your
lordship's caution is reasonable. The creditor must be bound to allow
Lord Glenvarloch sufficient time to redeem his estate by means of
the royal warrant, and must wave in his favour the right of instant
foreclosure, which may be, I should think, the more easily managed, as
the right of redemption must be exercised in his own name."

"But where shall we find a person in London fit to draw the necessary
writings?" said the earl. "If my old friend Sir John Skene of Halyards
had lived, we should have had his advice; but time presses, and--"

"I know," said Heriot, "an orphan lad, a scrivener, that dwells by
Temple Bar; he can draw deeds both after the English and Scottish
fashion, and I have trusted him often in matters of weight and of
importance. I will send one of my serving-men for him, and the mutual
deeds may be executed in your lordship's presence; for, as things stand,
there should be no delay." His lordship readily assented; and, as they
now landed upon the private stairs leading down to the river from the
gardens of the handsome hotel which he inhabited, the messenger was
dispatched without loss of time.

Nigel, who had sat almost stupefied while these zealous friends
volunteered for him in arranging the measures by which his fortune was
to be disembarrassed, now made another eager attempt to force upon
them his broken expressions of thanks and gratitude. But he was again
silenced by Lord Huntinglen, who declared he would not hear a word on
that topic, and proposed instead, that they should take a turn in the
pleached alley, or sit upon the stone bench which overlooked the Thames,
until his son's arrival should give the signal for dinner.

"I desire to introduce Dalgarno and Lord Glenvarloch to each other," he
said, "as two who will be near neighbours, and I trust will be more kind
ones than their fathers were formerly. There is but three Scots miles
betwixt the castles, and the turrets of the one are visible from the
battlements of the other."

The old earl was silent for a moment, and appeared to muse upon the
recollections which the vicinity of the castles had summoned up.

"Does Lord Dalgarno follow the Court to Newmarket next week?" said
Heriot, by way of removing the conversation.

"He proposes so, I think," answered Lord Huntinglen, relapsed into
his reverie for a minute or two, and then addressed Nigel somewhat
abruptly--

"My young friend, when you attain possession of your inheritance, as I
hope you soon will, I trust you will not add one to the idle followers
of the Court, but reside on your patrimonial estate, cherish your
ancient tenants, relieve and assist your poor kinsmen, protect the poor
against subaltern oppression, and do what our fathers used to do, with
fewer lights and with less means than we have."

"And yet the advice to keep the country," said Heriot, "comes from an
ancient and constant ornament of the Court."

"From an old courtier, indeed," said the earl, "and the first of my
family that could so write himself--my grey beard falls on a cambric
ruff and a silken doublet--my father's descended upon a buff coat and
a breast-plate. I would not that those days of battle returned; but I
should love well to make the oaks of my old forest of Dalgarno ring once
more with halloo, and horn, and hound, and to have the old stone-arched
hall return the hearty shout of my vassals and tenants, as the bicker
and the quaigh walked their rounds amongst them. I should like to see
the broad Tay once more before I die--not even the Thames can match it,
in my mind."

"Surely, my lord," said the citizen, "all this might be easily done--it
costs but a moment's resolution, and the journey of some brief days, and
you will be where you desire to be--what is there to prevent you?"

"Habits, Master George, habits," replied the earl, "which to young men
are like threads of silk, so lightly are they worn, so soon broken; but
which hang on our old limbs as if time had stiffened them into gyves of
iron. To go to Scotland for a brief space were but labour in vain; and
when I think of abiding there, I cannot bring myself to leave my old
master, to whom I fancy myself sometimes useful, and whose weal and
woe I have shared for so many years. But Dalgarno shall be a Scottish
noble."

"Has he visited the North?" said Heriot.

"He was there last year and made such a report of the country, that the
prince has expressed a longing to see it."

"Lord Dalgarno is in high grace with his Highness and the Duke of
Buckingham?" observed the goldsmith.

"He is so," answered the earl,--"I pray it may be for the advantage of
them all. The prince is just and equitable in his sentiments, though
cold and stately in his manners, and very obstinate in his most trifling
purposes; and the duke, noble and gallant, and generous and open, is
fiery, ambitious, and impetuous. Dalgarno has none of these faults,
and such as he may have of his own, may perchance be corrected by the
society in which he moves.--See, here he comes."

Lord Dalgarno accordingly advanced from the farther end of the alley to
the bench on which his father and his guests were seated, so that Nigel
had full leisure to peruse his countenance and figure. He was dressed
point-device, and almost to extremity, in the splendid fashion of the
time, which suited well with his age, probably about five-and-twenty,
with a noble form and fine countenance, in which last could easily be
traced the manly features of his father, but softened by a more
habitual air of assiduous courtesy than the stubborn old earl had ever
condescended to assume towards the world in general. In other respects,
his address was gallant, free, and unencumbered either by pride or
ceremony--far remote certainly from the charge either of haughty
coldness or forward impetuosity; and so far his father had justly freed
him from the marked faults which he ascribed to the manners of the
prince and his favourite Buckingham.

While the old earl presented his young acquaintance Lord Glenvarloch to
his son, as one whom he would have him love and honour, Nigel marked the
countenance of Lord Dalgarno closely, to see if he could detect aught
of that secret dislike which the king had, in one of his broken
expostulations, seemed to intimate, as arising from a clashing of
interests betwixt his new friend and the great Buckingham. But nothing
of this was visible; on the contrary, Lord Dalgarno received his new
acquaintance with the open frankness and courtesy which makes conquest
at once, when addressed to the feelings of an ingenuous young man.

It need hardly be told that his open and friendly address met equally
ready and cheerful acceptation from Nigel Olifaunt. For many months, and
while a youth not much above two-and-twenty, he had been restrained by
circumstances from the conversation of his equals. When, on his father's
sudden death, he left the Low Countries for Scotland, he had found
himself involved, to all appearance inextricably, with the details
of the law, all of which threatened to end in the alienation of the
patrimony which should support his hereditary rank. His term of sincere
mourning, joined to injured pride, and the swelling of the heart under
unexpected and undeserved misfortune, together with the uncertainty
attending the issue of his affairs, had induced the young Lord of
Glenvarloch to live, while in Scotland, in a very private and reserved
manner. How he had passed his time in London, the reader is acquainted
with. But this melancholy and secluded course of life was neither
agreeable to his age nor to his temper, which was genial and sociable.
He hailed, therefore, with sincere pleasure, the approaches which a
young man of his own age and rank made towards him; and when he had
exchanged with Lord Dalgarno some of those words and signals by which,
as surely as by those of freemasonry, young people recognise a mutual
wish to be agreeable to each other, it seemed as if the two noblemen had
been acquainted for some time.

Just as this tacit intercourse had been established, one of Lord
Huntinglen's attendants came down the alley, marshalling onwards a
man dressed in black buckram, who followed him with tolerable speed,
considering that, according to his sense of reverence and propriety, he
kept his body bent and parallel to the horizon from the moment that he
came in sight of the company to which he was about to be presented.

"Who is this, you cuckoldy knave," said the old lord, who had retained
the keen appetite and impatience of a Scottish baron even during a long
alienation from his native country; "and why does John Cook, with a
murrain to him, keep back dinner?"

"I believe we are ourselves responsible for this person's intrusion,"
said George Heriot; "this is the scrivener whom we desired to see.--Look
up, man, and see us in the face as an honest man should, instead of
beating thy noddle charged against us thus, like a battering-ram."

The scrivener did look up accordingly, with the action of an automaton
which suddenly obeys the impulse of a pressed spring. But, strange to
tell, not even the haste he had made to attend his patron's mandate,
a business, as Master Heriot's message expressed, of weight and
importance--nay not even the state of depression in which, out of sheer
humility, doubtless, he had his head stooped to the earth, from the
moment he had trod the demesnes of the Earl of Huntinglen, had called
any colour into his countenance. The drops stood on his brow from haste
and toil, but his cheek was still pale and tallow-coloured as before;
nay, what seemed stranger, his very hair, when he raised his head, hung
down on either cheek as straight and sleek and undisturbed as it was
when we first introduced him to our readers, seated at his quiet and
humble desk.

Lord Dalgarno could not forbear a stifled laugh at the ridiculous and
puritanical figure which presented itself like a starved anatomy to the
company, and whispered at the same time into Lord Glenvarloch's ear--

     "The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon,
      Where got'st thou that goose-look?"

Nigel was too little acquainted with the English stage to understand a
quotation which had already grown matter of common allusion in London.
Lord Dalgarno saw that he was not understood, and continued, "That
fellow, by his visage, should either be a saint, or a most hypocritical
rogue--and such is my excellent opinion of human nature, that I always
suspect the worst. But they seem deep in business. Will you take a
turn with me in the garden, my lord, or will you remain a member of the
serious conclave?"

"With you, my lord, most willingly," said Nigel; and they were turning
away accordingly, when George Heriot, with the formality belonging
to his station, observed, that, "as their business concerned Lord
Glenvarloch, he had better remain, to make himself master of it, and
witness to it."

"My presence is utterly needless, my good lord;-and, my best friend,
Master Heriot," said the young nobleman, "I shall understand nothing
the better for cumbering you with my ignorance in these matters; and can
only say at the end, as I now say at the beginning, that I dare not take
the helm out of the hand of the kind pilots who have already guided
my course within sight of a fair and unhoped-for haven. Whatever you
recommend to me as fitting, I shall sign and seal; and the import of the
deeds I shall better learn by a brief explanation from Master Heriot, if
he will bestow so much trouble in my behalf, than by a thousand learned
words and law terms from this person of skill."

"He is right," said Lord Huntinglen; "our young friend is right, in
confiding these matters to you and me, Master George Heriot--he has not
misplaced his confidence."

Master George Heriot cast a long look after the two young noblemen, who
had now walked down the alley arm-in-arm, and at length said, "He hath
not, indeed, misplaced his confidence, as your lordship well and truly
says--but, nevertheless, he is not in the right path; for it behoves
every man to become acquainted with his own affairs, so soon as he hath
any that are worth attending to."

When he had made this observation, they applied themselves, with the
scrivener, to look into various papers, and to direct in what manner
writings should be drawn, which might at once afford sufficient security
to those who were to advance the money, and at the same time preserve
the right of the young nobleman to redeem the family estate, provided he
should obtain the means of doing so, by the expected reimbursement from
the Scottish Exchequer, or otherwise. It is needless to enter into those
details. But it is not unimportant to mention, as an illustration of
character, that Heriot went into the most minute legal details with a
precision which showed that experience had made him master even of the
intricacies of Scottish conveyancing; and that the Earl of Huntinglen,
though far less acquainted with technical detail, suffered no step of
the business to pass over, until he had attained a general but distinct
idea of its import and its propriety.

They seemed to be admirably seconded in their benevolent intentions
towards the young Lord Glenvarloch, by the skill and eager zeal of the
scrivener, whom Heriot had introduced to this piece of business, the
most important which Andrew had ever transacted in his life, and the
particulars of which were moreover agitated in his presence between an
actual earl, and one whose wealth and character might entitle him to be
an alderman of his ward, if not to be lord mayor, in his turn.

While they were thus in eager conversation on business, the good earl
even forgetting the calls of his appetite, and the delay of dinner, in
his anxiety to see that the scrivener received proper instructions, and
that all was rightly weighed and considered, before dismissing him to
engross the necessary deeds, the two young men walked together on the
terrace which overhung the river, and talked on the topics which Lord
Dalgarno, the elder, and the more experienced, thought most likely to
interest his new friend.

These naturally regarded the pleasures attending a Court life; and Lord
Dalgarno expressed much surprise at understanding that Nigel proposed an
instant return to Scotland.

"You are jesting with me," he said. "All the Court rings--it is needless
to mince it--with the extraordinary success of your suit--against the
highest interest, it is said, now influencing the horizon at Whitehall.
Men think of you--talk of you--fix their eyes on you--ask each other,
who is this young Scottish lord, who has stepped so far in a single day?
They augur, in whispers to each other, how high and how far you may push
your fortune--and all that you design to make of it, is, to return to
Scotland, eat raw oatmeal cakes, baked upon a peat-fire, have your hand
shaken by every loon of a blue-bonnet who chooses to dub you cousin,
though your relationship comes by Noah; drink Scots twopenny ale,
eat half-starved red-deer venison, when you can kill it, ride upon a
galloway, and be called my right honourable and maist worthy lord!"

"There is no great gaiety in the prospect before me, I confess," said
Lord Glenvarloch, "even if your father and good Master Heriot should
succeed in putting my affairs on some footing of plausible hope. And yet
I trust to do something for my vassals as my ancestors before me, and to
teach my children, as I have myself been taught, to make some personal
sacrifices, if they be necessary, in order to maintain with dignity the
situation in which they are placed by Providence."

Lord Dalgarno, after having once or twice stifled his laughter during
this speech, at length broke out into a fit of mirth, so hearty and
so resistless, that, angry as he was, the call of sympathy swept Nigel
along with him, and despite of himself, he could not forbear to join
in a burst of laughter, which he thought not only causeless, but almost
impertinent.

He soon recollected himself, however, and said, in a tone qualified to
allay Lord Dalgarno's extreme mirth: "This is all well, my lord; but how
am I to understand your merriment?" Lord Dalgarno only answered him with
redoubled peals of laughter, and at length held by Lord Glenvarloch's
cloak, as if to prevent his falling down on the ground, in the extremity
of his convulsion.

At length, while Nigel stood half abashed, half angry, at becoming thus
the subject of his new acquaintance's ridicule, and was only restrained
from expressing his resentment against the son, by a sense of the
obligations he owed the father, Lord Dalgarno recovered himself, and
spoke in a half-broken voice, his eyes still running with tears: "I
crave your pardon, my dear Lord Glenvarloch--ten thousand times do I
crave your pardon. But that last picture of rural dignity, accompanied
by your grave and angry surprise at my laughing at what would have made
any court-bred hound laugh, that had but so much as bayed the moon once
from the court-yard at Whitehall, totally overcame me. Why, my liefest
and dearest lord, you, a young and handsome fellow, with high birth, a
title, and the name of an estate, so well received by the king at your
first starting, as makes your further progress scarce matter of doubt,
if you know how to improve it--for the king has already said you are a
'braw lad, and well studied in the more humane letters'--you, too, whom
all the women, and the very marked beauties of the Court, desire to see,
because you came from Leyden, were born in Scotland, and have gained a
hard-contested suit in England--you, I say, with a person like a prince,
an eye of fire, and a wit as quick, to think of throwing your cards on
the table when the game is in your very hand, running back to the
frozen north, and marrying--let me see--a tall, stalking, blue-eyed,
fair-skinned bony wench, with eighteen quarters in her scutcheon, a sort
of Lot's wife, newly descended from her pedestal, and with her to shut
yourself up in your tapestried chamber! Uh, gad!--Swouns, I shall never
survive the idea!"

It is seldom that youth, however high-minded, is able, from mere
strength of character and principle, to support itself against the force
of ridicule. Half angry, half mortified, and, to say truth, half ashamed
of his more manly and better purpose, Nigel was unable, and flattered
himself it was unnecessary, to play the part of a rigid moral patriot,
in presence of a young man whose current fluency of language, as well as
his experience in the highest circles of society, gave him, in spite of
Nigel's better and firmer thoughts, a temporary ascendency over him. He
sought, therefore, to compromise the matter, and avoid farther debate,
by frankly owning, that, if to return to his own country were not his
choice, it was at least a matter of necessity. "His affairs," he said,
"were unsettled, his income precarious."

"And where is he whose affairs are settled, or whose income is less than
precarious, that is to be found in attendance on the Court?" said Lord
Dalgarno; "all are either losing or winning. Those who have wealth, come
hither to get rid of it, while the happy gallants, who, like you and I,
dear Glenvarloch, have little or none, have every chance to be sharers
in their spoils."

"I have no ambition of that sort," said Nigel, "and if I had, I must
tell you plainly, Lord Dalgarno, I have not the means to do so. I can
scarce as yet call the suit I wear my own; I owe it, and I do riot blush
to say so, to the friendship of yonder good man."

"I will not laugh again, if I can help it," said Lord Dalgarno.
"But, Lord! that you should have gone to a wealthy goldsmith for your
habit--why, I could have brought you to an honest, confiding tailor,
who should have furnished you with half-a-dozen, merely for love of the
little word, 'lordship,' which you place before your name;--and then
your goldsmith, if he be really a friendly goldsmith, should have
equipped you with such a purse of fair rose-nobles as would have bought
you thrice as many suits, or done better things for you."

"I do not understand these fashions, my lord," said Nigel, his
displeasure mastering his shame; "were I to attend the Court of my
sovereign, it should be when I could maintain, without shifting or
borrowing, the dress and retinue which my rank requires."

"Which my rank requires!" said Lord Dalgarno, repeating his last words;
"that, now, is as good as if my father had spoke it. I fancy you
would love to move to Court with him, followed by a round score of
old blue-bottles, with white heads and red noses, with bucklers and
broadswords, which their hands, trembling betwixt age and strong waters,
can make no use of--as many huge silver badges on their arms, to
show whose fools they are, as would furnish forth a court cupboard of
plate--rogues fit for nothing but to fill our ante-chambers with the
flavour of onions and genievre--pah!"

"The poor knaves!" said Lord Glenvarloch; "they have served your father,
it may be, in the wars. What would become of them were he to turn them
off?"

"Why, let them go to the hospital," said Dalgarno, "or to the
bridge-end, to sell switches. The king is a better man than my father,
and you see those who have served in HIS wars do so every day; or, when
their blue coats were well worn out, they would make rare scarecrows.
Here is a fellow, now, comes down the walk; the stoutest raven dared
not come within a yard of that copper nose. I tell you, there is more
service, as you will soon see, in my valet of the chamber, and such
a lither lad as my page Lutin, than there is in a score of these old
memorials of the Douglas wars, [Footnote: The cruel civil wars waged by
the Scottish barons during the minority of James VI., had the name from
the figure made in them by the celebrated James Douglas, Earl of Morton.
Both sides executed their prisoners without mercy or favour.] where they
cut each other's throats for the chance of finding twelve pennies Scots
on the person of the slain. Marry, my lord, to make amends, they will
