      Heard ye so merry the little bird sing?
    Old men's love the longest will last,
      And the throstle-cock's head is under his wing.

    The young man's wrath is like light straw on fire;
      Heard ye so merry the little bird sing?
    But like red-hot steel is the old man's ire,
      And the throstle-cock's head is under his wing.

    The young man will brawl at the evening board;
      Heard ye so merry the little bird sing?
    But the old man will draw at the dawning the sword,
      And the throstle-cock's head is under his wing.

Waverley could not avoid observing that Davie laid something like a
satirical emphasis on these lines. He therefore approached, and
endeavoured, by sundry queries, to elicit from him what the innuendo
might mean; but Davie had no mind to explain, and had wit enough to make
his folly cloak his knavery. Edward could collect nothing from him,
excepting that the Laird of Balmawhapple had gone home yesterday morning
'wi' his boots fu' o' bluid.' In the garden, however, he met the old
butler, who no longer attempted to conceal that, having been bred in the
nursery line with Sumack and Co. of Newcastle, he sometimes wrought a
turn in the flower-borders to oblige the Laird and Miss Rose. By a series
of queries, Edward at length discovered, with a painful feeling of
surprise and shame, that Balmawhapple's submission and apology had been
the consequence of a rencontre with the Baron before his guest had
quitted his pillow, in which the younger combatant had been disarmed and
wounded in the sword arm.

Greatly mortified at this information, Edward sought out his friendly
host, and anxiously expostulated with him upon the injustice he had done
him in anticipating his meeting with Mr. Falconer, a circumstance which,
considering his youth and the profession of arms which he had just
adopted, was capable of being represented much to his prejudice. The
Baron justified himself at greater length than I choose to repeat. He
urged that the quarrel was common to them, and that Balmawhapple could
not, by the code of honour, evite giving satisfaction to both, which he
had done in his case by an honourable meeting, and in that of Edward by
such a palinode as rendered the use of the sword unnecessary, and which,
being made and accepted, must necessarily sopite the whole affair.

With this excuse, or explanation, Waverley was silenced, if not
satisfied; but he could not help testifying some displeasure against the
Blessed Bear, which had given rise to the quarrel, nor refrain from
hinting that the sanctified epithet was hardly appropriate. The Baron
observed, he could not deny that 'the Bear, though allowed by heralds as
a most honourable ordinary, had, nevertheless, somewhat fierce, churlish,
and morose in his disposition (as might be read in Archibald Simson,
pastor of Dalkeith's 'Hieroglyphica Animalium') and had thus been the
type of many quarrels and dissensions which had occurred in the house of
Bradwardine; of which,' he continued, 'I might commemorate mine own
unfortunate dissension with my third cousin by the mother's side, Sir Hew
Halbert, who was so unthinking as to deride my family name, as if it had
been QUASI BEAR-WARDEN; a most uncivil jest, since it not only insinuated
that the founder of our house occupied such a mean situation as to be a
custodier of wild beasts, a charge which, ye must have observed, is only
entrusted to the very basest plebeians; but, moreover, seemed to infer
that our coat-armour had not been achieved by honourable actions in war,
but bestowed by way of paranomasia, or pun, upon our family
appellation,--a sort of bearing which the French call armoires parlantes,
the Latins arma cantantia, and your English authorities canting heraldry,
[Footnote: See Note 37] being indeed a species of emblazoning more
befitting canters, gaberlunzies, and such like mendicants, whose
gibberish is formed upon playing upon the word, than the noble,
honourable, and useful science of heraldry, which assigns armorial
bearings as the reward of noble and generous actions, and not to tickle
the ear with vain quodlibets, such as are found in jestbooks.' Of his
quarrel with Sir Hew he said nothing more than that it was settled in a
fitting manner.

Having been so minute with respect to the diversions of Tully-Veolan on
the first days of Edward's arrival, for the purpose of introducing its
inmates to the reader's acquaintance, it becomes less necessary to trace
the progress of his intercourse with the same accuracy. It is probable
that a young man, accustomed to more cheerful society, would have tired
of the conversation of so violent an assertor of the 'boast of heraldry'
as the Baron; but Edward found an agreeable variety in that of Miss
Bradwardine, who listened with eagerness to his remarks upon literature,
and showed great justness of taste in her answers. The sweetness of her
disposition had made her submit with complacency, and even pleasure, to
the course of reading prescribed by her father, although it not only
comprehended several heavy folios of history, but certain gigantic tomes
in high-church polemics. In heraldry he was fortunately contented to give
her only such a slight tincture as might be acquired by perusal of the
two folio volumes of Nisbet. Rose was indeed the very apple of her
father's eye. Her constant liveliness, her attention to all those little
observances most gratifying to those who would never think of exacting
them, her beauty, in which he recalled the features of his beloved wife,
her unfeigned piety, and the noble generosity of her disposition, would
have justified the affection of the most doting father.





His anxiety on her behalf did not, however, seem to extend itself in that
quarter where, according to the general opinion, it is most efficiently
displayed, in labouring, namely, to establish her in life, either by a
large dowry or a wealthy marriage. By an old settlement, almost all the
landed estates of the Baron went, after his death, to a distant relation;
and it was supposed that Miss Bradwardine would remain but slenderly
provided for, as the good gentleman's cash matters had been too long
under the exclusive charge of Bailie Macwheeble to admit of any great
expectations from his personal succession. It is true, the said Bailie
loved his patron and his patron's daughter next (though at an
incomparable distance) to himself. He thought it was possible to set
aside the settlement on the male line, and had actually procured an
opinion to that effect (and, as he boasted, without a fee) from an
eminent Scottish counsel, under whose notice he contrived to bring the
point while consulting him regularly on some other business. But the
Baron would not listen to such a proposal for an instant. On the
contrary, he used to have a perverse pleasure in boasting that the barony
of Bradwardine was a male fief, the first charter having been given at
that early period when women were not deemed capable to hold a feudal
grant; because, according to Les coustusmes de Normandie, c'est l'homme
ki se bast et ki conseille; or, as is yet more ungallantly expressed by
other authorities, all of whose barbarous names he delighted to quote at
full length, because a woman could not serve the superior, or feudal
lord, in war, on account of the decorum of her sex, nor assist him with
advice, because of her limited intellect, nor keep his counsel, owing to
the infirmity of her disposition. He would triumphantly ask, how it would
become a female, and that female a Bradwardine, to be seen employed in
servitio exuendi, seu detrahendi, caligas regis post battaliam? that is,
in pulling off the king's boots after an engagement, which was the feudal
service by which he held the barony of Bradwardine. 'No,' he said,
'beyond hesitation, procul dubio, many females, as worthy as Rose, had
been excluded, in order to make way for my own succession, and Heaven
forbid that I should do aught that might contravene the destination of my
forefathers, or impinge upon the right of my kinsman, Malcolm Bradwardine
of Inchgrabbit, an honourable, though decayed branch of my own family.'

The Bailie, as prime minister, having received this decisive
communication from his sovereign, durst not press his own opinion any
farther, but contented himself with deploring, on all suitable occasions,
to Saunderson, the minister of the interior, the laird's self-willedness,
and with laying plans for uniting Rose with the young Laird of
Balmawhapple, who had a fine estate, only moderately burdened, and was a
faultless young gentleman, being as sober as a saint--if you keep brandy
from him and him from brandy--and who, in brief, had no imperfection but
that of keeping light company at a time; such as Jinker, the
horse-couper, and Gibby Gaethroughwi't, the piper o' Cupar; 'o' whilk
follies, Mr. Saunderson, he'll mend, he'll mend,' pronounced the Bailie.

'Like sour ale in simmer,' added Davie Gellatley, who happened to be
nearer the conclave than they were aware of.

Miss Bradwardine, such as we have described her, with all the simplicity
and curiosity of a recluse, attached herself to the opportunities of
increasing her store of literature which Edward's visit afforded her. He
sent for some of his books from his quarters, and they opened to her
sources of delight of which she had hitherto had no idea. The best
English poets, of every description, and other works on belles-lettres,
made a part of this precious cargo. Her music, even her flowers, were
neglected, and Saunders not only mourned over, but began to mutiny
against, the labour for which he now scarce received thanks. These new
pleasures became gradually enhanced by sharing them with one of a kindred
taste. Edward's readiness to comment, to recite, to explain difficult
passages, rendered his assistance invaluable; and the wild romance of his
spirit delighted a character too young and inexperienced to observe its
deficiencies. Upon subjects which interested him, and when quite at ease,
he possessed that flow of natural, and somewhat florid eloquence, which
has been supposed as powerful even as figure, fashion, fame, or fortune,
in winning the female heart. There was, therefore, an increasing danger
in this constant intercourse to poor Rose's peace of mind, which was the
more imminent as her father was greatly too much abstracted in his
studies, and wrapped up in his own dignity, to dream of his daughter's
incurring it. The daughters of the house of Bradwardine were, in his
opinion, like those of the house of Bourbon or Austria, placed high above
the clouds of passion which might obfuscate the intellects of meaner
females; they moved in another sphere, were governed by other feelings,
and amenable to other rules than those of idle and fantastic affection.
In short, he shut his eyes so resolutely to the natural consequences of
Edward's intimacy with Miss Bradwardine, that the whole neighbourhood
concluded that he had opened them to the advantages of a match between
his daughter and the wealthy young Englishman, and pronounced him much
less a fool than he had generally shown himself in cases where his own
interest was concerned.

If the Baron, however, had really meditated such an alliance, the
indifference of Waverley would have been an insuperable bar to his
project. Our hero, since mixing more freely with the world, had learned
to think with great shame and confusion upon his mental legend of Saint
Cecilia, and the vexation of these reflections was likely, for some time
at least, to counterbalance the natural susceptibility of his
disposition. Besides, Rose Bradwardine, beautiful and amiable as we have
described her, had not precisely the sort of beauty or merit which
captivates a romantic imagination in early youth. She was too frank, too
confiding, too kind; amiable qualities, undoubtedly, but destructive of
the marvellous, with which a youth of imagination delights to dress the
empress of his affections. Was it possible to bow, to tremble, and to
adore, before the timid, yet playful little girl, who now asked Edward to
mend her pen, now to construe a stanza in Tasso, and now how to spell a
very--very long word in her version of it? All these incidents have their
fascination on the mind at a certain period of life, but not when a youth
is entering it, and rather looking out for some object whose affection
may dignify him in his own eyes than stooping to one who looks up to him
for such distinction. Hence, though there can be no rule in so capricious
a passion, early love is frequently ambitious in choosing its object; or,
which comes to the same, selects her (as in the case of Saint Cecilia
aforesaid) from a situation that gives fair scope for le beau ideal,
which the reality of intimate and familiar life rather tends to limit and
impair. I knew a very accomplished and sensible young man cured of a
violent passion for a pretty woman, whose talents were not equal to her
face and figure, by being permitted to bear her company for a whole
afternoon. Thus, it is certain, that had Edward enjoyed such an
opportunity of conversing with Miss Stubbs, Aunt Rachel's precaution
would have been unnecessary, for he would as soon have fallen in love
with the dairy-maid. And although Miss Bradwardine was a very different
character, it seems probable that the very intimacy of their intercourse
prevented his feeling for her other sentiments than those of a brother
for an amiable and accomplished sister; while the sentiments of poor Rose
were gradually, and without her being conscious, assuming a shade of
warmer affection.

I ought to have said that Edward, when he sent to Dundee for the books
before mentioned, had applied for, and received permission, extending his
leave of absence. But the letter of his commanding officer contained a
friendly recommendation to him not to spend his time exclusively with
persons who, estimable as they might be in a general sense, could not be
supposed well affected to a government which they declined to acknowledge
by taking the oath of allegiance. The letter further insinuated, though
with great delicacy, that although some family connections might be
supposed to render it necessary for Captain Waverley to communicate with
gentlemen who were in this unpleasant state of suspicion, yet his
father's situation and wishes ought to prevent his prolonging those
attentions into exclusive intimacy. And it was intimated, that, while his
political principles were endangered by communicating with laymen of this
description, he might also receive erroneous impressions in religion from
the prelatic clergy, who so perversely laboured to set up the royal
prerogative in things sacred.

This last insinuation probably induced Waverley to set both down to the
prejudices of his commanding officer. He was sensible that Mr.
Bradwardine had acted with the most scrupulous delicacy, in never
entering upon any discussion that had the most remote tendency to bias
his mind in political opinions, although he was himself not only a
decided partisan of the exiled family, but had been trusted at different
times with important commissions for their service. Sensible, therefore,
that there was no risk of his being perverted from his allegiance, Edward
felt as if he should do his uncle's old friend injustice in removing from
a house where he gave and received pleasure and amusement, merely to
gratify a prejudiced and ill-judged suspicion. He therefore wrote a very
general answer, assuring his commanding officer that his loyalty was not
in the most distant danger of contamination, and continued an honoured
guest and inmate of the house of Tully-Veolan.




CHAPTER XV

A CREAGH, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES


When Edward had been a guest at Tully-Veolan nearly six weeks, he
descried, one morning, as he took his usual walk before the breakfast
hour, signs of uncommon perturbation in the family. Four bare-legged
dairy-maids, with each an empty milk-pail in her hand, ran about with
frantic gestures, and uttering loud exclamations of surprise, grief, and
resentment. From their appearance, a pagan might have conceived them a
detachment of the celebrated Belides, just come from their baling
penance. As nothing was to be got from this distracted chorus, excepting
'Lord guide us!' and 'Eh sirs!' ejaculations which threw no light upon
the cause of their dismay, Waverley repaired to the fore-court, as it was
called, where he beheld Bailie Macwheeble cantering his white pony down
the avenue with all the speed it could muster. He had arrived, it would
seem, upon a hasty summons, and was followed by half a score of peasants
from the village who had no great difficulty in keeping pace with him.

The Bailie, greatly too busy and too important to enter into explanations
with Edward, summoned forth Mr. Saunderson, who appeared with a
countenance in which dismay was mingled with solemnity, and they
immediately entered into close conference. Davie Gellatley was also seen
in the group, idle as Diogenes at Sinope while his countrymen were
preparing for a siege. His spirits always rose with anything, good or
bad, which occasioned tumult, and he continued frisking, hopping,
dancing, and singing the burden of an old ballad--

    'Our gear's a' gane,'

until, happening to pass too near the Bailie, he received an admonitory
hint from his horse-whip, which converted his songs into lamentation.

Passing from thence towards the garden, Waverley beheld the Baron in
person, measuring and re-measuring, with swift and tremendous strides,
the length of the terrace; his countenance clouded with offended pride
and indignation, and the whole of his demeanour such as seemed to
indicate, that any inquiry concerning the cause of his discomposure would
give pain at least, if not offence. Waverley therefore glided into the
house, without addressing him, and took his way to the breakfast-parlour,
where he found his young friend Rose, who, though she neither exhibited
the resentment of her father, the turbid importance of Bailie Macwheeble,
nor the despair of the handmaidens, seemed vexed and thoughtful. A single
word explained the mystery. 'Your breakfast will be a disturbed one,
Captain Waverley. A party of Caterans have come down upon us last night,
and have driven off all our milch cows.'

'A party of Caterans?'

'Yes; robbers from the neighbouring Highlands. We used to be quite free
from them while we paid blackmail to Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich Ian Vohr; but
my father thought it unworthy of his rank and birth to pay it any longer,
and so this disaster has happened. It is not the value of the cattle,
Captain Waverley, that vexes me; but my father is so much hurt at the
affront, and is so bold and hot, that I fear he will try to recover them
by the strong hand; and if he is not hurt himself, he will hurt some of
these wild people, and then there will be no peace between them and us
perhaps for our life-time; and we cannot defend ourselves as in old
times, for the government have taken all our arms; and my dear father is
so rash--O what will become of us!'--Here poor Rose lost heart
altogether, and burst into a flood of tears.

The Baron entered at this moment, and rebuked her with more asperity than
Waverley had ever heard him use to any one. 'Was it not a shame,' he
said, 'that she should exhibit herself before any gentleman in such a
light, as if she shed tears for a drove of horned nolt and milch kine,
like the daughter of a Cheshire yeoman!--Captain Waverley, I must request
your favourable construction of her grief, which may, or ought to
proceed, solely from seeing her father's estate exposed to spulzie and
depredation from common thieves and sorners, while we are not allowed to
keep half a score of muskets, whether for defence or rescue.'

Bailie Macwheeble entered immediately afterwards, and by his report of
arms and ammunition confirmed this statement, informing the Baron, in a
melancholy voice, that though the people would certainly obey his
honour's orders, yet there was no chance of their following the gear to
ony guid purpose, in respect there were only his honour's body servants
who had swords and pistols, and the depredators were twelve Highlanders,
completely armed after the manner of their country. Having delivered this
doleful annunciation, he assumed a posture of silent dejection, shaking
his head slowly with the motion of a pendulum when it is ceasing to
vibrate, and then remained stationary, his body stooping at a more acute
angle than usual, and the latter part of his person projecting in
proportion.

The Baron, meanwhile, paced the room in silent indignation, and at length
fixing his eye upon an old portrait, whose person was clad in armour, and
whose features glared grimly out of a huge bush of hair, part of which
descended from his head to his shoulders, and part from his chin and
upper-lip to his breast-plate,--'That gentleman, Captain Waverley, my
grandsire,' he said, 'with two hundred horse,--whom he levied within his
own bounds, discomfited and put to the rout more than five hundred of
these Highland reivers, who have been ever lapis offensionis et petra
scandali, a stumbling-block and a rock of offence, to the Lowland
vicinage--he discomfited them, I say, when they had the temerity to
descend to harry this country, in the time of the civil dissensions, in
the year of grace sixteen hundred forty and two. And now, sir, I, his
grandson, am thus used at such unworthy hands.'

Here there was an awful pause; after which all the company, as is usual
in cases of difficulty, began to give separate and inconsistent counsel.
Alexander ab Alexandro proposed they should send some one to compound
with the Caterans, who would readily, he said, give up their prey for a
dollar a head. The Bailie opined that this transaction would amount to
theft-boot, or composition of felony; and he recommended that some canny
hand should be sent up to the glens to make the best bargain he could, as
it were for himself, so that the Laird might not be seen in such a
transaction. Edward proposed to send off to the nearest garrison for a
party of soldiers and a magistrate's warrant; and Rose, as far as she
dared, endeavoured to insinuate the course of paying the arrears of
tribute money to Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich Ian Vohr, who, they all knew, could
easily procure restoration of the cattle, if he were properly
propitiated.

None of these proposals met the Baron's approbation. The idea of
composition, direct or implied, was absolutely ignominious; that of
Waverley only showed that he did not understand the state of the country,
and of the political parties which divided it; and, standing matters as
they did with Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich Ian Vohr, the Baron would make no
concession to him, were it, he said, 'to procure restitution in integrum
of every stirk and stot that the chief, his forefathers, and his clan,
had stolen since the days of Malcolm Canmore.'

In fact his voice was still for war, and he proposed to send expresses to
Balmawhapple, Killancureit, Tulliellum, and other lairds, who were
exposed to similar depredations, inviting them to join in the pursuit;
'and then, sir, shall these nebulones nequissimi, as Leslaeus calls them,
be brought to the fate of their predecessor Cacus,

    "Elisos oculos, et siccum sanguine guttur."'

The Bailie, who by no means relished these warlike counsels, here pulled
forth an immense watch, of the colour, and nearly of the size, of a
pewter warming-pan, and observed it was now past noon, and that the
Caterans had been seen in the pass of Ballybrough soon after sunrise; so
that, before the allied forces could assemble, they and their prey would
be far beyond the reach of the most active pursuit, and sheltered in
those pathless deserts, where it was neither advisable to follow, nor
indeed possible to trace them.

This proposition was undeniable. The council therefore broke up without
coming to any conclusion, as has occurred to councils of more importance;
only it was determined that the Bailie should send his own three milkcows
down to the mains for the use of the Baron's family, and brew small ale,
as a substitute for milk, in his own. To this arrangement, which was
suggested by Saunderson, the Bailie readily assented, both from habitual
deference to the family, and an internal consciousness that his courtesy
would, in some mode or other, be repaid tenfold.

The Baron having also retired to give some necessary directions, Waverley
seized the opportunity to ask, whether this Fergus, with the
unpronounceable name, was the chief thief-taker of the district?

'Thief-taker!' answered Rose, laughing; 'he is a gentleman of great
honour and consequence, the chieftain of an independent branch of a
powerful Highland clan, and is much respected, both for his own power and
that of his kith, kin, and allies.'

'And what has he to do with the thieves, then? Is he a magistrate, or in
the commission of the peace?' asked Waverley.

'The commission of war rather, if there be such a thing,' said Rose; 'for
he is a very unquiet neighbour to his unfriends, and keeps a greater
following on foot than many that have thrice his estate. As to his
connection with the thieves, that I cannot well explain; but the boldest
of them will never steal a hoof from any one that pays black-mail to Vich
lan Vohr.'

'And what is black-mail?'

'A sort of protection-money that Low-Country gentlemen and heritors,
lying near the Highlands, pay to some Highland chief, that he may neither
do them harm himself, nor suffer it to be done to them by others; and
then if your cattle are stolen, you have only to send him word, and he
will recover them; or it may be, he will drive away cows from some
distant place, where he has a quarrel, and give them to you to make up
your loss.' [Footnote: See note 13.]

'And is this sort of Highland Jonathan Wild admitted into society, and
called a gentleman?'

'So much so,' said Rose, 'that the quarrel between my father and Fergus
Mac-Ivor began at a county meeting, where he wanted to take precedence of
all the Lowland gentlemen then present, only my father would not suffer
it. And then he upbraided my father that he was under his banner, and
paid him tribute; and my father was in a towering passion, for Bailie
Macwheeble, who manages such things his own way, had contrived to keep
this black-mail a secret from him, and passed it in his account for
cess-money. And they would have fought; but Fergus Mac-Ivor said, very
gallantly, he would never raise his hand against a grey head that was so
much respected as my father's.--O I wish, I wish they had continued
friends!'

'And did you ever see this Mr. Mac-Ivor, if that be his name, Miss
Bradwardine?'

'No, that is not his name; and he would consider MASTER as a sort of
affront, only that you are an Englishman, and know no better. But the
Lowlanders call him, like other gentlemen, by the name of his estate,
Glennaquoich; and the Highlanders call him Vich Ian Vohr, that is, the
son of John the Great; and we upon the braes here call him by both names
indifferently.'

'I am afraid I shall never bring my English tongue to call him by either
one or other.'

'But he is a very polite, handsome man,' continued Rose; 'and his sister
Flora is one of the most beautiful and accomplished young ladies in this
country; she was bred in a convent in France, and was a great friend of
mine before this unhappy dispute. Dear Captain Waverley, try your
influence with my father to make matters up. I am sure this is but the
beginning of our troubles; for Tully-Veolan has never been a safe or
quiet residence when we have been at feud with the Highlanders. When I
was a girl about ten, there was a skirmish fought between a party of
twenty of them and my father and his servants behind the mains; and the
bullets broke several panes in the north windows, they were so near.
Three of the Highlanders were killed, and they brought them in wrapped in
their plaids, and laid them on the stone floor of the hall; and next
morning, their wives and daughters came, clapping their hands, and crying
the coronach, and shrieking, and carried away the dead bodies, with the
pipes playing before them. I could not sleep for six weeks without
starting and thinking I heard these terrible cries, and saw the bodies
lying on the steps, all stiff and swathed up in their bloody tartans. But
since that time there came a party from the garrison at Stirling, with a
warrant from the Lord Justice Clerk, or some such great man, and took
away all our arms; and now, how are we to protect ourselves if they come
down in any strength?'

Waverley could not help starting at a story which bore so much
resemblance to one of his own day-dreams. Here was a girl scarce
seventeen, the gentlest of her sex, both in temper and appearance, who
had witnessed with her own eyes such a scene as he had used to conjure up
in his imagination, as only occurring in ancient times, and spoke of it
coolly, as one very likely to recur. He felt at once the impulse of
curiosity, and that slight sense of danger which only serves to heighten
its interest. He might have said with Malvolio, '"I do not now fool
myself, to let imagination jade me!" I am actually in the land of
military and romantic adventures, and it only remains to be seen what
will be my own share in them.'

The whole circumstances now detailed concerning the state of the country
seemed equally novel and extraordinary. He had indeed often heard of
Highland thieves, but had no idea of the systematic mode in which their
depredations were conducted; and that the practice was connived at, and
even encouraged, by many of the Highland chieftains, who not only found
the creaghs, or forays, useful for the purpose of training individuals of
their clan to the practice of arms, but also of maintaining a wholesome
terror among their Lowland neighbours, and levying, as we have seen, a
tribute from them, under colour of protection-money.

Bailie Macwheeble, who soon afterwards entered, expatiated still more at
length upon the same topic. This honest gentleman's conversation was so
formed upon his professional practice, that Davie Gellatley once said his
discourse was like a 'charge of horning.' He assured our hero, that 'from
the maist ancient times of record, the lawless thieves, limmers, and
broken men of the Highlands, had been in fellowship together by reason of
their surnames, for the committing of divers thefts, reifs, and herships
upon the honest men of the Low Country, when they not only intromitted
with their whole goods and gear, corn, cattle, horse, nolt, sheep,
outsight and insight plenishing, at their wicked pleasure, but moreover
made prisoners, ransomed them, or concussed them into giving borrows
(pledges) to enter into captivity again;--all which was directly
prohibited in divers parts of the Statute Book, both by the act one
thousand five hundred and sixty-seven, and various others; the whilk
statutes, with all that had followed and might follow thereupon, were
shamefully broken and vilipended by the said sorners, limmers, and broken
men, associated into fellowships, for the aforesaid purposes of theft,
stouthreef, fire-raising, murther, raptus mulierum, or forcible abduction
of women, and such like as aforesaid.'

It seemed like a dream to Waverley that these deeds of violence should be
familiar to men's minds, and currently talked of as falling within the
common order of things, and happening daily in the immediate vicinity,
without his having crossed the seas, and while he was yet in the
otherwise well-ordered island of Great Britain.




CHAPTER XVI

AN UNEXPECTED ALLY APPEARS


The Baron returned at the dinner-hour, and had in a great measure
recovered his composure and good-humour. He not only confirmed the
stories which Edward had heard from Rose and Bailie Macwheeble, but added
many anecdotes from his own experience, concerning the state of the
Highlands and their inhabitants. The chiefs he pronounced to be, in
general, gentlemen of great honour and high pedigree, whose word was
accounted as a law by all those of their own sept, or clan. 'It did not
indeed,' he said, 'become them, as had occurred in late instances, to
propone their prosapia, a lineage which rested for the most part on the
vain and fond rhymes of their seannachies or bhairds, as aequiponderate
with the evidence of ancient charters and royal grants of antiquity,
conferred upon distinguished houses in the Low Country by divers Scottish
monarchs; nevertheless, such was their outrecuidance and presumption, as
to undervalue those who possessed such evidents, as if they held their
lands in a sheep's skin.'

This, by the way, pretty well explained the cause of quarrel between the
Baron and his Highland ally. But he went on to state so many curious
particulars concerning the manners, customs, and habits of this
patriarchal race that Edward's curiosity became highly interested, and he
inquired whether it was possible to make with safety an excursion into
the neighbouring Highlands, whose dusky barrier of mountains had already
excited his wish to penetrate beyond them. The Baron assured his guest
that nothing would be more easy, providing this quarrel were first made
up, since he could himself give him letters to many of the distinguished
chiefs, who would receive him with the utmost courtesy and hospitality.

While they were on this topic, the door suddenly opened, and, ushered by
Saunders Saunderson, a Highlander, fully armed and equipped, entered the
apartment. Had it not been that Saunders acted the part of master of the
ceremonies to this martial apparition, without appearing to deviate from
his usual composure, and that neither Mr. Bradwardine nor Rose exhibited
any emotion, Edward would certainly have thought the intrusion hostile.
As it was, he started at the sight of what he had not yet happened to
see, a mountaineer in his full national costume. The individual Gael was
a stout, dark, young man, of low stature, the ample folds of whose plaid
added to the appearance of strength which his person exhibited. The short
kilt, or petticoat, showed his sinewy and clean-made limbs; the goatskin
purse, flanked by the usual defences, a dirk and steel-wrought pistol,
hung before him; his bonnet had a short feather, which indicated his
claim to be treated as a duinhe-wassel, or sort of gentleman; a
broadsword dangled by his side, a target hung upon his shoulder, and a
long Spanish fowling-piece occupied one of his hands. With the other hand
he pulled off his bonnet, and the Baron, who well knew their customs, and
the proper mode of addressing them, immediately said, with an air of
dignity, but without rising, and much, as Edward thought, in the manner
of a prince receiving an embassy, 'Welcome, Evan Dhu Maccombich; what
news from Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich lan Vohr?'

'Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich lan Vohr,' said the ambassador, in good English,
'greets you well, Baron of Bradwardine and Tully-Veolan, and is sorry
there has been a thick cloud interposed between you and him, which has
kept you from seeing and considering the friendship and alliances that
have been between your houses and forebears of old; and he prays you that
the cloud may pass away, and that things may be as they have been
heretofore between the clan Ivor and the house of Bradwardine, when there
was an egg between them for a flint and a knife for a sword. And he
expects you will also say, you are sorry for the cloud, and no man shall
hereafter ask whether it descended from the bill to the valley, or rose
from the valley to the hill; for they never struck with the scabbard who
did not receive with the sword, and woe to him who would lose his friend
for the stormy cloud of a spring morning.'

To this the Baron of Bradwardine answered with suitable dignity, that he
knew the chief of Clan Ivor to be a well-wisher to the King, and he was
sorry there should have been a cloud between him and any gentleman of
such sound principles, 'for when folks are banding together, feeble is he
who hath no brother.'

This appearing perfectly satisfactory, that the peace between these
august persons might be duly solemnised, the Baron ordered a stoup of
usquebaugh, and, filling a glass, drank to the health and prosperity of
Mac-Ivor of Glennaquoich; upon which the Celtic ambassador, to requite
his politeness, turned down a mighty bumper of the same generous liquor,
seasoned with his good wishes to the house of Bradwardine.

Having thus ratified the preliminaries of the general treaty of
pacification, the envoy retired to adjust with Mr. Macwheeble some
subordinate articles with which it was not thought necessary to trouble
the Baron. These probably referred to the discontinuance of the subsidy,
and apparently the Bailie found means to satisfy their ally, without
suffering his master to suppose that his dignity was compromised. At
least, it is certain, that after the plenipotentiaries had drunk a bottle
of brandy in single drams, which seemed to have no more effect upon such
seasoned vessels than if it had been poured upon the two bears at the top
of the avenue, Evan Dhu Maccombich, having possessed himself of all the
information which he could procure respecting the robbery of the
preceding night, declared his intention to set off immediately in pursuit
of the cattle, which he pronounced to be 'no that far off; they have
broken the bone,' he observed, 'but they have had no time to suck the
marrow.'

Our hero, who had attended Evan Dhu during his perquisitions, was much
struck with the ingenuity which he displayed in collecting information,
and the precise and pointed conclusions which he drew from it. Evan Dhu,
on his part, was obviously flattered with the attention of Waverley, the
interest he seemed to take in his inquiries, and his curiosity about the
customs and scenery of the Highlands. Without much ceremony he invited
Edward to accompany him on a short walk of ten or fifteen miles into the
mountains, and see the place where the cattle were conveyed to; adding,
'If it be as I suppose, you never saw such a place in your life, nor ever
will, unless you go with me or the like of me.'

Our hero, feeling his curiosity considerably excited by the idea of
visiting the den of a Highland Cacus, took, however, the precaution to
inquire if his guide might be trusted. He was assured that the invitation
would on no account have been given had there been the least danger, and
that all he had to apprehend was a little fatigue; and, as Evan proposed
he should pass a day at his Chieftain's house in returning, where he
would be sure of good accommodation and an excellent welcome, there
seemed nothing very formidable in the task he undertook. Rose, indeed,
turned pale when she heard of it; but her father, who loved the spirited
curiosity of his young friend, did not attempt to damp it by an alarm of
danger which really did not exist, and a knapsack, with a few
necessaries, being bound on the shoulders of a sort of deputy gamekeeper,
our hero set forth with a fowling-piece in his hand, accompanied by his
new friend Evan Dhu, and followed by the gamekeeper aforesaid, and by two
wild Highlanders, the attendants of Evan, one of whom had upon his
shoulder a hatchet at the end of a pole, called a Lochaber-axe,
[Footnote: See Note 14] and the other a long ducking-gun. Evan, upon
Edward's inquiry, gave him to understand that this martial escort was by
no means necessary as a guard, but merely, as he said, drawing up and
adjusting his plaid with an air of dignity, that he might appear decently
at Tully-Veolan, and as Vich Ian Vohr's foster-brother ought to do. 'Ah!'
said he, 'if you Saxon duinhe-wassel (English gentleman) saw but the
Chief with his tail on!'

'With his tail on?' echoed Edward in some surprise.

'Yes--that is, with all his usual followers, when he visits those of the
same rank. There is,' he continued, stopping and drawing himself proudly
up, while he counted upon his fingers the several officers of his chief's
retinue; 'there is his hanchman, or right-hand man; then his bard, or
poet; then his bladier, or orator, to make harangues to the great folks
whom he visits; then his gilly-more, or armour-bearer, to carry his sword
and target, and his gun; then his gilly-casfliuch, who carries him on his
back through the sikes and brooks; then his gilly-comstrian, to lead his
horse by the bridle in steep and difficult paths; then his
gilly-trushharnish, to carry his knapsack; and the piper and the piper's
man, and it may be a dozen young lads beside, that have no business, but
are just boys of the belt, to follow the Laird and do his honour's
bidding.'

'And does your Chief regularly maintain all these men?' demanded
Waverley.

'All these?' replied Evan; 'ay, and many a fair head beside, that would
not ken where to lay itself, but for the mickle barn at Glennaquoich.'

With similar tales of the grandeur of the Chief in peace and war, Evan
Dhu beguiled the way till they approached more closely those huge
mountains which Edward had hitherto only seen at a distance. It was
towards evening as they entered one of the tremendous passes which afford
communication between the high and low country; the path, which was
extremely steep and rugged, winded up a chasm between two tremendous
rocks, following the passage which a foaming stream, that brawled far
below, appeared to have worn for itself in the course of ages. A few
slanting beams of the sun, which was now setting, reached the water in
its darksome bed, and showed it partially, chafed by a hundred rocks and
broken by a hundred falls. The descent from the path to the stream was a
mere precipice, with here and there a projecting fragment of granite, or
a scathed tree, which had warped its twisted roots into the fissures of
the rock. On the right hand, the mountain rose above the path with almost
equal inaccessibility; but the hill on the opposite side displayed a
shroud of copsewood, with which some pines were intermingled.

'This,' said Evan, 'is the pass of Bally-Brough, which was kept in former
times by ten of the clan Donnochie against a hundred of the Low-Country
carles. The graves of the slain are still to be seen in that little
corrie, or bottom, on the opposite side of the burn; if your eyes are
good, you may see the green specks among the heather. See, there is an
earn, which you Southrons call an eagle. You have no such birds as that
in England. He is going to fetch his supper from the Laird of
Bradwardine's braes, but I 'll send a slug after him.'

He fired his piece accordingly, but missed the superb monarch of the
feathered tribes, who, without noticing the attempt to annoy him,
continued his majestic flight to the southward. A thousand birds of prey,
hawks, kites, carrion-crows, and ravens, disturbed from the lodgings
which they had just taken up for the evening, rose at the report of the
gun, and mingled their hoarse and discordant notes with the echoes which
replied to it, and with the roar of the mountain cataracts. Evan, a
little disconcerted at having missed his mark, when he meant to have
displayed peculiar dexterity, covered his confusion by whistling part of
a pibroch as he reloaded his piece, and proceeded in silence up the pass.

It issued in a narrow glen, between two mountains, both very lofty and
covered with heath. The brook continued to be their companion, and they
advanced up its mazes, crossing them now and then, on which occasions
Evan Dhu uniformly offered the assistance of his attendants to carry over
Edward; but our hero, who had been always a tolerable pedestrian,
declined the accommodation, and obviously rose in his guide's opinion, by
showing that he did not fear wetting his feet. Indeed he was anxious, so
far as he could without affectation, to remove the opinion which Evan
seemed to entertain of the effeminacy of the Lowlanders, and particularly
of the English.

Through the gorge of this glen they found access to a black bog, of
tremendous extent, full of large pit-holes, which they traversed with
great difficulty and some danger, by tracks which no one but a Highlander
could have followed. The path itself, or rather the portion of more solid
ground on which the travellers half walked, half waded, was rough,
broken, and in many places quaggy and unsound. Sometimes the ground was
so completely unsafe that it was necessary to spring from one hillock to
another, the space between being incapable of bearing the human weight.
This was an easy matter to the Highlanders, who wore thin-soled brogues
fit for the purpose, and moved with a peculiar springing step; but Edward
began to find the exercise, to which he was unaccustomed, more fatiguing
than he expected. The lingering twilight served to show them through this
Serbonian bog, but deserted them almost totally at the bottom of a steep
and very stony hill, which it was the travellers' next toilsome task to
ascend. The night, however, was pleasant, and not dark; and Waverley,
calling up mental energy to support personal fatigue, held on his march
gallantly, though envying in his heart his Highland attendants, who
continued, without a symptom of abated vigour, the rapid and swinging
pace, or rather trot, which, according to his computation, had already
brought them fifteen miles upon their journey.

After crossing this mountain and descending on the other side towards a
thick wood, Evan Dhu held some conference with his Highland attendants,
in consequence of which Edward's baggage was shifted from the shoulders
of the gamekeeper to those of one of the gillies, and the former was sent
off with the other mountaineer in a direction different from that of the
three remaining travellers. On asking the meaning of this separation,
Waverley was told that the Lowlander must go to a hamlet about three
miles off for the night; for unless it was some very particular friend,
Donald Bean Lean, the worthy person whom they supposed to be possessed of
the cattle, did not much approve of strangers approaching his retreat.
