  Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew.
  But when the tenth bright morning orient glow'd,
  The faithful youth his monarch's mandate show'd:
  The fatal tablets, till that instant seal'd,
  The deathful secret to the king reveal'd.
  First, dire Chimaera's conquest was enjoin'd;
  A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
  Behind, a dragon's fiery tail was spread;
  A goat's rough body bore a lion's head;
  Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
  Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.

  "This pest he slaughter'd, (for he read the skies,
  And trusted heaven's informing prodigies,)
  Then met in arms the Solymaean crew,(169)
  (Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew;
  Next the bold Amazons' whole force defied;
  And conquer'd still, for heaven was on his side.

  "Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,
  At his return, a treacherous ambush rose,
  With levell'd spears along the winding shore:
  There fell they breathless, and return'd no more.

  "At length the monarch, with repentant grief,
  Confess'd the gods, and god-descended chief;
  His daughter gave, the stranger to detain,
  With half the honours of his ample reign:
  The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,
  With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crown'd.
  There long the chief his happy lot possess'd,
  With two brave sons and one fair daughter bless'd;
  (Fair e'en in heavenly eyes: her fruitful love
  Crown'd with Sarpedon's birth the embrace of Jove;)
  But when at last, distracted in his mind,
  Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind,
  Wide o'er the Aleian field he chose to stray,
  A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way!(170)
  Woes heap'd on woes consumed his wasted heart:
  His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebe's dart;
  His eldest born by raging Mars was slain,
  In combat on the Solymaean plain.
  Hippolochus survived: from him I came,
  The honour'd author of my birth and name;
  By his decree I sought the Trojan town;
  By his instructions learn to win renown,
  To stand the first in worth as in command,
  To add new honours to my native land,
  Before my eyes my mighty sires to place,
  And emulate the glories of our race."

  He spoke, and transport fill'd Tydides' heart;
  In earth the generous warrior fix'd his dart,
  Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince address'd:
  "Welcome, my brave hereditary guest!
  Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace,
  Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race.
  Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old;
  OEneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold:
  Our ancient seat his honour'd presence graced,
  Where twenty days in genial rites he pass'd.
  The parting heroes mutual presents left;
  A golden goblet was thy grandsire's gift;
  OEneus a belt of matchless work bestowed,
  That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glow'd.
  (This from his pledge I learn'd, which, safely stored
  Among my treasures, still adorns my board:
  For Tydeus left me young, when Thebe's wall
  Beheld the sons of Greece untimely fall.)
  Mindful of this, in friendship let us join;
  If heaven our steps to foreign lands incline,
  My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine.
  Enough of Trojans to this lance shall yield,
  In the full harvest of yon ample field;
  Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
  But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
  Now change we arms, and prove to either host
  We guard the friendship of the line we boast."

  Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
  Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
  Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign'd,
  (Jove warm'd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
  For Diomed's brass arms, of mean device,
  For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
  He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,(171)
  A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

  Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Great Hector, enter'd at the Scaean gate.(172)
  Beneath the beech-tree's consecrated shades,
  The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids
  Around him flock'd, all press'd with pious care
  For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
  He bids the train in long procession go,
  And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
  And now to Priam's stately courts he came,
  Rais'd on arch'd columns of stupendous frame;
  O'er these a range of marble structure runs,
  The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,
  In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,(173)
  Opposed to those, where Priam's daughters sate.
  Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone,
  Of equal beauty, and of polish'd stone.
  Hither great Hector pass'd, nor pass'd unseen
  Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen.
  (With her Laodice, whose beauteous face
  Surpass'd the nymphs of Troy's illustrious race.)
  Long in a strict embrace she held her son,
  And press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "O Hector! say, what great occasion calls
  My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;
  Com'st thou to supplicate the almighty power
  With lifted hands, from Ilion's lofty tower?
  Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crown'd,
  In Jove's high name, to sprinkle on the ground,
  And pay due vows to all the gods around.
  Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul,
  And draw new spirits from the generous bowl;
  Spent as thou art with long laborious fight,
  The brave defender of thy country's right."

  "Far hence be Bacchus' gifts; (the chief rejoin'd;)
  Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind,
  Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.
  Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice
  To sprinkle to the gods, its better use.
  By me that holy office were profaned;
  Ill fits it me, with human gore distain'd,
  To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise,
  Or offer heaven's great Sire polluted praise.
  You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train,
  And burn rich odours in Minerva's fane.
  The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,
  Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
  Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
  And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
  So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
  Our wives, our infants, and our city spare;
  And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
  Be this, O mother, your religious care:
  I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;
  If yet not lost to all the sense of shame,
  The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
  Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace,
  That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race!(174)
  Deep to the dark abyss might he descend,
  Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end."

  This heard, she gave command: and summon'd came
  Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
  The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,
  Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
  There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,
  Sidonian maids embroider'd every part,
  Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,
  With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
  Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes
  The various textures and the various dyes,
  She chose a veil that shone superior far,
  And glow'd refulgent as the morning star.
  Herself with this the long procession leads;
  The train majestically slow proceeds.
  Soon as to Ilion's topmost tower they come,
  And awful reach the high Palladian dome,
  Antenor's consort, fair Theano, waits
  As Pallas' priestess, and unbars the gates.
  With hands uplifted and imploring eyes,
  They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
  The priestess then the shining veil displays,
  Placed on Minerva's knees, and thus she prays:

  "Oh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid,
  Troy's strong defence, unconquer'd Pallas, aid!
  Break thou Tydides' spear, and let him fall
  Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall!
  So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,
  Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke.
  But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer,
  Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!"
  So pray'd the priestess in her holy fane;
  So vow'd the matrons, but they vow'd in vain.

  While these appear before the power with prayers,
  Hector to Paris' lofty dome repairs.(175)
  Himself the mansion raised, from every part
  Assembling architects of matchless art.
  Near Priam's court and Hector's palace stands
  The pompous structure, and the town commands.
  A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length,
  The steely point with golden ringlets join'd,
  Before him brandish'd, at each motion shined
  Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found
  His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round,
  His eyes delighting with their splendid show,
  Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow.
  Beside him Helen with her virgins stands,
  Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.

  Him thus inactive, with an ardent look
  The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.
  "Thy hate to Troy, is this the time to show?
  (O wretch ill-fated, and thy country's foe!)
  Paris and Greece against us both conspire,
  Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
  For thee great Ilion's guardian heroes fall,
  Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall,
  For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns,
  And wasteful war in all its fury burns.
  Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care,
  Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
  Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend,
  And all the Phrygian glories at an end."

  "Brother, 'tis just, (replied the beauteous youth,)
  Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth:
  Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief!
  On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief:
  Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate,
  And mourn'd, in secret, his and Ilion's fate.
  'Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms,
  And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms.
  Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless,
  'Tis man's to fight, but heaven's to give success.
  But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind;
  Or go, and Paris shall not lag behind."

                  [Illustration: HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.]

                          HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.


  He said, nor answer'd Priam's warlike son;
  When Helen thus with lowly grace begun:

  "Oh, generous brother! (if the guilty dame
  That caused these woes deserve a sister's name!)
  Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done,
  The day that show'd me to the golden sun
  Had seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bear
  The fatal infant to the fowls of air?
  Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide,
  And midst the roarings of the waters died?
  Heaven fill'd up all my ills, and I accursed
  Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst.
  Helen at least a braver spouse might claim,
  Warm'd with some virtue, some regard of fame!
  Now tired with toils, thy fainting limbs recline,
  With toils, sustain'd for Paris' sake and mine
  The gods have link'd our miserable doom,
  Our present woe, and infamy to come:
  Wide shall it spread, and last through ages long,
  Example sad! and theme of future song."

  The chief replied: "This time forbids to rest;
  The Trojan bands, by hostile fury press'd,
  Demand their Hector, and his arm require;
  The combat urges, and my soul's on fire.
  Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,
  And timely join me, ere I leave the walls.
  Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,
  My wife, my infant, claim a moment's stay;
  This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)
  Demands a parting word, a tender tear:
  This day, some god who hates our Trojan land
  May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand."

  He said, and pass'd with sad presaging heart
  To seek his spouse, his soul's far dearer part;
  At home he sought her, but he sought in vain;
  She, with one maid of all her menial train,
  Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
  Pensive she stood on Ilion's towery height,
  Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight;
  There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
  Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

  But he who found not whom his soul desired,
  Whose virtue charm'd him as her beauty fired,
  Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
  Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
  Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
  Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?"
  "Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
  Nor mix'd with matrons to Minerva's fane:
  To Ilion's steepy tower she bent her way,
  To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
  Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
  She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
  Distracted with surprise, she seem'd to fly,
  Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye.
  The nurse attended with her infant boy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy."

  Hector this heard, return'd without delay;
  Swift through the town he trod his former way,
  Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
  And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
  With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
  His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir:
  (Cilician Thebe great Aetion sway'd,
  And Hippoplacus' wide extended shade:)
  The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press'd,
  His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
  Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
  Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
  To this loved infant Hector gave the name
  Scamandrius, from Scamander's honour'd stream;
  Astyanax the Trojans call'd the boy,
  From his great father, the defence of Troy.
  Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resign'd
  To tender passions all his mighty mind;
  His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
  Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
  Her bosom laboured with a boding sigh,
  And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.

          [Illustration: THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.]

                  THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.


  "Too daring prince! ah, whither dost thou run?
  Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
  And think'st thou not how wretched we shall be,
  A widow I, a helpless orphan he?
  For sure such courage length of life denies,
  And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
  Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
  Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain.
  O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,
  All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
  So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
  And end with sorrows as they first begun.
  No parent now remains my griefs to share,
  No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
  The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
  Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
  His fate compassion in the victor bred;
  Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
  His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
  And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
  Then raised a mountain where his bones were burn'd,
  The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn'd,
  Jove's sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
  A barren shade, and in his honour grow.

  "By the same arm my seven brave brothers fell;
  In one sad day beheld the gates of hell;
  While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
  Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
  My mother lived to wear the victor's bands,
  The queen of Hippoplacia's sylvan lands:
  Redeem'd too late, she scarce beheld again
  Her pleasing empire and her native plain,
  When ah! oppress'd by life-consuming woe,
  She fell a victim to Diana's bow.

  "Yet while my Hector still survives, I see
  My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:
  Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all
  Once more will perish, if my Hector fall,
  Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
  Oh, prove a husband's and a father's care!
  That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
  Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;
  Thou, from this tower defend the important post;
  There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
  That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,
  And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
  Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
  Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
  Let others in the field their arms employ,
  But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy."

  The chief replied: "That post shall be my care,
  Not that alone, but all the works of war.
  How would the sons of Troy, in arms renown'd,
  And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground
  Attaint the lustre of my former name,
  Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
  My early youth was bred to martial pains,
  My soul impels me to the embattled plains!
  Let me be foremost to defend the throne,
  And guard my father's glories, and my own.

  "Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates!
  (How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
  The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
  And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
  And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
  My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
  Not Priam's hoary hairs defiled with gore,
  Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
  As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread:
  I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
  In Argive looms our battles to design,
  And woes, of which so large a part was thine!
  To bear the victor's hard commands, or bring
  The weight of waters from Hyperia's spring.
  There while you groan beneath the load of life,
  They cry, 'Behold the mighty Hector's wife!'
  Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
  Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.
  The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
  A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
  May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
  Press'd with a load of monumental clay!
  Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
  Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep."

  Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy
  Stretch'd his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
  The babe clung crying to his nurse's breast,
  Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
  With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
  And Hector hasted to relieve his child,
  The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
  And placed the beaming helmet on the ground;
  Then kiss'd the child, and, lifting high in air,
  Thus to the gods preferr'd a father's prayer:

  "O thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne,
  And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
  Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
  To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
  Against his country's foes the war to wage,
  And rise the Hector of the future age!
  So when triumphant from successful toils
  Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
  Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
  And say, 'This chief transcends his father's fame:'
  While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
  His mother's conscious heart o'erflows with joy."

  He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
  Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
  Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
  Hush'd to repose, and with a smile survey'd.
  The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
  She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
  The soften'd chief with kind compassion view'd,
  And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

  "Andromache! my soul's far better part,
  Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
  No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
  Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
  Fix'd is the term to all the race of earth;
  And such the hard condition of our birth:
  No force can then resist, no flight can save,
  All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
  No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
  There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
  Me glory summons to the martial scene,
  The field of combat is the sphere for men.
  Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
  The first in danger as the first in fame."

  Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
  His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
  His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
  Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
  That stream'd at every look; then, moving slow,
  Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
  There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
  Through all her train the soft infection ran;
  The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
  And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

  But now, no longer deaf to honour's call,
  Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.
  In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray,
  Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.
  The wanton courser thus with reins unbound(176)
  Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground;
  Pamper'd and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,
  And laves, in height of blood his shining sides;
  His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies;
  He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
  With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay,
  In arms refulgent as the god of day,
  The son of Priam, glorying in his might,
  Rush'd forth with Hector to the fields of fight.

  And now, the warriors passing on the way,
  The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
  To whom the noble Hector thus replied:
  "O chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!
  Thy power in war with justice none contest;
  Known is thy courage, and thy strength confess'd.
  What pity sloth should seize a soul so brave,
  Or godlike Paris live a woman's slave!
  My heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say,
  And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the stain away.
  Haste then, in all their glorious labours share,
  For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war.
  These ills shall cease, whene'er by Jove's decree
  We crown the bowl to heaven and liberty:
  While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs mourns,
  And Greece indignant through her seas returns."

                    [Illustration: BOWS AND BOW CASE.]

                            BOWS AND BOW CASE.


                          [Illustration: IRIS.]

                                  IRIS.





BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT

THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX.

The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector, Minerva
is under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing her descend from
Olympus, joins her near the Scaean gate. They agree to put off the general
engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a
single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the challenge, the lot is
cast and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after several attacks, are parted
by the night. The Trojans calling a council, Antenor purposes the delivery
of Helen to the Greeks, to which Paris will not consent, but offers to
restore them her riches. Priam sends a herald to make this offer, and to
demand a truce for burning the dead, the last of which only is agreed to
by Agamemnon. When the funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the
advice of Nestor, erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp,
flanked with towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune
testifies his jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from
Jupiter. Both armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens
the Trojans with thunder, and other signs of his wrath.

The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax, the
next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the funeral rites of
the slain and one more in building the fortification before the ships. So
that somewhat about three days is employed in this book. The scene lies
wholly in the field.

  So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Then rush'd impetuous through the Scaean gate.
  Him Paris follow'd to the dire alarms;
  Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
  As when to sailors labouring through the main,
  That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,
  Jove bids at length the expected gales arise;
  The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
  So welcome these to Troy's desiring train,
  The bands are cheer'd, the war awakes again.

  Bold Paris first the work of death begun
  On great Menestheus, Areithous' son,
  Sprung from the fair Philomeda's embrace,
  The pleasing Arne was his native place.
  Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,
  Beneath his steely casque he felt the blow(177)
  Full on his neck, from Hector's weighty hand;
  And roll'd, with limbs relax'd, along the land.
  By Glaucus' spear the bold Iphmous bleeds,
  Fix'd in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
  Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound,
  Drop the cold useless members on the ground.

  When now Minerva saw her Argives slain,
  From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain
  Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight,
  Nor shot less swift from Ilion's towery height.
  Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade;
  When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid:

  "What cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!
  Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
  Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way,
  To give to Greece the long divided day?
  Too much has Troy already felt thy hate,
  Now breathe thy rage, and hush the stern debate;
  This day, the business of the field suspend;
  War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend;
  Since vengeful goddesses confederate join
  To raze her walls, though built by hands divine."

  To whom the progeny of Jove replies:
  "I left, for this, the council of the skies:
  But who shall bid conflicting hosts forbear,
  What art shall calm the furious sons of war?"
  To her the god: "Great Hector's soul incite
  To dare the boldest Greek to single fight,
  Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers show
  A warrior worthy to be Hector's foe."

  At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew;
  Sage Helenus their secret counsels knew;
  Hector, inspired, he sought: to him address'd,
  Thus told the dictates of his sacred breast:
  "O son of Priam! let thy faithful ear
  Receive my words: thy friend and brother hear!
  Go forth persuasive, and a while engage
  The warring nations to suspend their rage;
  Then dare the boldest of the hostile train
  To mortal combat on the listed plain.
  For not this day shall end thy glorious date;
  The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate."

  He said: the warrior heard the word with joy;
  Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
  Held by the midst athwart. On either hand
  The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand;
  Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear:
  They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war.
  The Athenian maid, and glorious god of day,(178)
  With silent joy the settling hosts survey:
  In form of vultures, on the beech's height
  They sit conceal'd, and wait the future fight.

  The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields,
  Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
  As when a general darkness veils the main,
  (Soft Zephyr curling the wide wat'ry plain,)
  The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps,
  And a still horror saddens all the deeps;
  Thus in thick orders settling wide around,
  At length composed they sit, and shade the ground.
  Great Hector first amidst both armies broke
  The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke:

  "Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
  What my soul prompts, and what some god commands.
  Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose,
  O'erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;
  War with a fiercer tide once more returns,
  Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
  You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear;
  'Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:
  From all your troops select the boldest knight,
  And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight.
  Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,
  Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain;
  But let my body, to my friends return'd,
  By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burn'd.
  And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,
  Shall stretch your daring champion in the dust;
  If mine the glory to despoil the foe;
  On Phoebus' temple I'll his arms bestow:
  The breathless carcase to your navy sent,
  Greece on the shore shall raise a monument;
  Which when some future mariner surveys,
  Wash'd by broad Hellespont's resounding seas,
  Thus shall he say, 'A valiant Greek lies there,
  By Hector slain, the mighty man of war,'
  The stone shall tell your vanquish'd hero's name.
  And distant ages learn the victor's fame."

  This fierce defiance Greece astonish'd heard,
  Blush'd to refuse, and to accept it fear'd.
  Stern Menelaus first the silence broke,
  And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:

  "Women of Greece! O scandal of your race,
  Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,
  How great the shame, when every age shall know
  That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
  Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,
  A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
  Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,
  Myself will dare the danger of the day;
  'Tis man's bold task the generous strife to try,
  But in the hands of God is victory."

  These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  His manly limbs in azure arms he dress'd.
  That day, Atrides! a superior hand
  Had stretch'd thee breathless on the hostile strand;
  But all at once, thy fury to compose,
  The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose;
  Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press'd
  Thy daring hand, and this advice address'd:
  "Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run,
  And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
  Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design;
  Great Hectors arm is mightier far than thine:
  Even fierce Achilles learn'd its force to fear,
  And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
  Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;
  Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
  The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,
  Though bold and burning with desire of fame,
  Content the doubtful honour might forego,
  So great the danger, and so brave the foe."

  He said, and turn'd his brother's vengeful mind;
  He stoop'd to reason, and his rage resign'd,
  No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
  His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

  He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
  Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
  Thus to the kings he spoke: "What grief, what shame
  Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
  How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn
  Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
  What tears shall down thy silvery beard be roll'd,
  O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old!
  Once with what joy the generous prince would hear
  Of every chief who fought this glorious war,
  Participate their fame, and pleased inquire
  Each name, each action, and each hero's sire!
  Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand,
  And trembling all before one hostile hand;
  How would he lift his aged arms on high,
  Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
  Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
  Minerva, Phoebus, and almighty Jove!
  Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
  And give this arm the spring which once it knew
  When fierce in war, where Jardan's waters fall,
  I led my troops to Phea's trembling wall,
  And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,
  Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.(179)
  There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,
  Proud Areithous' dreadful arms to wield;
  Great Areithous, known from shore to shore
  By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore;
  No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,
  But broke, with this, the battle of the foe.
  Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,
  Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew,
  Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,
  Nor aught the warrior's thundering mace avail'd.
  Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before
  Had given the vanquish'd, now the victor bore:
  But when old age had dimm'd Lycurgus' eyes,
  To Ereuthalion he consign'd the prize.
  Furious with this he crush'd our levell'd bands,
  And dared the trial of the strongest hands;
  Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay:
  All saw, and fear'd, his huge tempestuous sway
  Till I, the youngest of the host, appear'd,
  And, youngest, met whom all our army fear'd.
  I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crown'd:
  Prone fell the giant o'er a length of ground.
  What then I was, O were your Nestor now!
  Not Hector's self should want an equal foe.
  But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast,
  The flower of Greece, the examples of our host,
  Sprung from such fathers, who such numbers sway,
  Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?"

  His warm reproofs the listening kings inflame;
  And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name,
  Up-started fierce: but far before the rest
  The king of men advanced his dauntless breast:
  Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appear'd;
  And next his bulk gigantic Ajax rear'd;
  Oileus follow'd; Idomen was there,(180)
  And Merion, dreadful as the god of war:
  With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand,
  And wise Ulysses closed the daring band.
  All these, alike inspired with noble rage,
  Demand the fight. To whom the Pylian sage:

  "Lest thirst of glory your brave souls divide,
  What chief shall combat, let the gods decide.
  Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to raise
  His country's fame, his own immortal praise."

  The lots produced, each hero signs his own:
  Then in the general's helm the fates are thrown,(181)
  The people pray, with lifted eyes and hands,
  And vows like these ascend from all the bands:
  "Grant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate,
  A worthy champion for the Grecian state:
  This task let Ajax or Tydides prove,
  Or he, the king of kings, beloved by Jove."
  Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired,
  Leap'd forth the lot, of every Greek desired.
  This from the right to left the herald bears,
  Held out in order to the Grecian peers;
  Each to his rival yields the mark unknown,
  Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own;
  Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes,
  Then casts before him, and with transport cries:

  "Warriors! I claim the lot, and arm with joy;
  Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.
  Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest,
  To Saturn's son be all your vows address'd:
  But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear,
  And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear.
  Said I in secret? No, your vows declare
  In such a voice as fills the earth and air,
  Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread?
  Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred!
  From warlike Salamis I drew my birth,
  And, born to combats, fear no force on earth."

  He said. The troops with elevated eyes,
  Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies:
  "O father of mankind, superior lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored:
  Who in the highest heaven hast fix'd thy throne,
  Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone:
  Grant thou, that Telamon may bear away
  The praise and conquest of this doubtful day;
  Or, if illustrious Hector be thy care,
  That both may claim it, and that both may share."

  Now Ajax braced his dazzling armour on;
  Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone:
  He moves to combat with majestic pace;
  So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,(182)
  When Jove to punish faithless men prepares,
  And gives whole nations to the waste of wars,
  Thus march'd the chief, tremendous as a god;
  Grimly he smiled; earth trembled as he strode:(183)
  His massy javelin quivering in his hand,
  He stood, the bulwark of the Grecian band.
  Through every Argive heart new transport ran;
  All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:
  Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppress'd,
  Felt his great heart suspended in his breast:
  'Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear;
  Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

  Stern Telamon behind his ample shield,
  As from a brazen tower, o'erlook'd the field.
  Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o'ercast,
  Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
  (The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwell'd
  And in all arts of armoury excell'd,)
  This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
  And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address'd:

  "Hector! approach my arm, and singly know
  What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
  Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
  Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:
  Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
  Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
  Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
  And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
  Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
  No more--be sudden, and begin the fight."

  "O son of Telamon, thy country's pride!
  (To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
  Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
  New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
  Thou meet'st a chief deserving of thy arms,
  To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
  I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
  Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
  To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
  And bear thick battle on my sounding shield
  But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
  I steal no conquest from a noble foe."

  He said, and rising, high above the field
  Whirl'd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
  Full on the brass descending from above
  Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
