
"Fair lady," replied the Frank, "be not offended at my stating once for
all, in plain terms, that I am a Christian man, spitting at, and
bidding defiance to Apollo, Bacchus, Comus, and all other heathen
deities whatsoever."

"O! cruel interpretation of my unwary words!" said the Princess; "I did
but mention the gods of music, poetry, and eloquence, worshipped by our
divine philosophers, and whose names are still used to distinguish the
arts and sciences over which they presided--and the Count interprets it
seriously into a breach of the second commandment! Our Lady preserve
me, we must take care how we speak, when our words are so sharply
interpreted."

The Count laughed as the Princess spoke. "I had no offensive meaning,
madam," he said, "nor would I wish to interpret your words otherwise
than as being most innocent and praiseworthy. I shall suppose that your
speech contained all that was fair and blameless. You are, I have
understood, one of those who, like our worthy host, express in
composition the history and feats of the warlike time in which you
live, and give to the posterity which shall succeed us, the knowledge
of the brave deeds which have been achieved in our day. I respect the
task to which you have dedicated yourself, and know not how a lady
could lay after ages under an obligation to her in the same degree,
unless, like my wife, Brenhilda, she were herself to be the actress of
deeds which she recorded. And, by the way, she now looks towards her
neighbour at the table, as if she were about to rise and leave him; her
inclinations are towards Constantinople, and, with your ladyship's
permission, I cannot allow her to go thither alone."

"That you shall neither of you do," said Anna Comnena; "since we all go
to the capital directly, and for the purpose of seeing those wonders of
nature, of which numerous examples have been collected by the splendour
of my Imperial father.--If my husband seems to have given offence to
the Countess, do not suppose that it was intentionally dealt to her; on
the contrary, you will find the good man, when you are better
acquainted with him, to be one of those simple persons who manage so
unhappily what they mean for civilties, that those to whom they are
addressed receive them frequently in another sense."

The Countess of Paris, however, refused again to sit down to the table
from which she had risen, so that Agelastes and his Imperial guests saw
themselves under the necessity either to permit the strangers to
depart, which they seemed unwilling to do, or to detain them by force,
to attempt which might not perhaps have been either safe or pleasant;
or, lastly, to have waived the etiquette of rank and set out along with
them, at the same time managing their dignity, so as to take the
initiatory step, though the departure took place upon the motion of
their wilful guests. Much tumult there was--bustling, disputing, and
shouting--among the troops and officers who were thus moved from their
repast, two hours at least sooner than had been experienced upon
similar occasions in the memory of the oldest among them. A different
arrangement of the Imperial party likewise seemed to take place by
mutual consent.

Nicephorus Briennius ascended the seat upon the elephant, and remained
there placed beside his august mother-in-law. Agelastes, on a
sober-minded palfrey, which permitted him to prolong his philosophical
harangues at his own pleasure, rode beside the Countess Brenhilda, whom
he made the principal object of his oratory. The fair historian, though
she usually travelled in a litter, preferred upon this occasion a
spirited horse, which enabled her to keep pace with Count Robert of
Paris, on whose imagination, if not his feelings, she seemed to have it
in view to work a marked impression. The conversation of the Empress
with her son-in-law requires no special detail. It was a tissue of
criticisms upon the manners and behaviour of the Franks, and a hearty
wish that they might be soon transported from the realms of Greece,
never more to return. Such was at least the tone of the Empress, nor
did the Caesar find it convenient to express any more tolerant opinion
of the strangers. On the other hand, Agelastes made a long circuit ere
he ventured to approach the subject which he wished to introduce. He
spoke of the menagerie of the Emperor as a most superb collection of
natural history; he extolled different persons at court for having
encouraged Alexius Comnenus in this wise and philosophical amusement.
But, finally, the praise of all others was abandoned that the
philosopher might dwell upon that of Nicephorus Briennius, to whom the
cabinet or collection of Constantinople was indebted, he said, for the
principal treasures it contained.

"I am glad it is so," said the haughty Countess, without lowering her
voice or affecting any change of manner; "I am glad that he understands
some things better worth understanding than whispering with stranger
young women. Credit me, if he gives much license to his tongue among
such women of nay country as these stirring times may bring hither,
some one or other of them will fling him into the cataract which dashes
below."

"Pardon me, fair lady," said Agelastes; "no female heart could meditate
an action so atrocious against so fine a form as that of the Caesar
Nicephorus Briennius."

"Put it not on that issue, father," said the offended Countess; "for,
by my patroness Saint, our Lady of the Broken Lances, had it not been
for regard to these two ladies, who seemed to intend some respect to my
husband and myself, that same Nicephorus should have been as perfectly
a Lord of the Broken Bones as any Caesar who has borne the title since
the great Julius!"

The philosopher, upon this explicit information, began to entertain
some personal fear for himself, and hastened, by diverting the
conversation, which he did with great dexterity, to the story of Hero
and Leander, to put the affront received out of the head of this
unscrupulous Amazon.

Meantime, Count Robert of Paris was engrossed, as it may be termed, by
the fair Anna Comnena. She spoke on all subjects, on some better,
doubtless, others worse, but on none did she suspect herself of any
deficiency; while the good Count wished heartily within himself that
his companion had been safely in bed with the enchanted Princess of
Zulichium. She performed, right or wrong, the part of a panegyrist of
the Normans, until at length the Count, tired of hearing her prate of
she knew not exactly what, broke in as follows:--

"Lady," he said, "notwithstanding I and my followers are sometimes so
named, yet we are not Normans, who come hither as a numerous and
separate body of pilgrims, under the command of their Duke Robert, a
valiant, though extravagant, thoughtless, and weak man. I say nothing
against the fame of these Normans. They conquered, in our fathers'
days, a kingdom far stronger than their own, which men call England; I
see that you entertain some of the natives of which country in your
pay, under the name of Varangians. Although defeated, as I said, by the
Normans, they are, nevertheless, a brave race; nor would we think
ourselves much dishonoured by mixing in battle with them. Still we are
the valiant Franks, who had their dwelling on the eastern banks of the
Rhine and of the Saale, who were converted to the Christian faith by
the celebrated Clovis, and are sufficient, by our numbers and courage,
to re-conquer the Holy Land, should all Europe besides stand neutral in
the contest."

There are few things more painful to the vanity of a person like the
Princess, than the being detected in an egregious error, at the moment
she is taking credit to herself for being peculiarly accurately
informed.

"A false slave, who knew not what he was saying, I suppose," said the
Princess, "imposed upon me the belief that the Varangians were the
natural enemies of the Normans. I see him marching there by the side of
Achilles Tatius, the leader of his corps.--Call him hither, you
officers!--Yonder tall man, I mean, with the battle-axe upon his
shoulder."

Hereward, distinguished by his post at the head of the squadron, was
summoned from thence to the presence of the Princess, where he made his
military obeisance with a cast of sternness in his aspect, as his
glance lighted upon the proud look of the Frenchman who rode beside
Anna Comnena.

"Did I not understand thee, fellow," said Anna Comnena, "to have
informed me, nearly a month ago, that the Normans and the Franks were
the same people, and enemies to the race from which you spring?"

"The Normans are our mortal enemies, Lady," answered Hereward, "by whom
we were driven from our native land. The Franks are subjects of the
same Lord-Paramount with the Normans, and therefore they neither love
the Varangians, nor are beloved by them."

"Good fellow," said the French Count, "you do the Franks wrong, and
ascribe to the Varangians, although not unnaturally, an undue degree of
importance, when you suppose that a race which has ceased to exist as
an independent nation for more than a generation, can be either an
object of interest or resentment to such as we are."

"I am no stranger," said the Varangian, "to the pride of your heart, or
the precedence which you assume over those who have been less fortunate
in war than yourselves. It is God who casteth down and who buildeth up,
nor is there in the world a prospect to which the Varangians would look
forward with more pleasure than that a hundred of their number should
meet in a fair field, either with the oppressive Normans, or their
modern compatriots, the vain Frenchmen, and let God be the judge which
is most worthy of victory."

"You take an insolent advantage of the chance," said the Count of
Paris, "which gives you an unlooked-for opportunity to brave a
nobleman."

"It is my sorrow and shame," said the Varangian, "that that opportunity
is not complete; and that there is a chain around me which forbids me
to say, Slay me, or I'll kill thee before we part from this spot!"

"Why, thou foolish and hot-brained churl," replied the Count, "what
right hast thou to the honour of dying by my blade? Thou art mad, or
hast drained the ale-cup so deeply that thou knowest not what thou
thinkest or sayest."

"Thou liest," said the Varangian; "though such a reproach be the utmost
scandal of thy race."

The Frenchman motioned his hand quicker than light to his sword, but
instantly withdrew it, and said with dignity, "thou canst not offend
me."

"But thou," said the exile, "hast offended me in a matter which can
only be atoned by thy manhood."

"Where and how?" answered the Count; "although it is needless to ask
the question, which thou canst not answer rationally."

"Thou hast this day," answered the Varangian, "put a mortal affront
upon a great prince, whom thy master calls his ally, and by whom thou
hast been received with every rite of hospitality. Him thou hast
affronted as one peasant at a merry-making would do shame to another,
and this dishonour thou hast done to him in the very face of his own
chiefs and princes, and the nobles from every court of Europe."

"It was thy master's part to resent my conduct," said the Frenchman,
"if in reality he so much felt it as an affront."

"But that," said Hereward, "did not consist with the manners of his
country to do. Besides that, we trusty Varangians esteem ourselves
bound by our oath as much to defend our Emperor, while the service
lasts, on every inch of his honour as on every foot of his territory; I
therefore tell thee, Sir Knight, Sir Count, or whatever thou callest
thyself, there is mortal quarrel between thee and the Varangian guard,
ever and until thou hast fought it out in fair and manly battle, body
to body, with one of the said Imperial Varangians, when duty and
opportunity shall permit:--and so God schaw the right!"

As this passed in the French language, the meaning escaped the
understanding of such Imperialists as were within hearing at the time;
and the Princess, who waited with some astonishment till the Crusader
and the Varangian had finished their conference, when it was over, said
to him with interest, "I trust you feel that poor man's situation to be
too much at a distance from your own, to admit of your meeting him in
what is termed knightly battle?"

"On such a question," said the knight, "I have but one answer to any
lady who does not, like my Brenhilda, cover herself with a shield, and
bear a sword by her side, and the heart of a knight in her bosom."

"And suppose for once," said the Princess Anna Comnena, "that I
possessed such titles to your confidence, what would your answer be to
me?"

"There can be little reason for concealing it," said the Count. "The
Varangian is a brave man, and a strong one; it is contrary to my vow to
shun his challenge, and perhaps I shall derogate from my rank by
accepting it; but the world is wide, and he is yet to be born who has
seen Robert of Paris shun the face of mortal man. By means of some
gallant officer among the Emperor's guards, this poor fellow, who
nourishes so strange an ambition, shall learn that he shall have his
wish gratified."

"And then?"--said Anna Comnena.

"Why, then," said the Count, "in the poor man's own language, God schaw
the right!"

"Which is to say," said the Princess, "that if my father has an officer
of his guards honourable enough to forward so pious and reasonable a
purpose, the Emperor must lose an ally, in whose faith he puts
confidence, or a most trusty and faithful soldier of his personal
guard, who has distinguished himself upon many occasions?"

"I am happy to hear," said the Count, "that the man bears such a
character. In truth, his ambition ought to have some foundation. The
more I think of it, the rather am I of opinion that there is something
generous, rather than derogatory, in giving to the poor exile, whose
thoughts are so high and noble, those privileges of a man of rank,
which some who were born in such lofty station are too cowardly to
avail themselves of. Yet despond not, noble Princess; the challenge is
not yet accepted of, and if it was, the issue is in the hand of God. As
for me, whose trade is war, the sense that I have something so serious
to transact with this resolute man, will keep me from other less
honourable quarrels, in which a lack of occupation might be apt to
involve me."

The Princess made no farther observation, being resolved, by private
remonstrance to Achilles Tatius, to engage him to prevent a meeting
which might be fatal to the one or the other of two brave men. The town
now darkened before them, sparkling, at the same time, through its
obscurity, by the many lights which illuminated the houses of the
citizens. The royal cavalcade held their way to the Golden Gate, where
the trusty centurion put his guard under arms to receive them.

"We must now break off, fair ladies," said the Count, as the party,
having now dismounted, were standing together at the private gate of
the Blacquernal Palace, "and find as we can, the lodgings which we
occupied last night."

"Under your favour, no," said the Empress. "You must be content to take
your supper and repose in quarters more fitting your rank; and," added
Irene, "with no worse quartermaster than one of the Imperial family who
hag been your travelling companion."

This the Count heard, with considerable inclination to accept the
hospitality which was so readily offered. Although as devoted as a man
could well be to the charms of his Brenhilda, the very idea never
having entered his head of preferring another's beauty to hers, yet,
nevertheless, he had naturally felt himself flattered by the attentions
of a woman of eminent beauty and very high rank; and the praises with
which the Princess had loaded him, had not entirely fallen to the
ground. He was no longer in the humour in which the morning had found
him, disposed to outrage the feelings of the Emperor, and to insult his
dignity; but, flattered by the adroit sycophancy which the old
philosopher had learned from the schools, and the beautiful Princess
had been gifted with by nature, he assented to the Empress's proposal;
the more readily, perhaps, that the darkness did not permit him to see
that there was distinctly a shade of displeasure on the brow of
Brenhilda. Whatever the cause, she cared not to express it, and the
married pair had just entered that labyrinth of passages through which
Hereward had formerly wandered, when a chamberlain, and a female
attendant, richly dressed, bent the knee before them, and offered them
the means and place to adjust their attire, ere they entered the
Imperial presence. Brenhilda looked upon her apparel and arms, spotted
with the blood of the insolent Scythian, and, Amazon as she was, felt
the shame of being carelessly and improperly dressed. The arms of the
knight were also bloody, and in disarrangement.

"Tell my female squire, Agatha, to give her attendance," said the
Countess. "She alone is in the habit of assisting to unarm and to
attire me."

"Now, God be praised," thought the Grecian lady of the bed-chamber,
"that I am not called to a toilet where smiths' hammers and tongs are
like to be the instruments most in request!"

"Tell Marcian, my armourer," said the Count, "to attend with the silver
and blue suit of plate and mail which I won in a wager from the Count
of Thoulouse." [Footnote: Raymond Count of Thoulouse, and St. Giles,
Duke of Carboune, and Marquis of Provence, an aged warrior who had won
high distinction in the contests against the Saracens in Spain, was the
chief leader of the Crusaders from the south of France. His title of
St. Giles is corrupted by Anna Comnena into _Sangles_, by which name
she constantly mentions him in the Alexiad.]

"Might I not have the honour of adjusting your armour," said a
splendidly drest courtier, with some marks of the armourer's
profession, "since I have put on that of the Emperor himself?--may his
name be sacred!"

"And how many rivets hast thou clenched upon the occasion with this
hand," said the Count, catching hold of it, "which looks as if it had
never been washed, save with milk of roses,--and with this childish
toy?" pointing to a hammer with ivory haft and silver head, which,
stuck into a milk-white kidskin apron, the official wore as badges of
his duty. The armourer fell back in some confusion. "His grasp," he
said to another domestic, "is like the seizure of a vice!"

While this little scene passed apart, the Empress Irene, her daughter,
and her son-in-law, left the company, under pretence of making a
necessary change in their apparel. Immediately after, Agelastes was
required to attend the Emperor, and the strangers were conducted to two
adjacent chambers of retirement, splendidly fitted up, and placed for
the present at their disposal, and that of their attendants. There we
shall for a time leave them, assuming, with the assistance of their own
attendants, a dress which their ideas regarded as most fit for a great
occasion; those of the Grecian court willingly keeping apart from a
task which they held nearly as formidable as assisting at the lair of a
royal tiger or his bride.

Agelastes found the Emperor sedulously arranging his most splendid
court-dress; for, as in the court of Pekin, the change of ceremonial
attire was a great part of the ritual observed at Constantinople.

"Thou hast done well, wise Agelastes," said Alexius to the philosopher,
as he approached with abundance of prostrations and genuflexions--"Thou
hast done well, and we are content with thee. Less than thy wit and
address must have failed in separating from their company this tameless
bull, and unyoked heifer, over whom, if we obtain influence, we shall
command, by every account, no small interest among those who esteem
them the bravest in the host."

"My humble understanding," said Agelastes, "had been infinitely
inferior to the management of so prudent and sagacious a scheme, had it
not been shaped forth and suggested by the inimitable wisdom of your
most sacred Imperial Highness."

"We are aware," said Alexius, "that we had the merit of blocking forth
the scheme of detaining these persons, either by their choice as
allies, or by main force as hostages. Their friends, ere yet they have
missed them, will be engaged in war with the Turks, and at no liberty,
if the devil should suggest such an undertaking, to take arms against
the sacred empire. Thus, Agelastes, we shall obtain hostages at least
as important and as valuable as that Count of Vermandois, whose liberty
the tremendous Godfrey of Bouillon extorted from us by threats of
instant war."

"Pardon," said Agelastes, "if I add another reason to those which of
themselves so heavily support your august resolution. It is possible
that we may, by observing the greatest caution and courtesy towards
these strangers, win them in good earnest to our side."

"I conceive you, I conceive you,"--said the Emperor; "and this very
night I will exhibit myself to this Count and his lady in the royal
presence chamber, in the richest robes which our wardrobe can furnish.
The lions of Solomon shall roar, the golden tree of Comnenus shall
display its wonders, and the feeble eyes of these Franks shall be
altogether dazzled by the splendour of the empire. These spectacles
cannot but sink into their minds, and dispose them to become the allies
and servants of a nation so much more powerful, skilful, and wealthy
than their own--Thou hast something to say, Agelastes. Years and long
study have made thee wise; though we have given our opinion, thou mayst
speak thine own, and live."

Thrice three times did Agelastes press his brow against the hem of the
Emperor's garment, and great seemed his anxiety to find such words as
might intimate his dissent from his sovereign, yet save him from the
informality of contradicting him expressly.

"These sacred words, in which your sacred Highness has uttered your
most just and accurate opinions, are undeniable, and incapable of
contradiction, were any vain enough to attempt to impugn them.
Nevertheless, be it lawful to say, that men show the wisest arguments
in vain to those who do not understand reason, just as you would in
vain exhibit a curious piece of limning to the blind, or endeavour to
bribe, as scripture saith, a sow by the offer of a precious stone. The
fault is not, in such case, in the accuracy of your sacred reasoning,
but in the obtuseness and perverseness of the barbarians to whom it is
applied."

"Speak more plainly," said the Emperor; "how often must we tell thee,
that in cases in which we really want counsel, we know we must be
contented to sacrifice ceremony?"

"Then in plain words," said Agelastes, "these European barbarians are
like no others under the cope of the universe, either on the things on
which they look with desire, or on those which they consider as
discouraging. The treasures of this noble empire, so far as they
affected their wishes, would merely inspire them with the desire to go
to war with a nation possessed of so much wealth, and who, in their
self-conceited estimation, were less able to defend, than they
themselves are powerful to assail. Of such a description, for instance,
is Bohemond of Tarentum,--and such, a one is many a crusader less able
and sagacious than he;--for I think I need not tell your Imperial
Divinity, that he holds his own self-interest to be the devoted guide
of his whole conduct through this extraordinary war; and that,
therefore, you can justly calculate his course, when once you are aware
from which point of the compass the wind of avarice and self-interest
breathes with respect to him. But there are spirits among the Franks of
a very different nature, and who must be acted upon by very different
motives, if we would make ourselves masters of their actions, and the
principles by which they are governed. If it were lawful to do so, I
would request your Majesty to look at the manner by which an artful
juggler of your court achieves his imposition upon the eyes of
spectators, yet needfully disguises the means by which he attains his
object. This people--I mean the more lofty-minded of these crusaders,
who act up to the pretences of the doctrines which they call
chivalry--despise the thirst of gold, and gold itself, unless to hilt
their swords, or to furnish forth some necessary expenses, as alike
useless and contemptible. The man who can be moved by the thirst of
gain, they contemn, scorn, and despise, and liken him, in the meanness
of his objects, to the most paltry serf that ever followed the plough,
or wielded the spade. On the other hand, if it happens that they
actually need gold, they are sufficiently unceremonious in taking it
where they can most easily find it. Thus, they are neither easily to be
bribed by giving them sums of gold, nor to be starved into compliance
by withholding what chance may render necessary for them. In the one
case, they set no value upon the gift of a little paltry yellow dross;
in the other, they are accustomed to take what they want."

"Yellow dross," interrupted Alexius. "Do they call that noble metal,
equally respected by Roman and barbarian, by rich and poor, by great
and mean, by churchmen and laymen, which all mankind are fighting for,
plotting for, planning for, intriguing for, and damning themselves for,
both soul and body--by the opprobrious name of yellow dross? They are
mad, Agelastes, utterly mad. Perils and dangers, penalties and
scourges, are the arguments to which men who are above the universal
influence which moves all others, can possibly be accessible."

"Nor are they," said Agelastes, "more accessible to fear than they are
to self-interest. They are indeed, from their boyhood, brought up to
scorn those passions which influence ordinary minds, whether by means
of avarice to impel, or of fear to hold back. So much is this the case,
that what is enticing to other men, must, to interest them, have the
piquant sauce of extreme danger. I told, for instance, to this very
hero, a legend of a Princess of Zulichium, who lay on an enchanted
couch, beautiful as an angel, awaiting the chosen knight who should, by
dispelling her enchanted slumbers, become master of her person, of her
kingdom of Zulichium, and of her countless treasures; and, would your
Imperial Majesty believe me, I could scarce get the gallant to attend
to my legend or take any interest in the adventure, till I assured him
he would have to encounter a winged dragon, compared to which the
largest of those in the Frank romances was but like a mere dragon-fly?"

"And did this move the gallant?" said the Emperor.

"So much so," replied the philosopher, "that had I not unfortunately,
by the earnestness of my description, awakened the jealousy of his
Penthesilea of a Countess, he had forgotten the crusade and all
belonging to it, to go in quest of Zulichium and its slumbering
sovereign."

"Nay, then," said the Emperor, "we have in our empire (make us sensible
of the advantage!) innumerable tale-tellers who are not possessed in
the slightest degree of that noble scorn of gold which is proper to the
Franks, but shall, for a brace of besants, lie with the devil, and beat
him to boot, if in that manner we can gain, as mariners say, the
weathergage of the Franks."

"Discretion," said Agelastes, "is in the highest degree necessary.
Simply to lie is no very great matter; it is merely a departure from
the truth, which is little different from missing a mark at archery,
where the whole horizon, one point alone excepted, will alike serve the
shooter's purpose; but to move the Frank as is desired, requires a
perfect knowledge of his temper and disposition, great caution and
presence of mind, and the most versatile readiness in changing from one
subject to another. Had I not myself been, somewhat alert, I might have
paid the penalty of a false step in your Majesty's service, by being
flung into my own cascade by the virago whom I offended."

"A perfect Thalestris!" said the Emperor; "I shall take care what
offence I give her."

"If I might speak and live," said Agelastes, "the Caesar Nicephorus
Briennius had best adopt the same precaution."

"Nicephorus," said the Emperor, "must settle that with our daughter. I
have ever told her that she gives him too much of that history, of
which a page or two is sufficiently refreshing; but by our own self we
must swear it, Agelastes, that, night after night, hearing nothing
else, would subdue the patience of a saint!--Forget, good Agelastes,
that them hast heard me say such a thing--more especially, remember it
not when thou art in presence of our Imperial wife and daughter."

"Nor were the freedoms taken by the Caesar beyond the bounds of an
innocent gallantry," said Agelastes; "but the Countess, I must needs
say, is dangerous. She killed this day the Scythian Toxartis, by what
seemed a mere fillip on the head."

"Hah!" said the Emperor; "I knew that Toxartis, and he was like enough
to deserve his death, being a bold unscrupulous marauder. Take notes,
however, how it happened, the names of witnesses, &c., that, if
necessary, we may exhibit the fact as a deed of aggression on the part
of the Count and Countess of Paris, to the assembly of the crusaders."

"I trust," said Agelastes, "your Imperial Majesty will not easily
resign the golden opportunity of gaining to your standard persons whose
character stands so very high in chivalry. It would cost you but little
to bestow upon them a Grecian island, worth a hundred of their own
paltry lordship of Paris; and if it were given under the condition of
their expelling the infidels or the disaffected who may have obtained
the temporary possession, it would be so much the more likely to be an
acceptable offer. I need not say that the whole knowledge, wisdom, and
skill of the poor Agelastes is at your Imperial Majesty's disposal."

The Emperor paused for a moment, and then said, as if on full
consideration, "Worthy Agelastes, I dare trust thee in this difficult
and somewhat dangerous matter; but I will keep my purpose of exhibiting
to them the lions of Solomon, and the golden tree of our Imperial
house."

"To that there can be no objection," returned the philosopher; "only
remember to exhibit few guards, for these Franks are like a fiery
horse; when in temper he may be ridden with a silk thread, but when he
has taken umbrage or suspicion, as they would likely do if they saw
many armed men, a steel bridle would not restrain him."

"I will be cautious," said the Emperor, "in that particular, as well as
others.--Sound the silver bell, Agelastes, that the officers of our
wardrobe may attend."

"One single word, while your Highness is alone," said Agelastes. "Will
your Imperial Majesty transfer to me the direction of your menagerie,
or collection of extraordinary creatures?"

"You make me wonder," said the Emperor, taking a signet, bearing upon
it a lion, with the legend, _Vicit Leo ex tribu Judae_. "This," he
said, "will give thee the command of our dens. And now, be candid for
once with thy master--for deception is thy nature even with me--By what
charm wilt thou subdue these untamed savages?"

"By the power of falsehood," replied Agelastes, with deep reverence.

"I believe thee an adept in it," said the Emperor. "And to which of
their foibles wilt thou address it?"

"To their love of fame," said the philosopher; and retreated backwards
out of the royal apartment, as the officers of the wardrobe entered to
complete the investment of the Emperor in his Imperial habiliments.




CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

     I will converse with iron-witted fools,
     And unrespective boys; none are for me,
     That look into me with considerate eyes;--
     High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
                                    RICHARD III.


As they parted from each other, the Emperor and philosopher had each
their own anxious thoughts on the interview which had passed between
them; thoughts which they expressed in broken sentences and
ejaculations, though for the better understanding of the degree of
estimation in which they held each other, we will give them a more
regular and intelligible form.

"Thus, then," half muttered half said Alexius, but so low as to hide
his meaning from the officers of the wardrobe, who entered to do their
office,--"thus, then, this bookworm--this remnant of old heathen
philosophy, who hardly believes, so God save me, the truth of the
Christian creed, has topp'd his part so well that he forces his Emperor
to dissemble in his presence. Beginning by being the buffoon of the
court, he has wormed himself into all its secrets, made himself master
of all its intrigues, conspired with my own son-in-law against me,
debauched my guards,--indeed so woven his web of deceit, that my life
is safe no longer, than he believes me the imperial dolt which I have
affected to seem, in order to deceive him; fortunate that even so can I
escape his cautionary anticipation of my displeasure, by avoiding to
precipitate his measures of violence. But were this sudden storm of the
crusade fairly passed over, the ungrateful Caesar, the boastful coward
Achilles Tatius, and the bosom serpent Agelastes, shall know whether
Alexius Comnenus has been born their dupe. When Greek meets Greek,
comes the strife of subtlety, as well as the tug of war." Thus saying,
he resigned himself to the officers of his wardrobe, who proceeded to
ornament him as the solemnity required,

"I trust him not," said Agelastes, the meaning of whose gestures and
exclamations, we, in like manner, render into a connected meaning. "I
cannot, and do not trust him--he somewhat overacts his part. He has
borne himself upon other occasions with the shrewd wit of his family
the Comneni; yet he now trusts to the effect of his trumpery lions upon
such a shrewd people as the Franks and Normans, and seems to rely upon
me for the character of men with whom he has been engaged in peace and
war for many years. This can be but to gain my confidence; for there
were imperfect looks, and broken sentences, which seemed to say,
'Agelastes, the Emperor knows thee and confides not in thee.' Yet the
plot is successful and undiscovered, as far as can be judged; and were
I to attempt to recede now, I were lost for ever. A little time to
carry on this intrigue with the Frank, when possibly, by the assistance
of this gallant, Alexius shall exchange the crown for a cloister, or a
still narrower abode; and then, Agelastes, thou deservest to be blotted
from the roll of philosophers, if thou canst not push out of the throne
the conceited and luxurious Caesar, and reign in his stead, a second
Marcus Antoninus, when the wisdom of thy rule, long unfelt in a world
which has been guided by tyrants and voluptuaries, shall soon
obliterate recollection of the manner in which thy power was acquired.
To work then--be active, and be cautious. The time requires it, and the
prize deserves it."

While these thoughts passed through his mind, he arrayed himself, by
the assistance of Diogenes, in a clean suit of that simple apparel in
which he always frequented the court; a garb as unlike that of a
candidate for royalty, as it was a contrast to the magnificent robes
with which Alexius was now investing himself,

In their separate apartments, or dressing-rooms, the Count of Paris and
his lady put on the best apparel which they had prepared to meet such a
chance upon their journey. Even in France, Robert was seldom seen in
the peaceful cap and sweeping mantle, whose high plumes and flowing
folds were the garb of knights in times of peace. He was now arrayed in
a splendid suit of armour, all except the head, which was bare
otherwise than as covered by his curled locks. The rest of his person
was sheathed in the complete mail of the time, richly inlaid with
silver, which contrasted with the azure in which the steel was
damasked. His spurs were upon his heels--his sword was by his side, and
his triangular shield was suspended round his neck, bearing, painted
upon it, a number of _fleures-de-lis semees_, as it is called, upon the
field, being the origin of those lily flowers which after times reduced
to three only; and which were the terror of Europe, until they suffered
so many reverses in our own time.

The extreme height of Count Robert's person adapted him for a garb,
which had a tendency to make persons of a lower stature appear rather
dwarfish and thick when arrayed _cap-a-pie_. The features, with their
self-collected composure, and noble contempt of whatever could have
astounded or shaken an ordinary mind, formed a well-fitted capital to
the excellently proportioned and vigorous frame which they terminated.
The Countess was in more peaceful attire; but her robes were short and
succinct, like those of one who might be called to hasty exercise. The
upper part of her dress consisted of more than one tunic, sitting close
to the body, while a skirt, descending from the girdle, and reaching to
the ankles, embroidered elegantly but richly, completed an attire which
a lady might have worn in much more modern times. Her tresses were
covered with a light steel head-piece, though some of them, escaping,
played round her face, and gave relief to those handsome features which
might otherwise have seemed too formal, if closed entirely within the
verge of steel. Over these undergarments was flung a rich velvet cloak
of a deep green colour, descending from the head, where a species of
hood was loosely adjusted over the helmet, deeply laced upon its verges
and seams, and so long as to sweep the ground behind. A dagger of rich
materials ornamented a girdle of curious goldsmith's work, and was the
only offensive weapon which, notwithstanding her military occupation,
she bore upon this occasion.

The toilet--as modern times would say--of the Countess, was not nearly
so soon ended as that of Count Robert, who occupied his time, as
husbands of every period are apt to do, in little sub-acid complaints
between jest and earnest, upon the dilatory nature of ladies, and the
time which they lose in doffing and donning their garments. But when
the Countess Brenhilda came forth in the pride of loveliness, from the
inner chamber where she had attired herself, her husband, who was still
her lover, clasped her to his breast and expressed his privilege by the
kiss which he took as of right from a creature so beautiful. Chiding
him for his folly, yet almost returning the kiss which she received,
Brenhilda began now to wonder how they were to find their way to the
presence of the Emperor.

The query was soon solved, for a gentle knock at the door announced
Agelastes, to whom, as best acquainted with the Frankish manners, had
been committed, by the Emperor, the charge of introducing the noble
strangers. A distant sound, like that of the roaring of a lion, or not
unsimilar to a large and deep gong of modern times, intimated the
commencement of the ceremonial. The black slaves upon guard, who, as
hath been observed, were in small numbers, stood ranged in their state
dresses of white and gold, bearing in one hand a naked sabre, and in
the other a torch of white wax, which served to guide the Count and
Countess through the passages that led to the interior of the palace,
and to the most secret hall of audience.

The door of this _sanctum sanctorum_ was lower than usual, a simple
stratagem devised by some superstitious officer of the Imperial
household, to compel the lofty-crested Frank to lower his body, as he
presented himself in the Imperial presence. Robert, when the door flew
open, and he discovered in the background the Emperor seated upon his
throne amidst a glare of light, which was broken and reflected in ten
thousand folds by the jewels with which his vestments were covered,
stopt short, and demanded the meaning of introducing him through so low
an arch? Agelastes pointed to the Emperor by way of shifting from
himself a question which he could not have answered. The mute, to
apologize for his silence, yawned, and showed the loss of his tongue.

"Holy Virgin!" said the Countess, "what can these unhappy Africans have
done, to have deserved a condemnation which involves so cruel a fate?"

"The hour of retribution is perhaps come," said the Count, in a
displeased tone, while Agelastes, with such hurry as time and place
permitted, entered, making his prostrations and genuflexions, little
doubting that the Frank must follow him, and to do so must lower his
body to the Emperor. The Count, however, in the height of displeasure
at the trick which he conceived had been, intended him, turned himself
round, and entered the presence-chamber with his back purposely turned
to the sovereign, and did not face Alexius until he reached the middle
of the apartment, when he was joined by the Countess, who had made her
approach in a more seemly manner. The Emperor, who had prepared to
acknowledge the Count's expected homage in the most gracious manner,
found himself now even more unpleasantly circumstanced than when this
uncompromising Frank had usurped the royal throne in the course of the
day.

The officers and nobles who stood around, though a very select number,
were more numerous than usual, as the meeting was not held for counsel,
but merely for state. These assumed such an appearance of mingled
displeasure and confusion as might best suit with the perplexity of
Alexius, while the wily features of the Norman-Italian, Bohemond of
Tarentum, who was also present, had a singular mixture of fantastical
glee and derision. It is the misfortune of the weaker on such
occasions, or at least the more timid, to be obliged to take the petty
part of winking hard, as if not able to see what they cannot avenge.

Alexius made the signal that the ceremonial of the grand reception
should immediately commence. Instantly the lions of Solomon, which had
been newly furbished, raised their heads, erected their manes,
brandished their tails, until they excited the imagination of Count
Robert, who, being already on fire at the circumstances of his
reception, conceived the bellowing of these automata to be the actual
annunciation of immediate assault. Whether the lions, whose forms he
beheld, were actually lords of the forest,--whether they were mortals
who had suffered transformation,--whether they were productions of the
skill of an artful juggler or profound naturalist, the Count neither
knew nor cared. All that he thought of the danger was, it was worthy of
his courage; nor did his heart permit him a moment's irresolution. He
strode to the nearest lion, which seemed in the act of springing up,
and said, in a tone loud and formidable as its own, "How now, dog!" At
the same time he struck the figure with his clenched fist and steel
gauntlet with so much force, that its head burst, and the steps and
carpet of the throne were covered with wheels, springs, and other
machinery, which had been the means of producing its mimic terrors.

On this display of the real nature of the cause of his anger, Count
Robert could not but feel a little ashamed of having given way to
passion on such an occasion. He was still more confused when Bohemond,
descending from his station near the Emperor, addressed him in the
Frank language;--"You have done a gallant deed, truly, Count Robert, in
freeing the court of Byzantium from an object of fear which has long
been used to frighten peevish children and unruly barbarians!"

Enthusiasm has no greater enemy than ridicule. "Why, then," said Count
Robert, blushing deeply at the same time, "did they exhibit its
fantastic terrors to me? I am neither child nor barbarian."

"Address yourself to the Emperor, then, as an intelligent man,"
answered Bohemond. "Say something to him in excuse of your conduct, and
show that our bravery has not entirely run away with our common sense.
And hark you also, while I have a moment's speech of you,--do you and
your wife heedfully follow my example at supper!" These words were
spoken with a significant tone and corresponding look.

The opinion of Bohemond, from his long intercourse, both in peace and
war, with the Grecian Emperor, gave him great influence with the other
crusaders, and Count Robert yielded to his advice. He turned towards
the Emperor with something liker an obeisance than he had hitherto
paid. "I crave your pardon," he said, "for breaking that gilded piece
of pageantry; but, in sooth, the wonders of sorcery, and the portents
of accomplished and skilful jugglers, are so numerous in this country,
that one does not clearly distinguish what is true from what is false,
or what is real from what is illusory."

The Emperor, notwithstanding the presence of mind for which he was
remarkable, and the courage in which he was not held by his countrymen
to be deficient, received this apology somewhat awkwardly. Perhaps the
rueful complaisance with which he accepted the Count's apology, might
be best compared to that of a lady of the present day when an awkward
guest has broken a valuable piece of china. He muttered something about
the machines having been long preserved in the Imperial family, as
being made on the model of those which guarded the throne of the wise
King of Israel; to which the blunt plain-spoken Count expressed his
doubt in reply, whether the wisest prince in the world ever
condescended to frighten his subjects or guests by the mimic roarings
of a wooden lion. "If," said he, "I too hastily took it for a living
creature, I have had the worst, by damaging my excellent gauntlet in
dashing to pieces its timber skull."

The Emperor, after a little more had been said, chiefly on the same
subject, proposed that they should pass to the banquet-room.
Marshalled, accordingly, by the grand sewer of the Imperial table, and
attended by all present, excepting the Emperor and the immediate
members of his family, the Frankish guests were guided through a
labyrinth of apartments, each of which was filled with wonders of
nature and art, calculated to enhance their opinion of the wealth and
grandeur which had assembled together so much that was wonderful. Their
passage being necessarily slow and interrupted, gave the Emperor time
to change his dress, according to the ritual of his court, which did
not permit his appearing twice in the same vesture before the same
spectators. He took the opportunity to summon Agelastes into his
presence, and, that their conference might be secret, he used, in
assisting his toilet, the agency of some of the mutes destined for the
service of the interior.

The temper of Alexius Comnenus was considerably moved, although it was
one of the peculiarities of his situation to be ever under the
necessity of disguising the emotions of his mind, and of affecting, in
presence of his subjects, a superiority to human passion, which he was
far from feeling. It was therefore with gravity, and even reprehension,
that he asked, "By whose error it was that the wily Bohemond,
half-Italian, and half-Norman, was present at this interview? Surely,
if there be one in the crusading army likely to conduct that foolish
youth and his wife behind the scenes of the exhibition by which we
hoped to impose upon them, the Count of Tarentum, as he entitles
himself, is that person."

"It was that old man," said Agelastes, "(if I may reply and live,)
Michael Cantacuzene, who deemed that his presence was peculiarly
desired; but he returns to the camp this very night."

"Yes," said Alexius, "to inform Godfrey, and the rest of the crusaders,
that one of the boldest and most highly esteemed of their number is
left, with his wife, a hostage in our Imperial city, and to bring back,
perhaps, an alternative of instant war, unless they are delivered up!"

"If it is your Imperial Highness's will to think so," said Agelastes,
"you can suffer Count Robert and his wife to return to the camp with
the Italian-Norman."

"What?" answered the Emperor, "and so lose all the fruits of an
enterprise, the preparations for which have already cost us so much in
actual expense; and, were our heart made of the same stuff with that of
ordinary mortals, would have cost us so much more in vexation and
anxiety? No, no; issue warning to the crusaders, who are still on the
hither side, that farther rendering of homage is dispensed with, and
that they repair to the quays on the banks of the Bosphorus, by peep of
light to-morrow. Let our admiral, as he values his head, pass every man
of them over to the farther side before noon. Let there be largesses, a
princely banquet on the farther bank--all that may increase their
anxiety to pass. Then, Agelastes, we will trust to ourselves to meet
this additional danger, either by bribing the venality of Bohemond, or
by bidding defiance to the crusaders. Their forces are scattered, and
the chief of them, with the leaders themselves, are all now--or by far
the greater part--on the east side of the Bosphorus.--And now to the
banquet! seeing that the change of dress has been made sufficient to
answer the statutes of the household; since our ancestors chose to make
rules for exhibiting us to our subjects, as priests exhibit their
images at their shrines!"

"Under grant of life," said Agelastes, "it was not done
inconsiderately, but in order that the Emperor, ruled ever by the same
laws from father to son, might ever be regarded as something beyond the
common laws of humanity--the divine image of a saint, therefore, rather
than a human being."

"We know it, good Agelastes," answered the Emperor, with a smile, "and
we are also aware, that many of our subjects, like the worshippers of
Bel in holy writ, treat us so far as an image, as to assist us in
devouring the revenues of our provinces, which are gathered in our
name, and for our use. These things we now only touch lightly, the time
not suiting them."

Alexius left the secret council accordingly, after the order for the
passage of the crusaders had been written out and subscribed in due
form, and in the sacred ink of the Imperial chancery.

Meantime, the rest of the company had arrived in a hall, which, like
the other apartments in the palace, was most tastefully as well as
gorgeously fitted up, except that a table, which presented a princely
banquet, might have been deemed faulty in this respect, that the
dishes, which were most splendid, both in the materials of which they
were composed, and in the viands which they held, were elevated by
means of feet, so as to be upon a level with female guests as they sat,
and with men as they lay recumbent at the banquet which it offered.

Around stood a number of black slaves richly attired, while the grand
sewer, Michael Cantazucene, arranged the strangers with his golden
wand, and conveyed orders to them, by signs, that all should remain
standing around the table, until a signal should be given.

The upper end of the board, thus furnished, and thus surrounded, was
hidden by a curtain of muslin and silver, which fell from the top of
the arch under which the upper part seemed to pass. On this curtain the
sewer kept a wary eye; and when he observed it slightly shake, he waved
his wand of office, and all expected the result.

As if self-moved, the mystic curtain arose, and discovered behind it a
throne eight steps higher than the end of the table, decorated in the
most magnificent manner, and having placed before it a small table of
ivory inlaid with silver, behind which was seated Alexius Comnenus, in
a dress entirely different from what he had worn in the course of the
day, and so much more gorgeous than his former vestments, that it
seemed not unnatural that his subjects should prostrate themselves
before a figure so splendid. His wife, his daughter, and his son-in-law
the Caesar, stood behind him with faces bent to the ground, and it was
with deep humility, that, descending from the throne at the Emperor's
command, they mingled with the guests of the lower table, and, exalted
as they were, proceeded to the festive board at the signal of the grand
sewer. So that they could not be said to partake of the repast with the
Emperor, nor to be placed at the Imperial table, although they supped
in his presence, and were encouraged by his repeated request to them to
make good cheer. No dishes presented at the lower table were offered at
the higher; but wines, and more delicate sorts of food, which arose
before the Emperor as if by magic, and seemed designed for his own
proper use, were repeatedly sent, by his special directions, to one or
other of the guests whom Alexius delighted to honour--among these the
Franks being particularly distinguished.

The behaviour of Bohemond was on this occasion particularly remarkable.

Count Robert, who kept an eye upon him, both from his recent words, and
owing to an expressive look which he once or twice darted towards him,
observed, that in no liquors or food, not even those sent from the
Emperor's own table, did this astucious prince choose to indulge. A
piece of bread, taken from the canister at random, and a glass of pure
water, was the only refreshment of which he was pleased to partake. His
alleged excuse was, the veneration due to the Holy Festival of the
Advent, which chanced to occur that very night, and which both the
Greek and Latin rule agree to hold sacred.

"I had not expected this of you, Sir Bohemond," said the Emperor, "that
