that if it does come it will be from the southeast, in which case
you will have a sharp buffeting. But you will make good passage
enough down to the Nore once you are fairly round the Whittaker."

"Glad to see you, young masters," Joe Chambers said, as the boat
came alongside his craft. "You often grumbled at the light winds,
but unless I am mistaken we shall be carrying double reefs this
journey. What do you think, Uncle John?"

"I have been saying the same, lad; still there is no saying. You
will know more about it in a few hours' time."

It was evening when the boys went on board the Susan, and as soon
as supper was over they lay down, as she was to start at daybreak
the next morning. As soon as they were roused by the creaking of
the blocks and the sound of trampling of feet overhead they went up
on deck. Day had just broken; the sky was overspread by dark clouds.

"There is not much wind after all," Geoffrey said as he looked
round.

"No, it has fallen light during the last two hours," the skipper
replied, "but I expect we shall have plenty before long. However,
we could do with a little more now."

Tide was half out when they started. Joe Chambers had said the night
before that he intended to drop down to the edge of the sands and
there anchor, and to make across them past the Whittaker Beacon
into the channel as soon as there was sufficient water to enable
him to do so. The wind was light, sometimes scarcely sufficient
to belly out the sails and give the boat steerage way, at others
coming in short puffs which heeled her over and made her spring
forward merrily.

Before long the wind fell lighter and lighter, and at last Joe
Chambers ordered the oars to be got out.

"We must get down to the edge of the Buxey," he said, "before the
tide turns, or we shall have it against us, and with this wind we
should never be able to stem it, but should be swept up the Crouch.
At present it is helping us, and with a couple of hours' rowing we
may save it to the Buxey."

The boys helped at the sweeps, and for two hours the creaking of
the oars and the dull flapping of the sail alone broke the silence
of the calm; and the lads were by no means sorry when the skipper
gave the order for the anchor to be dropped.

"I should like to have got about half a mile further," he said;
"but I can see by the landmarks that we are making no way now. The
tide is beginning to suck in."

"How long will it be before we have water enough to cross the Spit?"
Lionel asked as they laid in the oars.

"Well nigh four hours, Master Lionel. Then, even if it keeps a
stark calm like this, we shall be able to get across the sands and
a mile or two up the channel before we meet the tide. There we must
anchor again till the first strength is past, and then if the wind
springs up we can work along at the edge of the sands against it.
There is no tide close in to the sands after the first two hours.
But I still think this is going to turn into wind presently; and
if it does it will be sharp and heavy, I warrant. It's either that
or rain."

The sky grew darker and darker until the water looked almost black
under a leaden canopy.

"I wish we were back into Bricklesey," Joe Chambers said. "I have
been well nigh fifteen years going backwards and forwards here, and
I do not know that ever I saw an awkwarder look about the sky. It
reminds me of what I have heard men who have sailed to the Indies
say they have seen there before a hurricane breaks. If it was
not that we saw the clouds flying fast overhead when we started,
I should have said it was a thick sea fog that had rolled in upon
us. Ah, there is the first drop. I don't care how hard it comes
down so that there is not wind at the tail of it. A squall of wind
before rain is soon over; but when it follows rain you will soon
have your sails close reefed. You had best go below or you will be
wet through in a minute."

The great drops were pattering down on the deck and causing splashes
as of ink on the surface of the oily looking water. Another half
minute it was pouring with such a mighty roar on the deck that the
boys below needed to shout to make each other heard. It lasted but
five minutes, and then stopped as suddenly as it began. The lads
at once returned to the deck.

"So it is all over, Master Chambers."

"Well the first part is over, but that is only a sort of a beginning.
Look at that light under the clouds away to the south of east. That
is where it is coming from, unless I am mistaken. Turn to and get
the mainsail down, lads," for although after dropping anchor the
head sails had been lowered, the main and mizzen were still on her.

The men set to work, and the boys helped to stow the sail and
fasten it with the tiers. Suddenly there was a sharp puff of wind.
It lasted a few seconds only, then Joe Chambers pointed towards
the spot whence a hazy light seemed to come.

"Here it comes," he said. "Do you see that line of white water?
That is a squall and no mistake. I am glad we are not under sail."

There was a sharp, hissing sound as the line of white water
approached them, and then the squall struck them with such force
and fury that the lads instinctively grasped at the shrouds. The
mizzen had brought the craft in a moment head to wind, and Joe
Chambers and the two sailors at once lowered it and stowed it away.

"Only put a couple of tiers on," the skipper shouted. "We may have
to upsail again if this goes on."

The sea got up with great rapidity, and a few minutes after the
squall had struck them the Susan was beginning to pitch heavily. The
wind increased in force, and seemed to scream rather than whistle
in the rigging.

"The sea is getting up fast!" Geoffrey shouted in the skipper's
ear as he took his place close to him.

"It won't be very heavy yet," Joe Chambers replied; "the sands
break its force. But the tide has turned now, and as it makes over
the sand there will be a tremendous sea here in no time; that is
if this wind holds, and it seems to me that it is going to be an
unusual gale altogether."

"How long will it be before we can cross the Spit?"

"We are not going to cross today, that's certain," the skipper
said. "There will be a sea over those sands that would knock the
life out of the strongest craft that ever floated. No, I shall wait
here for another hour or two if I can, and then slip my cable and
run for the Crouch. It is a narrow channel, and I never care about
going into it after dark until there is water enough for a craft
of our draught over the sands. It ain't night now, but it is well
nigh as dark. There is no making out the bearings of the land, and
we have got to trust to the perches the fishermen put up at the
bends of the channel. However, we have got to try it. Our anchors
would never hold here when the sea gets over the sands, and if they
did they would pull her head under water.

In half an hour a sea had got up that seemed to the boys tremendous.
Dark as it was they could see in various directions tracts of white
water where the waves broke wildly over the sands. The second anchor
had been let go some time before. The two cables were as taut as
iron bars, and the boat was pulling her bow under every sea. Joe
Chambers dropped a lead line overboard and watched it closely.

"We are dragging our anchors," he said. "There is nothing for it
but to run."

He went to the bow, fastened two logs of wood by long lines to
the cables outside the bow, so that he could find and recover the
anchors on his return, then a very small jib was hoisted, and as it
filled two blows with an axe severed the cables inboard. The logs
attached to them were thrown over, and the skipper ran aft and put
up the helm as the boat's head payed off before the wind. As she
did so a wave struck her and threw tons of water on board, filling
her deck nearly up to the rails. It was well Joe had shouted to
the boys to hold on, for had they not done so they would have been
swept overboard.

Another wave struck them before they were fairly round, smashing in
the bulwark and sweeping everything before it, and the boys both
thought that the Susan was sinking under their feet. However she
recovered herself. The water poured our through the broken bulwark,
and the boat rose again on the waves as they swept one after
another down upon her stern. The channel was well marked now, for
the sands on either side were covered with breaking water. Joe
Chambers shouted to the sailors to close reef the mizzen and hoist
it, so that he might have the boat better under control. The wind
was not directly astern but somewhat on the quarter; and small as
was the amount of sail shown, the boat lay over till her lee rail
was at times under water; the following waves yawing her about so
much that it needed the most careful steering to prevent her from
broaching to.

"It seems to me as the wind is northering!" one of the men shouted.

The skipper nodded and slackened out the sheet a bit as the wind
came more astern. He kept his eyes fixed ahead of him, and the men
kept gazing through the gloom.

"There is the perch," one of them shouted presently, "just on her
weather bow!"

The skipper nodded and held on the same course until abreast of the
perch, which was only a forked stick. The men came aft and hauled
in the mizzen sheet. Chambers put up the helm. The mizzen came
across with a jerk, and the sheet was again allowed to run out.
The jib came over with a report like the shot of a cannon, and at
the same moment split into streamers.

"Hoist the foresail!" the skipper shouted, and the men sprang forward
and seized the halliards; but at this moment the wind seemed to
blow with a double fury, and the moment the sail was set it too
split into ribbons.

"Get up another jib!" Joe Chambers shouted, and one of the men
sprang below. In half a minute he reappeared with another sail.

"Up with it quick, Bill. We are drifting bodily down on the sand."

Bill hurried forward. The other hand had hauled in the traveller,
to which the bolt rope of the jib was still attached, and hauling
on this had got the block down and in readiness for fastening on
the new jib. The sheets were hooked on, and then while one hand
ran the sail out with the out haul to the bowsprit end, the other
hoisted with the halliards. By this time the boat was close to the
broken water. As the sail filled her head payed off towards it.
The wind lay her right over, and before she could gather way there
was a tremendous crash. The Susan had struck on the sands. The next
wave lifted her, but as it passed on she came down with a crash
that seemed to shake her in pieces. Joe Chambers relaxed his grasp
of the now useless tiller.

"It is all over," he said to the boys. "Nothing can save her now.
If she had been her own length farther off the sands she would have
gathered way in time. As it is another ten minutes and she will be
in splinters."

She was now lying over until her masthead was but a few feet above
water. The seas were striking her with tremendous force, pouring
a deluge of water over her.

"There is but one chance for you," he went on. "The wind is dead
on the shore, and Foulness lies scarce three miles to leeward."

He went into the cabin and fetched out a small axe fastened in the
companion where it was within reach of the helmsman. Two blows cut
the shrouds of the mizzen, a few vigorous strokes were given to the
foot of the mast, and, as the boat lifted and crashed down again
on the sand, it broke off a few inches above the deck.

"Now, lads, I will lash you loosely to this. You can both swim,
and with what aid it will give you may well reach the shore. There
are scarce three feet of water here, and except where one or two
deeps pass across it there is no more anywhere between this and
the land. It will not be rough very far. Now, be off at once; the
boat will go to pieces before many minutes. I and the two men will
take to the mainmast, but I want to see you off first."

Without hesitation the boys pushed off with the mast. As they did
so a cataract of water poured over the smack upon them, knocking
them for a moment under the surface with its force.

For the next few minutes it was a wild struggle for life. They
found at once that they were powerless to swim in the broken water,
which, as it rushed across the sand, impelled alike by the rising
tide behind it and the force of the wind, hurried them along at a
rapid pace, breaking in short steep waves. They could only cling to
the mast and snatch a breath of air from time to time as it rolled
over and over. Had they not been able to swim they would very
speedily have been drowned; but, accustomed as they were to diving,
they kept their presence of mind, holding their breath when under
water and breathing whenever they were above it with their faces
to the land. It was only so that they could breathe, for the air
was thick with spray, which was swept along with such force by the
wind that it would have drowned the best swimmer who tried to face
it as speedily as if he had been under water.

After what seemed to them an age the waves became somewhat less
violent, though still breaking in a mass of foam. Geoffrey loosed
his hold of the spar and tried to get to his feet. He was knocked
down several times before he succeeded, but when he did so found
that the water was little more than two feet deep, although the
waves rose to his shoulders. The soft mud under his feet rendered
it extremely difficult to stand, and the rope which attached him
to the spar, which was driving before him, added to the difficulty.
He could not overtake the mast, and threw himself down again and
swam to it.

"Get up, Lionel!" he shouted; "we can stand here." But Lionel was
too exhausted to be capable of making the effort. With the greatest
difficulty Geoffrey raised him to his feet and supported him with
his back to the wind.

"Get your breath again!" he shouted. "We are over the worse now and
shall soon be in calmer water. Get your feet well out in front of
you, if you can, and dig your heels into the mud, then you will
act as a buttress to me and help me to keep my feet."

It was two or three minutes before Lionel was able to speak. Even
during this short time they had been carried some distance forward,
for the ground on which they stood seemed to be moving, and the
force of the waves carried them constantly forward.

"Feel better, old fellow?" Geoffrey asked, as he felt Lionel making
an effort to resist the pressure of the water.

"Yes, I am better now," Lionel said.

"Well, we will go on as we are as long as we can; let us just try
to keep our feet and give way to the sea as it rakes us along. The
quicker we go the sooner we shall be in shallower water; but the
tide is rising fast, and unless we go on it will speedily be as
bad here as it was where we started."

As soon as Lionel had sufficiently recovered they again took to
the spar; but now, instead of clasping it with their arms and legs,
they lay with their chest upon it, and used their efforts only to
keep it going before the wind and tide. Once they came to a point
where the sand was but a few inches under water. Here they stood
up for some minutes, and then again proceeded on foot until the
water deepened to their waists.

Their progress was now much more easy, for the high bank had broken
the run of the surf. The water beyond it was much smoother, and
they were able to swim, pushing the spar before them.

"We are in deep water," Geoffrey said presently, dropping his feet.
"It is out of my depth. Chambers said there was a deep channel
across the sands not far from the island; so in that case the shore
cannot be far away."

In another quarter of an hour the water was again waist deep.
Geoffrey stood up.

"I think I see a dark line ahead, Lionel; we shall soon be there."

Another ten minutes and the water was not above their knees. They
could see the low shore now at a distance of but a few hundred yards
ahead, and untying the ropes under their arms they let the spar
drift on, and waded forward until they reached the land. There was
a long mud bank yet to cross, and exhausted as they were it took
them a long time to do this; but at last they came to a sandy bank
rising sharply some ten feet above the flat. They threw themselves
down on this and lay for half an hour without a word being spoken.

"Now, Lionel," Geoffrey said at last, raising himself to a sitting
position, "we must make an effort to get on and find a shelter.
There are people living in the island. I have heard that they are
a wild set, making their living by the wrecks on these sands and
by smuggling goods without paying dues to the queen. Still, they
will not refuse us shelter and food, and assuredly there is nothing
on us to tempt them to plunder us."

He rose to his feet and helped Lionel up. Once on the top of the
bank a level country stretched before them. The wind aided their
footsteps, sweeping along with such tremendous force that at times
they had difficulty in keeping their feet. As they went on they came
upon patches of cultivated land, with hedgerows and deep ditches.
Half a mile further they perceived a house. On approaching it
they saw that it was a low structure of some size with several out
buildings. They made their way to it and knocked at the door. They
knocked twice before it was opened, then some bolts were withdrawn.
The door was opened a few inches. A man looked out, and seeing two
lads opened it widely.

"Well, who are you, and what do you want?" he asked roughly.

"We have been wrecked in a storm on the sands. We were sailing from
Bricklesey for Sheerness when the storm caught us."

The man looked at them closely. Their pale faces and evidently
exhausted condition vouched for the truth of their story.

"The house is full," he said gruffly, "and I cannot take in strangers.
You will find some dry hay in that out house, and I will bring you
some food there. When you have eaten and drunk you had best journey
on."

So saying he shut the door in their faces.

"This is strange treatment," Geoffrey said. "I should not have
thought a man would have refused shelter to a dog such a day as
this. What do you say, Lionel, shall we go on?"

"I don't think I can go any further until I have rested, Geoffrey,"
Lionel replied faintly. "Let us lie down in shelter if it is only
for half an hour. After that, if the man brings us some food as he
says, we can go on again."

They went into the shed the man had pointed out. It was half full
of hay.

"Let us take our things off and wring them, Lionel, and give ourselves
a roll in the hay to dry ourselves. We shall soon get warm after
that."

They stripped, wrung the water from their clothes, rolled themselves
in the hay until they felt a glow of returning warmth, and then
put on their clothes again. Scarcely had they done so when the man
came in with a large tankard and two hunks of bread.

"Here," he said, "drink this and then be off. We want no strangers
hanging round here."

At any other time the boys would have refused hospitality so
cheerlessly offered, but they were too weak to resist the temptation.
The tankard contained hot spiced ale, and a sensation of warmth
and comfort stole over them as soon as they had drunk its contents
and eaten a few mouthfuls of bread. The man stood by them while
they ate.

"Are you the only ones saved from the wreck?" he asked.

"I trust that we are not," Geoffrey replied. "The master of the
boat tied us to a mast as soon as she struck, and he and the two
men with him were going to try to get to shore in the same way."

As soon as they had finished they stood up and handed the tankard
to the man.

"I am sorry I must turn you out," he said, as if somewhat ashamed
of his want of courtesy. "Any other day it would be different, but
today I cannot take anyone in."

"I thank you for what you have given us," Geoffrey said. "Can you
tell us which is the way to the ferry?"

"Follow the road and it will take you there. About a couple of
miles. You cannot mistake the way."

Feeling greatly strengthened and refreshed the lads again started.

"This is a curious affair," Geoffrey said, "and I cannot make out
why they should not let us in. However, it does not matter much.
I feel warm all over now, in spite of my wet clothes."

"So do I," Lionel agreed. "Perhaps there were smugglers inside,
or some fugitives from justice hiding there. Anyhow, I am thankful
for that warm ale; it seems to have given me new life altogether."

They had walked a quarter of a mile, when they saw four horsemen
coming on the road. They were closely wrapped up in cloaks, and as
they passed, with their heads bent down to meet the force of the
gale and their broad brimmed hats pulled low down over their eyes,
the boys did not get even a glimpse of their features.

"I wonder who they can be," Geoffrey said, looking after them. "They
are very well mounted, and look like persons of some degree. What
