Michel was indeed interested; but when, after telling him where the
carcass lay, Edouard gave him Roland's order to send a couple of men
after the beast, he shook his head.

"What!" demanded Edouard, "are you going to refuse to obey my brother?"

"Heaven forbid! Master Edouard. Jacques shall start this instant for
Montagnac."

"Are you afraid he won't find any body?"

"Goodness, no; he could get a dozen. But the trouble is the time of
night. You say the boar lies close to the pavilion of the Chartreuse?"

"Not twenty yards from it."

"I'd rather it was three miles," replied Michel scratching his head;
"but never mind. I'll send for them anyway without telling them what
they're wanted for. Once here, it's for your brother to make them go."

"Good! Good! Only get them here and I'll see to that myself."

"Oh!" exclaimed Michel, "if I hadn't this beastly sprain I'd go myself.
But to-day's doings have made it worse. Jacques! Jacques!"

Jacques came, and Edouard not only waited to hear the order given, but
until he had started. Then he ran upstairs to do what Roland and Sir
John were already doing, that is, dress for dinner.

The whole talk at table, as may be easily imagined, centred upon the
day's prowess. Edouard asked nothing better than to talk about it, and
Sir John, astounded by Roland's skill, courage, and good luck, improved
upon the child's narrative. Madame de Montrevel shuddered at each
detail, and yet she made them repeat it twenty times. That which seemed
most clear to her in all this was that Roland had saved Edouard's life.

"Did you thank him for it?" she asked the boy. "Thank whom?"

"Your brother."

"Why should I thank him?" retorted Edouard. "I should have done the same
thing."

"Ah, madame, what can you expect!" said Sir John; "you are a gazelle who
has unwittingly given birth to a race of lions."

Amelie had also paid the closest attention to the account, especially
when the hunters spoke of their proximity to the Chartreuse. From that
time on she listened with anxious eyes, and seemed scarcely to breathe,
until they told of leaving the woods after the killing.

After dinner, word was brought that Jacques had returned with two
peasants from Montagnac. They wanted exact directions as to where the
hunters had left the animal. Roland rose, intending to go to them, but
Madame de Montrevel, who could never see enough of her son, turned
to the messenger and said: "Bring these worthy men in here. It is not
necessary to disturb M. Roland for that."

Five minutes later the two peasants entered, twirling their hats in
their hands.

"My sons," said Roland, "I want you to fetch the boar we killed in the
forest of Seillon."

"That can be done," said one of the peasants, consulting his companion
with a look.

"Yes, it can be done," answered the other.

"Don't be alarmed," said Roland. "You shall lose nothing by your
trouble."

"Oh! we're not," interrupted one of the peasants. "We know you, Monsieur
de Montrevel."

"Yes," answered the other, "we know that, like your father, you're
not in the habit of making people work for nothing. Oh! if all the
aristocrats had been like you, Monsieur Louis, there wouldn't have been
any revolution."

"Of course not," said the other, who seemed to have come solely to echo
affirmatively what his companion said.

"It remains to be seen now where the animal is," said the first peasant.

"Yes," repeated the second, "remains to be seen where it is."

"Oh! it won't be hard to find."

"So much the better," interjected the peasant.

"Do you know the pavilion in the forest?"

"Which one?"

"Yes, which one?"

"The one that belongs to the Chartreuse of Seillon."

The peasants looked at each other.

"Well, you'll find it some twenty feet distant from the front on the way
to Genoud."

The peasants looked at each other once more.

"Hum!" grunted the first one.

"Hum!" repeated the other, faithful echo of his companion.

"Well, what does this 'hum' mean?" demanded Roland.

"Confound it."

"Come, explain yourselves. What's the matter?"

"The matter is that we'd rather that it was the other end of the
forest."

"But why the other end?" retorted Roland, impatiently; "it's nine miles
from here to the other end, and barely three from here to where we left
the boar."

"Yes," said the first peasant, "but just where the boar lies--" And he
paused and scratched his head.

"Exactly; that's what," added the other.

"Just what?"

"It's a little too near the Chartreuse."

"Not the Chartreuse; I said the pavilion."

"It's all the same. You know, Monsieur Louis, that there is an
underground passage leading from the pavilion to the Chartreuse."

"Oh, yes, there is one, that's sure," added the other.

"But," exclaimed Roland, "what has this underground passage got to do
with our boar?"

"This much, that the beast's in a bad place, that's all."

"Oh, yes! a bad place," repeated the other peasant.

"Come, now, explain yourselves, you rascals," said Roland, who was
growing angry, while his mother seemed uneasy, and Amelie visibly turned
pale.

"Beg pardon, Monsieur Louis," answered the peasant; "we are not rascals;
we're God-fearing men, that's all."

"By thunder," cried Roland, "I'm a God-fearing man myself. What of
that?"

"Well, we don't care to have any dealings with the devil."

"No, no, no," asserted the second peasant.

"A man can match a man if he's of his own kind," continued the first
peasant.

"Sometimes two," said the second, who was built like a Hercules.

"But with ghostly beings phantoms, spectres--no thank you," continued
the first peasant.

"No, thank you," repeated the other.

"Oh, mother, sister," queried Roland, addressing the two women, "in
Heaven's name, do you understand anything of what these two fools are
saying?"

"Fools," repeated the first peasant; "well, possibly. But it's not the
less true that Pierre Marey had his neck twisted just for looking over
the wall. True, it was of a Saturday--the devil's sabbath."

"And they couldn't straighten it out," affirmed the second peasant, "so
they had to bury him with his face turned round looking the other way.

"Oh!" exclaimed Sir John, "this is growing interesting. I'm very fond of
ghost stories."

"That's more than sister Amelie is it seems," cried Edouard.

"What do you mean?"

"Just see how pale she's grown, brother Roland."

"Yes, indeed," said Sir John; "mademoiselle looks as if she were going
to faint."

"I? Not at all," exclaimed Amelie, wiping the perspiration from her
forehead; "only don't you think it seems a little warm here, mother?"

"No," answered Madame de Montrevel.

"Still," insisted Amelie, "if it would not annoy you, I should like to
open the window."

"Do so, my child."

Amelie rose hastily to profit by this permission, and went with
tottering steps to a window opening upon the garden. After it was
opened, she stood leaning against the sill, half-hidden by the curtains.

"Ah!" she said, "I can breathe here."

Sir John rose to offer her his smelling-salts, but Amelie declined
hastily: "No, no, my lord. Thank you, but I am better now."

"Come, come," said Roland, "don't bother about that; it's our boar."

"Well, Monsieur Louis, we will fetch your boar tomorrow."

"That's it," said the second peasant, "to-morrow morning, when it's
light."

"But to go there at night--"

"Oh! to go there at night--"

The peasant looked at his comrade and both shook their heads.

"It can't be done at night."

"Cowards."

"Monsieur Louis, a man's not a coward because he's afraid."

"No, indeed; that's not being a coward," replied the other.

"Ah!" said Roland, "I wish some stronger minded men than you would face
me with that argument; that a man is not a coward because he's afraid!"

"Well, it's according to what he's afraid of, Monsieur Louis. Give me a
good sickle and a good cudgel, and I'm not afraid of a wolf; give me a
good gun and I'm not afraid of any man, even if I knew he's waiting to
murder me."

"Yes," said Edouard, "but you're afraid of a ghost, even when it's only
the ghost of a monk."

"Little Master Edouard," said the peasant, "leave your brother to do the
talking; you're not old enough to jest about such things--"

"No," added the other peasant, "wait till your beard is grown, my little
gentleman."

"I haven't any beard," retorted Edouard, starting up, "but just the same
if I was strong enough to carry the boar, I'd go fetch it myself either
by day or night."

"Much good may it do you, my young gentleman. But neither my comrade nor
myself would go, even for a whole louis."

"Nor for two?" said Roland, wishing to corner them.

"Nor for two, nor four, nor ten, Monsieur de Montrevel. Ten louis are
good, but what could I do with them if my neck was broken?"

"Yes, twisted like Pierre Marey's," said the other peasant.

"Ten louis wouldn't feed my wife and children for the rest of my life,
would they?"

"And besides, when you say ten louis," interrupted the second peasant,
"you mean really five, because I'd get five, too."

"So the pavilion is haunted by ghosts, is it?" asked Roland.

"I didn't say the pavilion--I'm not sure about the pavilion--but in the
Chartreuse--"

"In the Chartreuse, are you sure?"

"Oh! there, certainly."

"Have you seen them?"

"I haven't; but some folks have."

"Has your comrade?" asked the young officer, turning to the second
peasant.

"I haven't seen them; but I did see flames, and Claude Philippon heard
chains."

"Ah! so they have flames and chains?" said Roland.

"Yes," replied the first peasant, "for I have seen the flames myself."

"And Claude Philippon on heard the chains," repeated the other.

"Very good, my friends, very good," replied Roland, sneering; "so you
won't go there to-night at any price?"

"Not at any price."

"Not for all the gold in the world."

"And you'll go to-morrow when it's light?"

"Oh! Monsieur Louis, before you're up the boar will be here."

"Before you're up," said Echo.

"All right," said Roland. "Come back to me the day after tomorrow."

"Willingly, Monsieur Louis. What do you want us to do?"

"Never mind; just come."

"Oh! we'll come."

"That means that the moment you say, 'Come,' you can count upon us,
Monsieur Louis."

"Well, then I'll have some information for you."

"What about?"

"The ghosts."

Amelie gave a stifled cry; Madame de Montrevel alone heard it. Louis
dismissed the two peasants, and they jostled each other at the door in
their efforts to go through together.

Nothing more was said that evening about the Chartreuse or the pavilion,
nor of its supernatural tenants, spectres or phantoms who haunted them.




CHAPTER XV. THE STRONG-MINDED MAN

At ten o'clock everyone was in bed at the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines,
or, at any rate, all had retired to their rooms.

Three or four times in the course of the evening Amelie had approached
Roland as if she had something to say to him; but each time the words
died upon her lips. When the family left the salon, she had taken
his arm, and, although his room was on the floor above hers, she had
accompanied him to his very door. Roland had kissed her, bade her
good-night, and closed his door, declaring himself very tired.

Nevertheless, in spite of this assertion, Roland, once alone, did not
proceed to undress. He went to his collection of arms, selected a pair
of magnificent pistols, manufactured at Versailles, and presented to
his father by the Convention. He snapped the triggers, and blew into
the barrels to see that there were no old charges in them. They were in
excellent condition. After which he laid them side by side on the table;
then going to the door, looking out upon the stairs, he opened it softly
to see if any one were watching. Finding the corridor and stairs empty,
he went to Sir John's door and knocked.

"Come in," said the Englishman. Sir John, like himself, was not prepared
for bed.

"I guessed from the sign you made me that you had something to say to
me," said Sir John, "so I waited for you, as you see."

"Indeed, I have something to say to you," returned Roland, seating
himself gayly in an armchair.

"My kind host," replied the Englishman, "I am beginning to understand
you. When I see you as gay as you are now, I am like your peasants, I
feel afraid."

"Did you hear what they were saying?"

"I heard them tell a splendid ghost story. I, myself, have a haunted
castle in England."

"Have you ever seen the ghosts, my lord?"

"Yes, when I was little. Unfortunately, since I have grown up they have
disappeared."

"That's always the way with ghosts," said Roland gayly; "they come and
go. How lucky it is that I should return just as the ghosts have begun
to haunt the Chartreuse of Seillon."

"Yes," replied Sir John, "very lucky. Only are you sure that there are
any there?"

"No. But I'll know by the day after to-morrow."

"How so?"

"I intend to spend to-morrow night there."

"Oh!" said the Englishmen, "would you like to have me go with you?"

"With pleasure, my lord. Only, unfortunately, that is impossible."

"Impossible, oh!"

"As I have just told you, my dear fellow."

"But why impossible?"

"Are you acquainted with the manners and customs of ghosts, Sir John?"
asked Roland gravely.

"No."

"Well, I am. Ghosts only show themselves under certain conditions."

"Explain that."

"Well, for example, in Italy, my lord, and in Spain, the most
superstitious of countries, there are no ghosts, or if there are,
why, at the best, it's only once in ten or twenty years, or maybe in a
century."

"And to what do you attribute their absence?"

"To the absence of fogs."

"Ah! ah!"

"Not a doubt of it. You understand the native atmosphere of ghosts is
fog. Scotland, Denmark and England, regions of fog, are overrun with
ghosts. There's the spectre of Hamlet, then that of Banquo, the shadows
of Richard III. Italy has only one spectre, Caesar, and then where did he
appear to Brutus? At Philippi, in Macedonia and in Thessaly, the Denmark
of Greece, the Scotland of the Orient; where the fog made Ovid so
melancholy he named the odes he wrote there Tristia. Why did Virgil make
the ghost of Anchises appear to Eneas? Because he came from Mantua.
Do you know Mantua? A marsh, a frog-pond, a regular manufactory
of rheumatism, an atmosphere of vapors, and consequently a nest of
phantoms."

"Go on, I'm listening to you."

"Have you seen the Rhine?"

"Yes."

"Germany, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Still another country of fairies, water sprites, sylphs, and
consequently phantoms ('for whoso does the greater see, can see the
less'), and all that on account of the fog. But where the devil can
the ghosts hide in Italy and Spain? Not the least bit of mist. And,
therefore, were I in Spain or Italy I should never attempt to-morrow's
adventure."

"But all that doesn't explain why you refuse my company," insisted Sir
John.

"Wait a moment. I've just explained to you that ghosts don't venture
into certain countries, because they do not offer certain atmospheric
conditions. Now, let me explain the precautions we must take if we wish
to see them."

"Explain! explain!" said Sir John, "I would rather hear you talk than
any other man, Roland."

And Sir John, stretching himself out in his easy-chair, prepared to
listen with delight to the improvisations of this fantastic mind,
which he had seen under so many aspects during the few days of their
acquaintance.

Roland bowed his head by way of thanks.

"Well, this is the way of it, and you will grasp it readily enough. I
have heard so much about ghosts in my life that I know the scamps as if
I had made them. Why do ghosts appear?"

"Are you asking me that?" inquired Sir John.

"Yes, I ask you."

"I own that, not having studied ghosts as you have, I am unable to give
you a definitive answer."

"You see! Ghosts show themselves, my dear fellow, in order to frighten
those who see them."

"That is undeniable."

"Of course! Now, if they don't frighten those to whom they appear, they
are frightened by them; witness M. de Turenne, whose ghosts proved to be
counterfeiters. Do you know that story?"

"No."

"I'll tell it to you some day; don't let's get mixed up. That is just
why, when they decide to appear--which is seldom--ghosts select stormy
nights, when it thunders, lightens and blows; that's their scenery."

"I am forced to admit that nothing could be more correct."

"Wait a moment! There are instances when the bravest man feels a shudder
run through his veins. Even before I was suffering with this aneurism it
has happened to me a dozen times, when I have seen the flash of sabres
and heard the thunder of cannon around me. It is true that since I have
been subject to this aneurism I rush where the lightning flashes and the
thunder growls. Still there is the chance that these ghosts don't know
this and believe that I can be frightened."

"Whereas that is an impossibility, isn't it?" asked Sir John.

"What will you! When, right or wrong, one feels that, far from dreading
death, one has every reason to seek it, what should he fear? But I
repeat, these ghosts, who know so much, may not know that only ghosts
know this; they know that the sense of fear increases or diminishes
according to the seeing and hearing of exterior things. Thus, for
example, where do phantoms prefer to appear? In dark places, cemeteries,
old cloisters, ruins, subterranean passages, because the aspect of these
localities predisposes the soul to fear. What precedes their appearance?
The rattling of chains, groans, sighs, because there is nothing very
cheerful in all that? They are careful not to appear in the bright
light, or after a strain of dance music. No, fear is an abyss into which
you descend step by step, until you are overcome by vertigo; your feet
slip, and you plunge with closed eyes to the bottom of the precipice.
Now, if you read the accounts of all these apparitions, you'll find they
all proceed like this: First the sky darkens, the thunder growls, the
wind howls, doors and windows rattle, the lamp--if there is a lamp
in the room of the person the ghosts are trying to frighten--the lamp
flares, flickers and goes out--utter darkness! Then, in the darkness,
groans, wails and the rattling of chains are heard; then, at last, the
door opens and the ghost appears. I must say that all the apparitions
that I have not seen but read about have presented themselves under
similar circumstances. Isn't that so, Sir John?"

"Perfectly."

"And did you ever hear of a ghost appearing to two persons at the same
time?"

"I certainly never did hear of it."

"It's quite simple, my dear fellow. Two together, you understand, have
no fear. Fear is something mysterious, strange, independent of the will,
requiring isolation, darkness and solitude. A ghost is no more dangerous
than a cannon ball. Well, a soldier never fears a cannon ball in the
daytime, when his elbows touch a comrade to the right and left. No, he
goes straight for the battery and is either killed or he kills. That's
not what the phantoms want. That's why they never appear to two persons
at the same time, and that is the reason I want to go to the Chartreuse
alone, my lord. Your presence would prevent the boldest ghost from
appearing. If I see nothing, or if I see something worth the trouble,
you can have your turn the next day. Does the bargain suit you?"

"Perfectly! But why can't I take the first night?"

"Ah! first, because the idea didn't occur to you, and it is only just
that I should benefit by my own cleverness. Besides, I belong to the
region; I was friendly with the good monks in their lifetime, and there
may be a chance of their appearing to me after death. Moreover, as I
know the localities, if it becomes necessary to run away or pursue I
can do it better than you. Don't you see the justice of that, my dear
fellow?"

"Yes, it couldn't be fairer; but I am sure of going the next night."

"The next night, and the one after, and every day and night if you
wish; I only hold to the first. Now," continued Roland rising, "this is
between ourselves, isn't it? Not a word to any one. The ghosts might be
forewarned and act accordingly. It would never do to let those gay dogs
get the best of us; that would be too grotesque."

"Oh, be easy about that. You will go armed, won't you?"

"If I thought I was only dealing with ghosts, I'd go with my hands in
my pockets and nothing in my fobs. But, as I told you, M. de Turenne's
ghosts were counterfeiters, so I shall take my pistols."

"Do you want mine?"

"No, thanks. Though yours are good, I am about resolved never to use
them again." Then, with a smile whose bitterness it would be impossible
to describe, he added: "They brought me ill-luck. Good-night! Sir John.
I must sleep soundly to-night, so as not to want to sleep to-morrow
night."

Then, shaking the Englishman's hand vigorously a second time, he left
the room and returned to his own. There he was greatly surprised to find
the door, which he was sure he had left closed, open. But as soon as he
entered, the sight of his sister explained the matter to him.

"Hello!" he exclaimed, partly astonished, partly uneasy; "is that you,
Amelie?"

"Yes, it is I," she said. Then, going close to her brother, and letting
him kiss her forehead, she added in a supplicating voice: "You won't go,
will you, dear Roland?"

"Go where?" asked Roland.

"To the Chartreuse."

"Good! Who told you that?"

"Oh! for one who knows, how difficult it is to guess!"

"And why don't you want me to go to the Chartreuse?"

"I'm afraid something might happen to you."

"What! So you believe in ghosts, do you?" he asked, looking fixedly into
Amelie's eyes.

Amelie lowered her glance, and Roland felt his sister's hand tremble in
his.

"Come," said Roland; "Amelie, at least the one I used to know, General
de Montrevel's daughter and Roland's sister, is too intelligent to yield
to these vulgar terrors. It's impossible that you can believe these
tales of apparitions, chains, flames, spectres, and phantoms."

"If I did believe them, Roland, I should not be so alarmed. If ghosts do
exist, they must be souls without bodies, and consequently cannot bring
their material hatred from the grave. Besides, why should a ghost hate
you, Roland; you, who never harmed any one?"

"Good! You forget all those I have killed in war or in duels."

Amelie shook her head. "I'm not afraid of them."

"Then what are you afraid of?"

The young girl raised her beautiful eyes, wet with tears, to Roland, and
threw herself in his arms, saying: "I don't know, Roland. But I can't
help it, I am afraid."

The young man raised her head, which she was hiding in his breast, with
gentle force, and said, kissing her eyelids softly and tenderly: "You
don't believe I shall have ghosts to fight with to-morrow, do you?"

"Oh, brother, don't go to the Chartreuse!" cried Amelie, eluding the
question.

"Mother told you to say this to me, didn't she?"

"Oh, no, brother! Mother said nothing to me. It is I who guessed that
you intended to go."

"Well, if I want to go," replied Roland firmly, "you ought to know,
Amelie, that I shall go."

"Even if I beseech you on my knees, brother?" cried Amelie in a tone of
anguish, slipping down to her brother's feet; "even if I beseech you on
my knees?"

"Oh! women! women!" murmured Roland, "inexplicable creatures, whose
words are all mystery, whose lips never tell the real secrets of their
hearts, who weep, and pray, and tremble--why? God knows, but man, never!
I shall go, Amelie, because I have resolved to go; and when once I have
taken a resolution no power on earth can make me change it. Now kiss me
and don't be frightened, and I will tell you a secret."

Amelie raised her head, and gazed questioningly, despairingly, at
Roland.

"I have known for more than a year," replied the young man, "that I have
the misfortune not to be able to die. So reassure yourself, and don't be
afraid."

Roland uttered these words so dolefully that Amelie, who had, until
then, kept her emotion under control, left the room sobbing.

The young officer, after assuring himself that her door was closed, shut
his, murmuring: "We'll see who will weary first, Fate or I."




CHAPTER XVI. THE GHOST

The next evening, at about the same hour, the young officer, after
convincing himself that every one in the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines
had gone to bed, opened his door softly, went downstairs holding his
breath, reached the vestibule, slid back the bolts of the outer door
noiselessly, and turned round to make sure that all was quiet. Reassured
by the darkened windows, he boldly opened the iron gate. The hinges
had probably been oiled that day, for they turned without grating,
and closed as noiselessly as they had opened behind Roland, who walked
rapidly in the direction of Pont d'Ain at Bourg.

He had hardly gone a hundred yards before the clock at Saint-Just struck
once; that of Montagnac answered like a bronze echo. It was half-past
ten o'clock. At the pace the young man was walking he needed only twenty
minutes to reach the Chartreuse; especially if, instead of skirting the
woods, he took the path that led direct to the monastery. Roland was
too familiar from youth with every nook of the forest of Seillon
to needlessly lengthen his walk ten minutes. He therefore turned
unhesitatingly into the forest, coming out on the other side in about
five minutes. Once there, he had only to cross a bit of open ground to
reach the orchard wall of the convent. This took barely another five
minutes.

At the foot of the wall he stopped, but only for a few seconds. He
unhooked his cloak, rolled it into a ball, and tossed it over the wall.
The cloak off, he stood in a velvet coat, white leather breeches, and
top-boots. The coat was fastened round the waist by a belt in which were
a pair of pistols. A broad-brimmed hat covered his head and shaded his
face.

With the same rapidity with which he had removed his garment that might
have hindered his climbing the wall, he began to scale it. His foot
readily found a chink between the stones; he sprang up, seizing the
coping, and was on the other side without even touching the top of the
wall over which he bounded. He picked up his cloak, threw it over
his shoulder, hooked it, and crossed the orchard to a little door
communicating with the cloister. The clock struck eleven as he passed
through it. Roland stopped, counted the strokes, and slowly walked
around the cloister, looking and listening.

He saw nothing and heard no noise. The monastery was the picture of
desolation and solitude; the doors were all open, those of the cells,
the chapel, and the refectory. In the refectory, a vast hall where the
tables still stood in their places, Roland noticed five or six bats
circling around; a frightened owl flew through a broken casement, and
perched upon a tree close by, hooting dismally.

"Good!" said Roland, aloud; "I'll make my headquarters here; bats and
owls are the vanguards of ghosts."

The sound of that human voice, lifted in the midst of this solitude,
darkness and desolation, had something so uncanny, so lugubrious about
it, that it would have caused even the speaker to shudder, had not
Roland, as he himself said, been inaccessible to fear. He looked about
for a place from which he could command the entire hall. An isolated
table, placed on a sort of stage at one end of the refectory, which had
no doubt been used by the superior of the convent to take his food apart
from the monks, to read from pious books during the repast, seemed to
Roland best adapted to his needs. Here, backed by the wall, he could
not be surprised from behind, and, once his eye grew accustomed to the
darkness, he could survey every part of the hall. He looked for a seat,
and found an overturned stool about three feet from the table, probably
the one occupied by the reader or the person dining there in solitude.

Roland sat down at the table, loosened his cloak to insure greater
freedom of movement, took his pistols from his belt, laid one on the
table, and striking three blows with the butt-end of the other, he said,
in a loud voice: "The meeting is open; the ghosts can appear!"

Those who have passed through churches and cemeteries at night have
often experienced, without analyzing it, the supreme necessity of
speaking low and reverently which attaches to certain localities. Only
such persons can understand the strange impression produced on any
one who heard it by that curt, mocking voice which now disturbed the
solitude and the shadows. It vibrated an instant in the darkness, which
seemed to quiver with it; then it slowly died away without an echo,
escaping by all the many openings made by the wings of time.

As he had expected, Roland's eyes had accustomed themselves to the
darkness, and now, by the pale light of the rising moon, whose long,
white rays penetrated the refectory through the broken windows, he could
see distinctly from one end to the other of the vast apartment. Although
Roland was as evidently without fear internally as externally, he was
not without distrust, and his ear caught the slightest sounds.

He heard the half-hour strike. In spite of himself the sound startled
him, for it came from the bell of the convent. How was it that, in this
ruin where all was dead, a clock, the pulse of time, was living?

"Oh! oh!" said Roland; "that proves that I shall see something."

The words were spoken almost in an aside. The majesty of the place and
the silence acted upon that heart of iron, firm as the iron that had
just tolled the call of time upon eternity. The minutes slowly passed,
one after the other. Perhaps a cloud was passing between earth and
moon, for Roland fancied that the shadows deepened. Then, as midnight
approached, he seemed to hear a thousand confused, imperceptible sounds,
coming no doubt from the nocturnal universe which wakes while the other
sleeps. Nature permits no suspension of life, even for repose. She
created her nocturnal world, even as she created her daily world, from
the gnat which buzzes about the sleeper's pillow to the lion prowling
around the Arab's bivouac.

But Roland, the camp watcher, the sentinel of the desert, Roland, the
hunter, the soldier, knew all those sounds; they were powerless to
disturb him.

Then, mingling with these sounds, the tones of the clock, chiming the
hour, vibrated above his head. This time it was midnight. Roland counted
the twelve strokes, one after the other. The last hung, quivering upon
the air, like a bird with iron wings, then slowly expired, sad and
mournful. Just then the young man, thought he heard a moan. He listened
in the direction whence it came. Again he heard it, this time nearer at
hand.

He rose, his hands resting upon the table, the butt-end of a pistol
beneath each palm. A rustle like that of a sheet or a gown trailing
along the grass was audible on his right, not ten paces from him. He
straightened up as if moved by a spring.

At the same moment a shade appeared on the threshold of the vast hall.
This shade resembled the ancient statues lying on the tombs. It was
wrapped in an immense winding-sheet which trailed behind it.

For an instant Roland doubted his own eyes. Had the preoccupation of his
mind made him see a thing which was not? Was he the dupe of his senses,
the sport of those hallucinations which physicians assert, but cannot
explain? A moan, uttered by the phantom, put his doubts to flight.

"My faith!" he cried in a burst of laughter, "now for a tussle, friend
ghost!"

The spectre paused and extended a hand toward the young officer.
"Roland! Roland!" said the spectre in a muffled voice, "it would be a
pity not to follow to the grave those you have sent there."

And the spectre, without hastening its step, continued on its way.

Roland, astounded for an instant, came down from the stage, and
resolutely followed the ghost. The path was difficult, encumbered with
stones, benches awry, and over-turned tables. And yet, through all
these obstacles, an invisible channel seemed open for the spectre, which
pursued its way unchecked.

Each time it passed before a window, the light from with out, feeble
as it was, shone upon the winding-sheet and the ghost, outlining the
figure, which passed into the obscurity to reappear and vanish again at
each succeeding one, Roland, his eyes fixed upon the figure, fearing to
lose sight of it if he diverted his gaze from it, dared not look at the
path, apparently so easy to the spectre, yet bristling with obstacles
for him. He stumbled at every step. The ghost was gaining upon him. It
reached the door opposite to that by which it had entered. Roland saw
the entrance to a dark passage. Feeling that the ghost would escape him,
he cried: "Man or ghost, robber or monk, halt or I fire!"

"A dead body cannot be killed twice, and death has no power over the
spirit," replied the ghost in its muffled voice.

"Who are you?"

"The Shade of him you tore violently from the earth."

The young officer burst into that harsh, nervous laugh, made more
terrible by the darkness around him.

"Faith!" said he, "if you have no further indications to give me, I
shall not trouble myself to discover you."

"Remember the fountain at Vaucluse," said the Shade, in a voice so faint
the words seemed to escape his lips like a sigh rather than articulate
speech.

For an instant Roland felt, not his heart failing him, but the sweat
pouring from his forehead. Making an effort over himself, he regained
