tone; "the King hath a commission with which to intrust your nephew."

"Why, wherefore, and for what reason?" said Balafre. "Why doth he choose
the boy, and not me?"

"I can go no farther back than your own ultimate cause, Seignior Le
Balafre, such are his Majesty's commands. But," said he, "if I might use
the presumption to form a conjecture, it may be his Majesty hath work to
do, fitter for a youth like your nephew, than for an experienced warrior
like yourself, Seignior Balafre.--Wherefore, young gentleman, get your
weapons and follow me. Bring with you a harquebuss, for you are to mount
sentinel."

"Sentinel!" said the uncle. "Are you sure you are right, Master Oliver?
The inner guards of the Castle have ever been mounted by those only who
have (like me) served twelve years in our honourable body."

"I am quite certain of his Majesty's pleasure," said Oliver, "and must
no longer delay executing it."

"But," said Le Balafre, "my nephew is not even a free Archer, being only
an Esquire, serving under my lance."

"Pardon me," answered Oliver; "the King sent for the register not half
an hour since, and enrolled him among the Guard. Have the goodness to
assist to put your nephew in order for the service."

Balafre, who had no ill nature, or even much jealousy in his
disposition, hastily set about adjusting his nephew's dress, and giving
him directions for his conduct under arms, but was unable to refrain
from larding them with interjections of surprise at such luck's chancing
to fall upon the young man so early.

It had never taken place before in the Scottish Guard, he said, not even
in his own instance. But doubtless his service must be to mount guard
over the popinjays and Indian peacocks, which the Venetian ambassador
had lately presented to the King--it could be nothing else; and such
duty being only fit for a beardless boy (here he twirled his own grim
mustaches), he was glad the lot had fallen on his fair nephew.

Quick and sharp of wit, as well as ardent in fancy, Quentin saw visions
of higher importance in this early summons to the royal presence,
and his heart beat high at the anticipation of rising into speedy
distinction. He determined carefully to watch the manners and language
of his conductor, which he suspected must, in some cases at least,
be interpreted by contraries, as soothsayers are said to discover
the interpretation of dreams. He could not but hug himself on having
observed strict secrecy on the events of the chase, and then formed a
resolution, which, for so young a person, had much prudence in it, that
while he breathed the air of this secluded and mysterious Court, he
would keep his thoughts locked in his bosom, and his tongue under the
most careful regulation.

His equipment was soon complete, and, with his harquebuss on his
shoulder (for though they retained the name of Archers, the Scottish
Guard very early substituted firearms for the long bow, in the use of
which their nation never excelled), he followed Master Oliver out of the
barrack.

His uncle looked long after him, with a countenance in which wonder
was blended with curiosity; and though neither envy nor the malignant
feelings which it engenders entered into his honest meditations, there
was yet a sense of wounded or diminished self importance, which mingled
with the pleasure excited by his nephew's favourable commencement of
service.

He shook his head gravely, opened a privy cupboard, took out a large
bottrine of stout old wine, shook it to examine how low the contents
had ebbed, filled and drank a hearty cup; then took his seat, half
reclining, on the great oaken settle; and having once again slowly
shaken his head, received so much apparent benefit from the oscillation,
that, like the toy called a mandarin, he continued the motion until he
dropped into a slumber, from which he was first roused by the signal to
dinner.

When Quentin Durward left his uncle to these sublime meditations, he
followed his conductor, Master Oliver, who, without crossing any of the
principal courts, led him, partly through private passages exposed
to the open air, but chiefly through a maze of stairs, vaults, and
galleries, communicating with each other by secret doors and at
unexpected points, into a large and spacious latticed gallery, which,
from its breadth, might have been almost termed a hall, hung with
tapestry more ancient than beautiful, and with a very few of the hard,
cold, ghastly looking pictures, belonging to the first dawn of the arts
which preceded their splendid sunrise. These were designed to represent
the Paladins of Charlemagne, who made such a distinguished figure in the
romantic history of France; and as this gigantic form of the celebrated
Orlando constituted the most prominent figure, the apartment acquired
from him the title of Rolando's Hall, or Roland's Gallery.

[Charlemagne... was accounted a saint during the dark ages: and
Louis XI, as one of his successors, honoured his shrine with peculiar
observance. S.]

[Orlando: also called Roland. His history may be read in the Chanson de
Roland.]

"You will keep watch here," said Oliver, in a low whisper, as if the
hard delineations of monarchs and warriors around could have been
offended at the elevation of his voice, or as if he had feared to awaken
the echoes that lurked among the groined vaults and Gothic drop work on
the ceiling of this huge and dreary apartment.

"What are the orders and signs of my watch?" answered Quentin, in the
same suppressed tone.

"Is your harquebuss loaded?" replied Oliver, without answering his
query.

"That," answered Quentin, "is soon done;" and proceeded to charge his
weapon, and to light the slow match (by which when necessary it was
discharged) at the embers of a wood fire, which was expiring in the huge
hall chimney--a chimney itself so large that it might have been called a
Gothic closet or chapel appertaining to the hall.

When this was performed, Oliver told him that he was ignorant of one of
the high privileges of his own corps, which only received orders from
the King in person, or the High Constable of France, in lieu of their
own officers. "You are placed here by his Majesty's command, young man,"
added Oliver, "and you will not be long here without knowing wherefore
you are summoned. Meantime your walk extends along this gallery. You are
permitted to stand still while you list, but on no account to sit down,
or quit your weapon. You are not to sing aloud, or whistle, upon any
account; but you may, if you list, mutter some of the church's prayers,
or what else you list that has no offence in it, in a low voice.
Farewell, and keep good watch."

"Good watch!" thought the youthful soldier as his guide stole away from
him with that noiseless gliding step which was peculiar to him, and
vanished through a side door behind the arras.

"Good watch! but upon whom and against whom?--for what, save bats
or rats, are there here to contend with, unless these grim old
representatives of humanity should start into life for the disturbance
of my guard? Well, it is my duty, I suppose, and I must perform it."

With the vigorous purpose of discharging his duty, even to the very
rigour, he tried to while away the time with some of the pious hymns
which he had learned in the convent in which he had found shelter after
the death of his father--allowing in his own mind, that, but for the
change of a novice's frock for the rich military dress which he now
wore, his soldierly walk in the royal gallery of France resembled
greatly those of which he had tired excessively in the cloistered
seclusion of Aberbrothick.

Presently, as if to convince himself he now belonged not to the cell but
to the world, he chanted to himself, but in such tone as not to exceed
the license given to him, some of the ancient rude ballads which the old
family harper had taught him, of the defeat of the Danes at Aberlemno
and Forres, the murder of King Duffus at Forfar, and other pithy sonnets
and lays which appertained to the history of his distant native country,
and particularly of the district to which he belonged. This wore away a
considerable space of time, and it was now more than two hours past
noon when Quentin was reminded by his appetite that the good fathers of
Aberbrothick, however strict in demanding his attendance upon the
hours of devotion, were no less punctual in summoning him to those of
refection; whereas here, in the interior of a royal palace, after a
morning spent in exercise, and a noon exhausted in duty, no man seemed
to consider it as a natural consequence that he must be impatient for
his dinner.

There are, however, charms in sweet sounds which can lull to rest even
the natural feelings of impatience by which Quentin was now visited.
At the opposite extremities of the long hall or gallery were two
large doors, ornamented with heavy architraves, probably opening into
different suites of apartments, to which the gallery served as a medium
of mutual communication. As the sentinel directed his solitary walk
betwixt these two entrances, which formed the boundary of his duty, he
was startled by a strain of music which was suddenly waked near one of
those doors, and which, at least in his imagination, was a combination
of the same lute and voice by which he had been enchanted on the
preceding day. All the dreams of yesterday morning, so much weakened by
the agitating circumstances which he had since undergone, again arose
more vivid from their slumber, and, planted on the spot where his ear
could most conveniently, drink in the sounds, Quentin remained, with his
harquebuss shouldered, his mouth half open, ear, eye, and soul
directed to the spot, rather the picture of a sentinel than a living
form,--without any other idea than that of catching, if possible, each
passing sound of the dulcet melody.

These delightful sounds were but partially heard--they languished,
lingered, ceased entirely, and were from time to time renewed after
uncertain intervals. But, besides that music, like beauty, is often most
delightful, or at least most interesting, to the imagination when its
charms are but partially displayed and the imagination is left to fill
up what is from distance but imperfectly detailed, Quentin had matter
enough to fill up his reverie during the intervals of fascination. He
could not doubt, from the report of his uncle's comrades and the scene
which had passed in the presence chamber that morning, that the siren
who thus delighted his ears, was not, as he had profanely supposed, the
daughter or kinswoman of a base Cabaretier [inn keeper], but the same
disguised and distressed Countess for whose cause kings and princes were
now about to buckle on armour, and put lance in rest. A hundred wild
dreams, such as romantic and adventurous youth readily nourished in
a romantic and adventurous age, chased from his eyes the bodily
presentiment of the actual scene, and substituted their own bewildering
delusions, when at once, and rudely, they were banished by a rough grasp
laid upon his weapon, and a harsh voice which exclaimed, close to his
ear, "Ha! Pasques dieu, Sir Squire, methinks you keep sleepy ward."

The voice was the tuneless, yet impressive and ironical tone of Maitre
Pierre, and Quentin, suddenly recalled to himself, saw, with shame and
fear, that he had, in his reverie, permitted Louis himself--entering
probably by some secret door, and gliding along by the wall, or behind
the tapestry--to approach him so nearly as almost to master his weapon.

The first impulse of his surprise was to free his harquebuss by a
violent exertion, which made the King stagger backward into the hall.
His next apprehension was that, in obeying the animal instinct, as it
may be termed, which prompts a brave man to resist an attempt to disarm
him, he had aggravated, by a personal struggle with the King, the
displeasure produced by the negligence with which he had performed his
duty upon guard; and, under this impression, he recovered his harquebuss
without almost knowing what he did, and, having again shouldered it,
stood motionless before the Monarch, whom he had reason to conclude he
had mortally offended.

Louis, whose tyrannical disposition was less founded on natural ferocity
or cruelty of temper, than on cold blooded policy and jealous suspicion,
had, nevertheless, a share of that caustic severity which would have
made him a despot in private conversation, and he always seemed to enjoy
the pain which he inflicted on occasions like the present. But he
did not push his triumph far, and contented himself with saying, "Thy
service of the morning hath already overpaid some negligence in so young
a soldier.--Hast thou dined?"

Quentin, who rather looked to be sent to the Provost Marshal than
greeted with such a compliment, answered humbly in the negative.

"Poor lad," said Louis, in a softer tone than he usually spoke in,
"hunger hath made him drowsy.--I know thine appetite is a wolf," he
continued; "and I will save thee from one wild beast as thou didst me
from another; thou hast been prudent too in that matter, and I thank
thee for it.--Canst thou yet hold out an hour without food?"

"Four-and-twenty, Sire," replied Durward, "or I were no true Scot."

"I would not for another kingdom be the pasty which should encounter
thee after such a vigil," said the King; "but the question now is,
not of thy dinner, but of my own. I admit to my table this day, and in
strict privacy, the Cardinal Balue and this Burgundian--this Count de
Crevecoeur--and something may chance; the devil is most busy when foes
meet on terms of truce."

He stopped, and remained silent, with a deep and gloomy look. As the
King was in no haste to proceed, Quentin at length ventured to ask what
his duty was to be in these circumstances.

"To keep watch at the beauffet, with thy loaded weapon," said Louis;
"and if there is treason, to shoot the traitor."

"Treason, Sire! and in this guarded castle!" exclaimed Durward.

"You think it impossible," said the King, not offended, it would seem,
by his frankness; "but our history has shown that treason can creep into
an auger hole.--Treason excluded by guards! Oh, thou silly boy!--quis
custodiat ipsos custodes--who shall exclude the treason of those very
warders?"

"Their Scottish honour," answered Durward, boldly.

"True: most right:--thou pleasest me," said the King, cheerfully;
"the Scottish honour was ever true, and I trust it accordingly. But
treason!"--here he relapsed into his former gloomy mood, and traversed
the apartment with unequal steps--"she sits at our feasts, she sparkles
in our bowls, she wears the beard of our counsellors, the smiles of our
courtiers, the crazy laugh of our jesters--above all, she lies hid under
the friendly air of a reconciled enemy. Louis of Orleans trusted John of
Burgundy--he was murdered in the Rue Barbette. John of Burgundy trusted
the faction of Orleans--he was murdered on the bridge of Montereau.--I
will trust no one--no one. Hark ye; I will keep my eye on that insolent
Count; ay, and on the churchman too, whom I hold not too faithful. When
I say, Ecosse, en avant [Forward, Scotland], shoot Crevecoeur dead on
the spot."

"It is my duty," said Quentin, "your Majesty's life being endangered."

"Certainly--I mean it no otherwise," said the King. "What should I get
by slaying this insolent soldier?--Were it the Constable Saint Paul
indeed"--here he paused, as if he thought he had said a word too much,
but resumed, laughing, "our brother-in-law, James of Scotland--your own
James, Quentin--poniarded the Douglas when on a hospitable visit, within
his own royal castle of Skirling."

[Douglas: the allusion in the text is to the fate of James, Earl of
Douglas, who, upon the faith of a safe conduct, after several acts of
rebellion, visited James the Second in the Castle of Stirling. The king
stabbed Douglas, who received his mortal wound from Sir Patrick Grey,
one of the king's attendants.]

"Of Stirling," said Quentin, "and so please your Highness.--It was a
deed of which came little good."

"Stirling call you the castle?" said the King, overlooking the latter
part of Quentin's speech. "Well, let it be Stirling--the name is nothing
to the purpose. But I meditate no injury to these men--none.--It would
serve me nothing. They may not purpose equally fair by me--I rely on thy
harquebuss."

"I shall be prompt at the signal," said Quentin; "but yet"

"You hesitate," said the King. "Speak out--I give thee full leave. From
such as thou art, hints may be caught that are right valuable."

"I would only presume to say," replied Quentin, "that your Majesty
having occasion to distrust this Burgundian, I marvel that you suffer
him to approach so near your person, and that in privacy."

"Oh, content you, Sir Squire," said the King. "There are some dangers
which when they are braved, disappear, and which yet, when there is
an obvious and apparent dread of them displayed, become certain and
inevitable. When I walk boldly up to a surly mastiff, and caress him,
it is ten to one I soothe him to good temper; if I show fear of him,
he flies on me and rends me. I will be thus far frank with thee.--It
concerns me nearly that this man returns not to his headlong master in
a resentful humour. I run my risk, therefore. I have never shunned to
expose my life for the weal of my kingdom. Follow me."

Louis led his young Life Guardsman, for whom he seemed to have taken a
special favour, through the side door by which he had himself entered,
saying, as he showed it him, "He who would thrive at Court must know the
private wickets and concealed staircases--ay, and the traps and pitfalls
of the palace, as well as the principal entrances, folding doors, and
portals."

After several turns and passages, the King entered a small vaulted
room, where a table was prepared for dinner with three covers. The whole
furniture and arrangements of the room were plain almost to meanness. A
beauffet, or folding and movable cupboard, held a few pieces of gold and
silver plate, and was the only article in the chamber which had in the
slightest degree the appearance of royalty. Behind this cupboard, and
completely hidden by it, was the post which Louis assigned to Quentin
Durward; and after having ascertained, by going to different parts of
the room, that he was invisible from all quarters, he gave him his last
charge: "Remember the word, Posse, en avant; and so soon as ever I utter
these sounds, throw down the screen--spare not for cup or goblet, and be
sure thou take good aim at Crevecoeur--if thy piece fail, cling to him,
and use thy knife--Oliver and I can deal with the Cardinal."

Having thus spoken, he whistled aloud, and summoned into the apartment
Oliver, who was premier valet of the chamber as well as barber, and who,
in fact, performed all offices immediately connected with the King's
person, and who now appeared, attended by two old men, who were the only
assistants or waiters at the royal table. So soon as the King had taken
his place, the visitors were admitted; and Quentin, though himself
unseen, was so situated as to remark all the particulars of the
interview.

The King welcomed his visitors with a degree of cordiality which Quentin
had the utmost difficulty to reconcile with the directions which he
had previously received, and the purpose for which he stood behind the
beauffet with his deadly weapon in readiness. Not only did Louis appear
totally free from apprehension of any kind, but one would have supposed
that those visitors whom he had done the high honour to admit to his
table were the very persons in whom he could most unreservedly
confide, and whom he was, most willing to honour. Nothing could be more
dignified, and, at the same time, more courteous than his demeanour.
While all around him, including even his own dress, was far beneath
the splendour which the petty princes of the kingdom displayed in
their festivities, his own language and manners were those of a mighty
Sovereign in his most condescending mood. Quentin was tempted to
suppose, either that the whole of his previous conversation with Louis
had been a dream, or that the dutiful demeanour of the Cardinal, and the
frank, open, and gallant bearing of the Burgundian noble had entirely
erased the King's suspicion.

But whilst the guests, in obedience to the King, were in the act of
placing themselves at the table, his Majesty darted one keen glance on
them, and then instantly directed his look to Quentin's post. This was
done in an instant; but the glance conveyed so much doubt and hatred
towards his guests, such a peremptory injunction on Quentin to be
watchful in attendance, and prompt in execution, that no room was left
for doubting that the sentiments of Louis continued unaltered, and his
apprehensions unabated. He was, therefore, more than ever astonished at
the deep veil under which that Monarch was able to conceal the movements
of his jealous disposition.

Appearing to have entirely forgotten the language which Crevecoeur had
held towards him in the face of his Court, the King conversed with him
of old times, of events which had occurred during his own exile in the
territories of Burgundy, and inquired respecting all the nobles with
whom he had been then familiar, as if that period had indeed been
the happiest of his life, and as if he retained towards all who had
contributed to soften the term of his exile, the kindest and most
grateful sentiments.

"To an ambassador of another nation," he said, "I would have thrown
something of state into our reception; but to an old friend, who often
shared my board at the Castle of Genappes [during his residence in
Burgundy, in his father's lifetime, Genappes was the usual abode of
Louis.... S.], I wished to show myself, as I love best to live, old
Louis of Valois, as simple and plain as any of his Parisian badauds
[idlers]. But I directed them to make some better cheer than ordinary
for you, Sir Count, for I know your Burgundian proverb, 'Mieux vault
bon repas que bel habit' [a good meal is better than a beautiful coat.
(Present spelling is vaut.)]; and therefore I bid them have some care
of our table. For our wine, you know well it is the subject of an
old emulation betwixt France and Burgundy, which we will presently
reconcile; for I will drink to you in Burgundy, and you, Sir Count,
shall pledge me in Champagne.--Here, Oliver, let me have a cup of Vin
d'Auxerre;" and he hummed gaily a song then well known,


     "Auxerre est le boisson des Rois."

     [Auxerre wine is the beverage of kings]


"Here, Sir Count, I drink to the health of the noble Duke of Burgundy,
our kind and loving cousin.--Oliver, replenish yon golden cup with Vin
de Rheims, and give it to the Count on your knee--he represents our
loving brother.--My Lord Cardinal, we will ourself fill your cup."

"You have already, Sire, even to overflowing," said the Cardinal, with
the lowly mien of a favourite towards an indulgent master.

"Because we know that your Eminence can carry it with a steady hand,"
said Louis. "But which side do you espouse in the great controversy,
Sillery or Auxerre--France or Burgundy?"

"I will stand neutral, Sire," said the Cardinal, "and replenish my cup
with Auvernat."

"A neutral has a perilous part to sustain," said the King; but as he
observed the Cardinal colour somewhat, he glided from the subject and
added, "But you prefer the Auvernat, because it is so noble a wine it
endures not water.--You, Sir Count, hesitate to empty your cup. I trust
you have found no national bitterness at the bottom."

"I would, Sire," said the Count de Crevecoeur, "that all national
quarrels could be as pleasantly ended as the rivalry betwixt our
vineyards."

"With time, Sir Count," answered the King, "with time--such time as you
have taken to your draught of Champagne.--And now that it is finished,
favour me by putting the goblet in your bosom, and keeping it as a
pledge of our regard. It is not to every one that we would part with it.
It belonged of yore to that terror of France, Henry V of England, and
was taken when Rouen was reduced, and those islanders expelled from
Normandy by the joint arms of France and Burgundy. It cannot be better
bestowed than on a noble and valiant Burgundian, who well knows that on
the union of these two nations depends the continuance of the freedom of
the continent from the English yoke."

The Count made a suitable answer, and Louis gave unrestrained way to
the satirical gaiety of disposition which sometimes enlivened the darker
shades of his character. Leading, of course, the conversation, his
remarks, always shrewd and caustic, and often actually witty, were
seldom good natured, and the anecdotes with which he illustrated them
were often more humorous than delicate; but in no one word, syllable,
or letter did he betray the state of mind of one who, apprehensive of
assassination, hath in his apartment an armed soldier with his piece
loaded, in order to prevent or anticipate an attack on his person.

The Count de Crevecoeur gave frankly in to the King's humour [the nature
of Louis XI's coarse humour may be guessed at by those who have perused
the Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles, which are grosser than most similar
collections of the age. S.]; while the smooth churchman laughed at every
jest and enhanced every ludicrous idea, without exhibiting any shame at
expressions which made the rustic young Scot blush even in his place of
concealment. In about an hour and a half the tables were drawn; and the
King, taking courteous leave of his guests, gave the signal that it was
his desire to be alone.

So soon as all, even Oliver, had retired, he called Quentin from his
place of concealment; but with a voice so faint, that the youth could
scarcely believe it to be the same which had so lately given animation
to the jest, and zest to the tale. As he approached, he saw an equal
change in his countenance. The light of assumed vivacity had left the
King's eyes, the smile had deserted his face, and he exhibited all
the fatigue of a celebrated actor, when he has finished the exhausting
representation of some favourite character, in which, while upon the
stage, he had displayed the utmost vivacity.

"Thy watch is not yet over," said he to Quentin; "refresh thyself for
an instant--yonder table affords the means; I will then instruct thee in
thy farther duty. Meanwhile it is ill talking between a full man and a
fasting."

He threw himself back on his seat, covered his brow with his hand, and
was silent.



CHAPTER XI: THE HALL OF ROLAND

     Painters show cupid blind--Hath Hymen eyes?
     Or is his sight warp'd by those spectacles
     which parents, guardians, and advisers, lent him,
     That he may look through them on lands and mansions,
     On jewels, gold, and all such rich dotations,
     And see their value ten times magnified?--
     Methinks 't will brook a question.

     THE MISERIES OF ENFORCED MARRIAGE


Louis XI of France, though the sovereign in Europe who was fondest
and most jealous of power, desired only its substantial enjoyment;
and though he knew well enough, and at times exacted strictly, the
observances due to his rank, he was in general singularly careless of
show.

In a prince of sounder moral qualities, the familiarity with which he
invited subjects to his board--nay, occasionally sat at theirs--must
have been highly popular; and even such as he was, the King's homeliness
of manners atoned for many of his vices with that class of his subjects
who were not particularly exposed to the consequences of his suspicion
and jealousy. The tiers etat, or commons of France, who rose to more
opulence and consequence under the reign of this sagacious Prince,
respected his person, though they loved him not; and it was resting on
their support that he was enabled to make his party good against the
hatred of the nobles, who conceived that he diminished the honour of the
French crown, and obscured their own splendid privileges by that very
neglect of form which gratified the citizens and commons.

With patience which most other princes would have considered as
degrading, and not without a sense of amusement, the Monarch of France
waited till his Life Guardsman had satisfied the keenness of a youthful
appetite. It may be supposed, however, that Quentin had too much sense
and prudence to put the royal patience to a long or tedious proof; and
indeed he was repeatedly desirous to break off his repast ere Louis
would permit him.

"I see it in thine eye," he said good naturedly, "that thy courage is
not half abated. Go on--God and Saint Denis!--charge again. I tell thee
that meat and mass" (crossing himself) "never hindered the work of a
good Christian man. Take a cup of wine; but mind thou be cautious of the
wine pot--it is the vice of thy countrymen as well as of the English,
who, lacking that folly, are the choicest soldiers ever wore armour. And
now wash speedily--forget not thy benedicite, and follow me."

Quentin obeyed, and, conducted by a different but as maze-like an
approach as he had formerly passed, he followed Louis into the Hall of
Roland.

"Take notice," said the King, imperatively, "thou hast never left this
post--let that be thine answer to thy kinsman and comrades--and, hark
thee, to bind the recollection on thy memory, I give thee this gold
chain" (flinging on his arm one of considerable value). "If I go not
brave myself, those whom I trust have ever the means to ruffle it with
the best. But when such chains as these bind not the tongue from wagging
too freely, my gossip, L'Hermite, hath an amulet for the throat, which
never fails to work a certain cure. And now attend.--No man, save Oliver
or I myself, enters here this evening; but ladies will come hither,
perhaps from the one extremity of the hall, perhaps from the other,
perhaps one from each. You may answer if they address you, but, being
on duty, your answer must be brief; and you must neither address them
in your turn, nor engage in any prolonged discourse. But hearken to what
they say. Thine ears as well as thy hands are mine--I have bought thee,
body and soul. Therefore, if thou hearest aught of their conversation,
thou must retain it in memory until it is communicated to me, and then
forget it. And, now I think better on it, it will be best that thou pass
for a Scottish recruit, who hath come straight down from his mountains,
and hath not yet acquired our most Christian language.--Right.--So,
if they speak to thee, thou wilt not answer--this will free you
from embarrassment, and lead them to converse without regard to your
presence. You understand me.--Farewell. Be wary, and thou hast a
friend."

The King had scarce spoken these words ere he disappeared behind the
arras, leaving Quentin to meditate on what he had seen and heard. The
youth was in one of those situations from which it is pleasanter to look
forward than to look back; for the reflection that he had been planted
like a marksman in a thicket who watches for a stag, to take the life of
the noble Count of Crevecoeur, had in it nothing ennobling. It was very
true that the King's measures seemed on this occasion merely cautionary
and defensive; but how did the youth know but he might be soon
commanded on some offensive operation of the same kind? This would be an
unpleasant crisis, since it was plain, from the character of his master,
that there would be destruction in refusing, while his honour told him
that there would be disgrace in complying. He turned his thoughts from
this subject of reflection with the sage consolation so often adopted by
youth when prospective dangers intrude themselves on their mind, that it
was time enough to think what was to be done when the emergence actually
arrived, and that sufficient for the day was the evil thereof.

Quentin made use of this sedative reflection the more easily that the
last commands of the King had given him something more agreeable to
think of than his own condition. The Lady of the Lute was certainly one
of those to whom his attention was to be dedicated; and well in his mind
did he promise to obey one part of the King's mandate, and listen with
diligence to every word that might drop from her lips that he might know
if the magic of her conversation equalled that of her music. But with
as much sincerity did he swear to himself, that no part of her discourse
should be reported by him to the King which might affect the fair
speaker otherwise than favourably.

Meantime, there was no fear of his again slumbering on his post. Each
passing breath of wind, which, finding its way through the open lattice,
waved the old arras, sounded like the approach of the fair object of
his expectation. He felt, in short, all that mysterious anxiety and
eagerness of expectation which is always the companion of love, and
sometimes hath a considerable share in creating it.

At length, a door actually creaked and jingled (for the doors even
of palaces did not in the fifteenth century turn on their hinges so
noiseless as ours); but, alas! it was not at that end of the hall from
which the lute had been heard. It opened, however, and a female figure
entered, followed by two others, whom she directed by a sign to remain
without, while she herself came forward into the hall. By her imperfect
and unequal gait, which showed to peculiar disadvantage as she traversed
this long gallery, Quentin at once recognised the Princess Joan, and
with the respect which became his situation, drew himself up in an
attitude of silent vigilance, and lowered his weapon to her as she
passed. She acknowledged the courtesy by a gracious inclination of
her head, and he had an opportunity of seeing her countenance more
distinctly than he had in the morning.

There was little in the features of this ill fated Princess to atone for
the misfortune of her shape and gait. Her face was, indeed, by no means
disagreeable in itself, though destitute of beauty; and there was a
meek impression of suffering patience in her large blue eyes, which
were commonly fixed upon the ground. But besides that she was extremely
pallid in complexion, her skin had the yellowish discoloured tinge which
accompanies habitual bad health; and though her teeth were white and
regular, her lips were thin and pale. The Princess had a profusion of
flaxen hair, but it was so light coloured as to be almost of a bluish
tinge; and her tire woman, who doubtless considered the luxuriance of
her mistress's tresses as a beauty, had not greatly improved matters by
arranging them in curls around her pale countenance, to which they added
an expression almost corpse-like and unearthly. To make matters still
worse, she had chosen a vest or cymar of a pale green silk, which gave
her, on the whole, a ghastly and even spectral appearance.

While Quentin followed this singular apparition with eyes in which
curiosity was blended with compassion, for every look and motion of the
Princess seemed to call for the latter feeling, two ladies entered from
the upper end of the apartment.

One of these was the young person who upon Louis's summons had served
him with fruit, while Quentin made his memorable breakfast at the Fleur
de Lys. Invested now with all the mysterious dignity belonging to the
nymph of the veil and lute, and proved, besides (at least in Quentin's
estimation), to be the high born heiress of a rich earldom, her beauty
made ten times the impression upon him which it had done when he
beheld in her one whom he deemed the daughter of a paltry innkeeper, in
attendance upon a rich and humorous old burgher. He now wondered what
fascination could ever have concealed from him her real character. Yet
her dress was nearly as simple as before, being a suit of deep mourning,
without any ornaments. Her headdress was but a veil of crape, which was
entirely thrown back, so as to leave her face uncovered; and it was only
Quentin's knowledge of her actual rank, which gave in his estimation new
elegance to her beautiful shape, a dignity to her step which had before
remained unnoticed, and to her regular features, brilliant complexion,
and dazzling eyes, an air of conscious nobleness that enhanced their
beauty.

Had death been the penalty, Durward must needs have rendered to this
beauty and her companion the same homage which he had just paid to the
royalty of the Princess. They received it as those who were accustomed
to the deference of inferiors, and returned it with courtesy; but he
thought--perhaps it was but a youthful vision--that the young lady
