say that Napoleon is gathering a great army, and against such a force,
with the French troops already in Spain, our twenty or twenty-five
thousand men would fare very badly, especially as they say that the
emperor is coming himself."

"That is worse news than the other, Terence. It is only because the French
generals have always been quarrelling among themselves that the whole
Peninsula has not been conquered; but with Napoleon at the head of affairs
it would be a different matter altogether, and my humble opinion is that
we had better stay where we are until he has wiped out the Spaniards
altogether."

Terence laughed.

"You don't take a sanguine view of things."

"You have been with the regiment, Terence, and have had very little to do
with the natives. I have not seen very much of them either, thank
goodness; but I have seen quite enough to know that though perhaps the
peasants would make good soldiers, if officered by Englishmen, there is
mighty little feeling of patriotism among the classes above them. Reading
and writing may be good for some countries, but as far as I see here,
reading and writing spoil them here, for every man one comes across who
can sign his name is intent either on filling his pocket, or on working
some scheme or other for his own advantage. If I were Sir John Moore I
would send up a division to Oporto, hang the bishop and every member of
the Junta, shoot Friere and a dozen of his principal officers, and if the
people of Oporto gave them the chance clear the streets with grape-shot.
Why, if it hadn't been for a small guard of our fellows with the French
garrisons that were marched down there to embark, the Portuguese would
have murdered every man-jack of them. They did murder a good many, and
robbed them all of their baggage; and if it had not been that our men
loaded and would have fired on them if they had gone further, not a
Frenchman would have got off alive. If this had been done in Lisbon, where
the French had been masters, there might have been some sort of excuse for
it; but they had never been near Oporto at all, and therefore the people
there had no scores to settle with them."

"I am afraid, O'Flaherty, that an army worked on your principles would
never get far from the coast, for we should have the whole country against
us."

"So much the better if we never got far from the coast. How much help have
we had from them? There is not a single horse or waggon for transport
except those we have hired at exorbitant prices; not a single ounce of
food. They would not even divide with us the magazines at Leirya, which
they had no share in capturing. The rabble they call an army has never
fired a shot or marched a yard with us, except Trant's small command, and
they were kept so far out of it in both fights, that I doubt whether they
fired a shot; and yet they take upon themselves to throw every obstacle in
our way, to dictate to our generals, and to upset every plan as soon as it
is formed.

"Well, I shall be glad to be back with the regiment again, Terence. There
is some fun going on there anyhow, and I have not had a hearty laugh since
O'Grady went off ten days ago."

"We were all heartily glad to see him back again," Terence said. "He does
not seem a bit the worse for having lost his hand."

"No, he has got through it a deal better than I had expected, considering
that he is not what might be called a very temperate man."

"Not by any means. It is not very often that he takes more liquor than he
can carry, but he generally goes very close to the mark."

"I kept him very short here," O'Flaherty laughed, "and told him that if he
did not obey orders I would have him invalided home; I have got him to
promise that he will draw in a bit in future, and have good hopes of his
keeping it, seeing that when the army starts again you won't get much
chance of indulging."

"It will be a good thing for others as well as O'Grady," Terence said,
quietly. "I suppose in Ireland the whisky does not do much harm, seeing
that it is a wet country; but here I notice that they cannot drink half as
much as they were accustomed to without feeling it."

"That is true for you, Terence. Half a bottle here goes as far as a bottle
in the old country; and I find with the wounded, spirits have a very bad
effect, even in very small quantities. There is one thing, when the troops
are on the march they not only get small chance of getting drink, but
mighty little time to think of it. When you have been doing your twenty
miles a day, with halts and stoppages on these beastly roads and defiles,
and are on your feet from daylight until late in the evening, and then,
perhaps, a turn at the outposts, a man hasn't got much time for divarshon;
and even if there is liquor to be had, he is glad enough when he has had a
glass or so to wrap himself in his cloak and lie down to sleep. I have
nearly sworn off myself, for I found that my head troubled me in the
morning after a glass or two, more than it did after an all-night's
sitting at Athlone. Ah, Terence, it is lucky for you that you have no
fancy for it!"

"I hope I never shall have, O'Flaherty. If one has got thoroughly wet
through in a long day's fishing, it may be that a glass of punch may keep
away a cold, though even that I doubt. But I am sure that I am better
without it at any other time; and I hope some day the fashion will change,
and instead of it being considered almost as a matter of course after a
dinner that half the men should be under the table, it will then be looked
upon as disgraceful for a man to get drunk, as it is now for a woman to do
so."

O'Flaherty looked at his companion with amused surprise. "Faith, Terence,
that would be a change indeed, and you might as well say that you hope the
time will come when you can whip off a fellow's leg without his feeling
pain."

"Perhaps that may come too," Terence laughed; "there is no saying."

The next morning the detachment started at daybreak and marched to Torres
Vedras, where they heard that a general movement was expected to begin.
The regiment had now a comfortable mess, and the situation was freely
discussed as scraps of news arrived from Lisbon. Could the English
ministry have heard the comments on their imbecility passed by the
officers of the British army, even they might have doubted the perfect
wisdom of their plan. On the 6th of October, Moore had received a despatch
stating that 30,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry were to be employed in the
north of Spain. Ten thousand of these were to be sent out direct from
England, the remainder were to be composed of regiments from the army in
Portugal. Moore had the choice of taking the troops round in ships or of
marching them direct. He decided upon the latter course, for arrangements
had been made by Sir Hew Dalrymple to enter Spain by Almeida, and,
moreover, he thought that the resources of the sea-coast of Galicia would
not be more than sufficient to supply transport and food for the 10,000
men who were to land there under the command of Sir David Baird.

The English general's difficulties were indeed overwhelming. He had
soldiers who, although but recently raised, had shown themselves good
fighters; but he was altogether without even transport sufficient for the
officers. With an ample supply of money, an experienced staff, and a
well-organized commissariat, the difficulties might have been overcome,
but Sir John Moore was practically without money. His staff had no
experience whatever, and the commissariat and transport officers were
alike ignorant of the work they were called upon to perform. He was
unacquainted with the views of the Spanish government, and uninformed as
to the numbers, composition, and situation of the Spanish armies with whom
he was to act, or with those of the enemy. He had a winter march of 300
miles before he could join Sir David Baird, who would have 200 miles to
march from Corunna to join him, and there was then a distance of another
300 miles to be traversed before he reached the Ebro, which was designated
as the centre of his operations.

And all this had to be done while a great French army was already pouring
in through the passes of the Pyrenees. No more tremendous, or, it may be
said, impossible, task was ever assigned to an English commander; and to
add to the absurdity of their scheme, the British government sent off Sir
David Baird without instructions, and even without money. The Duke of York
had vainly protested against the plan of the ministry, and had pointed out
that nothing short of an army of 60,000 men, fully equipped with all
necessaries for war--money, transport, and artillery--could achieve
success of any kind.

Upon the day Terence rejoined, news came from the engineers in advance
that the assurances Sir John Moore had received that the road by which the
army was to travel was perfectly practicable for artillery and
baggage-waggons, were wholly false, and it was probable that the artillery
and cavalry would have to make a long circuit to the south.

It was too late now to change the route for the rest of the army. Nearly
half the force had already started on the road to Almeida, and the
supplies for their subsistence had been collected at that town. Therefore
it was necessary that the main body of the infantry should travel by that
road, while three thousand were to act as a guard for the artillery and
cavalry on the other route.


CHAPTER VII

THE ADVANCE

"It is enough to drive Sir John out of his senses," the colonel said, as
the news was discussed after mess. "These people must be the champion
liars of the world. Not content with doing nothing themselves, they seem
to delight in inventing lies to prevent our doing anything for them. Who
ever heard of an army marching, without artillery and cavalry, one way,
while these arms travelled by a different road entirely, and that not for
a march of twenty miles, but for a march of three hundred? One battery is
to go with us. But what will be the use of six guns against an enemy with
sixty? Every day the baggage is being cut down owing to these blackguard
Portuguese breaking their engagements to furnish waggons, and we shall
have to march pretty nearly as we stand, and to take with us nothing
beyond one change of clothes."

Loud exclamations of discontent ran round the table. It was bad enough
that in the midst of a campaign waggons should break down and baggage be
left behind, but that troops should start upon a campaign with scarcely
the necessaries of life had caused general anger in the army; and no order
would have been more willingly obeyed than one to march upon Lisbon, shoot
every public official, establish a state of siege, and rule by martial
law, seizing for the use of the army every draught animal, waggon, and
carriage that could be found in the city, or swept in from the country
round. The colonel had not exaggerated matters. The number of tents to be
taken were altogether insufficient for the regiment, even with the utmost
crowding possible. The officers' baggage had been cut down to twenty
pounds a head--an amount scarcely sufficient for a single change of
clothes and boots. Even the amount of ammunition to be taken would be
insufficient to refill the soldiers' pouches after the supply they carried
was exhausted.

The paucity of baggage would not have mattered so much had the march begun
at the commencement of summer, instead of just as winter was setting in.
In the former case, men could have slept in the open air, and a solitary
blanket and one change of clothes would have sufficed; but with the wet
season at hand, to be followed by winter cold, the grievance was a very
serious one. Terence had already learned that the brigade was to march in
two days, and that the great bulk of the baggage was to be stored at
Torres Vedras, which was to be occupied on their leaving by some of the
troops that would remain in Portugal.

"Faith, it is an evil look-out, Terence," O'Grady, who was sitting next to
him, said, pathetically. "Sorra a drop of whisky is there in the camp, and
now we sha'n't be able to have even a drink of their bastely spirits,
onless we can buy it at the towns; and as Anstruther's division has gone
on ahead of us, it is likely that every drop has been drunk up."

"It will be all the better for you, O'Grady. Daly tells me that your arm
is not fully healed yet. I know that you would not like to be left behind
when we have once started."

"That is true enough, but a drop of the cratur hurts no one."

"I beg your pardon, O'Grady, it is very bad for anything like a wound. The
doctor told me, when I was chatting with him before dinner, that he really
did not think that you could go, for you would not obey his orders to give
up spirits altogether."

"Well, I own that it has been smarting a good deal the last few days,"
O'Grady admitted, reluctantly, "though I have not said as much to the
doctor. I don't know that you are not about right, Terence; but faith,
after being kept upon bastely slops by O'Flaherty, it was not in human
nature to drink nothing but water when one gets a chance. At any rate, I
am not likely to find any great temptation after we have started."

"Well, you had better begin to-night, O'Grady. I am going to get away as
soon as I can, and if you will take my advice you will come too."

"What! and us to march in two days? It is not to be thought of. You mane
well, Terence, but a lad like you must not take to lecturing your
supayrior officer. Shure, and don't I know what to do for meself better
than any other?"

Terence saw that it was useless to endeavour to persuade him to move, and
presently went round to Dr. Daly and said, quietly:

"Doctor, O'Grady tells me that his arm has been hurting him a good deal
more during the last two days. I expect they will make a night of it this
evening, and again to-morrow, and if he once begins, nothing will stop him
until they break up. Could not you do anything?"

"I will talk to him like a father, Terence. You are a good boy to have
told me; I might have gone away without thinking of it."

"Don't mention my name, Doctor."

The doctor nodded, and Terence went away and took a vacant seat at some
distance from him. Presently the doctor got up and went round to O'Grady.
The supply of claret had just been finished, and bottles of spirits had
been placed upon the table. O'Grady stretched out his hand to one near
him, but the doctor quietly removed it.

"Not for you, O'Grady," he said; "you have had more than sufficient wine
already. I have been doubting whether you are fit to go on with the
regiment; and, by the powers, if you touch spirits to-night or to-morrow,
I will put your name down in the list of those who are to be left behind
as unfit for service!"

"Sure you are joking, Doctor?"

"Never was more earnest in my life, O'Grady. You don't want to be left
behind, I suppose, in some filthy Portuguese town, while we march on, and
that is what it will come to if your wound inflames. I told you this
morning that it was not doing as well as it ought to, and that you must
cut off liquor altogether. I have had my eye upon you, and you have taken
down more than a bottle of wine already. I don't think I ought to let you
go with us, even as it is; but, by the piper that played before Moses, if
you don't go off to your quarters, without touching a drop more, I will
have you left behind!"

"You are mighty hard on a poor fellow, and must have a heart of stone to
treat a man, who has lost his arm and wants a bit of comfort, in such
fashion. Faith, I would not do it to a dog."

"There would be no occasion, O'Grady; a dog has got sense."

"And I haven't? Thank ye for the compliment. I will appeal to the colonel.
Colonel, the doctor says if I drink a drop of spirits to-night or
to-morrow he will put me down in the black list. Now, I ask you, do the
regulations justify his using such a threat as that?"

"I think they do," the colonel said, with a laugh. "I think that his order
is good and sensible, and I endorse it. You know yourself that spirits are
bad for you, with an arm only just healed up. Now, behave like a
raisonable fellow, and go off to your quarters. You know well enough that
if you stop here you won't be able to keep from it."

"Faith, if the two of you are against me I have nothing more to say. It is
mighty hard that after having lost an arm in the service of my country I
should be treated like a child and sent off to bed."

"I am going, too, O'Grady," Terence, who had gone back to his original
place, now said. "There is no occasion to go to bed. I have a box of good
cigars in my tent, and we can sit there and chat as long as you like."

But O'Grady's dignity was ruffled.

"Thank you, Mr O'Connor," he said, stiffly; "but with your lave I will do
as I said."

"That is the best thing," the doctor said. "You have not had a long
night's rest since you rejoined. I am going myself, and I see that some of
the others are getting up, too, and it would be a good thing if all would
do so, for, with such work as we have got before us, the more sleep we
get, while we can, the better."

As nearly half the officers now rose from their seats, O'Grady was
mollified, and as he went out he said:

"I think, after all, Terence, I will try one of those cigars of yours."

On the 14th of October Fane's brigade left Torres Vedras.


[Illustration: 'I AM TOLD THAT YOU WISH TO SPEAK TO ME, GENERAL.']


A number of the troops had been stationed along the line of route to be
followed, and these had started simultaneously with the departure of
Fane's brigade from Torres Vedras. The discontent as to the reduction of
baggage ceased as soon as the troops were in motion. They were going to
invade Spain, and ignorant as the soldiers were of the real state of
affairs, none doubted but that success would attend them there. Among the
officers better acquainted with the state of things there was no such
feeling of confidence, but they hoped that they should at least give as
good an account of themselves as before, against any French force of
anything like equal strength they might encounter. O'Grady, influenced by
the doctor's threats, which he knew the latter would be firm enough to
carry out, had obeyed his orders, and had confided to Terence, when the
regiment formed up at daybreak for the march, that his arm felt much
better.

"I don't say that the doctor may not have been right, Terence, but he need
not have threatened me in that way, at all, at all."

"I don't know," Terence replied. "I feel pretty sure that if he hadn't,
you would not have knocked off spirits. Well, it is a glorious morning for
starting, but I am afraid the fine weather won't last long. Everyone says
that the rains generally begin about this time."

As Terence fell in with his company the adjutant rode up.

"Mr. O'Connor, you are to report yourself to the brigadier."

Wondering much at the message, Terence hurried to the house occupied by
General Fane. He and several officers were standing in front of it.

"I am told that you wish to speak to me, General," he said, saluting.

"Oh, you are Mr. O'Connor! Can you ride?"

"Yes, sir," Terence replied; for he had often had a scamper across the
hills around Athlone on half-broken ponies, and occasionally on the horses
of some of his friends in the regiment.

"I have a vacancy on my staff. Lieutenant Andrews was thrown when riding
out from Lisbon with a despatch last night, and broke a leg. I was on
board the flag-ship when your colonel brought his report about the fight
between the transport and the two privateers. I read it, and was so much
struck with the quickness and intelligence you displayed, that I made a
note at the time that if I should have a vacancy on my staff I would
appoint you."

"I am very much obliged, General," Terence said, "but I have no horse."

"I have arranged that. Lieutenant Andrews will not be fit for service for
a long time. It is a compound fracture, and he will, the doctor says,
probably be sent back to England by the first ship that arrives after he
reaches Lisbon. His horse is therefore useless to him, and as it is only a
native animal and would not fetch a ten-pound note, he agreed at once to
hand it over to his successor, and in fact was rather glad to get it off
his hands. He has an English saddle, bridle, and holsters; he will take
five pounds for them. If you happen to be short of cash the paymaster will
settle it for you."

"Thank you, sir; I have the money about me, and I am very much obliged to
you for making the arrangement."

Terence was indeed in funds, for in addition to the ten pounds that had
fallen to him as his share of the prize money, his pay had been almost
untouched from the day he left England, and his father had, on embarking,
added ten pounds to his store.

"I won't want it, Terence," he said; "I have got another twenty pounds by
me, and by the time I get to England I shall have another month's pay to
draw, and shall no doubt be put in a military hospital, where I shall have
no occasion for money till I am out again."

"But I sha'n't want it either, father."

"There is never any saying, lad; it is always useful to have money on a
campaign. You may be in places where the commissariat breaks down
altogether, and you have to depend on what you buy; you may be left behind
wounded, or may be taken prisoner, one never can tell. I shall feel more
comfortable about you if I know that you are well provided with cash,
whatever may happen. My advice is, Terence, get fifteen or twenty pounds
in gold sewn up in your boot; have an extra sole put on, and the money
sewn inside. If it is your bad luck to be taken prisoner, you will find
the money mighty useful in a great many ways."

Terence had followed this advice and had fifteen pounds hidden away,
besides ten that he carried in his pockets; he therefore hurried to the
hut where Lieutenant Andrews was lying. He was slightly acquainted with
him, as he had been Fane's aide-de-camp from the time of landing. The
young lieutenant's servant was standing at the door with a horse ready
saddled and bridled.

"I am very sorry to hear of your injury," he said to the young officer.

"Yes, it is a horrible nuisance," the other replied; "and just as we were
starting, too. There is an end of my campaigning for the present. I should
not have minded if it had been a French ball, but to be merely thrown from
a horse is disgusting."

"I am extremely obliged to you for the horse, Andrews, but I would rather
pay you for it; it is not fair that I should get it for nothing."

"Oh, that is all right! It would be a bother taking it down, and I should
not know what to do with it when I got to Lisbon; it would be a nuisance
altogether, and I am glad to get rid of it. The money is of no consequence
to me one way or the other. I wish you better luck with it than I have
had."

"At any rate here are five pounds for the saddle and bridle," and he put
the money down on the table by the bed.

"That is all right," the other said, without looking at it; "they are well
off my hands, too. I hope the authorities will send me straight on board
ship when I get to Lisbon; my servant will go down with me. If I am kept
there, he will of course stay with me until I sail; if not, he will rejoin
as soon as he has seen me on board. He is a good servant, and I can
recommend him to you; he is rather fond of the bottle, but that is his
only fault as far as I know. He is a countryman of yours, and you will be
able to make allowances for his failing," he added, with a laugh.

There was no time to be lost--the bugles were sounding--so, with a brief
adieu, Terence went out, mounted the horse and rode after the general, who
had just left with his staff, and taken his place at the head of the
column. As he passed his regiment, he stopped for a moment to speak to the
colonel.

"I heard that you were wanted by the general, Terence," the latter said,
"and I congratulate you on your appointment. I am sorry that you are
leaving us, but, as you will be with the brigade, we shall often see you.
O'Driscol is as savage as a bull at the loss of one of his subalterns.
Well, it is your own luck that you have and another's; drop in this
evening, if you can, and tell us how it was that Fane came to pick you
out."

