    Father to us, and god!
  Rise with thy diadem, O sire benign,
    Upon thy brow!
  List to the strange new sorrows of thy line,
    Sire of a woeful son!

  A mist of fate and hell is round us now,
  And all the city's flower to death is done!
  Alas, we wept thee once, and weep again!
  O Lord of lords, by recklessness twofold
  The land is wasted of its men,
  And down to death are rolled
  Wreckage of sail and oar,
  Ships that are ships no more,
  And bodies of the slain!
                                      [The GHOST OF DARIUS _rises_.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Ye aged Persians, truest of the true,
  Coevals of the youth that once was mine,
  What troubleth now our city? harken, how
  It moans and beats the breast and rends the plain!
  And I, beholding how my consort stood
  Beside my tomb, was moved with awe, and took
  The gift of her libation graciously.
  But ye are weeping by my sepulchre,
  And, shrilling forth a sad, evoking cry,
  Summon me mournfully, _Arise, arise_.
  No light thing is it, to come back from death,
  For, in good sooth, the gods of nether gloom
  Are quick to seize but late and loth to free!
  Yet among them I dwell as one in power--
  And lo, I come! now speak, and speed your words,
  Lest I be blamed for tarrying overlong!
  What new disaster broods o'er Persia's realm?

  CHORUS

  With awe on thee I gaze,
  And, standing face to face,
  I tremble as I did in olden days!

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Nay, but as I rose to earth again, obedient to your call,
  Prithee, tarry not in parley! be one word enough for all--
  Speak and gaze on me unshrinking, neither let my face appal!

CHORUS


  I tremble to reveal,
  Yet tremble to conceal
  Things hard for friends to feel!


GHOST OF DARIUS

  Nay, but if the old-time terror on your spirit keeps its hold,
  Speak thou, O royal lady who didst couch with me of old!
  Stay thy weeping and lamenting and to me reveal the truth--
  Speak! for man is born to sorrow; yea, the proverb sayeth sooth!
  'Tis the doom of mortal beings, if they live to see old age,
  To suffer bale, by land and sea, through war and tempest's rage.

ATOSSA

  O thou whose blissful fate on earth all mortal weal excelled--
  Who, while the sunlight touched thine eyes, the lord of all wert
       held!
  A god to Persian men thou wert, in bliss and pride and fame--
  I hold thee blest too in thy death, or e'er the ruin came!
  Alas,  Darius! one brief word must tell thee all the tale--
  The Persian power is in the dust, gone down in blood and bale!

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Speak--by what chance? did man rebel, or pestilence descend?

ATOSSA

  Neither! by Athens' fatal shores our army met its end.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Which of my children led our host to Athens? speak and say.

ATOSSA

  The froward Xerxes, leaving all our realm to disarray.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Was it with army or with fleet on folly's quest he went?

ATOSSA

  With both alike, a twofold front of double armament.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  And how then did so large a host on foot pass o'er the sea?

ATOSSA

  He bridged the ford of Helle's strait by artful carpentry.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  How? could his craft avail to span the torrent of that tide?

ATOSSA

  'Tis sooth I say--some unknown power did fatal help provide!

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Alas, that power in malice came, to his bewilderment!

ATOSSA

  Alas, we see the end of all, the ruin on us sent.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Speak, tell me how they fared therein, that thus ye mourn and weep?

ATOSSA

  Disaster to the army came, through ruin on the deep!

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Is all undone? hath all the folk gone down before the foe?

ATOSSA

  Yea, hark to Susa's mourning cry for warriors laid low!

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Alas for all our gallant aids, our Persia's help and pride!

ATOSSA

  Ay! old with young, the Bactrian force hath perished at our side!

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Alas, my son! what gallant youths hath he sent down to death!

ATOSSA

  Alone, or with a scanty guard--for so the rumour saith--

GHOST OF DARIUS

  He came--but how, and to what end? doth aught of hope remain?

ATOSSA

  With joy he reached the bridge that spanned the Hellespontine main.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  How? is he safe, in Persian land? speak soothly, yea or nay!

ATOSSA

  Clear and more clear the rumour comes, for no man to gainsay.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Woe for the oracle fulfilled, the presage of the war
  Launched on my son, by will of Zeus!  I deemed our doom afar
  In lap of time; but, if a king push forward to his fate,
  The god himself allures to death that man infatuate!
  So now the very fount of woe streams out on those I loved,
  And mine own son, unwisely bold, the truth hereof hath proved!
  He sought to shackle and control the Hellespontine wave,
  That  rushes  from  the  Bosphorus,  with fetters of a slave!--
  To curb and bridge, with welded links, the streaming water-way,
  And guide across the passage broad his manifold array!
  Ah, folly void of counsel! he deemed that mortal wight
  Could thwart the will of Heaven itself and curb Poseidon's might!
  Was it not madness? much I fear lest all my wealth and store
  Pass from my treasure-house, to be the snatcher's prize once more!

ATOSSA

  Such is the lesson, ah, too late! to eager Xerxes taught--
  Trusting random counsellors and hare-brained men of nought,
  Who said _Darius mighty wealth and fame to us did bring,
  But thou art nought, a blunted spear, a palace-keeping king_!
  Unto those sorry counsellors a ready ear he lent,
  And led away to Hellas' shore his fated armament.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Therefore through them hath come calamity
  Most huge and past forgetting; nor of old
  Did ever such extermination fall
  Upon the city Susa. Long ago
  Zeus in his power this privilege bestowed,
  That with a guiding sceptre one sole man
  Should rule this Asian land of flock and herd.
  Over the folk a Mede, Astyages,
  Did grasp the power: then Cyaxares ruled
  In his sire's place, and held the sway aright,
  Steering his state with watchful wariness.
  Third in succession, Cyrus, blest of Heaven,
  Held rule and 'stablished peace for all his clan:
  Lydian and Phrygian won he to his sway,
  And wide Ionia to his yoke constrained,
  For the god favoured his discretion sage.
  Fourth in the dynasty was Cyrus' son,
  And fifth was Mardus, scandal of his land
  And ancient lineage. Him Artaphrenes,
  Hardy of heart, within his palace slew,
  Aided by loyal plotters, set for this.
  And I too gained the lot for which I craved,
  And oftentimes led out a goodly host,
  Yet never brought disaster such as this
  Upon the city. But my son is young
  And reckless in his youth, and heedeth not
  The warnings of my mouth. Mark this, my friends,
  Born with my birth, coeval with mine age--
  Not all we kings who held successive rule
  Have wrought, combined, such ruin as my son!

CHORUS

  How then, O King Darius? whitherward
  Dost thou direct thy warning? from this plight
  How can we Persians fare towards hope again?

GHOST OF DARIUS

  By nevermore assailing Grecian lands,
  Even tho' our Median force be double theirs--
  For the land's self protects its denizens.

CHORUS

  How meanest thou? by what defensive power?

GHOST OF DARIUS

  She wastes by famine a too countless foe.

CHORUS

  But we will bring a host more skilled than huge.

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Why, e'en that army, camped in Hellas still,
  Shall never win again to home and weal!

CHORUS

  How say'st thou? will not all the Asian host
  Pass back from Europe over Helle's ford?

GHOST OF DARIUS

  Nay--scarce a tithe of all those myriads,
  If man may trust the oracles of Heaven
  When he beholds the things already wrought,
  Not false with true, but true with no word false
  If what I trow be truth, my son has left
  A chosen rear-guard of our host, in whom
  He trusts, now, with a random confidence!
  They tarry where Asopus laves the ground
  With rills that softly bless Boeotia's plain--
  There is it fated for them to endure
  The very crown of misery and doom,
  Requital for their god-forgetting pride!
  For why? they raided Hellas, had the heart
  To wrong the images of holy gods,
  And give the shrines and temples to the flame!
  Defaced and dashed from sight the altars fell,
  And each god's image, from its pedestal
  Thrust and flung down, in dim confusion lies!
  Therefore, for outrage vile, a doom as dark
  They suffer, and yet more shall undergo--
  They touch no bottom in the swamp of doom,
  But round them rises, bubbling up, the ooze!
  So deep shall lie the gory clotted mass
  Of corpses by the Dorian spear transfixed
  Upon Plataea's field! yea, piles of slain
  To the third generation shall attest
  By silent eloquence to those that see--
  _Let not a mortal vaunt him overmuch_.
  For pride grows rankly, and to ripeness brings
  The curse of fate, and reaps, for harvest, tears!
  Therefore when ye behold, for deeds like these,
  Such stern requital paid, remember then
  Athens and Hellas. Let no mortal wight,
  Holding too lightly of his present weal
  And passionate for more, cast down and spill
  The mighty cup of his prosperity!
  Doubt not that over-proud and haughty souls
  Zeus lours in wrath, exacting the account.
  Therefore, with wary warning, school my son,
  Though he be lessoned by the gods already,
  To curb the vaunting that affronts high Heaven!
  And thou, O venerable Mother-queen,
  Beloved of Xerxes, to the palace pass
  And take therefrom such raiment as befits
  Thy son, and go to meet him: for his garb
  In this extremity of grief hangs rent
  Around his body, woefully unstitched,
  Mere tattered fragments of once royal robes!
  Go thou to him, speak soft and soothing words--
  Thee, and none other, will he bear to hear,
  As well I know. But I must pass away
  From earth above, unto the nether gloom;
  Therefore, old men, take my farewell, and clasp,
  Even amid the ruin of this time,
  Unto your souls the pleasure of the day,
  For dead men have no profit of their gold!
                           [_The_ GHOST OF DARIUS _sinks_.

CHORUS

  Alas, I thrill with pain for Persia's woes--
  Many fulfilled, and others hard at hand!

ATOSSA

  O spirit of the race, what sorrows crowd
  Upon me! and this anguish stings me worst,
  That round my royal son's dishonoured form
  Hang rags and tatters, degradation deep!
  I will away, and, bringing from within
  A seemly royal robe, will straightway strive
  To meet and greet my son: foul scorn it were
  To leave our dearest in his hour of shame.
                                            [_Exit_ ATOSSA.

CHORUS

  Ah glorious and goodly they were,
      the life and the lot that we gained,
  The cities we held in our hand
      when the monarch invincible reigned,
  The king that was good to his realm,
      sufficing, fulfilled of his sway,
  A lord that was peer of the gods,
      the pride of the bygone day!
  Then could we show to the skies
      great hosts and a glorious name,
  And laws that were stable in might;
      as towers they guarded our fame!
  There without woe or disaster
      we came from the foe and the fight,
  In triumph, enriched with the spoil,
      to the land and the city's delight.
  What towns ere the Halys he passed!
      what towns ere he came to the West,
  To the main and the isles of the Strymon,
      and the Thracian region possess'd!
  And those that stand back from the main,
      enringed by their fortified wall,
  Gave o'er to Darius, the king,
      the sceptre and sway over all!
  Those too by the channel of Helle,
      where southward it broadens and glides,
  By the inlets, Propontis! of thee,
      and the strait of the Pontic tides,
  And the isles that lie fronting our sea-board,
      and the Eastland looks on each one,
  Lesbo and Chios and Paros,
      and Samos with olive-trees grown,
  And Naxos, and Myconos' rock,
      and Tenos with Andros hard by,
  And isles that in midmost Aegean,
      aloof from the continent, lie--
  And Lemnos and Icaros' hold--
     all these to his sceptre were bowed,
  And Cnidos and neighbouring Rhodes,
      and Soli, and Paphos the proud,
  And Cyprian Salamis, name-child of her
      who hath wrought us this wrong!
  Yea, and all the Ionian tract,
      where the Greek-born inhabitants throng,
  And the cities are teeming with gold--
      Darius was lord of them all,
  And, great by his wisdom, he ruled,
      and ever there came to his call,
