enough to raise the interest of inexperienced youngsters like ourselves.

I have said that he was dressed in the height of fashion, and such
indeed was the impression which a glance would give. His face was thin
and aristocratic, with a well-marked nose, delicate features, and gay
careless expression. Some little paleness of the cheeks and darkness
under the eyes, the result of hard travel or dissipation, did but add a
chastening grace to his appearance. His white periwig, velvet and silver
riding coat, lavender vest and red satin knee-breeches were all of the
best style and cut, but when looked at closely, each and all of these
articles of attire bore evidence of having seen better days. Beside the
dust and stains of travel, there was a shininess or a fading of colour
here and there which scarce accorded with the costliness of their
material or the bearing of their wearer. His long riding-boots had a
gaping seam in the side of one of them, whilst his toe was pushing
its way through the end of the other. For the rest, he wore a handsome
silver-hilted rapier at his side, and had a frilled cambric shirt
somewhat the worse for wear and open at the front, as was the mode with
the gallants of those days. All the time he was speaking he mumbled a
toothpick, which together with his constant habit of pronouncing his
o's as a's made his conversation sound strange to our ears. (Note D
Appendix) Whilst we were noting these peculiarities he was reclining
upon Dame Hobson's best taffatta-covered settee, tranquilly combing his
wig with a delicate ivory comb which he had taken from a small satin bag
which hung upon the right of his sword-belt.

'Lard preserve us from country inns!' he remarked. 'What with the boors
that swarm in every chamber, and the want of mirrors, and jasmine water,
and other necessaries, blister me if one has not to do one's toilet
in the common room. 'Oons! I'd as soon travel in the land of the Great
Mogul!'

'When you shall come to be my age, young sir,' Saxon answered, 'you may
know better than to decry a comfortable country hostel.'

'Very like, sir, very like!' the gallant answered, with a careless
laugh. 'For all that, being mine own age, I feel the wilds of Wiltshire
and the inns of Bruton to be a sorry change after the Mall, and the fare
of Pontack's or the Coca Tree. Ah, Lud! here comes the sack! Open it, my
pretty Hebe, and send a drawer with fresh glasses, for these gentlemen
must do me the honour of drinking with me. A pinch of snuff, sirs? Aye,
ye may well look hard at the box. A pretty little thing, sirs, from a
certain lady of title, who shall be nameless; though, if I were to say
that her title begins with a D and her name with a C, a gentleman of the
Court might hazard a guess.'

Our hostess, having brought fresh glasses, withdrew, and Decimus
Saxon soon found an opportunity for following her. Sir Gervas Jerome
continued, however, to chatter freely to Reuben and myself over
the wine, rattling along as gaily and airily as though we were old
acquaintances.

'Sink me, if I have not frighted your comrade away!' he remarked, 'Or is
it possible that he hath gone on the slot of the plump widow? Methought
he looked in no very good temper when I kissed her at the door. Yet it
is a civility which I seldom refuse to anything which wears a cap. Your
friend's appearance smacked more of Mars than of Venus, though, indeed,
those who worship the god are wont to be on good terms with the goddess.
A hardy old soldier, I should judge, from his feature and attire.'

'One who hath seen much service abroad,' I answered.

'Ha! ye are lucky to ride to the wars in the company of so accomplished
a cavalier. For I presume that it is to the wars that ye are riding,
since ye are all so armed and accoutred.'

'We are indeed bound for the West,' I replied, with some reserve, for in
Saxon's absence I did not care to be too loose-tongued.

'And in what capacity?' he persisted. 'Will ye risk your crowns in
defence of King James's one, or will ye strike in, hit or miss, with
these rogues of Devon and Somerset? Stop my vital breath, if I would not
as soon side with the clown as with the crown, with all due respect to
your own principles!'

'You are a daring man,' said I, 'if you air your opinions thus in every
inn parlour. Dost not know that a word of what you have said, whispered
to the nearest justice of the peace, might mean your liberty, if not
your life?'

'I don't care the rind of a rotten orange for life or liberty either,'
cried our acquaintance, snapping his finger and thumb. 'Burn me if
it wouldn't be a new sensation to bandy words with some heavy-chopped
country justice, with the Popish plot still stuck in his gizzard, and
be thereafter consigned to a dungeon, like the hero in John Dryden's
latest. I have been round-housed many a time by the watch in the old
Hawkubite days; but this would be a more dramatic matter, with high
treason, block, and axe all looming in the background.'

'And rack and pincers for a prologue,' said Reuben. 'This ambition is
the strangest that I have ever heard tell of.'

'Anything for a change,' cried Sir Gervas, filling up a bumper. 'Here's
to the maid that's next our heart, and here's to the heart that loves
the maids! War, wine, and women, 'twould be a dull world without them.
But you have not answered my question.'

'Why truly, sir,' said I, 'frank as you have been with us, I can scarce
be equally so with you, without the permission of the gentleman who has
just left the room. He is the leader of our party. Pleasant as our short
intercourse has been, these are parlous times, and hasty confidences are
apt to lead to repentance.'

'A Daniel come to judgment!' cried our new acquaintance. 'What ancient,
ancient words from so young a head! You are, I'll warrant, five years
younger than a scatterbrain like myself, and yet you talk like the seven
wise men of Greece. Wilt take me as a valet?'

'A valet!' I exclaimed.

'Aye, a valet, a man-servant. I have been waited upon so long that it is
my turn to wait now, and I would not wish a more likely master. By the
Lard! I must, in applying for a place, give an account of my character
and a list of my accomplishments. So my rascals ever did with me, though
in good truth I seldom listened to their recital. Honesty--there I
score a trick. Sober--Ananias himself could scarce say that I am
that. Trustworthy--indifferently so. Steady--hum! about as much so
as Garraway's weathercock. Hang it, man, I am choke full of good
resolutions, but a sparkling glass or a roguish eye will deflect me, as
the mariners say of the compass. So much for my weaknesses. Now let me
see what qualifications I can produce. A steady nerve, save only when I
have my morning qualms, and a cheerful heart; I score two on that. I
can dance saraband, minuet, or corranto; fence, ride, and sing French
chansons. Good Lard! who ever heard a valet urge such accomplishments? I
can play the best game of piquet in London. So said Sir George Etherege
when I won a cool thousand off him at the Groom Parter. But that won't
advance me much, either. What is there, then, to commend me? Why, marry,
I can brew a bowl of punch, and I can broil a devilled fowl. It is not
much, but I can do it well.'

'Truly, good sir,' I said, with a smile, 'neither of these
accomplishments is like to prove of much use to us on our present
errand. You do, however, but jest, no doubt, when you talk of descending
to such a position.'

'Not a whit! not a whit!' he replied earnestly. '"To such base uses do
we come," as Will Shakespeare has it. If you would be able to say that
you have in your service Sir Gervas Jerome, knight banneret, and sole
owner of Beacham Ford Park, with a rent-roll of four thousand good
pounds a year, he is now up for sale, and will be knocked down to the
bidder who pleases him best. Say but the word, and we'll have another
flagon of sack to clinch the bargain.'

'But,' said I, 'if you are indeed owner of this fair property, why
should you descend to so menial an occupation?'

'The Jews, the Jews, oh most astute and yet most slow-witted master! The
ten tribes have been upon me, and I have been harried and wasted, bound,
ravished, and despoiled. Never was Agag, king of Amalek, more completely
in the hands of the chosen, and the sole difference is that they have
hewed into pieces mine estate instead of myself.'

'Have you lost all, then?' Reuben asked, open-eyed.

'Why no--not all--by no means all!' he answered, with a merry laugh; 'I
have a gold Jacobus and a guinea or two in my purse. 'Twill serve for
a flask or so yet. There is my silver-hilted rapier, my rings, my gold
snuff-box, and my watch by Tompion at the sign of the Three Crowns.
It was never bought under a hundred, I'll warrant. Then there are such
relics of grandeur as you see upon my person, though they begin to
look as frail and worn as a waiting-woman's virtue. In this bag, too,
I retain the means for preserving that niceness and elegance of person
which made me, though I say it, as well groomed a man as ever set foot
in St. James's Park. Here are French scissors, eyebrow brush, toothpick
case, patch-box, powder-bag, comb, puff, and my pair of red-heeled
shoes. What could a man wish for more? These, with a dry throat, a
cheerful heart, and a ready hand, are my whole stock in trade.'

Reuben and I could not forbear from laughing at the curious inventory of
articles which Sir Gervas had saved from the wreck of his fortunes. He
upon seeing our mirth was so tickled at his own misfortunes, that he
laughed in a high treble key until the whole house resounded with his
merriment. 'By the Mass,' he cried at last, 'I have never had so much
honest amusement out of my prosperity as hath been caused in me by my
downfall. Fill up your glasses!'

'We have still some distance to travel this evening, and must not drink
more,' I observed, for prudence told me that it was dangerous work for
two sober country lads to keep pace with an experienced toper.

'So!' said he in surprise. 'I should have thought that would be a
"raison de plus," as the French say. But I wish your long-legged friend
would come back, even if he were intent upon slitting my weazand for my
attention to the widow. He is not a man to flinch from his liquor, I'll
warrant. Curse this Wiltshire dust that clings to my periwig!'

'Until my comrade returns, Sir Gervas,' said I, 'you might, since the
subject does not appear to be a painful one to you, let us know how
these evil times, which you bear with such philosophy, came upon you.'

'The old story!' he answered, flicking away a few grains of snuff with
his deeply-laced cambric handkerchief. 'The old, old story! My father, a
good, easy country baronet, finding the family purse somewhat full, must
needs carry me up to town to make a man of me. There as a young lad I
was presented at Court, and being a slim active youngster with a pert
tongue and assured manner, I caught the notice of the Queen, who made
me one of her pages of honour. This post I held until I grew out of
it, when I withdrew from town, but egad! I found I must get back to it
again, for Beacham Ford Park was as dull as a monastery after the life
which I had been living. In town I stayed then with such boon companions
as Tommy Lawson, my Lord Halifax, Sir Jasper Lemarck, little Geordie
Chichester, aye, and old Sidney Godolphin of the Treasury; for with all
his staid ways and long-winded budgets he could drain a cup with the
best of us, and was as keen on a main of cocks as on a committee of ways
and means. Well, it was rare sport while it lasted, and sink me if
I wouldn't do the same again if I had my time once more. It is like
sliding down a greased plank though, for at first a man goes slow
enough, and thinks he can pull himself up, but presently he goes faster
and faster, until he comes with a crash on to the rocks of ruin at the
bottom.'

'And did you run through four thousand pounds a year?' I exclaimed.

'Od's bodikins, man, you speak as if this paltry sum were all the
wealth of the Indies. Why, from Ormonde or Buckingham, with their twenty
thousand, down to ranting Dicky Talbot, there was not one of my set who
could not have bought me out. Yet I must have my coach and four, my town
house, my liveried servants, and my stable full of horses. To be in the
mode I must have my poet, and throw him a handful of guineas for his
dedication. Well, poor devil, he is one who will miss me. I warrant his
heart was as heavy as his verses when he found me gone, though perchance
he has turned a few guineas by this time by writing a satire upon me.
It would have a ready sale among my friends. Gad's life! I wonder how
my levees get on, and whom all my suitors have fastened on to now. There
they were morning after morning, the French pimp, the English bully, the
needy man o' letters, the neglected inventor--I never thought to have
got rid of them, but indeed I have shaken them off very effectually now.
When the honey-pot is broken it is farewell to the flies.'

'And your noble friends?' I asked. 'Did none of them stand by you in
your adversity?'

'Well, well, I have nought to complain of!' exclaimed Sir Gervas. 'They
were brave-hearted boys for the most part. I might have had their names
on my bills as long as their fingers could hold a pen, but slit me if I
like bleeding my own companions. They might have found a place for me,
too, had I consented to play second-fiddle where I had been used to lead
the band. I' faith, I care not what I turn my hand to amongst strangers,
but I would fain leave my memory sweet in town.'

'As to what you proposed, of serving us as a valet,' said I, 'it is not
to be thought of. We are, in spite of my friend's waggishness, but two
plain blunt countrymen, and have no more need of a valet than one of
those poets which you have spoken of. On the other hand, if you should
care to attach yourself to our party, we shall take you where you
will see service which shall be more to your taste than the curling of
periwigs or the brushing of eyebrows.'

'Nay, nay, my friend. Speak not with unseemly levity of the mysteries
of the toilet,' he cried. 'Ye would yourselves be none the worse for
a touch of mine ivory comb, and a closer acquaintance with the famous
skin-purifying wash of Murphy which I am myself in the habit of using.'

'I am beholden to you, sir,' said Reuben, 'but the famous spring water
wash by Providence is quite good enough for the purpose.'

'And Dame Nature hath placed a wig of her own upon me,' I added, 'which
I should be very loth to change.'

'Goths! Perfect Goths!' cried the exquisite, throwing up his white
hands. 'But here comes a heavy tread and the clink of armour in the
passage. 'Tis our friend the knight of the wrathful countenance, if I
mistake not.'

It was indeed Saxon, who strode into the room to tell us that our horses
were at the door, and that all was ready for our departure. Taking
him aside I explained to him in a whisper what had passed between the
stranger and ourselves, with the circumstances which had led me to
suggest that he should join our party. The old soldier frowned at the
news.

'What have we to do with such a coxcomb?' he said. 'We have hard fare
and harder blows before us. He is not fit for the work.'

'You said yourself that Monmouth will be weak in horse,' I answered.
'Here is a well-appointed cavalier, who is to all appearance a desperate
man and ready for anything. Why should we not enrol him?'

'I fear,' said Saxon, 'that his body may prove to be like the bran of
a fine cushion, of value only for what it has around it. However, it is
perhaps for the best. The handle to his name may make him welcome in the
camp, for from what I hear there is some dissatisfaction at the way in
which the gentry stand aloof from the enterprise.'

'I had feared,' I remarked, still speaking in a whisper, 'that we were
about to lose one of our party instead of gaining one in this Bruton
inn.'

'I have thought better of it,' he answered, with a smile. 'Nay, I'll
tell you of it anon. Well, Sir Gervas Jerome,' he added aloud, turning
to our new associate, 'I hear that you are coming with us. For a day you
must be content to follow without question or remark. Is that agreed!'

'With all my heart,' cried Sir Gervas.

'Then here's a bumper to our better acquaintance,' cried Saxon, raising
his glass.

'I pledge ye all,' quoth the gallant. 'Here's to a fair fight, and may
the best men win.'

'Donnerblitz, man!' said Saxon. 'I believe there's mettle in you for all
your gay plumes. I do conceive a liking for you. Give me your hand!'

The soldier of fortune's great brown grip enclosed the delicate hand
of our new friend in a pledge of comradeship. Then, having paid our
reckoning and bade a cordial adieu to Dame Hobson, who glanced methought
somewhat reproachfully or expectantly at Saxon, we sprang on our steeds
and continued our journey amidst a crowd of staring villagers, who
huzzaed lustily as we rode out from amongst them.



Chapter XIV. Of the Stiff-legged Parson and his Flock

Our road lay through Castle Carey and Somerton, which are small towns
lying in the midst of a most beautiful pastoral country, well wooded and
watered by many streams. The valleys along the centre of which the road
lies are rich and luxuriant, sheltered from the winds by long rolling
hills, which are themselves highly cultivated. Here and there we passed
the ivy-clad turret of an old castle or the peaked gables of a rambling
country house, protruding from amongst the trees and marking the country
seat of some family of repute. More than once, when these mansions were
not far from the road, we were able to perceive the unrepaired dints and
fractures on the walls received during the stormy period of the civil
troubles. Fairfax it seems had been down that way, and had left abundant
traces of his visit. I have no doubt that my father would have had much
to say of these signs of Puritan wrath had he been riding at our side.

The road was crowded with peasants who were travelling in two strong
currents, the one setting from east to west, and the other from west to
east. The latter consisted principally of aged people and of children,
who were being sent out of harm's way to reside in the less disturbed
counties until the troubles should be over. Many of these poor folk were
pushing barrows in front of them, in which a few bedclothes and some
cracked utensils represented the whole of their worldly goods. Others
more prosperous had small carts, drawn by the wild shaggy colts which
are bred on the Somerset moors. What with the spirit of the half-tamed
beasts and the feebleness of the drivers, accidents were not uncommon,
and we passed several unhappy groups who had been tumbled with their
property into a ditch, or who were standing in anxious debate round a
cracked shaft or a broken axle.

The countrymen who were making for the West were upon the other hand
men in the prime of life, with little or no baggage. Their brown faces,
heavy boots, and smockfrocks proclaimed most of them to be mere hinds,
though here and there we overtook men who, by their top-boots and
corduroys, may have been small farmers or yeomen. These fellows walked
in gangs, and were armed for the most part with stout oak cudgels,
which were carried as an aid to their journey, but which in the hands of
powerful men might become formidable weapons. From time to time one
of these travellers would strike up a psalm tune, when all the others
within earshot would join in, until the melody rippled away down the
road. As we passed some scowled angrily at us, while others whispered
together and shook their heads, in evident doubt as to our character and
aims. Now and again among the people we marked the tall broad-brimmed
hat and Geneva mantle which were the badges of the Puritan clergy.

'We are in Monmouth's country at last,' said Saxon to me, for Reuben
Lockarby and Sir Gervas Jerome had ridden on ahead. 'This is the raw
material which we shall have to lick into soldiership.'

'And no bad material either,' I replied, taking note of the sturdy
figures and bold hearty faces of the men. 'Think ye that they are bound
for Monmouth's camp, then?'

'Aye, are they. See you yon long-limbed parson on the left--him with the
pent-house hat. Markest thou not the stiffness wherewith he moves his
left leg!'

'Why, yes; he is travel-worn doubtless.'

'Ho! ho!' laughed my companion. 'I have seen such a stiffness before
now. The man hath a straight sword within he leg of his breeches. A
regular Parliamentary tuck, I'll warrant. When he is on safe ground he
will produce it, aye, and use it too, but until he is out of all danger
of falling in with the King's horse he is shy of strapping it to his
belt. He is one of the old breed by his cut, who:

          "Call fire and sword and desolation,
           A godly thorough reformation."

Old Samuel hath them to a penstroke! There is another ahead of him
there, with the head of a scythe inside his smock. Can you not see the
outline? I warrant there is not one of the rascals but hath a pike-head
or sickle-blade concealed somewhere about him. I begin to feel the
breath of war once more, and to grow younger with it. Hark ye, lad! I am
glad that I did not tarry at the inn.'

'You seemed to be in two minds about it,' said I.

'Aye, aye. She was a fine woman, and the quarters were comfortable. I do
not gainsay it. But marriage, d'ye see, is a citadel that it is plaguy
easy to find one's way into, but once in old Tilly himself could not
bring one out again with credit, I have known such a device on the
Danube, where at the first onfall the Mamelukes have abandoned the
breach for the very purpose of ensnaring the Imperial troops in the
narrow streets beyond, from which few ever returned. Old birds are not
caught with such wiles. I did succeed in gaining the ear of one of the
gossips, and asking him what he could tell me of the good dame and her
inn. It seemeth that she is somewhat of a shrew upon occasion, and that
her tongue had more to do with her husband's death than the dropsy which
the leech put it down to. Again, a new inn hath been started in the
village, which is well-managed, and is like to draw the custom from
her. It is, too, as you have said, a dull sleepy spot. All these reasons
weighed with me, and I decided that it would be best to raise my siege
of the widow, and to retreat whilst I could yet do so with the credit
and honours of war.'

''Tis best so,' said I; 'you could not have settled down to a life of
toping and ease. But our new comrade, what think you of him?'

'Faith!' Saxon answered, 'we shall extend into a troop of horse if we
add to our number every gallant who is in want of a job. As to this Sir
Gervas, however, I think, as I said at the inn, that he hath more mettle
in him than one would judge at first sight. These young sprigs of the
gentry will always fight, but I doubt if he is hardened enough or
hath constancy enough for such a campaign as this is like to be. His
appearance, too, will be against him in the eyes of the saints; and
though Monmouth is a man of easy virtue, the saints are like to have the
chief voice in his councils. Now do but look at him as he reins up that
showy grey stallion and gazes back at us. Mark his riding-hat tilted
over his eye, his open bosom, his whip dangling from his button-hole,
his hand on his hip, and as many oaths in his mouth as there are ribbons
to his doublet. Above all, mark the air with which he looks down upon
the peasants beside him. He will have to change his style if he is to
fight by the side of the fanatics. But hark! I am much mistaken if they
have not already got themselves into trouble.'

Our friends had pulled up their horses to await our coming. They had
scarce halted, however, before the stream of peasants who had been
moving along abreast of them slackened their pace, and gathered round
them with a deep ominous murmur and threatening gestures. Other
rustics, seeing that there was something afoot, hurried up to help their
companions. Saxon and I put spurs to our horses, and pushing through the
throng, which was becoming every instant larger and more menacing, made
our way to the aid of our friends, who were hemmed in on every side by
the rabble. Reuben had laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword, while
Sir Gervas was placidly chewing his toothpick and looking down at the
angry mob with an air of amused contempt.

'A flask or two of scent amongst them would not be amiss,' he remarked;
'I would I had a casting bottle.'

'Stand on your guard, but do not draw,' cried Saxon. 'What the henker
hath come over the chaw-bacons? They mean mischief. How now, friends,
why this uproar?'

This question instead of allaying the tumult appeared to make it tenfold
worse. All round us twenty deep were savage faces and angry eyes,
with the glint here and there of a weapon half drawn from its place of
concealment. The uproar, which had been a mere hoarse growl, began to
take shape and form. 'Down with the Papists!' was the cry. 'Down with
the Prelatists!' 'Smite the Erastian butchers!' 'Smite the Philistine
horsemen!' 'Down with them!'

A stone or two had already whistled past our ears, and we had been
forced in self-defence to draw our swords, when the tall minister whom
we had already observed shoved his way through the crowd, and by dint of
his lofty stature and commanding voice prevailed upon them to be silent.

'How say ye,' he asked, turning upon us, 'fight ye for Baal or for the
Lord? He who is not with us is against us.'

'Which is the side of Baal, most reverend sir, and which of the Lord?'
asked Sir Gervas Jerome. 'Methinks if you were to speak plain English
instead of Hebrew we might come to an understanding sooner.'

'This is no time for light words,' the minister cried, with a flush of
anger upon his face. 'If ye would keep your skins whole, tell me, are ye
for the bloody usurper James Stuart, or are ye for his most Protestant
Majesty King Monmouth?'

'What! He hath come to the title already!' exclaimed Saxon. 'Know then
that we are four unworthy vessels upon our way to offer our services to
the Protestant cause.'

'He lies, good Master Pettigrue, he lies most foully,' shouted a burly
fellow from the edge of the crowd. 'Who ever saw a good Protestant in
such a Punchinello dress as yonder? Is not Amalekite written upon his
raiment? Is he not attired as becometh the bridegroom of the harlot of
Rome? Why then should we not smite him?'

'I thank you, my worthy friend,' said Sir Gervas, whose attire had moved
this champion's wrath. 'If I were nearer I should give you some return
for the notice which you have taken of me.'

'What proof have we that ye are not in the pay of the usurper, and on
your way to oppress the faithful?' asked the Puritan divine.

'I tell you, man,' said Saxon impatiently, 'that we have travelled all
the way from Hampshire to fight against James Stuart. We will ride with
ye to Monmouth's camp, and what better proof could ye desire than that?'

'It may be that ye do but seek an opportunity of escaping from our
bondage,' the minister observed, after conferring with one or two of the
leading peasants. 'It is our opinion, therefore, that before coming
with us ye must deliver unto us your swords, pistols, and other carnal
weapons.'

'Nay, good sir, that cannot be,' our leader answered. 'A cavalier may
not with honour surrender his blade or his liberty in the manner ye
demand. Keep close to my bridle-arm, Clarke, and strike home at any
rogue who lays hands on you.'

A hum of anger rose from the crowd, and a score of sticks and
scythe-blades were raised against us, when the minister again interposed
and silenced his noisy following.

'Did I hear aright?' he asked. 'Is your name Clarke?'

'It is,' I answered.

'Your Christian name?'

'Micah.'

'Living at?'

'Havant.'

The clergyman conferred for a few moments with a grizzly-bearded,
harsh-faced man dressed in black buckram who stood at his elbow.

'If you are really Micah Clarke of Havant,' quoth he, 'you will be able
to tell us the name of an old soldier, skilled in the German wars, who
was to have come with ye to the camp of the faithful.'

'Why, this is he,' I answered; 'Decimus Saxon is his name.'

'Aye, aye, Master Pettigrue,' cried the old man. 'The very name given by
Dicky Rumbold. He said that either the old Roundhead Clarke or his son
would go with him. But who are these?'

'This is Master Reuben Lockarby, also of Havant, and Sir Gervas Jerome
of Surrey,' I replied. 'They are both here as volunteers desiring to
serve under the Duke of Monmouth.'

'Right glad I am to see ye, then,' said the stalwart minister heartily.
'Friends, I can answer for these gentlemen that they favour the honest
folk and the old cause.'

At these words the rage of the mob turned in an instant into the most
extravagant adulation and delight. They crowded round us, patting our
riding-boots, pulling at the skirts of our dress, pressing our hands and
calling down blessings upon our heads, until their pastor succeeded
at last in rescuing us from their attentions and in persuading them to
resume their journey. We walked our horses in the midst of them whilst
the clergyman strode along betwixt Saxon and myself. He was, as Reuben
remarked, well fitted to be an intermediary between us, for he was
taller though not so broad as I was, and broader though not so tall as
the adventurer. His face was long, thin, and hollow-cheeked, with a pair
of great thatched eyebrows and deep sunken melancholy eyes, which lit up
upon occasion with a sudden quick flash of fiery enthusiasm.

'Joshua Pettigrue is my name, gentlemen,' said he; 'I am an unworthy
worker in the Lord's vineyard, testifying with voice and with arm to His
holy covenant. These are my faithful flock, whom I am bringing westward
that they may be ready for the reaping when it pleases the Almighty to
gather them in.'

'And why have you not brought them into some show of order or
formation?' asked Saxon. 'They are straggling along the road like a line
of geese upon a common when Michaelmas is nigh. Have you no fears? Is
it not written that your calamity cometh suddenly--suddenly shall you be
broken down without remedy?'

'Aye, friend, but is it not also written, "Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding!" Mark ye, if I
were to draw up my men in military fashion it would invite attention and
attack from any of James Stuart's horse who may come our way. It is my
desire to bring my flock to the camp and obtain pieces for them before
exposing them to so unequal a contest.'

'Truly, sir, it is a wise resolution,' said Saxon grimly, 'for if a
troop of horse came down upon these good people the pastor would find
himself without his flock.'

'Nay, that could never be!' cried Master Pettigrue with fervour. 'Say
rather that pastor, flock, and all would find their way along the thorny
track of martyrdom to the new Jerusalem. Know, friend, that I have come
from Monmouth in order to conduct these men to his standard. I received
from him, or rather from Master Ferguson, instructions to be on the
lookout for ye and for several others of the faithful we expect to join
us from the East. By what route came ye?'

'Over Salisbury Plain and so through Bruton.'

'And saw ye or met ye any of our people upon the way?'

'None,' Saxon answered. 'We left the Blue Guards at Salisbury, however,
and we saw either them or some other horse regiment near this side of
the Plain at the village of Mere.'

'Ah, there is a gathering of the eagles,' cried Master Joshua Pettigrue,
shaking his head. 'They are men of fine raiment, with war-horses and
