and life is a farce, and he that laughs most has most profit of the
performance. The worst thing is good enough to be laughed at, though
it be good for nothing else; and the best thing, though it be good for
something else, is good for nothing better."

And he struck up a song in praise of laughing and quaffing, without
further adverting to Marian's insinuated accusation; being, perhaps,
of opinion, that it was a subject on which the least said would be the
soonest mended.

So passed the night. In the morning a forester came to the friar, with
intelligence that Prince John had been compelled, by the urgency of
his affairs in other quarters, to disembarrass Nottingham Castle of
his royal presence. Our wanderers returned joyfully to their
forest-dominion, being thus relieved from the vicinity of any more
formidable belligerent than their old bruised and beaten enemy the
sheriff of Nottingham.




CHAPTER XVII

                    Oh! this life
      Is nobler than attending for a check,
      Richer than doing nothing for a bribe
      Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk.--Cymbeline.


So Robin and Marian dwelt and reigned in the forest, ranging the glades
and the greenwoods from the matins of the lark to the vespers of the
nightingale, and administering natural justice according to Robin's
ideas of rectifying the inequalities of human condition: raising
genial dews from the bags of the rich and idle, and returning them in
fertilising showers on the poor and industrious: an operation which more
enlightened statesmen have happily reversed, to the unspeakable benefit
of the community at large. The light footsteps of Marian were impressed
on the morning dew beside the firmer step of her lover, and they shook
its large drops about them as they cleared themselves a passage through
the thick tall fern, without any fear of catching cold, which was not
much in fashion in the twelfth century. Robin was as hospitable as
Cathmor; for seven men stood on seven paths to call the stranger to his
feast. It is true, he superadded the small improvement of making the
stranger pay for it: than which what could be more generous? For Cathmor
was himself the prime giver of his feast, whereas Robin was only
the agent to a series of strangers, who provided in turn for
the entertainment of their successors; which is carrying the
disinterestedness of hospitality to its acme. Marian often killed the
deer,

 Which Scarlet dressed, and Friar Tuck blessed
 While Little John wandered in search of a guest.

Robin was very devout, though there was great unity in his religion: it
was exclusively given to our Lady the Virgin, and he never set forth in
a morning till he had said three prayers, and had heard the sweet voice
of his Marian singing a hymn to their mutual patroness. Each of his men
had, as usual, a patron saint according to his name or taste. The
friar chose a saint for himself, and fixed on Saint Botolph, whom he
euphonised into Saint Bottle, and maintained that he was that very
Panomphic Pantagruelian saint, well known in ancient France as a female
divinity, by the name of La Dive Bouteille, whose oracular monosyllable
"Trincq," is celebrated and under-stood by all nations, and is
expounded by the learned doctor Alcofribas, [6] who has treated at large
on the subject, to signify "drink." Saint Bottle, then, was the saint of
Friar Tuck, who did not yield even to Robin and Marian in the assiduity
of his devotions to his chosen patron. Such was their summer life, and
in their winter caves they had sufficient furniture, ample provender,
store of old wine, and assuredly no lack of fuel, with joyous music and
pleasant discourse to charm away the season of darkness and storms.


The reader who desires to know more about this oracular divinity, may
consult the said doctor Alcofribas Nasier, who will usher him into the
adytum through the medium of the high priestess Bacbuc.


Many moons had waxed and waned, when on the afternoon of a lovely
summer day a lusty broad-boned knight was riding through the forest
of Sherwood. The sun shone brilliantly on the full green foliage, and
afforded the knight a fine opportunity of observing picturesque effects,
of which it is to be feared he did not avail himself. But he had not
proceeded far, before he had an opportunity of observing something
much more interesting, namely, a fine young outlaw leaning, in the true
Sherwood fashion, with his back against a tree. The knight was preparing
to ask the stranger a question, the answer to which, if correctly given,
would have relieved him from a doubt that pressed heavily on his mind,
as to whether he was in the right road or the wrong, when the youth
prevented the inquiry by saying: "In God's name, sir knight, you are
late to your meals. My master has tarried dinner for you these three
hours."

"I doubt," said the knight, "I am not he you wot of. I am no where
bidden to day and I know none in this vicinage."

"We feared," said the youth, "your memory would be treacherous:
therefore am I stationed here to refresh it."

"Who is your master?" said the knight; "and where does he abide?"

"My master," said the youth, "is called Robin Hood, and he abides hard
by."

"And what knows he of me?" said the knight.

"He knows you," answered the youth "as he does every way-faring knight
and friar, by instinct."

"Gramercy," said the knight; "then I understand his bidding: but how if
I say I will not come?"

"I am enjoined to bring you," said the youth. "If persuasion avail not,
I must use other argument."

"Say'st thou so?" said the knight; "I doubt if thy stripling rhetoric
would convince me."

"That," said the young forester, "we will see."

"We are not equally matched, boy," said the knight. "I should get less
honour by thy conquest, than grief by thy injury."

"Perhaps," said the youth, "my strength is more than my seeming, and my
cunning more than my strength. Therefore let it please your knighthood
to dismount."

"It shall please my knighthood to chastise thy presumption," said the
knight, springing from his saddle.

Hereupon, which in those days was usually the result of a meeting
between any two persons anywhere, they proceeded to fight.

The knight had in an uncommon degree both strength and skill: the
forester had less strength, but not less skill than the knight, and
showed such a mastery of his weapon as reduced the latter to great
admiration.

They had not fought many minutes by the forest clock, the sun; and had
as yet done each other no worse injury than that the knight had wounded
the forester's jerkin, and the forester had disabled the knight's plume;
when they were interrupted by a voice from a thicket, exclaiming, "Well
fought, girl: well fought. Mass, that had nigh been a shrewd hit. Thou
owest him for that, lass. Marry, stand by, I'll pay him for thee."

The knight turning to the voice, beheld a tall friar issuing from the
thicket, brandishing a ponderous cudgel.

"Who art thou?" said the knight.

"I am the church militant of Sherwood," answered the friar. "Why art
thou in arms against our lady queen?"

"What meanest thou?" said the knight.

"Truly, this," said the friar, "is our liege lady of the forest, against
whom I do apprehend thee in overt act of treason. What sayest thou for
thyself?"

"I say," answered the knight, "that if this be indeed a lady, man never
yet held me so long."

"Spoken," said the friar, "like one who hath done execution. Hast thou
thy stomach full of steel? Wilt thou diversify thy repast with a taste
of my oak-graff? Or wilt thou incline thine heart to our venison which
truly is cooling? Wilt thou fight? or wilt thou dine? or wilt thou fight
and dine? or wilt thou dine and fight? I am for thee, choose as thou
mayest."

"I will dine," said the knight; "for with lady I never fought before,
and with friar I never fought yet, and with neither will I ever fight
knowingly: and if this be the queen of the forest, I will not, being in
her own dominions, be backward to do her homage."

So saying, he kissed the hand of Marian, who was pleased most graciously
to express her approbation.

"Gramercy, sir knight," said the friar, "I laud thee for thy courtesy,
which I deem to be no less than thy valour. Now do thou follow me, while
I follow my nose, which scents the pleasant odour of roast from the
depth of the forest recesses. I will lead thy horse, and do thou lead my
lady."

The knight took Marian's hand, and followed the friar, who walked before
them, singing:

 When the wind blows, when the wind blows
 From where under buck the dry log glows,
     What guide can you follow,
     O'er brake and o'er hollow,
 So true as a ghostly, ghostly nose?




CHAPTER XVIII

     Robin and Richard were two pretty men.
     --Mother Goose's Melody.


They proceeded, following their infallible guide, first along a light
elastic greensward under the shade of lofty and wide-spreading trees
that skirted a sunny opening of the forest, then along labyrinthine
paths, which the deer, the outlaw, or the woodman had made, through the
close shoots of the young coppices, through the thick undergrowth of
the ancient woods, through beds of gigantic fern that filled the narrow
glades and waved their green feathery heads above the plume of the
knight. Along these sylvan alleys they walked in single file; the friar
singing and pioneering in the van, the horse plunging and floundering
behind the friar, the lady following "in maiden meditation fancy free,"
and the knight bringing up the rear, much marvelling at the strange
company into which his stars had thrown him. Their path had expanded
sufficiently to allow the knight to take Marian's hand again, when they
arrived in the august presence of Robin Hood and his court.

Robin's table was spread under a high overarching canopy of living
boughs, on the edge of a natural lawn of verdure starred with flowers,
through which a swift transparent rivulet ran sparkling in the sun. The
board was covered with abundance of choice food and excellent liquor,
not without the comeliness of snow-white linen and the splendour
of costly plate, which the sheriff of Nottingham had unwillingly
contributed to supply, at the same time with an excellent cook, whom
Little John's art had spirited away to the forest with the contents of
his master's silver scullery.

An hundred foresters were here assembled over-ready for their dinner,
some seated at the table and some lying in groups under the trees.

Robin bade courteous welcome to the knight, who took his seat between
Robin and Marian at the festal board; at which was already placed one
strange guest in the person of a portly monk, sitting between Little
John and Scarlet, with, his rotund physiognomy elongated into an
unnatural oval by the conjoint influence of sorrow and fear: sorrow for
the departed contents of his travelling treasury, a good-looking valise
which was hanging empty on a bough; and fear for his personal safety,
of which all the flasks and pasties before him could not give him
assurance. The appearance of the knight, however, cheered him up with
a semblance of protection, and gave him just sufficient courage to
demolish a cygnet and a rumble-pie, which he diluted with the contents
of two flasks of canary sack.

But wine, which sometimes creates and often increases joy, doth also,
upon occasion, heighten sorrow: and so it fared now with our portly
monk, who had no sooner explained away his portion of provender, than he
began to weep and bewail himself bitterly.

"Why dost thou weep, man?" said Robin Hood. "Thou hast done thine
embassy justly, and shalt have thy Lady's grace."

"Alack! alack!" said the monk: "no embassy had I, luckless sinner,
as well thou wottest, but to take to my abbey in safety the treasure
whereof thou hast despoiled me."

"Propound me his case," said Friar Tuck, "and I will give him ghostly
counsel."

"You well remember," said Robin Hood, "the sorrowful knight who dined
with us here twelve months and a day gone by."

"Well do I," said Friar Tuck. "His lands were in jeopardy with a certain
abbot, who would allow him no longer day for their redemption. Whereupon
you lent to him the four hundred pounds which he needed, and which he
was to repay this day, though he had no better security to give than our
Lady the Virgin."

"I never desired better," said Robin, "for she never yet failed to
send me my pay; and here is one of her own flock, this faithful and
well-favoured monk of St. Mary's, hath brought it me duly, principal and
interest to a penny, as Little John can testify, who told it forth. To
be sure, he denied having it, but that was to prove our faith. We sought
and found it."

"I know nothing of your knight," said the monk: "and the money was our
own, as the Virgin shall bless me."

"She shall bless thee," said Friar Tuck, "for a faithful messenger."

The monk resumed his wailing. Little John brought him his horse. Robin
gave him leave to depart. He sprang with singular nimbleness into the
saddle, and vanished without saying, God give you good day.

The stranger knight laughed heartily as the monk rode off.

"They say, sir knight," said Friar Tuck, "they should laugh who win: but
thou laughest who art likely to lose."

"I have won," said the knight, "a good dinner, some mirth, and some
knowledge: and I cannot lose by paying for them."

"Bravely said," answered Robin. "Still it becomes thee to pay: for it is
not meet that a poor forester should treat a rich knight. How much money
hast thou with thee?"

"Troth, I know not," said the knight. "Sometimes much, sometimes little,
sometimes none. But search, and what thou findest, keep: and for the
sake of thy kind heart and open hand, be it what it may, I shall wish it
were more."

"Then, since thou sayest so," said Robin, "not a penny will I touch.
Many a false churl comes hither, and disburses against his will: and
till there is lack of these, I prey not on true men."

"Thou art thyself a true man, right well I judge, Robin," said the
stranger knight, "and seemest more like one bred in court than to thy
present outlaw life."

"Our life," said the friar, "is a craft, an art, and a mystery. How much
of it, think you, could be learned at court?"

"Indeed, I cannot say," said the stranger knight: "but I should
apprehend very little."

"And so should I," said the friar: "for we should find very little
of our bold open practice, but should hear abundance of praise of our
principles. To live in seeming fellowship and secret rivalry; to have a
hand for all, and a heart for none; to be everybody's acquaintance, and
nobody's friend; to meditate the ruin of all on whom we smile, and to
dread the secret stratagems of all who smile on us; to pilfer honours
and despoil fortunes, not by fighting in daylight, but by sapping in
darkness: these are arts which the court can teach, but which we, by 'r
Lady, have not learned. But let your court-minstrel tune up his throat
to the praise of your court-hero, then come our principles into play:
then is our practice extolled not by the same name, for their Richard
is a hero, and our Robin is a thief: marry, your hero guts an exchequer,
while your thief disembowels a portmanteau, your hero sacks a city,
while your thief sacks a cellar: your hero marauds on a larger scale,
and that is all the difference, for the principle and the virtue are
one: but two of a trade cannot agree: therefore your hero makes laws to
get rid of your thief, and gives him an ill name that he may hang him:
for might is right, and the strong make laws for the weak, and they that
make laws to serve their own turn do also make morals to give colour to
their laws."

"Your comparison, friar," said the stranger, "fails in this: that your
thief fights for profit, and your hero for honour. I have fought under
the banners of Richard, and if, as you phrase it, he guts exchequers,
and sacks cities, it is not to win treasure for himself, but to furnish
forth the means of his greater and more glorious aim."

"Misconceive me not, sir knight," said the friar. "We all love and
honour King Richard, and here is a deep draught to his health: but I
would show you, that we foresters are miscalled by opprobrious names,
and that our virtues, though they follow at humble distance, are yet
truly akin to those of Coeur-de-Lion. I say not that Richard is a
thief, but I say that Robin is a hero: and for honour, did ever yet man,
miscalled thief, win greater honour than Robin? Do not all men grace him
with some honourable epithet? The most gentle thief, the most courteous
thief, the most bountiful thief, yea, and the most honest thief? Richard
is courteous, bountiful, honest, and valiant: but so also is Robin:
it is the false word that makes the unjust distinction. They are
twin-spirits, and should be friends, but that fortune hath differently
cast their lot: but their names shall descend together to the latest
days, as the flower of their age and of England: for in the pure
principles of freebootery have they excelled all men; and to the
principles of freebootery, diversely developed, belong all the qualities
to which song and story concede renown."

"And you may add, friar," said Marian, "that Robin, no less than
Richard, is king in his own dominion; and that if his subjects be fewer,
yet are they more uniformly loyal."

"I would, fair lady," said the stranger, "that thy latter observation
were not so true. But I nothing doubt, Robin, that if Richard could hear
your friar, and see you and your lady, as I now do, there is not a man
in England whom he would take by the hand more cordially than yourself."

"Gramercy, sir knight," said Robin---- But his speech was cut short by
Little John calling, "Hark!"

All listened. A distant trampling of horses was heard. The sounds
approached rapidly, and at length a group of horsemen glittering in
holyday dresses was visible among the trees.

"God's my life!" said Robin, "what means this? To arms, my merrymen
all."

"No arms, Robin," said the foremost horseman, riding up and springing
from his saddle: "have you forgotten Sir William of the Lee?"

"No, by my fay," said Robin; "and right welcome again to Sherwood."

Little John bustled to re-array the disorganised economy of the table,
and replace the dilapidations of the provender.

"I come late, Robin," said Sir William, "but I came by a wrestling,
where I found a good yeoman wrongfully beset by a crowd of sturdy
varlets, and I staid to do him right."

"I thank thee for that, in God's name," said Robin, "as if thy good
service had been to myself."

"And here," said the knight, "is thy four hundred pound; and my men have
brought thee an hundred bows and as many well-furnished quivers; which
I beseech thee to receive and to use as a poor token of my grateful
kindness to thee: for me and my wife and children didst thou redeem from
beggary."

"Thy bows and arrows," said Robin, "will I joyfully receive: but of thy
money, not a penny. It is paid already. My Lady, who was thy security,
hath sent it me for thee."

Sir William pressed, but Robin was inflexible.

"It is paid," said Robin, "as this good knight can testify, who saw my
Lady's messenger depart but now."

Sir William looked round to the stranger knight, and instantly fell on
his knee, saying, "God save King Richard."

The foresters, friar and all, dropped on their knees together, and
repeated in chorus: "God save King Richard."

"Rise, rise," said Richard, smiling: "Robin is king here, as his lady
hath shown. I have heard much of thee, Robin, both of thy present and
thy former state. And this, thy fair forest-queen, is, if tales say
true, the lady Matilda Fitzwater."

Marian signed acknowledgment.

"Your father," said the king, "has approved his fidelity to me, by
the loss of his lands, which the newness of my return, and many public
cares, have not yet given me time to restore: but this justice shall be
done to him, and to thee also, Robin, if thou wilt leave thy forest-life
and resume thy earldom, and be a peer of Coeur-de-Lion: for braver heart
and juster hand I never yet found."

Robin looked round on his men.

"Your followers," said the king, "shall have free pardon, and such of
them as thou wilt part with shall have maintenance from me; and if ever
I confess to priest, it shall be to thy friar."

"Gramercy to your majesty," said the friar; "and my inflictions shall
be flasks of canary; and if the number be (as in grave cases I may,
peradventure, make it) too great for one frail mortality, I will relieve
you by vicarious penance, and pour down my own throat the redundancy of
the burden."

Robin and his followers embraced the king's proposal. A joyful meeting
soon followed with the baron and Sir Guy of Gamwell: and Richard himself
honoured with his own presence a formal solemnization of the nuptials of
our lovers, whom he constantly distinguished with his peculiar regard.

The friar could not say, Farewell to the forest, without something of
a heavy heart: and he sang as he turned his back upon its bounds,
occasionally reverting his head:

 Ye woods, that oft at sultry noon
     Have o'er me spread your messy shade:
 Ye gushing streams, whose murmured tune
     Has in my ear sweet music made,
 While, where the dancing pebbles show
     Deep in the restless fountain-pool
 The gelid water's upward flow,
