  ceremony a sword was girded upon him and he received a slight blow on
  the neck from the sword of some knight, or perhaps of the king. His
  armor covered him from head to foot in metal, and sometimes his horse
  was also covered with metal plates. When he was fully armed, he was
  expected to show his skill to the lords and ladies who were present.

THE DUTIES OF A KNIGHT. The duties of the knight were to defend the
  weak, to protect women from wrong, to be faithful to his lord and king,
  and to be courteous even to an enemy. A knight true to these duties was
  called "chivalrous," a word which means very much what we mean by the
  word "gentlemanly." There were many wicked knights, but we must not
  forget that the good knights taught courtesy, faithfulness in keeping
  promises, respect for women, courage, self-sacrifice, and honor.

  [Illustration: A Knight in Armor Thirteenth century]

THE PEASANTS. Most of the people were peasants or townsmen. There
  were few towns, because many had been burned by the barbarian tribes
  which broke into the Roman Empire, or had been destroyed in the later
  wars. The peasants were crowded in villages close to the walls of some
  castle or monastery. They paid dearly for the protection which the lord
  of the castle or the abbot of the monastery gave them, for they were
  obliged to work on his lands three days or more each week, and to bring
  him eggs, chickens, and a little money several times a year. They also
  gave him a part of their harvest.

THE TOWNSMEN. At first the towns belonged to lords, or abbots, or
  bishops, but many towns drove out their lords and ruled themselves or
  received officers from the king. When they ruled themselves, their towns
  were called communes. The citizens agreed that whenever the town bell
  was rung they would gather together. Any one who was absent was fined.
  For them "eternal vigilance was the price of liberty." Some of the
  belfries of these mediaeval towns are still standing, and remind the
  citizens of to-day of the struggles of the early days.

  [Illustration: VIEW OF CARCASSONNE This is an ancient city in
  France founded by the Romans]

  The men of each occupation or trade were organized into societies or
  guilds, with masters, journeymen, and apprentices. There were guilds of
  goldsmiths, ironmongers, and fishmongers, that is, workers in gold and
  iron and sellers of fish. The merchants also had their guilds. In many
  towns no one was allowed to work at a trade or sell merchandise who was
  not a member of a guild.

OLD CITIES WHICH STILL EXIST. Many of the towns which grew up in
  the Middle Ages are now the great cities of England and Europe. Their
  citizens can look back a thousand years and more over the history of
  their city, can point to churches, to town halls, and sometimes to
  private houses, that have stood all this time. They can often show the
  remains of mediaeval walls or broad streets where once these walls
  stood, and the moats that surrounded them. The traveler in York or
  London, in Paris, in Nuremburg, in Florence, or in Rome eagerly searches
  for the relics about which so many interesting stories of the past
  are told.

VENICE AND GENOA. One of the most fascinating of these old cities
  is Venice, built upon low-lying islands two miles from the shore of
  Italy and protected by a sand bar from the waters of the Adriatic.
  Venice was founded by men and women who fled from a Roman city on the
  mainland which was ruined by the barbarians in the fifth century after
  Christ. In many places piles had to be driven into the loose sands to
  furnish a foundation for houses. The Venetians did not try to keep out
  the water but used it as streets, and instead of driving in wagons they
  went about in boats. They grew rich in trade on the sea, as the Greeks
  had done in those same waters hundreds of years before.

  Farther down the coast of Italy were the cities Brindisi and Taranto,
  the Brundusium and Tarentum of the Romans. Across the peninsula to the
  west was another trading city called Genoa, which was the birthplace
  of Columbus.

MODERN LANGUAGES. While the people of mediaeval times were building
  city walls and towers to protect themselves they were also doing other
  things. Almost without knowing it they formed the languages which we now
  speak and write--English, German, French, Italian, and Spanish.

  The English and German languages are closely related because the
  forefathers of the English emigrated to England from Germany, taking
  their language with them. This older language was gradually changed, but
  it still remained like German. Dutch is another language like both
  English and German.

  There are many words in these languages borrowed from other peoples.
  Englishmen, because of their long union with western France, borrowed
  many words from the French. The French did not invent these words, for
  the French language grew out of the Latin language which the French
  learned from the Romans.

HOW MODERN LANGUAGES WERE FORMED. In English we have two sets of
  words and phrases: one is used in writing books or speeches, the other
  in conversation. When the Gauls learned Latin, the language of Rome,
  most of them learned the words used in conversation and did not learn
  the words of Roman books. Before long spoken words differed so much from
  the older written words that only scholars understood that the two had
  belonged to the same language. This new language was French. In the same
  way Italian and Spanish grew out of the ordinary Latin spoken in Italy
  and Spain.

  When men began to write books in the new languages, the changes went on
  more slowly because the use of words in books kept the spelling the
  same. Men wrote less in Latin, but it was still used in the religious
  services of the Church and in the schools and universities.

  [Illustration: VENICE AND THE GRAND CANAL]

SCHOOLS IN THE MIDDLE AGES. In the Middle Ages most boys and girls
  did not go to school. Education was principally for those who expected
  to become priests or monks. The schools were in the monasteries or in
  the houses or palaces of the bishops. The students were taught a little
  Latin grammar, to write or speak Latin, and to debate. They also learned
  arithmetic; enough astronomy to reckon the days on which the festivals
  of the Church should come; and music, so much as was then known of it.
  Printing had not been invented, so there were no text-books for them to
  study, and written books or manuscripts were too costly. Students
  listened to the teacher as he read from his manuscripts and copied the
  words or tried to remember them.

THE BEGINNING OF UNIVERSITIES. If students remained in the schools
  after these things had been learned, they studied the laws of the
  Romans, or the practise of medicine, or the religious questions which
  are called theology. Some teachers talked in such an interesting way
  about such questions that hundreds of students came to listen. Like
  other kinds of workers, who were organized in societies or guilds, the
  teachers and students formed a guild called a university. The teachers
  were the master-workmen, and the students were the apprentices.

WHERE THE STUDENTS LIVED. In the beginning the universities had no
  buildings of their own, and the teachers taught in hired halls, the
  students boarding wherever they could find lodgings. Partly to help
  students who were too poor to pay for good lodgings, and partly to bring
  the students under the direct rule of teachers, colleges were built.
  These were not separate institutions like the American colleges, but
  simply houses for residence, although later some teaching was done
  in them.

SOME FAMOUS UNIVERSITIES. The oldest university was in Bologna in
  Italy, and teachers began to explain the laws of the Romans to its
  students eight hundred years ago. The University of Paris was called the
  greatest university in the Middle Ages. Its students numbered sometimes
  between six and seven thousand. About the same time the English
  universities of Oxford and Cambridge were formed, and there, many years
  later, a large number of the men who settled in America were educated.

THE WISDOM OF THE ARABS. Students in these universities obtained
  several of the writings of the Greeks through the Arabs, the followers
  of Mohammed, who had conquered most of Spain. Long before Europeans
  thought of founding universities the Arabs had flourishing schools and
  universities in Spain. The capital of the Mohammedan Empire was first at
  Bagdad on the Euphrates, where once ruled Haroun-al-Raschid, the hero of
  the tales of the Arabian Nights.

  [Illustration: VIEW OF NEW COLLEGE, OXFORD Built in the
  fourteenth century]

WHAT EUROPEANS BORROWED FROM THE ARABS. The Arabs had learned much
  of geography and mathematics from the Greeks, and they also found out
  much for themselves. The numerals which we use are Arabic; and algebra,
  one of our principal studies in mathematics, was thought out by the
  Arabs. Their learned men were deeply interested in the books of
  Aristotle, an ancient Greek, who had been a teacher of Alexander the
  Great. They translated his books into Arabic, and Christian students in
  Spain translated the Arabic into Latin. The great scholars at the
  University of Paris believed that Aristotle reasoned better than other
  thinkers, and took as their model the methods of reasoning found in this
  Latin translation of an Arabic translation of what Aristotle had
  written in Greek.

  [Illustration: THE ALCAZAR AT SEVILLE Built by the Moors in the
  twelfth century. Note the elaborate decoration of the Moorish
  architecture.]

BUILDERS IN THE MIDDLE AGES. The Greeks and the Romans had been
  great builders, but the men of the Middle Ages succeeded in building
  churches, town halls, and palaces or castles which equaled in grandeur
  and beauty the best that the ancient builders had made. The large
  churches or cathedrals seem wonderful because their builders were able
  to place masses of stone high in the air and to cover immense spaces
  with beautiful vaulted roofs. Builders nowadays imitate, but not often,
  if ever, equal them. Fortunately the original buildings are still
  standing in many English and European cities: in Canterbury, Durham, and
  Winchester; in Paris, Chartres, and Rheims; in Cologne, Erfurt, and
  Strasbourg; in Barcelona and Toledo; in Milan, Venice, and Rome.

  [Illustration: NOTRE DAME IN PARIS View from the rear,
  showing the arches and buttresses]

CHURCH BUILDING. The Italians began by building churches like Roman
  basilicas. Roman arches and domes, supported by heavy walls, were also
  used north of the Alps, and the method of building was named Romanesque,
  or in England, Norman. The architects or builders of western France
  discovered a way of roofing over just as large spaces without using such
  heavy walls, so that the interior could be lighted by larger windows.
  Instead of having rounded arches they used pointed arches. The walls
  between the windows were strengthened by masses of stone called
  buttresses. The peak of the roof of these cathedrals was sometimes more
  than one hundred and fifty feet above the floor. The glass of the
  windows showed in beautiful colors scenes from the Bible or from lives
  of sainted men and women. The outer walls, especially the western front,
  the doorways and the towers, were richly carved and adorned with
  statues, and often with the figures of strange birds and beasts which
  lived only in the imagination of the builders. This method of building
  was named Gothic, and it was used not only for churches but for town
  halls and private houses. Architects use similar methods of
  building nowadays.

  [Illustration: THE CATHEDRAL AT AMIENS A typical Gothic
  interior.]

THE RENAISSANCE. Men who could build and adorn great churches and
  town halls and who were eager to study in the new universities should be
  called civilized. The barbarous days were gone, but men still had much
  to learn from the ancient Greeks and Romans. Many of the ancient
  buildings were in ruins, the statues half buried or broken, the
  paintings destroyed, and the books lost. Men began to search for what
  was left of these things and to study them carefully to learn what the
  Graeco-Roman world had been like. After a while students could think of
  nothing else, and tried to imitate, if they could not surpass, what the
  Romans and the Greeks had done. The age in which men were first
  interested in these things is called the Renaissance or "rebirth,"
  because men were so unlike what they had been that they seemed born
  again. With the beginning of the Renaissance the Middle Ages came to
  an end.

  [Illustration: ST. PETER'S AT ROME]

PETRARCH. One of the earliest of these "new" men was Petrarch, an
  Italian poet who lived in the fourteenth century, a hundred years before
  Columbus. He wished above all things to read, copy, and possess the
  writings of the Romans, and especially of Cicero, an orator and writer
  who lived in the days of Julius Caesar. Petrarch and his friends
  searched for the manuscripts of Roman authors which had been preserved,
  hidden away in monastery libraries.

  The same love of Roman books seized others, and princes spent large sums
  of money in collecting and copying ancient writings. At this time a
  beginning of the great libraries of Europe was made, Petrarch tried to
  learn Greek, but could find no one in Italy able to teach him.

GREEK BOOKS BROUGHT AGAIN TO ITALY. Shortly after Petrarch died
  some Greeks came from Constantinople seeking the aid of the pope and the
  kings of the West in an attempt to drive back the Turks, who had already
  crossed into Europe and settled in the lands which they now occupy.
  Unless help should be sent to Constantinople, the city would certainly
  fall into their hands. With these Greeks was one of those men who still
  loved to read the writings of the ancient authors. He was persuaded to
  remain a few years in Florence and other Italian cities and teach Greek
  to the eager Italian scholars. He was also persuaded to write a grammar
  of the Greek language, in order that after he had returned to
  Constantinople others might be able to continue his teaching.

  Collectors of books now searched for Greek writings as eagerly as they
  had searched for Latin writings. Merchants sent their agents to
  Constantinople to buy books. One traveler and scholar brought back to
  Italy over two hundred. Soon Italy was the land to which students from
  Germany, France, and England went to learn Greek and to obtain copies of
  Greek books. It was fortunate that so many books had been brought from
  Constantinople, for at last, in 1453, the Turks captured that city and
  no place in the East was left where the books of the Greeks were studied
  as they had been at Constantinople.

  [Illustration: A PRINTING OFFICE IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY]

THE INVENTION OF PRINTING. After collectors of Greek and Roman
  writings had made several good libraries, partly by purchase, partly by
  copying manuscripts belonging to others, a great invention was made
  which enabled these writings to be spread far and wide and placed in the
  hands of every student. This invention was the method of printing with
  movable types. It is not quite certain who made the invention, although
  John Gutenberg, of Mainz, in Germany, has generally been called the
  inventor. Probably several men thought of the method at about the same
  time, that is, about 1450.

DIFFERENT KINDS OF TYPE. In forming their type the German printers
  imitated the lettering made by copyists with a quill. Their type is
  called Gothic, and it is still widely used in German books. The Italian
  printers made their letters more round and simple in shape, imitating
  the handwriting of the best Italian copyists. This is the Roman type, in
  which many European peoples, as also the English and the Americans,
  print their books. The Italians also prepared a kind of lettering which,
  because they were the inventors, is named _italic_.

THE ALDINE PRESS. One of the most famous printers of this early
  time was a Venetian named Aldus Manutius or Manucci. He gathered about
  him a number of Greeks and planned to print all the Greek manuscripts
  that had been discovered. This he did in beautiful type, imitated from
  the handwriting of one of his Greek friends. He sold the books for a
  price per volume about equal to our fifty cents, so that few scholars
  were too poor to buy.

SOME EARLY PRINTED BOOKS. Another great printer was the Englishman
  William Caxton, who learned the art in the Netherlands. Among the books
  he printed was Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. The first book printed by
  Gutenberg was the Bible in Latin. Early in the sixteenth century,
  through the labors of a Dutch scholar, Erasmus, and of his printer, the
  German Froben, the New Testament in Greek was printed.

ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE. The artists and the architects of this
  time began to imitate the buildings they found or that they unearthed.
  They used round arches and domes more than the pointed arches and
  vaulted roofs of the Gothic builders. Sculptors pictured in stone the
  stories of the Greek and Roman gods and heroes. Statues long buried in
  ancient ruins were dug up, and great artists like the Italian Michel
  Angelo studied them and rivaled them in the beautiful statues they cut.
  On every hand men's minds were awakened by what they saw of the work of
  the founders of the civilized world.

  [Illustration: FACSIMILE OF PART OF CAXTON'S AENEID (REDUCED)
  With the same in modern type]



    QUESTIONS

    1. Why did the memory of the Greeks and Romans remain longer in
    France and Italy than in Germany and England?

    2. What different classes of people were there in the Middle Ages?
    What was the difference between a parish priest and a monk?

    3. How did the nobles gain a living? Were they useful? In what sorts
    of houses did they live? Describe a castle. What was the "keep"?

    4. How were the sons of nobles trained? What was a page? How was a
    young man made a knight? What were the duties of a knight?

    5. Were the farmers or peasants prosperous and happy in the Middle
    Ages? How did the townsmen learn to protect themselves? What was a
    guild? Why are many Europeans proud of their cities?

    6. Why is Venice especially interesting? Why do we remember Genoa?

    7. From what language did French, Italian, and Spanish grow? How
    were the changes made in the old language? Where did the English get
    their language? Was it just like the English we speak?

    8. What did the boys study in the Middle Ages? What did the word
    "university" mean then? Name two or three universities founded then
    which still exist. What did the Arabs teach Christian students?

    9. What sort of buildings did men in the Middle Ages especially like
    to build? Are these buildings still standing? Why do we admire these
    great churches?

    10. What do we call the time when men began to study once more Roman
    and Greek books, and began to imitate the ways of living and
    thinking common in the Graeco-Roman world? Who was the first of
    these "new" men? Where especially did men search for Greek books?

    11. What invention helped men spread far and wide this new
    knowledge? How do the Germans come to have "Gothic" type? Where do
    we get our Roman and _italic_ type? What books did the Venetian
    printer Aldus print? Name a famous English and a famous
    German printer.

    12. What besides ancient books did the men of the Renaissance like
    to study and imitate?



    EXERCISES

    1. Find out what titles of noblemen are used now in different
    European countries. In what country are men often knighted? Why are
    they knighted? What title shows that a man is a knight?
