eating would be an affront, we attacked the little dog and devoured him
before the eyes of his unconscious parent. Smoke in the meantime was
preparing his great pipe. It was lighted when we had finished our
repast, and we passed it from one to another till the bowl was empty.
This done, we took our leave without further ceremony, knocked at the
gate of the fort, and after making ourselves known were admitted.

One morning, about a week after reaching Fort Laramie, we were holding
our customary Indian levee, when a bustle in the area below announced
a new arrival; and looking down from our balcony, I saw a familiar red
beard and mustache in the gateway. They belonged to the captain, who
with his party had just crossed the stream. We met him on the stairs as
he came up, and congratulated him on the safe arrival of himself and his
devoted companions. But he remembered our treachery, and was grave and
dignified accordingly; a tendency which increased as he observed on our
part a disposition to laugh at him. After remaining an hour or two at
the fort he rode away with his friends, and we have heard nothing of him
since. As for R., he kept carefully aloof. It was but too evident that
we had the unhappiness to have forfeited the kind regards of our London
fellow-traveler.



CHAPTER X

THE WAR PARTIES


The summer of 1846 was a season of much warlike excitement among all the
western bands of the Dakota. In 1845 they encountered great reverses.
Many war parties had been sent out; some of them had been totally cut
off, and others had returned broken and disheartened, so that the whole
nation was in mourning. Among the rest, ten warriors had gone to the
Snake country, led by the son of a prominent Ogallalla chief, called The
Whirlwind. In passing over Laramie Plains they encountered a superior
number of their enemies, were surrounded, and killed to a man.
Having performed this exploit the Snakes became alarmed, dreading the
resentment of the Dakota, and they hastened therefore to signify their
wish for peace by sending the scalp of the slain partisan, together with
a small parcel of tobacco attached, to his tribesmen and relations. They
had employed old Vaskiss, the trader, as their messenger, and the scalp
was the same that hung in our room at the fort. But The Whirlwind proved
inexorable. Though his character hardly corresponds with his name, he is
nevertheless an Indian, and hates the Snakes with his whole soul. Long
before the scalp arrived he had made his preparations for revenge. He
sent messengers with presents and tobacco to all the Dakota within three
hundred miles, proposing a grand combination to chastise the Snakes, and
naming a place and time of rendezvous. The plan was readily adopted and
at this moment many villages, probably embracing in the whole five or
six thousand souls, were slowly creeping over the prairies and tending
towards the common center at La Bonte's Camp, on the Platte. Here their
war-like rites were to be celebrated with more than ordinary solemnity,
and a thousand warriors, as it was said, were to set out for the enemy
country. The characteristic result of this preparation will appear in
the sequel.

I was greatly rejoiced to hear of it. I had come into the country almost
exclusively with a view of observing the Indian character. Having from
childhood felt a curiosity on this subject, and having failed completely
to gratify it by reading, I resolved to have recourse to observation.
I wished to satisfy myself with regard to the position of the Indians
among the races of men; the vices and the virtues that have sprung from
their innate character and from their modes of life, their government,
their superstitions, and their domestic situation. To accomplish my
purpose it was necessary to live in the midst of them, and become, as
it were, one of them. I proposed to join a village and make myself an
inmate of one of their lodges; and henceforward this narrative, so far
as I am concerned, will be chiefly a record of the progress of this
design apparently so easy of accomplishment, and the unexpected
impediments that opposed it.

We resolved on no account to miss the rendezvous at La Bonte's Camp. Our
plan was to leave Delorier at the fort, in charge of our equipage and
the better part of our horses, while we took with us nothing but our
weapons and the worst animals we had. In all probability jealousies and
quarrels would arise among so many hordes of fierce impulsive savages,
congregated together under no common head, and many of them strangers,
from remote prairies and mountains. We were bound in common prudence to
be cautious how we excited any feeling of cupidity. This was our plan,
but unhappily we were not destined to visit La Bonte's Camp in this
manner; for one morning a young Indian came to the fort and brought us
evil tidings. The newcomer was a dandy of the first water. His ugly face
was painted with vermilion; on his head fluttered the tail of a prairie
cock (a large species of pheasant, not found, as I have heard, eastward
of the Rocky Mountains); in his ears were hung pendants of shell, and a
flaming red blanket was wrapped around him. He carried a dragoon sword
in his hand, solely for display, since the knife, the arrow, and the
rifle are the arbiters of every prairie fight; but no one in this
country goes abroad unarmed, the dandy carried a bow and arrows in an
otter-skin quiver at his back. In this guise, and bestriding his yellow
horse with an air of extreme dignity, The Horse, for that was his name,
rode in at the gate, turning neither to the right nor the left, but
casting glances askance at the groups of squaws who, with their mongrel
progeny, were sitting in the sun before their doors. The evil tidings
brought by The Horse were of the following import: The squaw of Henry
Chatillon, a woman with whom he had been connected for years by the
strongest ties which in that country exist between the sexes, was
dangerously ill. She and her children were in the village of The
Whirlwind, at the distance of a few days' journey. Henry was anxious to
see the woman before she died, and provide for the safety and support
of his children, of whom he was extremely fond. To have refused him
this would have been gross inhumanity. We abandoned our plan of joining
Smoke's village, and of proceeding with it to the rendezvous, and
determined to meet The Whirlwind, and go in his company.

I had been slightly ill for several weeks, but on the third night
after reaching Fort Laramie a violent pain awoke me, and I found myself
attacked by the same disorder that occasioned such heavy losses to the
army on the Rio Grande. In a day and a half I was reduced to extreme
weakness, so that I could not walk without pain and effort. Having
within that time taken six grains of opium, without the least beneficial
effect, and having no medical adviser, nor any choice of diet, I
resolved to throw myself upon Providence for recovery, using, without
regard to the disorder, any portion of strength that might remain to
me. So on the 20th of June we set out from Fort Laramie to meet The
Whirlwind's village. Though aided by the high-bowed "mountain saddle,"
I could scarcely keep my seat on horseback. Before we left the fort we
hired another man, a long-haired Canadian, with a face like an owl's,
contrasting oddly enough with Delorier's mercurial countenance. This was
not the only re-enforcement to our party. A vagrant Indian trader, named
Reynal, joined us, together with his squaw Margot, and her two nephews,
our dandy friend, The Horse, and his younger brother, The Hail Storm.
Thus accompanied, we betook ourselves to the prairie, leaving the beaten
trail, and passing over the desolate hills that flank the bottoms of
Laramie Creek. In all, Indians and whites, we counted eight men and one
woman.

Reynal, the trader, the image of sleek and selfish complacency, carried
The Horse's dragoon sword in his hand, delighting apparently in this
useless parade; for, from spending half his life among Indians, he had
caught not only their habits but their ideas. Margot, a female animal
of more than two hundred pounds' weight, was couched in the basket of
a travail, such as I have before described; besides her ponderous bulk,
various domestic utensils were attached to the vehicle, and she was
leading by a trail-rope a packhorse, who carried the covering of
Reynal's lodge. Delorier walked briskly by the side of the cart, and
Raymond came behind, swearing at the spare horses, which it was his
business to drive. The restless young Indians, their quivers at their
backs, and their bows in their hand, galloped over the hills, often
starting a wolf or an antelope from the thick growth of wild-sage
bushes. Shaw and I were in keeping with the rest of the rude cavalcade,
having in the absence of other clothing adopted the buckskin attire
of the trappers. Henry Chatillon rode in advance of the whole. Thus we
passed hill after hill and hollow after hollow, a country arid, broken
and so parched by the sun that none of the plants familiar to our more
favored soil would flourish upon it, though there were multitudes of
strange medicinal herbs, more especially the absanth, which covered
every declivity, and cacti were hanging like reptiles at the edges of
every ravine. At length we ascended a high hill, our horses treading
upon pebbles of flint, agate, and rough jasper, until, gaining the top,
we looked down on the wild bottoms of Laramie Creek, which far below us
wound like a writhing snake from side to side of the narrow interval,
amid a growth of shattered cotton-wood and ash trees. Lines of tall
cliffs, white as chalk, shut in this green strip of woods and meadow
land, into which we descended and encamped for the night. In the morning
we passed a wide grassy plain by the river; there was a grove in front,
and beneath its shadows the ruins of an old trading fort of logs. The
grove bloomed with myriads of wild roses, with their sweet perfume
fraught with recollections of home. As we emerged from the trees, a
rattlesnake, as large as a man's arm, and more than four feet long,
lay coiled on a rock, fiercely rattling and hissing at us; a gray hare,
double the size of those in New England, leaped up from the tall ferns;
curlew were screaming over our heads, and a whole host of little prairie
dogs sat yelping at us at the mouths of their burrows on the dry plain
beyond. Suddenly an antelope leaped up from the wild-sage bushes, gazed
eagerly at us, and then, erecting his white tail, stretched away like a
greyhound. The two Indian boys found a white wolf, as large as a calf in
a hollow, and giving a sharp yell, they galloped after him; but the wolf
leaped into the stream and swam across. Then came the crack of a rifle,
the bullet whistling harmlessly over his head, as he scrambled up the
steep declivity, rattling down stones and earth into the water below.
Advancing a little, we beheld on the farther bank of the stream, a
spectacle not common even in that region; for, emerging from among the
trees, a herd of some two hundred elk came out upon the meadow, their
antlers clattering as they walked forward in dense throng. Seeing us,
they broke into a run, rushing across the opening and disappearing
among the trees and scattered groves. On our left was a barren prairie,
stretching to the horizon; on our right, a deep gulf, with Laramie
Creek at the bottom. We found ourselves at length at the edge of a
steep descent; a narrow valley, with long rank grass and scattered trees
stretching before us for a mile or more along the course of the
stream. Reaching the farther end, we stopped and encamped. An old huge
cotton-wood tree spread its branches horizontally over our tent. Laramie
Creek, circling before our camp, half inclosed us; it swept along the
bottom of a line of tall white cliffs that looked down on us from the
farther bank. There were dense copses on our right; the cliffs, too,
were half hidden by shrubbery, though behind us a few cotton-wood trees,
dotting the green prairie, alone impeded the view, and friend or enemy
could be discerned in that direction at a mile's distance. Here we
resolved to remain and await the arrival of The Whirlwind, who would
certainly pass this way in his progress toward La Bonte's Camp. To go
in search of him was not expedient, both on account of the broken and
impracticable nature of the country and the uncertainty of his position
and movements; besides, our horses were almost worn out, and I was in no
condition to travel. We had good grass, good water, tolerable fish
from the stream, and plenty of smaller game, such as antelope and deer,
though no buffalo. There was one little drawback to our satisfaction--a
certain extensive tract of bushes and dried grass, just behind us, which
it was by no means advisable to enter, since it sheltered a numerous
brood of rattlesnakes. Henry Chatillon again dispatched The Horse to the
village, with a message to his squaw that she and her relatives should
leave the rest and push on as rapidly as possible to our camp.

Our daily routine soon became as regular as that of a well-ordered
household. The weather-beaten old tree was in the center; our rifles
generally rested against its vast trunk, and our saddles were flung on
the ground around it; its distorted roots were so twisted as to form one
or two convenient arm-chairs, where we could sit in the shade and read
or smoke; but meal-times became, on the whole, the most interesting
hours of the day, and a bountiful provision was made for them. An
antelope or a deer usually swung from a stout bough, and haunches were
suspended against the trunk. That camp is daguerreotyped on my memory;
the old tree, the white tent, with Shaw sleeping in the shadow of it,
and Reynal's miserable lodge close by the bank of the stream. It was a
wretched oven-shaped structure, made of begrimed and tattered buffalo
hides stretched over a frame of poles; one side was open, and at the
side of the opening hung the powder horn and bullet pouch of the owner,
together with his long red pipe, and a rich quiver of otterskin, with a
bow and arrows; for Reynal, an Indian in most things but color, chose
to hunt buffalo with these primitive weapons. In the darkness of this
cavern-like habitation, might be discerned Madame Margot, her overgrown
bulk stowed away among her domestic implements, furs, robes, blankets,
and painted cases of PAR' FLECHE, in which dried meat is kept. Here
she sat from sunrise to sunset, a bloated impersonation of gluttony
and laziness, while her affectionate proprietor was smoking, or begging
petty gifts from us, or telling lies concerning his own achievements,
or perchance engaged in the more profitable occupation of cooking some
preparation of prairie delicacies. Reynal was an adept at this work; he
and Delorier have joined forces and are hard at work together over
the fire, while Raymond spreads, by way of tablecloth, a buffalo hide,
carefully whitened with pipeclay, on the grass before the tent. Here,
with ostentatious display, he arranges the teacups and plates; and then,
creeping on all fours like a dog, he thrusts his head in at the opening
of the tent. For a moment we see his round owlish eyes rolling wildly,
as if the idea he came to communicate had suddenly escaped him; then
collecting his scattered thoughts, as if by an effort, he informs us
that supper is ready, and instantly withdraws.

When sunset came, and at that hour the wild and desolate scene would
assume a new aspect, the horses were driven in. They had been grazing
all day in the neighboring meadow, but now they were picketed close
about the camp. As the prairie darkened we sat and conversed around the
fire, until becoming drowsy we spread our saddles on the ground, wrapped
our blankets around us and lay down. We never placed a guard, having
by this time become too indolent; but Henry Chatillon folded his loaded
rifle in the same blanket with himself, observing that he always took it
to bed with him when he camped in that place. Henry was too bold a man
to use such a precaution without good cause. We had a hint now and then
that our situation was none of the safest; several Crow war parties were
known to be in the vicinity, and one of them, that passed here some time
before, had peeled the bark from a neighboring tree, and engraved upon
the white wood certain hieroglyphics, to signify that they had invaded
the territories of their enemies, the Dakota, and set them at defiance.
One morning a thick mist covered the whole country. Shaw and Henry went
out to ride, and soon came back with a startling piece of intelligence;
they had found within rifle-shot of our camp the recent trail of about
thirty horsemen. They could not be whites, and they could not be Dakota,
since we knew no such parties to be in the neighborhood; therefore
they must be Crows. Thanks to that friendly mist, we had escaped a hard
battle; they would inevitably have attacked us and our Indian companions
had they seen our camp. Whatever doubts we might have entertained, were
quite removed a day or two after, by two or three Dakota, who came to us
with an account of having hidden in a ravine on that very morning, from
whence they saw and counted the Crows; they said that they followed
them, carefully keeping out of sight, as they passed up Chugwater; that
here the Crows discovered five dead bodies of Dakota, placed according
to the national custom in trees, and flinging them to the ground, they
held their guns against them and blew them to atoms.

If our camp were not altogether safe, still it was comfortable enough;
at least it was so to Shaw, for I was tormented with illness and vexed
by the delay in the accomplishment of my designs. When a respite in my
disorder gave me some returning strength, I rode out well-armed upon
the prairie, or bathed with Shaw in the stream, or waged a petty warfare
with the inhabitants of a neighborhood prairie-dog village. Around our
fire at night we employed ourselves in inveighing against the fickleness
and inconstancy of Indians, and execrating The Whirlwind and all his
village. At last the thing grew insufferable.

"To-morrow morning," said I, "I will start for the fort, and see if I
can hear any news there." Late that evening, when the fire had sunk
low, and all the camp were asleep, a loud cry sounded from the darkness.
Henry started up, recognized the voice, replied to it, and our dandy
friend, The Horse, rode in among us, just returned from his mission to
the village. He coolly picketed his mare, without saying a word, sat
down by the fire and began to eat, but his imperturbable philosophy
was too much for our patience. Where was the village? about fifty miles
south of us; it was moving slowly and would not arrive in less than
a week; and where was Henry's squaw? coming as fast as she could with
Mahto-Tatonka, and the rest of her brothers, but she would never reach
us, for she was dying, and asking every moment for Henry. Henry's manly
face became clouded and downcast; he said that if we were willing he
would go in the morning to find her, at which Shaw offered to accompany
him.

We saddled our horses at sunrise. Reynal protested vehemently against
being left alone, with nobody but the two Canadians and the young
Indians, when enemies were in the neighborhood. Disregarding his
complaints, we left him, and coming to the mouth of Chugwater,
separated, Shaw and Henry turning to the right, up the bank of the
stream, while I made for the fort.

Taking leave for a while of my friend and the unfortunate squaw, I will
relate by way of episode what I saw and did at Fort Laramie. It was not
more than eighteen miles distant, and I reached it in three hours; a
shriveled little figure, wrapped from head to foot in a dingy white
Canadian capote, stood in the gateway, holding by a cord of bull's hide
a shaggy wild horse, which he had lately caught. His sharp prominent
features, and his little keen snakelike eyes, looked out from beneath
the shadowy hood of the capote, which was drawn over his head exactly
like the cowl of a Capuchin friar. His face was extremely thin and like
an old piece of leather, and his mouth spread from ear to ear. Extending
his long wiry hand, he welcomed me with something more cordial than the
ordinary cold salute of an Indian, for we were excellent friends. He had
made an exchange of horses to our mutual advantage; and Paul, thinking
himself well-treated, had declared everywhere that the white man had
a good heart. He was a Dakota from the Missouri, a reputed son of the
half-breed interpreter, Pierre Dorion, so often mentioned in Irving's
"Astoria." He said that he was going to Richard's trading house to sell
his horse to some emigrants who were encamped there, and asked me to go
with him. We forded the stream together, Paul dragging his wild charge
behind him. As we passed over the sandy plains beyond, he grew quite
communicative. Paul was a cosmopolitan in his way; he had been to the
settlements of the whites, and visited in peace and war most of the
tribes within the range of a thousand miles. He spoke a jargon of French
and another of English, yet nevertheless he was a thorough Indian; and
as he told of the bloody deeds of his own people against their enemies,
his little eye would glitter with a fierce luster. He told how the
Dakota exterminated a village of the Hohays on the Upper Missouri,
slaughtering men, women, and children; and how an overwhelming force of
them cut off sixteen of the brave Delawares, who fought like wolves
to the last, amid the throng of their enemies. He told me also another
story, which I did not believe until I had it confirmed from so many
independent sources that no room was left for doubt. I am tempted to
introduce it here.

Six years ago a fellow named Jim Beckwith, a mongrel of French,
American, and negro blood, was trading for the Fur Company, in a very
large village of the Crows. Jim Beckwith was last summer at St. Louis.
He is a ruffian of the first stamp; bloody and treacherous, without
honor or honesty; such at least is the character he bears upon the
prairie. Yet in his case all the standard rules of character fail,
for though he will stab a man in his sleep, he will also perform most
desperate acts of daring; such, for instance, as the following: While he
was in the Crow village, a Blackfoot war party, between thirty and forty
in number came stealing through the country, killing stragglers and
carrying off horses. The Crow warriors got upon their trail and pressed
them so closely that they could not escape, at which the Blackfeet,
throwing up a semicircular breastwork of logs at the foot of a
precipice, coolly awaited their approach. The logs and sticks, piled
four or five high, protected them in front. The Crows might have
swept over the breastwork and exterminated their enemies; but though
out-numbering them tenfold, they did not dream of storming the little
fortification. Such a proceeding would be altogether repugnant to their
notions of warfare. Whooping and yelling, and jumping from side to side
like devils incarnate, they showered bullets and arrows upon the logs;
not a Blackfoot was hurt, but several Crows, in spite of their leaping
and dodging, were shot down. In this childish manner the fight went on
for an hour or two. Now and then a Crow warrior in an ecstasy of valor
and vainglory would scream forth his war song, boasting himself the
bravest and greatest of mankind, and grasping his hatchet, would rush
up and strike it upon the breastwork, and then as he retreated to his
companions, fall dead under a shower of arrows; yet no combined
attack seemed to be dreamed of. The Blackfeet remained secure in their
intrenchment. At last Jim Beckwith lost patience.

"You are all fools and old women," he said to the Crows; "come with me,
if any of you are brave enough, and I will show you how to fight."

He threw off his trapper's frock of buckskin and stripped himself naked
like the Indians themselves. He left his rifle on the ground, and taking
in his hand a small light hatchet, he ran over the prairie to the right,
concealed by a hollow from the eyes of the Blackfeet. Then climbing
up the rocks, he gained the top of the precipice behind them. Forty or
fifty young Crow warriors followed him. By the cries and whoops that
rose from below he knew that the Blackfeet were just beneath him; and
running forward, he leaped down the rock into the midst of them. As
he fell he caught one by the long loose hair and dragging him down
tomahawked him; then grasping another by the belt at his waist, he
struck him also a stunning blow, and gaining his feet, shouted the Crow
war-cry. He swung his hatchet so fiercely around him that the astonished
Blackfeet bore back and gave him room. He might, had he chosen, have
leaped over the breastwork and escaped; but this was not necessary, for
with devilish yells the Crow warriors came dropping in quick succession
over the rock among their enemies. The main body of the Crows, too,
answered the cry from the front and rushed up simultaneously. The
convulsive struggle within the breastwork was frightful; for an instant
the Blackfeet fought and yelled like pent-up tigers; but the butchery
was soon complete, and the mangled bodies lay piled up together under
the precipice. Not a Blackfoot made his escape.

As Paul finished his story we came in sight of Richard's Fort. It stood
in the middle of the plain; a disorderly crowd of men around it, and an
emigrant camp a little in front.

"Now, Paul," said I, "where are your Winnicongew lodges?"

"Not come yet," said Paul, "maybe come to-morrow."

Two large villages of a band of Dakota had come three hundred miles
from the Missouri, to join in the war, and they were expected to reach
Richard's that morning. There was as yet no sign of their approach; so
pushing through a noisy, drunken crowd, I entered an apartment of logs
and mud, the largest in the fort; it was full of men of various races
and complexions, all more or less drunk. A company of California
emigrants, it seemed, had made the discovery at this late day that they
