my ambition?"

"In your heart, my daughter.  But it is not a sinful ambition.  It is
not an ambition of this world.  Would you not love to turn the king
towards good?"

"I would give my life for it."

"And there is your ambition.  Ah, can I not read your noble soul?
Would you not love to see the Church reign pure and serene over all this
realm--to see the poor housed, the needy helped, the wicked turned from
their ways, and the king ever the leader in all that is noble and good?
Would you not love that, my daughter?"

Her cheeks had flushed, and her eyes shone as she looked at the gray
face of the Jesuit, and saw the picture which his words had conjured up
before her.  "Ah, that would be joy indeed!" she cried.

"And greater joy still to know, not from the mouths of the people, but
from the voice of your own heart in the privacy of your chamber, that
you had been the cause of it, that your influence had brought this
blessing upon the king and upon the country."

"I would die to do it."

"We wish you to do what may be harder.  We wish you to live to do it."

"Ah!" She glanced from one to the other with questioning eyes.

"My daughter," said Bossuet solemnly, leaning forward, with his broad
white hand outstretched and his purple pastoral ring sparkling in the
sunlight, "it is time for plain speaking.  It is in the interests of the
Church that we do it.  None hear, and none shall ever hear, what passes
between us now.  Regard us, if you will, as two confessors, with whom
your secret is inviolable.  I call it a secret, and yet it is none to
us, for it is our mission to read the human heart.  You love the king."

"Your Grace!" She started, and a warm blush, mantling up in her pale
cheeks, deepened and spread until it tinted her white forehead and her
queenly neck.

"You love the king."

"Your Grace--father!" She turned in confusion from one to the other.

"There is no shame in loving, my daughter.  The shame lies only in
yielding to love.  I say again that you love the king."

"At least I have never told him so," she faltered.

"And will you never?"

"May heaven wither my tongue first!"

"But consider, my daughter.  Such love in a soul like yours is heaven's
gift, and sent for some wise purpose.  This human love is too often but
a noxious weed which blights the soil it grows in, but here it is a
gracious flower, all fragrant with humility and virtue."

"Alas! I have tried to tear it from my heart."

"Nay; rather hold it firmly rooted there.  Did the king but meet with
some tenderness from you, some sign that his own affection met with an
answer from your heart, it might be that this ambition which you profess
would be secured, and that Louis, strengthened by the intimate
companionship of your noble nature, might live in the spirit as well as
in the forms of the Church.  All this might spring from the love which
you hide away as though it bore the brand of shame."

The lady half rose, glancing from the prelate to the priest with eyes
which had a lurking horror in their depths.

"Can I have understood you!" she gasped.  "What meaning lies behind
these words?  You cannot counsel me to--"

The Jesuit had risen, and his spare figure towered above her.

"My daughter, we give no counsel which is unworthy of our office.
We speak for the interests of Holy Church, and those interests demand
that you should marry the king."

"Marry the king!" The little room swam round her.  "Marry the king!"

"There lies the best hope for the future.  We see in you a second Jeanne
d'Arc, who will save both France and France's king."

Madame sat silent for a few moments.  Her face had regained its
composure, and her eyes were bent vacantly upon her tapestry frame as
she turned over in her mind all that was involved in the suggestion.

"But surely--surely this could never be," she said at last, "Why should
we plan that which can never come to pass?"

"And why?"

"What King of France has married a subject?  See how every princess of
Europe stretches out her hand to him.  The Queen of France must be of
queenly blood, even as the last was."

"All this may be overcome."

"And then there are the reasons of state.  If the king marry, it should
be to form a powerful alliance, to cement a friendship with a neighbour
nation, or to gain some province which may be the bride's dowry.
What is my dowry?  A widow's pension and a work-box."  She laughed
bitterly, and yet glanced eagerly at her companions, as one who wished
to be confuted.

"Your dowry, my daughter, would be those gifts of body and of mind with
which heaven has endowed you.  The king has money enough, and the king
has provinces enough.  As to the state, how can the state be better
served than by the assurance that the king will be saved in future from
such sights as are to be seen in this  palace to-day?"

"Oh, if it could be so!  But think, father, think of those about him--
the dauphin, monsieur his brother, his ministers.  You know how little
this would please them, and how easy it is for them to sway his mind.
No, no;  it is a dream, father, and it can never be."

The faces of the two ecclesiastics, who had dismissed her other
objections with a smile and a wave, clouded over at this, as though she
had at last touched upon the real obstacle.

"My daughter," said the Jesuit gravely, "that is a matter which you may
leave to the Church.  It may be that we, too, have some power over the
king's mind, and that we may lead him in the right path, even though
those of his own blood would fain have it otherwise.  The future only
can show with whom the power lies.  But you?  Love and duty both draw
you one way now, and the Church may count upon you."

"To my last breath, father."

"And you upon the Church.  It will serve you, if you in turn will but
serve it."

"What higher wish could I have?"

"You will be our daughter, our queen, our champion, and you will heal
the wounds of the suffering Church."

"Ah! if I could!"

"But you can.  While there is heresy within the land there can be no
peace or rest for the faithful.  It is the speck of mould which will in
time, if it be not pared off, corrupt the whole fruit."

"What would you have, then, father?"

"The Huguenots must go.  They must be driven forth.  The goats must be
divided from the sheep.  The king is already in two minds.  Louvois is
our friend now.  If you are with us, then all will be well."

"But, father, think how many there are!"

"The more reason that they should be dealt with."

"And think, too, of their sufferings should they be driven forth."

"Their cure lies in their own hands."

"That is true.  And yet my heart softens for them."

Pere la Chaise and the bishop shook their heads.  Nature had made them
both kind and charitable men, but the heart turns to flint when the
blessing of religion is changed to the curse of sect.

"You would befriend God's enemies then?"

"No, no; not if they are indeed so."

"Can you doubt it?  Is it possible that your heart still turns towards
the heresy of your youth?"

"No, father; but it is not in nature to forget that my father and my
grandfather--"

"Nay, they have answered for their own sins.  Is it possible that the
Church has been mistaken in you?  Do you then refuse the first favour
which she asks of you?  You would accept her aid, and yet you would give
none in return."

Madame de Maintenon rose with the air of one who has made her
resolution.  "You are wiser than I," said she, "and to you have been
committed the interests of the Church.  I will do what you advise."

"You promise it?"

"I do."

Her two visitors threw up their hands together.  "It is a blessed day,"
they cried, "and generations yet unborn will learn to deem it so."

She sat half stunned by the prospect which was opening out in front of
her.  Ambitious she had, as the Jesuit had surmised, always been--
ambitious for the power which would enable her to leave the world better
than she found it.  And this ambition she had already to some extent
been able to satisfy, for more than once she had swayed both king and
kingdom.  But to marry the king--to marry the man for whom she would
gladly lay down her life, whom in the depths of her heart she loved in
as pure and as noble a fashion as woman ever yet loved man--that was
indeed a thing above her utmost hopes.  She knew her own mind, and she
knew his.  Once his wife, she could hold him to good, and keep every
evil influence away from him.  She was sure of it.  She should be no
weak Maria Theresa, but rather, as the priest had said, a new Jeanne
d'Arc, come to lead France and France's king into better ways.  And if,
to gain this aim, she had to harden her heart against the Huguenots, at
least the fault, if there were one, lay with those who made this
condition rather than with herself.  The king's wife!  The heart of the
woman and the soul of the enthusiast both leaped at the thought.

But close at the heels of her joy there came a sudden revulsion to doubt
and despondency.  Was not all this fine prospect a mere day-dream? and
how could these men be so sure that they held the king in the hollow of
their hand?  The Jesuit read the fears which dulled the sparkle of her
eyes, and answered her thoughts before she had time to put them into
words.

"The Church redeems its pledges swiftly," said he.  "And you, my
daughter, you must be as prompt when your own turn comes."

"I have promised, father."

"Then it is for us to perform.  You will remain in your room all
evening."

"Yes, father."

"The king already hesitates.  I spoke with him this morning, and his
mind was full of blackness and despair.  His better self turns in
disgust from his sins, and it is now when the first hot fit of
repentance is just coming upon him that he may best be moulded to our
ends.  I have to see and speak with him once more, and I go from your
room to his.  And when I have spoken, he will come from his room to
yours, or I have studied his heart for twenty years in vain.  We leave
you now, and you will not see us, but you will see the effects of what
we do, and you will remember your pledge to us."  They bowed low to her
both together, and left her to her thoughts.

An hour passed, and then a second one, as she sat in her _fauteuil_, her
tapestry before her, but her hands listless upon her lap, waiting for
her fate.  Her life's future was now being settled for her, and she was
powerless to turn it in one way or the other.  Daylight turned to the
pearly light of evening, and that again to dusk, but she still sat
waiting in the shadow.  Sometimes as a step passed in the corridor she
would glance expectantly towards the door, and the light of welcome
would spring up in her gray eyes, only to die away again into
disappointment.  At last, however, there came a quick sharp tread, crisp
and authoritative, which brought her to her feet with flushed cheeks and
her heart beating wildly.  The door opened, and she saw outlined against
the gray light of the outer passage the erect and graceful figure of the
king.

"Sire!  One instant, and mademoiselle will light the lamp."

"Do not call her."  He entered and closed the door behind him.
"Francoise, the dusk is welcome to me, because it screens me from the
reproaches which must lie in your glance, even if your tongue be too
kindly to speak them."

"Reproaches, sire!  God forbid that I should utter them!"

"When I last left you, Francoise, it was with a good resolution in my
mind.  I tried to carry it out, and I failed--I failed.  I remember that
you warned me.  Fool that I was not to follow your advice!"

"We are all weak and mortal, sire.  Who has not fallen?  Nay, sire, it
goes to my heart to see you thus."

He was standing by the fireplace, his face buried in his hands, and she
could tell by the catch of his breath that he was weeping.  All the pity
of her woman's nature went out to that silent and repenting figure dimly
seen in the failing light.  She put out her hand with a gesture of
sympathy, and it rested for an instant upon his velvet sleeve.  The next
he had clasped it between his own, and she made no effort to release it.

"I cannot do without you, Francoise," he cried.  "I am the loneliest man
in all this world, like one who lives on a great mountain-peak, with
none to bear him company.  Who have I for a friend?  Whom can I rely
upon?  Some are for the Church; some are for their families; most are
for themselves.  But who of them all is single-minded?  You are my
better self, Francoise;  you are my guardian angel.  What the good
father says is true, and the nearer I am to you the further am I from
all that is evil.  Tell me, Francoise, do you love me?"

"I have loved you for years, sire."  Her voice was low but clear--the
voice of a woman to whom coquetry was abhorrent.

"I had hoped it, Francoise, and yet it thrills me to hear you say it.
I know that wealth and title have no attraction for you, and that your
heart turns rather towards the convent than the palace.  Yet I ask you
to remain in the palace, and to reign there.  Will you be my wife,
Francoise?"

And so the moment had in very truth come.  She paused for an instant,
only an instant, before taking this last great step; but even that was
too long for the patience of the king.

"Will you not, Francoise?" he cried, with a ring of fear in his voice.

"May God make me worthy of such an honour, sire!" said she.  "And here I
swear that if heaven double my life, every hour shall be spent in the
one endeavour to make you a happier man!"

She had knelt down, and the king, still holding her hand, knelt down
beside her.

"And I swear too," he cried, "that if my days also are doubled, you will
now and forever be the one and only woman for me."

And so their double oath was taken, an oath which was to be tested in
the future, for each did live almost double their years, and yet neither
broke the promise made hand in hand on that evening in the shadow-girt
chamber.



CHAPTER XII.


THE KING RECEIVES.

It may have been that Mademoiselle Nanon, the faithful _confidante_ of
Madame de Maintenon, had learned something of this interview, or it may
be that Pere la Chaise, with the shrewdness for which his Order is
famous, had come to the conclusion that publicity was the best means of
holding the king to his present intention; but whatever the source, it
was known all over the court next day that the old favourite was again
in disgrace, and that there was talk of a marriage between the king and
the governess of his children.  It was whispered at the _petit lever_,
confirmed at the _grand entree_, and was common gossip by the time that
the king had returned from chapel.  Back into wardrobe and drawer went
the flaring silks and the feathered hats, and out once more came the
sombre coat and the matronly dress.  Scudery and Calpernedi gave place
to the missal and St. Thomas a Kempis, while Bourdaloue, after preaching
for a week to empty benches, found his chapel packed to the last seat
with weary gentlemen and taper-bearing ladies.  By midday there was none
in the court who had not heard the tidings, save only Madame de
Montespan, who, alarmed by her lover's absence, had remained in haughty
seclusion in her room, and knew nothing of what had passed.  Many there
were who would have loved to carry her the tidings; but the king's
changes had been frequent of late, and who would dare to make a mortal
enemy of one who might, ere many weeks were past, have the lives and
fortunes of the whole court in the hollow of her hand?

Louis, in his innate selfishness, had been so accustomed to regard every
event entirely from the side of how it would affect himself, that it had
never struck him that his long-suffering family, who had always yielded
to him the absolute obedience which he claimed as his right, would
venture to offer any opposition to his new resolution.  He was
surprised, therefore, when his brother demanded a private interview that
afternoon, and entered his presence without the complaisant smile and
humble air with which he was wont to appear before him.

Monsieur was a curious travesty of his elder brother.  He was shorter,
but he wore enormously high boot-heels, which brought him to a fair
stature.  In figure he had none of that grace which marked the king, nor
had he the elegant hand and foot which had been the delight of
sculptors.  He was fat, waddled somewhat in his walk, and wore an
enormous black wig, which rolled down in rows and rows of curls over his
shoulders.  His face was longer and darker than the king's, and his nose
more prominent, though he shared with his brother the large brown eyes
which each had inherited from Anne of Austria.  He had none of the
simple and yet stately taste which marked the dress of the monarch, but
his clothes were all tagged over with fluttering ribbons, which rustled
behind him as he walked, and clustered so thickly over his feet as to
conceal them from view.  Crosses, stars, jewels, and insignia were
scattered broadcast over his person, and the broad blue ribbon of the
Order of the Holy Ghost was slashed across his coat, and was gathered at
the end into a great bow, which formed the incongruous support of a
diamond-hilted sword.  Such was the figure which rolled towards the
king, bearing in his right hand his many-feathered beaver, and
appearing in his person, as he was in his mind, an absurd burlesque of
the monarch.

"Why, monsieur, you seem less gay than usual to-day," said the king,
with a smile.  "Your dress, indeed, is bright, but your brow is clouded.
I trust that all is well with Madame and with the Duc de Chartres?"

"Yes, sire, they are well; but they are sad like myself, and from the
same cause."

"Indeed! and why?"

"Have I ever failed in my duty as your younger brother, sire?"

"Never, Philippe, never!" said the king, laying his hand affectionately
upon the other's shoulder.  "You have set an excellent example to my
subjects."

"Then why set a slight upon me?"

"Philippe!"

"Yes, sire, I say it is a slight.  We are of royal blood, and our wives
are of royal blood also.  You married the Princess of Spain; I married
the Princess of Bavaria.  It was a condescension, but still I did it.
My first wife was the Princess of England.  How can we admit into a
house which has formed such alliances as these a woman who is the widow
of a hunchback singer, a mere lampooner, a man whose name is a byword
through Europe?"

The king had stared in amazement at his brother, but his anger now
overcame his astonishment.

"Upon my word!" he cried; "upon my word!  I have said just now that you
have been an excellent brother, but I fear that I spoke a little
prematurely.  And so you take upon yourself to object to the lady whom I
select as my wife!"

"I do, sire."

"And by what right?"

"By the right of the family honour, sire, which is as much mine as
yours."

"Man," cried the king furiously, "have you not yet learned that within
this kingdom I am the fountain of honour, and that whomsoever I may
honour becomes by that very fact honourable?  Were I to take a
cinder-wench out of the Rue Poissonniere, I could at my will raise her
up until the highest in France would be proud to bow down before her.
Do you not know this?"

"No, I do not," cried his brother, with all the obstinacy of a weak man
who has at last been driven to bay.  "I look upon it as a slight upon me
and a slight upon my wife."

"Your wife!  I have every respect for Charlotte Elizabeth of Bavaria,
but how is she superior to one whose grandfather was the dear friend and
comrade in arms of Henry the Great?  Enough!  I will not condescend to
argue such a matter with you!  Begone, and do not return to my presence
until you have learned not to interfere in my affairs."

"For all that, my wife shall not know her!" snarled monsieur; and then,
as his brother took a fiery step or two towards him, he turned and
scuttled out of the room as fast as his awkward gait and high heels
would allow him.

But the king was to have no quiet that day.  If Madame de Maintenon's
friends had rallied to her yesterday, her enemies were active to-day.
Monsieur had hardly disappeared before there rushed into the room a
youth who bore upon his rich attire every sign of having just arrived
from a dusty journey.  He was pale-faced and auburn-haired, with
features which would have been strikingly like the king's if it were not
that his nose had been disfigured in his youth.  The king's face had
lighted up at the sight of him, but it darkened again as he hurried
forward and threw himself down at his feet.

"Oh, sire," he cried, "spare us this grief--spare us this humiliation!
I implore you to pause before you do what will bring dishonour upon
yourself and upon us!"

The king started back from him, and paced angrily up and down the room.

"This is intolerable!" he cried.  "It was bad from my brother, but worse
from my son.  You are in a conspiracy with him, Louis.  Monsieur has
told you to act this part."

The dauphin rose to his feet and looked steadfastly at his angry father.

"I have not seen my uncle," he said.  "I was at Meudon when I heard this
news--this dreadful news--and I sprang upon my horse, sire, and galloped
over to implore you to think again before you drag our royal house so
low."

"You are insolent, Louis."

"I do not mean to be so, sire.  But consider, sire, that my mother was a
queen, and that it would be strange indeed if for a step-mother I had
a--"

The king raised his hand with a gesture of authority which checked the
word upon his lips.

"Silence!" he cried, "or you may say that which would for ever set a
gulf between us.  Am I to be treated worse than my humblest subject, who
is allowed to follow his own bent in his private affairs?"

"This is not your own private affair, sire; all that you do reflects
upon your family.  The great deeds of your reign have given a new glory
to the name of Bourbon.  Oh, do not mar it now, sire! I implore it of
you upon my bended knees!"

"You talk like a fool!" cried his father roughly.  "I propose to marry a
virtuous and charming lady of one of the oldest noble families of
France, and you talk as if I were doing something degrading and unheard
of.  What is your objection to this lady?"
