
"I've broken my man's skull," cried D'Artagnan. "And you----"

"I've only thrown the fellow down, but hark!"

Another shot of a carbine was heard. It was Mousqueton, who was obeying
his master's command.

"On! on!" cried D'Artagnan; "all goes well! we have the first throw."

"Ha! ha!" answered Porthos, "behold, other players appear."

And in fact, two other cavaliers made their appearance, detached, as it
seemed, from the principal group; they again disputed the road.

This time the lieutenant did not wait for the opposite party to speak.

"Stand aside!" he cried; "stand off the road!"

"What do you want?" asked a voice.

"The duke!" Porthos and D'Artagnan roared out both at once.

A burst of laughter was the answer, but finished with a groan.
D'Artagnan had, with his sword, cut in two the poor wretch who had
laughed.

At the same time Porthos and his adversary fired on each other and
D'Artagnan turned to him.

"Bravo! you've killed him, I think."

"No, wounded his horse only."

"What would you have, my dear fellow? One doesn't hit the bull's-eye
every time; it is something to hit inside the ring. Ho! parbleau! what
is the matter with my horse?"

"Your horse is falling," said Porthos, reining in his own.

In truth, the lieutenant's horse stumbled and fell on his knees; then a
rattling in his throat was heard and he lay down to die. He had received
in the chest the bullet of D'Artagnan's first adversary. D'Artagnan
swore loud enough to be heard in the skies.

"Does your honor want a horse?" asked Mousqueton.

"Zounds! want one!" cried the Gascon.

"Here's one, your honor----"

"How the devil hast thou two horses?" asked D'Artagnan, jumping on one
of them.

"Their masters are dead! I thought they might be useful, so I took
them."

Meantime Porthos had reloaded his pistols.

"Be on the qui vive!" cried D'Artagnan. "Here are two other cavaliers."

As he spoke, two horsemen advanced at full speed.

"Ho! your honor!" cried Mousqueton, "the man you upset is getting up."

"Why didn't thou do as thou didst to the first man?" said Porthos.

"I held the horses, my hands were full, your honor."

A shot was fired that moment; Mousqueton shrieked with pain.

"Ah, sir! I'm hit in the other side! exactly opposite the other! This
hurt is just the fellow of the one I had on the road to Amiens."

Porthos turned around like a lion, plunged on the dismounted cavalier,
who tried to draw his sword; but before it was out of the scabbard,
Porthos, with the hilt of his had struck him such a terrible blow on the
head that he fell like an ox beneath the butcher's knife.

Mousqueton, groaning, slipped from his horse, his wound not allowing him
to keep the saddle.

On perceiving the cavaliers, D'Artagnan had stopped and charged his
pistol afresh; besides, his horse, he found, had a carbine on the bow of
the saddle.

"Here I am!" exclaimed Porthos. "Shall we wait, or shall we charge?"

"Let us charge them," answered the Gascon.

"Charge!" cried Porthos.

They spurred on their horses; the other cavaliers were only twenty steps
from them.

"For the king!" cried D'Artagnan.

"The king has no authority here!" answered a deep voice, which seemed to
proceed from a cloud, so enveloped was the cavalier in a whirlwind of
dust.

"'Tis well, we will see if the king's name is not a passport
everywhere," replied the Gascon.

"See!" answered the voice.

Two shots were fired at once, one by D'Artagnan, the other by the
adversary of Porthos. D'Artagnan's ball took off his enemy's hat. The
ball fired by Porthos's foe went through the throat of his horse, which
fell, groaning.

"For the last time, where are you going?"

"To the devil!" answered D'Artagnan.

"Good! you may be easy, then--you'll get there."

D'Artagnan then saw a musket-barrel leveled at him; he had no time to
draw from his holsters. He recalled a bit of advice which Athos had once
given him, and made his horse rear.

The ball struck the animal full in front. D'Artagnan felt his horse
giving way under him and with his wonderful agility threw himself to one
side.

"Ah! this," cried the voice, the tone of which was at once polished and
jeering, "this is nothing but a butchery of horses and not a combat
between men. To the sword, sir! the sword!"

And he jumped off his horse.

"To the swords! be it so!" replied D'Artagnan; "that is exactly what I
want."

D'Artagnan, in two steps, was engaged with the foe, whom, according to
custom, he attacked impetuously, but he met this time with a skill and a
strength of arm that gave him pause. Twice he was obliged to step back;
his opponent stirred not one inch. D'Artagnan returned and again
attacked him.

Twice or thrice thrusts were attempted on both sides, without effect;
sparks were emitted from the swords like water spouting forth.

At last D'Artagnan thought it was time to try one of his favorite feints
in fencing. He brought it to bear, skillfully executed it with the
rapidity of lightning, and struck the blow with a force which he fancied
would prove irresistible.

The blow was parried.

"'Sdeath!" he cried, with his Gascon accent.

At this exclamation his adversary bounded back and, bending his bare
head, tried to distinguish in the gloom the features of the lieutenant.

As to D'Artagnan, afraid of some feint, he still stood on the defensive.

"Have a care," cried Porthos to his opponent; "I've still two pistols
charged."

"The more reason you should fire the first!" cried his foe.

Porthos fired; the flash threw a gleam of light over the field of
battle.

As the light shone on them a cry was heard from the other two
combatants.

"Athos!" exclaimed D'Artagnan.

"D'Artagnan!" ejaculated Athos.

Athos raised his sword; D'Artagnan lowered his.

"Aramis!" cried Athos, "don't fire!"

"Ah! ha! is it you, Aramis?" said Porthos.

And he threw away his pistol.

Aramis pushed his back into his saddle-bags and sheathed his sword.

"My son!" exclaimed Athos, extending his hand to D'Artagnan.

This was the name which he gave him in former days, in their moments of
tender intimacy.

"Athos!" cried D'Artagnan, wringing his hands. "So you defend him! And
I, who have sworn to take him dead or alive, I am dishonored--and by
you!"

"Kill me!" replied Athos, uncovering his breast, "if your honor requires
my death."

"Oh! woe is me! woe is me!" cried the lieutenant; "there's only one man
in the world who could stay my hand; by a fatality that very man bars my
way. What shall I say to the cardinal?"

"You can tell him, sir," answered a voice which was the voice of high
command in the battle-field, "that he sent against me the only two men
capable of getting the better of four men; of fighting man to man,
without discomfiture, against the Comte de la Fere and the Chevalier
d'Herblay, and of surrendering only to fifty men!

"The prince!" exclaimed at the same moment Athos and Aramis, unmasking
as they addressed the Duc de Beaufort, whilst D'Artagnan and Porthos
stepped backward.

"Fifty cavaliers!" cried the Gascon and Porthos.

"Look around you, gentlemen, if you doubt the fact," said the duke.

The two friends looked to the right, to the left; they were encompassed
by a troop of horsemen.

"Hearing the noise of the fight," resumed the duke, "I fancied you had
about twenty men with you, so I came back with those around me, tired of
always running away, and wishing to draw my sword in my own cause; but
you are only two."

"Yes, my lord; but, as you have said, two that are a match for twenty,"
said Athos.

"Come, gentlemen, your swords," said the duke.

"Our swords!" cried D'Artagnan, raising his head and regaining his
self-possession. "Never!"

"Never!" added Porthos.

Some of the men moved toward them.

"One moment, my lord," whispered Athos, and he said something in a low
voice.

"As you will," replied the duke. "I am too much indebted to you to
refuse your first request. Gentlemen," he said to his escort, "withdraw.
Monsieur d'Artagnan, Monsieur du Vallon, you are free."

The order was obeyed; D'Artagnan and Porthos then found themselves in
the centre of a large circle.

"Now, D'Herblay," said Athos, "dismount and come here."

Aramis dismounted and went to Porthos, whilst Athos approached
D'Artagnan.

All four once more together.

"Friends!" said Athos, "do you regret you have not shed our blood?"

"No," replied D'Artagnan; "I regret to see that we, hitherto united, are
opposed to each other. Ah! nothing will ever go well with us hereafter!"

"Oh, Heaven! No, all is over!" said Porthos.

"Well, be on our side now," resumed Aramis.

"Silence, D'Herblay!" cried Athos; "such proposals are not to be made to
gentlemen such as these. 'Tis a matter of conscience with them, as with
us."

"Meantime, here we are, enemies!" said Porthos. "Gramercy! who would
ever have thought it?"

D'Artagnan only sighed.

Athos looked at them both and took their hands in his.

"Gentlemen," he said, "this is a serious business and my heart bleeds as
if you had pierced it through and through. Yes, we are severed; there is
the great, the distressing truth! But we have not as yet declared war;
perhaps we shall have to make certain conditions, therefore a solemn
conference is indispensable."

"For my own part, I demand it," said Aramis.

"I accept it," interposed D'Artagnan, proudly.

Porthos bowed, as if in assent.

"Let us choose a place of rendezvous," continued Athos, "and in a last
interview arrange our mutual position and the conduct we are to maintain
toward each other."

"Good!" the other three exclaimed.

"Well, then, the place?"

"Will the Place Royale suit you?" asked D'Artagnan.

"In Paris?"

"Yes."

Athos and Aramis looked at each other.

"The Place Royale--be it so!" replied Athos.

"When?"

"To-morrow evening, if you like!"

"At what hour?"

"At ten in the evening, if that suits you; by that time we shall have
returned."

"Good."

"There," continued Athos, "either peace or war will be decided; honor,
at all events, will be maintained!"

"Alas!" murmured D'Artagnan, "our honor as soldiers is lost to us
forever!"

"D'Artagnan," said Athos, gravely, "I assure you that you do me wrong in
dwelling so upon that. What I think of is, that we have crossed swords
as enemies. Yes," he continued, sadly shaking his head, "Yes, it is as
you said, misfortune, indeed, has overtaken us. Come, Aramis."

"And we, Porthos," said D'Artagnan, "will return, carrying our shame to
the cardinal."

"And tell him," cried a voice, "that I am not too old yet for a man of
action."

D'Artagnan recognized the voice of De Rochefort.

"Can I do anything for you, gentlemen?" asked the duke.

"Bear witness that we have done all that we could."

"That shall be testified to, rest assured. Adieu! we shall meet soon, I
trust, in Paris, where you shall have your revenge." The duke, as he
spoke, kissed his hand, spurred his horse into a gallop and disappeared,
followed by his troop, who were soon lost in distance and darkness.

D'Artagnan and Porthos were now alone with a man who held by the bridles
two horses; they thought it was Mousqueton and went up to him.

"What do I see?" cried the lieutenant. "Grimaud, is it thou?"

Grimaud signified that he was not mistaken.

"And whose horses are these?" cried D'Artagnan.

"Who has given them to us?" said Porthos.

"The Comte de la Fere."

"Athos! Athos!" muttered D'Artagnan; "you think of every one; you are
indeed a nobleman! Whither art thou going, Grimaud?"

"To join the Vicomte de Bragelonne in Flanders, your honor."

They were taking the road toward Paris, when groans, which seemed to
proceed from a ditch, attracted their attention.

"What is that?" asked D'Artagnan.

"It is I--Mousqueton," said a mournful voice, whilst a sort of shadow
arose out of the side of the road.

Porthos ran to him. "Art thou dangerously wounded, my dear Mousqueton?"
he said.

"No, sir, but I am severely."

"What can we do?" said D'Artagnan; "we must return to Paris."

"I will take care of Mousqueton," said Grimaud; and he gave his arm to
his old comrade, whose eyes were full of tears, nor could Grimaud tell
whether the tears were caused by wounds or by the pleasure of seeing him
again.

D'Artagnan and Porthos went on, meantime, to Paris. They were passed by
a sort of courier, covered with dust, the bearer of a letter from the
duke to the cardinal, giving testimony to the valor of D'Artagnan and
Porthos.

Mazarin had passed a very bad night when this letter was brought to him,
announcing that the duke was free and that he would henceforth raise up
mortal strife against him.

"What consoles me," said the cardinal after reading the letter, "is
that, at least, in this chase, D'Artagnan has done me one good turn--he
has destroyed Broussel. This Gascon is a precious fellow; even his
misadventures are of use."

The cardinal referred to that man whom D'Artagnan upset at the corner of
the Cimetiere Saint Jean in Paris, and who was no other than the
Councillor Broussel.




27. The four old Friends prepare to meet again.


Well," said Porthos, seated in the courtyard of the Hotel de la
Chevrette, to D'Artagnan, who, with a long and melancholy face, had
returned from the Palais Royal; "did he receive you ungraciously, my
dear friend?"

"I'faith, yes! a brute, that cardinal. What are you eating there,
Porthos?"

"I am dipping a biscuit in a glass of Spanish wine; do the same."

"You are right. Gimblou, a glass of wine."

"Well, how has all gone off?"

"Zounds! you know there's only one way of saying things, so I went in
and said, 'My lord, we were not the strongest party.'

"'Yes, I know that,' he said, 'but give me the particulars.'

"You know, Porthos, I could not give him the particulars without naming
our friends; to name them would be to commit them to ruin, so I merely
said they were fifty and we were two.

"'There was firing, nevertheless, I heard,' he said; 'and your
swords--they saw the light of day, I presume?'

"'That is, the night, my lord,' I answered.

"'Ah!' cried the cardinal, 'I thought you were a Gascon, my friend?'

"'I am a Gascon,' said I, 'only when I succeed.' The answer pleased him
and he laughed.

"'That will teach me,' he said, 'to have my guards provided with better
horses; for if they had been able to keep up with you and if each one of
them had done as much as you and your friend, you would have kept your
word and would have brought him back to me dead or alive.'"

"Well, there's nothing bad in that, it seems to me," said Porthos.

"Oh, mon Dieu! no, nothing at all. It was the way in which he spoke. It
is incredible how these biscuit soak up wine! They are veritable
sponges! Gimblou, another bottle."

The bottle was brought with a promptness which showed the degree of
consideration D'Artagnan enjoyed in the establishment. He continued:

"So I was going away, but he called me back.

"'You have had three horses foundered or killed?' he asked me.

"'Yes, my lord.'

"'How much were they worth?'"

"Why," said Porthos, "that was very good of him, it seems to me."

"'A thousand pistoles,' I said."

"A thousand pistoles!" Porthos exclaimed. "Oh! oh! that is a large sum.
If he knew anything about horses he would dispute the price."

"Faith! he was very much inclined to do so, the contemptible fellow. He
made a great start and looked at me. I also looked at him; then he
understood, and putting his hand into a drawer, he took from it a
quantity of notes on a bank in Lyons."

"For a thousand pistoles?"

"For a thousand pistoles--just that amount, the beggar; not one too
many."

"And you have them?"

"They are here."

"Upon my word, I think he acted very generously."

"Generously! to men who had risked their lives for him, and besides had
done him a great service?"

"A great service--what was that?"

"Why, it seems that I crushed for him a parliament councillor."

"What! that little man in black that you upset at the corner of Saint
Jean Cemetery?"

"That's the man, my dear fellow; he was an annoyance to the cardinal.
Unfortunately, I didn't crush him flat. It seems that he came to himself
and that he will continue to be an annoyance."

"See that, now!" said Porthos; "and I turned my horse aside from going
plump on to him! That will be for another time."

"He owed me for the councillor, the pettifogger!"

"But," said Porthos, "if he was not crushed completely----"

"Ah! Monsieur de Richelieu would have said, 'Five hundred crowns for the
councillor.' Well, let's say no more about it. How much were your
animals worth, Porthos?"

"Ah, if poor Mousqueton were here he could tell you to a fraction."

"No matter; you can tell within ten crowns."

"Why, Vulcan and Bayard cost me each about two hundred pistoles, and
putting Phoebus at a hundred and fifty, we should be pretty near the
amount."

"There will remain, then, four hundred and fifty pistoles," said
D'Artagnan, contentedly.

"Yes," said Porthos, "but there are the equipments."

"That is very true. Well, how much for the equipments?"

"If we say one hundred pistoles for the three----"

"Good for the hundred pistoles; there remains, then, three hundred and
fifty."

Porthos made a sign of assent.

"We will give the fifty pistoles to the hostess for our expenses," said
D'Artagnan, "and share the three hundred."

"We will share," said Porthos.

"A paltry piece of business!" murmured D'Artagnan crumpling his note.

"Pooh!" said Porthos, "it is always that. But tell me----"

"What?"

"Didn't he speak of me in any way?"

"Ah! yes, indeed!" cried D'Artagnan, who was afraid of disheartening his
friend by telling him that the cardinal had not breathed a word about
him; "yes, surely, he said----"

"He said?" resumed Porthos.

"Stop, I want to remember his exact words. He said, 'As to your friend,
tell him he may sleep in peace.'"

"Good, very good," said Porthos; "that signified as clear as daylight
that he still intends to make me a baron."

At this moment nine o'clock struck. D'Artagnan started.

"Ah, yes," said Porthos, "there is nine o'clock. We have a rendezvous,
you remember, at the Place Royale."

"Ah! stop! hold your peace, Porthos, don't remind me of it; 'tis that
which has made me so cross since yesterday. I shall not go."

"Why?" asked Porthos.

"Because it is a grievous thing for me to meet again those two men who
caused the failure of our enterprise."

"And yet," said Porthos, "neither of them had any advantage over us. I
still had a loaded pistol and you were in full fight, sword in hand."

"Yes," said D'Artagnan; "but what if this rendezvous had some hidden
purpose?"

"Oh!" said Porthos, "you can't think that, D'Artagnan!"

D'Artagnan did not believe Athos to be capable of a deception, but he
sought an excuse for not going to the rendezvous.

"We must go," said the superb lord of Bracieux, "lest they should say we
were afraid. We who have faced fifty foes on the high road can well meet
two in the Place Royale."

"Yes, yes, but they took part with the princes without apprising us of
it. Athos and Aramis have played a game with me which alarms me. We
discovered yesterday the truth; what is the use of going to-day to learn
something else?"

"You really have some distrust, then?" said Porthos.

"Of Aramis, yes, since he has become an abbe. You can't imagine, my dear
fellow, the sort of man he is. He sees us on the road which leads him to
a bishopric, and perhaps will not be sorry to get us out of his way."

"Ah, as regards Aramis, that is another thing," said Porthos, "and it
wouldn't surprise me at all."

"Perhaps Monsieur de Beaufort will try, in his turn, to lay hands on
us."

"Nonsense! He had us in his power and he let us go. Besides we can be on
our guard; let us take arms, let Planchet post himself behind us with
his carbine."

"Planchet is a Frondeur," answered D'Artagnan.

"Devil take these civil wars! one can no more now reckon on one's
friends than on one's footmen," said Porthos. "Ah! if Mousqueton were
here! there's a fellow who will never desert me!"

"So long as you are rich! Ah! my friend! 'tis not civil war that
disunites us. It is that we are each of us twenty years older; it is
that the honest emotions of youth have given place to suggestions of
interest, whispers of ambition, counsels of selfishness. Yes, you are
right; let us go, Porthos, but let us go well armed; were we not to keep
the rendezvous, they would declare we were afraid. Halloo! Planchet!
here! saddle our horses, take your carbine."

"Whom are we going to attack, sir?"

"No one; a mere matter of precaution," answered the Gascon.

"You know, sir, that they wished to murder that good councillor,
Broussel, the father of the people?"

"Really, did they?" said D'Artagnan.

"Yes, but he has been avenged. He was carried home in the arms of the
people. His house has been full ever since. He has received visits from
the coadjutor, from Madame de Longueville, and the Prince de Conti;
Madame de Chevreuse and Madame de Vendome have left their names at his
door. And now, whenever he wishes----"

"Well, whenever he wishes?"

Planchet began to sing:

"Un vent de fronde S'est leve ce matin; Je crois qu'il gronde Contre le
Mazarin. Un vent de fronde S'est leve ce matin."

"It doesn't surprise me," said D'Artagnan, in a low tone to Porthos,
"that Mazarin would have been much better satisfied had I crushed the
life out of his councillor."

"You understand, then, monsieur," resumed Planchet, "that if it were for
some enterprise like that undertaken against Monsieur Broussel that you
should ask me to take my carbine----"

"No, don't be alarmed; but where did you get all these details?"

"From a good source, sir; I heard it from Friquet."

"From Friquet? I know that name----"

"A son of Monsieur de Broussel's servant, and a lad that, I promise you,
in a revolt will not give away his share to the dogs."

"Is he not a singing boy at Notre Dame?" asked D'Artagnan.

"Yes, that is the very boy; he's patronized by Bazin."

"Ah, yes, I know."

"Of what importance is this little reptile to you?" asked Porthos.

"Gad!" replied D'Artagnan; "he has already given me good information and
he may do the same again."

Whilst all this was going on, Athos and Aramis were entering Paris by
the Faubourg St. Antoine. They had taken some refreshment on the road
and hastened on, that they might not fail at the appointed place. Bazin
was their only attendant, for Grimaud had stayed behind to take care of
Mousqueton. As they were passing onward, Athos proposed that they should
lay aside their arms and military costume, and assume a dress more
suited to the city.

"Oh, no, dear count!" cried Aramis, "is it not a warlike encounter that
we are going to?"

"What do you mean, Aramis?"

"That the Place Royale is the termination to the main road to Vendomois,
and nothing else."

"What! our friends?"

"Are become our most dangerous enemies, Athos. Let us be on our guard."

"Oh! my dear D'Herblay!"

"Who can say whether D'Artagnan may not have betrayed us to the
cardinal? who can tell whether Mazarin may not take advantage of this
rendezvous to seize us?"

"What! Aramis, you think that D'Artagnan, that Porthos, would lend their
hands to such an infamy?"

"Among friends, my dear Athos, no, you are right; but among enemies it
would be only a stratagem."

Athos crossed his arms and bowed his noble head.

"What can you expect, Athos? Men are so made; and we are not always
twenty years old. We have cruelly wounded, as you know, that personal
pride by which D'Artagnan is blindly governed. He has been beaten. Did
you not observe his despair on the journey? As to Porthos, his barony
was perhaps dependent on that affair. Well, he found us on his road and
will not be baron this time. Perhaps that famous barony will have
something to do with our interview this evening. Let us take our
precautions, Athos."

"But suppose they come unarmed? What a disgrace to us."

"Oh, never fear! besides, if they do, we can easily make an excuse; we
came straight off a journey and are insurgents, too."

"An excuse for us! to meet D'Artagnan with a false excuse! to have to
make a false excuse to Porthos! Oh, Aramis!" continued Athos, shaking
his head mournfully, "upon my soul, you make me the most miserable of
men; you disenchant a heart not wholly dead to friendship. Go in
whatever guise you choose; for my part, I shall go unarmed."

"No, for I will not allow you to do so. 'Tis not one man, not Athos
only, not the Comte de la Fere whom you will ruin by this amiable
weakness, but a whole party to whom you belong and who depend upon you."

"Be it so then," replied Athos, sorrowfully.

And they pursued their road in mournful silence.

Scarcely had they reached by the Rue de la Mule the iron gate of the
Place Royale, when they perceived three cavaliers, D'Artagnan, Porthos,
and Planchet, the two former wrapped up in their military cloaks under
which their swords were hidden, and Planchet, his musket by his side.
They were waiting at the entrance of the Rue Sainte Catharine, and their
horses were fastened to the rings of the arcade. Athos, therefore,
commanded Bazin to fasten up his horse and that of Aramis in the same
manner.

They then advanced two and two, and saluted each other politely.

"Now where will it be agreeable to you that we hold our conference?"
inquired Aramis, perceiving that people were stopping to look at them,
supposing that they were going to engage in one of those far-famed duels
still extant in the memory of the Parisians, and especially the
inhabitants of the Place Royale.

"The gate is shut," said Aramis, "but if these gentlemen like a cool
retreat under the trees, and perfect seclusion, I will get the key from
the Hotel de Rohan and we shall be well suited."

D'Artagnan darted a look into the obscurity of the Place. Porthos
ventured to put his head between the railings, to try if his glance
could penetrate the gloom.

"If you prefer any other place," said Athos, in his persuasive voice,
"choose for yourselves."

"This place, if Monsieur d'Herblay can procure the key, is the best that
we can have," was the answer.

Aramis went off at once, begging Athos not to remain alone within reach
of D'Artagnan and Porthos; a piece of advice which was received with a
contemptuous smile.

Aramis returned soon with a man from the Hotel de Rohan, who was saying
to him:

"You swear, sir, that it is not so?"

"Stop," and Aramis gave him a louis d'or.

"Ah! you will not swear, my master," said the concierge, shaking his
head.

"Well, one can never say what may happen; at present we and these
gentlemen are excellent friends."

"Yes, certainly," added Athos and the other two.

D'Artagnan had heard the conversation and had understood it.

"You see?" he said to Porthos.

"What do I see?"

"That he wouldn't swear."

"Swear what?"

"That man wanted Aramis to swear that we are not going to the Place
Royale to fight."

"And Aramis wouldn't swear?"

"No."

"Attention, then!"

Athos did not lose sight of the two speakers. Aramis opened the gate and
faced around in order that D'Artagnan and Porthos might enter. In
passing through the gate, the hilt of the lieutenant's sword was caught
in the grating and he was obliged to pull off his cloak; in doing so he
showed the butt end of his pistols and a ray of the moon was reflected
on the shining metal.

"Do you see?" whispered Aramis to Athos, touching his shoulder with one
hand and pointing with the other to the arms which the Gascon wore under
his belt.

"Alas! I do!" replied Athos, with a deep sigh.

He entered third, and Aramis, who shut the gate after him, last. The two
serving-men waited without; but as if they likewise mistrusted each
other, they kept their respective distances.




28. The Place Royale.


They proceeded silently to the centre of the Place, but as at this very
moment the moon had just emerged from behind a cloud, they thought they
might be observed if they remained on that spot and therefore regained
the shade of the lime-trees.

There were benches here and there; the four gentlemen stopped near them;
at a sign from Athos, Porthos and D'Artagnan sat down, the two others
stood in front of them.

After a few minutes of silent embarrassment, Athos spoke.

"Gentlemen," he said, "our presence here is the best proof of former
friendship; not one of us has failed the others at this rendezvous; not
one has, therefore, to reproach himself."

"Hear me, count," replied D'Artagnan; "instead of making compliments to
each other, let us explain our conduct to each other, like men of right
and honest hearts."

"I wish for nothing more; have you any cause of complaint against me or
Monsieur d'Herblay? If so, speak out," answered Athos.

"I have," replied D'Artagnan. "When I saw you at your chateau at
Bragelonne, I made certain proposals to you which you perfectly
understood; instead of answering me as a friend, you played with me as a
child; the friendship, therefore, that you boast of was not broken
yesterday by the shock of swords, but by your dissimulation at your
castle."

"D'Artagnan!" said Athos, reproachfully.

"You asked for candor and you have it. You ask what I have against you;
I tell you. And I have the same sincerity to show you, if you wish,
Monsieur d'Herblay; I acted in a similar way to you and you also
deceived me."

"Really, monsieur, you say strange things," said Aramis. "You came
seeking me to make to me certain proposals, but did you make them? No,
you sounded me, nothing more. Very well what did I say to you? that
Mazarin was contemptible and that I wouldn't serve Mazarin. But that is
all. Did I tell you that I wouldn't serve any other? On the contrary, I
gave you to understand, I think, that I adhered to the princes. We even
joked very pleasantly, if I remember rightly, on the very probable
contingency of your being charged by the cardinal with my arrest. Were
you a party man? There is no doubt of that. Well, why should not we,
too, belong to a party? You had your secret and we had ours; we didn't
exchange them. So much the better; it proves that we know how to keep
our secrets."

"I do not reproach you, monsieur," said D'Artagnan; "'tis only because
Monsieur de la Fere has spoken of friendship that I question your
conduct."

"And what do you find in it that is worthy of blame?" asked Aramis,
haughtily.

The blood mounted instantly to the temples of D'Artagnan, who arose, and
replied:

"I consider it worthy conduct of a pupil of Jesuits."

On seeing D'Artagnan rise, Porthos rose also; these four men were
therefore all standing at the same time, with a menacing aspect,
opposite to each other.

Upon hearing D'Artagnan's reply, Aramis seemed about to draw his sword,
when Athos prevented him.

"D'Artagnan," he said, "you are here to-night, still infuriated by
yesterday's adventure. I believed your heart noble enough to enable a
friendship of twenty years to overcome an affront of a quarter of an
hour. Come, do you really think you have anything to say against me? Say
it then; if I am in fault I will avow the error."

The grave and harmonious tones of that beloved voice seemed to have
still its ancient influence, whilst that of Aramis, which had become
harsh and tuneless in his moments of ill-humor, irritated him. He
answered therefore:

"I think, monsieur le comte, that you had something to communicate to me
at your chateau of Bragelonne, and that gentleman"--he pointed to
Aramis--"had also something to tell me when I was in his convent. At
that time I was not concerned in the adventure, in the course of which
you have so successfully estopped me! However, because I was prudent you
must not take me for a fool. If I had wished to widen the breach between
those whom Monsieur d'Herblay chooses to receive with a rope ladder and
those whom he receives with a wooden ladder, I could have spoken out."

"What are you meddling with?" cried Aramis, pale with anger, suspecting
that D'Artagnan had acted as a spy on him and had seen him with Madame
de Longueville.

"I never meddle save with what concerns me, and I know how to make
believe that I haven't seen what does not concern me; but I hate
hypocrites, and among that number I place musketeers who are abbes and
abbes who are musketeers; and," he added, turning to Porthos "here's a
gentleman who's of the same opinion as myself."

Porthos, who had not spoken one word, answered merely by a word and a
gesture.

He said "yes" and he put his hand on his sword.

Aramis started back and drew his. D'Artagnan bent forward, ready either
to attack or to stand on his defense.

Athos at that moment extended his hand with the air of supreme command
which characterized him alone, drew out his sword and the scabbard at
the same time, broke the blade in the sheath on his knee and threw the
pieces to his right. Then turning to Aramis:

"Aramis," he said, "break your sword."

Aramis hesitated.

"It must be done," said Athos; then in a lower and more gentle voice, he
added. "I wish it."

Then Aramis, paler than before, but subdued by these words, snapped the
serpent blade between his hands, and then folding his arms, stood
trembling with rage.

These proceedings made D'Artagnan and Porthos draw back. D'Artagnan did
not draw his sword; Porthos put his back into the sheath.

"Never!" exclaimed Athos, raising his right hand to Heaven, "never! I
swear before God, who seeth us, and who, in the darkness of this night
heareth us, never shall my sword cross yours, never my eye express a
glance of anger, nor my heart a throb of hatred, at you. We lived
together, we loved, we hated together; we shed, we mingled our blood
together, and too probably, I may still add, that there may be yet a
bond between us closer even than that of friendship; perhaps there may
be the bond of crime; for we four, we once did condemn, judge and slay a
human being whom we had not any right to cut off from this world,
although apparently fitter for hell than for this life. D'Artagnan, I
have always loved you as my son; Porthos, we slept six years side by
side; Aramis is your brother as well as mine, and Aramis has once loved
you, as I love you now and as I have ever loved you. What can Cardinal
Mazarin be to us, to four men who compelled such a man as Richelieu to
act as we pleased? What is such or such a prince to us, who fixed the
diadem upon a great queen's head? D'Artagnan, I ask your pardon for
having yesterday crossed swords with you; Aramis does the same to
Porthos; now hate me if you can; but for my own part, I shall ever, even
if you do hate me, retain esteem and friendship for you. I repeat my
words, Aramis, and then, if you desire it, and if they desire it, let us
separate forever from our old friends."

There was a solemn, though momentary silence, which was broken by
Aramis.

"I swear," he said, with a calm brow and kindly glance, but in a voice
still trembling with recent emotion, "I swear that I no longer bear
animosity to those who were once my friends. I regret that I ever
crossed swords with you, Porthos; I swear not only that it shall never
again be pointed at your breast, but that in the bottom of my heart
there will never in future be the slightest hostile sentiment; now,
Athos, come."

Athos was about to retire.

"Oh! no! no! do not go away!" exclaimed D'Artagnan, impelled by one of
those irresistible impulses which showed the nobility of his nature, the
native brightness of his character; "I swear that I would give the last
drop of my blood and the last fragment of my limbs to preserve the
friendship of such a friend as you, Athos--of such a man as you,
Aramis." And he threw himself into the arms of Athos.

"My son!" exclaimed Athos, pressing him in his arms.

"And as for me," said Porthos, "I swear nothing, but I'm choked.
Forsooth! If I were obliged to fight against you, I think I should allow
myself to be pierced through and through, for I never loved any one but
you in the wide world;" and honest Porthos burst into tears as he
embraced Athos.

"My friends," said Athos, "this is what I expected from such hearts as
yours. Yes, I have said it and I now repeat it: our destinies are
irrevocably united, although we now pursue divergent roads. I respect
your convictions, and whilst we fight for opposite sides, let us remain
friends. Ministers, princes, kings, will pass away like mountain
torrents; civil war, like a forest flame; but we--we shall remain; I
have a presentiment that we shall."

"Yes," replied D'Artagnan, "let us still be musketeers, and let us
retain as our battle-standard that famous napkin of the bastion St.
Gervais, on which the great cardinal had three fleurs-de-lis
embroidered."

"Be it so," cried Aramis. "Cardinalists or Frondeurs, what matters it?
Let us meet again as capital seconds in a duel, devoted friends in
business, merry companions in our ancient pleasures."

"And whenever," added Athos, "we meet in battle, at this word, 'Place
Royale!' let us put our swords into our left hands and shake hands with
the right, even in the very lust and music of the hottest carnage."

"You speak charmingly," said Porthos.

"And are the first of men!" added D'Artagnan. "You excel us all."

Athos smiled with ineffable pleasure.

"'Tis then all settled. Gentlemen, your hands; are we not pretty good
Christians?"

"Egad!" said D'Artagnan, "by Heaven! yes."

"We should be so on this occasion, if only to be faithful to our oath,"
said Aramis.

"Ah, I'm ready to do what you will," cried Porthos; "even to swear by
Mahomet. Devil take me if I've ever been so happy as at this moment."

And he wiped his eyes, still moist.

"Has not one of you a cross?" asked Athos.

Aramis smiled and drew from his vest a cross of diamonds, which was hung
around his neck by a chain of pearls. "Here is one," he said.

"Well," resumed Athos, "swear on this cross, which, in spite of its
magnificent material, is still a cross; swear to be united in spite of
everything, and forever, and may this oath bind us to each other, and
even, also, our descendants! Does this oath satisfy you?"

"Yes," said they all, with one accord.

"Ah, traitor!" muttered D'Artagnan, leaning toward Aramis and whispering
in his ear, "you have made us swear on the crucifix of a Frondeuse."




29. The Ferry across the Oise.


We hope that the reader has not quite forgotten the young traveler whom
we left on the road to Flanders.

In losing sight of his guardian, whom he had quitted, gazing after him
in front of the royal basilican, Raoul spurred on his horse, in order
not only to escape from his own melancholy reflections, but also to hide
from Olivain the emotion his face might betray.

One hour's rapid progress, however, sufficed to disperse the gloomy
fancies that had clouded the young man's bright anticipations; and the
hitherto unfelt pleasure of freedom--a pleasure which is sweet even to
those who have never known dependence--seemed to Raoul to gild not only
Heaven and earth, but especially that blue but dim horizon of life we
call the future.

Nevertheless, after several attempts at conversation with Olivain he
foresaw that many days passed thus would prove exceedingly dull; and the
count's agreeable voice, his gentle and persuasive eloquence, recurred
to his mind at the various towns through which they journeyed and about
which he had no longer any one to give him those interesting details
which he would have drawn from Athos, the most amusing and the best
informed of guides. Another recollection contributed also to sadden
Raoul: on their arrival at Sonores he had perceived, hidden behind a
screen of poplars, a little chateau which so vividly recalled that of La
Valliere to his mind that he halted for nearly ten minutes to gaze at
it, and resumed his journey with a sigh too abstracted even to reply to
Olivain's respectful inquiry about the cause of so much fixed attention.
The aspect of external objects is often a mysterious guide communicating
with the fibres of memory, which in spite of us will arouse them at
times; this thread, like that of Ariadne, when once unraveled will
conduct one through a labyrinth of thought, in which one loses one's
self in endeavoring to follow that phantom of the past which is called
recollection.

Now the sight of this chateau had taken Raoul back fifty leagues
westward and had caused him to review his life from the moment when he
had taken leave of little Louise to that in which he had seen her for
the first time; and every branch of oak, every gilded weathercock on
roof of slates, reminded him that, instead of returning to the friends
of his childhood, every instant estranged him further and that perhaps
he had even left them forever.

With a full heart and burning head he desired Olivain to lead on the
horses to a wayside inn, which he observed within gunshot range, a
little in advance of the place they had reached.

As for himself, he dismounted and remained under a beautiful group of
chestnuts in flower, amidst which were murmuring a multitude of happy
bees, and bade Olivain send the host to him with writing paper and ink,
to be placed on a table which he found there, conveniently ready.
Olivain obeyed and continued on his way, whilst Raoul remained sitting,
with his elbow leaning on the table, from time to time gently shaking
the flowers from his head, which fell upon him like snow, and gazing
vaguely on the charming landscape spread out before him, dotted over
with green fields and groups of trees. Raoul had been there about ten
minutes, during five of which he was lost in reverie, when there
appeared within the circle comprised in his rolling gaze a man with a
rubicund face, who, with a napkin around his body, another under his
arm, and a white cap upon his head, approached him, holding paper, pen
and ink in hand.

"Ha! ha!" laughed the apparition, "every gentleman seems to have the
same fancy, for not a quarter of an hour ago a young lad, well mounted
like you, as tall as you and of about your age, halted before this clump
of trees and had this table and this chair brought here, and dined here,
with an old gentleman who seemed to be his tutor, upon a pie, of which
they haven't left a mouthful, and two bottles of Macon wine, of which
they haven't left a drop, but fortunately we have still some of the same
wine and some of the same pies left, and if your worship will but give
your orders----"

"No, friend," replied Raoul, smiling, "I am obliged to you, but at this
moment I want nothing but the things for which I have asked--only I
shall be very glad if the ink prove black and the pen good; upon these
conditions I will pay for the pen the price of the bottle, and for the
ink the price of the pie."

"Very well, sir," said the host, "I'll give the pie and the bottle of
wine to your servant, and in this way you will have the pen and ink into
the bargain."

"Do as you like," said Raoul, who was beginning his apprenticeship with
that particular class of society, who, when there were robbers on the
highroads, were connected with them, and who, since highwaymen no longer
exist, have advantageously and aptly filled their vacant place.

The host, his mind at ease about his bill, placed pen, ink and paper
upon the table. By a lucky chance the pen was tolerably good and Raoul
began to write. The host remained standing in front of him, looking with
a kind of involuntary admiration at his handsome face, combining both
gravity and sweetness of expression. Beauty has always been and always
will be all-powerful.

"He's not a guest like the other one here just now," observed mine host
to Olivain, who had rejoined his master to see if he wanted anything,
"and your young master has no appetite."

"My master had appetite enough three days ago, but what can one do? he
lost it the day before yesterday."

And Olivain and the host took their way together toward the inn,
Olivain, according to the custom of serving-men well pleased with their
place, relating to the tavern-keeper all that he could say in favor of
the young gentleman; whilst Raoul wrote on thus:

"Sir,--After a four hours' march I stop to write to you, for I miss you
every moment, and I am always on the point of turning my head as if to
reply when you speak to me. I was so bewildered by your departure and so
overcome with grief at our separation, that I am sure I was able to but
very feebly express all the affection and gratitude I feel toward you.
You will forgive me, sir, for your heart is of such a generous nature
that you can well understand all that has passed in mine. I entreat you
to write to me, for you form a part of my existence, and, if I may
