Nicol, cut a crystal of Iceland spar in two halves in a certain
direction. He polished the severed surfaces, and reunited them by
Canada balsam, the surface of union being so inclined to the beam
traversing the spar that the ordinary ray, which is the most highly
refracted, was totally reflected by the balsam, while the
extraordinary ray was permitted to pass on.

Let _b x, c y_ (fig. 34) represent the section of an elongated rhomb
of Iceland spar cloven from the crystal. Let this rhomb be cut along
the plane _b c_; and the two severed surfaces, after having been
polished, reunited by Canada balsam. We learned, in our first lecture,
that total reflection only takes place when a ray seeks to escape from
a more refracting to a less refracting medium, and that it always,
under these circumstances, takes place when the obliquity is
sufficient. Now the refractive index of Iceland spar is, for the
extraordinary ray less, and for the ordinary greater, than for Canada
balsam. Hence, in passing from the spar to the balsam, the
extraordinary ray passes from a less refracting to a more refracting
medium, where total reflection cannot occur; while the ordinary ray
passes from a more refracting to a less refracting medium, where
total reflection can occur. The requisite obliquity is secured by
making the rhomb of such a length that the plane of which _b c_ is the
section shall be perpendicular, or nearly so, to the two end surfaces
of the rhomb _b x, c y_.

[Illustration: Fig. 34.]

The invention of the Nicol prism was a great step in practical optics,
and quite recently such prisms have been constructed of a size and
purity which enable audiences like the present to witness the
chromatic phenomena of polarized light to a degree altogether
unattainable a short time ago.

(The two prisms employed in these experiments were lent to me by my
lamented friend Mr. William Spottiswoode, and they were manufactured
by Mr. Ahrens, an optician of consummate skill.)


Sec. 2. _Colours of Films of Selenite in Polarized Light_.

Two Nicol prisms play the same part as the two plates of tourmaline.
Placed with their directions of vibration parallel, the light passes
through both; while when these directions are crossed the light is
quenched. Introducing a film of mica between the prisms, the light, as
in the case of the tourmaline, is restored. But notice, when the film
of mica is _thin_ you have sometimes not only light, but _coloured_
light. Our work for some time to come will consist of the examination
of such colours. With this view, I will take a representative crystal,
one easily dealt with, because it cleaves with great facility--the
crystal gypsum, or selenite, which is crystallized sulphate of lime.
Between the crossed Nicols I place a thick plate of this crystal; like
the mica, it restores the light, but it produces no colour. With my
penknife I take a thin splinter from the crystal and place it between
the prisms; the image of the splinter glows with the richest colours.
Turning the prism in front, these colours gradually fade and
disappear, but, by continuing the rotation until the vibrating
sections of the prisms are parallel to each other, vivid colours again
arise, but these colours are complementary to the former ones.

Some patches of the splinter appear of one colour, some of another.
These differences are due to the different thicknesses of the film. As
in the case of Hooke's thin plates, if the thickness be uniform the
colour is uniform. Here, for instance, is a stellar shape, every
lozenge of the star being a film of gypsum of uniform thickness: each
lozenge, you observe, shows a brilliant and uniform colour. It is
easy, by shaping our films so as to represent flowers or other
objects, to exhibit such objects in hues unattainable by art. Here,
for example, is a specimen of heart's-ease, the colours of which you
might safely defy the artist to reproduce. By turning the front Nicol
90 degrees round, we pass through a colourless phase to a series of
colours complementary to the former ones. This change is still more
strikingly represented by a rose-tree, which is now presented in its
natural hues--a red flower and green leaves; turning the prism 90
degrees round, we obtain a green flower and red leaves. All these
wonderful chromatic effects have definite mechanical causes in the
motions of the ether. The principle of interference duly applied and
interpreted explains them all.


Sec. 3. _Colours of Crystals in Polarized Light explained by the
Undulatory Theory_.

By this time you have learned that the word 'light' may be used in two
different senses: it may mean the impression made upon consciousness,
or it may mean the physical cause of the impression. It is with this
cause that we have to occupy ourselves at present. The luminiferous
ether is a substance which fills all space, and surrounds the atoms
and molecules of bodies. To this inter-stellar and inter-atomic medium
definite mechanical properties are ascribed, and we deal with it in
our reasonings and calculations as a body possessed of these
properties. In mechanics we have the composition and resolution of
forces and of motions, extending to the composition and resolution of
_vibrations_. We treat the luminiferous ether on mechanical
principles, and, from the composition and resolution of its
vibrations we deduce all the phenomena displayed by crystals in
polarized light.

[Illustration: Fig. 35.]

Let us take, as an example, the crystal of tourmaline, with which we
are now so familiar. Let a vibration cross this crystal oblique to its
axis. Experiment has assured us that a portion of the light will pass
through. The quantity which passes we determine in this way. Let A B
(fig. 35) be the axis of the tourmaline, and let _a_ _b_ represent the
amplitude of an oblique ethereal vibration before it reaches A B. From
_a_ and _b_ let the two perpendiculars _a_ _c_ and _b_ _d_ be drawn
upon the axis: then _c_ _d_ will be the amplitude of the transmitted
vibration.

I shall immediately ask you to follow me while I endeavour to explain
the effects observed when a film of gypsum is placed between the two
Nicol prisms. But, prior to this, it will be desirable to establish
still further the analogy between the action of the prisms and that of
the two plates of tourmaline. The magnified images of these plates,
with their axes at right-angles to each other, are now before you.
Introducing between them a film of selenite, you observe that by
turning the film round it may be placed in a position where it has no
power to abolish the darkness of the superposed portions of the
tourmalines. Why is this? The answer is, that in the gypsum there are
two directions, at right angles to each other, in which alone
vibrations can take place, and that in our present experiment one of
these directions is parallel to one of the axes of the tourmaline, and
the other parallel to the other axis. When this is the case, the film
exercises no sensible action upon the light. But now I turn the film
so as to render its directions of vibration _oblique_ to the two
tourmaline axes; then, you see it exercises the power, demonstrated in
the last lecture, of partially restoring the light.

[Illustration: Fig. 36.]

Let us now mount our Nicol prisms, and cross them as we crossed the
tourmaline. Introducing our film of gypsum between them, you notice
that in one particular position the film has no power whatever over
the field of view. But, when the film is turned a little way round,
the light passes. We have now to understand the mechanism by which
this is effected.

First, then, we have a prism which receives the light from the
electric lamp, and which is called the _polarizer_. Then we have the
plate of gypsum (supposed to be placed at S, fig. 36), and then the
prism in front, which is called the _analyzer_. On its emergence from
the first prism, the light is polarized; and, in the particular case
now before us, its vibrations are executed in a horizontal plane. We
have to examine what occurs when the two directions of vibration in
the interposed gypsum are oblique to the horizon. Draw a rectangular
cross (A B, C D, fig. 37) to represent these two directions. Draw a
line (_a_ _b_) to represent the amplitude of the horizontal vibration
on the emergence of the light from the first Nicol. Let fall from each
end of this line two perpendiculars (_a_ _c_, _a_ _f_, _b_ _d_, _b_
_e_) on the two arms of the cross; then the distances (_c_ _d_, _e_
_f_) between the feet of these perpendiculars represent the amplitudes
of two rectangular vibrations, which are the _components_ of the first
single vibration. Thus the polarized ray, when it enters the gypsum,
is resolved into its two equivalents, which vibrate at right angles to
each other.

[Illustration; Fig. 37.]

In one of these two rectangular directions the ether within the gypsum
is more sluggish than in the other; and, as a consequence, the waves
that follow this direction are more retarded than the others. In both
cases the undulations are shortened when they enter the gypsum, but
in the one case they are more shortened than in the other. You can
readily imagine that in this way the one system of waves may get half
a wave-length, or indeed any number of half wavelengths, in advance of
the other. The possibility of interference here at once flashes upon
the mind. A little consideration, however, will render it evident
that, as long as the vibrations are executed at right angles to each
other, they cannot quench each other, no matter what the retardation
may be. This brings us at once to the part played by the analyzer. Its
sole function is to recompound the two vibrations emergent from the
gypsum. It reduces them to a single plane, where, if one of them be
retarded by the proper amount, extinction will occur.

But here, as in the case of thin films, the different lengths of the
waves of light come into play. Red will require a greater thickness to
produce the retardation necessary for extinction than blue;
consequently when the longer waves have been withdrawn by
interference, the shorter ones remain, the film of gypsum shining with
the colours which the short waves confer. Conversely, when the shorter
waves have been withdrawn, the thickness is such that the longer waves
remain. An elementary consideration suffices to show, that when the
directions of vibration of the prisms and the gypsum enclose an angle
of forty-five degrees, the colours are at their maximum brilliancy.
When the film is turned from this direction, the colours gradually
fade, until, at the point where the directions of vibration in plate
and prisms are parallel, they disappear altogether.

(The best way of obtaining a knowledge of these phenomena is to
construct a model of thin wood or pasteboard, representing the plate
of gypsum, its planes of vibration, and also those of the polarizer
and analyzer. Two parallel pieces of the board are to be separated by
an interval which shall represent the thickness of the film of gypsum.
Between them two other pieces, intersecting each other at a right
angle, are to represent the planes of vibration within the film; while
attached to the two parallel surfaces outside are two other pieces of
board, which represent the planes of vibration of the polarizer and
analyzer. On the two intersecting planes the waves are to be drawn,
showing the resolution of the first polarized beam into two others,
and then the subsequent reduction of the two systems of vibrations to
a common plane by the analyzer. Following out rigidly the interaction
of the two systems of waves, we are taught by such a model that all
the phenomena of colour obtained by the combination of the waves, when
the planes of vibration of the two Nicols are parallel, are displaced
by the _complementary_ phenomena, when the planes of vibration are
perpendicular to each other.)

In considering the next point, we will operate, for the sake of
simplicity, with monochromatic light--with red light, for example,
which is easily obtained pure by red glass. Supposing a certain
thickness of the gypsum produces a retardation of half a wave-length,
twice this thickness will produce a retardation of two half
wave-lengths, three times this thickness a retardation of three half
wave-lengths, and so on. Now, when the Nicols are parallel, the
retardation of half a wave-length, or of any _odd_ number of half
wave-lengths, produces extinction; at all thicknesses, on the other
hand, which correspond to a retardation of an _even_ number of half
wave-lengths, the two beams support each other, when they are brought
to a common plane by the analyzer. Supposing, then, that we take a
plate of a wedge form, which grows gradually thicker from edge to
back, we ought to expect, in red light, a series of recurrent bands of
light and darkness; the dark bands occurring at thicknesses which
produce retardations of one, three, five, etc., half wave-lengths,
while the bright bands occur between the dark ones. Experiment proves
the wedge-shaped film to show these bands. They are also beautifully
shown by a circular film, so worked as to be thinnest at the centre,
and gradually increasing in thickness from the centre outwards. A
splendid series of rings of light and darkness is thus produced.

When, instead of employing red light, we employ blue, the rings are
also seen: but as they occur at thinner portions of the film, they are
smaller than the rings obtained with the red light. The consequence of
employing white light may be now inferred; inasmuch as the red and the
blue fall in different places, we have _iris-coloured_ rings produced
by the white light.

Some of the chromatic effects of irregular crystallization are
beautiful in the extreme. Could I introduce between our two Nicols a
pane of glass covered by those frost-ferns which your cold weather
renders now so frequent, rich colours would be the result. The
beautiful effects of the irregular crystallization of tartaric acid
and other substances on glass plates now presented to you, illustrate
what you might expect from the frosted window-pane. And not only do
crystalline bodies act thus upon light, but almost all bodies that
possess a definite structure do the same. As a general rule, organic
bodies act thus upon light; for their architecture implies an
arrangement of the molecules, and of the ether associated with the
molecules, which involves double refraction. A film of horn, or the
section of a shell, for example, yields very beautiful colours in
polarized light. In a tree, the ether certainly possesses different
degrees of elasticity along and across the fibre; and, were wood
transparent, this peculiarity of molecular structure would infallibly
reveal itself by chromatic phenomena like those that you have seen.


Sec. 4. _Colours produced by Strain and Pressure._

Not only do natural bodies behave in this way, but it is possible, as
shown by Brewster, to confer, by artificial strain or pressure, a
temporary double refracting structure upon non-crystalline bodies such
as common glass. This is a point worthy of illustration. When I place
a bar of wood across my knee and seek to break it, what is the
mechanical condition of the bar? It bends, and its convex surface is
_strained_ longitudinally; its concave surface, that next my knee, is
longitudinally _pressed_. Both in the strained portion and in the
pressed portion of the wood the ether is thrown into a condition which
would render the wood, were it transparent, double-refracting. For, in
cases like the present, the drawing of the molecules asunder
longitudinally is always accompanied by their approach to each other
laterally; while the longitudinal squeezing is accompanied by lateral
retreat. Each half of the bar of wood exhibits this antithesis, and is
therefore double-refracting.

Let us now repeat this experiment with a bar of glass. Between the
crossed Nicols I introduce such a bar. By the dim residue of light
lingering upon the screen, you see the image of the glass, but it has
no effect upon the light. I simply bend the glass bar with my finger
and thumb, keeping its length oblique to the directions of vibration
in the Nicols. Instantly light flashes out upon the screen. The two
sides of the bar are illuminated, the edges most, for here the strain
and pressure are greatest. In passing from longitudinal strain to
longitudinal pressure, we cross a portion of the glass where neither
is exerted. This is the so-called neutral axis of the bar of glass,
and along it you see a dark band, indicating that the glass along this
axis exercises no action upon the light. By employing the force of a
press, instead of the force of my finger and thumb, the brilliancy of
the light is greatly augmented.

Again, I have here a square of glass which can be inserted into a
press of another kind. Introducing the uncompressed square between the
prisms, its neutrality is declared; but it can hardly be held
sufficiently loosely in the press to prevent its action from
manifesting itself. Already, though the pressure is infinitesimal, you
see spots of light at the points where the press is in contact with
the glass. On turning a screw, the image of the square of glass
flashes out upon the screen. Luminous spaces are seen separated from
each other by dark bands.

Every two adjacent spaces are in opposite mechanical conditions. On
one side of the dark band we have strain, on the other side pressure,
the band marking the neutral axis between both. I now tighten the
vice, and you see colour; tighten still more, and the colours appear
as rich as those presented by crystals. Releasing the vice, the
colours suddenly vanish; tightening suddenly, they reappear. From the
colours of a soap-bubble Newton was able to infer the thickness of the
bubble, thus uniting by the bond of thought apparently incongruous
things. From the colours here presented to you, the magnitude of the
pressure employed might be inferred. Indeed, the late M. Wertheim, of
Paris, invented an instrument for the determination of strains and
pressures, by the colours of polarized light, which exceeded in
accuracy all previous instruments of the kind.

And now we have to push these considerations to a final illustration.
Polarized light may be turned to account in various ways as an
analyzer of molecular condition. It may, for instance, be applied to
reveal the condition of a solid body when it becomes sonorous. A strip
of glass six feet long, two inches wide and a quarter of an inch
thick, is held at the centre between the finger and thumb. On sweeping
a wet woollen rag over one of its halves, you hear an acute sound due
to the vibrations of the glass. What is the condition of the glass
while the sound is heard? This: its two halves lengthen and shorten in
quick succession. Its two ends, therefore, are in a state of quick
vibration; but at the centre the pulses from the two ends alternately
meet and retreat from each other. Between their opposing actions, the
glass at the centre is kept motionless: but, on the other hand, it is
alternately strained and compressed. In fig. 38, A B may be taken to
represent the glass rectangle with its centre condensed; while A' B'
represents the same rectangle with its centre rarefied. The ends of
the strip suffer neither condensation nor rarefaction.

[Illustration: Fig. 38]

If we introduce the strip of glass (_s_ _s'_, fig. 39) between the
crossed Nicols, taking care to keep it oblique to the directions of
vibration of the Nicols, and sweep our wet rubber over the glass, this
is what may be expected to occur: At every moment of compression the
light will flash through; at every moment of strain the light will
also flash through; and these states of strain and pressure will
follow each other so rapidly, that we may expect a permanent luminous
impression to be made upon the eye. By pure reasoning, therefore, we
reach the conclusion that the light will be revived whenever the glass
is sounded. That it is so, experiment testifies: at every sweep of the
rubber (_h_, fig. 39) a fine luminous disk (O) flashes out upon the
screen. The experiment may be varied in this way: Placing in front of
the polarizer a plate of unannealed glass, you have a series of
beautifully coloured rings, intersected by a black cross. Every sweep
of the rubber not only abolishes the rings, but introduces
complementary ones, the black cross being, for the moment, supplanted
by a white one. This is a modification of a beautiful experiment which
we owe to Biot. His apparatus, however, confined the observation of it
to a single person at a time.

[Illustration: Fig. 39.]


Sec. 5. _Colours of Unannealed Glass_.

Bodies are usually expanded by heat and contracted by cold. If the
heat be applied with perfect uniformity, no local strains or pressures
come into play; but, if one portion of a solid be heated and another
portion not, the expansion of the heated portion introduces strains
and pressures which reveal themselves under the scrutiny of polarized
light. When a square of common window-glass is placed between the
Nicols, you see its dim outline, but it exerts no action on the
polarized light. Held for a moment over the flame of a spirit-lamp, on
reintroducing it between the Nicols, light flashes out upon the
screen. Here, as in the case of mechanical action, you have luminous
spaces of strain divided by dark neutral axes from spaces of pressure.

[Illustration: Fig. 40.]

[Illustration: Fig. 41.]

Let us apply the heat more symmetrically. A small square of glass is
