unlimited supply of fruit, and Ralph and his companion sat down on a
log of wood by the wharves and enjoyed a feast of pine apples,
bananas, and custard apples. Then they set about their work. In an
hour both were suited. Jacques Clery shipped as a foremast hand on
board an American trading schooner, which was about to return to New
York; while Ralph obtained a berth before the mast in a fine bark that
would sail for England in a few days.

Next morning they said good-by to each other, for Jacques had to go on
board after breakfast. They made many promises to see each other again
when the war came to an end.

"I shall never forget your kindness, Jacques; and if I am still at
Dover when peace is proclaimed I will run over to Dunkirk by the very
first vessel that sails."

"As for the kindness, it is nothing," Jacques replied; "and beside
that, you saved my life from that snake. I dream sometimes of the
beast still. And it was really owing to you that I am here now, and
that I shall get a round sum coming to me when I return home. If it
hadn't been for you I should not have been chosen to stop behind and
get three shares instead of one of the prize money. And in the next
place it is your doing that I am free to start at once, and to make my
way back as soon as I can, instead of spending four or five years, it
may be, in an English prison. Why, my Louise will be ready to jump for
joy when she sees me arrive, instead of having to wait another two
years for me, with the chance of my never coming back at all; and she
will hardly believe me when I tell her that I shall be able to afford
to buy that fishing boat and set up in a house of our own at once; and
she will be most surprised of all when I tell her that it is all owing
to an English boy I fished on board on a dark night in the channel."

"Well, Jacques, we won't dispute as to which owes the other most.
Anyhow, except for my mother, I am not sorry I have made the trip in
the Belle Maire. I have seen a lot of life, and have had a rare
adventure; and I have learned so much of sailor's work, that if I am
ever driven to it I can work my way anywhere before the mast in
future."

Ralph went on board his own ship as soon as he had seen Jacques off,
and was soon hard at work assisting to hoist on board hogsheads of
sugar and other produce. He was startled by the sound of a heavy gun.
It was answered presently by all the ships of war in the harbor and by
the forts on shore, and for five minutes the heavy cannonade
continued. The captain, who had been on shore, crossed the gangway on
to the ship as the crew were gazing in surprise at the cannonade,
exchanging guesses as to its cause.

"I have great news, lads," he said. "Peace is proclaimed, and Napoleon
has surrendered, and is to be shut up in the Isle of Elba in the
Mediterranean. No more fear of privateers or French prisons."

The crew burst into a hearty cheer. This was indeed surprising news.
It was known that Wellington was gradually driving back the French
marshals in the south of France, and that the allies were marching
toward Paris. But Napoleon had been so long regarded as invincible,
that no one had really believed that his downfall was imminent.

Four days later the cargo was all on board, and the Fanny sailed for
England. The voyage was accomplished without adventure. As soon as the
vessel entered dock and the crew were discharged Ralph landed, and
having purchased a suit of landsman clothes, presented his kit to a
lad of about his own age, who had been his special chum on board the
Fanny, and then made his way to the inn from which the coaches for
Dover started. Having secured a place for next day, dined, and ordered
a bed, he passed the evening strolling about the streets of London,
and next morning at six o'clock took his place on the coach.

"Going back from school, I suppose, young gentleman?" a
military-looking man seated next to him on the coach remarked as soon
as they had left the streets behind them, and were rattling along the
Old Kent Road.

"No, I am not going home from school," Ralph said with a smile. "At
least not from the sort of school you mean; though I have been
learning a good deal too. I arrived yesterday from the West Indies."

"Indeed!" the gentleman said, scrutinizing him closely. "I see you
look sunburned and weather-beaten now that I look at you; but somehow
I should not have put you down as a sailor."

"Well, I am not exactly a sailor; though I may say I have worked as
one before the mast both out and home. That was my first experience;
and I suppose one takes longer than that to get the regular nautical
manner."

"Before the mast, were you? Then I suppose you have been getting into
some scrape at home, young sir, and run away; for, from your
appearance, you would hardly have been before the mast otherwise. Boys
never know what is good for them. But I suppose after your experience
you will be inclined to put up with any disagreeables you may have at
home rather than try running away again?"

"You are mistaken!" Ralph said with a laugh. "I did not run away. I
was run away with!"

"Kidnapped!" the gentleman said in surprise. "I know that merchantmen
have often difficulty in getting hands owing to the need of men for
the navy, but I did not know that they had taken to press-gangs on
their own account."

"No, I don't know that they have come to that," Ralph replied. "The
fact is, sir, I was out fishing a few miles off Dover, when the smack
I was in was run down in the dark by a French privateer. I was hauled
on board, and as she was bound for the West Indies I had to make the
voyage whether I liked it or not."

"How long ago is it that you were run down?"

"About five months," Ralph replied.

"Why, you are not the son of Mrs. Conway of Dover, are you?"

"Yes, I am, sir. Do you know her, and can you tell me how she is?"
Ralph asked eagerly.

"I believe that she is well, although of course she must have suffered
very greatly at your disappearance. I haven't the pleasure of knowing
her personally, but several friends of mine are acquainted with her. I
heard the matter talked about at the time the boat was missing. Some
portions of her were picked up by other fishing boats, and by the
shattered state of some of the planks they said that she had been run
down; beside, there had been no wind about the time she disappeared,
so that there was little doubt some vessel or other had cut her down.
I happened to hear of it from Colonel Bryant, who is a friend of your
mother."

"Yes, I know him," Ralph put in.

"I have heard Colonel Bryant say that she has not altogether abandoned
hope, and still clings to the idea that you may have been run down by
some outward-bound ship and that you had been saved and carried away,
and that she declares that she shall not give up all hope until ample
time has elapsed for a ship to make the voyage to India and return."

"I am very glad of that," Ralph said. "It has been a great trouble to
me that she would be thinking all this time that I was dead. I should
not have minded having been carried away so much if I had had a chance
of writing to her to tell her about it; but I never did have a chance,
for I came home by the very first ship that left Port Royal after I
arrived there."

"But how did you get away from the French privateer--was she
captured?"

"Well, it is rather a long story, sir," Ralph said modestly.

"All the better," the gentleman replied. "We have got fourteen hours
journey before us, and your story will help pass the time; so don't
try to cut it short, but let me have it in full." Ralph thereupon told
the story, which lasted until the coach reached Tunbridge, where it
stopped for the passengers to dine.

"Well, that is an adventure worth going through," the officer, who had
already mentioned that his name was Major Barlow, said; "and it was
well for you, lad, that you possessed good spirits and courage. A man
who is cheerful and willing under difficulties will always make his
way in the world, while one who repines and kicks against his fate
only makes it harder for him. I have no doubt that if, instead of
taking matters coolly when you found yourself on board the privateer
you had fretted and grumbled, you would have been made a drudge and
kicked and cuffed by everyone on board. You would not have had a
chance of landing at that island or of being chosen to make the signal
when they went away, and you would now be leading the life of a dog on
board that brig. Cheerful and willing are two of the great watchwords
of success in life, and certainly you have found it so."

It was eight o'clock when the coach rattled up the streets of Dover.
Major Barlow had already offered Ralph to take him to Colonel Bryant's
quarters, and to ask the colonel to go with him to call on Mrs. Conway
and prepare her for Ralph's coming.




CHAPTER VII.

A COMMISSION.


Colonel Bryant was just rising from dinner at the mess when Major
Barlow and Ralph arrived at the barracks, and after congratulating the
lad on his return he willingly agreed to accompany them to Mrs.
Conway. A quarter of an hour's walk took them to her house. Ralph
remained outside when the two officers entered. Colonel Bryant lost no
time in opening the subject.

"I have brought my friend Major Barlow to introduce to you, Mrs.
Conway, because he has happened to hear some news that may, I think,
bear upon the subject that you have most at heart."

"Ralph!" Mrs. Conway exclaimed, clasping her hands.

"We think it may refer to your son, Mrs. Conway," Major Barlow said.
"I have just returned from town, and happened to hear that a vessel
had been spoken with that reported having picked up a lad from a smack
run down in the channel some five months ago, which corresponds pretty
well, I think, with the time your son was missing."

"Just the time," Mrs. Conway said. "Did they not say the name?"

"Well, yes. The name, as far as I heard it, for as I had not the
pleasure of knowing you I was not of course so interested in the
matter, was the same as yours."

"I think that there is no doubt about it, Mrs. Conway," Colonel Bryant
said kindly. "I consider you may quite set your mind at ease, for I
have no doubt whatever it is your son who has been picked up." Mrs.
Conway was so much overcome that she sank into a chair and sat for a
short time with her face in her hand, crying happy tears and thanking
God for his mercy. Then with a great effort she aroused herself.

"You will excuse my emotion, gentlemen, and I am sure you can
understand my feelings. I am thankful indeed for the news you have
brought me. I have never ceased for a moment to hope that my boy would
be restored to me; but the knowledge that it is so, and that God has
spared him to me, is for the moment overpowering. And where was the
ship met with, Major Barlow, and where was she bound for? How long do
you think it is likely to be before Ralph comes home?"

"Well, Mrs. Conway," Major Barlow said, hesitating a little, "the ship
was bound for India; but I understood from what was said that the
vessel, that is the vessel that brought the news, had also brought
home the lad who had been carried away."

"Then, in that case," Mrs. Conway cried, "he may be home in a day or
two. Perhaps--perhaps--and she paused and looked from one to the
other.

"Perhaps he is here already," Colonel Bryant said gently. "Yes, Mrs.
Conway, if you feel equal to it you may see him at once." No word was
needed. Major Barlow opened the door, went through the hall, and
called Ralph, and in another moment the lad was clasped in his
mother's arms, and the two officers without another word went quietly
out and left them to themselves. It was some time before a coherent
word could be spoken by mother or son, and it was not until they had
knelt down together and returned thanks to God for Ralph's restoration
that they were able to talk quietly of what had passed. Then Mrs.
Conway poured out question after question, but Ralph refused to enter
upon a narrative of his adventures.

"It's a long story, mother, and will keep very well till to-morrow. It
is past nine o'clock now, and I am sure that you want a night's rest
after this excitement; and after fourteen hours on a coach, I sha'n't
be sorry to be in bed myself. Beside, I want you to tell me first how
you have been getting on while I have been away, and all the news
about everyone; but even that will keep. I think, mother, a cup of tea
first and then bed will be best for us both."

The next morning Ralph related all his adventures to his mother, who
was surprised indeed at his story.

"I suppose poor old Joe was never heard of, mother?"

"No, Ralph. His son has been up here a good many times to inquire if
we had any news of you. He has gone into another fishing boat now, and
his sister has gone out to service. Their mother died years ago, you
know."

"I was afraid that he had gone straight down, mother. Nobody on board
the brig heard any cry or shout for help. He must have been injured in
the collision."

"I must write to-day to Mr. Penfold. He has written to me several
times, and has been most kind. He has all along said that he believed
you would turn up one of these days, for as the weather was fine and
the sea fairly calm when you were run down, the probabilities in favor
of your being picked up were great, especially as you were such a good
swimmer. I am sure he will be delighted to hear of your return."

"I hope he will not be wanting me to go straight off down there
again," Ralph said ruefully. "I was only back with you one day,
mother, after my visit to them, and now I have been five months away
it will be very hard if I am to be dragged off again."

"I am sure Mr. Penfold will not be so unreasonable as to want to take
you away from me," Mrs. Conway said.

"And am I to go back to school again, mother?"

"Not now, certainly, Ralph. The holidays will be beginning in a
fortnight again; beside, you know, we were talking anyhow of your
leaving at the end of this half year."

"That's right, mother. It's high time I was doing something for
myself. Beside, after doing a man's work for the last five months I
shouldn't like to settle down to lessons again."

"Well, we must think about it, Ralph, You know I consented greatly
against my will to your choosing the army for your profession, and I
am not going to draw back from that. You are just sixteen now, and
although that is rather young I believe that a good many lads do get
their commissions somewhere about that age. In one of his letters Mr.
Penfold said that as soon as you came back he would take the matter in
hand, and though I have good interest in other quarters and could
probably manage it, Mr. Penfold has a great deal more than I have, and
as he has expressed his willingness to arrange it I shall be grateful
to him for doing so."

"That will be first rate, mother," Ralph said in delight. "I thought
in another year I might get my commission; but of course it would be
ever so much better to get it a year earlier."

For the next few days Ralph was a hero among his boy friends, and had
to tell his story so often that at last he told his mother that if it
wasn't for leaving her so soon he should be quite ready to go off
again for another visit to Mr. Penfold.

"You won't be called upon to do that," she said smiling; "for this
letter that I have just opened is from him, and he tells me he is
coming here at once to see you, for he thinks it would be too hard to
ask me to spare you again so soon."

"You don't mean to say that he is coming all that way?" Ralph said in
surprise. "Well, I am very glad."

"He asks me in his letter," Mrs. Conway said with a passing smile of
amusement, "if I can take in a young friend of his, Miss Mabel
Withers. He says she has never been from home before, and that it
would be a treat for her to get away and see a little of the world. He
is going to stop a few days in London, and show her the sights on his
way back."

"That will be very jolly, mother. You know I told you what a nice sort
of girl she was, and how well we got on together. I don't know how I
should have got through my visit there if it hadn't been for her. Her
father and mother were very kind too, and I was often over at their
house."

Mr. Penfold had not succeeded in inducing Mr. and Mrs. Withers to
allow Mabel to accompany him without much argument. "You know what I
have set my mind on, Mrs. Withers," he said. "But of course such an
idea doesn't enter the young people's heads, it would be very
undesirable that it should do. But now Ralph has returned he will be
wanting to get his commission at once, and then he may be away on
foreign service for years, and I do think it would be a good thing for
the young people to see as much of each other as possible before he
goes. If anything happens to me before he comes back, and you know how
probable it is that this will be the case, they would meet almost as
strangers, and I do want to see my pet scheme at least on the way to
be carried out before I go. It would be a treat for Mabel, and I am
sure that Mrs. Conway will look after her well."

"How long are you thinking of stopping there, Mr. Penfold?"

"Oh, ten days or a fortnight. I shall be a day or two in town as I go
through, for I want to arrange about Ralph's commission. Then,
perhaps, I shall persuade Mrs. Conway to come up with Ralph to town
with us, and to go about with the young people to see the sights. Now,
if you and Mrs. Withers would join us there, that would complete my
happiness."

The clergyman and his wife both said that this was impossible. But Mr.
Penfold urged his request with so much earnestness, that at last they
agreed to come up to town and stay with him at a hotel. And, indeed,
when they recovered from the first surprise at the proposal, both of
them thought that the trip would be an extremely pleasant one; for in
those days it was quite an event in the lives of people residing at a
distance from a town to pay a visit to the metropolis.

"Then everything is arranged delightfully," Mr. Penfold said. "This
will be a holiday indeed for me; and however much you may all enjoy
yourselves I shall enjoy myself a great deal more. Now, I suppose I
may tell Mabel of our arrangement?"

"But you don't know that Mrs. Conway will take her in yet. Surely you
are going to wait to hear from her?"

"Indeed I am not, Mrs. Withers. I am as impatient as a schoolboy to be
off. And I am perfectly certain that Mrs. Conway will be very glad to
receive her. She knows Mabel, for I have given her an idea of my fancy
about that matter; and of course she will be glad to learn something
of your girl."

"But she may not have a spare room," Mrs. Withers urged feebly.

"It is not likely," Mr. Penfold said decisively; "and if there should
be any difficulty on that score it will be very easily managed, as
Ralph can give up his room to Mabel, and come and stay at the hotel
with me."

Mr. Withers laughed. "I see that it is of no use raising objections,
Penfold; you are armed at all points. I scarcely know you, and have
certainly never seen you possessed of such a spirit of determination."

Mr. Penfold smiled. "It would have been better for me, perhaps, if I
had always been so determined, Withers. At any rate I mean to have my
own way in this matter. I have not had a real holiday for years."

So Mr. Penfold had his own way, and carried off Mabel wild with
delight and excitement upon the day after he had received Mrs.
Conway's letter. There was no shade of embarrassment in the meeting
between Mrs. Conway and the man who had once been her lover. It was
like two old and dear friends who had long been separated and now come
together again. Mr. Penfold's first words after introducing Mabel had
reference to Ralph.

"Your boy has grown quite a man, Mary, in the last six months. I
scarcely recognized the bronzed young fellow who met vis at the coach
office as the lad who was down with me in the summer. Don't you see
the change, Mabel?"

"Yes, he is quite different," the girl said. "Why, the first time I
saw him he was as shy as shy could be. It was quite hard work getting
on with him. Now he seems quite a man."

"Nothing like that yet, Mabel," Ralph protested.

"Not a man!" Mr. Penfold exclaimed. "What! after wandering about as a
pirate, capturing ships, and cutting men's throats for anything I
know, and taking part in all sorts of atrocities? I think he's
entitled to think himself very much a man."

Ralph laughed.

"Not as bad as that, Mr. Penfold. They did take one ship, but I had
nothing to do with it; and there were no throats cut. I simply made a
voyage out and back as a boy before the mast; and, as far as I have
been concerned, the ship might have been a peaceful trader instead of
a French privateer."

"Well, Mary, you have not changed much all these years," Mr. Penfold
said turning to Mrs. Conway, while the two young people began to talk
to each other. "I had thought you would be much more changed; but time
has treated you much more kindly than it has me. You are thirty-seven,
if I remember right, and you don't look thirty. I am forty, and look
at the very least ten years older."

Mrs. Conway did not contradict him, for she could not have done so
