CHAPTER X.

All America and Canada to the Rescue


During the first three days after the terrible news had been flashed
over the world the relief fund from the nation had leaped beyond the
$5,000,000 mark. New York took the lead in the most generous giving that
the world has ever seen. From every town and country village the people
hastened to the Town Halls, the newspaper offices and wherever help was
to be found most quickly, to add their savings and to sacrifice all but
necessities for their stricken fellow-countrymen. Never has there been
such a practical illustration of brotherly love. A perfect shower of
gold and food was poured out to the sufferers to give them immediate
assistance and to help them to a new start in life. All relief records
were broken within two days of the disaster, but still the purses of the
rich and poor alike continued to add to the huge contributions. Though
the relief records were broken, every succeeding dispatch from the West
told too plainly the terrible fact that all records of necessity were
also broken.

Over the entire globe Americans wherever they were hastened to cable or
telegraph their bankers to add their share to the great work. A large
fund was at once started in London, and with contributions of from
$2,000 to $12,000 the sum was soon raised to hundreds of thousands of
dollars.

Individual contributions of $100,000 were common. In addition to John
D. Rockefeller's gift of this sum, his company, the Standard Oil, gave
another $100,000. The Steel Corporation and Andrew Carnegie each
gave $100,000. From London William Waldorf Astor cabled his American
representative, Charles A. Peabody, to place $100,000 at once at
the disposal of Mayor Schmitz, of San Francisco, which was done. The
Dominion Government of Canada made a special appropriation of $100,000
and the Canadian Bank of Commerce, at Toronto, gave $10,000. And two of
the great steamship companies owned in Germany sent $25,000 each.


RIGHT OF WAY FOR FOOD TRAINS.


On nearly a dozen roads, two days before the fire was over, great trains
of freight cars loaded with foodstuffs were hastening at express
speed to San Francisco. They had the right of way on every line. E. H.
Harriman, in addition to giving $200,000 for the Union Pacific, Southern
Pacific and other Harriman roads, issued orders that all relief trains
bound for the desolated city should have Precedence over all other
business of the roads.

Advices from many points indicated that at least 150 freight cars loaded
with the necessaries so eagerly awaited in San Francisco were speeding
there as fast as steam could drive them. In addition, several steamers
from other Pacific coast points, all food-laden, were rushing toward the
stricken city.

The rapidity with which the various relief funds in every city grew was
almost magical.

From corporations, firms, labor unions, religious societies,
individuals, rich and poor, money flowed. Even the children in the
schools gave their pennies. Every grade of society, every branch of
trade and commerce seemed inspired by a spirit of emulation in giving.

The United States Government at once voted a contribution of $1,000,000,
and government supplies were rushed from every post in the West.

The $1,000,000 government gift, which formed the nucleus of the relief
fund, was doubled on Saturday by a resolution appropriating another, and
a vote was taken on Monday to increase this sum to $1,500,000, making a
total government contribution of $2,500,000. This was largely expended
in supplies of absolute necessaries, furnished from the stores of the
War Department, and those first sent being five carloads of army medical
supplies from St. Louis. A cargo of evaporated cream was also sent to
use in the care of little children, while the Red Cross Society shipped
a carload of eggs from Chicago. Dr. Edward Devine, special Red Cross
agent in San Francisco, was appointed to distribute these supplies.


CARGOES OF SUPPLIES.


Trainloads of other supplies were dispatched in all haste from various
points in the West and East, carrying provisions of all kinds, tents,
cots, clothing, bedding and a great variety of other articles. A special
train of twenty-six cars was dispatched from Portland, Oregon, on
Thursday night, conveying ten doctors, twenty trained nurses and 800,000
pounds of provisions. Chicago sent meat. Minneapolis sent flour, and,
in fact, every part of the country moved in the greatest haste for the
relief of the stricken city.

There was urgent need of haste. On Friday, while the flames were still
making their way onward, General Funston telegraphed: "Famine seems
inevitable." The people of the country took a more hopeful view of it,
and by Saturday night the spectre of famine was definitely driven from
the field and food for all the fugitives was within reach.


THE SYMPATHY OF THE PEOPLE AWAKES.


On all sides the people were awake and doing. In all the great
cities agencies to receive contributions were opened, and many of the
newspapers undertook the task of collecting and forwarding supplies. The
smaller towns were equally alert in furnishing their quota to the good
work, and from countryside and village contributions were forwarded
until the fund accumulated to an unprecedented amount. Collections were
made in factories, in stores, in offices, in the public schools; cash
boxes or globes stood in all frequented places and were rapidly filled
with bank notes; theatrical and musical entertainments were given for
the benefit of the earthquake sufferers; never had there been such an
awakening. As an instance of the spirit displayed, one man came running
into a banking house and threw a thousand dollar bill on the counter.

"For San Francisco," he said, as he turned toward the door.

"What name?" asked the teller.

"Put it down to 'cash,'" he answered, as he vanished.

Rapidly the fund accumulated. A few days brought it up to the $5,000,000
mark. Then it grew to $10,000,000. Within ten days' time the relief fund
was estimated at $18,000,000, and the good work was still going on--in
less profusion, it is true, but still the spirit was alive.


FOREIGN OFFERS OF AID.


The generous impulse was not confined to the United States. From all
countries came offers of aid. Canada was promptly in the field, and
the chief nations of Europe were quick to follow, while Japan made a
generous offer, and in far Australia funds were started at the various
cities for the sufferers. No doubt a large sum from foreign lands would
have been available had not President Roosevelt declined to accept
contributions from abroad, as not needed in view of America's abundant
response. To the Hamburg-Line which offered $25,000, the following
letter was sent:

"The President deeply appreciates your message of sympathy, and desires
me to thank you heartily for the kind offer of outside aid. Although
declining, the President earnestly wishes you to understand how much he
appreciates your cordial and generous sympathy."

All other offerings from abroad were in the same thankful spirit
declined, even those from our immediate neighbors, Canada and Mexico.
Some feeling was aroused by this, especially in the relief committee at
San Francisco, which felt that the need of that city was so great and
urgent that no offer of relief should have been declined. In response
the President explained that he only spoke for the government, in his
official capacity, and that San Francisco was in no sense debarred from
accepting any contributions made directly to it.

It may justly be said for the people of this country that their
spontaneous generosity in the presence of a great calamity, either at
home or abroad, is always magnificent. It never waits for solicitation.
It does not delay even until the necessity is demonstrated, but it
assumes that where there is great destruction of property and homes are
swept away there must be distress which calls for immediate relief.

There is one ray of light in the gloom caused by the calamity at San
Francisco. A truly splendid display of brotherly love and sympathy has
been shown by the people of this country, and a similar display was
ready to be shown by the people of the civilized world had it been felt
that the occasion demanded it and that the exigency surpassed the power
of our people to meet it.


ENTERPRISE IN SAN FRANCISCO.


In the face of an appalling and death-dealing disaster, rendering an
entire community dependent for the bare necessities of life and putting
it in imminent danger of greater horrors, the nation has been stirred
as it has rarely been before, and there have been awakened those deeper
feelings of brotherhood which are referred to in the oft-quoted passage
that "one touch of nature makes the whole world akin."

The nature indicated in this instance is human nature in its highest
manifestation, the sympathetic sentiment that stirs deeply in all our
hearts and needs but the occasion to make itself warmly manifested.
There is something incomparably splendid in the spectacle of an entire
nation straining every nerve to send succor to the helpless and the
suffering, and this spectacle has warmed the hearts of our people to the
uttermost and inspired them to make the most strenuous efforts to drive
away the gaunt wolf of famine from the ruined homes of our far Pacific
brethren.

It may be said that San Francisco will be willing to accept this relief
only so long as stern necessity demands it. At this writing only two
weeks have passed since the dread calamity, and already active steps
are being taken to provide for themselves. As an example of their
enterprise, it may be said that their newspapers hardly suspended at
all, the Evening Post alone suspending publication for a time from
being unable to acquire a plant in the vicinity of the city. When the
conflagration made it apparent that all plants would be destroyed, the
Bulletin put at work a force in its composing rooms, a hand-bill was
set and some hundreds of copies run off on the proof-press, giving the
salient features of the day's news.

The morning papers, the Call, Chronicle and Examiner, retired to
Oakland, on the other side of the bay, and there, on Thursday morning,
issued a joint paper from the office of the Oakland Tribune. On Friday
morning they split forces again, the Examiner retaining the use of the
Tribune plant and the Call and Chronicle issuing from the office of
the Oakland Herald. Two days later the Call secured the service of
the Oakland Enquirer plant. Meantime, on Friday, the Bulletin, after a
suspension of one day, made arrangements for the use in the afternoon
of the Oakland Herald equipment, and from these sources and under such
circumstances the San Francisco papers have been issuing.

Offices were hurriedly opened on Fillmore Street, which today is the
main thoroughfare of San Francisco, and from these headquarters the news
of the day as it is gathered is transmitted by means of automobiles and
ferry service to the Oakland shore.

There also were accepted such advertisements as had been offered. The
number of these was, perhaps, the best visual sign of the resurrection
of the new city. It was noted that in a fourteen-page paper printed
within two weeks after the fire by the Examiner there were over nine
pages of advertisements, and in a sixteen-page paper published by the
Chronicle at least fifty per cent. of its space was devoted to the same
end.

Many of the larger factories left unharmed were also quick to start
work. At the Union Iron Works 2,300 men were promptly employed, and the
management expected within a fortnight to have the full complement of
its force, nearly 4,000 men, engaged. No damage was done to the three
new warships being built at these works for the government, the cruisers
California and Milwaukee and the battleship South Dakota. The steamer
City of Puebla, which was sunk in the bay, has been raised and is being
repaired. Workmen are also engaged fixing the steamship Columbia, which
was turned on her side. The hulls of the new Hawaiian-American Steamship
Company's liners were pitched about four feet to the south, but were
uninjured and only need to be replaced in position.

As for the working people at large, those without funds for their own
support, abundant employment will quickly be provided for them in the
necessary work of clearing away the debris, thus opening the way to a
resumption of business and reducing the number requiring relief. The
ukase has already been issued that all able-bodied men needing aid must
go to work or leave the city.

This dictum of Chief of Police Dinan's will be strictly enforced. The
relief work and distribution of food and clothing are attracting a
certain element to the city which does not desire to labor, while some
already here prefer to live on the generosity of others. Chief Dinan has
determined that those who apply for relief and refuse work when it
is offered them shall leave the city or be arrested for vagrancy. The
police judges have suggested establishing a chain gang and putting all
vagrants and petty offenders at work clearing up the ruins.

Perhaps never in the history of the city has there been so little crime
in San Francisco. With the saloons closed, Chinatown, the Barbary Coast,
and other haunts of criminals wiped out, and soldiers and marines on
almost every block in the residence districts, there have been few
crimes of any kind. It is the opinion of the police that most of the
criminal element has left the city. The saloons, in all probability will
remain closed for two more months.


THE PROBLEM OF THE CHINESE.


In conclusion of this chapter it is advisable to refer to the situation
of one of the elements of San Francisco's population, the people of
Chinatown. One of the problems facing the relief committees on both
sides of the bay is the sheltering of the Chinese. Many of them are
destitute. It has long been a question in San Francisco what should be
done with Chinatown, and moving the Chinese in the direction of Colma
has been agitated. Now they are without homes and without prospects of
procuring any. They can get no land. The limits of Oakland's Chinatown
have already been extended, and the strictest police regulations are in
force to prevent further enlargement. On this side of the bay they are
camping in open lots. Unless the government undertakes their relief,
they are in grave danger. Those who have money cannot purchase property,
as no one will sell to them. Few, however, even of the wealthiest
merchants in Chinatown, saved anything of value, for their wealth was
invested in the Oriental village which had sprung up in the heart of the
area burned.

Yet it is the desire of the municipality not to harass this portion of
its foreign population, and the vexatious problem of placing the new
Chinatown will probably be settled to the satisfaction of the Chinese
colony. This colony diverts an important part of the trade of San
Francisco to that city, and if its members are dealt with unjustly there
is danger of losing this trade. The question is one that must be left
for the future to decide, but no doubt care will be taken that a new
Chinatown with the unsavory conditions of the old shall not arise.



CHAPTER XI.

San Francisco of the Past


The story of San Francisco's history and tragedy appeal with
extraordinary force to the imagination of all civilized men. For several
generations the city was looked upon as an Arabian Night's dream--a
place where gold lay in the streets and joy and happiness were
unlimited. Its settlement, or, rather, its real rise as a city, was as
by magic. It was first a city of tents, of shanties, of "shacks," lying
on the rim of a great, spacious bay. Ships of all sizes and rigs brought
gold-seekers and provisions from the East, all the way round Cape Horn,
after voyages of weary months, and at San Francisco their crews deserted
and hundreds of these craft were left at their moorings to rot. Ashore
was a riot of money, prodigious extravagance, mean, shabby appointments,
sudden riches, great disappointment, revelry, improvidence and suicide.

The streets that now lay squares from the water were then at the water's
edge and batteaus brought cargoes ashore. Long wharves--one was for
years called the Long Wharf even after there were others built much
longer--led out over the shallow water. These shallows were later filled
and streets built upon them, and upon them arose warehouses, hotels,
factories, lodging houses and business places.

The city grew rapidly in the direction away from the bay. But in its
early days it was a city with no confidence in its own stability, and
its buildings were accordingly unstable. A few minor earthquakes shook
some of these down years ago and established in the minds of the people
a horror of earthquakes. Frame houses became the rule.

In its ensuing life San Francisco developed the attributes of a city of
gayety tempered by business. The population, for the most part, affected
light-hearted scorn of money, or, rather, of saving money. It made
mirth of life, habituated itself to expect windfalls such as miners
and prospectors dream of, developed a moderate amount of business, and
enjoyed the day while there was sunlight and the night when there was
artificial light. The windfalls grew less frequent, mining became a
costly and scientific process, and agriculture succeeded it. But, though
it was only necessary to tickle the land with a hoe and pour water upon
the tickled spot, to have it laugh with two, three or even four harvests
a year, agriculturists continued scarce. The Chinese truck farms, some
of which lay within the city's lines, supplied the small fruits and
vegetables. Across the bay white men farmed, and grapes, fruits,
vegetables and flowers of prodigious variety and monstrous dimensions
were grown. But Eastern men came to do the farming. The Californian who
himself was an "Argonaut," or whose father was an Argonaut, found no
attractions in the steady labor of farming.

There followed a period of depression, ascribed by many to the influx of
the Chinese and their effect upon the labor market, though the army of
the unemployed were as a rule unwilling to do the work their Celestial
rivals engaged in, that of truck farming, fruit raising, manual
household labor, wood cutting and the like. A heavy weight settled on
the city; business grew slack; the army of the unemployed, of ruined
speculators and moneyless newcomers grew steadily greater, and for an
era San Francisco saw its dark side.

But this was not a long duration. There was fast developing a new and
important business, resulting from the development of the real resources
of the State--the fruits, particularly the citrous fruits that grew
abundantly in the warm valley. Fortunes were made in oranges, lemons,
limes, grapes, almonds and pears. Raisins, whose size defied anything
heretofore known, were made from the huge grapes that grew in the San
Joaquin Valley. Sonoma sent its grapes to be made into wine. Capital
flowed in from every side. Eastern men in search of health, others in
search of wealth, came to the Golden State. No matter who came, where
they came from, or where they were going, they spent a few days, or
many, and some money, or much, in "'Frisco." The enterprise of the
second edition pioneers quickly transformed the State and city.


AGRICULTURE BRINGS NEW WEALTH.


Luxury was startling. San Francisco's mercantile community equaled the
best, the stores and shops were as beautiful as anywhere in the
world and proportionately as well patronized. Theatres, music halls,
restaurants, hotel bars and the like were ablaze with lights at night,
and patronized by a gay throng. Sutro's bath, near the Cliff House, was
a species of entertainment unequaled anywhere. The Presidio, as the army
post is still known, as in the Spanish nomenclature, gave its drills,
regarded as free exhibitions for the people. Golden Gate Park was an
endless daily picnic ground.

The crowds in the streets of San Francisco were noticeably well dressed
and usually gay, without that fixed, drawn, saturnine look noticeable
among the people of the East. It is doubtful whether, upon the whole,
the earnings of the San Francisco man equaled those of his Eastern
brother, but his holidays were frequent and his joys greater. The grind
of life was not yet steady--men had not become mere machines.

The climate of California is peculiar; it is hard to give an impression
of it. In the first place, all the forces of nature work on laws of
their own in that part of California. There is no thunder or lightning;
there is no snow, except a flurry once in five or six years; there are
perhaps half a dozen nights in the winter when the thermometer drops
low enough so that there is a little film of ice on exposed water in the
morning. Neither is there any hot weather. Yet most Easterners remaining
in San Francisco for a few days remember that they were always chilly.


A PECULIAR YET DELIGHTFUL CLIMATE.


For the Gate is a big funnel, drawing in the winds and the mists which
cool off the great, hot interior valley of San Joaquin and Sacramento.
So the west wind blows steadily ten months of the year and almost all
the mornings are foggy. This keeps the temperature steady at about 55
degrees--a little cool for comfort of an unacclimated person, especially
indoors. Californians, used to it, hardly ever think of making fires in
their houses except in the few exceptional days of the winter season,
and then they rely mainly upon fireplaces. This is like the custom of
the Venetians and the Florentines.

But give an Easterner six months of it, and he, too, learns to exist
without a chill in a steady temperature a little lower than that to
which he is accustomed at home. After that one goes about with perfect
indifference to the temperature. Summer and winter San Francisco women
wear light tailor-made clothes, and men wear the same fall-weight suits
all the year around.

Except for the modern buildings, the fruit of the last ten years, the
town presented at first sight to the newcomer a disreputable appearance.
Most of the buildings were low and of wood. In the middle period of the
70's, when a great part of San Francisco was building, there was some
atrocious architecture perpetrated. In that time, too, every one put
bow windows on his house, to catch all of the morning sunlight that was
coming through the fog, and those little houses, with bow windows and
fancy work all down their fronts, were characteristic of the middle
class residence districts.

Then the Italians, who tumbled over Telegraph Hill, had built as they
listed and with little regard for streets, and their houses hung crazily
on a side hill which was little less than a precipice. For the most part
the Chinese, although they occupied an abandoned business district, had
remade the houses Chinese fashion, and the Mexicans and Spaniards had
added to their houses those little balconies without which life is not
life to a Spaniard.

The hills are steep beyond conception. Where Vallejo Street ran up
Russian Hill it progressed for four blocks by regular steps like a
flight of stairs.

With these hills, with the strangeness of the architecture, and with the
green gray tinge over everything, the city fell always into vistas and
pictures, a setting for the romance which hung over everything, which
has always hung over life in San Francisco since the padres came and
gathered the Indians about Mission Dolores.

And it was a city of romance and a gateway to adventure. It opened out
on the mysterious Pacific, the untamed ocean, and most of China, Japan,
the South Sea Islands, Lower California, the west coast of Central
America, Australia that came to this country passed in through the
Golden Gate. There was a sprinkling, too, of Alaska and Siberia.
From his windows on Russian Hill one saw always something strange and
suggestive creeping through the mists of the bay. It would be a South
Sea Island brig, bringing in copra, to take out cottons and idols; a
Chinese junk with fan-like sails, back from an expedition after sharks'
