stood, for well I had seen by his words and deeds that he cherished me as
a son.  So she granted this, and we fell to devising as to what was to be
in days to come.  Lackland was I, and penniless, save for my pay, if I
got it; but we looked to the common fortune of young men-at-arms, namely,
spoil of war and the ransom of prisoners of England or Burgundy.  For I
had set up my resolve either to die gloriously, or to win great wealth
and honour, which, to a young man and a lover, seem things easily come
by.  Nor could my master look for a great fortune in marriage, seeing
that, despite his gentle birth, he lived but as a burgess, and by the
work of his hands.

As we thus devised, she told me how matters now were in the country, of
which, indeed, I still knew but little, for, to a man sick and nigh upon
death, nothing imports greatly that betides beyond the walls of his
chamber.  What I heard was this: namely, that, about Orleans, the English
ever pressed the good town more closely, building new bastilles and other
great works, so as to close the way from Blois against any that came
thence of our party with victual and men-at-arms.  And daily there was
fighting without the walls, wherein now one side had the better, now the
other; but food was scant in Orleans, and many were slain by
cannon-shots.  Yet much was spoken of a new cannonier, lately come to aid
the men of Orleans, and how he and John of Lorraine slew many of the
hardiest of the English with their couleuvrines.

At this telling I bethought me of Brother Thomas, but spoke no word
concerning him, for my mistress began very gladly to devise of her dear
Maid, concerning whom, indeed, she could never long be silent.  "Faithless
heart and fickle," I said in a jest, "I believe you love that Maid more
than you love me, and as she wears sword at side, like a man, I must even
challenge her to fight in the island."

Here she stayed my speech in the best manner and the most gracious,
laughing low, so that, verily, I was clean besotted with love, and
marvelled that any could be so fair as she, and how I could have won such
a lady.

"Beware how you challenge my Maid," said she at last, "for she fights but
on horseback, with lance and sperthe, {20} and the Duc d'Alencon has seen
her tilt at the ring, and has given her the best steed in his stables,
whereon she shall soon lead her army to Orleans."

"Then I must lay by my quarrel, for who am I to challenge my captain?
But, tell me, hath she heard any word of thee and me?"

Elliot waxed rosy, and whispered--

"We had spoken together about thee, ere she went to Poictiers to be
examined and questioned by the doctors of law and learning, after thou
wert wounded."  Concerning this journey to Poictiers I knew nothing, but
I was more concerned to hear what the Maid had said about Elliot and me.
For seeing that the Maid herself was vowed (as men deemed) to virginity,
it passed into my mind that she might think holy matrimony but a low
estate, and might try to set my mistress's heart on following her own
example.  And then, I thought, but foolishly, Elliot's love for me might
be weaker than her love for the Maid.

"Yes," my lady went on, "I could not but open my heart about thee and me,
to one who is of my own age, and so wise, unlike other girls.  Moreover,
I scarce knew well whether your heart was like disposed with my heart.
Therefore I devised with her more than once or twice."

Hiding her face on my breast, she spoke very low; and as my fancy had
once seen the children, the dark head and the golden, bowed together in
prayer for France and the Dauphin, so now I saw them again, held close
together in converse, and that strange Maid and Prophetess listening,
like any girl, to a girl's tale of the secrets of her heart.

"And what counsel gave the Maid?" I said; "or had she any prophecy of our
fortune?"

"Nay, on such matters she knows no more than you or I, or knows but
seldom, nor seeks to learn from her counsel.  Only she is bidden that she
must rescue Orleans, and lead the Dauphin to his sacring at Rheims.  But
she wished me well, and comforted me that your heart was even as my own,
as she saw on that day when you wore woman's gear and slew him that
blasphemed her.  And of you she spoke the best words, for that you, who
knew her not, took her part against her enemy.  And for your wound she
sorrowed much, not knowing, more than I who am simple, whether it would
turn to life or death.  And if to life, then, if she could but persuade
the doctor and clergy and the King's counsellors to let her go, she said
that you should follow with her to the wars, and she, if so the saints
pleased, would be the making of your fortune, you and I being her first
friends."

"The saints fight for her!" I said, "for we have done our part thus far,
and I would that I may be well ere she raises her standard."

But here Elliot turned right pale, at the thought of my going to the
wars, she holding my face off and gazing steadily upon me with wistful
eyes.

"O God, send that the Maid go speedily!" she cried, "for as now you are
not fit to bear arms."

"Thou wouldst not have me lag behind, when the Maid's banner is on the
wind?"

"Nay," she said, but slowly, "thee and all that I have would I give for
her and for her cause, and for the saints.  But now thou must not
go,"--and her eyes yearned upon me--"now that I could overthrow thee if
we came to war."

So here she laughed again, being like the weather without--a changeful
thing of shower and shine.

Thus we continued devising, and she told me that, some days after my
wounding, the Maid had held converse apart with the King, and then gave
him to wit of certain marvellous matters, that none might know save by
heavenly inspiration.  But what these matters might be none could tell,
save the King and the Maiden only.

That this was sooth I can affirm, having myself been present in later
years, when one that affected to be the very Pucelle, never slain, or re-
arisen by miracle, came before the King, and truly she had beguiled many.
Then the King said, "Welcome Pucelle, ma mie, thou art welcome if thou
hast memory of that secret thing which is between thee and me."  Whereon
this false woman, as one confounded, fell on her knees and confessed her
treason.

This that Elliot told me, therefore, while the sun shone into the chamber
through the bare vine-tendrils, was sooth, and by this miracle, it seems,
the Maid had at last won the ear of the King.  So he bade carry her to
Poictiers, where the doctors and the learned were but now examining into
her holy life, and her knowledge of religion, being amazed by the wisdom
of her answers.  The noble ladies about her, too, and these mendicant
friars that were sent to hold inquisition concerning her at Domremy, had
found in her nothing but simplicity and holy maidenhood, pity and piety.
But, as for a sign of her sending, and a marvel to convince all men's
hearts, that, she said, she would only work at Orleans.  So now she was
being accepted, and was to raise her standard, as we had cause to
believe.

"But," said Elliot, "the weeks go by, and much is said, and men and
victual are to be gathered, and still they tarry, doing no great deed.
Oh, would that to-day her standard were on the wind! for to-day, and for
these many days, I must have you here, and tend you till you be fit to
bear arms."

Therewith she made me much good cheer; then, very tenderly taking her
arms from about me, lest I should be hurt again, she cried--

"But we speak idly, and thou hast not seen the standard, and the banner,
and the pennon of the Maid that my father is painting."

Then I must lean on her shoulder, as, indeed, I still had cause to do,
and so, right heedfully, she brought me into the painting-chamber.  There,
upon great easels, were stretched three sheets of "bougran," {21} very
white and glistering--a mighty long sheet for the standard, a smaller
one, square, for the banner, and the pennon smaller yet, in form of a
triangle, as is customary.

The great standard, in the Maiden's wars, was to be used for the rallying
of all her host; the pennon was a signal to those who fought around her,
as guards of her body; and about the banner afterwards gathered, for
prayer and praise, those men, confessed and clean of conscience, whom she
had called and chosen.

These cloths were now but half painted, the figures being drawn, by my
master's hands, and the ground-colours laid; but some portions were quite
finished, very bright and beautiful.  On the standard was figured God the
Father, having the globe in His hand; two angels knelt by Him, one
holding for His blessing the lily of France.  The field was to be sown
with fleurs-de-lys, and to bear the holy names: Jhesu--Maria.  On the
banner was our Lord crucified between the Holy Virgin and St. John.  And
on the pennon was wrought the Annunciation, the angel with a lily
kneeling to the Blessed Virgin.  On the standard, my master, later,
fashioned the chosen blazon of the Maid--a dove argent, on a field azure.
But the blazon of the sword supporting the crown, between two lilies,
that was later given to her and her house, she did not use, as her
enemies said she did, out of pride and vainglory, mixing her arms with
holy things, even at Rheims at the sacring.  For when she was at Rheims,
no armorial bearings had yet been given to her.  Herein, then, as always,
they lied in their cruel throats; for, as the Psalmist says, "Quare
fremuerunt gentes?"

All these evil tongues, and all thought of evil days, were far from us as
we stood looking at the work, and praising it, as well we might, for
never had my master wrought so well.  Now, as I studied on the paintings,
I well saw that my master had drawn the angel of the pennon in the
likeness of his own daughter Elliot.  Wonderful it was to see her fair
face and blue eyes, holy and humble, with the gold halo round her head.

"Ah, love," I said, "that banner I could follow far, pursuing fame and
the face of my lady!"

With that we fell into such dalliance and kind speech as lovers use,
wholly rapt from the world in our happiness.

Even then, before we so much as heard his step at the door, my master
entered, and there stood we, my arm about her neck and hers about my
body, embracing me.

He stood with eyes wide open, and gave one long whistle.

"Faith!" he cried, "our surgery hath wrought miracles!  You are whole
beyond what I looked for; but surely you are deaf, for my step is heavy
enough, yet, me thinks, you heard me not."

Elliot spoke no word, but drawing me very heedfully to a settle that was
by the side of the room, she fled without looking behind her.

"Sir," I said, as soon as she was gone, "I need make no long story--"

"Faith, no!" he answered, standing back from the banner and holding his
hands at each side of his eyes, regarding his work as limners do.  "You
twain, I doubt not, were smitten senseless by these great masterpieces,
and the thought of the holy use to which they were made."

"That might well have been, sir, but what we had covenanted to tell you
this day we have told unwittingly, methinks, already.  I could not be in
your daughter's company, and have the grace of her gentle ministerings--"

"But you must stand senseless before her father's paintings?  Faith, you
are a very grateful lad!  But so it is, and I am not one of those blind
folk who see not what is under their eyes.  And now, what now?  Well, I
can tell you.  You are to be healed, and follow these flags to war, and
win your spurs, and much wealth by ransoms, and so make my lass your
lady.  Is it not so?"

I was abashed by his "bourdes," and could say nought, for, being still
very weak, the tears came into my eyes.  Then he drew near me, limping,
and put his hand on my shoulder, but very gently, saying--

"Even so be it, my son, as better may not be.  'Tis no great match, but I
looked, in this country, for nothing nobler or more wealthy.  That my
lass should be happy, and have one to fend for her, there is my affair,
and I am not one of those fathers who think to make their daughters glad
by taking from them their heart's desire.  So cheer up!  What, a man-at-
arms weeping!  Strange times, when maids lead men-at-arms and men-at-arms
weep at home!"

With these words he comforted me, and made me welcome, for indeed he was
a kind man and a wise; so many there are that cause shrewd sorrow when
there should be joy in their houses!  This was never his way, and wise do
I call him, for all that has come and gone.

In a little time, when I had thanked him, and shown him, I trow, how he
stood in my love, he bade me go to my chamber and be at rest, saying that
he must take thought as to how matters stood.

"For you are not yet fit to bear arms, nor will be for these many days.
Nor is it seemly, nor our country's custom, that my maid should dwell
here in the house with you, as things are between you, and I must
consider of how I may bestow her till you march with your troop, if
marching there is to be."

This I dared not gainsay, and so I went to my chamber with a heart full
of grief and joy, for these hours that are all of gladness come rarely to
lovers, and to me were scantly measured.  Perchance it was for my soul's
welfare, to win me from the ways of the world.

But to Elliot and me that night bore no joy, but sorrow, albeit passing.
At supper we met, indeed, but she stayed with us not long after supper,
when my master, with a serious countenance, told me how he had taken
counsel with a very holy woman, of his own kin, widow of an archer, and
how she was going on pilgrimage to our Lady of Puy en Velay, by reason of
the jubilee, for this year Good Friday and the Annunciation fell on the
same day.

"To-morrow she sets forth, and whatsoever prayer can do for France and
the King shall be done.  Always, after this day of jubilee, they say that
strange and great matters come to pass.  That there will be strange
matters I make no doubt, for when before, save under holy Deborah in
Scripture, did men follow a woman to war?  May good come of it!  However
it fall out, Elliot is willing to go on pilgrimage, for she is very
devout.  Moreover, she tells me that it had been in her mind before, for
the mother of that Maid is to be at Puy, praying for her daughter, as,
certes, she hath great need, if ever woman had.  And Elliot is fain to
meet her and devise with her about the Maid.  And for you, you still need
our nursing, and the sooner you win strength, the nearer you are to that
which you would win.  Still, I am sorry, lad, for I remember my courting
days and the lass's mother, blessings on her!"

To all this I could make no answer but that his will was mine; and so the
day ended in a mingling of gladness and sorrow.




CHAPTER X--HOW NORMAN LESLIE WAS OUT OF ALL COMFORT


My brethren the good Benedictine Fathers here in Pluscarden Priory, are
wont betimes to be merry over my penitents, for all the young lads and
lasses in the glen say they are fain to be shriven by old Father Norman
and by no other.

This that my brethren report may well be true, and yet I take no shame in
the bruit or "fama."  For as in my hot youth I suffered sorrows many from
love, so now I may say, like that Carthaginian queen in Maro, "miseris
succurrere disco."  The years of the youth of most women and men are like
a tourney, or jousts courteous, and many fall in the lists of love, and
many carry sorer wounds away from Love's spears, than they wot of who do
but look on from the safe seats and secure pavilions of age.  Though all
may seem but a gentle and joyous passage of arms, and the weapons that
they use but arms of courtesy, yet are shrewd blows dealt and wounds
taken which bleed inwardly, perchance through a whole life long.  To
medicine these wounds with kind words is, it may be, part of my poor
skill as a healer of souls in my degree, and therefore do the young
resort to Father Norman.

Some confessors there be who laugh within their hearts at these sorrows
of lovers, as if they were mere "nugae" and featherweights: others there
are who wax impatient, holding all love for sin in some degree, and
forgetting that Monseigneur St. Peter himself was a married man, and
doubtless had his own share of trouble and amorous annoy when he was
winning the lady his wife, even as other men.  But if I be of any avail
(as they deem) in the healing of hearts, I owe my skill of that surgery
to remembrance of the days of my youth, when I found none to give me
comfort, save what I won from a book that my master had in hand to copy
and adorn, namely, "The Book of One Hundred Ballades, containing Counsel
to a Knight, that he should love loyally"; this counsel offered by
Messire Lyonnet de Coismes, Messire Jehan de Mailly, the Sieur d'Yvry,
and many other good knights that were true lovers.  Verily, in sermons of
preachers and lives of holy men I found no such comfort.

Almost the sorest time of my sorrowing was for very grief of heart when
Elliot set forth on pilgrimage to Puy en Velay, for we were but newly
come together; "twain we were with one heart," as a maker sang whom once
I met in France ere I came back to Scotland; sweetly could he make, but
was a young clerk of no godly counsel, and had to name Maitre Francoys
Villon.  Our heart was one, the heart of Elliot and mine own, and lo!
here, in a day, it was torn asunder and we were set apart by the wisdom
of men.

I remember me how I lay wakeful on the night before the day when Elliot
should depart.  Tossing and turning, I lay till the small fowls brake
forth with their songs, and my own thought seemed to come and go, and
come again in my head, like the "ritournelle" of the birds.  At last I
might not endure, but rose and attired myself very early, and so went
down into the chamber.  Thither presently came Elliot, feigning wonder to
find me arisen, and making pretence that she was about her housewiferies,
but well I wot that she might sleep no more than I.  The old housewife
coming and going through the room, there we devised, comforting each
other with hopes and prayers; indeed we sorely wanted comfort, because
never till we were wed, if ever that should be, might we have such solace
of each other's presence as we desired.  Then I brought from the workshop
a sheet of vellum and colours, and the painting tools, and so fashioned a
little picture of her, to wear within the breast of my doublet.  A rude
thing it was and is, for what gold, however finely handled, could match
with her golden hair, whereof, at my desire, she gave me a lock; and of
all worldly gear from my secular life, these and the four links of my
mother's chain alone are still mine, and where my heart is there is my
treasure.  And she, too, must clip a long curl of my hair, for as yet it
was not cut "en ronde," as archers use to wear it, but when she came
again, she said she would find me shrewdly shaven, and then would love me
no longer.  Then she laughed and kissed me, and fell to comforting me for
that she would not be long away.

"And in three months or four," she said, "the King will be sacred at
Rheims, and the Maid will give you red wine to drink in Paris town, and
the English will be swept into the sea, and then we shall have peace and
abundance."
