over. That one fact alone set him apart at once from the other boys of
his class. To them reading was an irksome labor.

All this reading had its effect. He acquired a vocabulary. That is to
say, instead of the few hundred words which were all the other boys knew
by which to express their thoughts, he soon had twice as many; besides
that, he soon got a reputation as a wit and story-teller, and his
command of words made him fond of speechmaking. He resembled most boys
in liking to "show off." He had learned, too, that there were comforts
in the world which he need never look for in his father's house, and so,
as soon as he was of age, he left that unattractive dwelling-place and
struck out for himself, making a livelihood in various ways--by
splitting rails, running a river boat, managing a store, enlisting for
the Black Hawk war--doing anything, in a word, that came to hand and
would serve to put a little money in his pocket. He came to know a great
many people and so, in 1832, he proclaimed himself a candidate for the
state legislature for Sangamon County, Illinois, where he had made his
home for some years. No doubt to most people, his candidacy must have
seemed in the nature of a joke, and though he stumped the county
thoroughly and entertained the crowds with his stories and flashes of
wit, he was defeated at the polls.

That episode ended, he returned to store-keeping; but he had come to see
that the law was the surest road to political preferment, and so he
spent such leisure as he had in study, and in 1836 was admitted to the
bar. As has been remarked before, the requirements for admission were
anything but prohibitory, most lawyers sharing the oft-quoted opinion of
Patrick Henry that the only way to learn law was to practise it. Lincoln
decided to establish himself at Springfield, opened an office there, and
for the next twenty years, practised law with considerable success,
riding from one court to another, and gradually extending his circle of
acquaintances. He even became prosperous enough to marry, and in 1842,
after a courtship of the most peculiar description, married a Miss Mary
Todd--a young woman somewhat above him in social station, and possessed
of a sharp tongue and uncertain temper which often tried him severely.

It was inevitable, of course, that he should become interested again in
politics, and he threw in his fortunes with the Whig Party, serving two
or three terms in the state legislature and one in Congress. All of this
did much to temper and chasten his native coarseness and uncouthness,
but he was still just an average lawyer and politician, with no evidence
of greatness about him, and many evidences of commonness. Then,
suddenly, in 1858, he stood forth as a national figure, in a contest
with one of the most noteworthy men in public life, Stephen A. Douglas.

Douglas was an aggressive, tireless and brilliant political leader, the
acknowledged head of the Democratic party, and had represented Illinois
in the Senate for many years. He had a great ambition to be President,
had missed the nomination in 1852 and 1856, but was determined to secure
it in 1860, and was carefully building to that end. His term as senator
expired in 1858, and his re-election seemed essential to his success. Of
his re-election he had no doubt, for Illinois had always been a
Democratic state, though it was becoming somewhat divided in opinion.
The southern part was largely pro-slavery, but the northern part,
including the rapidly-growing city of Chicago, was inclined the other
way. This division of opinion made Douglas's part an increasingly
difficult one, for pro-slave and anti-slave sentiment were as
irreconcilable as fire and water.

Lincoln, meanwhile, had been active in the formation of the new
Republican party in the state, had made a number of strong speeches,
and, on June 16, 1858, the Republican convention resolved that: "Hon.
Abraham Lincoln is our first and only choice for United States senator
to fill the vacancy about to be created by the expiration of Mr.
Douglas's term of office." A month later, Lincoln challenged Douglas to
a series of joint debates. Douglas at once accepted, never doubting his
ability to overwhelm his obscure opponent, and the famous duel began
which was to rivet national attention and give Lincoln a national
prominence.

The challenge on Lincoln's part was a piece of superb generalship. In
such a contest, he had everything to gain and nothing to lose. Whatever
the result, the fact that he had crossed swords with so renowned a man
as Stephen A. Douglas would give him a kind of reflected glory. But in
addition to that, he had the better side of the question. His course was
simple; he was seeking the support of anti-slavery people; Douglas's
task was much more complex, for he wished to offend neither northern nor
southern Democrats, and he soon found himself offending both. To carry
water on both shoulders is always a risky thing to attempt, and Douglas
soon found himself fettered by the awkward position he was forced to
maintain; while Lincoln, free from any such handicap, could strike with
all his strength.

His stand from the first was a bold one--so bold that many of his
followers regarded it with consternation and disapproval. In his speech
accepting the nomination, he had said, "I believe this government cannot
endure permanently half slave and half free. It will become all one
thing or all the other," and he pursued this line of argument in the
debates alleging that the purpose of the pro-slavery men was to make
slavery perpetual and universal, and pointing to recent history in
proof of the assertion. When asked by Douglas whether he considered the
negro his equal, he answered: "In the right to eat the bread which his
own hand earns, he is my equal, and the equal of Judge Douglas, and the
equal of every living man." He was not an abolitionist, and declared
more than once that he had "no purpose, directly or indirectly, to
interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it
exists," that he had "no lawful right to do so," but only to prohibit it
in "any new country which is not already cursed with the actual presence
of the evil."

Even so skillful a debater as Douglas soon found himself hard put to it
to answer Lincoln's arguments, without offending one or the other of the
powerful factions whose support he must have to reach the presidency. At
the beginning, his experience and adroitness gave him an advantage,
which, however, Lincoln's earnestness and directness soon overcame. Tens
of thousands of people gathered to hear the debates, they were printed
from end to end of the country, and Lincoln loomed larger than ever
before the nation; but so far as the immediate result was concerned,
Douglas was the victor, for the election gave him a majority of the
legislature, and he was chosen to succeed himself in the Senate.

Yet more than once he must have regretted that he had consented to cross
swords with his lank opponent, for he had been forced into many an
awkward corner. There is a popular tradition that the presidential
nomination came to Lincoln unsought; but this is anything but true. On
the contrary, in those debates with Douglas, he was consciously laying
the foundation for his candidacy two years later. He used every effort
to drive Douglas to admissions and statements which would tell against
him in a presidential campaign, while he himself took a position which
would insure his popularity with the Republican party. So his defeat at
the time was of no great moment to him.

He had gained an entrance to the national arena, and he took care to
remain before the public. He made speeches in Ohio, in Kansas, and even
in New York and throughout New England, everywhere making a powerful
impression. To disunion and secession he referred only once or twice,
for he perceived a truth which, even yet, some of us are reluctant to
admit: that every nation has a right to maintain by force, if it can,
its own integrity, and that a portion of a nation may sometimes be
justified in struggling for independent national existence. The whole
justification of such a struggle lies in whether its cause and basis is
right or wrong. So, beneath the question of disunion, was the question
as to whether slavery was right or wrong. On this question, of course,
northern opinion was practically all one way, while even in the South
there were many enemies of the institution. The world was outgrowing
what was really a survival of the dark ages.

When the campaign for the presidential nomination opened in the winter
of 1859-1860, Lincoln was early in the field and did everything possible
to win support. He secured the Illinois delegates without difficulty,
and when the national convention met at Chicago, in May, the contest
soon narrowed down to one between Lincoln and William H. Seward. Let it
be said, at once, that Seward deserved the nomination, if high service
and party loyalty and distinguished ability counted for anything, and it
looked for a time as though he were going to get it, for on the first
ballot he received 71 more votes than Lincoln. But in the course of his
public career he had made enemies who were anxious for his defeat, his
campaign managers were too confident or too clumsy to take advantage of
opportunity; Lincoln's friends were busy, and by some expert trading, of
which, be it said in justice to Lincoln, he himself was ignorant,
succeeded in securing for him a majority of the votes on the third
ballot.

So, blindly and almost by chance, was the nomination secured of the one
man fitted to meet the crisis. The only other event in American history
to be compared with it in sheer wisdom was the selection of Washington
to head the Revolutionary army--a selection made primarily, not because
of Washington's fitness for the task, but to heal sectional differences
and win the support of the South to a war waged largely in the North.

The nomination, so curiously made, was received with anything but
enthusiasm by the country at large. "Honest Abe, the Rail-Splitter,"
might appeal to some, but there was a general doubt whether, after all,
rail-splitting, however honorable in itself, was the best training for
a President. However, the anti-slavery feeling was a tie that bound
together people of the most diverse opinions about other things, and a
spirited canvass was made, greatly assisted by the final and suicidal
split in the ranks of the Democracy, which placed in nomination two men,
Lincoln's old antagonist, Stephen A. Douglas, representing the northern
or moderate element of the party, and John C. Breckenridge, of Kentucky,
representing the southern, or extreme pro-slavery element. And this was
just the corner into which Lincoln had hoped, all along, to drive his
opponents. Had the party been united, he would have been hopelessly
defeated, for in the election which followed, he received only a little
more than one third of the popular vote; but this was sufficient to give
him the northern states, with 180 electoral votes. But let us remember
that, in 1860, Abraham Lincoln was the choice for President of very much
less than half the people of the country.

The succeeding four months witnessed the peculiar spectacle of the South
leisurely completing its arrangements for secession, and perfecting its
civil and military organization, while the North, under a discredited
ruler of whom it could not rid itself until March 4th, was unable to
make any counter-preparation or to do anything to prevent the diversion
of a large portion of the arms and munitions of the country into the
southern states. It gave the southern leaders, too, opportunity to work
upon the feelings of their people, more than half of whom, in the fall
of 1860, were opposed to disunion. It should not be forgotten that,
however fully the South came afterwards to acquiesce in the policy of
secession, it was, in its inception, a plan of the politicians,
undertaken, to a great extent, for purposes of self-aggrandizement. They
controlled the conventions which, in every case except that of Texas,
decided whether or not the state should secede. "We can make better
terms out of the Union than in it," was a favorite argument, and many of
them dreamed of the establishment of a great slave empire, in which they
would play the leading parts.

To the southern leaders, then, the election of Lincoln was the striking
of the appointed hour for rebellion. South Carolina led the way,
declaring, on December 17, 1860, that the "Union now subsisting between
South Carolina and other states, under the name of the United States of
America, is hereby dissolved." Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia,
Louisiana and Texas followed. Opinion at the North was divided as to the
proper course to follow. Horace Greeley, in the New York _Tribune_,
said that the South had as good a right to secede from the Union as the
colonies had to secede from Great Britain, and, as Greeley afterwards
observed, the _Tribune_ had plenty of company in these sentiments.
Meanwhile the Southern Confederacy had been formed, Jefferson Davis
elected President, and steps taken at once for the organization of an
army.

Everyone was waiting anxiously for the inauguration of the new
President--waiting to see what his course would be. They were not left
long in doubt. His inaugural address was earnest and direct. He said,
"The union of these States is perpetual. No State upon its own mere
motion can lawfully get out of the Union. I shall take care that the
laws of the Union are faithfully executed in all the States." It was, in
effect, a declaration of war, and was so received by the South. Whether
or not it was the constitutional attitude need not concern us now.

The story of Lincoln's life for the next five years is the story of the
Civil War. How Lincoln grew and broadened in those fateful years, how he
won men by his deep humanity, his complete understanding, his ready
sympathy; how, once having undertaken the task of conquering rebellion,
he never faltered nor turned back despite the awful sacrifices which the
conflict demanded; all this has passed into the commonplaces of history.
No man ever had a harder task, and no other man could have accomplished
it so well.

[Illustration: LINCOLN]

The emancipation of the slaves, which has loomed so large in history,
was in reality, merely an incident, a war measure, taken to weaken the
enemy and justifiable, perhaps, only on that ground; the preliminary
proclamation, indeed, proposed to liberate the slaves only in such
states as were in rebellion on the following first of January. Nor did
emancipation create any great popular enthusiasm. The congressional
elections which followed it showed a great reaction against
anti-slavery. The Democrats carried Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York,
Illinois. For a time the administration was fighting for its life,
and won by an alarmingly small margin.

Before the year had elapsed, however, there was a great reversal in
public opinion, and at the succeeding election, Lincoln received 212 out
of 233 electoral votes. The end of the Confederacy was by this time in
sight. A month after his second inauguration, Richmond fell, and five
days later, Lee surrendered his army to General Grant. Lincoln at once
paid a visit to Richmond and then returned to Washington for the last
act of the drama.

The fourteenth of April was Good Friday, and the President arranged to
take a small party to Ford's theatre to witness a performance of a farce
comedy called "Our American Cousin." The President entered his box about
nine o'clock and was given a tumultuous reception. Then the play went
forward quietly, until suddenly the audience was startled by a pistol
shot, followed by a woman's scream. At the same instant, a man was seen
to leap from the President's box to the stage. Pausing only to wave a
dagger which he carried in his hand and to shout, "Sic semper tyrannis!"
the man disappeared behind the scenes. Amid the confusion, no efficient
pursuit was made. The President had been shot through the head, the
bullet passing through the brain. Unconsciousness, of course, came
instantly, and death followed in a few hours.

Eleven days later, the murderer, an actor by the name of John Wilkes
Booth, was surrounded in a barn where he had taken refuge; he refused to
come out, and the barn was set on fire. Soon afterwards, the assassin
was brought forth with a bullet at the base of his brain, whether fired
by himself or one of the besieging soldiers was never certainly known.

It is startling to contemplate the fearful responsibility which Booth
assumed when he fired that shot. So far from benefiting the South, he
did it incalculable harm, for the North was thoroughly aroused by the
deed. Thousands and thousands flocked to see the dead President as he
lay in state at the Capitol, and in the larger cities in which his
funeral procession paused on its way to his home in Springfield. The
whole country was in mourning, as for its father; business was
practically suspended, and the people seemed stunned by the great
calamity. That so gentle a man should have been murdered wakened, deep
down in the heart of the North, a fierce resentment; the feelings of
kindliness for a vanquished foe were, for the moment, swept away in
anger; and the North turned upon the South with stern face and shining
eyes. The wild and foolish assassin brought down upon the heads of his
own people such a wrath as the great conflict had not awakened. We shall
see how bitter was the retribution.

Not then so fully as now was Lincoln's greatness understood. He has come
to personify for us the triumphs and glories, the sadness and the
pathos, of the great struggle which he guided. His final martyrdom seems
almost a fitting crown for his achievements. It has, without doubt, done
much to secure him the exalted niche which he occupies in the hearts of
the American people, whom, in a way, he died to save. Had he lived
through the troubled period of Reconstruction which followed, he might
have emerged with a fame less clear and shining; and yet the hand which
guided the country through four years of Civil War, was without doubt
the one best fitted to save it from the misery and disgrace which lay in
store for it. But speculations as to what might have been are vain and
idle. What was, we know; and above the clouds of conflict, Lincoln's
figure looms, serene and venerable. Two of his own utterances reveal him
as the words of no other man can--his address on the battlefield of
Gettysburg, and his address at his second inauguration--but two months
after he was laid to rest, James Russell Lowell, at the services in
commemoration of the three hundredth anniversary of Harvard College,
paid him one of the most eloquent tributes ever paid any man, concluding
with the words:

"Great captains, with their guns and drums;
  Disturb our judgment for the hour,
But at last silence comes;
  These all are gone, and, standing like a tower,
Our children shall behold his fame,
  The kindly-earnest, brave, foreseeing man;
Sagacious, patient, dreading praise, not blame;
  New birth of our new soil, the first American."

On the ticket with Lincoln, the Republicans had placed, as a sop to such
pro-slavery sentiment as still existed at the North, a southerner and
state rights Democrat named Andrew Johnson. By one of those singular
chances of history, Johnson's origin and early years had been very much
like Lincoln's. He, too, was born of a "poor white" family; first seeing
the light in North Carolina about six weeks before Abraham Lincoln
opened his eyes in that rude log cabin in Kentucky. His condition was,
if anything, even more hopeless and degraded than Lincoln's, and if any
one had prophesied that these two ignorant and poverty-stricken children
would one day rise, side by side, to the greatest position in the
Republic, he would have been regarded, and justly, as a hopeless madman.
But not even to a madman did any such wild idea occur. "Poor whites"
were despised throughout the South, even by the slaves; if there was, in
the whole United States, any law of caste, it was against these ignorant
and shiftless people; and Andrew Johnson, at the age of fifteen, was
little better than a young savage. He had never gone to school, he had
never seen a book. But one day, he heard a man reading aloud, and the
wonder of it quickened a new purpose within him. He induced a friend to
teach him the alphabet, and then, borrowing the book, he laboriously
taught himself to read. So there was something more than "poor white" in
him, after all.

By the time he was eighteen, he had had enough of his shiftless
surroundings, and struck out for himself, journeyed across the mountains
to Greenville, Tennessee, met there a girl of sixteen named Eliza
McCardle, and, with youth's sublime improvidence, married her! As it
happened, he did well, for his wife had a fair education, and night
after night taught him patiently, until he could read fairly well and
write a little. I like to think of that family group, so different from
most, and to admire that girl-wife teaching her husband the rudiments of
education.

Already, as a result of his lowly birth and the class prejudice he
everywhere encountered, young Johnson had conceived that hatred of the
ruling class at the South which was to influence his after life so
deeply. He had a certain rude eloquence which appealed to the lower
classes of the people, and, in 1835, succeeded in gaining an election to
