themselves in bucklers of matting and buffalo hide, Radisson led the
assault on the Iroquois barricade.  Trees were cut down, and the Upper
Indians rushed the rude fort with timbers extemporized into
battering-rams.  In close range of the enemy, Radisson made a curious
discovery.  Frenchmen were directing the Iroquois warriors.  Who had
sent these French to intercept the explorers?  If Radisson suspected
treachery on the part of jealous rivals from Quebec, it must have
redoubled his fury; for the Indians from the Upper Country threw
themselves in the breached barricade with such force that the Iroquois
lost heart and tossed belts of wampum over the stockades to supplicate
peace.  It was almost night.  Radisson's Indians drew off to consider
the terms of peace.  When morning came, behold an empty fort!  The
French renegades had fled with their Indian allies.

[Illustration: Chateau St. Louis, Quebec, 1669, from one of the oldest
prints in existence.]

Glad to be rid of the first hindrance, the explorers once more sped
north.  In the afternoon, Radisson's scouts ran full tilt into a band
of Iroquois laden with beaver pelts.  The Iroquois were smarting from
their defeat of the previous night; and what was Radisson's amusement
to see his own scouts and the Iroquois running from each other in equal
fright, while the ground between lay strewn with booty!  Radisson
rushed his Indians for the waterside to intercept the Iroquois' flight.
The Iroquois left their boats and swam for the opposite shore, where
they threw up the usual barricade and entrenched themselves to shoot on
Radisson's passing canoes.  Using the captured beaver pelts as shields,
the Upper Indians ran the gantlet of the Iroquois fire with the loss of
only one man.

The slightest defeat may turn well-ordered retreat into panic.  If the
explorers went on, the Iroquois would hang to the rear of the
travelling Indians and pick off warriors till the Upper Country people
became so weakened they would fall an easy prey.  Not flight, but
fight, was Radisson's motto.  He ordered his men ashore to break up the
barricade.  Darkness fell over the forest.  The Iroquois could not see
to fire.  "They spared not their powder," relates Radisson, "but they
made more noise than hurt."  Attaching a fuse to a barrel of powder,
Radisson threw this over into the Iroquois fort.  The crash of the
explosion was followed by a blaze of the Iroquois musketry that killed
three of Radisson's men.  Radisson then tore the bark off a birch tree,
filled the bole with powder, and in the darkness crept close to the
Iroquois barricade and set fire to the logs.  Red tongues of fire
leaped up, there was a roar as of wind, and the Iroquois fort was on
fire.  Radisson's men dashed through the fire, hatchet in hand.  The
Iroquois answered with their death chant.  Friend and foe merged in the
smoke and darkness.  "We could not know one another in that skirmish of
blows," says Radisson.  "There was noise to terrify the stoutest man."
In the midst of the melee a frightful storm of thunder and sheeted rain
rolled over the forest.  "To my mind," writes the disgusted Radisson,
"that was something extraordinary.  I think the Devil himself sent that
storm to let those wretches escape, so that they might destroy more
innocents."  The rain put out the fire.  As soon as the storm had
passed, Radisson kindled torches to search for the missing.  Three of
his men were slain, seven wounded.  Of the enemy, eleven lay dead, five
were prisoners.  The rest of the Iroquois had fled to the forest.  The
Upper Indians burned their prisoners according to their custom, and the
night was passed in mad orgies to celebrate the victory.  "The sleep we
took did not make our heads giddy," writes Radisson.

The next day they encountered more Iroquois.  Both sides at once began
building forts; but when he could, Radisson always avoided war.  Having
gained victory enough to hold the Iroquois in check, he wanted no
massacre.  That night he embarked his men noiselessly; and never once
stopping to kindle camp-fire, they paddled from Friday night to Tuesday
morning.  The _portages _over rocks in the dark cut the _voyageurs'_
moccasins to shreds.  Every landing was marked with the blood of
bruised feet.  Sometimes they avoided leaving any trace of themselves
by walking in the stream, dragging their boats along the edge of the
rapids.  By Tuesday the Indians were so fagged that they could go no
farther without rest.  Canoes were moored in the hiding of the rushes
till the _voyageurs_ slept.  They had been twenty-two days going from
Three Rivers to Lake Nipissing, and had not slept one hour on land.

It was October when they came to Lake Superior.  The forests were
painted in all the glory of autumn, and game abounded.  White fish
appeared under the clear, still waters of the lake like shoals of
floating metal; bears were seen hulking away from the watering places
of sandy shores; and wild geese whistled overhead.  After the terrible
dangers of the voyage, with scant sleep and scanter fare, the country
seemed, as Radisson says, a terrestrial paradise.  The Indians gave
solemn thanks to their gods of earth and forest, "and we," writes
Radisson, "to the God of gods."  Indian summer lay on the land.
November found the explorers coasting the south shore of Lake Superior.
They passed the Island of Michilimackinac with its stone arches.
Radisson heard from the Indians of the copper mines.  He saw the
pictured rocks that were to become famous for beauty.  "I gave it the
name of St. Peter because that was my name and I was the first
Christian to see it," he writes of the stone arch.  "There were in
these places very deep caves, caused by the violence of the waves."
Jesuits had been on the part of Lake Superior near the Sault, and poor
Menard perished in the forests of Lake Michigan; but Radisson and
Groseillers were the first white men to cruise from south to west and
west to north, where a chain of lakes and waterways leads from the
Minnesota lake country to the prairies now known as Manitoba.  Before
the end of November the explorers rounded the western end of Lake
Superior and proceeded northwest.  Radisson records that they came to
great winter encampments of the Crees; and the Crees did not venture
east for fear of Sautaux and Iroquois.  He mentions a river of
Sturgeons, where was a great store of fish.

The Crees wished to conduct the two white men to the wooded lake
region, northwest towards the land of the Assiniboines, where Indian
families took refuge on islands from those tigers of the plains--the
Sioux--who were invincible on horseback but less skilful in canoes.
The rivers were beginning to freeze.  Boats were abandoned; but there
was no snow for snow-shoe travelling, and the explorers were unable to
transport the goods brought for trade.  Bidding the Crees go to their
families and bring back slaves to carry the baggage, Radisson and
Groseillers built themselves the first fort and the first fur post
between the Missouri and the North Pole.  It was evidently somewhere
west of Duluth in either what is now Minnesota or northwestern Ontario.


This fur post was the first habitation of civilization in all the Great
Northwest.  Not the railway, not the cattle trail, not the path of
forward-marching empire purposely hewing a way through the wilderness,
opened the West.  It was the fur trade that found the West.  It was the
fur trade that explored the West.  It was the fur trade that wrested
the West from savagery.  The beginning was in the little fort built by
Radisson and Groseillers.  No great factor in human progress ever had a
more insignificant beginning.

The fort was rushed up by two men almost starving for food.  It was on
the side of a river, built in the shape of a triangle, with the base at
the water side.  The walls were of unbarked logs, the roof of thatched
branches interlaced, with the door at the river side.  In the middle of
the earth floor, so that the smoke would curl up where the branches
formed a funnel or chimney, was the fire.  On the right of the fire,
two hewn logs overlaid with pine boughs made a bed.  On the left,
another hewn log acted as a table.  Jumbled everywhere, hanging from
branches and knobs of branches, were the firearms, clothing, and
merchandise of the two fur traders.  Naturally, a fort two thousand
miles from help needed sentries.  Radisson had not forgotten his
boyhood days of Onondaga.  He strung carefully concealed cords through
the grass and branches around the fort.  To these bells were fastened,
and the bells were the sentries.  The two white men could now sleep
soundly without fear of approach.  This fort, from which sprang the
buoyant, aggressive, prosperous, free life of the Great Northwest, was
founded and built and completed in two days.

The West had begun.[4]

It was a beginning which every Western pioneer was to repeat for the
next two hundred years: first, the log cabins; then, the fight with the
wilderness for food.

Radisson, being the younger, went into the woods to hunt, while
Groseillers kept house.  Wild geese and ducks were whistling south, but
"the whistling that I made," writes Radisson, "was another music than
theirs; for I killed three and scared the rest."  Strange Indians came
through the forest, but were not admitted to the tiny fort, lest
knowledge of the traders' weakness should tempt theft.  Many a night
the explorers were roused by a sudden ringing of the bells or crashing
through the underbrush, to find that wild animals had been attracted by
the smell of meat, and wolverine or wildcat was attempting to tear
through the matted branches of the thatched roof.  The desire for
firearms has tempted Indians to murder many a trader; so Radisson and
Groseillers _cached_ all the supplies that they did not need in a hole
across the river.  News of the two white men alone in the northern
forest spread like wild-fire to the different Sautaux and Ojibway
encampments; and Radisson invented another protection in addition to
the bells.  He rolled gunpowder in twisted tubes of birch bark, and ran
a circle of this round the fort.  Putting a torch to the birch, he
surprised the Indians by displaying to them a circle of fire running
along the ground in a series of jumps.  To the Indians it was magic.
The two white men were engirt with a mystery that defended them from
all harm.  Thus white men passed their first winter in the Great
Northwest.

Toward winter four hundred Crees came to escort the explorers to the
wooded lake region yet farther west towards the land of the
Assiniboines, the modern Manitoba.  "We were Caesars," writes Radisson.
"There was no one to contradict us.  We went away free from any burden,
while those poor miserables thought themselves happy to carry our
equipage in the hope of getting a brass ring, or an awl, or a
needle. . . .  They admired our actions more than the fools of Paris
their king. . . .[5]  They made a great noise, calling us gods and
devils.  We marched four days through the woods.  The country was
beautiful with clear parks.  At last we came within a league of the
Cree cabins, where we spent the night that we might enter the
encampment with pomp the next day.  The swiftest Indians ran ahead to
warn the people of our coming."  Embarking in boats, where the water
was open, the two explorers came to the Cree lodges.  They were
welcomed with shouts.  Messengers marched in front, scattering presents
from the white men,--kettles to call all to a feast of friendship;
knives to encourage the warriors to be brave; swords to signify that
the white men would fight all enemies of the Cree; and abundance of
trinkets--needles and awls and combs and tin mirrors--for the women.
The Indians prostrated themselves as slaves; and the explorers were
conducted to a grand council of welcome.  A feast was held, followed by
a symbolic dance in celebration of the white men's presence.

Their entry to the Great Northwest had been a triumph: but they could
not escape the privations of the explorer's life.  Winter set in with a
severity to make up for the long, late autumn.  Snow fell continuously
till day and night were as one, the sombre forests muffled to silence
with the wild creatures driven for shelter to secret haunts.  Four
hundred men had brought the explorers north.  Allowing an average of
four to each family, there must have been sixteen hundred people in the
encampment of Crees.  To prevent famine, the Crees scattered to the
winter hunting-grounds, arranging to come together again in two months
at a northern rendezvous.  When Radisson and Groseillers came to the
rendezvous, they learned that the gathering hunters had had poor luck.
Food was short.  To make matters worse, heavy rains were followed by
sharp frost.  The snow became iced over, destroying rabbit and grouse,
which feed the large game.  Radisson noticed that the Indians often
snatched food from the hands of hungry children.  More starving Crees
continued to come into camp.  Soon the husbands were taking the wives'
share of food, and the women were subsisting on dried pelts.  The Crees
became too weak to carry their snow-shoes, or to gather wood for fire.
The cries of the dying broke the deathly stillness of the winter
forest; and the strong began to dog the footsteps of the weak.  "Good
God, have mercy on these innocent people," writes Radisson; "have mercy
on us who acknowledge Thee!"  Digging through the snow with their
rackets, some of the Crees got roots to eat.  Others tore the bark from
trees and made a kind of soup that kept them alive.  Two weeks after
the famine set in, the Indians were boiling the pulverized bones of the
waste heap.  After that the only food was the buckskin that had been
tanned for clothing.  "We ate it so eagerly," writes Radisson, "that
our gums did bleed. . . .  We became the image of death."  Before the
spring five hundred Crees had died of famine.  Radisson and Groseillers
scarcely had strength to drag the dead from the tepees.  The Indians
thought that Groseillers had been fed by some fiend, for his heavy,
black beard covered his thin face.  Radisson they loved, because his
beardless face looked as gaunt as theirs.[6]

Relief came with the breaking of the weather.  The rain washed the iced
snows away; deer began to roam; and with the opening of the rivers came
two messengers from the Sioux to invite Radisson and Groseillers to
visit their nation.  The two Sioux had a dog, which they refused to
sell for all Radisson's gifts.  The Crees dared not offend the Sioux
ambassadors by stealing the worthless cur on which such hungry eyes
were cast, but at night Radisson slipped up to the Sioux tepee.  The
dog came prowling out.  Radisson stabbed it so suddenly that it dropped
without a sound.  Hurrying back, he boiled and fed the meat to the
famishing Crees.  When the Sioux returned to their own country, they
sent a score of slaves with food for the starving encampment.  No doubt
Radisson had plied the first messengers with gifts; for the slaves
brought word that thirty picked runners from the Sioux were coming to
escort the white men to the prairie.  To receive their benefactors, and
also, perhaps, to show that they were not defenceless, the Crees at
once constructed a fort; for Cree and Sioux had been enemies from time
immemorial.  In two days came the runners, clad only in short garments,
and carrying bow and quiver.  The Crees led the young braves to the
fort.  Kettles were set out.  Fagged from the long run, the Sioux ate
without a word.  At the end of the meal one rose.  Shooting an arrow
into the air as a sign that he called Deity to witness the truth of his
words, he proclaimed in a loud voice that the elders of the Sioux
nation would arrive next day at the fort to make a treaty with the
French.

The news was no proof of generosity.  The Sioux were the great warriors
of the West.  They knew very well that whoever formed an alliance with
the French would obtain firearms; and firearms meant victory against
all other tribes.  The news set the Crees by the ears.  Warriors
hastened from the forests to defend the fort.  The next day came the
elders of the Sioux in pomp.  They were preceded by the young braves
bearing bows and arrows and buffalo-skin shields on which were drawn
figures portraying victories.  Their hair was turned up in a stiff
crest surmounted by eagle feathers, and their bodies were painted
bright vermilion.  Behind came the elders, with medicine-bags of
rattlesnake skin streaming from their shoulders and long strings of
bears' claws hanging from neck and wrist.  They were dressed in
buckskin, garnished with porcupine quills, and wore moccasins of
buffalo hide, with the hair dangling from the heel.  In the belt of
each was a skull-cracker--a sort of sling stone with a long handle--and
a war-hatchet.  Each elder carried a peace pipe set with precious
stones, and stuck in the stem were the quills of the war eagle to
represent enemies slain.  Women slaves followed, loaded with skins for
the elders' tents.

[Illustration: A parley on the Plains.]

A great fire had been kindled inside the court of the Cree stockades.
Round the pavilion the Sioux elders seated themselves.  First, they
solemnly smoked the calumet of peace.  Then the chief of the Sioux rose
and chanted a song, giving thanks for their safe journey.  Setting
aside gifts of rare beaver pelts, he declared that the Sioux had come
to make friends with the French, who were masters of peace and war;
that the elders would conduct the white men back to the Sioux country;
that the mountains were levelled and the valleys cast up, and the way
made smooth, and branches strewn on the ground for the white men's
feet, and streams bridged, and the doors of the tepees open.  Let the
French come to the Sioux!  The Indians would die for the French.  A
gift was presented to invoke the friendship of the Crees.  Another rich
gift of furs let out the secret of the Sioux' anxiety: it was that the
French might give the Sioux "thunder weapons," meaning guns.

The speech being finished, the Crees set a feast before their guests.
To this feast Radisson and Groseillers came in a style that eclipsed
the Sioux.  Cree warriors marched in front, carrying guns.  Radisson
and Groseillers were dressed in armor.[7]  At their belts they wore
pistol, sword, and dagger.  On their heads were crowns of colored
porcupine quills.  Two pages carried the dishes and spoons to be used
at the feast; and four Cree magicians followed with smoking calumets in
their hands.  Four Indian maids carried bearskins to place on the
ground when the two explorers deigned to sit down.  Inside the fort
more than six hundred councillors had assembled.  Outside were gathered
a thousand spectators.  As Radisson and Groseillers entered, an old
Cree flung a peace pipe at the explorers' feet and sang a song of
thanksgiving to the sun that he had lived to see "those terrible men
whose words (guns) made the earth quake."  Stripping himself of his
costly furs, he placed them on the white men's shoulders, shouting: "Ye
are masters over us; dead or alive, dispose of us as you will."

Then Radisson rose and chanted a song, in which he declared that the
French took the Crees for brethren and would defend them.  To prove his
words, he threw powder in the fire and had twelve guns shot off, which
frightened the Sioux almost out of their senses.  A slave girl placed a
coal in the calumet.  Radisson then presented gifts; the first to
testify that the French adopted the Sioux for friends; the second as a
token that the French also took the Crees for friends; the third as a
sign that the French "would reduce to powder with heavenly fire" any
one who disturbed the peace between these tribes.  The fourth gift was
in grateful recognition of the Sioux' courtesy in granting free passage
through their country.  The gifts consisted of kettles and hatchets and
awls and needles and looking-glasses and bells and combs and paint, but
_not_ guns.  Radisson's speech was received with "Ho, ho's" of
applause.  Sports began.  Radisson offered prizes for racing, jumping,
shooting with the bow, and climbing a greased post.  All the while,
musicians were singing and beating the tom-tom, a drum made of buffalo
hide stretched on hoops and filled with water.

Fourteen days later Radisson and Groseillers set out for the Sioux
country, or what are now known as the Northwestern states.[8]  On the
third voyage Radisson came to the Sioux from the south.  On this
voyage, he came to them from the northeast.  He found that the tribe
numbered seven thousand men of fighting age.  He remarked that the
Sioux used a kind of coke or peat for fire instead of wood.  While he
heard of the tribes that used coal for fire, he does not relate that he
went to them on this trip.  Again he heard of the mountains far inland,
where the Indians found copper and lead and a kind of stone that was
transparent.[9]  He remained six weeks with the Sioux, hunting buffalo
and deer.  Between the Missouri and the Saskatchewan ran a well-beaten
trail northeastward, which was used by the Crees and the Sioux in their
wars.  It is probable that the Sioux escorted Radisson back to the
Crees by this trail, till he was across what is now the boundary
between Minnesota and Canada, and could strike directly eastward for
the Lake of the Woods region, or the hinterland between James Bay and
Lake Superior.

In spring the Crees went to the Bay of the North, which Radisson was
seeking; and after leaving the Sioux, the two explorers struck for the
little fort north of Lake Superior, where they had _cached_ their
goods.  Spring in the North was later than spring in the South; but the
shore ice of the Northern lakes had already become soft.  To save time
