my lord?" asked Tom, turning to a learned judge.

"The law doth not permit a child to make or meddle in any weighty
matter, good my liege, holding that its callow wit unfitteth it to cope
with the riper wit and evil schemings of them that are its elders.  The
_Devil_ may buy a child, if he so choose, and the child agree thereto,
but not an Englishman--in this latter case the contract would be null
and void."

"It seemeth a rude unchristian thing, and ill contrived, that English
law denieth privileges to Englishmen to waste them on the devil!" cried
Tom, with honest heat.

This novel view of the matter excited many smiles, and was stored
away in many heads to be repeated about the Court as evidence of Tom's
originality as well as progress toward mental health.

The elder culprit had ceased from sobbing, and was hanging upon Tom's
words with an excited interest and a growing hope.  Tom noticed this,
and it strongly inclined his sympathies toward her in her perilous and
unfriended situation.  Presently he asked--

"How wrought they to bring the storm?"

"_By pulling off their stockings_, sire."

This astonished Tom, and also fired his curiosity to fever heat. He
said, eagerly--

"It is wonderful!  Hath it always this dread effect?"

"Always, my liege--at least if the woman desire it, and utter the
needful words, either in her mind or with her tongue."

Tom turned to the woman, and said with impetuous zeal--

"Exert thy power--I would see a storm!"

There was a sudden paling of cheeks in the superstitious assemblage, and
a general, though unexpressed, desire to get out of the place--all of
which was lost upon Tom, who was dead to everything but the proposed
cataclysm.  Seeing a puzzled and astonished look in the woman's face, he
added, excitedly--

"Never fear--thou shalt be blameless.  More--thou shalt go free--none
shall touch thee.  Exert thy power."

"Oh, my lord the King, I have it not--I have been falsely accused."

"Thy fears stay thee.  Be of good heart, thou shalt suffer no harm.
 Make a storm--it mattereth not how small a one--I require nought great
or harmful, but indeed prefer the opposite--do this and thy life is
spared--thou shalt go out free, with thy child, bearing the King's
pardon, and safe from hurt or malice from any in the realm."

The woman prostrated herself, and protested, with tears, that she had
no power to do the miracle, else she would gladly win her child's life
alone, and be content to lose her own, if by obedience to the King's
command so precious a grace might be acquired.

Tom urged--the woman still adhered to her declarations.  Finally he
said--

"I think the woman hath said true.  An' _my_ mother were in her place
and gifted with the devil's functions, she had not stayed a moment to
call her storms and lay the whole land in ruins, if the saving of my
forfeit life were the price she got!  It is argument that other
mothers are made in like mould.  Thou art free, goodwife--thou and thy
child--for I do think thee innocent.  _Now_ thou'st nought to fear,
being pardoned--pull off thy stockings!--an' thou canst make me a storm,
thou shalt be rich!"

The redeemed creature was loud in her gratitude, and proceeded to
obey, whilst Tom looked on with eager expectancy, a little marred
by apprehension; the courtiers at the same time manifesting decided
discomfort and uneasiness.  The woman stripped her own feet and her
little girl's also, and plainly did her best to reward the King's
generosity with an earthquake, but it was all a failure and a
disappointment.  Tom sighed, and said--

"There, good soul, trouble thyself no further, thy power is departed
out of thee.  Go thy way in peace; and if it return to thee at any time,
forget me not, but fetch me a storm." {13}




CHAPTER XVI. The State Dinner.

The dinner hour drew near--yet strangely enough, the thought brought
but slight discomfort to Tom, and hardly any terror.  The morning's
experiences had wonderfully built up his confidence; the poor little
ash-cat was already more wonted to his strange garret, after four
days' habit, than a mature person could have become in a full month.  A
child's facility in accommodating itself to circumstances was never more
strikingly illustrated.

Let us privileged ones hurry to the great banqueting-room and have a
glance at matters there whilst Tom is being made ready for the
imposing occasion.  It is a spacious apartment, with gilded pillars
and pilasters, and pictured walls and ceilings.  At the door stand tall
guards, as rigid as statues, dressed in rich and picturesque costumes,
and bearing halberds.  In a high gallery which runs all around the place
is a band of musicians and a packed company of citizens of both sexes,
in brilliant attire.  In the centre of the room, upon a raised platform,
is Tom's table. Now let the ancient chronicler speak:

"A gentleman enters the room bearing a rod, and along with him another
bearing a tablecloth, which, after they have both kneeled three times
with the utmost veneration, he spreads upon the table, and after
kneeling again they both retire; then come two others, one with the rod
again, the other with a salt-cellar, a plate, and bread; when they have
kneeled as the others had done, and placed what was brought upon the
table, they too retire with the same ceremonies performed by the first;
at last come two nobles, richly clothed, one bearing a tasting-knife,
who, after prostrating themselves three times in the most graceful
manner, approach and rub the table with bread and salt, with as much awe
as if the King had been present." {6}

So end the solemn preliminaries.  Now, far down the echoing corridors
we hear a bugle-blast, and the indistinct cry, "Place for the King!
 Way for the King's most excellent majesty!"  These sounds are momently
repeated--they grow nearer and nearer--and presently, almost in our
faces, the martial note peals and the cry rings out, "Way for the King!"
 At this instant the shining pageant appears, and files in at the door,
with a measured march. Let the chronicler speak again:--

"First come Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Knights of the Garter, all richly
dressed and bareheaded; next comes the Chancellor, between two, one of
which carries the royal sceptre, the other the Sword of State in a red
scabbard, studded with golden fleurs-de-lis, the point upwards; next
comes the King himself--whom, upon his appearing, twelve trumpets and
many drums salute with a great burst of welcome, whilst all in the
galleries rise in their places, crying 'God save the King!'  After him
come nobles attached to his person, and on his right and left march his
guard of honour, his fifty Gentlemen Pensioners, with gilt battle-axes."

This was all fine and pleasant.  Tom's pulse beat high, and a glad light
was in his eye.  He bore himself right gracefully, and all the more
so because he was not thinking of how he was doing it, his mind being
charmed and occupied with the blithe sights and sounds about him--and
besides, nobody can be very ungraceful in nicely-fitting beautiful
clothes after he has grown a little used to them--especially if he is
for the moment unconscious of them. Tom remembered his instructions, and
acknowledged his greeting with a slight inclination of his plumed head,
and a courteous "I thank ye, my good people."

He seated himself at table, without removing his cap; and did it without
the least embarrassment; for to eat with one's cap on was the one
solitary royal custom upon which the kings and the Cantys met upon
common ground, neither party having any advantage over the other in the
matter of old familiarity with it.  The pageant broke up and grouped
itself picturesquely, and remained bareheaded.

Now to the sound of gay music the Yeomen of the Guard entered,--"the
tallest and mightiest men in England, they being carefully selected in
this regard"--but we will let the chronicler tell about it:--

"The Yeomen of the Guard entered, bareheaded, clothed in scarlet, with
golden roses upon their backs; and these went and came, bringing in each
turn a course of dishes, served in plate.  These dishes were received
by a gentleman in the same order they were brought, and placed upon
the table, while the taster gave to each guard a mouthful to eat of the
particular dish he had brought, for fear of any poison."

Tom made a good dinner, notwithstanding he was conscious that hundreds
of eyes followed each morsel to his mouth and watched him eat it with an
interest which could not have been more intense if it had been a deadly
explosive and was expected to blow him up and scatter him all about
the place.  He was careful not to hurry, and equally careful not to do
anything whatever for himself, but wait till the proper official knelt
down and did it for him.  He got through without a mistake--flawless and
precious triumph.

When the meal was over at last and he marched away in the midst of his
bright pageant, with the happy noises in his ears of blaring bugles,
rolling drums, and thundering acclamations, he felt that if he had seen
the worst of dining in public it was an ordeal which he would be glad
to endure several times a day if by that means he could but buy himself
free from some of the more formidable requirements of his royal office.




CHAPTER XVII. Foo-foo the First.

Miles Hendon hurried along toward the Southwark end of the bridge,
keeping a sharp look-out for the persons he sought, and hoping and
expecting to overtake them presently.  He was disappointed in this,
however.  By asking questions, he was enabled to track them part of the
way through Southwark; then all traces ceased, and he was perplexed as
to how to proceed.  Still, he continued his efforts as best he
could during the rest of the day.  Nightfall found him leg-weary,
half-famished, and his desire as far from accomplishment as ever; so
he supped at the Tabard Inn and went to bed, resolved to make an early
start in the morning, and give the town an exhaustive search.  As he lay
thinking and planning, he presently began to reason thus:  The boy would
escape from the ruffian, his reputed father, if possible; would he go
back to London and seek his former haunts?  No, he would not do that,
he would avoid recapture. What, then, would he do?  Never having had a
friend in the world, or a protector, until he met Miles Hendon, he would
naturally try to find that friend again, provided the effort did not
require him to go toward London and danger.  He would strike for Hendon
Hall, that is what he would do, for he knew Hendon was homeward bound
and there he might expect to find him.  Yes, the case was plain to
Hendon--he must lose no more time in Southwark, but move at once through
Kent, toward Monk's Holm, searching the wood and inquiring as he went.
 Let us return to the vanished little King now.

The ruffian whom the waiter at the inn on the bridge saw 'about to join'
the youth and the King did not exactly join them, but fell in close
behind them and followed their steps.  He said nothing. His left arm was
in a sling, and he wore a large green patch over his left eye; he limped
slightly, and used an oaken staff as a support.  The youth led the King
a crooked course through Southwark, and by-and-by struck into the
high road beyond.  The King was irritated, now, and said he would stop
here--it was Hendon's place to come to him, not his to go to Hendon.  He
would not endure such insolence; he would stop where he was.  The youth
said--

"Thou'lt tarry here, and thy friend lying wounded in the wood yonder?
 So be it, then."

The King's manner changed at once.  He cried out--

"Wounded?  And who hath dared to do it?  But that is apart; lead on,
lead on!  Faster, sirrah!  Art shod with lead?  Wounded, is he?  Now
though the doer of it be a duke's son he shall rue it!"

It was some distance to the wood, but the space was speedily traversed.
The youth looked about him, discovered a bough sticking in the ground,
with a small bit of rag tied to it, then led the way into the forest,
watching for similar boughs and finding them at intervals; they were
evidently guides to the point he was aiming at.  By-and-by an open place
was reached, where were the charred remains of a farm-house, and near
them a barn which was falling to ruin and decay.  There was no sign of
life anywhere, and utter silence prevailed.  The youth entered the barn,
the King following eagerly upon his heels.  No one there! The King shot
a surprised and suspicious glance at the youth, and asked--

"Where is he?"

A mocking laugh was his answer.  The King was in a rage in a moment; he
seized a billet of wood and was in the act of charging upon the youth
when another mocking laugh fell upon his ear.  It was from the lame
ruffian who had been following at a distance. The King turned and said
angrily--

"Who art thou?  What is thy business here?"

"Leave thy foolery," said the man, "and quiet thyself.  My disguise is
none so good that thou canst pretend thou knowest not thy father through
it."

"Thou art not my father.  I know thee not.  I am the King.  If thou hast
hid my servant, find him for me, or thou shalt sup sorrow for what thou
hast done."

John Canty replied, in a stern and measured voice--

"It is plain thou art mad, and I am loath to punish thee;  but if thou
provoke me, I must.  Thy prating doth no harm here, where there are
no ears that need to mind thy follies; yet it is well to practise thy
tongue to wary speech, that it may do no hurt when our quarters change.
 I have done a murder, and may not tarry at home--neither shalt thou,
seeing I need thy service.  My name is changed, for wise reasons; it is
Hobbs--John Hobbs; thine is Jack--charge thy memory accordingly.  Now,
then, speak.  Where is thy mother?  Where are thy sisters?  They came
not to the place appointed--knowest thou whither they went?"

The King answered sullenly--

"Trouble me not with these riddles.  My mother is dead; my sisters are
in the palace."

The youth near by burst into a derisive laugh, and the King would have
assaulted him, but Canty--or Hobbs, as he now called himself--prevented
him, and said--

"Peace, Hugo, vex him not; his mind is astray, and thy ways fret him.
Sit thee down, Jack, and quiet thyself; thou shalt have a morsel to eat,
anon."

Hobbs and Hugo fell to talking together, in low voices, and the King
removed himself as far as he could from their disagreeable company.
 He withdrew into the twilight of the farther end of the barn, where
he found the earthen floor bedded a foot deep with straw.  He lay down
here, drew straw over himself in lieu of blankets, and was soon absorbed
in thinking.  He had many griefs, but the minor ones were swept almost
into forgetfulness by the supreme one, the loss of his father.  To
the rest of the world the name of Henry VIII. brought a shiver, and
suggested an ogre whose nostrils breathed destruction and whose hand
dealt scourgings and death; but to this boy the name brought only
sensations of pleasure; the figure it invoked wore a countenance that
was all gentleness and affection.  He called to mind a long succession
of loving passages between his father and himself, and dwelt fondly upon
them, his unstinted tears attesting how deep and real was the grief that
possessed his heart. As the afternoon wasted away, the lad, wearied with
his troubles, sank gradually into a tranquil and healing slumber.

After a considerable time--he could not tell how long--his senses
struggled to a half-consciousness, and as he lay with closed eyes
vaguely wondering where he was and what had been happening, he noted a
murmurous sound, the sullen beating of rain upon the roof. A snug sense
of comfort stole over him, which was rudely broken, the next moment,
by a chorus of piping cackles and coarse laughter.  It startled him
disagreeably, and he unmuffled his head to see whence this interruption
proceeded.  A grim and unsightly picture met his eye.  A bright fire was
burning in the middle of the floor, at the other end of the barn; and
around it, and lit weirdly up by the red glare, lolled and sprawled the
motliest company of tattered gutter-scum and ruffians, of both sexes, he
had ever read or dreamed of.  There were huge stalwart men, brown
with exposure, long-haired, and clothed in fantastic rags; there were
middle-sized youths, of truculent countenance, and similarly clad; there
were blind mendicants, with patched or bandaged eyes; crippled ones,
with wooden legs and crutches; diseased ones, with running sores peeping
from ineffectual wrappings; there was a villain-looking pedlar with
his pack; a knife-grinder, a tinker, and a barber-surgeon, with the
implements of their trades; some of the females were hardly-grown girls,
some were at prime, some were old and wrinkled hags, and all were loud,
brazen, foul-mouthed; and all soiled and slatternly; there were three
sore-faced babies; there were a couple of starveling curs, with strings
about their necks, whose office was to lead the blind.

The night was come, the gang had just finished feasting, an orgy was
beginning; the can of liquor was passing from mouth to mouth. A general
cry broke forth--

"A song! a song from the Bat and Dick and Dot-and-go-One!"

One of the blind men got up, and made ready by casting aside the patches
that sheltered his excellent eyes, and the pathetic placard which
recited the cause of his calamity.  Dot-and-go-One disencumbered himself
of his timber leg and took his place, upon sound and healthy limbs,
beside his fellow-rascal; then they roared out a rollicking ditty,
and were reinforced by the whole crew, at the end of each stanza, in
a rousing chorus.  By the time the last stanza was reached, the
half-drunken enthusiasm had risen to such a pitch, that everybody joined
in and sang it clear through from the beginning, producing a volume of
villainous sound that made the rafters quake.  These were the inspiring
words:--

'Bien Darkman's then, Bouse Mort and Ken, The bien Coves bings awast, On
Chates to trine by Rome Coves dine For his long lib at last. Bing'd out
bien Morts and toure, and toure, Bing out of the Rome vile bine, And
toure the Cove that cloy'd your duds, Upon the Chates to trine.'

(From'The English Rogue.' London, 1665.)

Conversation followed; not in the thieves' dialect of the song, for that
was only used in talk when unfriendly ears might be listening.  In the
course of it, it appeared that 'John Hobbs' was not altogether a new
recruit, but had trained in the gang at some former time.  His later
history was called for, and when he said he had 'accidentally' killed a
man, considerable satisfaction was expressed; when he added that the
man was a priest, he was roundly applauded, and had to take a drink with
everybody.  Old acquaintances welcomed him joyously, and new ones were
proud to shake him by the hand.  He was asked why he had 'tarried away
so many months.'  He answered--

"London is better than the country, and safer, these late years, the
laws be so bitter and so diligently enforced.  An' I had not had that
accident, I had stayed there.  I had resolved to stay, and never more
venture country-wards--but the accident has ended that."

He inquired how many persons the gang numbered now.  The 'ruffler,' or
chief, answered--

"Five and twenty sturdy budges, bulks, files, clapperdogeons and
maunders, counting the dells and doxies and other morts. {7}  Most are
here, the rest are wandering eastward, along the winter lay. We follow
at dawn."

"I do not see the Wen among the honest folk about me.  Where may he be?"

"Poor lad, his diet is brimstone, now, and over hot for a delicate
taste. He was killed in a brawl, somewhere about midsummer."

"I sorrow to hear that; the Wen was a capable man, and brave."

"That was he, truly.  Black Bess, his dell, is of us yet, but absent on
the eastward tramp; a fine lass, of nice ways and orderly conduct, none
ever seeing her drunk above four days in the seven."

"She was ever strict--I remember it well--a goodly wench and worthy
all commendation.  Her mother was more free and less particular; a
troublesome and ugly-tempered beldame, but furnished with a wit above
the common."

"We lost her through it.  Her gift of palmistry and other sorts of
fortune-telling begot for her at last a witch's name and fame. The
law roasted her to death at a slow fire.  It did touch me to a sort of
tenderness to see the gallant way she met her lot--cursing and reviling
all the crowd that gaped and gazed around her, whilst the flames licked
upward toward her face and catched her thin locks and crackled about
her old gray head--cursing them! why an' thou should'st live a thousand
years thoud'st never hear so masterful a cursing.  Alack, her art died
with her.  There be base and weakling imitations left, but no true
blasphemy."

The Ruffler sighed; the listeners sighed in sympathy; a general
depression fell upon the company for a moment, for even hardened
outcasts like these are not wholly dead to sentiment, but are able to
feel a fleeting sense of loss and affliction at wide intervals and
under peculiarly favouring circumstances--as in cases like to this, for
instance, when genius and culture depart and leave no heir.  However, a
deep drink all round soon restored the spirits of the mourners.

"Have any others of our friends fared hardly?" asked Hobbs.

"Some--yes.  Particularly new comers--such as small husbandmen turned
shiftless and hungry upon the world because their farms were taken from
them to be changed to sheep ranges.  They begged, and were whipped at
the cart's tail, naked from the girdle up, till the blood ran; then set
in the stocks to be pelted; they begged again, were whipped again, and
deprived of an ear; they begged a third time--poor devils, what else
could they do?--and were branded on the cheek with a red-hot iron, then
sold for slaves; they ran away, were hunted down, and hanged.  'Tis
a brief tale, and quickly told.  Others of us have fared less hardly.
Stand forth, Yokel, Burns, and Hodge--show your adornments!"

These stood up and stripped away some of their rags, exposing their
backs, criss-crossed with ropy old welts left by the lash; one turned
up his hair and showed the place where a left ear had once been; another
showed a brand upon his shoulder--the letter V--and a mutilated ear; the
third said--
