    Arose, they knew not; but the pangs they knew
    When love is passionate, and man betrays,
    And what a frantic woman scorned can do,
And many a sad surmise their boding thoughts pursue.

II. The fleet was on mid-ocean; land no more
    Was visible, nor aught but sea and sky;
    When lo! above them a black cloud, that bore
    Tempest and Night, frowned iron-dark on high,
    And the wave, shuddering as the wind swept by,
    Curled and was darkened. From the stern loud cries
    The pilot Palinurus: "Whence and why
    This cloudy rack that gathers o'er the skies?
What, father Neptune, now, what mischief dost devise?"

III. So having said, he bade the seamen take
    The tackling in, and ply the lusty oar,
    Then sloped the mainsheet to the wind, and spake:
    "Noble AEneas, e'en if high Jove swore
    To bring us safely to Italia's shore,
    With skies like these, 'twere hopeless. Westward loom
    The dark clouds mustering, and the changed winds roar
    Athwart us, and the air is thick with gloom.
Vainly we strive to move, and struggle with our doom.

IV. "Come, then, since Fortune hath the mastering hand,
    Yield we and turn. Not far, methinks, there lies
    A friendly shore, thy brother Eryx' land,
    And ports Sicanian, if aright these eyes
    Recall my former reading of the skies."
    Then good AEneas: "Long ago, 'tis plain,
    The winds so willed it. I have seen," he cries,
    "And marked thee toiling in their teeth in vain.
Shift sail and turn the helm. What sweeter shore to gain,

V.  "What port more welcome to a wearied fleet
    And wave-worn mariners, what land more blest
    Than that where still Acestes lives, to greet
    His Dardan friends, and in the boon earth's breast
    My father's bones, Anchises', are at rest?"
    He spake; at once the Trojans strive to gain
    The port. Fair breezes, blowing from the West,
    Swell out the sails. They bound along the main,
And soon with gladdening hearts the well-known shore attain.

VI. Far off Acestes, wondering, from a height
    The coming of their friendly ships descries,
    And hastes to meet them. Roughly is he dight
    In Libyan bearskin, as in huntsman's guise;
    A pointed javelin in each hand he plies.
    Him once a Trojan to Crimisus bore,
    The stream-god. Mindful of ancestral ties
    He hails his weary kinsmen, come once more,
And dainty fruits sets forth, and cheers them from his store.

VII. Next dawn had chased the stars, when on the shore
    AEneas thus the gathered crews addressed:
    "Twelve months have passed, brave Dardans, since we bore
    The bones of great Anchises to his rest,
    And laid his ashes in the ground, and blessed
    The mourning altars by the rolling sea.
    And now once more, if rightly I have guessed,
    The day is come, which Heaven hath willed to be
Sacred for evermore, but ever sad to me.

VIII. This day, though exiled on Gaetulian sands,
    Or caught by tempests on th' AEgean brine,
    Or at Mycenae in the foemen's hands,
    With annual honours will I hold divine,
    And head with fitting offerings the shrine.
    By chance unsought, now hither are we led,
    Yet not, I ween, without the God's design,
    Where lie the ashes of my father dead,
And greet a friendly port, by favouring breezes sped.

IX. "Come then, with festival his name revere,
    Pray we for winds to waft us, and entreat
    His shade to take these offerings year by year,
    When gathered to our new-built Troy, we meet
    In hallowed fanes, his worship to repeat.
    See, for each ship two head of horned kine
    Acestes sends, his Trojan friends to greet
    Bid then the home-gods of the Trojan line,
With those our host adores, to grace the feast divine.

X.  "Nay, if the ninth fair morning show fine day,
    And bring the sunshine, be a match decreed
    For Teucrian ships, their swiftness to essay.
    Next, in the footrace whosoe'er hath speed,
    Or, glorying in his manhood, claims the meed
    With dart, or flying arrow and the bow,
    Or bout with untanned gauntlet, mark and heed,
    And wait the victor's guerdon. Come ye now;
Hush'd be each idle tongue, and garlanded each brow."

XI. He spake, and round his temples binds with joy
    His mother's myrtle. Helymus is crowned,
    The veteran Acestes, and the boy
    Ascanius, and the Trojan warriors round.
    So from the council to the funeral mound
    He moves, the centre of a circling crowd.
    Two bowls of wine he pours upon the ground,
    Two of warm milk, and two of victim's blood,
And, scattering purple flowers, invokes the shade aloud.

XII. "Hail, holy Sire! blest Spirit, hail once more,
    And ashes, vainly rescued! Not with thee
    Was I allowed to reach Italia's shore,
    The fields Ausonian that the Fates decree,
    And Latin Tiber--whatsoe'er it be."
    He ceased, when lo, a monstrous serpent, wound
    In seven huge coils, seven giant spires, they see
    Glide from the grave, and gently clasp the mound,
And 'twixt the altars trail in many a tortuous round.

XIII. The back with azure and the scales with gold
    In streaks and glittering patches were ablaze:
    So doth the rainbow in the clouds unfold
    A thousand hues against the sun's bright rays.
    AEneas stood bewildered with amaze.
    In lengthened train meanwhile the snake went on,
    'Twixt cups and bowls weaving its sinuous ways,
    Then sipped the sacred food, and harming none,
The tasted altars left and 'neath the tomb was gone.

XIV. Cheered, to Anchises he the rites renewed,
    In doubt if there some Genius of the shrine
    Or menial spirit of his sire he viewed.
    Two sheep, two dark-backed heifers, and two swine
    He slays, invoking, as he pours the wine,
    The ghost, released from Acheron. Glad of soul,
    Each adds his gift. These slay the sacred Kine,
    Pile altars, set the cauldrons, heap the coal,
And, sitting, hold the spits, and roast the entrails whole.

XV. Now came the looked-for day. The ninth fair dawn
    Bright Phaethon drove up a cloudless sky.
    Rumour and great Acestes' name had drawn
    The neighbouring folk; shoreward in crowds they hie
    To see the Trojans, or the games to try.
    Piled in the lists the presents they behold,
    Green garlands, tripods, robes of purple dye,
    The conqueror's palm, bright armour for the bold,
And many a talent's weight of silver and of gold.

XVI. Now from a mound the trumpet's notes proclaim
    The sports begun. Four galleys from the fleet,
    The choicest, manned by mariners of fame,
    And matched in size and urged with ponderous beat
    Of oar-blades, for the naval contest meet.
    See, here the Shark comes speeding to her place,
    Trained is her crew and eager to compete,
    Brave Mnestheus is her captain, born to grace
Italia's land ere long, and found the Memmian race.

XVII. Here too, the huge Chimaera towers along,
    A floating citadel, with walls of pine,
    Three tale of Dardans urge her, stout and strong,
    Their triple tiers in unison combine
    To drive her, ruled by Gyas, through the brine.
    Borne in the monstrous Centaur, next doth come
    Sergestus, father of the Sergian line.
    Last, in the dark-blue Scylla ploughs the foam
Cloanthus, whence thy house, Cluentius of Rome.

XVIII. Far seaward stands, afront the foamy shore,
    A rock, half-hid when wintry waves upleap,
    And skies are starless, and the North-winds roar,
    But still and silent, when the calm waves sleep,
    A level top it lifts above the deep,
    The seamews' haunt. A bough of ilex here
    The good AEneas sets upon the steep,
    Green-leaved and tall,--a goal, to seamen clear,
To seek and, doubling round, their homeward course to steer.

XIX. Each takes his station. On the sterns behold,
    Ranged in due order as the lots assign,
    The captains, gay with purple and with gold.
    The crews their brows with poplar garlands twine,
    And wet with oil their naked shoulders shine.
    Prone on their oars, and straining from the thwart,
    With souls astretch, they listen for the sign.
    Fear stirs the pulse and drains the throbbing heart,
Thrilled with the lust of praise, and panting for the start.

XX. Loud peals the trumpet. From the port they dash
    With cheers. The waves hiss, as the strong arms keep
    In time, drawn up to finish with a flash;
    And three-toothed prow and oars, with measured sweep,
    Tear up the yawning furrows of the deep,
    Less swiftly, to the chariot yoked atwain,
    The bounding racers from the base outleap,
    Less keen the driver, as they scour the plain,
Leans o'er the whistling lash, and slacks the streaming rein.

XXI. Shouts, cheers and plaudits wake the woods around,
    Their clamours roll along the land-locked shore,
    And, echoing, from the beaten hills rebound.
    First Gyas comes, amid the rout and roar;
    Cloanthus second,--better with the oar
    His crew, but heavier is the load of pine.
    Next Shark and Centaur struggle to the fore,
    Now Shark ahead, now Centaur, now in line
The long keels, urged abreast, together plough the brine.

XXII. Near lay the rock, the goal was close in sight,
    When Gyas, first o'er half a length of tide
    Shouts to his helmsman: "Whither to the right?
    Hug close the cliff, and graze the leftward side.
    Let others hold the deep." In vain he cried.
    Menoetes feared the hidden reefs, and bore
    To seaward. "Whither from thy course so wide?
    What; swerving still?" the captain shouts once more,
"Keep to the shore, I say, Menoetes, to the shore."

XXIII. He turned, when lo! behind him, gaining fast,
    Cloanthus. On the leeward side he stole
    A narrower compass, grazing as he passed
    His rival's vessel and the sounding shoal,
    Then gained safe water, as he turned the goal.
    Grief fired young Gyas at the sight, and drew
    Tears from his eyes and anger from his soul.
    Careless alike of honour and his crew,
Down from the lofty stern his timorous guide he threw.

XXIV. Forthwith he grasps the tiller in his hand,
    Captain and helmsman, and his comrades cheers,
    And wrests the rudder leftward to the land,
    Slow from the depths Menoetes reappears,
    Clogged by his clothes, and cumbered with his years.
    Then, shoreward swimming, climbs with feeble craft
    The rock, and there sits drying. All with jeers
    Laughed as he fell and floated; loud they laughed
As, sputtering, from his throat he spits the briny draught.

XXV. Joy, mixt with hope, as Gyas slacks his pace,
    Fires the two hindmost. Now they near the mark;
    Sergestus, leading, takes the inside place.
    Yet not a length divides them, for the Shark
    Shoots up halfway and overlaps his bark.
    Mnestheus, amidships pacing, cheers his crew;
    "Now, now lean to, and let each arm be stark;
    Row, mighty Hector's followers, whom I drew
From Troy, in Troy's last hour, my comrades tried and true!

XXVI. "Now for the strength and hardihood that braved
    Gaetulian shoals, and the Ionian main,
    And billows following billows, as they raved
    Against steep Malea. Not mine to gain
    The prize: I strive not to be first--'tis vain.
    Sweet were the thought--but Neptune rules the race;
    Let them the palm, whom he has willed, retain.
    But oh, for shame! to take the hindmost place
Win this--to ward that doom, and ban the dire disgrace."

XXVII. Straining each nerve, they bend them to the oar.
    The bronze poop reels, so lustily they row,
    And from beneath them slips the watery floor.
    The parched lips quiver, as they pant and blow,
    Sweat pours in rivers from their limbs; when now
    Chance brings the wished-for honour. Blindly rash,
    Close to the rocks Sergestus drives his prow.
    Too close he steals; on jutting crags they dash;
The straining oars snap short, the bows with sudden crash

XXVIII. Stick fast, and hang upon the ledge. Up spring
    With shouts the sailors, clamorous at delay,
    And snatch the crushed oars from the waves, and bring
    Sharp poles and steel-tipt boathooks, and essay
    To thrust the forepart from the rocks away.
    Brave Mnestheus sees and, glorying in his gain,
    Invokes the winds. With oarsmen in array
    His swift bark, urged with many a stalwart strain,
Shoots down the sloping tide, and wins the open main.

XXIX. Like as a pigeon, startled from her rest,
    Swift from the crannies of the rock, where clings
    Her heart's desire, the darlings of her nest,
    Darts forth and, scared with terror, flaps her wings,
    Then, gliding smoothly, in the soft air swings,
    And skims her liquid passage through the skies
    On pinions motionless. So Mnestheus springs,
    So springs the Shark; her impulse, as she flies,
Cleaving the homeward seas, the wanting wings supplies.

XXX. He leaves Sergestus, who implores in vain
    His aid, still toiling from the rocks to clear
    And headway with his shattered oars to gain.
    Soon huge Chimaera, left with none to steer,
    Drops off astern, and labours in the rear.
    Alone remains Cloanthus, but the race
    Well-nigh is ended, and the goal is near;
    Him Mnestheus seeks; his crew, with quickened pace
And utmost stretch of oars, press forward in the chase.

XXXI. Now, now the noise redoubles; cheers and cries
    Urge on the follower, and the wild acclaim
    Rolls up, and wakes the echoes of the skies.
    These scorn to lose their vantage, stung with shame,
    And life is wagered willingly for fame.
    Success inspires the hindmost; as they dare,
    They do; the thought of winning wins the game.
    With equal honours Chance had crowned the pair,
But thus, with outspread hands, Cloanthus breathed a prayer:

XXXII. "Great Gods of Ocean! on whose waves I ride,
    A milk-white bull upon the shore I vow,
    And with its entrails will I strew the tide,
    And on your altars make the wine outflow."
    Fair Panopea hears him from below,
    The Nereids hear, and old Portunus plies
    His own great hand, to push them as they go.
    Swifter than arrow to the shore she flies,
Swifter than Southern gale, and in the harbour lies.

XXXIII. All summoned now, the herald's voice declares
    Cloanthus conqueror, and with verdant bay
    AEneas crowns him. To each crew he shares
    Three steers and wine, and, to recall the day,
    A silver talent bids them bear away.
    Choice honours to the captains next are told,
    A scarf he gives the victor, rich and gay,
    Twice-fringed with purple, glorious to behold,
Whose Melibaean dye meanders round the gold.

XXXIV. Inwoven there, behold the kingly boy,
    Fair Ganymede, pursues the flying deer
    On Ida and the wooded heights of Troy,
    Swift-footed, glorying with uplifted spear,
    So keen the panting of his heart ye hear.
    Down swoops Jove's armour-bearer, and on high
    With taloned claws hath trussed him. Vainly here
    His aged guardians lift their heads and cry;
The faithful dogs look up, and fiercely bay the sky.

XXXV. A goodly hauberk to the next he gave,
    With polished rings and triple chain of gold,
    Torn by his own hands from Demoleos brave,
    Beneath high Troy, where Simois swiftly rolled,
    The warrior's glory and defence, to hold.
    Phegeus and Sagaris, with all their might,
    Two stalwart slaves, scarce bore it, fold on fold,
    That coat of mail, wherein Demoleos dight,
Trod down the ranks of Troy, and put his foes to flight.

XXXVI. Last comes the third: two brazen caldrons fine,
    Two cups of silver doth the prince bestow,
    Rough-chased with imagery of choice design.
    Each had his prize, and glorying forth they go,
    With purple ribbons on their brows, when lo!
    Scarce torn with effort from the rock's embrace,
    Oarless, and short of oarsmen by a row,
    Home comes Sergestus, and in rueful case
Drives his dishonoured bark, left hindmost in the race.

XXXVII. As when an adder, whom athwart the way
    Some wheel hath crushed, or traveller, passing by,
    Maimed with a stone, as unaware he lay,
    And left sore mangled, on the point to die,
    In vain his coils would lengthen, fain to fly:
    One half erect, his burning eyes around
    He darts, and lifts his hissing throat on high,
    Defiant, half still writhes upon the ground,
Self-twined in tortuous knots, and crippled by the wound:

XXXVIII. So slowly rows the Centaur, yet anon
    They set the sails, and loose the spreading sheet,
    And crowd full canvas; and the port is won.
    Glad is AEneas, and he joys to greet
    His friends brought safely and his ships complete.
    So to Sergestus, for his portion due,
    He gives fair Pholoe, a slave of Crete,
    Twins at her breast, two sons of loveliest hue,
And well Minerva's works, the weaving art, she knew.

XXXIX. This contest o'er, the good AEneas sought
    A grassy plain, with waving forests crowned
    And sloping hills--fit theatre for sport,
    Where in the middle of the vale was found
    A circus. Hither comes he, ringed around
    With thousands, here, amidst them, throned on high
    In rustic state, he seats him on a mound,
    And all who in the footrace list to vie,
With proffered gifts invites, and tempts their souls to try.

XL. In crowds the Teucrians and Sicanians come,
    First, Nisus and Euryalus. None so fair
    As young Euryalus, in youthful bloom
    And beauty; none with Nisus could compare
    In pure affection for a youth so rare.
    Here stood Diores, famous for his speed,
    A prince of Priam's lineage; Salius there,
    And Patron, this of Acarnanian seed,
That of Arcadian birth and Tegeaean breed.

XLI. Came from Trinacria two champions bold,
    Young Helymus and Panopes, well-tried
    In woodland craft, and followers of old
    Acestes; came full many a youth beside,
    Whose fame shines dimly, or whose name hath died.
    Then cries AEneas 'mid the concourse: "Ho!
    Give heed, for surely shall my word abide,
    Blithe be your hearts, for none among you--no,
Not one of all this crowd--without a gift shall go.

XLII. "To each, a common largess, be a pair
    Of Gnossian javelins and an axe decreed,
    With haft of silver chasings. Three shall wear
    Crowns of pale olive. For the victor's need,
    Adorned with trappings, stands a noble steed.
    A quiver, worn by Amazon of old,
    With Thracian arrows, for the next in speed,
    Clasped with a gem and belted with bright gold.
The third this Argive helm, fit recompense, shall hold."

XLIII. He spake, and at the signal forth they burst
    Together, like a storm-cloud, from the base,
    With eager eyes set goalward. Nisus first
    Darts off, and, bounding with the South-wind's pace,
    And swift as winged lightning, leads the race.
    Next, but the next with many a length between,
    Comes Salius; then, behind him, third in place,
    Euryalus; then Helymus is seen;
And lo! Diores last, comes flying along the green.

XLIV. Heel touching heel, on Helymus he hung,
    Shoulder to shoulder. But a rood beside,
    And, slipping past him, foremost he had sprung,
    And solved a doubt by winning. Side by side,
    The last lap reached, with many a labouring stride
    And breathless effort to the post they strain,
    When lo! chance-tripping where the sward is dyed
    With slippery blood of oxen newly slain,
Down luckless Nisus slides, and sprawls upon the plain.

XLV. Stumbling, he felt the tottering knees give way.
    With shouts of triumph on his lips he falls
    Prone in the gore and in the miry clay.
    E'en then, his love remembering, he recalls
    Euryalus. Across the track he crawls,
    Then, scrambling up from out the quagmire, flies
    At Salius. In the dust proud Salius sprawls.
    Forth darts Euryalus, 'mid cheers and cries,
Hailed, through his helping friend, the winner of the prize.

XLVI. The second prize to Helymus, the third
    Falls thus to brave Diores.--Now the heat
    Was o'er, when Salius with his clamouring stirred
    Troy's seated elders, furious with defeat,
    And claimed the prize, as wrested by a cheat.
    Tears aid Euryalus, and favour pleads
    His worth, more winsome in a form so sweet,
    And loudly, too, Diores intercedes.
Lost were his own last prize, if Salius' claim succeeds.

XLVII. "Boys," said the good AEneas, "the award
    Is fixt, and no man shall the palm withhold.
    Yet be it mine to cheer a friend ill-starred."
    He spake, and Salius with a gift consoled,
    A Moorish lion's hide, with claws of gold
    And shaggy hair. Then Nisus with a frown:
    "If gifts so great a vanquished man may hold,
    If falls win pity, and defeat renown,
What prize shall Nisus gain, whose merit earned the crown?

XLVIII. "Ay, who had won, had Chance not interfered,
    And baffled me, like Salius? Look," he said,
    And pointed to his limbs and forehead, smeared
    With ordure. Smiling, the good Sire surveyed
    His piteous plight and raiment disarrayed;
    Then forth he bade a glittering shield be borne,
    Which Didymaon's workmanship had made,
    From Neptune's temple by the Danaans torn.
This prize he gives the youth, his prowess to adorn.

XLIX. The race was ended, and the gifts assigned,
    When thus AEneas, as they thronged about,
    Addressed the crowd: "Now, whosoe'er hath mind
    His nerve to venture, or whose heart is stout,
    Step forth, and don the gauntlets and strike out."
    He spake, and straightway, while the lists they clear,
    Sets forth the gifts, for him who wins the bout,
    Gilt-horned and garlanded, a comely steer,
A sword and glittering helm, the loser's soul to cheer.

L.  At once, amid loud murmurs, to his feet
    Upsprang great Dares, who in olden day
    Alone the haughty Paris dared to meet.
    He, by the tomb where mightiest Hector lay,
    Huge Butes fought, who, glorying in the bay,
    And boasting Amycus' Bebrycian strain,
    Called for his match. But Dares heard him, yea,
    And smote him. Headlong on the sandy plain
A lifeless corpse he rolled, and all his boasts were vain.

LI. Such Dares towers, and strides into the ring,
    With head erect, and shoulders broad and bare,
    And right and left his sinewy arms doth swing,
    And burning for a rival, beats the air.
    Where is his match? Not one of all will dare
    To don the gloves. So, deeming none can stand
    Against him, flushed with triumph, then and there
    Before AEneas, grasping in his hand
