could see no shelter or sign of man? I could not guess, so since I must
keep moving I followed the bank of the river, as I walked disturbing
many crocodiles and loathsome snakes. Now I knew that I could not live
long in such suffering, and determined to struggle forward till I fell
down insensible and death put an end to my torments.

For an hour or more I went on thus till I came to a place that was clear
of bush and reeds. Across this I skipped and danced, striking with my
swollen hands at the gnats which buzzed about my head. Now the end was
not far off, for I was exhausted and near to falling, when suddenly
I came upon a party of men, brown in colour and clothed with white
garments, who had been fishing in the river. By them on the water were
several canoes in which were loads of merchandise, and they were now
engaged in eating. So soon as these men caught sight of me they uttered
exclamations in an unknown tongue and seizing weapons that lay by them,
bows and arrows and wooden clubs set on either side with spikes of
flinty glass, they made towards me as though to kill me. Now I lifted up
my hands praying for mercy, and seeing that I was unarmed and helpless
the men laid down their arms and addressed me. I shook my head to show
that I could not understand, and pointed first to the sea and then to
my swollen features. They nodded, and going to one of the canoes a man
brought from it a paste of a brown colour and aromatic smell. Then by
signs he directed me to remove such garments as remained on me, the
fashion of which seemed to puzzle them greatly. This being done, they
proceeded to anoint my body with the paste, the touch of which gave me
a most blessed relief from my intolerable itching and burning, and
moreover rendered my flesh distasteful to the insects, for after that
they plagued me little.

When I was anointed they offered me food, fried fish and cakes of
meal, together with a most delicious hot drink covered with a brown and
foaming froth that I learned to know afterwards as chocolate. When I
had finished eating, having talked a while together in low tones, they
motioned me to enter one of the canoes, giving me mats to lie on. I
obeyed, and three other men came with me, for the canoe was large. One
of these, a very grave man with a gentle face and manner whom I took
to be the chief of the party, sat down opposite to me, the other two
placing themselves in the bow and stern of the boat which they drove
along by means of paddles. Then we started, followed by three other
canoes, and before we had gone a mile utter weariness overpowered me and
I fell asleep.

I awoke much refreshed, having slept many hours, for now the sun was
setting, and was astonished to find the grave-looking man my companion
in the canoe, keeping watch over my sleep and warding the gnats from me
with a leafy branch. His kindness seemed to show that I was in no danger
of ill-treatment, and my fears on that point being set at rest, I began
to wonder as to what strange land I had come and who its people might
be. Soon, however, I gave over, having nothing to build on, and observed
the scenery instead. Now we were paddling up a smaller river than the
one on the banks of which I had been cast away, and were no longer in
the midst of marshes. On either side of us was open land, or rather land
that would have been open had it not been for the great trees, larger
than the largest oak, which grew upon it, some of them of surpassing
beauty. Up these trees climbed creepers that hung like ropes even
from the topmost boughs, and among them were many strange and gorgeous
flowering plants that seemed to cling to the bark as moss clings to
a wall. In their branches also sat harsh-voiced birds of brilliant
colours, and apes that barked and chattered at us as we went.

Just as the sun set over all this strange new scene the canoes came to
a landing place built of timber, and we disembarked. Now it grew dark
suddenly, and all I could discover was that I was being led along a good
road. Presently we reached a gate, which, from the barking of dogs and
the numbers of people who thronged about it, I judged to be the entrance
to a town, and passing it, we advanced down a long street with houses on
either side. At the doorway of the last house my companion halted, and
taking me by the hand, led me into a long low room lit with lamps of
earthenware. Here some women came forward and kissed him, while others
whom I took to be servants, saluted him by touching the floor with one
hand. Soon, however, all eyes were turned on me and many eager questions
were asked of the chief, of which I could only guess the purport.

When all had gazed their fill supper was served, a rich meal of many
strange meats, and of this I was invited to partake, which I did, seated
on a mat and eating of the dishes that were placed upon the ground by
the women. Among these I noticed one girl who far surpassed all the
others in grace, though none were unpleasing to the eye. She was dark,
indeed, but her features were regular and her eyes fine. Her figure was
tall and straight, and the sweetness of her face added to the charm of
her beauty. I mention this girl here for two reasons, first because she
saved me once from sacrifice and once from torture, and secondly because
she was none other than that woman who afterwards became known as
Marina, the mistress of Cortes, without whose aid he had never conquered
Mexico. But at this time she did not guess that it was her destiny to
bring her country of Anahuac beneath the cruel yoke of the Spaniard.

From the moment of my entry I saw that Marina, as I will call her,
for her Indian name is too long to be written, took pity on my forlorn
state, and did what lay in her power to protect me from vulgar curiosity
and to minister to my wants. It was she who brought me water to wash in,
and a clean robe of linen to replace my foul and tattered garments, and
a cloak fashioned of bright feathers for my shoulders.

When supper was done a mat was given me to sleep on in a little room
apart, and here I lay down, thinking that though I might be lost for
ever to my own world, at least I had fallen among a people who were
gentle and kindly, and moreover, as I saw from many tokens, no savages.
One thing, however, disturbed me; I discovered that though I was well
treated, also I was a prisoner, for a man armed with a copper spear
slept across the doorway of my little room. Before I lay down I looked
through the wooden bars which served as a protection to the window
place, and saw that the house stood upon the border of a large open
space, in the midst of which a great pyramid towered a hundred feet or
more into the air. On the top of this pyramid was a building of stone
that I took to be a temple, and rightly, in front of which a fire
burned. Marvelling what the purpose of this great work might be, and in
honour of what faith it was erected, I went to sleep.

On the morrow I was to learn.

Here it may be convenient for me to state, what I did not discover till
afterwards, that I was in the city of Tobasco, the capital of one of the
southern provinces of Anahuac, which is situated at a distance of some
hundreds of miles from the central city of Tenoctitlan, or Mexico. The
river where I had been cast away was the Rio de Tobasco, where Cortes
landed in the following year, and my host, or rather my captor, was the
cacique or chief of Tobasco, the same man who subsequently presented
Marina to Cortes. Thus it came about that, with the exception of a
certain Aguilar, who with some companions was wrecked on the coast of
Yucatan six years before, I was the first white man who ever dwelt among
the Indians. This Aguilar was rescued by Cortes, though his companions
were all sacrificed to Huitzel, the horrible war-god of the country. But
the name of the Spaniards was already known to the Indians, who looked
on them with superstitious fear, for in the year previous to my being
cast away, the hidalgo Hernandez de Cordova had visited the coast of
Yucatan and fought several battles with the natives, and earlier in the
same year of my arrival, Juan de Grigalva had come to this very river of
Tobasco. Thus it came about that I was set down as one of this strange
new nation of Teules, as the Indians named the Spaniards, and therefore
as an enemy for whose blood the gods were thirsting.


I awoke at dawn much refreshed with sleep, and having washed and clothed
myself in the linen robes that were provided for me, I came into the
large room, where food was given me. Scarcely had I finished my meal
when my captor, the cacique, entered, accompanied by two men whose
appearance struck terror to my heart. In countenance they were fierce
and horrible; they wore black robes embroidered with mystic characters
in red, and their long and tangled hair was matted together with some
strange substance. These men, whom all present, including the chief or
cacique, seemed to look on with the utmost reverence, glared at me with
a fierce glee that made my blood run cold. One of them, indeed, tore
open my white robe and placed his filthy hand upon my heart, which beat
quickly enough, counting its throbs aloud while the other nodded at his
words. Afterwards I learned that he was saying that I was very strong.

Glancing round to find the interpretation of this act upon the faces of
those about me, my eyes caught those of the girl Marina, and there was
that in them which left me in little doubt. Horror and pity were written
there, and I knew that some dreadful death overshadowed me. Before
I could do anything, before I could even think, I was seized by the
priests, or pabas as the Indians name them, and dragged from the room,
all the household following us except Marina and the cacique. Now I
found myself in a great square or market place bordered by many fine
houses of stone and lime, and some of mud, which was filling rapidly
with a vast number of people, men women and children, who all stared at
me as I went towards the pyramid on the top of which the fire burned. At
the foot of this pyramid I was led into a little chamber hollowed in its
thickness, and here my dress was torn from me by more priests, leaving
me naked except for a cloth about my loins and a chaplet of bright
flowers which was set upon my head. In this chamber were three other
men, Indians, who from the horror on their faces I judged to be also
doomed to death.

Presently a drum began to beat high above us, and we were taken from the
chamber and placed in a procession of many priests, I being the first
among the victims. Then the priests set up a chant and we began the
ascent of the pyramid, following a road that wound round and round its
bulk till it ended on a platform at its summit, which may have measured
forty paces in the square. Hence the view of the surrounding country was
very fine, but in that hour I scarcely noticed it, having no care for
prospects, however pleasing. On the further side of the platform were
two wooden towers fifty feet or so in height. These were the temples of
the gods, Huitzel God of War and Quetzal God of the Air, whose hideous
effigies carved in stone grinned at us through the open doorways. In
the chambers of these temples stood small altars, and on the altars
were large dishes of gold, containing the hearts of those who had been
sacrificed on the yesterday. These chambers, moreover, were encrusted
with every sort of filth. In front of the temples stood the altar
whereon the fire burned eternally, and before it were a hog-backed block
of black marble of the size of an inn drinking table, and a great carven
stone shaped like a wheel, measuring some ten feet across with a copper
ring in its centre.

All these things I remembered afterwards, though at the time I scarcely
seemed to see them, for hardly were we arrived on the platform when I
was seized and dragged to the wheel-shaped stone. Here a hide girdle
was put round my waist and secured to the ring by a rope long enough
to enable me to run to the edge of the stone and no further. Then a
flint-pointed spear was given to me and spears were given also to the
two captives who accompanied me, and it was made clear to me by signs
that I must fight with them, it being their part to leap upon the stone
and mine to defend it. Now I thought that if I could kill these two poor
creatures, perhaps I myself should be allowed to go free, and so to save
my life I prepared to take theirs if I could. Presently the head priest
gave a signal commanding the two men to attack me, but they were so lost
in fear that they did not even stir. Then the priests began to flog them
with leather girdles till at length crying out with pain, they ran at
me. One reached the stone and leapt upon it a little before the other,
and I struck the spear through his arm. Instantly he dropped his weapon
and fled, and the other man fled also, for there was no fight in them,
nor would any flogging bring them to face me again.

Seeing that they could not make them brave, the priests determined to
have done with them. Amidst a great noise of music and chanting, he whom
I had smitten was seized and dragged to the hog-backed block of marble,
which in truth was a stone of sacrifice. On this he was cast down,
breast upwards, and held so by five priests, two gripping his hands,
two his legs, and one his head. Then, having donned a scarlet cloak,
the head priest, that same who had felt my heart, uttered some kind of
prayer, and, raising a curved knife of the flint-like glass or itztli,
struck open the poor wretch's breast at a single blow, and made the
ancient offering to the sun.

As he did this all the multitude in the place below, in full view of
whom this bloody game was played, prostrated themselves, remaining on
their knees till the offering had been thrown into the golden censer
before the statue of the god Huitzel. Thereon the horrible priests,
casting themselves on the body, carried it with shouts to the edge of
the pyramid or teocalli, and rolled it down the steep sides. At the
foot of the slope it was lifted and borne away by certain men who were
waiting, for what purpose I did not know at that time.

Scarcely was the first victim dead when the second was seized and
treated in a like fashion, the multitude prostrating themselves as
before. And then last of all came my turn. I felt myself seized and my
senses swam, nor did I recover them till I found myself lying on the
accursed stone, the priests dragging at my limbs and head, my breast
strained upwards till the skin was stretched tight as that of a drum,
while over me stood the human devil in his red mantle, the glass knife
in his hand. Never shall I forget his wicked face maddened with the lust
for blood, or the glare in his eyes as he tossed back his matted locks.
But he did not strike at once, he gloated over me, pricking me with the
point of the knife. It seemed to me that I lay there for years while the
paba aimed and pointed with the knife, but at last through a mist that
gathered before my eyes, I saw it flash upward. Then when I thought that
my hour had come, a hand caught his arm in mid-air and held it and I
heard a voice whispering.

What was said did not please the priest, for suddenly he howled aloud
and made a dash towards me to kill me, but again his arm was caught
before the knife fell. Then he withdrew into the temple of the god
Quetzal, and for a long while I lay upon the stone suffering the agonies
of a hundred deaths, for I believed that it was determined to torture me
before I died, and that my slaughter had been stayed for this purpose.

There I lay upon the stone, the fierce sunlight beating on my breast,
while from below came the faint murmur of the thousands of the wondering
people. All my life seemed to pass before me as I was stretched upon
that awful bed, a hundred little things which I had forgotten came back
to me, and with them memories of childhood, of my oath to my father, of
Lily's farewell kiss and words, of de Garcia's face as I was hurled into
the sea, of the death of Isabella de Siguenza, and lastly a vague wonder
as to why all priests were so cruel!

At length I heard footsteps and shut my eyes, for I could bear the sight
of that dreadful knife no longer. But behold! no knife fell. Suddenly my
hands were loosed and I was lifted to my feet, on which I never hoped to
stand again. Then I was borne to the edge of the teocalli, for I could
not walk, and here my would-be murderer, the priest, having first
shouted some words to the spectators below, that caused them to murmur
like a forest when the wind stirs it, clasped me in his blood-stained
arms and kissed me on the forehead. Now it was for the first time that
I noticed my captor, the cacique, standing at my side, grave, courteous,
and smiling. As he had smiled when he handed me to the pabas, so he
smiled when he took me back from them. Then having been cleansed and
clothed, I was led into the sanctuary of the god Quetzal and stood face
to face with the hideous image there, staring at the golden censer that
was to have received my heart while the priests uttered prayers. Thence
I was supported down the winding road of the pyramid till I came to its
foot, where my captor the cacique took me by the hand and led me through
the people who, it seemed, now regarded me with some strange veneration.
The first person that I saw when we reached the house was Marina, who
looked at me and murmured some soft words that I could not understand.
Then I was suffered to go to my chamber, and there I passed the rest of
the day prostrated by all that I had undergone. Truly I had come to a
land of devils!

And now I will tell how it was that I came to be saved from the knife.
Marina having taken some liking to me, pitied my sad fate, and being
very quick-witted, she found a way to rescue me. For when I had been led
off to sacrifice, she spoke to the cacique, her lord, bringing it to
his mind that, by common report Montezuma, the Emperor of Anahuac, was
disturbed as to the Teules or Spaniards, and desired much to see one.
Now, she said, I was evidently a Teule, and Montezuma would be angered,
indeed, if I were sacrificed in a far-off town, instead of being sent
to him to sacrifice if he saw fit. To this the cacique answered that the
words were wise, but that she should have spoken them before, for now
the priests had got hold of me, and it was hopeless to save me from
their grip.

'Nay,' answered Marina, 'there is this to be said. Quetzal, the god
to whom this Teule is to be offered, was a white man,* and it may well
happen that this man is one of his children. Will it please the god
that his child should be offered to him? At the least, if the god is not
angered, Montezuma will certainly be wroth, and wreak a vengeance on you
and on the priests.'

     * Quetzal, or more properly Quetzalcoatl, was the divinity
     who is fabled to have taught the natives of Anahuac all the
     useful arts, including those of government and policy, he
     was white-skinned and dark-haired.  Finally he sailed from
     the shores of Anahuac for the fabulous country of Tlapallan
     in a bark of serpents' skins.  But before he sailed he
     promised that he would return again with a numerous progeny.
     This promise was remembered by the Aztecs, and it was
     largely on account of it that the Spaniards were enabled to
     conquer the country, for they were supposed to be his
     descendants. Perhaps Quetzalcoatl was a Norseman!   Vide
     Sagas of Eric the Red and of Thorfinn Karlsefne.--AUTHOR.

Now when the cacique heard this he saw that Marina spoke truth, and
hurrying up the teocalli, he caught the knife as it was in the act of
falling upon me. At first the head priest was angered and called out
that this was sacrilege, but when the cacique had told him his mind,
he understood that he would do wisely not to run a risk of the wrath of
Montezuma. So I was loosed and led into the sanctuary, and when I came
out the paba announced to the people that the god had declared me to be
one of his children, and it was for this reason that then and thereafter
they treated me with reverence.



CHAPTER XIV

THE SAVING OF GUATEMOC


Now after this dreadful day I was kindly dealt with by the people of
Tobasco, who gave me the name of Teule or Spaniard, and no longer sought
to put me to sacrifice. Far from it indeed, I was well clothed and fed,
and suffered to wander where I would, though always under the care of
guards who, had I escaped, would have paid for it with their lives. I
learned that on the morrow of my rescue from the priests, messengers
were despatched to Montezuma, the great king, acquainting him with the
history of my capture, and seeking to know his pleasure concerning me.
But the way to Tenoctitlan was far, and many weeks passed before the
messengers returned again. Meanwhile I filled the days in learning
the Maya language, and also something of that of the Aztecs, which I
practised with Marina and others. For Marina was not a Tobascan, having
been born at Painalla, on the southeastern borders of the empire. But
her mother sold her to merchants in order that Marina's inheritance
might come to another child of hers by a second marriage, and thus in
the end the girl fell into the hands of the cacique of Tobasco.

Also I learned something of the history and customs, and of the picture
writing of the land, and how to read it, and moreover I obtained great
repute among the Tobascans by my skill in medicine, so that in time they
grew to believe that I was indeed a child of Quetzal, the good god. And
the more I studied this people the less I could understand of them. In
most ways they were equal to any nation of our own world of which I had
knowledge. None are more skilled in the arts, few are better architects
or boast purer laws. Moreover, they were brave and had patience. But
their faith was the canker at the root of the tree. In precept it was
noble and had much in common with our own, such as the rite of baptism,
but I have told what it was in practice. And yet, when all is said, is
it more cruel to offer up victims to the gods than to torture them
in the vaults of the Holy Office or to immure them in the walls of
nunneries?

When I had lived a month in Tobasco I had learned enough of the language
to talk with Marina, with whom I grew friendly, though no more, and it
was from her that I gathered the most of my knowledge, and also many
hints as to the conduct necessary to my safety. In return I taught her
something of my own faith, and of the customs of the Europeans, and it
was the knowledge that she gained from me which afterwards made her
so useful to the Spaniards, and prepared her to accept their religion,
giving her insight into the ways of white people.

So I abode for four months and more in the house of the cacique of
Tobasco, who carried his kindness towards me to the length of offering
me his sister in marriage. To this proposal I said no as gently as I
might, and he marvelled at it, for the girl was fair. Indeed, so well
was I treated, that had it not been that my heart was far away, and
because of the horrible rites of their religion which I was forced to
witness almost daily, I could have learned to love this gentle, skilled,
and industrious people.


At length, when full four months had passed away, the messengers
returned from the court of Montezuma, having been much delayed
by swollen rivers and other accidents of travel. So great was the
importance that the Emperor attached to the fact of my capture, and
so desirous was he to see me at his capital, that he had sent his own
nephew, the Prince Guatemoc, to fetch me and a great escort of warriors
with him.

Never shall I forget my first meeting with this prince who afterwards
became my dear companion and brother in arms. When the escort arrived I
was away from the town shooting deer with the bow and arrow, a weapon in
the use of which I had such skill that all the Indians wondered at
me, not knowing that twice I had won the prize at the butts on Bungay
Common. Our party being summoned by a messenger, we returned bearing our
deer with us. On reaching the courtyard of the cacique's house, I found
it filled with warriors most gorgeously attired, and among them one more
splendid than the rest. He was young, very tall and broad, most handsome
in face, and having eyes like those of an eagle, while his whole aspect
breathed majesty and command. His body was encased in a cuirass of gold,
over which hung a mantle made of the most gorgeous feathers, exquisitely
set in bands of different colours. On his head he wore a helmet of gold
surmounted by the royal crest, an eagle, standing on a snake fashioned
in gold and gems. On his arms, and beneath his knees, he wore circlets
of gold and gems, and in his hand was a copper-bladed spear. Round this
man were many nobles dressed in a somewhat similar fashion, except that
the most of them wore a vest of quilted cotton in place of the gold
cuirass, and a jewelled panache of the plumes of birds instead of the
royal symbol.

This was Guatemoc, Montezuma's nephew, and afterwards the last emperor
of Anahuac. So soon as I saw him I saluted him in the Indian fashion by
touching the earth with my right hand, which I then raised to my head.
But Guatemoc, having scanned me with his eye as I stood, bow in hand,
attired in my simple hunter's dress, smiled frankly and said:

'Surely, Teule, if I know anything of the looks of men, we are too equal
in our birth, as in our age, for you to salute me as a slave greets his
master.' And he held his hand to me.

I took it, answering with the help of Marina, who was watching this
great lord with eager eyes.

'It may be so, prince, but though in my own country I am a man of repute
and wealth, here I am nothing but a slave snatched from the sacrifice.'

'I know it,' he said frowning. 'It is well for all here that you were so
snatched before the breath of life had left you, else Montezuma's wrath
had fallen on this city.' And he looked at the cacique who trembled,
such in those days was the terror of Montezuma's name.

Then he asked me if I was a Teule or Spaniard. I told him that I was
no Spaniard but one of another white race who had Spanish blood in his
veins. This saying seemed to puzzle him, for he had never so much as
heard of any other white race, so I told him something of my story, at
least so much of it as had to do with my being cast away.

When I had finished, he said, 'If I have understood aright, Teule, you
say that you are no Spaniard, yet that you have Spanish blood in you,
and came hither in a Spanish ship, and I find this story strange. Well,
it is for Montezuma to judge of these matters, so let us talk of them no
more. Come and show me how you handle that great bow of yours. Did you
bring it with you or did you fashion it here? They tell me, Teule, that
there is no such archer in the land.'

So I came up and showed him the bow which was of my own make, and would
shoot an arrow some sixty paces further than any that I saw in Anahuac,
and we fell into talk on matters of sport and war, Marina helping out my
want of language, and before that day was done we had grown friendly.

For a week the prince Guatemoc and his company rested in the town of
Tobasco, and all this time we three talked much together. Soon I saw
that Marina looked with eyes of longing on the great lord, partly
because of his beauty rank and might, and partly because she wearied of
her captivity in the house of the cacique, and would share Guatemoc's
power, for Marina was ambitious. She tried to win his heart in many
ways, but he seemed not to notice her, so that at last she spoke more
plainly and in my hearing.

'You go hence to-morrow, prince,' she said softly, 'and I have a favour
to ask of you, if you will listen to your handmaid.'

'Speak on, maiden,' he answered.

'I would ask this, that if it pleases you, you will buy me of the
cacique my master, or command him to give me up to you, and take me with
you to Tenoctitlan.'

Guatemoc laughed aloud. 'You put things plainly, maiden,' he said,
'but know that in the city of Tenoctitlan, my wife and royal cousin,
Tecuichpo, awaits me, and with her three other ladies, who as it chances
are somewhat jealous.'

Now Marina flushed beneath her brown skin, and for the first and last
time I saw her gentle eyes grow hard with anger as she answered:

'I asked you to take me with you, prince; I did not ask to be your wife
or love.'

'But perchance you meant it,' he said dryly.

'Whatever I may have meant, prince, it is now forgotten. I wished to see
the great city and the great king, because I weary of my life here and
would myself grow great. You have refused me, but perhaps a time will
come when I shall grow great in spite of you, and then I may remember
the shame that has been put upon me against you, prince, and all your
royal house.'

Again Guatemoc laughed, then of a sudden grew stern.

'You are over-bold, girl,' he said; 'for less words than these many a
