'Will you open this?' I said. 'I believe that it contains what your
brother lost. That it contains all I will not answer, Mademoiselle,
because I spilled the stones on the floor of my room, and I may have
failed to find some. But the others can be recovered; I know where they
are.'

She took the packet slowly and began to unroll it, her fingers shaking.
A few turns and the mild lustre of the stones shone out, making a kind
of moonlight in her hands--such a shimmering glory of imprisoned light
as has ruined many a woman and robbed many a man of his honour. MORBLEU!
as I looked at them and as she stood looking at them in dull, entranced
perplexity--I wondered how I had come to resist the temptation.

While I gazed her hands began to waver.

'I cannot count,' she muttered helplessly. 'How many are there?'

'In all, eighteen.'

'There should be eighteen,' she said.

She closed her hand on them with that, and opened it again, and did so
twice, as if to reassure herself that the stones were real and that she
was not dreaming. Then she turned to me with sudden fierceness, and I
saw that her beautiful face, sharpened by the greed of possession, was
grown as keen and vicious as before.

'Well?' she muttered between her teeth.

'Your price, man? Your price?'

'I am coming to it now, Mademoiselle,' I said gravely. 'It is a simple
matter. You remember the afternoon when I followed you--clumsily and
thoughtlessly perhaps--through the wood to restore these things? In
seeming that happened about a month ago. I believe that it happened the
day before yesterday. You called me then some very harsh names, which I
will not hurt you by repeating. The only price I ask for the restoration
of your jewels is that you on your part recall those names.'

'How?' she muttered. 'I do not understand.'

I repeated my words very slowly. 'The only price or reward I ask,
Mademoiselle, is that you take back those names and say that they were
not deserved.'

'And the jewels?' she exclaimed hoarsely.

'They are yours. They are not mine. They are nothing to me. Take them,
and say that you do not think of me--Nay, I cannot say the words,
Mademoiselle.'

'But there is something--else! What else?' she cried, her head thrown
back, her eyes, bright as any wild animal's, searching mine. 'Ha! my
brother? What of him? What of him, sir?'

'For him, Mademoiselle--I would prefer that you should tell me no more
than I know already,' I answered in a low voice. 'I do not wish to be in
that affair. But yes; there is one thing I have not mentioned. You are
right.'

She sighed so deeply that I caught the sound.

'It is,' I continued slowly, 'that you will permit me to remain at
Cocheforet for a few days while the soldiers are here. I am told that
there are twenty men and two officers quartered in your house. Your
brother is away. I ask to be permitted, Mademoiselle, to take his place
for the time, and to be privileged to protect your sister and yourself
from insult. That is all.'

She raised her hand to her head. After a long pause,--

'The frogs!' she muttered, 'they croak! I can not hear.'

Then, to my surprise, she turned quickly and suddenly on her heel, and
walked over the bridge, leaving me standing there. For a moment I stood
aghast, peering after her shadowy figure, and wondering what had taken
her. Then, in a minute or less, she came quickly back to me, and I
understood. She was crying.

'M. de Barthe,' she said, in a trembling voice, which told me that the
victory was won, 'is there nothing else? Have you no other penance for
me?'

'None, Mademoiselle.'

She had drawn the shawl over her head, and I no longer saw her face.

'That is all you ask?' she murmured.

'That is all I ask--now,' I answered.

'It is granted,' she said slowly and firmly. 'Forgive me if I seem to
speak lightly--if I seem to make little of your generosity or my shame;
but I can say no more now. I am so deep in trouble and so gnawed by
terror that--I cannot feel anything keenly to-night, either shame or
gratitude. I am in a dream; God grant that it may pass as a dream!
We are sunk in trouble. But for you and what you have done, M. de
Barthe--I--' she paused and I heard her fighting with the sobs which
choked her--'forgive me... I am overwrought. And my--my feet are cold,'
she added, suddenly and irrelevantly. 'Will you take me home?'

'Ah, Mademoiselle,' I cried remorsefully, 'I have been a beast! You are
barefoot, and I have kept you here.'

'It is nothing,' she said in a voice which thrilled me. 'My heart is
warm, Monsieur--thanks to you. It is many hours since it has been as
warm.'

She stepped out of the shadow as she spoke--and there, the thing was
done. As I had planned, so it had come about. Once more I was crossing
the meadow in the dark to be received at Cocheforet, a welcome guest.
The frogs croaked in the pool and a bat swooped round us in circles;
and surely never--never, I thought, with a kind of exultation in my
breast--had man been placed in a stranger position.

Somewhere in the black wood behind us--probably in the outskirts of the
village--lurked M. de Cocheforet. In the great house before us, outlined
by a score of lighted windows, were the soldiers come from Auch to take
him. Between the two, moving side by side in the darkness, in a silence
which each found to be eloquent, were Mademoiselle and I: she who knew
so much, I who knew all--all but one little thing!

We reached the house, and I suggested that she should steal in first by
the way she had come out, and that I should wait a little and knock at
the door when she had had time to explain matters to Clon.

'They do not let me see Clon,' she answered slowly.

'Then your woman must tell him,' I rejoined, 'or he may do something and
betray me.'

'They will not let our women come to us.'

'What?' I cried, astonished. 'But this is infamous. You are not
prisoners!'

Mademoiselle laughed harshly.

'Are we not? Well, I suppose not; for if we wanted company, Captain
Larolle said that he would be delighted to see us--in the parlour.'

'He has taken your parlour?' I said.

'He and his lieutenant sit there. But I suppose that we rebels should be
thankful,' she added bitterly; 'we have still our bedrooms left to us.'

'Very well,' I said. 'Then I must deal with Clon as I can. But I have
still a favour to ask, Mademoiselle. It is only that you and your sister
will descend to-morrow at your usual time. I shall be in the parlour.'

'I would rather not,' she said, pausing and speaking in a troubled
voice.

'Are you afraid?'

'No, Monsieur, I am not afraid,' she answered proudly, 'but--'

'You will come?' I said.

She sighed before she spoke. At length,--

'Yes, I will come--if you wish it,' she answered. And the next moment
she was gone round the corner of the house, while I laughed to think
of the excellent watch these gallant gentlemen were keeping. M. de
Cocheforet might have been with her in the garden, might have talked
with her as I had talked, might have entered the house even, and passed
under their noses scot-free. But that is the way of soldiers. They are
always ready for the enemy, with drums beating and flags flying--at ten
o'clock in the morning. But he does not always come at that hour.

I waited a little, and then I groped my way to the door and knocked on
it with the hilt of my sword. The dogs began to bark at the back, and
the chorus of a drinking-song, which came fitfully from the east wing,
ceased altogether. An inner door opened, and an angry voice, apparently
an officer's, began to rate someone for not coming. Another moment, and
a clamour of voices and footsteps seemed to pour into the hall, and
fill it. I heard the bar jerked away, the door was flung open, and in
a twinkling a lanthorn, behind which a dozen flushed visages were dimly
seen, was thrust into my face.

'Why, who the fiend is this?' one cried, glaring at me in astonishment.

'MORBLEU! It is the man!' another shrieked. 'Seize him!'

In a moment half a dozen hands were laid on my shoulders, but I only
bowed politely.

'The officer, my friends,' I said, 'M. le Capitaine Larolle. 'Where is
he?'

'DIABLE! but who are you, first?' the lanthorn-bearer retorted bluntly.
He was a tall, lanky sergeant, with a sinister face.

'Well, I am not M. de Cocheforet,' I replied; 'and that must satisfy
you, my man. For the rest, if you do not fetch Captain Larolle at once
and admit me, you will find the consequences inconvenient.'

'Ho! ho!' he said with a sneer. 'You can crow, it seems. Well, come in.'

They made way, and I walked into the hall keeping my hat on. On the
great hearth a fire had been kindled, but it had gone out. Three or
four carbines stood against one wall, and beside them lay a heap of
haversacks and some straw. A shattered stool, broken in a frolic, and
half a dozen empty wine-skins strewed the floor, and helped to give the
place an air of untidiness and disorder. I looked round with eyes of
disgust, and my gorge rose. They had spilled oil, and the place reeked
foully.

'VENTRE BLEU!' I said. 'Is this conduct in a gentleman's house, you
rascals? MA VIE! If I had you I would send half of you to the wooden
horse!'

They gazed at me open-mouthed; my arrogance startled them. The sergeant
alone scowled. When he could find his voice for rage--

'This way!' he said. 'We did not know that a general officer was coming,
or we would have been better prepared!' And muttering oaths under
his breath, he led me down the well-known passage. At the door of the
parlour he stopped. 'Introduce yourself!' he said rudely. 'And if you
find the air warm, don't blame me!'

I raised the latch and went in. At a table in front of the hearth, half
covered with glasses and bottles, sat two men playing hazard. The dice
rang sharply as I entered, and he who had just thrown kept the box
over them while he turned, scowling, to see who came in. He was a
fair-haired, blonde man, large-framed and florid. He had put off his
cuirass and boots, and his doublet showed frayed and stained where the
armour had pressed on it. Otherwise he was in the extreme of last year's
fashion. His deep cravat, folded over so that the laced ends drooped a
little in front, was of the finest; his great sash of blue and silver
was a foot wide. He had a little jewel in one ear, and his tiny beard
was peaked A L'ESPAGNOLE. Probably when he turned he expected to see the
sergeant, for at the sight of me he rose slowly, leaving the dice still
covered.

'What folly is this?' he cried, wrathfully. Here, sergeant!
Sergeant!--without there! What the--! Who are you, sir?'

'Captain Larolle,' I said uncovering politely, 'I believe?'

'Yes, I am Captain Larolle,' he retorted. 'But who, in the fiend's name,
are you?' You are not the man we are after!'

'I am not M. Cocheforet,' I said coolly. 'I am merely a guest in the
house, M. le Capitaine. I have been enjoying Madame de Cocheforet's
hospitality for some time, but by an evil chance I was away when you
arrived.' And with that I walked to the hearth, and, gently pushing
aside his great boots which stood there drying, I kicked the logs into a
blaze.

'MILLE DIABLES!' he whispered. And never did I see a man more
confounded. But I affected to be taken up with his companion, a sturdy,
white-moustachioed old veteran, who sat back in his chair, eyeing me
with swollen cheeks and eyes surcharged with surprise.

'Good evening, M. le Lieutenant,' I said, bowing gravely. 'It is a fine
night.'

Then the storm burst.

'Fine night!' the Captain shrieked, finding his voice at last. 'MILLE
DIABLES! Are you aware, sir, that I am in possession of this house, and
that no one harbours here without my permission? Guest? Hospitality?
Bundle of fiddle-faddle! Lieutenant, call the guard! Call the guard!' he
continued passionately. 'Where is that ape of a sergeant?'

The Lieutenant rose to obey, but I lifted my hand.

'Gently, gently, Captain,' I said. 'Not so fast. You seem surprised to
see me here. Believe me, I am much more surprised to see you.'

'SACRE!' he cried, recoiling at this fresh impertinence, while the
Lieutenant's eyes almost jumped out of his head.

But nothing moved me.

'Is the door closed?' I said sweetly. 'Thank you; it is, I see. Then
permit me to say again, gentlemen, that I am much more surprised to
see you than you can be to see me. For when Monseigneur the Cardinal
honoured me by sending me from Paris to conduct this matter, he gave me
the fullest--the fullest powers, M. le Capitaine--to see the affair to
an end. I was not led to expect that my plans would be spoiled on the
eve of success by the intrusion of half the garrison from Auch.'

'Oh, ho!' the Captain said softly--in a very different tone, and with a
very different face. 'So you are the gentleman I heard of at Auch?'

'Very likely,' I said drily. 'But I am from Paris, not from Auch.'

'To be sure,' he answered thoughtfully. 'Eh, Lieutenant?'

'Yes, M. le Capitaine, no doubt,' the inferior replied. And they both
looked at one another, and then at me, in a way I did not understand.

'I think,' said I, to clinch the matter, 'that you have made a mistake,
Captain; or the Commandant has. And it occurs to me that the Cardinal
will not be best pleased.'

'I hold the King's commission,' he answered rather stiffly.

'To be sure,' I replied. 'But, you see, the Cardinal--'

'Ay, but the Cardinal--' he rejoined quickly; and then he stopped and
shrugged his shoulders. And they both looked at me.

'Well?' I said.

'The King,' he answered slowly.

'Tut-tut!' I exclaimed, spreading out my hands. 'The Cardinal. Let us
stick to him. You were saying?'

'Well, the Cardinal, you see--' And then again, after the same words, he
stopped--stopped abruptly, and shrugged his shoulders.

I began to suspect something.

'If you have anything to say against Monseigneur,' I answered, watching
him narrowly, 'say it. But take a word of advice. Don't let it go beyond
the door of this room, my friend, and it will do you no harm.'

'Neither here nor outside,' he retorted, looking for a moment at his
comrade. 'Only I hold the King's commission. That is all, and, I think,
enough.'

'Well--for the rest, will you throw a main?' he answered evasively.
'Good! Lieutenant, find a glass, and the gentleman a seat. And here, for
my part, I will give you a toast The Cardinal--whatever betide!'

I drank it, and sat down to play with him; I had not heard the music of
the dice for a month, and the temptation was irresistible. But I was not
satisfied. I called the mains and won his crowns--he was a mere baby at
the game--but half my mind was elsewhere. There was something here that
I did not understand; some influence at work on which I had not counted;
something moving under the surface as unintelligible to me as the
soldiers' presence. Had the Captain repudiated my commission altogether,
and put me to the door or sent me to the guard-house, I could have
followed that. But these dubious hints, this passive resistance, puzzled
me. Had they news from Paris, I wondered? Was the King dead? Or the
Cardinal ill? I asked them, but they said no, no, no to all, and gave me
guarded answers. And midnight found us still playing; and still fencing.



CHAPTER IX. THE QUESTION

Sweep the room, Monsieur? And remove this medley? But M. le Capitaine--'

'The Captain is in the village,' I replied Sternly. 'And do you move.
Move, man, and the thing will be done while you are talking about it.
Set the door into the garden open--so.'

'Certainly, it is a fine morning. And the tobacco of M. le
Lieutenant--But M. le Capitaine did not--'

'Give orders? Well, I give them,' I answered. 'First of all, remove
these beds. And bustle, man, bustle, or I will find something to quicken
you!'

In a moment--'And M. le Capitaine's riding-boots?'

'Place them in the passage,' I replied.

'Oh! in the passage?' He paused, looking at them in doubt.

'Yes, booby; in the passage.'

'And the cloaks, Monsieur?'

'There is a bush handy outside the window. Let them air.'

'Ohe, the bush? Well, to be sure they are damp. But--yes, yes, Monsieur,
it is done. And the bolsters?'

