and discipline, which has been amply shown by the conduct of
Scindia's infantry, which are mainly officered by Europeans, it is
beyond belief that they can withstand the whole power of the
Mahratta empire. But granting that they might do so, what would be
the result? I should see my country shaken to the centre, the
capital in the hands of strangers, and to what end? Simply that I,
an old and worn-out man should, for a very few years, remain in
power here. It would be necessary for those who placed me there to
remain as my guardians, and I should be a mere cypher in their
hands. Nothing, therefore, would persuade me to seek English aid to
retain me in power."

"But the English would doubtless act in alliance with the Nizam,
and probably with the Rajahs of Berar and Kolapoore."

"Possibly they might do so, but what would be the result? Each of
these leaders would, in return for his aid, bargain for increased
territory, at the expense of the Peishwa; and I, who believe that I
am trusted by the great mass of the people here, should become an
object of execration at having brought the invaders into our
country.

"No, Mr. Lindsay; my enemies can, and I believe will, capture me
and throw me into prison. They will scarcely take my life, for to
do so would excite a storm of indignation; but I always carry
poison about with me and, if they applied torture as a preliminary
to death, I have the power of releasing myself from their hands.

"Are you established at the Residency?"

"No, sir; I am living in disguises, of which I have several, in the
town. In that way, I can better discover what is going on than if I
were in uniform, as assistant to Colonel Palmer. Should there be a
tumult in the city, or if I find that my disguise has been
detected, I can make for the Residency; and either put on my
uniform and declare my true character, or attire myself as one of
the Resident's escort."

"Come here as often as you can," Nana said. "I shall always be glad
to see you. It is a relief to speak to one of whose friendship I
feel secure. As a Brahmin, you can pass in and out without
suspicion; and I will always tell you how matters stand."

"I have not yet spoken, Nana, of my work as your agent in Bombay. I
have sent you reports, from time to time; but there was nothing in
them that could be of any value to you. At present, the attentions
of the authorities of Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta are centred upon
the probability of war with Mysore. Tippoo has continually broken
the conditions under which he made peace with us, six years ago;
and it is known that he is preparing for war. He has received with
honour many Frenchmen, and is in communication with the French
Government; and believes that he will be supported by an army,
under General Bonaparte and, as it is certain that, when the war
breaks out again, it will need the fighting strength of the three
towns to make head against the army of Mysore, as far as I have
been able to learn they have given but little attention to the
state of affairs in the Deccan. I have therefore been able to
furnish you with no useful information, beyond telling you that the
sympathies of the Governor and Council are wholly with you, and
that they consider that the fact of your being in power here
secures them from any trouble with the Mahrattas.

"Therefore, sir, I have put aside the allowance you have given me,
considering that I have in no way earned it; and have written this
order upon the bankers with whom I have placed it, authorizing them
to pay the money to anyone you may depute to receive it;" and he
handed the letter to the Nana.

The latter took it and, without opening it, tore it up.

"Your offer does you honour, Mr. Lindsay, but it is impossible for
me to accept it. Your information has not been without advantages.
I have foreseen that the Nizam would probably enter into an
alliance with your people; and that the very large increase that he
has made in his battalions, under foreign officers, was intended to
make his alliance more valuable. I, however, have not deemed it
necessary to imitate his example, and that of Scindia, by raising a
similar force. Your communications, therefore, have been of real
value, and have saved a large outlay here; but even had it not been
so, there can be no question of your returning your pay. You
undertook certain work, and you have to the best of your powers
carried it out; and it is not because you consider that the
information you sent me is not sufficiently valuable that you have,
in any way, failed to carry out your part of the contract.

"I consider it of very great value. In the first place because, as
I have said, it relieved me from anxiety as to the Nizam's
intentions of increasing his army; and in the second place, it
eased my mind by showing that neither Scindia nor Holkar was
intriguing with Bombay, which knowledge is worth a crore of rupees
to me.

"It is the first time, sir, since I have taken part in politics,
that anyone has offered to return money he has received on the
ground that he had not sufficiently earned it; or indeed, upon any
other ground, whatever. Your doing so has confirmed my opinion of
the honesty of your people, and I would that such a feeling were
common among my countrymen, here. No negotiations can be carried
on, no alliance can be formed, without a demand for a large sum of
money, or for an addition of territory. All our petty wars are
waged, not on a question of principle, but entirely from greed.

"Let us say no more about it. I am, as of course you have heard, a
very wealthy man; and have so distributed my money among the
shroffs of all India that, whatever may happen here, I shall lose
comparatively little; and I am glad to know that some very small
portion of it goes to one whom I regard as a genuine friend, and
who does not draw a tenth part of what many of those around me
accept, without any consideration given for it."

"Thank you, sir, but--at any rate while I am stationed here, as
Assistant Resident--I cannot continue to receive pay from you. I
should regard it as a disgraceful action, and absolutely
incompatible with my duty."

"Well, so far I will humour you, Mr. Lindsay; though from what I
hear, in the Carnatic and Bengal the British officers, civil and
military, do not hesitate to accept large sums from native
princes."

Harry was well aware that this was so, and that many British
officials had amassed considerable fortunes, by gifts from native
sources. He only replied:

"That is a matter for their own consciences, sir. They may be
rewards for services rendered, just as I did not hesitate to accept
the sum that you so generously bestowed upon me. It is not for me
to judge other men, but I cannot but think that the custom of
officials accepting presents is a bad one."

"Where can I find you," Nana said, changing the subject, "if I
should need to communicate with you, before you call again?"

Harry gave his address.

"Your messenger must enquire for Bhaskur, a trader from Ahmedabad,
who is lodging there."

He chatted for some time longer with Nana, and then took his leave
and returned to his lodging.



Chapter 7: An Act Of Treachery.


Some months passed quietly. Scindia more openly assumed supreme
power, imprisoned several leading men, and transferred their
jagheers to his own relations. Colonel Palmer had gone down to
Bombay on leave, his place being filled temporarily by Mr. Uhtoff.

Bajee was, as usual, playing a deep game. He desired to become
independent both of Scindia and Nana Furnuwees. The former, he
believed, must sooner or later return to his own dominions, and he
desired his aid to get rid of Nana; therefore it was against the
latter that his intrigues were, at present, directed. The minister
was still an object of affection to his people; who believed, as
before, in his goodness of character, and who put down every act of
oppression as being the work of Scindia.

Harry saw Nana frequently. There being no change in the position,
there was little talk of politics; and the minister generally
turned the conversation upon England, its power relatively to that
of France, the extent of its resources, the modes of life among the
population, and its methods of government.

"It all differs widely from ours," Nana said, after one of these
conversations, "and in most respects is better. The changes there
are made not by force, but by the will of the representatives of
the people, in their assembly. A minister defeated there retires at
once, and his chief opponent succeeds him. The army has no
determining voice in the conduct of affairs, but is wholly under
the orders of the minister who may happen to be in power. All this
seems strange to us but, undoubtedly, the system is far better for
the population. There is no bloodshed, no burning of villages, no
plundering, no confiscation of estates. It is a change in the
personnel of the government, but no change in the general course of
affairs.

"It is strange that your soldiers fight so well when, as you tell
me, they never carry arms until they enter the army; while ours are
trained from childhood in the use of weapons. And your enemies, the
French, is it the same with them?"

"It is the same, Nana, so far as their civil life is concerned; for
none carry weapons or are trained in their use. There is one wide
point of difference. The French have to go as soldiers when they
reach a certain age, however much they may dislike it; while with
us there is no compulsion, whatever, and men enlist in the army
just as they might take up any other trade. There is, however, a
body called the militia. This, like the army, consists of
volunteers; but is not liable for service abroad, and only goes out
for a short period of training, annually. However, by law, should
the supply of volunteers fall short, battalions can be kept at
their full strength by men chosen by ballot from the population.
But this is practically a dead letter, and I am told that the
ballot is never resorted to; though doubtless it would be, in the
case of a national emergency."

"Ah! It is pleasant to be a minister in your country, with no fear
of plots, of treachery, or assassination. Were I a younger man, I
should like to visit England and stay there for a time so that, on
my return, I could model some of our institutions upon yours.

"But no; I fear that that would be too much for the most powerful
minister to effect. The people are wedded to their old customs, and
would not change them for others, however much these might be for
their benefit. An order that none, save those in the army, should
carry arms would unite the whole people against those who issued
it."

It was on the last day of 1797 that Nana Furnuwees made a formal
visit to Scindia, in return for one the latter had paid him, a few
days before. Michel Filoze, a Neapolitan who commanded eight
battalions in Scindia's army, had given his word of honour as a
guarantee for the minister's safe return to his home. The European
officers in the service of the Indian princes bore a high
character, not only for their fidelity to those they served, but
also for their honour in all their dealings and, though Nana would
not have confided in an oath sworn by Scindia, he accepted that of
Filoze without hesitation.

On his arrival near Scindia's camp the traitor seized him and, with
his battalions, attacked his retinue, amounting to about a thousand
persons, among whom were many of his principal adherents. Some of
these were killed, all of them stripped of their robes and
ornaments. Parties of soldiers were immediately sent, by Ghatgay,
to plunder the house of Nana and those of all his adherents.

Harry was in his room when he heard a sudden outburst of firing
and, a minute or two later, Abdool ran in.

"Scindia's men are in the town, sahib! They are attacking the
houses of Nana's adherents. These are defending themselves as best
they can. There is a general panic, for it is believed that the
whole town will be looted."

"Get your things together, Abdool. I will change my dress for that
of a native soldier, and we will make for the Residency."

"Shall we ride, sahib?"

"No, we will leave the horses here. If we were to go on horseback,
we might be taken for Nana's adherents trying to make their escape,
and be shot down without any further question.

"I felt misgivings when I saw Nana going out; but it would have
come to the same thing, in the end, for if Scindia's whole army,
villainous as is the treachery, had advanced against the town, Nana
could have gathered no force to oppose them."

Three or four minutes later they started, Abdool carrying a bundle
containing Harry's disguises. They made their way through lanes,
where the people were all standing at their doors, talking
excitedly. Continuous firing was heard in the direction of the
better quarters, mingled with shouts and cries. No one questioned
them, all being too anxious as to their own safety to think of
anything else.

The Residency was half a mile from the town. There Mr. Uhtoff was
standing at his door, and the men of his escort were all under
arms. Harry had been in frequent communication with him, from the
time that he had taken Colonel Palmer's place. The Resident did
not, for the moment, recognize him in his new disguise but, when he
did so, he asked anxiously what was going on in the town.

"A strong body of Scindia's troops are there, attacking Nana's
adherents. I fear that the minister himself is a prisoner in their
camp."

"That is bad news, indeed. Nana told me, yesterday, that he
intended to visit Scindia, and had received a guarantee for his
safe return, from Filoze. I advised him not to go; but he said that
he could confide, implicitly, in the honour of a European officer.
I told him that the various European nations differed widely from
each other; and that, although I would accept the word of honour of
a British officer in Scindia's service, I would not take that of a
Neapolitan. However, he said, and said truly, that it was incumbent
on him to return Scindia's visit; and that if he did not do so it
would be treated as a slight and insult, and would serve as a
pretext for open war against him; and that, as he could but muster
three or four thousand men, the city must yield without resistance.

"I believe that this is the work of Bajee Rao, and of Ghatgay--two
scoundrels, of whom I prefer Ghatgay who, although a ruffian, is at
least a fearless one, while Bajee Rao is a monster of deceit. I
know that there have, of late, been several interviews between him
and Ghatgay; and I have not the least doubt that the whole affair
has been arranged between them with the hope, on Bajee's part, of
getting rid of Nana; and on Ghatgay's, of removing a sturdy
opponent of his future son-in-law, and of acquiring a large
quantity of loot by the plunder of Nana's adherents.

"You did well to come here for, if the work of plunder is once
begun, there is no saying how far it will spread. I shall ride, at
once, to see the Peishwa, and request an explanation of what has
occurred. There is that trooper's dress still lying ready for you,
if you would like to put it on. There is a spare horse in my
stable."

"Thank you, sir; I should like it very much;" and, rapidly changing
his dress, he was ready by the time the horses were brought round.

He then took his place among the troopers of the escort, and rode
to Bajee Rao's country palace, which was some three miles from the
town.

After seeing everything in train, the Peishwa had left Scindia's
camp before Nana's arrival there; and had summoned a dozen of the
latter's adherents, under the pretence that he desired to see them
on a matter of business. Wholly unsuspicious of treachery, they
rode out at once; and each, on his arrival, was seized and thrown
into a place of confinement.

The Resident learned this from a retainer of one of these nobles.
He had made his escape when his master was seized, and was riding
to carry the news to the British official; whose influence, he
thought, might suffice to save the captives' lives.

On arriving at the palace four of the troopers were ordered to
dismount--Harry being one of those selected--and, on demanding to
see the Peishwa the Resident was, after some little delay, ushered
into the audience chamber, where Bajee Rao was seated, with several
of his officers standing behind him. He received Mr. Uhtoff with a
show of great courtesy.

The latter, however, stood stiffly, and said:

"I have come, Your Highness, to request an explanation of what is
going on. The city of Poona is being treated like a town taken by
siege. The houses of a number of persons of distinction are being
attacked by Scindia's soldiery. Fighting is going on in the
streets, and the whole of the inhabitants are in a state of wild
alarm.

"But this is not all. Nana Furnuwees has, owing to his reliance
upon a solemn guarantee given for his safe return, been seized when
making a ceremonial visit to Scindia."

"You must surely be misinformed," the Peishwa said. "You will
readily believe that I am in perfect ignorance of such a
proceeding."

"I might believe it, Prince," Mr. Uhtoff said, coldly, "had I not
been aware that you and your officers have decoyed a number of
Nana's friends to this palace and, on their arrival, had them
suddenly arrested."

Bajee Rao, practised dissimulator as he was, flushed at this
unexpected accusation.

"I learned, sir," he said, after a pause, "that there was a plot
against my person, by Nana Furnuwees and his adherents; and I have
therefore taken what I considered the necessary step of placing
these in temporary confinement."

"It is a little strange, Your Highness, that the man who placed you
on the musnud should be conspiring to turn you from it. However,
what has been done has been done; and I cannot hope that any words
of mine will avail to persuade you to undo an act which will be
considered, throughout India, as one of the grossest treachery and
ingratitude. My duty is a simple one: namely, merely to report to
my Government the circumstances of the case."

The officers behind the Peishwa fingered the hilts of their swords,
and the four troopers involuntarily made a step forward, to support
the Resident. Bajee, however, made a sign to those behind him to
remain quiet; and the Resident, turning abruptly, and without
salutation to the Peishwa, left the hall, followed by his men.

They mounted as soon as they had left the palace, and rode back to
the Residency; Mr. Uhtoff keeping his place at their head, and
speaking no word until he dismounted, when he asked Harry to
accompany him to his room.

"This is a bad business, indeed, Mr. Lindsay. I cannot say that I
am surprised because, having studied Bajee Rao's character, I have
for some time been expecting that he would strike a blow at Nana.
Still, I acknowledge that it has come suddenly, and the whole
position of affairs has changed. Bajee has freed himself from Nana;
but he has only riveted Scindia's yoke more firmly on his
shoulders. Like most intriguers, he has overreached himself. He has
kept one object in view, and been blind to all else.

"His course should have been to support Nana against Scindia, and
thus to keep the balance of power in his own hands. He has only
succeeded in ridding himself of the one man who had the good of his
country at heart, and who was the only obstacle to Scindia's
ambition. The fool has ruined both himself and his country.

"I think, Mr. Lindsay, that the best plan will be for you to mount
at once, and ride down to Bombay. Your presence here, just now, can
be of no special utility; and it is most desirable that the
Government should have a full statement of the matter laid before
them, by one who has been present, and who has made himself fully
acquainted with the whole politics of the Deccan.

"It is better that you should not go into the town again. I will
send in for your horses, as soon as the tumult has subsided. We
have several spare animals here, and you and your servant can take
two of them. I will write to the Governor a report of my interview
with Bajee, and say that I have sent you down to give him all the
details of what has taken place; which will save the time that it
would take me to write a long report, and will be far more
convenient, inasmuch as you can answer any point that he is
desirous of ascertaining. I do not think that you can do better
than go in the disguise that you now have on; for a soldier to be
galloping fast is a common sight, but people would be astonished at
seeing either a Brahmin or a trader riding at full speed. I will
give orders for the horses to be saddled at once and, in the
meantime, you had best take a meal. You will have no chance of
getting one on the road, and I have no doubt that dinner is ready
for serving. I will tell the butler to give some food to your man,
at once."

Twenty minutes later, Harry and Abdool were on their way. Skirting
round Poona, they heard the rattle of musketry still being
maintained; and indeed, the fighting in the streets of the city
continued for twenty-four hours. By two in the morning, they halted
at the top of the Ghauts; partly to give the horses a rest, and
partly because it would have been very dangerous to attempt to make
the descent in the dark.

At daybreak they continued their journey, arriving at Bombay six
hours later. They rode straight for the Government House, where
Harry dismounted and, throwing the reins of his horse to Abdool,
told the attendant to inform the Governor that a messenger, from
the Resident at Poona, desired to see him. He was at once shown in.

"Why, it is Mr. Lindsay!" the Governor said, "though I should
scarce know you, in your paint and disguise. The matter on which
you come must be something urgent, or Mr. Uhtoff would not have
sent you down with it."

Harry handed over the despatch of which he was bearer and, as the
Governor ran his eye over it, his face became more and more grave,
as he gathered the news.

"This is serious, indeed," he said, "most serious. Now be pleased
to sit down, Mr. Lindsay, and furnish me with all the particulars
of the affair."

When Harry had finished, the Governor said:

"I imagine that you can have eaten nothing today, Mr. Lindsay. I am
about to take tiffin, and bid you do so with me. I shall at once
send to members of the Council and, by the time we have finished
our meal, they will no doubt be here."

"I shall be very glad to do so, sir, if you will allow me to go
into the dressing room, and put on my uniform. I should hardly like
to sit down to table in my present dress."

"Do so by all means, if you wish it; but you must remember that
your colour will not agree well with your dress."

"I will remove these caste marks, sir, and then I shall look only
as if I were somewhat severely tanned."

In ten minutes a servant knocked at the door, and said that
luncheon was ready. Harry was already dressed in his uniform, and
had removed the marks on his forehead; the dye, however, was as
dark as ever. He had, on leaving the Governor's room, sent a
servant down to fetch his wallet, and to tell Abdool that he was to
take the horses to the barracks.

The meal was an informal one. The Governor asked many questions,
and was pleased at the knowledge that Harry showed of all the
principal persons in Poona, and their character and ability.

"At the present moment," he said, "the information that you have
given me cannot be utilized; but it would be most valuable, were we
to get mixed up in the confusion of parties at Poona. I gather that
you consider Nana Furnuwees to be a great man."

"My opinion is not worth much, on that point, sir. I think that he
has, over and over again, shown great courage in extricating
himself from difficulties which appeared to be overwhelming. I
believe him to be a sincere patriot, and that he only desires to be
at the head of the administration of affairs that he may prevent
civil war from breaking out, and to thwart the ambition of the
great princes. His tastes are simple, his house is furnished
plainly, he cares nothing for the pleasures of the table; but he is
honest and, I believe, absolutely truthful--qualities which
certainly are possessed by very few men in the Deccan.

"I grant that he is not disposed to enter into any alliance with
the British. He has frequently told me that he admires them greatly
for their straightforwardness and truthfulness, as well as for
their bravery and their methods of government, both in the great
towns and in the districts in which they are masters; but he fears
that, were they to send an army to Poona on his behalf, or on that
of any of the other parties, it might end by their acquiring
control over the affairs of the country, and make them arbitrators
in all disputes."

"No doubt he is right, there," the Governor said, with a smile.
"However, at present we are certainly not likely to interfere in
the quarrels and intrigues beyond the Ghauts; nor do I see why we
should be brought into collision with the Mahrattas--at any rate,
until they have ceased to quarrel among themselves, and unite under
one master. In that case, they might make another effort to turn us
out.

"And now we will go into the room where the Council must be, by
this time, assembled."

This proved to be the case, and the Governor read to them the note
that he had received from Mr. Uhtoff; and then requested Harry to
repeat the details, as fully as he had already done. There was a
consensus of opinion as to the importance of the news.

"Come round again tomorrow morning, Mr. Lindsay," the Governor
said; "by that time I shall have fully thought the matter out."

"So you have been masquerading as a native again, Mr. Lindsay?" the
colonel said, when Harry called upon him.

