steeds long want a guide; for soon he found courageous Archeptolemus,
the son of Iphitus, whom then he made to mount the swift-footed steeds,
and gave the reins into his hands.

Then, indeed, had slaughter arisen, and dreadful deeds had been done,
and [the Trojans] had been pent up in Ilium like lambs, had not the
father of both men and gods quickly perceived it. Therefore, dreadfully
thundering he sent forth his glowing thunderbolt, and cast it into the
earth before the steeds of Diomede: but there arose a terrible flame of
burning sulphur, and the two frightened steeds crouched trembling
beneath the chariot. Moreover, the beautiful reins fell from the hands
of Nestor, and he feared in his soul, and addressed Diomede:

"Son of Tydeus, come now, turn thy solid-hoofed steeds to flight. Dost
thou not perceive that victory from Jove does not attend thee? For now,
this very day, of a truth, Saturnian Jove awards him glory; afterwards
again will he give it to us, if he shall be willing. By no means can a
man impede the will of Jove, not even a very mighty one; since he is by
far the most powerful."

But him Diomede, brave in the din of war, then answered: "Old man,
certainly thou hast said all this rightly: but this grievous sorrow
invades my heart and my soul: for Hector at some time will say,
haranguing amongst the Trojans, 'The son of Tydeus, routed by me, fled
to his ships.' Thus at some time will he boast: but then may the earth
yawn wide for me."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "Alas! warlike son of
Tydeus, what hast thou said? Even though Hector call thee coward and
unwarlike, yet the Trojans and Dardanians, and the wives of the
stout-hearted shield-bearing Trojans, whose vigorous husbands thou hast
prostrated in the dust, will not believe him."

Thus having said, he turned the solid-hoofed steeds to flight, back into
the crowd. But the Trojans and Hector, with a mighty shout, poured
destructive missiles upon them. And then after him loud roared mighty
crest-tossing Hector:

"Son of Tydeus, the swift-horsed Greeks honoured thee, indeed, above
[others] with a seat, with meat, and full cups; but now will they
dishonour thee; for thou hast become like a woman. Away! timorous girl!
since thou shalt never climb our towers, I giving way, nor bear away our
women in thy ships; first shall I give thee thy doom."

Thus he said; but the son of Tydeus debated whether to turn his steeds,
and to fight against him. Thrice, indeed, he thought in mind and soul,
but thrice, on the other hand, the provident Jove thundered from the
Idaean mountains, giving a signal to the Trojans, the alternating success
of battle. But Hector exhorted the Trojans, vociferating aloud:

"Ye Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, be men, my
friends, and be mindful of impetuous might! I know the son of Saturn
hath willingly accorded me victory and great renown, but to the Greeks
destruction. Fools, who indeed built those weak, worthless walls, which
shall not check my strength; but our steeds will easily overleap the dug
trench. But when, indeed, I come to their hollow ships, then let there
be some memory of burning fire, that I may consume their fleet with the
flame, and slay the Argives themselves at the ships, bewildered by the
smoke."

Thus having spoken, he cheered on his steeds, and said: "Xanthus, and
thou Podargus, and AEthon, and noble Lampus, now repay to me the
attention, with which, in great abundance, Andromache, the daughter of
magnanimous Eetion, gave to you the sweet barley, mixing wine also [for
you] to drink, whenever your mind ordered it, even before me, who boast
to be her vigorous husband. But follow and hasten, that we may take the
shield of Nestor, the fame of which has now reached the heaven, that it
is entirely golden, the handles and itself: but, from the shoulders of
horse-breaking Diomede, the well-made corslet, which the artist Vulcan
wrought. If we can take these, I expect that the Greeks this very night
will ascend their swift ships."

Thus he said boasting; but venerable Juno was indignant, and shook
herself on her throne, and made great Olympus tremble; and openly
accosted the mighty deity, Neptune:

"Alas! far-ruling Earth-shaker, dost thou not in thy soul pity the
perishing Greeks? But they bring thee many and grateful gifts to Helice
and AEgae. Do thou, therefore, will to them the victory. For if we were
willing, as many of us as are assistants to the Greeks, to repulse the
Trojans and restrain far-sounding Jove, then might he grieve sitting
alone there on Ida."

But her king Neptune, greatly excited, thus addressed: "Juno,
petulant[270] in speech, what hast thou said? I would not wish, indeed,
that we, the other gods, should fight with Saturnian Jove, since he is
by far most powerful."

   [Footnote 270: Compare the phrase [Greek: kathaptesthai
   epeessin].--Od. ii. 240. Suidas: [Greek: Aptoepes aptoetos en to
   legein]. Apollon. Lex. p. 188: [Greek: "Aptote, e aptonte tois
   logois, e kathaptomene ota ton logon"].]

Thus indeed were they holding such converse with each other. But
whatever space before the ships the trench belonging to the tower
enclosed, was filled with horses and shielded men crowded together.[271]
But Hector, the son of Priam, equal to swift Mars, had crowded them
thus, when Jupiter awarded him glory. And now would he have burned the
equal ships with blazing fire, had not venerable Juno put it into the
soul of Agamemnon, himself actively engaged, briskly to urge on the
Greeks. He therefore hastened to go along the tents and ships of the
Greeks, holding in his stout hand his great purple robe. But in the huge
black ship of Ulysses he stood, which was in the midst, that he might
shout audibly to either side, as well to the tent of Telamonian Ajax, as
to that of Achilles, for they had drawn up their equal ships at the
extremities of the line, relying on their valour and the strength of
their hands. Then he shouted distinctly, calling upon the Greeks:

"Shame! ye Greeks, foul subjects of disgrace! gallant in form [alone]!
Where are those boastings gone, when we professed ourselves the bravest;
those which, once in Lemnos, vain braggarts! ye did utter, eating much
flesh of horned oxen, and drinking-goblets crowned with wine,[272] that
each would in battle be equivalent to a hundred and even two hundred of
the Trojans? But now, indeed, we are not equal to Hector alone, who
shortly will burn our ships with flaming fire. O father Jove, hast thou
indeed ever yet afflicted with such destruction any one of mighty kings,
and so deprived him of high renown? And yet I say that I never passed by
thy fair altar in my many-benched ship, coming here with ill luck.[273]
But on all I burned the fat of oxen and the thighs, desiring to sack
well-walled Troy. But, O Jove, accomplish for me this vow, at least
permit us to escape and get away; nor suffer the Greeks to be thus
subdued by the Trojans."

   [Footnote 271: Observe that [Greek: ton] belongs to [Greek:
   ippon] and [Greek: andron], and that [Greek: oson ek neon apo
   pyrgou taphros eerge], means that "the space between the rampart
   and the sea was enclosed." [Greek: Apo] does not govern [Greek:
   pyrgou], but is compounded with [Greek: eerge].]

   [Footnote 272: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 292, sqq. who has, however,
   been long since anticipated by Paschal. de Coron. i. 4.]

   [Footnote 273: Schol. [Greek: Erron, epi phthor paoagenomenos].
   See Alberti on Hesych, s. v. t. i. p. 1445. So, also, Apollon. p.
   364: [Greek: Epi phthora porenomenos].]

Thus he said: and the Sire[274] pitied him weeping, and granted to him
that the army should be safe, and not perish. And forthwith he sent an
eagle, the most perfect[275] of birds, holding a fawn in his talons, the
offspring of a swift deer: and near the very beauteous altar of Jove he
cast down the fawn, where the Greeks were sacrificing to Panomphaean[276]
Jove.

When, therefore, they saw that the bird had come from Jove, they rushed
the more against the Trojans, and were mindful of battle. Then none of
the Greeks, numerous as they were, could have boasted that he had driven
his swift steeds before Diomede, and urged them beyond the ditch, and
fought against [the enemy]; for far the first he slew a helmeted Trojan
hero, Agelaus, son of Phradmon. He, indeed, was turning his horses for
flight; but as he was turning, Diomede fixed his spear in his back,
between his shoulders, and drove it through his breast. He fell from his
chariot, and his arms rattled upon him. After him the sons of Atreus,
Agamemnon and Menelaus; after them the Ajaces, clad in impetuous valour;
after them, Idomeneus and Meriones, the armour-bearer of Idomeneus,
equal to man-slaughtering Mars; and after them Eurypylus, the
illustrious son of Evaemon. Teucer came the ninth, stretching his
bent[277] bow, and stood under the shield of Telamonian Ajax. Then Ajax,
indeed, kept moving the shield aside, and the hero looking around, when
shooting, he had hit any one in the crowd, the one[278] falling there,
lost his life. But he[279] retiring like a child to his mother,
sheltered himself beneath Ajax, and he covered him with his splendid
shield. Then what Trojan first did blameless Teucer slay? Orsilochus
first, and Ormenus, and Ophelestes, and Daetor, and Chromius, and godlike
Lycophontes, and Amopaon, son of Polyaemon, and Melanippus--all, one
after the other, he stretched upon the bounteous earth. But Agamemnon,
king of men, rejoiced at seeing him destroying the phalanxes of the
Trojans with his stout bow. And advancing near him he stood, and thus
addressed him:

   [Footnote 274: See my note on AEsch. Prom. p. 3, n. 3, ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 275: _I. e_. with reference to augury. Hesych. p. 1360,
   explains it by [Greek: epitelestikotaton] (see Alberti). The
   eagle is said to have foretold Jove's own sovereignty, and hence
   to have been placed among the constellations. Cf. Hygin. Poet.
   Astr. ii. 16; Eratosthen. Catast. 30; Serv. on AEn. ix. 564.]

   [Footnote 276: So called, as being the author of all augury.]

   [Footnote 277: _I. e_. prepared for action.]

   [Footnote 278: _I. e_. the wounded man.]

   [Footnote 279: Teucer.]

"Teucer, beloved one, son of Telamon, ruler of forces, shoot thus, if
perchance thou mayest become a light[280] to the Greeks, and to thy
father Telamon, who brought thee up carefully, being a little one, and
treated thee with care in his palace, though being a spurious son. Him,
though far away, do thou exalt with glory. But I will declare to thee,
as it shall be brought to pass, if aegis-bearing Jove and Minerva shall
grant me to sack the well-built city of Ilium, next to myself I will
place an honourable reward in thy hands, either a tripod, or two steeds
with their chariot, or some fair one, who may ascend the same couch with
thee."

   [Footnote 280: See on vi. 6.]

But him blameless Teucer answering, addressed: "Most glorious son of
Atreus, why dost thou urge on me hastening; nor, as far as I have any
strength, do I loiter: but from the time we have driven the Trojans
towards Ilium, since that period have I slain men, intercepting them
with my shafts. Already have I discharged eight long-bearded arrows, and
they have all been fixed in the bodies of warlike youths; but I cannot
strike this raging dog."

He said; and another arrow from the string he shot right against Hector,
for his mind was eager to strike him; and him indeed he missed: but in
the breast he struck blameless Gorgythion with an arrow, the brave son
of Priam. Him his fair mother Castianira, like unto a goddess in person,
brought forth, being wedded from AEsyma. And as a poppy, which in the
garden is weighed down with fruit and vernal showers, droops its head to
one side, so did his head incline aside, depressed by the helmet. But
Teucer discharged another arrow from the string against Hector, for his
mind longed to strike him. Yet even then he missed, for Apollo warded
off the shaft: but he struck in the breast, near the pap, Archeptolemus,
the bold charioteer of Hector, rushing to battle: and he fell from his
chariot, and his swift steeds sprang back. There his soul and strength
were dissolved. But sad grief darkened the mind of Hector, on account of
his charioteer. Then indeed he left him, although grieved for his
companion, and ordered his brother Cebriones, being near, to take the
reins of the steeds; but he was not disobedient, having heard him. Then
[Hector] himself leaped from his all-shining chariot to the ground,
roaring dreadfully: and he seized a large stone in his hand, and went
straight against Teucer, for his mind encouraged him to strike him. He
on his part took out a bitter arrow from his quiver, and applied it to
the string: but him, on the other hand, near the shoulder, where the
collar-bone separates the neck and breast, and it is a particularly
fatal spot, there, as he was drawing back [the bow], the active warrior
Hector[281] with a rugged stone struck him earnestly rushing against
him. He broke his bowstring, and his hand was numbed at the wrist-joint.
Falling on his knees he stood, and the bow dropped from his hands. But
Ajax did not neglect his fallen brother; for running up, he protected
him, and stretched his shield before him. Afterwards his two dear
companions, Mecistheus, son of Echius, and noble Alastor, coming up,
carried him, groaning heavily, to the hollow ships.

   [Footnote 281: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 64.]

But again did Olympian Jove rouse the strength of the Trojans; and they
drove back the Greeks straight to the deep foss. But Hector went in the
van, looking grim through ferocity; as when some dog, relying on his
swift feet, seizes from the rear a wild boar or lion on the haunch and
buttocks, and marks him as he turns: so Hector hung on the rear of the
long-haired Greeks, always slaying the hindmost: and they fled. But when
they flying had passed through the stakes and the foss, and many were
subdued beneath the hands of the Trojans, they, on the one hand,
remaining at the ships were restrained, and having exhorted one another,
and raised their hands to all the gods, they prayed each with a loud
voice. But, on the other hand, Hector, having the eyes of a Gorgon, or
of man-slaughtering Mars, drove round his beauteous-maned steeds in all
directions.

But them [the Greeks] white-armed goddess Juno having beheld, pitied
them, and thus straightway to Minerva addressed winged words:

"Alas! daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, shall we no longer be anxious
about the perishing Greeks, although in extremity;--who now, indeed,
fulfilling evil fate, are perishing by the violence of one man? for
Hector, the son of Priam, rages, no longer to be endured, and already
has he done many evils."

But her the azure-eyed goddess Minerva in turn addressed: "And beyond
doubt this warrior would have lost his vigour and his life, destroyed by
the hands of the Greeks in his fatherland, were it not that this my sire
rages with no sound mind; cruel, ever unjust, a counteractor of my
efforts. Nor does he remember aught of my services, that I have very
often preserved his son, when oppressed by the labours of Eurystheus. He
truly wept to heaven; but me Jove sent down from heaven to aid him. But
had I known this in my prudent[282] mind, when he sent me to [the
dwelling] of the gaoler Pluto to drag from Erebus the dog of hateful
Pluto, he had not escaped the profound stream of the Stygian wave. But
now, indeed, he hates me, and prefers the wish of Thetis, who kissed his
knees, and took his beard in her hand, beseeching him to honour
city-destroying Achilles, The time will be when he will again call me
his dear Minerva. But do thou now harness for us thy solid-hoofed
steeds, while I, having entered the palace of aegis-bearing Jove, equip
myself with arms for war, that I may see whether crest-tossing Hector,
the son of Priam, will rejoice at us, as I appear in the walks[283] of
war. Certainly also some one of the Trojans will satiate the dogs and
birds with his fat and flesh, having fallen at the ships of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 282: The Scholiast, and Apollon. Lex. p. 658, interpret
   [Greek: peykalimsi, pikrais kai dynetais]. Perhaps "sharp
   devising" would be the best translation.]

   [Footnote 283: Literally, "bridges," _i. e._ the open spaces
   between the different battalions.]

Thus she said: nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey her. Juno,
on her part, venerable goddess, daughter of mighty Saturn, running in
haste, caparisoned the golden-bridled steeds. But Minerva, the daughter
of aegis-bearing Jove, let fall upon the pavement of her father her
beauteous variegated robe, which she had wrought and laboured with her
own hands. But she, having put on the coat of mail of cloud-compelling
Jove, was equipped in armour for the tearful war. She mounted her
flaming chariot on her feet, and took her heavy, huge, sturdy spear,
with which she is wont to subdue the ranks of heroic men, with
whomsoever she, sprung from a powerful sire, is enraged. But Juno with
the lash speedily urged on the steeds. The portals of heaven opened
spontaneously, which the Hours[284] guarded, to whom are intrusted the
great heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud, or to close
it. Then through these they guided their goaded steeds.

   [Footnote 284: Hence the Hours also possess the office of tending
   and harnessing the horses of the sun, as is shown by Dausq. on
   Quint. Calab. i. p. 9.]

But father Jove, when he beheld them from Ida, was grievously enraged,
and roused golden-winged Iris to bear this message:

"Away, depart, swift Iris, turn them back, nor suffer them to come
against me; for we shall not advantageously engage in battle. For thus I
speak, and it shall moreover be accomplished, I will lame their swift
steeds under their chariot, dislodge them from the chariot, and break
the chariot; nor for ten revolving years shall ye be healed of the
wounds which the thunderbolt shall inflict: that Minerva may know when
she may be fighting with her sire. But with Juno I am neither so
indignant nor so angry; for she is ever accustomed to counteract me, in
whatever I intend."

Thus he said: but Iris, swift as the storm, hastened to bear the
message. Down from the Idsean mountains she went to great Olympus:
meeting them in the foremost gates of many-valleyed Olympus, she
restrained them, and pronounced to them the message of Jove:

"Where do ye go? Why does your soul rage in your breasts? The sun of
Saturn does not suffer you to aid the Greeks. For thus has the son of
Saturn threatened, and he will assuredly perform it, to lame your swift
steeds under your chariot, and dislodge yourselves from the chariot, and
break the chariot; nor for ten revolving years shall ye be healed of the
wounds which his thunderbolt shall inflict: that thou, O Azure-eyed,
mayest know when thou art fighting with thy sire. But with Juno he is
neither so indignant nor so angry; for she is always accustomed to
counteract him in whatever he devises. But thou, most insolent and
audacious hound! if thou in reality shalt dare to raise thy mighty spear
against Jove--" [285]

   [Footnote 285: Observe the aposiopesis.]

Thus indeed having said, swift-footed Iris departed. Then Juno addressed
these words to Minerva:

"Alas! daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, I cannot any longer suffer that we
ourselves shall fight against Jove, on account of mortals. Of whom let
one perish, and let another live, whoever may chance. But let him,
meditating his own affairs in his mind, adjudicate to the Trojans and
the Greeks as is fair."

Thus then having said, she turned back the solid-hoofed steeds. The
Hours unyoked for them the fair-maned steeds, and bound them to the
ambrosial mangers; but they tilted the chariots against the splendid
walls. But they themselves sat, mingled with the other deities, on their
golden couches, sad at heart.

Then father Jove drove his beauteous-wheeled chariot and steeds from Ida
to Olympus, and came to the seats of the gods. His horses, indeed, the
illustrious Earth-shaker loosed, but he laid the chariot on its support,
spreading a linen coverlet [over it]. But loud-sounding Jove himself sat
on his golden throne, and mighty Olympus was shaken under his feet. But
Minerva and Juno by themselves sat apart from Jove, nor did they at all
address him, nor question him. But he knew in his mind, and said:

"Why are ye so sad, Minerva and Juno? Indeed, ye have not laboured long
in glorious battle to destroy the Trojans, against whom ye have taken
grievous hatred. Not all the gods in Olympus could altogether turn me to
flight, such are my strength and my invincible hands. But trembling
seized the shining limbs of both of you, before ye saw battle, and the
destructive deeds of war. For so I tell you, which would also have been
performed: no more should ye, stricken with my thunder, have returned in
your chariots to Olympus, where are the seats of the immortals."

Thus he said: but Minerva and Juno murmured. They sat near each other,
and were devising evils for the Trojans.

Minerva, indeed, was silent, nor said anything, angry with father Jove,
for wild rage possessed her. But Juno contained not her wrath in her
breast, but addressed him:

"Most terrible son of Saturn, what hast thou said? Well do we know that
thy might is invincible: yet do we lament the warlike Greeks, who will
now perish, fulfilling their evil destiny. But nevertheless, we will
desist from war, if thou desirest it. But we will suggest counsel to the
Greeks, which will avail them, that they may not all perish, thou being
wrathful."

But her cloud-compelling Jove answering, addressed: "To-morrow, if thou
wilt, O venerable, large-eyed Juno, thou shalt behold the very powerful
son of Saturn even with greater havoc destroying the mighty army of the
warlike Greeks. For warlike Hector will not cease from battle before
that he arouse the swift-footed son of Peleus at the ships. On that day,
when they indeed are fighting at the ships, in a very narrow pass, for
Patroclus fallen. For thus is it fated. But I do not make account of
thee enraged, not if thou shouldst go to the furthest limits of land and
ocean, where Iapetus and Saturn sitting, are delighted neither with the
splendour of the sun that journeys on high, nor with the winds; but
profound Tartarus [is] all around--not even if wandering, thou shouldst
go there, have I regard for thee enraged, since there is nothing more
impudent than thou."

Thus he said: but white-armed Juno answered nought. And the bright light
of the sun fell into the ocean, drawing dark night over the fruitful
earth.[286] The light set to the Trojans indeed unwilling; but gloomy
and much-desired light came on, grateful to the Greeks.

   [Footnote 286: Beautifully expressed by Ennius apud Macrob. Sat.
   vi. 4: "Interea fax Occidit, Oceanumque rubra tractim obruit
   aethra." See Columna on Enn. p. 113, ed. Hessel.]

But illustrious Hector then formed a council of the Trojans, having led
them apart from the ships, at the eddying river, in a clear space, where
the place appeared free from dead bodies. But alighting to the ground
from their horses, they listened to the speech which Hector, beloved of
Jove, uttered. In his hand he held a spear of eleven cubits: and before
him shone the golden point of the spear, and a golden ring surrounded
it. Leaning on this, he spoke winged words:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, and Dardanians, and allies: I lately thought that
having destroyed the ships and all the Greeks, I should return back to
wind-swept Ilium. But darkness has come on first, which has now been
the chief means of preserving the Greeks and their ships on the shore of
the sea. But, however, let us now obey dark night, and make ready our
repasts; and do ye loose from your chariots your beautiful-maned steeds,
and set fodder before them: and quickly bring from the city oxen and fat
sheep; bring sweet wine and bread from your homes; and besides collect
many fagots, that all night till Aurora, mother of dawn, we may kindle
many fires, and the splendour may ascend to heaven: lest haply in the
night the long-haired Greeks attempt to fly over the broad ridge of the
ocean. That they may not at all events without toil and without harm
ascend their ships: but [let us] take care that each of them may have to
heal a wound[287] at home, being stricken either with an arrow, or with
a sharp spear, bounding into his ship; that every other too may dread to
wage tearful war against the horse-breaking Trojans. Let the heralds,
dear to Jove, proclaim through the city, that the youths at the age of
puberty, and the hoary-templed sages, keep watch around the city, in the
god-built turrets; and let the females also, the feebler sex, in their
halls each kindle a mighty fire: and let there be some strong guard,
lest a secret band enter the city, the people being absent. Thus let it
be, magnanimous Trojans, as I say: and let the speech, which is now most
salutary, be thus spoken. But for that which will be [most expedient] in
the morning, I will [then] speak amongst the horse-breaking Trojans.
Making vows both to Jove and to the other gods, I hope to banish hence
those dogs borne hither by the fates, whom the fates bear in their black
ships.[288] But let us keep watch during the night, and in the morning,
at dawn, equipped with arms, let us stir up sharp conflict at the hollow
ships. I will see whether valiant Diomede, the son of Tydeus, will force
me back from the ships to our walls, or whether I shall bear away his
bloody spoils, having slain him with my brazen spear. To-morrow shall he
make manifest his valour, if he shall withstand my assaulting spear. But
I think that he will lie wounded amongst the first at sunrise to-morrow,
and many companions around him. Would that I were so certainly immortal,
and free from old age all my days, and honoured, as Minerva and Apollo
are honoured, as [I am certain] that this day will bring evil upon the
Greeks."

   [Footnote 287: Literally, "digest a weapon," _i.e._ have a wound
    to attend to. So _telum_ and _vulnus_ are used for each other
   in Latin.]

   [Footnote 288: Surely this line is a gloss upon [Greek:
   keressiphoretous].]

Thus Hector harangued them; but the Trojans applauded aloud. And they
loosed from the yoke their sweating steeds, and bound them with halters,
each to his own chariot. Quickly they brought from the city oxen and fat
sheep: and they brought sweet wine, and bread from their homes, and also
collected many fagots. But the winds raised the savour from the plain to
heaven.

But they, greatly elated, sat all night in the ranks of war, and many
fires blazed for them. As when in heaven the stars appear very
conspicuous[289] around the lucid moon, when the aether is wont to be
without a breeze, and all the pointed rocks and lofty summits and groves
appear, but in heaven the immense aether is disclosed, and all the stars
are seen, and the shepherd rejoices in his soul. Thus did many fires of
the Trojans kindling them appear before Ilium, between the ships and the
streams of Xanthus. A thousand fires blazed in the plain, and by each
sat fifty men, at the light of the blazing fire. But their steeds eating
white barley and oats, standing by the chariots, awaited
beautiful-throned Aurora.

   [Footnote 289: Cf. AEsch. Ag. 6: [Greek: Lamprous dynastas,
   emprepontas aitheri].]




                            BOOK THE NINTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

By advice of Nestor, Agamemnon sends Ulysses, Phoenix, and Ajax, to the
tent of Achilles to sue for a reconciliation. Notwithstanding the
earnest appeal of Phoenix, their errand proves fruitless.


Thus the Trojans indeed kept guard: but a mighty[290] Flight, the
companion of chill Fear, seized upon the Greeks; and all the chiefs were
afflicted with intolerable grief. And as two winds, the north and south,
which both blow from Thrace,[291] rouse the fishy deep, coming suddenly
[upon it]; but the black billows are elevated together; and they dash
much sea-weed out of the ocean; so was the mind of the Greeks distracted
within their bosoms.

   [Footnote 290: "In Il. 1,2, the [Greek: thespesin phuza] of the
   Achaeans is not to be explained as a supernatural flight,
   occasioned by the gods. It is a great and general flight, caused
   by Hector and the Trojans. For although this was approved of and
   encouraged by Jupiter, yet his was only that mediate influence of
   the deity without which in general nothing took place in the
   Homeric battles."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 358. Cf. Coleridge, p. 160.]

   [Footnote 291: Wood, p. 46, explains this from the situation of
   Ionia. Heyne, however, observes, "comparatio e mente poetae
   instituitur, non ex Agamemnonis persona."]

But Atrides, wounded to the heart with great sorrow, kept going round,
giving orders to the clear-voiced heralds, to summon each man by name to
an assembly, but not to call aloud; and he himself toiled among the
first. And they sat in council, grieved, and Agamemnon arose, shedding
tears, like a black-water fountain, which pours its gloomy stream from a
lofty rock. Thus he, deeply sighing, spoke words to the Greeks:

"O friends, leaders and chieftains over the Greeks, Jove, the son of
Saturn, has greatly entangled me in a grievous calamity: cruel, who once
promised me, and assented, that I should return, having destroyed
well-built Ilium. But now has he plotted an evil fraud, and orders me to
return inglorious to Argos, after I have lost much people. Thus,
doubtless, will it be agreeable to almighty Jove, who has already
overthrown the heights of many cities, and will still overthrow them,
for his power is greatest. But come, let us all obey as I advise: let us
fly with the ships to our dear fatherland, for now we shall not take
wide-wayed Troy."

Thus he spoke; but they were all still in silence, and the sons of the
Greeks being sad, kept silent long: at length Diomede, brave in the din
of battle, spoke:

"Son of Atreus, thee will I first oppose, speaking inconsiderately, as
is lawful, in the assembly; but be not thou the least offended. First
among the Greeks didst thou disparage my valour, saying that I was
unwarlike and weak;[292] and all this, as well the young as the old of
the Greeks know. One of two things hath the son of crafty Saturn given
thee: he has granted that thou shouldst be honoured by the sceptre above
all; but valour hath he not given thee, which is the greatest strength.
Strange man, dost thou then certainly think that the sons of the Greeks
are unwarlike and weak, as thou sayest? If indeed thy mind impels thee,
that thou shouldst return, go: the way lies open to thee, and thy ships
stand near the sea, which very many followed thee from Mycenae. But the
other long-haired Greeks will remain until we overthrow Troy: but if
they also [choose], let them fly with their ships to their dear
fatherland. But we twain, I and Sthenelus,[293] will fight, until we
find an end of Troy; for under the auspices of the deity we came."

   [Footnote 292: Cf. iv. 370, sqq.]

   [Footnote 293: Heyne compares Julius Caesar, Com. B. G. i. 40. "Si
   praeterea nemo sequatur (contra Ariovistum), tamen se cum sola
   decima legione iturum dicit."]

Thus he spoke; but all the sons of the Greeks applauded, admiring the
speech of steed-breaking Diomede. But them the knight Nestor, rising up,
addressed:

"Son of Tydeus, pre-eminently indeed art thou brave in battle, and the
best in council amongst all thine equals. No one has censured thy
discourse, nor contradicts it, as many as are the Greeks; but thou
comest not to an end of discussion.[294] Assuredly thou art youthful,
and mightst be my youngest son for age, yet thou speakest prudent words
to the kings of the Greeks, for thou hast said aright. But come, I who
boast to be older than thou, will speak out, and discuss everything: nor
will any one, not even king Agamemnon, disregard my speech. Tribeless,
lawless, homeless is he, who loves horrid civil war. But now, however,
let us obey dark night, and make ready suppers. But let the respective
guards lie down beside the trench, dug without the wall. To the youth,
indeed, I enjoin these things; but next, Atrides, do thou begin, for
thou art supreme. Give a banquet to the elders; it becomes thee, and is
not unseemly. Full are thy tents of wine, which the ships of the Greeks
daily bring over the wide sea from Thrace. Thou hast every
accommodation, and rulest over many people. But when many are assembled,
do thou obey him who shall give the best advice; for there is great need
of good and prudent [advice] to all the Greeks, since the enemy are
burning many fires near the ships; and who can rejoice at these things?
But this night will either ruin the army or preserve it."

   [Footnote 294: _I. e_. thou hast not said all that might have
   been said on the subject.]

Thus he spoke; and they heard him very attentively, and obeyed. But the
guards rushed forth with their arms, [those around] Thrasymedes, the son
of Nestor, the shepherd of the people, Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of
Mars, Meriones, Aphareus, and Deipyrus, as well as the son of Creon,
noble Lycomedes. There were seven leaders of the guards, and a hundred
youths marched along with each, holding long spears in their hands.
Proceeding to the space between the trench and the wall, there they sat
down, and there kindled a fire, and prepared each his supper.

But Atrides conducted the assembled elders of the Greeks to his tent,
and set before them a strength-recruiting banquet; and they laid their
hands upon the viands placed before them. But when they had dismissed
the desire of eating and drinking, to them first of all did aged Nestor,
whose advice had previously appeared best, begin to interweave advice;
who wisely counselling, addressed them, and said:

"Most glorious Atrides, king of men, Agamemnon, with thee shall I end,
and with thee shall I commence. Since thou art a king of many nations,
and Jove hath placed in thine hands both a sceptre and laws, that thou
mayest consult for their advantage. Therefore is it necessary that thou
in particular shouldst deliver and hear an opinion, and also accomplish
that of another, when his mind urges any one to speak for the [public]
good; but on thee will depend whatever takes the lead. Yet will I speak
as appears to me to be best. For no other person will propound a better
opinion than that which I meditate, both of old and also now, from that
period when thou, O nobly born, didst depart, carrying off the maid
Briseis from the tent of the enraged Achilles; by no means according to
my judgment; for I very strenuously dissuaded thee from it: but having
yielded to thy haughty temper, thou didst dishonour the bravest hero,
whom even the immortals have honoured; for, taking away his reward, thou
still retainest it. Yet even now let us deliberate how we may succeed in
persuading him, appeasing him with agreeable gifts and soothing words."

But him the king of men, Agamemnon, again addressed: "Old man, thou hast
not falsely enumerated my errors. I have erred, nor do I myself deny it.
That man indeed is equivalent to many troops, whom Jove loves in his
heart, as now he hath honoured this man, and subdued the people of the
Greeks. But since I erred, having yielded to my wayward disposition, I
desire again to appease him, and to give him invaluable presents. Before
you all will I enumerate the distinguished gifts: seven tripods
untouched by fire,[295] and ten talents of gold, and twenty shining
caldrons, and twelve stout steeds, victorious in the race, which have
borne off prizes by their feet. No pauper would the man be, nor in want
of precious gold, to whom as many prizes belong as [these] solid-hoofed
steeds have brought to me. I will likewise give seven beautiful Lesbian
women, skilful in faultless works; whom I selected when he himself took
well-inhabited Lesbos, who excel the race of women in beauty. These will
I give him, and amongst them will be her whom then I took away, the
daughter of Briseis; and I will swear moreover a mighty oath, that I
never ascended her bed, nor embraced her, as is the custom of human
beings--of men and women. All these shall immediately be ready; and if,
