again tried to learn the names of the real conspirators. He knew that
Harmodius and Aristogiton had often visited Leaena: so he had her
imprisoned and tortured, to make her tell the names of the conspirators,
because he wanted to kill them all as he had killed Aristogiton.

The brave woman, knowing that the lives of several young men depended
upon her, and that a single word might cause their death, resolved not
to utter a sound. In spite of the most awful tortures, she therefore
kept her mouth tightly closed; and when she was finally set free, they
found that she had bitten off her tongue for fear of betraying her
friends.

Poor Leaena did not live long after this; and when she died, she was
buried in a beautiful tomb, over which her friends put the image of a
lioness without a tongue, to remind the people of her courage.

The Athenians were very sorry for her death, and mourned the brave
youths Harmodius and Aristogiton for a long time; but the tyranny of the
son of Pisistratus daily grew more cruel and disagreeable.




XXXIX. HIPPIAS DRIVEN OUT OF ATHENS.


Four years passed thus, and the Athenians were hoping that the time
would soon come when they could get rid of Hippias. They were only too
glad, therefore, when they at last found a way to drive him out of the
town.

[Illustration: Delphi.]

You must remember how Megacles had killed the men who came out of
Athene's temple clinging to the cord they had fastened to her statue.
Megacles, as you know, had been banished from Athens with all his family
(the Alcmaeonidae) on account of this crime, but he had always hoped to be
allowed to return.

Meanwhile the beautiful temple at Delphi had been burned to the ground,
and the people were very anxious to rebuild it. They therefore voted a
certain sum of money for this purpose; and, as the Alcmaeonidae offered
to do the work for the least pay, the contract was given to them.

The Alcmaeonidae faithfully carried out the plans, and used the money;
but, instead of building the temple of brick, they made it of pure white
marble, paying for the more costly material themselves.

The priests of Delphi were so pleased with the handsome new building,
and with the generosity of the builders, that they were eager to do them
a good turn. So, knowing that the Alcmaeonidae wanted to get back to
Athens, they told the Spartans who came to consult the oracle, that
Hippias should be driven away, and the Alcmaeonidae allowed to return to
their native city.

As the people believed all the oracle said, the Spartans armed at once,
and, helped by the Alcmaeonidae, began to make war against the Athenians.
By a clever trick, they soon managed to capture the family of Hippias,
and they refused to set them free unless the tyrant left Athens forever.

Thus forced to give in, Hippias left Athens, and withdrew with his
family to Asia Minor. Here he spent all his time in trying to persuade
the different cities to make war against Athens, offering to lead their
armies, for he still hoped to regain his lost power.

The Athenians, delighted at the expulsion of the Pis-is-trat'i-dae, as
the driving-away of Hippias and his family is called in history, now
dared to make statues in honor of their favorites Harmodius and
Aristogiton, and openly expressed their regret that these brave young
men had not lived to see their native city free.

Many songs were composed to celebrate the patriotism of the two
friends; and these were sung on all public occasions, to encourage other
youths to follow their example, lead good and virtuous lives, and be
ready at any time to die, if need be, for the sake of their native land.

Leaena, too, received much praise, for the Athenian women never forgot
how bravely she had endured torture rather than betray the men who had
trusted her.

The Alcmaeonidae, having thus found their way back into the city, now
began to play an important part in the government; and Clis'the-nes,
their leader, urged the Athenians to obey again the laws which had been
made by Solon.

These were slightly changed, however, so as to give more power to the
people; and the government thus became more democratic than ever. Then,
too, Clisthenes said that there should always be ten Athenian generals
who should hold supreme command each for a day in turn.

He also made a law, to the effect that no man should be driven out of
the city unless there were six thousand votes in favor of his exile.
These votes were given in a strange way.

When a man was so generally disliked that his departure seemed best, all
the Athenians assembled in the market place. Then each voter received a
shell (Greek, _ostrakon_), and dropped it into a place made for that
purpose. All in favor of banishment wrote upon their shells the name of
the man they wished to exile. The others left theirs blank.

When all the votes had thus been cast, the shells were carefully
counted, and, if six thousand bore the name of the same man, he was
driven out of the city, or ostracized, as it was called from the name of
the shell, for ten years.




XL. THE GREAT KING.


Hippias, the exiled tyrant of Athens, as we have already seen, had taken
up his abode in Asia Minor, where he made several unsuccessful attempts
to regain his power.

The Greek cities were not ready to help him, however, so he tried to get
another ally. Now, the greatest ruler in Asia Minor was Da-ri'us, the
king who won his throne by the aid of his horse and groom, as you will
see in ancient history.

He was a powerful monarch,--so powerful that the Greeks, who had built
cities all along the coast of Asia Minor, in the country called Ionia,
never spoke of him except as "The Great King."

Darius' kingdom was so large that it was quite impossible for one person
to govern it without help. He therefore divided it into satrapies, or
provinces, each of which was under the care of a satrap, or governor.
These men received their orders from the king, saw that they were obeyed
in all the territory under their care, and kept Darius informed of all
that was going on.

The Great King generally dwelt at Ec-bat'a-na, a city surrounded by
seven walls, each painted in a different but very bright color. Inside
the seventh and last wall stood the palace and treasure house, which was
fairly overflowing with gold and precious stones.

As there were armed soldiers at every gate in the seven walls, only the
people to whom the king was willing to grant an audience could enter.

Now, although so secluded, Darius knew perfectly well all that was
happening in every part of his kingdom, and even in the neighboring
states; for his satraps sent him messengers daily to report all the
news, and he had many paid spies, whose duty it was to tell him all they
knew.

He was therefore one of the first Eastern rulers who heard of the revolt
of the Athenians; and soon after this he learned that Hippias had come
to Asia, and was trying to induce the Greek cities to make war against
the Athenians.

When Hippias arrived at Ecbatana in search of aid, he could not
immediately see the king, but was obliged to send in a message written
on a waxen tablet. This passed from hand to hand, and finally reached
Darius, who, recognizing the name at the bottom of the request,
graciously said that he would receive the exiled tyrant of Athens.




XLI. HIPPIAS VISITS DARIUS.


Hippias was led by one of the officers of the king's household past all
the guards, who respectfully made way for him, and was brought into the
most magnificent dwelling he had ever seen. All the walls were covered
with silken hangings of the richest dyes, and the furniture sparkled
with gold and precious stones.

After passing through many rooms, where he saw richly dressed courtiers,
and guards with jeweled weapons, Hippias was finally brought into a
great audience chamber, at one end of which hung a heavy curtain of
royal purple.

Here all the courtiers knelt, bending over to touch the floor with their
foreheads, in token of homage to The Great King. The officer now bade
Hippias do likewise; and when the Athenian raised his head, after
reluctantly going through this performance, he saw that the curtain had
been quietly pulled aside.

On a beautiful throne of ivory and gold, all overshadowed by a golden
vine bearing clusters of jeweled grapes, sat the Persian king. He was
clad in superbly embroidered robes, wore a diamond crown or tiara, held
a scepter of pure gold, and was surrounded by his officers, who were
almost as richly dressed as he.

As the Athenians were plain people, Hippias had never seen such a sight
before, and stared at the garments, which were far handsomer than those
which the Greek gods were given to wear.

Invited to speak freely and make his errand known, Hippias now told
Darius that he had come to ask his aid against the revolted Athenians.
Darius listened politely to all he had to say, and then sent him away,
graciously promising to think the matter over, and giving orders that
Hippias should be royally entertained in the mean while.

Among Darius' numerous slaves, most of whom were captives of war, there
was a learned Greek doctor called Dem-o-ce'des. This man, hoping soon to
recover his freedom by paying a sum of money, was very careful to hide
his name, and not to tell any one how much he knew.

It happened, however, that the king hurt his foot; and after the Persian
doctors had all vainly tried to cure him, he sent for Democedes, saying
that he would put him to death if he did not speedily help him.

Thus forced to use his knowledge, Democedes did all he could for the
king, and treated the wound so skillfully that the monarch was soon
cured. The king, who had found out from the other captives that the man
was a doctor, now named him court physician, and even had him attend his
wives.

One of these women was A-tos'sa, the favorite queen; and when she became
ill, Democedes was fortunate enough to save her life. The king was so
delighted with this cure, that he bade Democedes choose any reward he
pleased except his freedom.

Democedes, after a few moments' thought, asked permission to visit his
native land once more; and Darius let him go under the escort of fifteen
officers, who had orders not to lose sight of the doctor for a moment,
to bring him back by force if necessary, and to spy out the land.

In spite of the constant watching of these fifteen men, Democedes
managed to escape while they were in Greece, and hid so well that they
were never able to find him. They were therefore obliged to go home
without him; and as soon as they arrived in Persia, they reported to
Darius all they had done on the way.

The Great King questioned them very closely about all they had seen; and
his curiosity was so excited by what they told him, that he made up his
mind to conquer Greece and add it to his kingdom.

He therefore sent for Hippias again, told him that he was ready to help
him, and gave orders to collect one of the largest armies that had ever
been seen. With this army he hoped not only to take the whole country,
but also to get back the runaway doctor, Democedes, who in the mean
while was living peacefully in Greece, where he had married a daughter
of the famous strong man, Milo of Croton.




XLII. DESTRUCTION OF THE PERSIAN HOST.


The Persian preparations for war were hastened by news that all the
Ionian cities had rebelled. These were, as you remember, Greek colonies
founded on the coast of Asia Minor. They had little by little fallen
into the hands of the Persians; but, as they hated to submit to foreign
rule, they had long planned a revolt.

The Athenians, who knew that the Persians were talking of coming over to
conquer them, now offered to help the Ionians, and sent some troops over
to Asia Minor. These joined the rebels, and together they managed to
surprise and burn to the ground the rich city of Sar'dis, which belonged
to Darius.

A messenger was sent in hot haste to bear these tidings to The Great
King; and when he heard them, he was very angry indeed. In his wrath, he
said that he would punish both rebels and Athenians, and immediately
sent his army into Ionia.

The first part of his vow was easily kept, for his troops soon defeated
the Ionian army, and forced the rebels to obey him once more. When
Darius heard this, he was very much pleased; and then, sending for his
bow, he shot an arrow in the direction of Athens, to show that the
punishment of the Athenians would be his next care.

As he was afraid of forgetting these enemies in the pressure of other
business, he gave orders that a slave should appear before him every day
while he sat at dinner, and solemnly say, "Master, remember the
Athenians!"

When the preparations for this distant war were ended, the Persian army
set out for Greece. In order to reach that country, it had to march a
long way through the northern part of Asia Minor, cross a narrow strait
called the Hel'les-pont, and pass along the coast of the AEgean Sea,
through Thrace and Scyth'i-a.

In these countries the Persian army met the fierce and warlike
Scyth'i-ans mounted on their fleet-footed horses, and was nearly cut to
pieces. The Persians were so frightened by the attack of these foes,
that they refused to go any farther, and even beat a hasty retreat.

The Persian fleet in the mean while had sailed along bravely. It soon
came to the promontory formed by Mount A'thos, a tall mountain which
sometimes casts a shadow eighty miles long over the sea. Here a terrible
tempest overtook the fleet, and the waves rose so high that six hundred
vessels were dashed to pieces.

All the rest of the Persian vessels were so damaged by the storm, that
it was soon decided that they had better return home. The soldiers of
The Great King were of course greatly discouraged by these misfortunes;
but Darius was more than ever determined to conquer Greece, and at once
began to gather a second army and to build a second fleet.




XLIII. THE ADVANCE OF THE SECOND HOST.


Darius was very busy preparing this other army to march against Greece.
While the men were being drilled, he sent two messengers to the Greek
towns and islands, bidding them surrender and give him earth and water.

By demanding "earth and water," Darius meant that he wanted them to
recognize him as their king, and as master of all their lands and
vessels. The inhabitants of many of the islands and towns were so
