    Remark'd, and the Phaeacians thus bespake.
      Phaeacian Chiefs and Senators attend!
    Now let Demodocus enjoin his harp
    Silence, for not alike grateful to all
    His music sounds; during our feast, and since                    660
    The bard divine began, continual flow
    The stranger's sorrows, by remembrance caused
    Of some great woe which wraps his soul around.
    Then, let the bard suspend his song, that all
    (As most befits th' occasion) may rejoice,
    Both guest and hosts together; since we make
    This voyage, and these gifts confer, in proof
    Of hospitality and unfeign'd love,
    Judging, with all wise men, the stranger-guest
    And suppliant worthy of a brother's place.                       670
    And thou conceal not, artfully reserv'd,
    What I shall ask, far better plain declared
    Than smother'd close; who art thou? speak thy name,
    The name by which thy father, mother, friends
    And fellow-citizens, with all who dwell
    Around thy native city, in times past
    Have known thee; for of all things human none
    Lives altogether nameless, whether good
    Or whether bad, but ev'ry man receives
    Ev'n in the moment of his birth, a name.                         680
    Thy country, people, city, tell; the mark
    At which my ships, intelligent, shall aim,
    That they may bear thee thither; for our ships
    No pilot need or helm, as ships are wont,
    But know, themselves, our purpose; know beside
    All cities, and all fruitful regions well
    Of all the earth, and with dark clouds involv'd
    Plough rapid the rough Deep, fearless of harm,
    (Whate'er betide) and of disast'rous wreck.
    Yet thus, long since, my father I have heard                     690
    Nausithoues speaking; Neptune, he would say,
    Is angry with us, for that safe we bear
    Strangers of ev'ry nation to their home;
    And he foretold a time when he would smite
    In vengeance some Phaeacian gallant bark
    Returning after convoy of her charge,
    And fix her in the sable flood, transform'd
    Into a mountain, right before the town.
      So spake my hoary Sire, which let the God
    At his own pleasure do, or leave undone.                         700
    But tell me truth, and plainly. Where have been
    Thy wand'rings? in what regions of the earth
    Hast thou arrived? what nations hast thou seen,
    What cities? say, how many hast thou found
    Harsh, savage and unjust? how many, kind
    To strangers, and disposed to fear the Gods?
    Say also, from what secret grief of heart
    Thy sorrows flow, oft as thou hear'st the fate
    Of the Achaians, or of Ilium sung?
    That fate the Gods prepared; they spin the thread                710
    Of man's destruction, that in after days
    The bard may make the sad event his theme.
    Perish'd thy father or thy brother there?
    Or hast thou at the siege of Ilium lost
    Father-in-law, or son-in-law? for such
    Are next and dearest to us after those
    Who share our own descent; or was the dead
    Thy bosom-friend, whose heart was as thy own?
    For worthy as a brother of our love
    The constant friend and the discrete I deem.                     720


FOOTNOTES:

[27] Agamemnon having inquired at Delphos, at what time the Trojan war
would end, was answered that the conclusion of it should happen at a time
when a dispute should arise between two of his principal commanders. That
dispute occurred at the time here alluded to, Achilles recommending force
as most likely to reduce the city, and Ulysses stratagem.

[28] +Toisi d' apo nysoes tetato dromos+--This expression is by the
commentators generally understood to be significant of the effort which
they made at starting, but it is not improbable that it relates merely to
the measurement of the course, otherwise, +karpalimos epetonto+ will be
tautologous.

[29] In boxing.

[30] The Translator is indebted to Mr Grey for an epithet more expressive
of the original (+Marmarygas+) than any other, perhaps, in all our
language. See the Ode on the Progress of Poetry.

    "To brisk notes in cadence beating,
    Glance their _many-twinkling_ feet"

[31] The original line has received such a variety of interpretations,
that a Translator seems free to choose. It has, however, a proverbial
turn, which I have endeavoured to preserve, and have adopted the sense of
the words which appears best to accord with what immediately follows.
Vulcan pleads his own inability to enforce the demand, as a circumstance
that made Neptune's promise unacceptable.




BOOK IX

ARGUMENT

Ulysses discovers himself to the Phaeacians, and begins the history of his
adventures. He destroys Ismarus, city of the Ciconians; arrives among the
Lotophagi; and afterwards at the land of the Cyclops. He is imprisoned by
Polypheme in his cave, who devours six of his companions; intoxicates the
monster with wine, blinds him while he sleeps, and escapes from him.


    Then answer, thus, Ulysses wise return'd.
    Alcinoues! King! illustrious above all
    Phaeacia's sons, pleasant it is to hear
    A bard like this, sweet as the Gods in song.
    The world, in my account, no sight affords
    More gratifying than a people blest
    With cheerfulness and peace, a palace throng'd
    With guests in order ranged, list'ning to sounds
    Melodious, and the steaming tables spread
    With plenteous viands, while the cups, with wine                  10
    From brimming beakers fill'd, pass brisk around.
    No lovelier sight know I. But thou, it seems,
    Thy thoughts hast turn'd to ask me whence my groans
    And tears, that I may sorrow still the more.
    What first, what next, what last shall I rehearse,
    On whom the Gods have show'r'd such various woes?
    Learn first my name, that even in this land
    Remote I may be known, and that escaped
    From all adversity, I may requite
    Hereafter, this your hospitable care                              20
    At my own home, however distant hence.
    I am Ulysses, fear'd in all the earth
    For subtlest wisdom, and renown'd to heaven,
    The offspring of Laertes; my abode
    Is sun-burnt Ithaca; there waving stands
    The mountain Neritus his num'rous boughs,
    And it is neighbour'd close by clust'ring isles
    All populous; thence Samos is beheld,
    Dulichium, and Zacynthus forest-clad.
    Flat on the Deep she lies, farthest removed                       30
    Toward the West, while, situate apart,
    Her sister islands face the rising day;
    Rugged she is, but fruitful nurse of sons
    Magnanimous; nor shall these eyes behold,
    Elsewhere, an object dear and sweet as she.
    Calypso, beauteous Goddess, in her grot
    Detain'd me, wishing me her own espoused;
    AEaean Circe also, skill'd profound
    In potent arts, within her palace long
    Detain'd me, wishing me her own espoused;                         40
    But never could they warp my constant mind.
    So much our parents and our native soil
    Attract us most, even although our lot
    Be fair and plenteous in a foreign land.
    But come--my painful voyage, such as Jove
    Gave me from Ilium, I will now relate.
      From Troy the winds bore me to Ismarus,
    City of the Ciconians; them I slew,
    And laid their city waste; whence bringing forth
    Much spoil with all their wives, I portion'd it                   50
    With equal hand, and each received a share.
    Next, I exhorted to immediate flight
    My people; but in vain; they madly scorn'd
    My sober counsel, and much wine they drank,
    And sheep and beeves slew num'rous on the shore.
    Meantime, Ciconians to Ciconians call'd,
    Their neighbours summoning, a mightier host
    And braver, natives of the continent,
    Expert, on horses mounted, to maintain
    Fierce fight, or if occasion bade, on foot.                       60
    Num'rous they came as leaves, or vernal flow'rs
    At day-spring. Then, by the decree of Jove,
    Misfortune found us. At the ships we stood
    Piercing each other with the brazen spear,
    And till the morning brighten'd into noon,
    Few as we were, we yet withstood them all;
    But, when the sun verged westward, then the Greeks
    Fell back, and the Ciconian host prevail'd.
    Six warlike Greecians from each galley's crew
    Perish'd in that dread field; the rest escaped.                   70
      Thus, after loss of many, we pursued
    Our course, yet, difficult as was our flight,
    Went not till first we had invoked by name
    Our friends, whom the Ciconians had destroy'd.
    But cloud-assembler Jove assail'd us soon
    With a tempestuous North-wind; earth alike
    And sea with storms he overhung, and night
    Fell fast from heav'n. Their heads deep-plunging oft
    Our gallies flew, and rent, and rent again
    Our tatter'd sail-cloth crackled in the wind.                     80
    We, fearing instant death, within the barks
    Our canvas lodg'd, and, toiling strenuous, reach'd
    At length the continent. Two nights we lay
    Continual there, and two long days, consumed
    With toil and grief; but when the beauteous morn
    Bright-hair'd, had brought the third day to a close,
    (Our masts erected, and white sails unfurl'd)
    Again we sat on board; meantime, the winds
    Well managed by the steersman, urged us on.
    And now, all danger pass'd, I had attain'd                        90
    My native shore, but, doubling in my course
    Malea, waves and currents and North-winds
    Constrain'd me devious to Cythera's isle.
    Nine days by cruel storms thence was I borne
    Athwart the fishy Deep, but on the tenth
    Reach'd the Lotophagi, a race sustain'd
    On sweetest fruit alone. There quitting ship,
    We landed and drew water, and the crews
    Beside the vessels took their ev'ning cheer.
    When, hasty, we had thus our strength renew'd,                   100
    I order'd forth my people to inquire
    (Two I selected from the rest, with whom
    I join'd an herald, third) what race of men
    Might there inhabit. They, departing, mix'd
    With the Lotophagi; nor hostile aught
    Or savage the Lotophagi devised
    Against our friends, but offer'd to their taste
    The lotus; of which fruit what man soe'er
    Once tasted, no desire felt he to come
    With tidings back, or seek his country more,                     110
    But rather wish'd to feed on lotus still
    With the Lotophagi, and to renounce
    All thoughts of home. Them, therefore, I constrain'd
    Weeping on board, and dragging each beneath
    The benches, bound him there. Then, all in haste,
    I urged my people to ascend again
    Their hollow barks, lest others also, fed
    With fruit of lotus, should forget their home.
    They quick embark'd, and on the benches ranged
    In order, thresh'd with oars the foamy flood.                    120
      Thence, o'er the Deep proceeding sad, we reach'd
    The land at length, where, giant-sized[32] and free
    From all constraint of law, the Cyclops dwell.
    They, trusting to the Gods, plant not, or plough,
    But earth unsow'd, untill'd, brings forth for them
    All fruits, wheat, barley, and the vinous grape
    Large cluster'd, nourish'd by the show'rs of Jove.
    No councils they convene, no laws contrive,
    But in deep caverns dwell, found on the heads
    Of lofty mountains, judging each supreme                         130
    His wife and children, heedless of the rest.
    In front of the Cyclopean haven lies
    A level island, not adjoining close
    Their land, nor yet remote, woody and rude.
    There, wild goats breed numberless, by no foot
    Of man molested; never huntsman there,
    Inured to winter's cold and hunger, roams
    The dreary woods, or mountain-tops sublime;
    No fleecy flocks dwell there, nor plough is known,
    But the unseeded and unfurrow'd soil,                            140
    Year after year a wilderness by man
    Untrodden, food for blatant goats supplies.
    For no ships crimson-prow'd the Cyclops own,
    Nor naval artizan is there, whose toil
    Might furnish them with oary barks, by which
    Subsists all distant commerce, and which bear
    Man o'er the Deep to cities far remote
    Who might improve the peopled isle, that seems
    Not steril in itself, but apt to yield,
    In their due season, fruits of ev'ry kind.                       150
    For stretch'd beside the hoary ocean lie
    Green meadows moist, where vines would never fail;
    Light is the land, and they might yearly reap
    The tallest crops, so unctuous is the glebe.
    Safe is its haven also, where no need
    Of cable is or anchor, or to lash
    The hawser fast ashore, but pushing in
    His bark, the mariner might there abide
    Till rising gales should tempt him forth again.
    At bottom of the bay runs a clear stream                         160
    Issuing from a cove hemm'd all around
    With poplars; down into that bay we steer'd
    Amid the darkness of the night, some God
    Conducting us; for all unseen it lay,
    Such gloom involved the fleet, nor shone the moon
    From heav'n to light us, veil'd by pitchy clouds.
    Hence, none the isle descried, nor any saw
    The lofty surge roll'd on the strand, or ere
    Our vessels struck the ground; but when they struck,
    Then, low'ring all our sails, we disembark'd,                    170
    And on the sea-beach slept till dawn appear'd.
    Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Look'd rosy forth, we with admiring eyes
    The isle survey'd, roaming it wide around.
    Meantime, the nymphs, Jove's daughters, roused the goats
    Bred on the mountains, to supply with food
    The partners of my toils; then, bringing forth
    Bows and long-pointed javelins from the ships,
    Divided all into three sep'rate bands
    We struck them, and the Gods gave us much prey.                  180
    Twelve ships attended me, and ev'ry ship
    Nine goats received by lot; myself alone
    Selected ten. All day, till set of sun,
    We eating sat goat's flesh, and drinking wine
    Delicious, without stint; for dearth was none
    Of ruddy wine on board, but much remain'd,
    With which my people had their jars supplied
    What time we sack'd Ciconian Ismarus.
    Thence looking forth toward the neighbour-land
    Where dwell the Cyclops, rising smoke we saw,                    190
    And voices heard, their own, and of their flocks.
    Now sank the sun, and (night o'ershadowing all)
    We slept along the shore; but when again
    The rosy-finger'd daughter of the dawn
    Look'd forth, my crews convened, I thus began.
      Companions of my course! here rest ye all,
    Save my own crew, with whom I will explore
    This people, whether wild, they be, unjust,
    And to contention giv'n, or well-disposed
    To strangers, and a race who fear the Gods.                      200
      So speaking, I embark'd, and bade embark
    My followers, throwing, quick, the hawsers loose.
    They, ent'ring at my word, the benches fill'd
    Well-ranged, and thresh'd with oars the foamy flood.
    Attaining soon that neighbour-land, we found
    At its extremity, fast by the sea,
    A cavern, lofty, and dark-brow'd above
    With laurels; in that cavern slumb'ring lay
    Much cattle, sheep and goats, and a broad court
    Enclosed it, fenced with stones from quarries hewn,              210
    With spiry firs, and oaks of ample bough.
    Here dwelt a giant vast, who far remote
    His flocks fed solitary, converse none
    Desiring, sullen, savage, and unjust.
    Monster, in truth, he was, hideous in form,
    Resembling less a man by Ceres' gift
    Sustain'd, than some aspiring mountain-crag
    Tufted with wood, and standing all alone.
    Enjoining, then, my people to abide
    Fast by the ship which they should closely guard,                220
    I went, but not without a goat-skin fill'd
    With sable wine which I had erst received
    From Maron, offspring of Evanthes, priest
    Of Phoebus guardian god of Ismarus,
    Because, through rev'rence of him, we had saved
    Himself, his wife and children; for he dwelt
    Amid the grove umbrageous of his God.
    He gave me, therefore, noble gifts; from him
    Sev'n talents I received of beaten gold,
    A beaker, argent all, and after these                            230
    No fewer than twelve jars with wine replete,
    Rich, unadult'rate, drink for Gods; nor knew
    One servant, male or female, of that wine
    In all his house; none knew it, save himself,
    His wife, and the intendant of his stores.
    Oft as they drank that luscious juice, he slaked
    A single cup with twenty from the stream,
    And, even then, the beaker breath'd abroad
    A scent celestial, which whoever smelt,
    Thenceforth no pleasure found it to abstain.                     240
    Charged with an ample goat-skin of this wine
    I went, and with a wallet well supplied,
    But felt a sudden presage in my soul
    That, haply, with terrific force endued,
    Some savage would appear, strange to the laws
    And privileges of the human race.
    Few steps convey'd us to his den, but him
    We found not; he his flocks pastur'd abroad.
    His cavern ent'ring, we with wonder gazed
    Around on all; his strainers hung with cheese                    250
    Distended wide; with lambs and kids his penns
    Close-throng'd we saw, and folded separate
    The various charge; the eldest all apart,
    Apart the middle-aged, and the new-yean'd
    Also apart. His pails and bowls with whey
    Swam all, neat vessels into which he milk'd.
    Me then my friends first importuned to take
    A portion of his cheeses, then to drive
    Forth from the sheep-cotes to the rapid bark
    His kids and lambs, and plow the brine again.                    260
    But me they moved not, happier had they moved!
    I wish'd to see him, and to gain, perchance,
    Some pledge of hospitality at his hands,
    Whose form was such, as should not much bespeak
    When he appear'd, our confidence or love.
    Then, kindling fire, we offer'd to the Gods,
    And of his cheeses eating, patient sat
    Till home he trudged from pasture. Charged he came
    With dry wood bundled, an enormous load
    Fuel by which to sup. Loud crash'd the thorns                    270
    Which down he cast before the cavern's mouth,
    To whose interior nooks we trembling flew.
    At once he drove into his spacious cave
    His batten'd flock, all those which gave him milk,
    But all the males, both rams and goats, he left
    Abroad, excluded from the cavern-yard.
    Upheaving, next, a rocky barrier huge
    To his cave's mouth, he thrust it home. That weight
    Not all the oxen from its place had moved
    Of twenty and two wains; with such a rock                        280
    Immense his den he closed. Then down he sat,
    And as he milk'd his ewes and bleating goats
    All in their turns, her yeanling gave to each;
    Coagulating, then, with brisk dispatch,
    The half of his new milk, he thrust the curd
    Into his wicker sieves, but stored the rest
    In pans and bowls--his customary drink.
    His labours thus perform'd, he kindled, last,
    His fuel, and discerning _us_, enquired,
      Who are ye, strangers? from what distant shore                 290
    Roam ye the waters? traffic ye? or bound
    To no one port, wander, as pirates use,
    At large the Deep, exposing life themselves,
    And enemies of all mankind beside?
      He ceased; we, dash'd with terrour, heard the growl
    Of his big voice, and view'd his form uncouth,
    To whom, though sore appall'd, I thus replied.
      Of Greece are we, and, bound from Ilium home,
    Have wander'd wide the expanse of ocean, sport
    For ev'ry wind, and driven from our course,                      300
    Have here arrived; so stood the will of Jove.
    We boast ourselves of Agamemnon's train,
    The son of Atreus, at this hour the Chief
    Beyond all others under heav'n renown'd,
    So great a city he hath sack'd and slain
    Such num'rous foes; but since we reach, at last,
    Thy knees, we beg such hospitable fare,
    Or other gift, as guests are wont to obtain.
    Illustrious lord! respect the Gods, and us
    Thy suitors; suppliants are the care of Jove                     310
    The hospitable; he their wrongs resents
    And where the stranger sojourns, there is he.
      I ceas'd, when answer thus he, fierce, return'd.
    Friend! either thou art fool, or hast arrived
    Indeed from far, who bidd'st me fear the Gods
    Lest they be wroth. The Cyclops little heeds
    Jove AEgis-arm'd, or all the Pow'rs of heav'n.
    Our race is mightier far; nor shall myself,
    Through fear of Jove's hostility, abstain
    From thee or thine, unless my choice be such.                    320
    But tell me now. Where touch'd thy gallant bark
    Our country, on thy first arrival here?
    Remote or nigh? for I would learn the truth.
      So spake he, tempting me; but, artful, thus
    I answer'd, penetrating his intent.
      My vessel, Neptune, Shaker of the shores,
    At yonder utmost promontory dash'd
    In pieces, hurling her against the rocks
    With winds that blew right thither from the sea,
    And I, with these alone, escaped alive.                          330
      So I, to whom, relentless, answer none
    He deign'd, but, with his arms extended, sprang
    Toward my people, of whom seizing two
    At once, like whelps against his cavern-floor
    He dash'd them, and their brains spread on the ground.
    These, piece-meal hewn, for supper he prepared,
    And, like a mountain-lion, neither flesh
    Nor entrails left, nor yet their marrowy bones.
    We, viewing that tremendous sight, upraised
    Our hands to Jove, all hope and courage lost.                    340
    When thus the Cyclops had with human flesh
    Fill'd his capacious belly, and had quaff'd
    Much undiluted milk, among his flocks
    Out-stretch'd immense, he press'd his cavern-floor.
    Me, then, my courage prompted to approach
    The monster with my sword drawn from the sheath,
    And to transfix him where the vitals wrap
    The liver; but maturer thoughts forbad.
    For so, we also had incurred a death
    Tremendous, wanting pow'r to thrust aside                        350
    The rocky mass that closed his cavern-mouth
    By force of hand alone. Thus many a sigh
    Heaving, we watch'd the dawn. But when, at length,
    Aurora, day-spring's daughter rosy-palm'd
    Look'd forth, then, kindling fire, his flocks he milk'd
    In order, and her yeanling kid or lamb
    Thrust under each. When thus he had perform'd
    His wonted task, two seizing, as before,
    He slew them for his next obscene regale.
    His dinner ended, from the cave he drove                         360
    His fatted flocks abroad, moving with ease
    That pond'rous barrier, and replacing it
    As he had only closed a quiver's lid.
    Then, hissing them along, he drove his flocks
    Toward the mountain, and me left, the while,
    Deep ruminating how I best might take
    Vengeance, and by the aid of Pallas win
    Deathless renown. This counsel pleas'd me most.
    Beside the sheep-cote lay a massy club
    Hewn by the Cyclops from an olive stock,                         370
    Green, but which dried, should serve him for a staff.
    To us consid'ring it, that staff appear'd
    Tall as the mast of a huge trading bark,
    Impell'd by twenty rowers o'er the Deep.
    Such seem'd its length to us, and such its bulk.
    Part amputating, (an whole fathom's length)
    I gave my men that portion, with command
    To shave it smooth. They smooth'd it, and myself,
    Shaping its blunt extremity to a point,
    Season'd it in the fire; then cov'ring close                     380
    The weapon, hid it under litter'd straw,
    For much lay scatter'd on the cavern-floor.
    And now I bade my people cast the lot
    Who of us all should take the pointed brand,
    And grind it in his eye when next he slept.
    The lots were cast, and four were chosen, those
    Whom most I wish'd, and I was chosen fifth.
    At even-tide he came, his fleecy flocks
    Pasturing homeward, and compell'd them all
    Into his cavern, leaving none abroad,                            390
    Either through some surmise, or so inclined
    By influence, haply, of the Gods themselves.
    The huge rock pull'd into its place again
    At the cave's mouth, he, sitting, milk'd his sheep
    And goats in order, and her kid or lamb
    Thrust under each; thus, all his work dispatch'd,
    Two more he seiz'd, and to his supper fell.
    I then, approaching to him, thus address'd
    The Cyclops, holding in my hands a cup
    Of ivy-wood, well-charg'd with ruddy wine.                       400
      Lo, Cyclops! this is wine. Take this and drink
    After thy meal of man's flesh. Taste and learn
    What precious liquor our lost vessel bore.
    I brought it hither, purposing to make
    Libation to thee, if to pity inclined
    Thou would'st dismiss us home. But, ah, thy rage
    Is insupportable! thou cruel one!
    Who, thinkest thou, of all mankind, henceforth
    Will visit _thee_, guilty of such excess?
      I ceas'd. He took and drank, and hugely pleas'd[33]            410
    With that delicious bev'rage, thus enquir'd.
      Give me again, and spare not. Tell me, too,
    Thy name, incontinent, that I may make
    Requital, gratifying also thee
    With somewhat to thy taste. We Cyclops own
    A bounteous soil, which yields _us_ also wine
    From clusters large, nourish'd by show'rs from Jove;
    But this--this is from above--a stream
    Of nectar and ambrosia, all divine!
      He ended, and received a second draught,                       420
    Like measure. Thrice I bore it to his hand,
    And, foolish, thrice he drank. But when the fumes
    Began to play around the Cyclops' brain,
    With show of amity I thus replied.
      Cyclops! thou hast my noble name enquired,
    Which I will tell thee. Give me, in return,
    The promised boon, some hospitable pledge.
    My name is Outis,[34] Outis I am call'd
    At home, abroad; wherever I am known.
      So I; to whom he, savage, thus replied.                        430
    Outis, when I have eaten all his friends,
    Shall be my last regale. Be that thy boon.
      He spake, and, downward sway'd, fell resupine,
    With his huge neck aslant. All-conqu'ring sleep
    Soon seized him. From his gullet gush'd the wine
    With human morsels mingled, many a blast
    Sonorous issuing from his glutted maw.
    Then, thrusting far the spike of olive-wood
    Into the embers glowing on the hearth,
    I heated it, and cheer'd my friends, the while,                  440
    Lest any should, through fear, shrink from his part.
    But when that stake of olive-wood, though green,
    Should soon have flamed, for it was glowing hot,
    I bore it to his side. Then all my aids
    Around me gather'd, and the Gods infused
    Heroic fortitude into our hearts.
    They, seizing the hot stake rasp'd to a point,
    Bored his eye with it, and myself, advanced
    To a superior stand, twirled it about.
    As when a shipwright with his wimble bores                       450
    Tough oaken timber, placed on either side
    Below, his fellow-artists strain the thong
    Alternate, and the restless iron spins,
    So, grasping hard the stake pointed with fire,
    We twirl'd it in his eye; the bubbling blood
    Boil'd round about the brand; his pupil sent
    A scalding vapour forth that sing'd his brow,
    And all his eye-roots crackled in the flame.
    As when the smith an hatchet or large axe
    Temp'ring with skill, plunges the hissing blade                  460
    Deep in cold water, (whence the strength of steel)
    So hiss'd his eye around the olive-wood.
    The howling monster with his outcry fill'd
    The hollow rock, and I, with all my aids,
    Fled terrified. He, plucking forth the spike
