is the warrior's glory; and Achilles is better far than thou. Go
therefore now and sit amid the company of thy fellows; against him shall
the Achaians put forth another champion. Fearless though he be and
insatiate of turmoil, I ween that he shall be fain to rest his knees, if
he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray."

So spake the hero and persuaded his brother's heart with just counsel;
and he obeyed. So his squires thereat with gladness took his armour from
his shoulders; and Nestor stood up and spake amid the Argives: "Fie upon
it, verily sore lamentation cometh on the land of Achaia. Verily old
Peleus driver of chariots would groan sore, that goodly counsellor of
the Myrmidons and orator, who erst questioned me in his house, and
rejoiced greatly, inquiring of the lineage and birth of all the Argives.
If he heard now of those that all were cowering before Hector, then
would he lift his hands to the immortals, instantly praying that his
soul might depart from his limbs down to the house of Hades. Would to
God I were thus young and my strength were sound; then would Hector of
the glancing helm soon find his combat. But of those of you that be
chieftains of the host of the Achaians, yet desireth no man of good
heart to meet Hector face to face." So the old man upbraided them, and
there stood up nine in all. Far first arose Agamemnon king of men, and
after him rose Tydeus' son stalwart Diomedes, and after them the Aiantes
clothed with impetuous might, and after them Idomeneus and Idomeneus'
brother-in-arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios slayer of men, and after them
Eurypylos Euaimon's glorious son; and up rose Thoas Andraimon's son and
goodly Odysseus. So all these were fain to fight with goodly Hector. And
among them spake again knightly Nestor of Gerenia: "Now cast ye the lot
from the first unto the last, for him that shall be chosen: for he shall
in truth profit the well-greaved Achaians, yea and he shall have profit
of his own soul, if he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray."

So said he, and they marked each man his lot and cast them in the helmet
of Agamemnon Atreus' son; and the hosts prayed and lifted up their hands
to the gods. And thus would one say, looking up to wide heaven: "O
father Zeus, vouchsafe that the lot fall upon Aias or Tydeus' son, or
else on the king of Mykene rich in gold."

So spake they, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia shook the helmet, and
there leapt forth the lot that themselves desired, even the lot of Aias.
And Aias saw and knew the token upon the lot, and rejoiced in heart, and
spake: "My friends, verily the lot is mine, yea and myself am glad at
heart, because I deem that I shall vanquish goodly Hector. But come now,
while I clothe me in my armour of battle, pray ye the while to Kronos'
son king Zeus, in silence to yourselves, that the Trojans hear you
not--nay rather, openly if ye will, for we have no fear of any man
soever. For none by force shall chase me, he willing me unwilling,
neither by skill; seeing I hope that not so skill-less, either, was I
born in Salamis nor nurtured."

So said he, and they prayed to Kronos' son, king Zeus; and thus would
one speak, looking up to wide heaven: "O father Zeus that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great, vouchsafe to Aias victory and the
winning of great glory. But if thou so lovest Hector indeed, and carest
for him, grant unto either equal prowess and renown."

So said they, while Aias arrayed him in flashing bronze. And when he had
now clothed upon his flesh all his armour, then marched he as huge Ares
coming forth, when he goeth to battle amid heroes whom Kronos' son
setteth to fight in fury of heart-consuming strife. So rose up huge
Aias, bulwark of the Achaians, with a smile on his grim face: and went
with long strides of his feet beneath him, shaking his far-shadowing
spear. Then moreover the Argives rejoiced to look upon him, but sore
trembling came upon the Trojans, on the limbs of every man, and Hector's
own heart beat within his breast. But in no wise could he now flee nor
shrink back into the throng of the host, seeing he had challenged him to
battle. And Aias came near bearing his tower-like shield of bronze, with
sevenfold ox-hide, and stood near to Hector, and spake to him threatening:
"Hector, now verily shalt thou well know, man to man, what manner
of princes the Danaans likewise have among them, even after Achilles,
render of men, the lion-hearted. But he amid his beaked seafaring ships
lieth in sore wrath with Agamemnon shepherd of the host; yet are we such
as to face thee, yea and many of us. But make thou beginning of war and
battle."

And great Hector of the glancing helm answered him: "Aias of the seed of
Zeus, son of Telamon, chieftain of the host, tempt not thou me like some
puny boy or woman that knoweth not deeds of battle. But I well know wars
and slaughterings. To right know I, to left know I the wielding of my
tough targe; therein I deem is stalwart soldiership. And I know how to
charge into the mellay of fleet chariots, and how in close battle to
join in furious Ares' dance. Howbeit, I have no mind to smite thee,
being such an one as thou art, by spying thee unawares; but rather
openly, if perchance I may hit thee."

He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled and smote Aias'
dread shield of sevenfold hide upon the uttermost bronze, the eighth
layer that was thereon. Through six folds went the stubborn bronze
cleaving, but in the seventh hide it stayed. Then heaven-sprung Aias
hurled next his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the circle of the
shield of Priam's son. Through the bright shield passed the violent
spear, and through the curiously wrought corslet pressed it on; and
straight forth beside the flank the spear rent his doublet; but he
swerved aside and escaped black death. Then both together with their
hands plucked forth their long spears and fell to like ravening lions or
wild boars whose might is nowise feeble. Then Priam's son smote the
shield's midst with his dart, but the bronze brake not through, for the
point turned back; but Aias leapt on him and pierced his buckler, and
straight through went the spear and staggered him in his onset, and
cleft its way unto his neck, so that the dark blood gushed up. Yet even
then did not Hector of the glancing helm cease from fight, but yielded
ground and with stout hand seized a stone lying upon the plain, black
and rugged and great; therewith hurled he and smote Aias' dread shield
of sevenfold ox-hide in the midst upon the boss, and the bronze
resounded. Next Aias lifted a far greater stone, and swung and hurled
it, putting might immeasurable therein. So smote he the buckler and
burst it inwards with the rock like unto a millstone, and beat down his
knees; and he was stretched upon his back, pressed into his shield; but
Apollo straightway raised him up. And now had they been smiting hand to
hand with swords, but that the heralds, messengers of gods and men,
came, one from the Trojans, one from the mail-clad Achaians, even
Talthybios and Idaios, both men discreet. Between the two held they
their staves, and herald Idaios spake a word, being skilled in wise
counsel: "Fight ye no more, dear sons, neither do battle; seeing Zeus
the cloud-gatherer loveth you both, and both are men of war; that verily
know we all. But night already is upon us: it is well withal to obey the
hest [behest] of night."

Then Telamonian Aias answered and said to him: "Idaios, bid ye Hector
to speak those words; of his own self he challenged to combat all our
best. Let him be first, and I will surely follow as he saith."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm said to him: "Aias, seeing God
gave thee stature and might and wisdom, and with the spear thou art
excellent above all the Achaians, let us now cease from combat and
battle for the day; but hereafter will we fight until God judge between
as, giving to one of us the victory: But come, let us give each the
other famous gifts, that men may thus say, Achaians alike and Trojans:
'These, having fought for sake of heart-consuming strife, parted again
reconciled in friendship.'"

So said he, and gave him his silver-studded sword, with scabbard and
well-cut baldrick; and Aias gave his belt bright with purple. So they
parted, and one went to the Achaian host, and one betook him to the
throng of Trojans. And these rejoiced to behold him come to them alive
and sound, escaped from the fury of Aias and his hands unapproachable;
and they brought him to the city saved beyond their hope. And Aias on
their side the well-greaved Achaians brought to noble Agamemnon,
exulting in his victory.

So when these were come unto the huts of Atreides, then did Agamemnon
king of men slay them an ox, a male of five years old, for the most
mighty son of Kronos. This they flayed and made ready, and divided it
all, and minced it cunningly, and pierced it through with spits, and
roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. Then as soon as they had
rest from the task and had made ready the meal, they began the feast,
nor was their soul aught stinted of the equal banquet. And the hero son
of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, gave to Aias slices of the chine's
full length for his honour. And when they had put from them the desire
of meat and drink, then first the old man began to weave the web of
counsel, even Nestor whose rede [counsel] of old time was proved most
excellent. He made harangue among them and said: "Son of Atreus and ye
other princes of the Achaians, seeing that many flowing-haired Achaians
are dead, and keen Ares hath spilt their dusky blood about fair-flowing
Skamandros, and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades;
therefore it behoveth thee to make the battle of the Achaians cease with
daybreak; and we will assemble to wheel hither the corpses with oxen and
mules; so let us burn them; and let us heap one barrow about the pyre,
rearing it from the plain for all alike; and thereto build with speed
high towers, a bulwark for our ships and for ourselves. In the midst
thereof let us make gates well compact, that through them may be a way
for chariot-driving. And without let us dig a deep foss hard by, to be
about it and to hinder horses and footmen, lest the battle of the lordly
Trojans be heavy on us hereafter."

So spake he and all the chiefs gave assent. But meanwhile there was in
the high town of Ilios an assembly of the Trojans, fierce, confused,
beside Priam's gate. To them discreet Antenor began to make harangue:
"Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may tell you
that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Lo, go to now, let us give
Helen of Argos and the wealth with her for the sons of Atreus to take
away. Now fight we in guilt against the oaths of faith; therefore is
there no profit for us that I hope to see fulfilled, unless we do thus."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them noble
Alexandros, lord of Helen beautiful-haired; he made him answer and spake
winged words: "Antenor, these words from thee are no longer to my
pleasure; yet thou hast it in thee to devise other sayings more
excellent than this. But if indeed thou sayest this in earnest, then
verily the gods themselves have destroyed thy wit. But I will speak
forth amid the horse-taming Trojans, and declare outright; my wife will
I not give back; but the wealth I brought from Argos to our home, all
that I have a mind to give, and add more of mine own substance."

So spake he and sate him down, and there stood up among them Priam of
the seed of Dardanos, the peer of gods in counsel; he made harangue to
them, and said: "Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that
I may tell you that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Now eat your
supper throughout the city as of old, and take thought to keep watch,
and be wakeful every man. And at dawn let Idaios fare to the hollow
ships to tell to Atreus' sons Agamemnon and Menelaos the saying of
Alexandros, for whose sake strife is come about: and likewise to ask
them this wise word, whether they are minded to refrain from noisy war
till we have burned our dead; afterwards will we fight again, till
heaven part us and give one or other victory."

So spake he, and they hearkened diligently to him and obeyed: and at
dawn Idaios fared to the hollow ships. He found the Danaans in assembly,
the men of Ares' company, beside the stern of Agamemnon's ship; and so
the loud-voiced herald stood in their midst and said unto them:
"Atreides and ye other princes of the Achaians, Priam and all the noble
Trojans bade me tell you-if perchance it might find favour and
acceptance with you-the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife hath
come about. The wealth that Alexandros brought in his hollow ships to
Troy-would he had perished first!-all that he hath a mind to give, and
to add more thereto of his substance. But the wedded wife of glorious
Menelaos he saith he will not give; yet verily the Trojans bid him do
it. Moreover they bade me ask this thing of you; whether ye are minded
to refrain from noisy war until we have burned our dead; afterwards will
we fight again, till heaven part us and give one or other victory."

So said he and they all kept silence and were still. But at the last
spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry in their midst: "Let no man now
accept Alexandros' substance, neither Helen's self; known is it, even to
him that hath no wit at all, how that the issues of destruction hang
already over the Trojans."

So spake he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted, applauding the
saying of horse-taming Diomedes. And then lord Agamemnon spake to
Idaios: "Idaios, thyself thou hearest the saying of the Achaians, how
they answer thee; and the like seemeth good to me. But as concerning the
dead, I grudge you not to burn them; for dead corpses is there no
stinting; when they once are dead, of the swift propitiation of fire.
And for the oaths let Zeus be witness, the loud-thundering lord of
Hera."

So saying he lifted up his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
Idaios departed back to holy Ilios. Now Trojans and Dardanians sate in
assembly, gathered all together to wait till Idaios should come; and he
came and stood in their midst and declared his message. Then they made
them ready very swiftly for either task, some to bring the dead, and
some to seek for wood. And on their part the Argives hasted from their
well-decked ships, some to bring the dead and some to seek for wood.

Now the sun was newly beating on the fields as he climbed heaven from
the deep stream of gently-flowing Ocean, when both sides met together.
Then was it a hard matter to know each man again; but they washed them
with water clean of clotted gore, and with shedding of hot tears lifted
them upon the wains. But great Priam bade them not wail aloud; so in
silence heaped they the corpses on the pyre, stricken at heart; and when
they had burned them with fire departed to holy Ilios. And in like
manner on their side the well-greaved Achaians heaped the corpses on the
pyre, stricken at heart, and when they had burned them with fire
departed to the hollow ships.

And when day was not yet, but still twilight of night, then was the
chosen folk of the Achaians gathered together around the pyre, and made
one barrow about it, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and
thereto built they a wall and lofty towers, a bulwark for their ships
and for themselves. In the midst thereof made they gates well-compacted,
that through them might be a way for chariot-driving. And without they
dug a deep foss beside it, broad and great, and planted a palisade
therein.

Thus toiled the flowing-haired Achaians: and the gods sate by Zeus, the
lord of lightning, and marvelled at the great work of the mail-clad
Achaians. And Poseidon shaker of earth spake first to them: "O father
Zeus, is there any man throughout the boundless earth that will any more
declare to the immortals his mind and counsel? Seest thou not how the
flowing-haired Achaians have now again built them a wall before their
ships, and drawn a foss around it, but gave not excellent hecatombs to
the gods? Verily the fame thereof shall reach as far as the dawn
spreadeth, and men will forget the wall that I and Phoebus Apollo built
with travail for the hero Laomedon."

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer said to him, sore troubled: "Out on it,
far-swaying Shaker of earth, for this thing thou sayest. Well might some
other god fear this device, one that were far feebler than thou in the
might of his hands: but thine shall be the fame as far as the dawn
spreadeth. Go to now, hereafter when the flowing-haired Achaians be
departed upon their ships to their dear native land, then burst thou
this wall asunder and scatter it all into the sea, and cover the great
sea-beach over with sand again, that the great wall of the Achaians be
brought to naught."



BOOK VIII.

    How Zeus bethought him of his promise to avenge Achilles'
    wrong on Agamemnon; and therefore bade the gods refrain from
    war, and gave victory to the Trojans.

Now Dawn the saffron-robed was spreading over all the earth, and Zeus
whose joy is in the thunder let call an assembly of the gods upon the
topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus, and himself made harangue to them
and all the gods gave ear: "Hearken to me, all gods and all ye
goddesses, that I may tell you what my heart within my breast commandeth
me. One thing let none essay, be it goddess or be it god, to wit, to
thwart my saying; approve ye it all together, that with all speed I may
accomplish these things. Whomsoever I shall perceive minded to go, apart
from the gods, to succour Trojans or Danaans, chastened in no seemly
wise shall he return to Olympus, or I will take and cast him into misty
Tartaros, right far away, where is the deepest gulf beneath the earth;
there are the gate of iron and threshold of bronze, as far beneath Hades
as heaven is high above the earth: then shall he know how far I am
mightiest of all gods. Go to now, ye gods, make trial that ye all may
know. Fasten ye a rope of gold from heaven, and all ye gods lay hold
thereof and all goddesses; yet could ye not drag from heaven to earth
Zeus, counsellor supreme, not though ye toiled sore. But once I likewise
were minded to draw with all my heart, then should I draw you up with
very earth and sea withal. Thereafter would I bind the rope about a
pinnacle of Olympus, and so should all those things be hung in air. By
so much am I beyond gods and beyond men."

So saying he let harness to his chariot his bronze-shod horses, fleet of
foot, with flowing manes of gold; and himself clad him with gold upon
his flesh, and grasped the whip of gold, well wrought, and mounted upon
his car, and lashed the horses to start them; they nothing loth sped on
between earth and starry heaven. So fared he to many-fountained Ida,
mother of wild beasts, even unto Gargaros, where is his demesne and
fragrant altar. There did the father of men and gods stay his horses,
and unloose them from the car, and cast thick mist about them; and
himself sate on the mountain-tops rejoicing in his glory, to behold the
city of the Trojans and ships of the Achaians.

Now the flowing-haired Achaians took meat hastily among the huts and
thereafter arrayed themselves. Likewise the Trojans on their side armed
them throughout the town--a smaller host, yet for all that were they
eager to fight in battle, of forceful need, for their children's sake
and their wives'. And the gates were opened wide and the host issued
forth, footmen and horsemen; and mighty din arose.

So when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed they
targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed shields
pressed each on each, and mighty din arose. Then were heard the voice of
groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and the slain,
and the earth streamed with blood.

Now while it yet was morn and the divine day waxed, so long from either
side lighted the darts amain and the people fell. But when the sun
bestrode mid-heaven, then did the Father balance his golden scales, and
put therein two fates of death that layeth men at their length, one for
horse-taming Trojans, one for mail-clad Achaians; and he took the
scale-yard by the midst and lifted it, and the Achaians' day of destiny
sank down. So lay the Achaians' fates on the bounteous earth, and the
Trojans' fates were lifted up towards wide heaven. And the god thundered
aloud from Ida, and sent his blazing flash amid the host of the
Achaians; and they saw and were astonished, and pale fear gat hold upon
all.

Then had Idomeneus no heart to stand, neither Agamemnon, neither stood
the twain Aiantes, men of Ares' company. Only Nestor of Gerenia stood
his ground, he the Warden of the Achaians; neither he of purpose, but
his horse was fordone, which noble Alexandros, beauteous-haired Helen's
lord, had smitten with an arrow upon the top of the crest where the
foremost hairs of horses grow upon the skull; and there is the most
deadly spot. So the horse leapt up in anguish and the arrow sank into
his brain, and he brought confusion on the steeds as he writhed upon the
dart. While the old man leapt forth and with his sword began to hew the
traces, came Hector's fleet horses through the tumult, bearing a bold
charioteer, even Hecktor. And now had the old man lost his life, but
that Diomedes of the loud war-cry was swift to mark. Terribly shouted
he, summoning Odysseus: "Heaven-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of many
wiles, whither fleest thou with thy back turned, like a coward in the
throng? Beware lest as thou fleest one plant a spear between thy
shoulders. Nay, stand thy ground, till we thrust back from the old man
his furious foe."

So spake he, but much-enduring noble Odysseus heard him not, but
hastened by to the hollow ships of the Achaians. Yet Tydeides, though
but one, mingled amid the fighters in the forefront, and took his stand
before the steeds of the old man, Neleus' son, and spake to him winged
words, and said: "Old man, of a truth young warriors beset thee hard;
and thy force is abated, and old age is sore upon thee, and thy squire
is but a weakling, and thy steeds are slow. Come then, mount upon my
car, that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or fleeing hither or thither very fleetly across
the plain, even those that erst I took from Aineias inspirer of fear.
Thine let our squires tend, and these let us guide straight against the
horse-taming Trojans, that even Hector may know whether my spear also
rageth in my hands."

So said he, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia disregarded not. Then the two
squires tended Nestor's horses, even Sthenelos the valiant and kindly
Eurymedon: and the other twain both mounted upon Diomedes' car. And
Nestor took into his hands the shining reins, and lashed the horses; and
soon they drew nigh Hector. Then Tydeus' son hurled at him as he charged
straight upon them: him missed he, but his squire that drave his
chariot, Eniopeus, high-hearted Thebaios' son, even him as he held the
reins, he smote upon the breast beside the nipple. So he fell from out
the car, and his fleet-footed horses swerved aside; and there his soul
and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief encompassed Hector's soul for
sake of his charioteer. Yet left he him there lying, though he sorrowed
for his comrade, and drave in quest of a bold charioteer; and his horses
lacked not long a master, for anon he found Iphitos' son, bold
Archeptolemos, and him he made mount behind his fleet horses, and gave
the reins into his hands.

Then had destruction come and deeds beyond remedy been wrought, and so
had they been penned in Ilios like lambs, had not the father of gods and
men been swift to mark. So he thundered terribly and darted his white
lightning and hurled it before Diomedes' steeds to earth; and there
arose a terrible flame of sulphur burning, and the two horses were
affrighted and cowered beneath the car. And the shining reins dropped
from Nestor's hands, and he was afraid at heart and spake to Diomedes:
"Come now Tydeides, turn back thy whole-hooved horses to flight: seest
thou not that victory from Zeus attendeth not on thee? Now doth Kronos'
son vouchsafe glory to this Hector, for the day; hereafter shall he
grant it us likewise, if he will. A man may not at all ward off the will
of Zeus, not though one be very valiant; he verily is mightier far."

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry answered him: "Yea verily, old man,
all this thou sayest is according unto right. But this is the sore grief
that entereth my heart and soul: Hector some day shall say as he maketh
harangue amid the Trojans: 'Tydeides betook him to the ships in flight
before my face.' So shall he boast--in that day let the wide earth yawn
for me."

So spake he and turned the whole-hooved horses to flight, back through
the tumult; and the Trojans and Hector with wondrous uproar poured upon
them their dolorous darts. And over him shouted loudly great Hector of
the glancing helm: "Tydeides, the fleet-horsed Danaans were wont to
honour thee with the highest place, and meats, and cups brimful, but now
will they disdain thee; thou art after all no better than a woman.
Begone, poor puppet; not for my flinching shalt thou climb on our
towers, neither carry our wives away upon thy ships; ere that will I
