where there are so few men, and many hoes clean a field quickly."

"For my part I think there are enough of us already," said the young
girl, looking troubled, for she was Swart Piet's last Kaffir wife, and
did not desire to be supplanted by a new favourite. "But be silent, I
hear Bull-Head coming on his horse," and she began to work very hard at
cutting the wands.

A few minutes later Zinti saw Swart Piet himself ride up to the women,
who saluted him, calling him "Chief" and "Husband."

"You are idle," he said, eyeing them angrily.

"These wands are tough to cut, husband," murmured the young woman in
excuse.

"Still you must cut them quicker, girl," he answered, "if you would not
learn how one of them feels upon your back. It will go hard with all of
you if the big hut is not finished in seven days from now."

"We will do our best," said the girl, "but who is to dwell in the hut
when it is done?"

"Not you, be sure of that," he answered, roughly, "nor any black woman,
for I am weary of you, one and all. Listen: I go to-morrow with my
servants to fetch a chieftainess, a white lady, to rule over you, but if
any of you speak a word of her presence here you will pay for it, for I
shall turn you away to starve. Do you understand?"

"We hear you, husband," they replied, somewhat sullenly, for now they
understood that this new wife would be a mistress, and not a sister to
them.

"Then be careful that you do not forget my words, and--hearken--so soon
as you have cut a full load of hut-poles, let two of you carry them up
to the krantz yonder, where they are wanted, but be careful that no one
sees you going in or coming out."

"We hear you, husband," they said again, whereon Swart Piet turned and
rode away.

Now, although Zinti was said to be foolish, chiefly, as I think, because
he could not, or would not, work, yet in many ways he was cleverer than
most Kaffirs, and especially always did he desire to see new places, the
more so if they chanced to be secret places. Therefore, when he heard
Swart Piet command the women to carry the rods for the hidden krantz, he
determined that he would follow them, and this he did so skilfully that
they neither heard nor saw him. At first he wondered whither they could
be going, for they walked straight to the foot of what seemed to be an
unclimbable wall of rock more than a hundred feet high. On the face of
this rock, however, shrubs grew here and there like the bristles on the
back of a hog, and having first glanced round to see that no one was
watching them, the women climbed to one of these shrubs, which was
rooted in the cliff about the height of a man above the level of the
ground, and vanished so quickly that Zinti, who as watching, rubbed his
eyes in wonder. After waiting a while, however, he followed in their
steps to find that behind the shrub was a narrow cleft or crack such as
are often to be seen in cliffs, and that down this cleft ran a pathway
which twisted and turned in the rock, growing broader as it went, till
at last it ended in the hidden krantz. This krantz was a very beautiful
spot about three morgen, or six English acres, in extent, and walled all
round with impassable cliffs. Down the face of one of these cliffs fell
a waterfall forming a deep pool, out of which a stream ran, and on the
banks of this stream the new hut was being built in such a position that
the heat of the sun could strike it but little.

While he was taking note of these and other things Zinti saw some of
those who were working at the hut leave it and start to walk towards the
cleft. So having learnt everything that he could he thought it was time
to go, and slipped away back to the bush, and thence homewards by the
road which the cow had shown him.

Now, it chanced that as he went Zinti pierced his foot with a large
thorn so that he was only able to travel slowly. On the fifth night of
his journey he limped into a wood to sleep, which wood grew not much
more than two hours on horseback from our farm. When he had been asleep
for some hours he woke up, for all his food was done, and he could not
rest well because of his hunger, and was astonished to see the light of
a fire among the trees at some distance from him. Towards this fire he
crept, thinking that there were herds or travellers who would give him
food, but when he came to it he did not ask for any, since the first
thing he saw was Swart Piet himself walking up and down in front of the
fire, while at some distance from it lay a number of his men asleep in
their karosses. Presently another man appeared slipping through the tree
trunks, and coming to Swart Piet saluted him.

"Tell me what you have found out," he said.

"This, Baas," answered the man; "I went down to Heer Botmar's place and
begged a bowlful of meal there, pretending that I was a stranger on a
journey to court a girl at a distant kraal. The slaves gave me meal
and some flesh with it, and I learned in talk with them that the Heer
Botmar, his vrouw, his daughter Suzanne and the young Englishman,
Heer Kenzie, all rode away yesterday to the christening party of the
first-born of the Heer Roozen, who lives about five hours on horseback
to the north yonder. I learned also that it is arranged for them to
leave the Heer Roozen to-morrow at dawn, and to travel homewards by
the Tiger's Nek, in which they will off-saddle about two hours before
mid-day, for I forgot to say that they have two servants with them to
see to their horses."

"That makes six in all," said Swart Piet, "of whom two are women,
whereas we are twenty. Yes, it is very good, nothing could be better,
for I know the off-saddling place by the stream in Tiger's Nek, and it
is a nice place for men to hide behind the rocks and trees. Listen
now for the plan, and be sure you understand it. When these people are
off-saddled and eating their food, you Kaffirs will fall on them--with
the spear and the kerry alone, mind--and they will come to their end."

"Does the master mean that we are to kill them?" asked the man
doubtfully.

"Yes," answered Swart Piet, with some hesitation. "I do not want to
kill them indeed, but I see no other way, except as regards the girl, of
course, who must be saved. These people are to be attacked and robbed
by Kaffirs, for it must never be known that I had a hand in it, and
you brutes of Kaffirs always kill. Therefore, they must die, alas!
especially the Englishman, though so far as I am concerned I should
be glad to spare the others if I could, but it cannot be done without
throwing suspicion upon me. As for the girl, if she is harmed the lives
of all of you pay for it. You will throw a kaross over her head, and
bring her to the place which I will tell you of to-morrow, where I shall
come upon you with some men and seem to rescue her. Do you understand,
and do you think the plan good?"

"I understand, and I think the plan good--for you--and yet, Baas, there
is one thing that I have not told you which may mar it."

"What is it?"

"This: When I was down there at the Heer Botmar's place, I saw the
witch-doctoress Sihamba, who has a hut upon the farm. I was some way
off, but I think that she recognised me, as she might well do seeing
that it was I who set the rope about her neck when you wished to hang
her. Now if she did know me all your plans may be in vain, for that
woman has the Sight and she will guess them. Even when the cord was
round her she laughed at me and told me that I should die soon, but
that she would live for years, and therefore I fear her more than anyone
living."

"She laughed at you, did she?" said Swart Piet; "well, I laugh at her,
for neither she nor anyone who breathes shall stand between me and this
girl, who has preferred the suit of another man to mine."

"Ah, master!" said the Kaffir, with admiration, "you are a great one,
for when a fruit pleases you, you do not wait for it to drop into your
lap, you pluck it."

"Yes," said Swart Piet, striking his breast with pride, "if I desire a
fruit I pluck it as my father did before me. But now go you and sleep,
for to-morrow you will need all your wit and strength."



When the herd Zinti had heard this talk he crept away, heading straight
for the farm, but his foot was so bad, and he was so weak from want of
food, that he could only travel at the pace of a lame ox, now hopping
upon one leg and now crawling upon his knees. In this fashion it was
that at length, about half-past eight in the morning, he reached the
house, or rather the hut of Sihamba, for she had sent him out, and
therefore to her, after the Kaffir fashion, he went to make report. Now,
when he came to Sihamba, he greeted her and asked for a little food,
which she gave him. Then he began to tell his story, beginning as
natives do at the first of it, which in his case were all the wanderings
of the cow which he had followed, so that although she hurried him much,
many minutes went by before he came to that part of the tale which told
of what he had heard in the wood some eight hours before.

So soon as he began to speak of this, Sihamba stopped him, and calling
to a man who lingered near, she bade him bring to her Jan's famous young
horse, the roan _schimmel_, bridled but not saddled. Now this horse was
the finest in the whole district, for his sire was the famous stallion
which the Government imported from England, where it won all the races,
and his dam the swiftest and most enduring mare in the breeding herds at
the Paarl. What Jan gave for him as a yearling I never learned, because
he was afraid to tell me; but I know that we were short of money for
two years after he bought him. Yet in the end that _schimmel_ proved the
cheapest thing for which ever a man paid gold.

Well, the Kaffir hesitated, for, as might be guessed, Jan was very proud
of this horse, and none rode it save himself, but Sihamba sprang up and
spoke to him so fiercely that at last he obeyed her, since, although she
was small in stature, all feared the magic of Sihamba, and would do her
bidding. Nor had he far to go, for the _schimmel_ did not run wild upon
the veldt, but was fed and kept in a stable, where a slave groomed him
every morning. Thus it came about that before Zinti had finished his
tale, the horse was standing before Sihamba bridled but not saddled,
arching his neck and striking the ground with his hoof, for he was proud
and full of corn and eager to be away.

"Oh! fool," said Sihamba to Zinti, "why did not you begin with this
part of your story? Now, to save five from death and one from dishonour,
there is but a short hour left and twenty long miles to cover in it. Ho!
man, help me to mount this horse."

The slave put down his hand, and setting her foot in it, the little
woman sprang on to the back of the great stallion, which knew and loved
her as a dog might do, for she had tended it day and night when it was
ill from the sickness we call "thick head," and without doubt had saved
its life by her skill. Then, gripping its shoulders with her knees,
Sihamba shook the reins and called aloud to the _schimmel_, waving
the black rod she always carried in her hand, so that the fiery beast,
having plunged once, leapt away like an antelope, and in another minute
was nothing but a speck racing towards the mountains.



CHAPTER XIII

THE SCHIMMEL'S FIRST RACE

So hard did Sihamba ride, and so swift and untiring proved the horse,
to whose strength her light weight was as nothing, that, the veldt
over which they travelled being flat and free from stones or holes, she
reached the mouth of Tiger's Nek, twenty miles away, in very few minutes
over the hour of time. But the Nek itself was a mile or more in length,
and for aught she knew we might already be taken in Black Piet's trap,
and she but riding to share our fate. Still she did not stay, but
though it panted like a blacksmith's bellows, and its feet stumbled with
weariness among the stones of the Nek, she urged on the _schimmel_ at a
gallop. Now she turned the corner, and the off-saddling place was before
her. Swiftly and fearfully Sihamba glanced around, but seeing no signs
of us, she uttered a cry of joy and shook the reins, for she knew that
she had not ridden in vain. Then a voice from the rocks called out:

"It is the witch-doctoress, Sihamba, who rides to warn them. Kill her
swiftly." With the voice came a sound of guns and of bullets screaming
past her, one of which shattered the wand she carried in her hand,
numbing her arm. Nor was that all, for men sprang up across the further
end of the off-saddling place, where the path was narrow, to bar her
way, and they held spears in their hands. But Sihamba never heeded the
men or the spears, for she rode straight at them and through them, and
so soon was she gone that, although six or seven assegais were hurled
at her, only one of them struck the horse, wounding it slightly in the
shoulder.

A few minutes later, three perhaps, or five, just as the four of us with
our Kaffir servants were riding quietly up to the mouth of the Nek, we
saw a great horse thundering towards us, black with sweat and flecked
with foam, its shoulder bloody, its eyes staring, its red nostrils
agape, and perched upon its bare back a little woman who swayed from
side to side as though with weariness, holding in her hand a shattered
wand.

"Allemachter!" cried Jan. "It is Sihamba, and the witch rides my roan
_schimmel_!"

By this time Sihamba herself was upon us. "Back," she screamed as she
came, "death waits you in the pass;" whereon, compelled to it as it were
by the weight of the words and the face of she who spoke them, we turned
our horses' heads and galloped after the _schimmel_ for the half of a
mile or more till we were safe in the open veldt.

Then of a sudden the horse stopped, whether of its own accord or because
its rider pulled upon the reins I know not. At the least it stood there
trembling like a reed and Sihamba lay upon its back clinging to the
mane, and as she lay I saw blood running down her legs, for her skin was
chafed to the flesh beneath. Ralph sprang to her and lifted her to the
ground and Suzanne made her take a draught of peach brandy from Jan's
flask, which brought the life to her face again.

"Now," she said, "if you have it to spare, give the _schimmel_ yonder
a drink of that stuff, for he has saved all your lives and I think he
needs it."

"That is a wise word," said Jan, and he bade Ralph and the Kaffirs pour
the rest of the spirit down the horse's throat, which they did, thereby,
as I believe, saving its life, for until it had swallowed it the beast
looked as though its heart were about to burst.

"Now," said Jan, "why do you ride my best horse to death in this
fashion?"

"Have I not told you, father of Swallow," she answered, "that it was
to save you from death? But a few minutes over an hour ago, fifteen
perhaps, a word was spoken to me at your stead yonder and now I am here,
seven leagues away, having ridden faster than I wish to ride again,
or than any other horse in this country can travel with a man upon its
back."

"To save us from death! What death?" asked Jan astounded.

"Death at the hands of Swart Piet and his Kaffir tribesmen for the three
of you and the two slaves, and for the fourth, the lady Swallow there,
a love which she does not seek, the love of the murderer of her father,
her mother, and her chosen."

Now we stared at each other; only Suzanne ran to Sihamba, and putting
her arms about her, she kissed her.

"Nay," said the little woman smiling, "nay, Swallow, I do but repay to
you one-hundredth part of my debt, and all the rest is owing still."

Then she told her story in few words, and when it was done, having
first looked to see that Swart Piet and his men were not coming, at the
bidding of Jan we all knelt down upon the veldt and thanked the Almighty
for our deliverance. Only Sihamba did not kneel, for she was a heathen,
and worshipped no one unless it were Suzanne.

"You should pray to the horse, too," she said, "for had it not been for
his legs, I could never have reached you in time."

"Peace, Sihamba," I answered, "it is God who made the horse's legs, as
God put it into your mind to use them;" but I said no more, though at
any other time I should have rated her well for her heathen folly.

Then we consulted together as to what was to be done and decided to make
our way to the house by a longer path which ran through the open veldt,
since we were sure that there, where is no cover, Swart Piet would not
attack us. Ralph, it is true, was for going into the Nek and attacking
him, but, as Jan showed him, such an act would be madness, for they
were many, and we were few; moreover, they could have picked us off from
behind the shelter of the rocks. So we settled to leave him alone, and
that night came home safely, though not without trouble, for we carried
Sihamba the most of the way, and after he grew stiff the _schimmel_
could only travel at a walking pace. Very soon that horse recovered,
however, for he was a good feeder, and lived to do still greater
service, although for a while his legs were somewhat puffed and had to
be poulticed with cabbage leaves.

Now Jan and Ralph were mad against Swart Piet, and would have brought
him to justice. But this road of justice was full of stones and
mud-holes, since the nearest land-drost, as we call a magistrate, lived
a hundred miles off, and it would not have been easy to persuade Piet
to appear and argue the case before him. Moreover, here again we had no
evidence against the man except that of a simple black fellow, who would
never have been believed, for, in fact, no attack was made upon us,
while that upon Sihamba might very well have been the work of some of
the low Kaffirs that haunt the kloofs, runaway slaves, and other rascals
who desired to steal the fine horse upon which she rode. Also we learned
that our enemy, acting through some agent, had sold his farm to a
stranger for a small sum of money, giving it out that he had no need of
the land, as he was leaving this part of the country.

But if we saw Piet's face no more, we could still feel the weight of
his hand, since from that time forward we began to suffer from thefts of
cattle and other troubles with the natives, which--so Sihamba learned
in her underground fashion--were instigated by him, working through his
savage tools, while he himself lay hidden far away and in safety. Also
he did us another ill turn--for it was proved that his money was at
the bottom of it--by causing Ralph to be commandeered to serve on some
distant Kaffir expedition, out of which trouble we were obliged to buy
him, and at no small cost.

All these matters weighed upon us much, so much, indeed, that I wished
Jan to trek from the Transkei and found a new home; but he would not,
for he loved the place which he had built up brick by brick, and planted
tree by tree; nor would he consent to be driven out of it through fear
of the wicked practices of Swart Piet. To one thing he did consent,
however, and it was that Ralph and Suzanne should be married as soon as
possible, for he saw that until they were man and wife there would be
little peace for any of us. When they were spoken to on the matter,
neither of them had anything to say against this plan; indeed, I believe
that in their hearts, for the first and last time in their lives, they
blessed the name of Black Piet, whose evil-doing, as they thought, was
hurrying on their happiness.

Now it was settled that the matter of this marriage should be kept
secret for fear it should come to the ears of Van Vooren through his
spies, and stir him up to make a last attempt to steal away Suzanne.
And, indeed, it did come to his ears, though how to this hour I do
not know, unless, in spite of our warning, the _predicant_ who was to
perform the ceremony, a good and easy man but one who loved gossip,
blabbed of it on his journey to the farm, for he had a two days' ride to
reach it.

It was the wish of all of us that we should continue to live together
after the marriage of Ralph and Suzanne, though not beneath the same
roof. Indeed, there would have been no room for another married pair in
that house, especially if children came to them, nor did I wish to
