     Gulfs do not close over little female madcaps, my Laura; so we must
     not let her take the leap.  Enter the salle when you arrive: pass
     down it once and return upon your steps; then to my boudoir.  My
     maid Aennchen will conduct you.  Addio.  Tell this messenger that
     you come.  Laura mine, I am for ever thy

                                                  'AMALIA.'

Laura signalled to the chasseur that her answer was affirmative.  As he
was retiring, his black-plumed hat struck against Beppo, who thrust him
aside and gave the hat a dexterous kick, all the while keeping a decorous
front toward the signora.  She stood meditating.  The enraged chasseur
mumbled a word or two for Beppo's ear, in execrable Italian, and went.
Beppo then commenced bowing half toward the doorway, and tried to shoot
through, out of sight and away, in a final droop of excessive servility,
but the signora stopped him, telling him to consider himself her servant
until the morning; at which he manifested a surprising readiness,
indicative of nothing short of personal devotion, and remained for two
minutes after she had quitted the room.  So much time having elapsed, he
ran bounding down the stairs and found the hall-door locked, and that he
was a prisoner during the signora's pleasure.  The discovery that he was
mastered by superior cunning, instead of disconcerting, quieted him
wonderfully; so he put by the resources of his ingenuity for the next
opportunity, and returned stealthily to his starting-point, where the
signora found him awaiting her with composure.  The man was in mortal
terror lest he might be held guilty of a trust betrayed, in leaving his
mistress for an hour, even in obedience to her command, at this crisis:
but it was not in his nature to state the case openly to the signora,
whom he knew to be his mistress's friend, or to think of practising other
than shrewd evasion to accomplish his duty and satisfy his conscience.

Laura said, without smiling, 'The street-door opens with a key,' and she
placed the key in his hand, also her fan to carry.  Once out of the
house, she was sure that he would not forsake his immediate charge of the
fan: she walked on, heavily veiled, confident of his following.  The
Duchess of Graatli's house neighboured the Corso Francesco; numerous
carriages were disburdening their freights of fair guests, and now and
then an Austrian officer in full uniform ran up the steps, glittering
under the lamps.  'I go in among them,' thought Laura.  It rejoiced her
that she had come on foot.  Forgetting Beppo, and her black fan, as no
Italian woman would have done but she who paced in an acute quivering of
the anguish of hopeless remembrances and hopeless thirst of vengeance,
she suffered herself to be conducted in the midst of the guests, and
shuddered like one who has taken a fever-chill as she fulfilled the
duchess's directions; she passed down the length of the saloon, through a
light of visages that were not human to her sensations.

Meantime Beppo, oppressed by his custody of the fan, and expecting that
most serviceable lady's instrument to be sent for at any minute, stood
among a strange body of semi-feudal retainers below, where he was soon
singled out by the duchess's chasseur, a Styrian, who, masking his fury
under jest, in the South-German manner, endeavoured to lead him up to an
altercation.  But Beppo was much too supple to be entrapped.  He
apologized for any possible offences that he might have committed,
assuring the chasseur that he considered one hat as good as another, and
some hats better than others: in proof of extreme cordiality, he accepted
the task of repeating the chasseur's name, which was 'Jacob Baumwalder
Feckelwitz,' a tolerable mouthful for an Italian; and it was with
remarkable delicacy that Beppo contrived to take upon himself the whole
ridicule of his vile pronunciation of the unwieldy name.  Jacob
Baumwalder Feckelwitz offered him beer to refresh him after the effort.
While Beppo was drinking, he seized the fan.  'Good; good; a thousand
thanks,' said Beppo, relinquishing it; 'convey it aloft, I beseech you.'
He displayed such alacrity and lightness of limb at getting rid of it,
that Jacob thrust it between the buttons of his shirtfront, returning it
to his possession by that aperture.  Beppo's head sank.  A handful of
black lace and cedarwood chained him to the spot!  He entreated the men
in livery to take the fan upstairs and deliver it to the Signora Laura
Piaveni; but they, being advised by Jacob, refused.  'Go yourself,' said
Jacob, laughing, and little prepared to see the victim, on whom he
thought that for another hour at least he had got his great paw firmly,
take him at his word.  Beppo sprang into the hall and up the stairs.  The
duchess's maid, ivory-faced Aennchen, was flying past him.  She saw a
very taking dark countenance making eyes at her, leaned her ear shyly,
and pretending to understand all that was said by the rapid foreign
tongue, acted from the suggestion of the sole thing which she did
understand.  Beppo had mentioned the name of the Signora Piaveni.  'This
way,' she indicated with her finger, supposing that of course he wanted
to see the signora very urgently.

Beppo tried hard to get her to carry the fan; but she lifted her fingers
in a perfect Susannah horror of it, though still bidding him to follow.
Naturally she did not go fast through the dark passages, where the game
of the fan was once more played out, and with accompaniments.  The
accompaniments she objected to no further than a fish is agitated in
escaping from the hook; but 'Nein, nein!' in her own language, and 'No,
no!' in his, burst from her lips whenever he attempted to transfer the
fan to her keeping.  'These white women are most wonderful!' thought
Beppo, ready to stagger between perplexity and impatience.

'There; in there!' said Aennchen, pointing to a light that came through
the folds of a curtain.  Beppo kissed her fingers as they tugged
unreluctantly in his clutch, and knew by a little pause that the case was
hopeful for higher privileges.  What to do?  He had not an instant to
spare; yet he dared not offend a woman's vanity.  He gave an ecstatic
pressure of her hand upon his breastbone, to let her be sure she was
adored, albeit not embraced.  After this act of prudence he went toward
the curtain, while the fair Austrian soubrette flew on her previous
errand.

It was enough that Beppo found himself in a dark antechamber for him to
be instantly scrupulous in his footing and breathing.  As he touched the
curtain, a door opened on the other side of the interior, and a tender
gabble of fresh feminine voices broke the stillness and ran on like a
brook coming from leaps to a level, and again leaping and making noise of
joy.  The Duchess of Graatli had clasped the Signora Laura's two hands
and drawn her to an ottoman, and between kissings and warmer claspings,
was questioning of the little ones, Giacomo and her goddaughter Amalia.

'When, when did I see you last?' she exclaimed.  'Oh!  not since we met
that morning to lay our immortelles upon his tomb.  My soul's sister!
kiss me, remembering it.  I saw you in the gateway--it seemed to me, as
in a vision, that we had both had one warning to come for him, and knock,
and the door would be opened, and our beloved would come forth!  That was
many days back.  It is to me like a day locked up forever in a casket of
pearl.  Was it not an unstained morning, my own!  If I weep, it is with
pleasure.  But,' she added with precipitation, 'weeping of any kind will
not do for these eyelids of mine.'  And drawing forth a tiny gold-framed
pocket-mirror she perceived convincingly that it would not do.

'They will think it is for the absence of my husband,' she said, as only
a woman can say it who deplores nothing so little as that.

'When does he return from Vienna?' Laura inquired in the fallen voice of
her thoughtfulness.

'I receive two couriers a week; I know not any more, my Laura.  I believe
he is pushing some connubial complaint against me at the Court.  We have
been married seventeen months.  I submitted to the marriage because I
could get no proper freedom without, and now I am expected to abstain
from the very thing I sacrificed myself to get!  Can he hear that in
Vienna?' She snapped her fingers.  'If not, let him come and behold it in
Milan.  Besides, he is harmless.  The Archduchess is all ears for the
very man of whom he is jealous.  This is my reply: You told me to marry:
I obeyed.  My heart 's in the earth, and I must have distractions.  My
present distraction is De Pyrmont, a good Catholic and a good Austrian
soldier, though a Frenchman.  I grieve to say--it's horrible--that it
sometimes tickles me when I reflect that De Pyrmont is keen with the
sword.  But remember, Laura, it was not until after our marriage my
husband told me he could have saved Giacomo by the lifting of a finger.
Away with the man!--if it amuses me to punish him, I do so.'

The duchess kissed Laura's cheek, and continued:--

'Now to the point where we stand enemies!  I am for Austria, you are for
Italy.  Good.  But I am always for Laura.  So, there's a river between us
and a bridge across it.  My darling, do you know that we are much too
strong for you, if you mean anything serious tomorrow night?'

'Are you?' Laura said calmly.

'I know, you see, that something is meant to happen to-morrow night.'

Laura said, 'Do you?'

'We have positive evidence of it.  More than that: Your Vittoria--but do
you care to have her warned?  She will certainly find herself in a
pitfall if she insists on carrying out her design.  Tell me, do you care
to have her warned and shielded?  A year of fortress-life is not
agreeable, is not beneficial for the voice.  Speak, my Laura.'

Laura looked up in the face of her friend mildly with her large dark
eyes, replying, 'Do you think of sending Major de Pyrmont to her to warn
her?'

'Are you not wicked?' cried the duchess, feeling that she blushed, and
that Laura had thrown her off the straight road of her interrogation.
'But, play cards with open hands, my darling, to-night.  Look:--She is in
danger.  I know it; so do you.  She will be imprisoned perhaps before she
steps on the boards--who knows?  Now, I--are not my very dreams all sworn
in a regiment to serve my Laura?--I have a scheme.  Truth, it is hardly
mine.  It belongs to the Greek, the Signor Antonio Pericles
Agriolopoulos.  It is simply'--the duchess dropped her voice out of
Beppo's hearing--'a scheme to rescue her: speed her away to my chateau
near Meran in Tyrol.'  'Tyrol' was heard by Beppo.  In his frenzy at the
loss of the context he indulged in a yawn, and a grimace, and a dance of
disgust all in one; which lost him the next sentence likewise.  'There we
purpose keeping her till all is quiet and her revolutionary fever has
passed.  Have you heard of this Signor Antonio?  He could buy up the
kingdom of Greece, all Tyrol, half Lombardy.  The man has a passion for
your Vittoria; for her voice solely, I believe.  He is considered, no
doubt truly, a great connoisseur.  He could have a passion for nothing
else, or alas!' (the duchess shook her head with doleful drollery) 'would
he insist on written securities and mortgages of my private property when
he lends me money?  How different the world is from the romances, my
Laura!  But for De Pyrmont, I might fancy my smile was really incapable
of ransoming an empire; I mean an emperor.  Speak; the man is waiting to
come; shall I summon him?'

Laura gave an acquiescent nod.

By this time Beppo had taken root to the floor.  'I am in the best place
after all,' he said, thinking of the duties of his service.  He was
perfectly well acquainted with the features of the Signor Antonio.  He
knew that Luigi was the Signor Antonio's spy upon Vittoria, and that no
personal harm was intended toward his mistress; but Beppo's heart was in
the revolt of which Vittoria was to give the signal; so, without a touch
of animosity, determined to thwart him, Beppo waited to hear the Signor
Antonio's scheme.

The Greek was introduced by Aennchen.  She glanced at the signora's lap,
and seeing her still without her fan, her eye shot slyly up with her
shining temple, inspecting the narrow opening in the curtain furtively.
A short hush of preluding ceremonies passed.

Presently Beppo heard them speaking; he was aghast to find that he had
no comprehension of what they were uttering.  'Oh, accursed French
dialect!' he groaned; discovering the talk to be in that tongue.  The
Signor Antonio warmed rapidly from the frigid politeness of his
introductory manner.  A consummate acquaintance with French was required
to understand him.  He held out the fingers of one hand in regimental
order, and with the others, which alternately screwed his moustache from
its constitutional droop over the corners of his mouth, he touched the
uplifted digits one by one, buzzing over them: flashing his white eyes,
and shrugging in a way sufficient to madden a surreptitious listener who
was aware that a wealth of meaning escaped him and mocked at him.  At
times the Signor Antonio pitched a note compounded half of cursing, half
of crying, it seemed: both pathetic and objurgative, as if he whimpered
anathemas and had inexpressible bitter things in his mind.  But there was
a remedy!  He displayed the specific on a third finger.  It was there.
This being done (number three on the fingers), matters might still be
well.  So much his electric French and gesticulations plainly asserted.
Beppo strained all his attention for names, in despair at the riddle of
the signs.  Names were pillars of light in the dark unintelligible waste.
The signora put a question.  It was replied to with the name of the
Maestro Rocco Ricci.  Following that, the Signor Antonio accompanied his
voluble delivery with pantomimic action which seemed to indicate the
shutting of a door and an instantaneous galloping of horses--a flight
into air, any-whither.  He whipped the visionary steeds with enthusiastic
glee, and appeared to be off skyward like a mad poet, when the signora
again put a question, and at once he struck his hand flat across his
mouth, and sat postured to answer what she pleased with a glare of polite
vexation.  She spoke; he echoed her, and the duchess took up the same
phrase.  Beppo was assisted by the triangular recurrence of the words and
their partial relationship to Italian to interpret them: 'This night.'
Then the signora questioned further.  The Greek replied: 'Mademoiselle
Irma di Karski.'

'La Lazzeruola,' she said.

The Signor Antonio flashed a bit of sarcastic mimicry, as if acquiescing
in the justice of the opprobrious term from the high point of view: but
mademoiselle might pass, she was good enough for the public.

Beppo heard and saw no more.  A tug from behind recalled him to his
situation.  He put out his arms and gathered Aennchen all dark in them:
and first kissing her so heartily as to set her trembling on the verge of
a betrayal, before she could collect her wits he struck the fan down the
pretty hollow of her back, between her shoulder-blades, and bounded away.
It was not his intention to rush into the embrace of Jacob Baumwalder
Feckelwitz, but that perambulating chasseur received him in a semi-
darkness where all were shadows, and exclaimed, 'Aennchen!'  Beppo gave
an endearing tenderness to the few words of German known to him:
'Gottschaf-donner-dummer!' and slipped from the hold of the astonished
Jacob, sheer under his arm-pit.  He was soon in the street, excited he
knew not by what, or for what object.  He shuffled the names he
remembered to have just heard--'Rocco Ricci, and 'la Lazzeruola.' Why did
the name of la Lazzeruola come in advance of la Vittoria?  And what was
the thing meant by 'this night,' which all three had uttered as in an
agreement?--ay! and the Tyrol!  The Tyrol--this night-Rocco Ricci la
Lazzeruola!

Beppo's legs were carrying him toward the house of the Maestro Rocco
Ricci ere he had arrived at any mental decision upon these imminent
mysteries.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Agostino was enjoying the smoke of paper cigarettes
Anguish to think of having bent the knee for nothing
Art of despising what he coveted
Compliment of being outwitted by their own offspring
Hated tears, considering them a clog to all useful machinery
Intentions are really rich possessions
Italians were like women, and wanted--a real beating
Necessary for him to denounce somebody
Profound belief in her partiality for him

