townspeople, thrusting their pikes into the rotten mortar between the
stones, prised them up with all their strength. The parapet tottered,
and then with a tremendous crash fell, burying five or six of the
Imperialists and the petard beneath the ruins.

A shout of exultation rose from the defenders, and the Imperialists
at once withdrew at full speed. They halted out of gunshot, and then
a number of men were sent back to the village, whence they returned
carrying ladders, some of which had been collected the day before from
the neighbouring villages and others manufactured during the night.
The enemy now divided into three parties, which advanced simultaneously
against different points of the wall.

Notwithstanding the storm of shot poured upon them as they advanced,
they pressed forward until they reached the wall and planted their
ladders, and then essayed to climb; but at each point the stormers were
stoutly met with pike and sword, while the musketeers from the flanking
towers poured their bullets into them.

The troops proved themselves worthy of their reputation, for it was not
until more than fifty had fallen that they desisted from the attempt and
drew off.

"Now we shall have a respite," Malcolm said. "If there are no more of
them in the neighbourhood methinks they will retire altogether, but
if they have any friends with cannon anywhere within reach they will
probably send for them and renew the attack."

The day passed quietly. Parties of horsemen were seen leaving the
village to forage and plunder the surrounding country, but the main body
remained quietly there. The next day there was still no renewal of the
attack, but as the enemy remained in occupation of the village Malcolm
guessed that they must be waiting for the arrival of reinforcements.
The following afternoon a cloud of dust was seen upon the plain, and
presently a column of infantry some four hundred strong, with three
cannon, could be made out. The townspeople now wavered in their
determination. A few were still for resistance, but the majority held
that they could not attempt to withstand an assault by so strong a
force, and that it was better to make the best terms they could with the
enemy.

A parlementaire was accordingly despatched to the Imperialists asking
what terms would be granted should the place surrender.

"We will grant no terms whatever," the colonel in command of the
Imperialists said. "The town is at our mercy, and we will do as we
will with it and all within it; but tell Count Mansfeld that if he will
surrender the castle as well as the town at once, and without striking
another blow, his case shall receive favourable consideration."

"That will not do," the count said. "They either guarantee our lives
or they do not. I give not up my castle on terms like these, but I
will exercise no pressure on the townspeople. If they choose to defend
themselves till the last I will fight here with them; if they choose to
surrender they can do so; and those who differ from their fellows and
put no faith in Tilly's wolves can enter the castle with me."

The principal inhabitants of the town debated the question hotly.
Malcolm lost patience with them, and said: "Are you mad as well as
stupid? Do you not see the smoking villages round you? Do you not
remember the fate of Magdeburg, New Brandenburg, and the other towns
which have made a resistance? You have chosen to resist. It was open to
you to have fled when you heard the Imperialists were coming. You could
have opened the gates then with some hope at least of your lives; but
you decided to resist. You have killed some fifty or sixty of their
soldiers. You have repulsed them from a place which they thought to
take with scarce an effort. You have compelled them to send for
reinforcements and guns. And now you are talking of opening the gates
without even obtaining a promise that your lives shall be spared. This
is the extremity of folly, and all I can say is, if you take such a step
you will well deserve your fate."

Malcolm's indignant address had its effect, and after a short discussion
the townspeople again placed themselves at the count's disposal, and
said that they would obey his orders.

"I will give no orders," the count said. "My Scottish friend here agrees
with me that it is useless to try to defend the town. We might repulse
several attacks, but in the end they would surely break in, for the
walls are old and weak, and will crumble before their cannon. Were there
any hope of relief one would defend them to the last, but as it is
it would be but a waste of blood, for many would be slain both in
the defence and before they could retreat to the castle; therefore we
propose at once to withdraw. We doubt not that we can hold the castle.
Any who like to remain in their houses and trust to the tender mercy of
Tilly's wolves can do so."

There was no more hesitation, and a cannonball, the first which the
Imperialists had fired, at that moment crashed into a house hard by, and
sharpened their decision wonderfully.

"I have no great store of provisions in the castle," the count said,
"and although I deem it not likely that we shall have to stand a long
siege we must be prepared for it. There are already more than 700
of your wives and children there, therefore while half of the force
continue to show themselves upon the walls, and so deter the enemy from
attempting an assault until they have opened some breaches, let the rest
carry up provisions to the castle. Any houses from which the women have
fled are at once to be broken open. All that we leave behind the enemy
will take, and the less we leave for them the better; therefore all
stores and magazines of food and wine must be considered as public
property. Let the men at once be divided into two bodies--the one to
guard the walls, the other to search for and carry up provisions. They
can be changed every three or four hours."

The resolution was taken and carried into effect without delay. Most of
the horses and carts in the town had left with the fugitives, those
that remained were at once set to work. The carts were laden with large
barrels of wine and sacks of flour, while the men carried sides of
bacon, kegs of butter, and other portable articles on their heads. The
Imperialists, seeing the movement up the steep road to the castle gate,
opened fire with their arquebuses, but the defenders of the wall replied
so hotly that they were forced to retire out of range. The cannon played
steadily all day, and by nightfall two breaches had been effected in the
wall and the gate had been battered down.

But by this time an ample store of provisions had been collected in the
castle and as the Imperialists were seen to form up for the assault the
trumpet was sounded, and at the signal the whole of the defenders of the
walls left their posts and fell back to the castle, leaving the deserted
town at the mercy of the enemy. The Imperialists raised a shout of
triumph as they entered the breaches and found them undefended, and
when once assured that the town was deserted they broke their ranks and
scattered to plunder.

It was now quite dark, and many of them dragging articles of furniture
into the streets made great bonfires to light them at their work
of plunder. But they had soon reason to repent having done so, for
immediately the flames sprang up and lighted the streets, flashes ran
round the battlements of the castle, and a heavy fire was opened into
the streets, killing many of the soldiers. Seeing the danger of thus
exposing the men to the fire from the castle, the Imperialist commander
issued orders at once that all fires should be extinguished, that anyone
setting fire to a house should be instantly hung, and that no lights
were to be lit in the houses whose windows faced the castle.

Foreseeing the possibility of an attack from the castle, the Austrians
placed a hundred men at the foot of the road leading up to it, and laid
their three cannon loaded to the muzzle to command it.

"Have you not," Malcolm asked the count, "some means of exit from the
castle besides the way into the town?"

"Yes," the count said, "there is a footpath down the rock on the other
side."

"Then," Malcolm said, "as soon as they are fairly drunk, which will be
before midnight, let us fall upon them from the other side. Leave fifty
of your oldest men with half a dozen veteran soldiers to defend the
gateway against a sudden attack; with the rest we can issue out, and
marching round, enter by the gate and breaches, sweeping the streets as
we go, and then uniting, burst through any guard they may have placed to
prevent a sortie, and so regain the castle."

The count at once assented. In a short time shouts, songs, the sound
of rioting and quarrels, arose from the town, showing that revelry was
general. At eleven o'clock the men in the castle were mustered, fifty
were told off to the defence with five experienced soldiers, an officer
of the count being left in command. The rest sallied through a little
door at the back of the castle and noiselessly descended the steep path.
On arriving at the bottom they were divided into three bodies. Malcolm
with his Scots and fifty of the townspeople formed one. Count Mansfeld
took the command of another, composed of his own soldiers and fifty more
of the townspeople. The third consisted of eighty of the best fighting
men of the town under their own leaders. These were to enter by the
gate, while the other two parties came in by the breaches. The moment
the attack began the defenders of the castle were to open as rapid
a fire as they could upon the foot of the road so as to occupy the
attention of the enemy's force there, and to lead them to anticipate a
sortie.

The breach by which Malcolm was to enter was the farthest from the
castle, and his command would, therefore, be the last in arriving at its
station. When he reached it he ordered the trumpeters who accompanied
him to sound, and at the signal the three columns rushed into the town
uttering shouts of "Gustavus! Gustavus!"

The Imperialists in the houses near were slaughtered with scarcely
any resistance. They were for the most part intoxicated, and such as
retained their senses were paralysed at the sudden attack, and panic
stricken at the shouts, which portended the arrival of a relieving
force from the army of the King of Sweden. As the bands pressed forward,
slaying all whom they came upon, the resistance became stronger; but
the three columns were all headed by parties of pikemen who advanced
steadily and in good order, bearing down all opposition, and leaving to
those behind them the task of slaying all found in the houses.

Lights flashed from the windows and partly lit up the streets, and the
Imperialist officers attempted to rally their men; but the Scottish
shouts, "A Hepburn! A Hepburn!" and the sight of their green scarves
added to the terror of the soldiers, who were convinced that the
terrible Green Brigade of the King of Sweden was upon them.

Hundreds were cut down after striking scarce a blow in their defence,
numbers fled to the walls and leapt over. The panic communicated itself
to the party drawn up to repel a sortie. Hearing the yells, screams,
and shouts, accompanied by the musketry approaching from three different
quarters of the town, while a steady fire from the castle indicated
that the defenders there might, at any moment, sally out upon them,
they stood for a time irresolute; but as the heads of the three columns
approached they lost heart, quitted their station, and withdrew in
a body by a street by which they avoided the approaching columns. On
arriving at the spot Malcolm found the guns deserted.

"The town is won now," he said. "I will take my post here with my men in
case the Austrians should rally; do you with the rest scatter over the
town and complete the work, but bid them keep together in parties of
twenty."

The force broke up and scattered through the town in their work of
vengeance. House after house was entered and searched, and all who were
found there put to the sword; but by this time most of those who were
not too drunk to fly had already made for the gates.

In half an hour not an Imperialist was left alive in the town. Then
guards were placed at the gate and breaches, and they waited till
morning. Not a sign of an Imperialist was to be seen on the plain, and
parties sallying out found that they had fled in the utmost disorder.
Arms, accoutrements, and portions of plunder lay scattered thickly
about, and it was clear that in the belief that the Swedish army was on
them, the Imperialists had fled panic stricken, and were now far away.
Upwards of two hundred bodies were found in the streets and houses.

A huge grave was dug outside the walls, and here the fallen foes were
buried. Only three or four of the defenders of the town were killed and
a score or so wounded in the whole affair. Although there was little
fear of a return, as the Imperialists would probably continue their
headlong flight for a long distance, and would then march with all haste
to rejoin their main army with the news that a strong Swedish force
was at Mansfeld, the count set the townspeople at once to repair the
breaches.

The people were overjoyed with their success, and delighted at
having preserved their homes from destruction, for they knew that the
Imperialists would, if unsuccessful against the castle, have given the
town to the flames before retiring. The women and children flocked down
to their homes again, and although much furniture had been destroyed and
damage done, this was little heeded when so much was saved.

All vied in the expression of gratitude towards Malcolm and his Scots,
but Malcolm modestly disclaimed all merit, saying that he and his men
had scarcely struck a blow.

"It is not so much the fighting," the count said, "as the example which
you set the townsmen, and the spirit which the presence of you and your
men diffused among them. Besides, your counsel and support to me have
been invaluable; had it not been for you the place would probably have
been carried at the first attack, and if not the townspeople would have
surrendered when the enemy's reinforcements arrived; and in that case,
with so small a force at my command I could not have hoped to defend the
castle successfully. Moreover, the idea of the sortie which has freed us
of them and saved the town from destruction was entirely yours. No,
my friend, say what you will I feel that I am indebted to you for the
safety of my wife and child, and so long as I live I shall be deeply
your debtor."

The following day Malcolm with his party marched away. The count had
presented him with a suit of magnificent armour, and the countess with a
gold chain of great value. Handsome presents were also made to Sergeant
Sinclair, who was a cadet of good family, and a purse of gold was given
to each of the soldiers, so in high spirits the band marched away over
the mountains on their return to the village.



CHAPTER IX THE BATTLE OF BREITENFELD


Great joy was manifested as Malcolm's band marched into the village and
it was found that they had accomplished the mission on which they went,
had saved Mansfeld, and utterly defeated the Imperialists, and had
returned in undiminished numbers, although two or three had received
wounds more or less serious, principally in the first day's fighting.
They only remained one night in the village.

On the following morning the baggage was placed in the wagons with a
store of fruit and provisions for their march, and after another hearty
adieu the detachment set out in high spirits. After marching for two
days they learned that the Swedish army had marched to Werben, and that
Tilly's army had followed it there.

After the receipt of this news there was no more loitering; the
marches were long and severe, and after making a detour to avoid the
Imperialists the detachment entered the royal camp without having met
with any adventure on the way. His fellow officers flocked round Malcolm
to congratulate him on his safe return and on his restored health.

"The change has done wonders for you, Malcolm," Nigel Graheme said.
"Why, when you marched out you were a band of tottering scarecrows,
and now your detachment looks as healthy and fresh as if they had but
yesterday left Scotland; but come in, the bugle has just sounded to
supper, and we are only waiting for the colonel to arrive. He is at
present in council with the king with Hepburn and some more. Ah! here he
comes."

Munro rode up and leapt from his horse, and after heartily greeting
Malcolm led the way into the tent where supper was laid out. Malcolm
was glad to see by the faces of his comrades that all had shaken off the
disease which had played such havoc among them at Old Brandenburg.

"Is there any chance of a general engagement?" he asked Nigel.

"Not at present," Nigel said. "We are expecting the reinforcements up in
a few days. As you see we have fortified the camp too strongly for Tilly
to venture to attack us here. Only yesterday he drew up his army and
offered us battle; but the odds were too great, and the king will not
fight till his reinforcements arrive. Some of the hotter spirits were
sorry that he would not accept Tilly's invitation, and I own that I
rather gnashed my teeth myself; but I knew that the king was right in
not risking the whole cause rashly when a few days will put us in a
position to meet the Imperialists on something like equal terms. Is
there any news, colonel?" he asked, turning to Munro.

"No news of importance," the colonel replied; "but the king is rather
puzzled. A prisoner was taken today--one of Pappenheim's horsemen--and
he declares that a force of horse and foot have been defeated at
Mansfeld by a Swedish army with heavy loss. He avers that he was present
at the affair, and arrived in camp with the rest of the beaten force
only yesterday. We cannot make it out, as we know that there are no
Swedish troops anywhere in that direction."

Malcolm burst into a hearty laugh, to the surprise of his fellow
officers.

"I can explain the matter, colonel," he said. "It was my detachment that
had the honour of representing the Swedish army at Mansfeld."

"What on earth do you mean, Malcolm?" the colonel asked.

"Well, sir, as you know I went with a detachment to the village where I
had before been well treated, and had earned the gratitude of the people
by teaching them how to destroy a party of marauders. After having been
there for a month I was on the point of marching, for the men were all
perfectly restored to health; and indeed I know I ought to have returned
sooner, seeing that the men were fit for service; but as I thought
you were still at Old Brandenburg, and could well dispense with our
services, I lingered on to the last. But just as I was about to march
the news came that a party of Imperialist horse, three hundred strong,
was about to attack Mansfeld, a place of whose existence I had never
heard; but hearing that its count was a staunch Protestant, and that the
inhabitants intended to make a stout defence, I thought that I could not
be doing wrong in the service of the king by marching to aid them, the
place being but twenty-four miles away across the hills. We got there in
time, and aided the townspeople to repulse the first assault. After two
days they brought up a reinforcement of four hundred infantry and some
cannon. As the place is a small one, with but about two hundred and
fifty fighting men of all ages, we deemed it impossible to defend the
town, and while they were breaching the walls fell back to the castle.
The Imperialists occupied it at sunset, and at night, leaving a party to
hold the castle, we sallied out from the other side, and marching round,
entered by the breaches, and, raising the Swedish war cry fell upon
the enemy, who were for the most part too drunk to offer any serious
resistance. We killed two hundred and fifty of them, and the rest fled
in terror, thinking they had the whole Swedish army upon them. The
next day I started on my march back here, and though we have not spared
speed, it seems that the Imperialists have arrived before us."

A burst of laughter and applause greeted the solution of the mystery.

"You have done well, sir," Munro said cordially, "and have rendered a
great service not only in the defeat of the Imperialists, but in its
consequences here, for the prisoner said that last night five thousand
men were marched away from Tilly's army to observe and make head against
this supposed Swedish force advancing from the east. When I have done
my meal I will go over to the king with the news, for his majesty is
greatly puzzled, especially as the prisoner declared that he himself had
seen the Scots of the Green Brigade in the van of the column, and had
heard the war cry, 'A Hepburn! A Hepburn!'

"Hepburn himself could make neither head nor tail of it, and was half
