long concealed his great happiness from one who had been like a father
to him, at the same time begging him to second his suit with Rhodopis.

The old man listened to the youth's passionate language with a smile,
and said: "Ah, Bartja, how often have I warned thee against love! It is
a scorching fire."

"But its flame is bright and beautiful."

"It causes pain."

"But such pain is sweet."

"It leads the mind astray."

"But it strengthens the heart."

"Oh, this love!" cried Rhodopis. "Inspired by Eros, the boy speaks as if
he had been all his life studying under an Attic orator!"

"And yet," answered Croesus, "these lovers are the most unteachable of
pupils. Convince them as clearly as you will, that their passion is
only another word for poison, fire, folly, death, they still cry, 'Tis
sweet,' and will not be hindered in their course."

As he was speaking Sappho came in. A white festal robe, with wide
sleeves, and borders of purple embroidery, fell in graceful folds round
her delicate figure, and was confined at the waist by a golden girdle.
Her hair was adorned with fresh roses, and on her bosom lay her lover's
first gift, the flashing diamond star.

She came up modestly and gracefully, and made a low obeisance to
the aged Croesus. His eyes rested long on the maidenly and lovely
countenance, and the longer he gazed the kindlier became his gaze. For
a moment he seemed to grow young again in the visions conjured up by
memory, and involuntarily he went up to the young girl, kissed her
affectionately on the forehead, and, taking her by the hand, led her to
Bartja with the words: "Take her, thy wife she must be, if the entire
race of the Achaemenidae were to conspire against us!"

"Have I no voice in the matter?" said Rhodopis, smiling through her
tears.

On hearing these words, Bartja and Sappho each took one of her hands,
and gazed entreatingly into her face. She rose to her full stature, and
like a prophetess exclaimed: "Eros, who brought you to each other, Zeus
and Apollo defend and protect you. I see you now like two fair roses on
one stem, loving and happy in the spring of life. What summer, autumn
and winter may have in store for you, lies hidden with the gods. May
the shades of thy departed parents, Sappho, smile approvingly when these
tidings of their child shall reach them in the nether world."

      .................................

Three days later a densely packed crowd was once more surging round the
Sais landing-place. This time they had assembled to bid a last farewell
to their king's daughter, and in this hour the people gave clear tokens
that, in spite of all the efforts of the priestly caste, their hearts
remained loyal to their monarch and his house. For when Amasis and
Ladice embraced Nitetis for the last time with tears--when Tachot, in
presence of all the inhabitants of Sais, following her sister down the
broad flight of steps that led to the river, threw her arms round her
neck once more and burst into sobs--when at last the wind filled the
sails of the royal boat and bore the princess, destined to be the great
king's bride, from their sight, few eyes among that vast crowd remained
dry.

The priests alone looked on at this sad scene with unmoved gravity and
coldness; but when the south wind at last bore away the strangers who
had robbed them of their princess, many a curse and execration followed
from the Egyptians on the shore; Tachot alone stood weeping there and
waving her veil to them. For whom were these tears? for the play-fellow
of her youth, or for the handsome, beloved prince?

Amasis embraced his wife and daughter in the eyes of all his people;
and held up his little grandson, Prince Necho, to their gaze, the
sight eliciting cries of joy on all sides. But Psamtik, the child's own
father, stood by the while, tearless and motionless. The king appeared
not to observe him, until Neithotep approached, and leading him to his
father, joined their hands and called down the blessing of the gods upon
the royal house.

At this the Egyptians fell on their knees with uplifted hands. Amasis
clasped his son to his heart, and when the high-priest had concluded his
prayer, the following colloquy between the latter and Amasis took place
in low tones:

"Let peace be between us for our own and Egypt's sake!"

"Hast thou received Nebenchari's letter?"

"A Samian pirate-vessel is in pursuit of Phanes' trireme."

"Behold the child of thy predecessor Hophra, the rightful heiress of the
Egyptian throne, departing unhindered to a distant land!"

"The works of the Greek temple now building in Memphis shall be
discontinued."

"May Isis grant us peace, and may prosperity and happiness increase in
our land!"

        ............................

The Greek colonists in Naukratis had prepared a feast to celebrate the
departure of their protector's daughter.

Numerous animals had been slaughtered in sacrifice on the altars of the
Greek divinities, and the Nile-boats were greeted with a loud cry of
"Ailinos" on their arrival in the harbor.

A bridal wreath, composed of a hoop of gold wound round with scented
violets, was presented to Nitetis by a troop of young girls in holiday
dresses, the act of presentation being performed by Sappho, as the most
beautiful among the maidens of Naukratis.

On accepting the gift Nitetis kissed her forehead in token of gratitude.
The triremes were already waiting; she went on board, the rowers took
their oars and began the Keleusma.

   [The measure of the Keleusma was generally given by a flute-player,
   the Trieraules. AEschylus, Persians 403. Laert. Diog. IV. 22. In
   the Frogs of Aristophanes the inhabitants of the marshes are made to
   sing the Keleusma, v. 205. The melody, to the measure of which the
   Greek boatmen usually timed their strokes.]

Ailinos rang across the water from a thousand voices. Bartja stood
on the deck, and waved a last loving farewell to his betrothed; while
Sappho prayed in silence to Aphrodite Euploia, the protectress of those
who go down to the sea in ships. A tear rolled down her cheek, but
around her lips played a smile of love and hope, though her old slave
Melitta, who accompanied her to carry her parasol, was weeping as if
her heart would break. On seeing, however, a few leaves fall from
her darling's wreath, she forgot her tears for a moment and whispered
softly: "Yes, dear heart, it is easy to see that you are in love; when
the leaves fall from a maiden's wreath, 'tis a sure sign that her heart
has been touched by Eros.




CHAPTER XII.

Seven weeks after Nitetis had quitted her native country, a long train
of equipages and horsemen was to be seen on the king's highway from
the west to Babylon, moving steadily towards that gigantic city, whose
towers might already be descried in the far distance.

   [The great road called the "king's road," of which we shall have
   more to say, was made by Cyrus and carefully kept up by Darius.]

The principal object in this caravan was a richly-gilded, four-wheeled
carriage, closed in at the sides by curtains, and above by a roof
supported on wooden pillars. In this vehicle, called the Harmamaxa,
resting on rich cushions of gold brocade, sat our Egyptian Princess.

   [Harmamaxa--An Asiatic travelling carriage. The first mention of
   these is in Xenophon's Anabasis, where we find a queen travelling in
   such a vehicle. They were later adopted by the Romans and used for
   the same object.]

On either side rode her escort, viz.: the Persian princes and nobles
whom we have already learnt to know during their visit to Egypt, Croesus
and his son.

Behind these, a long train, consisting of fifty vehicles of different
kinds and six hundred beasts of burden, stretched away into
the distance, and the royal carriage was preceded by a troop of
splendidly-mounted Persian cavalry.

The high-road followed the course of the Euphrates, passing through
luxuriant fields of wheat, barley and sesame yielding fruit two, and
sometimes even three, hundred-fold. Slender date-palms covered with
golden fruit were scattered in every direction over the fields, which
were thoroughly irrigated by means of canals and ditches.

It was winter, but the sun shone warm and bright from a cloudless sky.
The mighty river swarmed with craft of all sizes, either transporting
the products of Upper Armenia to the plains of Mesopotamia, or the wares
of Greece and Asia Minor from Thapsakus to Babylon.

   [Thapsakus--An important commercial town on the Euphrates, and the
   point of observation from which Eratosthenes took his measurements
   of the earth.]

Pumps and water-wheels poured refreshing streams over the thirsty land,
and pretty villages ornamented the shores of the river. Indeed every
object gave evidence that our caravan was approaching the metropolis of
a carefully governed and civilized state.

Nitetis and her retinue now halted at a long brick house, roofed with
asphalte, and surrounded by a grove of plane-trees.

   [Asphalte--Nearly all authorities, ancient as well as modern, report
   that bitumen, which is still plentifully found in the neighborhood
   of Babylon, was used by the Babylonians as mortar. See, besides the
   accounts of ancient writers, W. Vaux, 'Nineveh and Persepolis'.
   Burnt bitumen was used by Assyrians for cement in building.]

Here Croesus was lifted from his horse, and approaching the carriage,
exclaimed: "Here we are at length at the last station! That high tower
which you see on the horizon is the celebrated temple of Bel, next to
the Pyramids, one of the most gigantic works ever constructed by human
hands. Before sunset we shall have reached the brazen gates of Babylon.
And now I would ask you to alight, and let me send your maidens into the
house; for here you must put on Persian apparel, to appear well-pleasing
in the eyes of Cambyses. In a few hours you will stand before your
future husband. But you are pale! Permit your maidens to adorn your
cheeks with a color that shall look like the excitement of joy. A first
impression is often a final one, and this is especially true with regard
to Cambyses. If, which I doubt not, you are pleasing in his eyes at
first, then you have won his love for ever; but if you should displease
him to-day he will never look kindly on you again, for he is rough and
harsh. But take courage, my daughter, and above all, do not forget the
advice I have given you." Nitetis dried her tears as she answered: "How
can I ever thank you, O Croesus, my second father, my protector and
adviser, for all your goodness? Oh, forsake me not in the days to come!
and if the path of my life should lead through grief and care, be near
to help and guide me as you did on the mountain-passes of this long and
dangerous journey. A thousand times I thank thee, O my father!"

And, as she said these words, the young girl threw her arms around the
old man's neck and kissed him tenderly.

On entering the court-yard, a tall stout man, followed by a train of
Asiatic serving-maidens, came forward to meet them. This was Boges, the
chief of the eunuchs, an important official at the Persian court. His
beardless face wore a smile of fulsome sweetness; in his ears hung
costly jewelled pendents; his neck, arms, legs and his effeminately long
garments glittered all over with gold chains and rings, and his crisp,
stiff curls, bound round by a purple fillet, streamed with powerful and
penetrating perfumes.

Making a low and reverential obeisance before Nitetis, and holding, the
while, his fat hands overloaded with rings before his mouth, he thus
addressed her: "Cambyses, lord of the world, hath sent me to thee, O
Queen, that I may refresh thy heart with the dew of his salutations.
He sendeth thee likewise by me, even by me the lowest of his servants,
Persian raiment, that thou, as befitteth the consort of the mightiest
of all rulers, mayest approach the gates of the Achaemenidae in Median
garments. These women whom thou seest are thy handmaidens, and only
await thy bidding to transform thee from an Egyptian jewel into a
Persian pearl."

The master of the caravansary then appeared, bearing, in token of
welcome, a basket of fruits arranged with great taste.

Nitetis returned her thanks to both these men in kind and friendly
words; then entering the house laid aside the dress and ornaments of her
native land, weeping as she did so, allowed the strangers to unloose the
plait of hair which hung down at the left side of her head, and was the
distinctive mark of an Egyptian princess, and to array her in Median
garments.

   [In almost all the Egyptian pictures, the daughters and sons of the
   Pharaohs are represented with these locks of hair, plaited and
   reaching from the forehead to the neck. Rosellini, Mon. stor. II.
   123. Lepsius, Denkmaler. The daughter of Rameses II. is drawn
   thus, and we have examples of the same in many other pictures.]

In the meantime, a repast had been commanded by the princes
who accompanied her. Eager and agile attendants rushed to the
baggage-waggons, fetching thence, in a few moments, seats, tables, and
golden utensils of all kinds. The cooks vied with them and with each
other, and as if by magic, in a short space of time a richly-adorned
banquet for the hungry guests appeared, at which even the flowers were
not wanting.

During the entire journey our travellers had lived in a similar luxury,
as their beasts of burden carried every imaginable convenience, from
tents of water-proof materials inwrought with gold, down to silver
foot-stools; and in the vehicles which composed their train were
not only bakers, cooks, cup-bearers and carvers, but perfumers,
hair-dressers and weavers of garlands. Beside these conveniences, a
well-fitted up caravansary, or inn, was to be found about every eighteen
miles along the whole route, where disabled horses could be replaced,
the plantations around which afforded a refreshing shelter from the
noonday heat, or their hearths a refuge from the snow and cold on the
mountain-passes.

The kingdom of Persia was indebted for these inns (similar to the
post-stations of modern days) to Cyrus, who had endeavored to connect
the widely-distant provinces of his immense dominions by a system of
well-kept roads, and a regular postal service. At each of these stations
the horseman carrying the letter-bag was relieved by a fresh man on a
fresh steed, to whom the letters were transferred, and who, in his turn,
darted off like the wind, to be again replaced at a similar distance
by another rider. These couriers, called Angari, were considered the
swiftest horsemen in the world.

   [Herodotus V. 14. 49-52. Persian milestones are still to be found
   among the ruins of the old king's road, which led from Nineveh to
   Ecbatana. The Kurds call them keli-Shin (blue pillars).]

Just as the banqueters, amongst whom Boges had taken his seat, were
rising from table, the door opened, and a vision appeared, which
drew prolonged exclamation of surprise from all the Persians present.
Nitetis, clad in the glorious apparel of a Median princess, proud in the
consciousness of her triumphant beauty, and yet blushing like a young
girl at the wondering admiration of her friends, stood before them.

The attendants involuntarily fell on their faces before her, according
to the custom of the Asiatics, and the noble Achaemenidae bowed low and
reverentially; for it seemed as if Nitetis has laid aside all her former
bashfulness and timidity with her simple Egyptian dress, and with the
splendid silken garments of a Persian princess, flashing as they were
with gold and jewels, had clothed herself in the majesty of a queen.

The deep reverence paid by all present seemed agreeable to her, and
thanking her admiring friends by a gracious wave of the hand, she turned
to the chief of the eunuchs and said in a kind tone but mingled with a
touch of pride; "Thou hast performed thy mission well; I am content with
the raiment and the slaves that thou hast provided and shall commend thy
circumspection to the king, my husband. Receive this gold chain in the
meanwhile, as a token of my gratitude."

The eunuch kissed the hem of her garment, and accepted the gift in
silence. This man, hitherto omnipotent in his office, had never before
encountered such pride in any of the women committed to his charge. Up
to the present time all Cambyses' wives had been Asiatics, and, well
aware of the unlimited power of the chief of the eunuchs, had used every
means within their reach to secure his favor by flattery and submission.

Boges now made a second obeisance before Nitetis, of which, however, she
took no notice, and turning to Croesus said: "Neither words nor gifts
could ever suffice to express my gratitude to you, kindest of friends,
for, if my future life at the court of Persia prove, I will not venture
to say a happy, but even a peaceful one, it is to you alone that I
shall owe it. Still, take this ring. It has never left my finger since
I quitted Egypt, and it has a significance far beyond its outward worth.
Pythagoras, the noblest of the Greeks, gave it to my mother, when he
was tarrying in Egypt to learn the wisdom of our priests, and it was her
parting gift to me. The number seven is engraved upon the simple stone.
This indivisible number represents perfect health, both to soul and body
for health is likewise one and indivisible.

   [Seven, the "motherless" number, which has no factor below ten.]

The sickness of one member is the sickness of all; one evil thought,
allowed to take up its abode within our heart, destroys the entire
harmony of the soul. When you see this seven therefore, let it recall my
heart's wish that you may ever enjoy undisturbed bodily health, and long
retain that loving gentleness which has made you the most virtuous, and
therefore the healthiest of men. No thanks, my father, for even if I
could restore to Croesus all the treasures that he once possessed, I
should still retrain his debtor. Gyges, to you I give this Lydian lyre;
let its tones recall the giver to your memory. For you, Zopyrus, I
have a golden chain; I have witnessed that you are the most faithful of
friends; and we Egyptians are accustomed to place cords and bands in
the hands of our lovely Hathor, the goddess of love and friendship,
as symbols of her captivating and enchaining attributes. As Darius has
studied the wisdom of Egypt and the signs of the starry heavens, I beg
him to take this circlet of gold, on which a skilful hand has traced the
signs of the Zodiac.

   [Diodorus (I. 49.) tells, that in the tomb of Osymandyas (palace of
   Rameses II. at Thebes) there lay a circle of gold, one ell thick and
   365 ells in circumference, containing a complete astronomical
   calendar. The circle of the zodiac from Dendera, which is now in
   Paris,--an astronomical ceiling painting, which was believed at the
   time of its discovery to be of great age, is not nearly so ancient
   as was supposed, dating only from the end of the Ptolemaic dynasty.
   Letronne was the first to estimate it correctly. See Lepsius,
   Chron. p.63. and Lauth, 'les zodiaques de Dendera'. Munich 1865.]

And lastly, to my dear brother-in-law Bartja I commit the most precious
jewel in my possession--this amulet of blue stone. My sister Tachot hung
it round my neck as I kissed her on the last night before we parted; she
told me it could bring to its wearer the sweet bliss of love. And then,
Bartja, she wept! I do not know of whom she was thinking in that
moment, but I hope I am acting according to her wishes in giving you
her precious jewel. Take it as a gift from Tachot, and sometimes call to
mind our games in the Sais gardens."

Thus far she had been speaking Greek, but now, addressing the attendants
who remained standing in an attitude of deep reverence, she began in
broken Persian: "Accept my thanks also. In Babylon you shall receive a
thousand gold staters." Then turning to Boges, she added: "Let this
sum be distributed among the attendants at latest by the day after
to-morrow. Take me to my carriage, Croesus."

The old king hastened to do her bidding, and as he was leading her
thither she pressed his arm and whispered gently, "Are you pleased with
me, my father?"

"I tell you, girl," the old man answered, "that no one but the king's
mother can ever be your equal at this court, for a true and queenly
pride reigns on your brow, and you have the power of using small means
to effect great ends. Believe me, the smallest gift, chosen and bestowed
as you can choose and bestow, gives more pleasure to a noble mind
than heaps of treasure merely cast down at his feet. The Persians are
accustomed to present and receive costly gifts. They understand already
how to enrich their friends, but you can teach them to impart a joy
with every gift. How beautiful you are to-day! Are your cushions to
your mind, or would you like a higher seat? But what is that? There are
clouds of dust in the direction of the city. Cambyses is surely coming
to meet you! Courage, my daughter. Above all try to meet his gaze and
respond to it. Very few can bear the lightning glance of those eyes,
but, if you can return it freely and fearlessly, you have conquered.
Fear nothing, my child, and may Aphrodite adorn you with her most
glorious beauty! My friends, we must start, I think the king himself is
coming." Nitetis sat erect in her splendid, gilded carriage; her hands
were pressed on her throbbing heart. The clouds of dust came nearer
and nearer, her eye caught the flash of weapons like lightning across
a stormy sky. The clouds parted, she could see single figures for a
moment, but soon lost them as the road wound behind some thickets and
shrubs. Suddenly the troop of horsemen appeared in full gallop only a
hundred paces before her, and distinctly visible.

Her first impression was of a motley mass of steeds and men, glittering
in purple, gold, silver and jewels. It consisted in reality of a troop
of more than two hundred horsemen mounted on pure white Nicaean horses,
whose bridles and saddle-cloths were covered with bells and bosses,
feathers, fringes, and embroidery. Their leader rode a powerful
coal-black charger, which even the strong will and hand of his rider
could not always curb, though in the end his enormous strength proved
him the man to tame even this fiery animal. This rider, beneath whose
weight the powerful steed trembled and panted, wore a vesture of scarlet
and white, thickly embroidered with eagles and falcons in silver.

   [Curtius III. 3. Xenoph. Cyrap, VIII. 3. 7. Aeschylus, Persians
   835. 836. The king's dress and ornaments were worth 12,000 talents,
   or L2,250,000 (estimate of 1880) according to Plutarch, Artaxerxes
   24.]

The lower part of his dress was purple, and his boots of yellow leather.
He wore a golden girdle; in this hung a short dagger-like sword,
the hilt and scabbard of which were thickly studded with jewels. The
remaining ornaments of his dress resembled those we have described as
worn by Bartja, and the blue and white fillet of the Achaemenidae was
bound around the tiara, which surmounted a mass of thick curls, black as
ebony. The lower part of his face was concealed by an immense beard. His
features were pale and immovable, but the eyes, (more intensely black,
if possible, than either hair or beard), glowed with a fire that was
rather scorching than warming. A deep, fiery-red scar, given by the
sword of a Massagetan warrior, crossed his high forehead, arched
nose and thin upper lip. His whole demeanor expressed great power and
unbounded pride.

Nitetis' gaze was at once riveted by this man. She had never seen any
one like him before, and he exercised a strange fascination over her.
The expression of indomitable pride, worn by his features, seemed to her
to represent a manly nature which the whole world, but she herself above
all others, was created to serve. She felt afraid, and yet her true
woman's heart longed to lean upon his strength as the vine upon the elm.
She could not be quite sure whether she had thus pictured to herself the
father of all evil, the fearful Seth, or the great god Ammon, the giver
of light.

The deepest pallor and the brightest color flitted by turns across her
lovely face, like the light and shadow when clouds pass swiftly over a
sunny noonday sky. She had quite forgotten the advice of her fatherly
old friend, and yet, when Cambyses brought his unruly, chafing steed to
a stand by the side of her carriage, she gazed breathless into the fiery
eyes of this man and felt at once that he was the king, though no one
had told her so.

The stern face of this ruler of half the known world relaxed, as
Nitetis, moved by an unaccountable impulse, continued to bear his
piercing gaze. At last he waved his hand to her in token of welcome, and
then rode on to her escort, who had alighted from their horses and were
awaiting him, some having cast themselves down in the dust, and others,
after the Persian manner, standing in an attitude of deep reverence,
their hands concealed in the wide sleeves of their robes.

He sprang from his horse, an example which was followed at once by his
entire suite. The attendants, with the speed of thought, spread a rich
purple carpet on the highway, lest the foot of the king should come
in contact with the dust of the earth, and then Cambyses proceeded to
salute his friends and relations by offering them his mouth to kiss.

He shook Croesus by the right hand, commanding him to remount and
accompany him to the carriage, as interpreter between himself and
Nitetis.

In an instant his highest office-bearers were at hand to lift the king
once more on to his horse, and at a single nod from their lord, the
train was again in motion.

Cambyses and Croesus rode by the side of the carriage.

"She is beautiful, and pleases me well," began the king. "Interpret
faithfully all her answers, for I understand only the Persian, Assyrian
and Median tongues."

Nitetis caught and understood these words. A feeling of intense joy
stole into her heart, and before Croesus could answer, she began softly
in broken Persian and blushing deeply: "Blessed be the gods, who have
caused me to find favor in thine eyes. I am not ignorant of the speech
of my lord, for the noble Croesus has instructed me in the Persian
language during our long journey. Forgive, if my sentences be broken and
imperfect; the time was short, and my capacity only that of a poor and
simple maiden."

   [Diodorus tells us that Themistocles learnt the Persian language
   during the journey to Susa. We are not, therefore, requiring an
   impossibility of Nitetis.]

A smile passed over the usually serious mouth of Cambyses. His vanity
was flattered by Nitetis' desire to win his approbation, and, accustomed
as he was to see women grow up in idleness and ignorance, thinking of
nothing but finery and intrigue, her persevering industry seemed to
him both wonderful and praise worthy. So he answered with evident
satisfaction: "I rejoice that we can speak without an interpreter.
Persevere in learning the beautiful language of my forefathers. Croesus,
who sits at my table, shall still remain your instructor."

"Your command confers happiness!" exclaimed the old man. "No more eager
or thankful pupil could be found, than the daughter of Amasis."

"She justifies the ancient report of the wisdom of Egypt," answered the
king, "and I can believe that she will quickly understand and receive
into her soul the religious instructions of our Magi."

Nitetis dropped her earnest gaze. Her fears were being realized. She
would be compelled to serve strange gods.

But her emotion passed unnoticed by Cambyses, who went on speaking:
"My mother Kassandane will tell you the duties expected from my wives.
To-morrow I myself will lead you to her. The words, which you innocently
chanced to hear, I now repeat; you please me well. Do nothing to
alienate my affection. We will try to make our country agreeable,
and, as your friend, I counsel you to treat Boges whom I sent as my
forerunner, in a kind and friendly manner. As head over the house of the
women, you will have to conform to his will in many things."

"Though he be head over the house of the women," answered Nitetis,
"surely your wife is bound to obey no other earthly will than yours.
Your slightest look shall be for me a command; but remember that I am a
king's daughter, that in my native land the weaker and the stronger sex
have equal rights, and that the same pride reigns in my breast, which
I see kindling in your eyes, my lord and king! My obedience to you, my
husband and my ruler, shall be that of a slave, but I can never stoop
to sue for the favor, or obey the orders of a venal servant, the most
unmanly of his kind!"

Cambyses' wonder and satisfaction increased. He had never heard any
woman speak in this way before, except his mother; the clever way in
which Nitetis acknowledged, and laid stress on, his right to command her
every act, was very flattering to his self-love, and her pride found an
echo in his own haughty disposition. He nodded approvingly and answered:
"You have spoken well. A separate dwelling shall be appointed you. I,
and no one else, will prescribe your rules of life and conduct. This day
the pleasant palace on the hanging-gardens shall be prepared for your
reception."

"A thousand, thousand thanks," cried Nitetis. "You little know the
blessing you are bestowing in this permission. Again and again I have
begged your brother Bartja to repeat the story of these gardens, and the
love of the king who raised that verdant and blooming hill, pleased us
better than all the other glories of your vast domains."

"To-morrow," answered the king, "you can enter your new abode. But tell
me now how my messengers pleased you and your countrymen."

"How can you ask? Who could know the noble Croesus without loving him?
Who could fail to admire the beauty of the young heroes, your friends?
They have all become dear to us, but your handsome brother Bartja
especially, won all hearts. The Egyptians have no love for strangers,
and yet the gaping crowd would burst into a murmur of admiration, when
his beautiful face appeared among them."

At these words the king's brow darkened; he struck his horse so sharply
that the creature reared, and then turning it quickly round he gallopped
to the front and soon reached the walls of Babylon.

        ...........................

Though Nitetis had been brought up among the huge temples and palaces
of Egypt, she was still astonished at the size and grandeur of this
gigantic city.

Its walls seemed impregnable; they measured more than seventy-five
feet--[Fifty ells. The Greek ell is equal to one foot and a half
English.]--in height and their breadth was so great, that two chariots
could conveniently drive abreast upon them. These mighty defences were
crowned and strengthened by two hundred and fifty high towers, and even
these would have been insufficient, if Babylon had not been protected on
one side by impassable morasses. The gigantic city lay on both shores
of the Euphrates. It was more than forty miles in circumference, and
its walls enclosed buildings surpassing in size and grandeur even the
Pyramids and the temples of Thebes.

   [These numbers and measurements are taken partly from Herodotus,
   partly from Diodorus, Strabo and Arrian. And even the ruins of this
   giant city, writes Lavard, are such as to allow a very fair
   conclusion of its enormous size. Aristotle (Polit. III. I.) says
   Babylon's dimensions were not those of a city, but of a nation.]

The mighty gates of brass, through which the royal train entered the
city, had opened wide to receive this noble company. This entrance was
defended on each side by a strong tower, and before each of these towers
lay, as warder, a gigantic winged bull carved in stone, with a human
head, bearded and solemn. Nitetis gazed at these gates in astonishment,
and then a joyful smile lighted up her face, as she looked up the long
broad street so brightly and beautifully decorated to welcome her.

The moment they beheld the king and the gilded carriage, the multitude
burst into loud shouts of joy, but when Bartja, the people's darling,
came in sight, the shouts rose to thunder-peals and shrieks of delight,
which seemed as if they would never end. It was long since the populace
had seen Cambyses, for in accordance with Median customs the king seldom
appeared in public. Like the Deity, he was to govern invisibly, and his
occasional appearance before the nation to be looked upon as a festival
and occasion of rejoicing. Thus all Babylon had come out to-day to
look upon their awful ruler and to welcome their favorite Bartja on his
return. The windows were crowded with eager, curious women, who threw
flowers before the approaching train, or poured sweet perfumes from
above as they passed by. The pavement was thickly strewn with myrtle
and palm branches, trees of different kinds had been placed before the
house-doors, carpets and gay cloths hung from the windows, garlands of
flowers were wreathed from house to house, fragrant odors of incense and
sandal-wood perfumed the air, and the way was lined with thousands of
gaping Babylonians dressed in white linen shirts, gaily-colored woollen
petticoats and short cloaks, and carrying long staves headed with
pomegranates, birds, or roses, of gold or silver.

The streets through which the procession moved were broad and straight,
the houses on either side, built of brick, tall and handsome. Towering
above every thing else, and visible from all points, rose the gigantic
temple of Bel. Its colossal staircase, like a huge serpent, wound round
and round the ever-diminishing series of stories composing the tower,
until it reached the summit crowned by the sanctuary itself.

   [This temple of Bel, which many consider may have been the tower of
   Babel of Genesis XI., is mentioned by Herodotus I. 181. 182. 183.
   Diodorus II. 8. 9. (Ktesias), Strabo 738 and many other ancient
   writers. The people living in its neighborhood now call the ruins
   Birs Nimrod, the castle of Nimrod. In the text we have
   reconstructed it as far as possible from the accounts of classical
   writers. The first story, which is still standing, in the midst of
   a heap of ruins, is 260 feet high. The walls surrounding the tower
   are said to be still clearly recognizable, and were 4000 feet long
   and 3000 broad. ]

The procession approached the royal palace. This corresponded in its
enormous size to the rest of the vast city. The walls surrounding it
were covered with gaily-colored and glazed representations of strange
figures made up of human beings, birds, quadrupeds and fishes;
hunting-scenes, battles and solemn processions. By the side of the river
towards the north, rose the hanging-gardens, and the smaller palace lay
toward the east on the other bank of the Euphrates, connected with the
larger one by the wondrous erection, a firm bridge of stone.

Our train passed on through the brazen gates of three of the walls
surrounding the palace, and then halted. Nitetis was lifted from her
carriage by bearers; she was at last in her new home, and soon after in
the apartments of the women's house assigned to her temporary use.

Cambyses, Bartja and their friends already known to us, were still
standing in the gaily-carpeted court of the palace, surrounded by
at least a hundred splendid dignitaries in magnificent dresses, when
suddenly a sound of loud female voices was heard, and a lovely Persian
girl richly dressed, her thick fair hair profusely wreathed with pearls,
rushed into the court, pursued by several women older than herself. She
ran up to the group of men; Cambyses with a smile placed himself in her
path, but the impetuous girl slipped adroitly past him, and in another
moment was hanging on Bartja's neck, crying and laughing by turns.

The attendants in pursuit prostrated themselves at a respectful
distance, but Cambyses, on seeing the caresses lavished by the young
girl on her newly-returned brother, cried: "For shame, Atossa! remember
that since you began to wear ear-rings you have ceased to be a child!

   [Ear-rings were given to the Persian girls in their fifteenth year,
   the marriageable age. Vendid. Farlard XIV. 66. At this age too
   boys as well as girls were obliged to wear the sacred cord, Kuctl or
   Kosti as a girdle; and were only allowed to unloose it in the night.
   The making of this cord is attended with many ceremonies, even among
   the Persians of our own day. Seventy-two threads must be employed,
   but black wool is prohibited.]

It is right that you should rejoice to see your brother again, but a
king's daughter must never forget what is due to her rank, even in her
greatest joy. Go back to your mother directly. I see your attendants
waiting yonder. Go and tell them, that as this is a day of rejoicing I
will allow your heedless conduct to pass unpunished, but the next time
you appear unbidden in these apartments, which none may enter without
