with her I know I could achieve it; without her, or with that gilded
toy Katharina, old age will bring me nothing but satiety, sobering and
regrets--or, to call it by its Christian designation: bitter repentance.
As Antaeus renewed his strength by contact with mother earth, so, father
do I feel myself grow taller when I only think of her. She is salvation
and honor; the other is ruin and misery in the future. My poor, dear
Father, you will, you must survive this stroke to see the fulfilment of
all your joyful hopes of your son. You always loved Paula; perhaps you
may be the one to appease her and bring her back to me; and how dear
will she be to you, and, God willing, to my mother, too, when you see
her reigning by my side an ornament to this house, to this city, to
this country--reigning like a queen, your son's redeeming and guardian
angel!"

Uplifted, carried away by these thoughts, he had reached the viridarium.
He there found Sebek the steward waiting for his young master: "My
lord is asleep now," he whispered, "as the physician foretold, but his
face.... Oh, if only we had Philippus here again!"

"Have you sent the chariot with the fast horses to the Convent of
St. Cecilia?" asked Orion eagerly; and when Sebek had replied in the
affirmative and vanished again indoors, the young man, overwhelmed with
painful forebodings, sank on his knees near a column to which a crucifix
was hung, and lifted up his hands and soul in fervent prayer.




CHAPTER XV.

The physician had installed Paula in her new home, and had introduced
her to the family who were henceforth to be her protectors, and to
enable her to lead a happier life.

He had but a few minutes to devote to her and her hosts; for scarcely
had he taken her into the spacious rooms, gay with flowers, of which she
now took possession, when he was enquired for by two messengers, both
anxious to speak with him. Paula knew how critical her uncle's state
was, and now, contemplating the probability of losing him, she first
understood what he had been to her. Thus sorrow was her first companion
in her new abode--a sorrow to which the comfort of her pretty, airy
rooms added keenness.

One of the messengers was a young Arab from the other side of the river,
who handed to Philippus a letter from the merchant Haschim. The old man
informed him that, in consequence of a bad fall his eldest son had had,
he was forced to start at once for Djiddah on the Red Sea. He begged the
physician to take every care of his caravan-leader, to whom he was much
attached, to remove him when he thought fit from the governor's house,
and to nurse him till he was well, in some quiet retreat. He would bear
in mind the commission given him by the daughter of the illustrious
Thomas. He sent with this letter a purse well-filled with gold pieces.

The other messenger was to take the leech back again in the light
chariot with the fast horses to the suffering Mukaukas. He at once
obeyed the summons, and the steeds, which the driver did not spare, soon
carried him back to the governor's house.

A glance at his patient told him that this was the beginning of the end;
still, faithful to his principle of never abandoning hope till the
heart of the sufferer had ceased to beat, he raised the senseless man,
heedless of Orion, who was on his knees by his father's pillow, signed
to the deaconess in attendance, an experienced nurse, and laid cool,
wet cloths on the head and neck of the sufferer, who was stricken with
apoplexy. Then he bled him.

Presently the Mukaukas wearily opened his eyes, turned uneasily from
side to side, and recognizing his kneeling son and his wife, bathed in
tears, he murmured, almost inarticulately, for his paralyzed tongue no
longer did his will: "Two pillules, Philip!"

The physician unhesitatingly acceded to the request of the dying man,
who again closed his eyes; but only to reopen them, and to say, with the
same difficulty, but with perfect consciousness: "The end is at hand!
The blessing of the Church--Orion, the Bishop."

The young man hastened out of the room to fetch the prelate, who was
waiting in the viridarium with two deacons, an exorcist, and a sacristan
bearing the sacred vessels.

The governor listened in devout composure to the service of the last
sacrament, looked on at the ceremonies performed by the exorcist as,
with waving of hands and pious ejaculations he banned the evil spirits
and cast out from the dying man the devil that might have part in him;
but he could no longer swallow the bread which, in the Jacobite rite,
was administered soaked in the wine. Orion took the holy elements for
him, and the dying man, with a smile, murmured to his son:

"God be with thee, my son! The Lord, it seems, denies me His precious
Blood--and yet--let me try once more."

This time he succeeded in swallowing the wine and a few crumbs of bread;
and the bishop Ptolimus, a gentle old man of a beautiful and dignified
presence, spoke comfort to him, and asked him whether he felt that he
was dying penitent and in perfect faith in the mercy of his Lord and
Saviour, and whether he repented of his sins and forgave his enemies.

The sick man bowed his head with an effort and murmured:

"Even the Melchites who murdered my sons--and even the head of our
Church, the Patriarch, who was only too glad to leave it to me to
achieve things which he scrupled to do himself. That--that--But you,
Ptolimus--a wise and worthy servant of the Lord--tell me to the best
of your convictions: May I die in the belief that it was not a sin to
conclude a peace with the Arab conquerors of the Greeks?--May I, even at
this hour, think of the Melchites as heretics?"

The prelate drew his still upright figure to its full height, and
his mild features assumed a determined--nay a stern expression as he
exclaimed:

"You know the decision pronounced by the Synod of Ephesus--the words
which should be graven on the heart of every true Jacobite as on marble
and brass 'May all who divide the nature of Christ--and this is what the
Melchites do--be divided with the sword, be hewn in pieces and be burnt
alive!'--No Head of our Church has ever hurled such a curse at the
Moslems who adore the One God!"

The sufferer drew a deep breath, but he presently added with a sigh:

"But Benjamin the Patriarch, and John of Niku have tormented my soul
with fears! Still, you too, Ptolimus, bear the crosier, and to you I
will confess that your brethren in office, the shepherds of the Jacobite
fold, have ruined my peace for hundreds of days and nights, and I have
been near to cursing them. But before the night fell the Lord sent light
into my soul, and I forgave them, and now, through you, I crave their
pardon and their blessing. The Church has but reluctantly opened the
doors to me in these last years; but what servant can be allowed to
complain of the Master from whom he expects grace? So listen to me. I
close my eyes as a faithful and devoted adherent of the Church, and in
token thereof I will endow her to the best of my power and adorn her
with rich and costly gifts; I will--but I can say no more.--Speak for
me, Orion. You know--the gems--the hanging...."

His son explained to the bishop what a splendid gift, in priceless
jewels, the dying man intended to offer to the Church. He desired to be
buried in the church of St. John at Alexandria by his father's side, and
to be prayed for in front of the mortuary chapel of his ancestors in the
Necropolis; he had set aside a sum of money, in his will, to pay for
the prayers to be offered for his soul. The priests were well pleased to
hear this, and they absolved him unconditionally and completely; then,
after blessing him fervently, they quitted the room.

Philippus heaved a sigh of relief when the ecclesiastics had departed,
and constantly renewed the wet compress, while the dying governor lay
for a long time in silence with his eyes shut. Presently he rubbed them
as though he felt revived, raised his head a little with the physician's
help, and looking up, said:

"Draw the ring off my finger, Orion, and wear it worthily.--Where is
little Mary, where is Paula? I should wish to bid them farewell too."

The young man and his mother exchanged uneasy glances, but Neforis
collected herself at once and replied:

"We have sent for Mary; but Paula--you know she never was happy with
us--and since the events of yesterday...."

"Well?" asked the invalid.

"She hastily quitted the house; but we parted friends, I can assure
you of that; she is still in Memphis, and she spoke of you most
affectionately and wished to see you, and charged me with many loving
messages for you; so, if you really care to see her...."

The sick man tried to nod his head, but in vain. He did not, however,
insist on her being sent for, but his face wore an expression of deep
melancholy and the words came faintly from his lips.

"Thomas' daughter! The noblest and loveliest of all."

"The noblest and loveliest," echoed Orion, in a voice that was tremulous
with strong, deep and sincere emotion; then he begged the leech and the
deaconess to leave him alone with his parents. As soon as they had left
the room the young man spoke softly but urgently into his father's ear:

"You are quite right, Father," he said. "She is better and more noble,
more beautiful and more highminded than any girl living. I love her,
and will stake everything to win her heart. Oh, God! Oh, God! Merciful
Heaven!--Are you glad, do you give your consent, Father? You dearest and
best of men; I see it in your face."

"Yes, yes, yes," murmured the governor; his yellow, bloodshot eyes
looked up to Heaven, and with a terrible effort he stammered out:
"Blessing--my blessing, on you and Paula.--Tell her from me.... If she
had confided in her old uncle, as she used to do, the freedman would
never have robbed us.--She is a brave soul; how she fought for the poor
fellow. I will hear more about it if my strength holds out.--Why is she
not here?"

"She wished so much to bid you farewell," replied Neforis, "but you were
asleep."

"Was she in such a hurry to be gone?" asked her husband with a bitter
smile. "Fear about the emerald may have had something to do with it?
But how could I be angry with her? Hiram acted without her knowledge, I
suppose? Yes, I knew it!--Ah; that dear, sweet face! If I could but
see it once more. The joy--of my eyes, and my companion at draughts!
A faithful heart too; how she clung to her father! she was ready to
sacrifice everything for him.--And you, you, my old.... But no--no
reproaches at such a time. You, Mother--you, my Neforis, thanks, a
thousand thanks for all your love and kindness. What a mystical and
magic bond is that of a Christian marriage like ours? Mark that, Orion.
And you, Mother: I am anxious about this. You--do not hurt the girl's
feelings again. Say--say you bless this union; it will make me happier
at the last.--Paula and Orion; both of them-both.--I never dared
before--but what better could we wish?"

The matron clasped her hands and sobbed out:

"Anything, everything you wish! But Father, Orion, our faith!--And then,
merciful Saviour, that poor little Katharina!"

"Katharina!" repeated the sick man, and his feeble lips parted in a
compassionate smile. "Our boy and the water--water--you know what I
would say."

Then his eyes began to sparkle more brightly and he said in a low voice,
but still eagerly, as though death were yet far from him:

"My name is George, the son of the Mukaukas; I am the great Mukaukas and
our family--all fine men of a proud race; all: My father, my uncle, our
lost sons, and Orion here--all palms and oaks! And shall a dwarf, a mere
blade of rice be grafted on to the grand old stalwart stock? What would
come of that?--Oh, ho! a miserable little brood! But Paula! The cedar of
Lebanon--Paula; she would give new life to the grand old race."

"But our faith, our faith," moaned Neforis. "And you, Orion, do you even
know what her feeling is towards you?"

"Yes and no. Let that rest for the present," said the youth, who was
deeply moved. "Oh Father! if I only knew that your blessing..."

"The Faith, the Faith," interrupted the Mukaukas in a broken voice.

"I will be true to my own!" cried Orion, raising his father's hand to
his lips. "But think, picture to yourself, how Paula and I would reign
in this house, and how another generation would grow up in it worthy of
the great Mukaukas and his ancestors!"

"I see it, I see it," murmured the sick man sinking back on his pillows,
unconscious.

Philippus was immediately called in, and, with him, little Mary came
weeping into the room. The physician's efforts to revive the sufferer
were presently successful; again the sick man opened his eyes, and spoke
more distinctly and loudly than before:

"There is a perfume of musk. It is the fragrance that heralds the Angel
of Death."

After this he lay still and silent for a long time. His eyes were
closed, but his brows were knit and showed that he was thinking with a
painful effort. At length, with a sigh, he said, almost inaudibly:
"So it was and so it is: The Greek oppressed my people with arbitrary
cruelty as if we were dogs; the Moslem, too, is a stranger, but he is
just. That which happened it was out of my power to prevent; and it is
well, it is very well that it turned out so.--Very well," he repeated
several times, and then he shivered and said with a groan:

"My feet are so cold! But never mind, never mind, I like to be cool."

The leech and the deaconess at once set to work to heat blocks of wood
to warm his feet; the sick man looked up gratefully and went on: "At
church, in the House of God, I have often found it deliciously cool and
to-day it is the Church that eases my death-bed by her pardon. Do you,
my Son, be faithful to her. No member of our house should ever be an
apostate. As to the new faith--it is overspreading land after land with
incredible power; ambition and covetousness are driving thousands into
its fold. But we--we are faithful to Christ Jesus, we are no traitors.
If I, I the Mukaukas, had consented to go over to the Khaliff I might
have been a prince in purple, and have governed my own country in his
name. How many have deserted to the Moslems! And the temptation will
come to you, too, and their faith offers much that is attractive to the
crowd. They imagine a Paradise full of unspeakably alluring joys--but
we, my son--we shall meet again in our own, shall we not?"

"Yes, yes, Father!" cried the young man. "I will remain a Christian,
staunch and true..."

"That is right," interrupted the sick man. He was determined to forget
that his son wished to marry a Melchite and went on quickly: "Paula....
But no more of that. Remain faithful to your own creed--otherwise....
However, child, seek your own road; you are--but you will walk in the
right way, and it is because I know that, know it surely, that I can die
so calmly.

"I have provided abundantly for your temporal welfare. I have been a
good husband, a faithful father, have I not, O Saviour?--Have I not,
Neforis? And that which is my best and surest comfort is that for many
long years I have administered justice in this land, and never, never
once--and Thou my Refuge and Comforter art my witness!--never once
consciously or willingly have I been an unrighteous judge. Before me the
poor were equal with the rich, the powerful with the helpless widow.
Who would have dared...." Here he broke off; his eyes, wandering feebly
round the room, fell on Mary who had sunk on her knees, opposite to
Orion on the other side of the bed. The dying man, who had thus summed
up the outcome of a long and busy life, ceased his reflections, and
when the child saw that he was vainly trying to turn his powerless
head towards her, she threw her arms round him with passionate grief;
unscared by his fixed gaze or the altered hue of his beloved face, she
kissed his lips and cheeks, exclaiming:

"Grandfather, dear grandfather, do not leave us; stay with us, pray,
pray stay with us!"

Something faintly resembling a smile parted his parched lips, and all
the tenderness with which his soul was overflowing for this sweet young
bud of humanity would have found expression in his voice but that he
could only mutter huskily:

"Mary, my darling! For your sake I should be glad to live a long while
yet, a very long while; but the other world--I am standing already on
its threshold. Good-bye--I must indeed say good-bye."

"No, no--I will pray; oh! I will pray so fervently that you may get well
again!" cried the child. But he replied:

"Nay, nay. The Saviour is already taking me by the hand. Farewell, and
again farewell. Did you bring Paula? I do not see her. Did you bring
Paula with you, sweetheart? She--did she leave us in anger? If she only
knew; ah! your Paula has treated us ill." The child's heart was still
full of the horrible crime which had so revolted her truthful nature,
and which had deprived her of rest all through an evening, a long
night and a morning; she laid her little head close to that of the old
man--her dearest and best friend. For years he had filled her father's
place, and now he was dying, leaving her forever! But she could not let
him depart with a false idea of the woman whom she worshipped with all
the fervor of her child's heart; in a subdued voice, but with eager
feeling, she said, close to his ear:

"But Grandfather, there is one thing you must know before the Saviour
takes you away to be happy in Heaven. Paula told the truth, and never,
never told a lie, not even for Hiram's sake. An empty gold frame hung to
her necklace and no gem at all. Whatever Orion may say, I saw it myself
and cannot be mistaken, as truly as I hope to see you and my poor father
in heaven! And Katharina, too, thought better of it, and confessed to me
just now that she had committed a great sin and had borne false witness
before the judges to please her dear Orion. I do not know what Hiram
had done to offend him; but on the strength of Katharina's evidence the
judges condemned him to death. But Paula--you must understand that Paula
had nothing, positively nothing whatever to do with the stealing of the
emerald."

Orion, kneeling there, was condemned to hear every word the little
girl so vehemently whispered, and each one pierced his heart like a
dagger-thrust. Again and again he felt inclined to clutch at her across
the bed and fling her on the ground before his father's eyes; but grief
and astonishment seemed to have paralyzed his whole being; he had not
even the power to interrupt her with a single word.

She had spoken, and all was told.

He clung to the couch like a shattered wretch; and when his father
turned his eyes on him and gasped out: "Then the Court--our Court
of justice pronounced an unrighteous sentence?" he bowed his head in
contrition.

The dying man murmured even less articulately and incoherently than
before: "The gem--the hanging--you, you perhaps--was it you? that
emerald--I cannot..."

Orion helped his father in his vain efforts to utter the dreadful words.
Sooner would he have died with the old man than have deceived him in
such a moment; he replied humbly and in a low voice:

"Yes, Father--I took it. But as surely as I love you and my mother this,
the first reckless act of my life, which has brought such horrors in its
train... Shall be the last," he would have said; but the words "I
took it," had scarcely passed his lips when his father was shaken by
a violent trembling, the expression of his eyes changed fearfully, and
before the son had spoken his vow to the end the unhappy father was, by
a tremendous effort, sitting upright. Loud sobs of penitence broke from
the young man's heaving breast, as the Mukaukas wrathfully exclaimed, in
thick accents, as quickly as the heavy, paralyzed tongue would allow:

"You, you! A disgrace to our ancient and blameless Court! You?--Away
with you! A thief, an unjust judge, a false witness,--and the only
descendant of Menas! If only these hands were able--you--you--Go,
villain!" And with this wild outcry, George, the gentle and just
Mukaukas, sank back on his pillows; his bloodshot eyes were staring,
fixed on vacancy; his gasping lips repeated again and again, but less
and less audibly the one word "Villain;" his swollen fingers clutched
at the light coverlet that lay over him; a strange, shrill wheezing
came through his open mouth, and the heavy corpse of the great dignitary
fell, like a falling palm-tree, into Orion's arms.

Orion started up, his eyes inflamed, his hair all dishevelled, and shook
the dead man as though to compel him back to life again, to hear his
oath and accept his vow, to see his tears of repentance, to pardon him
and take back the name of infamy which had been his parting word to his
loved and spoilt child.

In the midst of this wild outbreak the physician came back, glanced at
the dead man's distorted features, laid a hand on his heart, and said
with solemn regret as he led little Mary away from the couch:

"A good and just man is gone from the land of the living."

Orion cried aloud and pushed away Mary, who had stolen close to him;
for, young as she was, she felt that it was she who had brought the
worst woe on her uncle, and that it was her part to show him some
affection.

She ran then to her grandmother; but she, too, put her aside and fell on
her knees by the side of her wretched son to weep with him; to console
him who was inconsolable, and in whom, a few minutes since, she had
hoped to find her own best consolation; but her fond words of motherly
comfort found no echo in his broken spirit.




CHAPTER XVI.

When Philippus had parted from Paula he had told her that the Mukaukas
might indeed die at any moment, but that it was possible that he might
yet struggle with death for weeks to come. This hope had comforted her;
for she could not bear to think that the only true friend she had had
in Memphis, till she had become more intimate with the physician, should
quit the world forever without having heard her justification.
Nothing could be more unlikely than that any one in Neforis'
household--excepting her little grandchild should ever remember her with
kindness; and she scarcely desired it; but she rebelled against the idea
of forfeiting the respect she had earned, even in the governor's house.
If her friend should succeed in prolonging her uncle's life, by a
confidential interview with him she might win back his old affection and
his good opinion.

Her new home she felt was but a resting-place, a tabernacle in the
desert-journey of her solitary pilgrimage, and she here meant to
avail herself of the information she had gathered from her Melchite
dependents. Hope had now risen supreme in her heart over grief
and disappointment. Orion's presence alone hung like a threatening
hail-cloud over the sprouting harvest of her peace of mind. And yet,
next to the necessity of waiting at Memphis for the return of her
messenger, nothing tied her to the place so strongly as her interest
in watching the future course of his life, at any rate from a
distance. What she felt for him-and she told herself it was deep
aversion-nevertheless constituted a large share of her inner life,
little as she would confess it to herself.

Her new hosts had received her as a welcome guest, and they certainly
did not seem to be poor. The house was spacious, and though it was old
and unpretentious it was comfortable and furnished with artistic taste.
The garden had amazed her by the care lavished on it; she had seen
a hump-backed gardener and several children at work in it. A strange
party-for every one of them, like their chief, was in some way deformed
or crippled.

The plot of ground--which extended towards the river to the road-way
for foot passengers, vehicles and the files of men towing the
Nile-boats--was but narrow, and bounded on either side by extensive
premises. Not far from the spot where it lay nearest to the river was
the bridge of boats connecting Memphis with the island of Rodah. To
the right was the magnificent residence--a palace indeed--belonging
to Susannah; to the left was an extensive grove, where tall palms,
sycamores with spreading foliage, and dense thickets of blue-green
tamarisk trees cast their shade. Above this bower of splendid shrubs and
ancient trees rose a long, yellow building crowned with a turret; and
this too was not unknown to her, for she had often heard it spoken of
in her uncle's house, and had even gone there now and then escorted by
Perpetua. It was the convent of St. Cecilia, the refuge of the last
nuns of the orthodox creed left in Memphis; for, though all the other
sisterhoods of her confession had long since been banished, these had
been allowed to remain in their old home, not only because they were
famous sick-nurses, a distinction common to all the Melchite orders,
but even more because the decaying municipality could not afford to
sacrifice the large tax they annually paid to it. This tax was the
interest on a considerable capital bequeathed to the convent by a
certain wise predecessor of the Mukaukas', with the prudent proviso,
ratified under the imperial seal of Theodosius II., that if the convent
were at any time broken up, this endowment, with the land and buildings
which it likewise owed to the generosity of the same benefactor, should
become the property of the Christian emperor at that time reigning.

Mukaukas George, notwithstanding his well-founded aversion for
everything Melchite, had taken good care not to press this useful
Sisterhood too hardly, or to deprive his impoverished capital of its
revenues only to throw them into the hands of the wealthy Moslems. The
title-deed on which the Sisters relied was good; and the governor,
who was a good lawyer as well as a just man, had not only left them
unmolested, but in spite of his fears--during the last few years--for
his own safety, had shown himself no respecter of persons by defending
their rights firmly and resolutely against the powerful patriarch of the
Jacobite Church. The Senate of the ancient capital naturally, approved
his course, and had not merely suffered the heretic Sisterhood to
remain, but had helped and encouraged it.

The Jacobite clergy of the city shut their eyes, and only opened them to
watch the convent at Easter-tide; for on the Saturday before Easter, the
nuns, in obedience to an agreement made before the Monophysite Schism,
were required to pay a tribute of embroidered vestments to the head of
the Christian Churches, with wine of the best vintages of Kochome
near the Pyramid of steps, and a considerable quantity of flowers and
confectionary. So the ancient coenobium of women was maintained, and
though all Egypt was by this time Jacobite or Moslem, and many of the
older Sisters had departed this life within the last year, no one had
thought of enquiring how it was that the number of the nuns remained
still the same, till the Jacobite archbishop Benjamin filled the
patriarchal throne of Alexandria in the place of the Melchite Cyrus.

To Benjamin the heretical Sisters at Memphis--the hawks in a dove-cote,
as he called them--were an offence, and he thought that the deed might
bear a new interpretation: that as there was no longer a Christian
emperor, and as the word "Christian" was used in the document, if the
convent were broken up the property should pass into the hands of the
only Christian magnate then existing in the country: himself, namely,
and his Church. The ill-feeling which the Patriarch fostered against the
Mukaukas had been aggravated to hostility by their antagonism on this
matter.

A musical dirge now fell on Paula's ear from the convent chapel. Was
the worthy Mother Superior dead? No, this lament must be for some other
death, for the strange skirling wail of the Egyptian women came up to
her corner window from the road, from the bridge, and from the boats on
the river. No Jacobite of Memphis would have dared to express her grief
so publicly for the death of a Melchite; and as the chorus of voices
swelled, the thought struck her with a chill that it must be her uncle
and friend who had closed his weary eyes in death.

It was with deep emotion and many tears that she perceived how sincerely
the death of this righteous man was bewailed by all his fellow-citizens.
Yes, he only, and no other Egyptian, could have called forth this great
and expressive regret. The wailing women in the road were daubing the
mud of the river on their foreheads and bosoms; men were standing
in large groups and beating their heads and breasts with passionate
gestures. On the bridge of boats the men would stop others, and from
thence, too, piercing shrieks came across to her.

At last Philippus came in and confirmed her fears. The governor's death
had shocked him no less than it did her, and he had to tell Paula all he
knew of the dead man's last hours.

"Still, one good thing has come out of this misery," he said. "There
is nothing so comforting as the discovery that we have been deceived in
thinking ill of a man and of his character. This Orion, who has sinned
so basely against himself and against you, is not utterly reprobate."

"Not?" interrupted Paula. "Then he has taken you in too!"

"Taken me in?" said the leech. "Hardly, I think. I have, alas! stood
by many a death-bed; for I am too often sent for when Death is already
beckoning the sick man away. I have met thousands of mourners in these
melancholy scenes, which, I can assure you, are the very best school
for training any one who desires to search the hearts of his
fellow-creatures. By the bed of death, or in the mart, where everything
is a question of Mine and Thine, it is easy to see how some--we for
instance--are as careful to hide from the world all that is great and
noble in us as others are to conceal what is petty and mean--we read
men's hearts as an open page. From my observations of the dying and of
those who sorrow for them, I, who am not Menander not Lucian, could draw
a series of portraits which should be as truthful likenesses as though
the men had turned themselves inside out before me."

"That a dying man should show himself as he really is I can well
believe," replied Paula. "He need have no further care for the opinions
of others; but the mourners? Why, custom requires them to assume an air
of grief and to shed tears."

"Very true; regret repeats itself by the side of the dead," replied
the physician. "But the chamber of the dying is like a church. Death
consecrates it, and the man who stands face to face with death often
drops the mask by which he cheats his fellows. There we may see faces
which you would shudder to look on, but others, too, which merely to see
is enough to make us regard the degenerate species to which we belong
with renewed respect."

"And you found such a comforting vision in Orion,--the thief, the false
witness, the corrupt judge!" exclaimed Paula, starting up in indignant
astonishment.

"There! you see," laughed Philippus. "Just like a woman! A little
juggling, and lo! what was only rose color is turned to purple. No. The
son of the Mukaukas has not yet undergone such a dazzling change of hue;
but he has a feeling and impressible heart--and I hold even that in
high esteem. I have no doubt that he loved his father deeply, nay
passionately; though I have ample reason to believe him capable of the
very worst. So long as I was present at the scene of death the father
and son were parting in all friendship and tenderness, and when the good
old man's heart had ceased to beat I found Orion in a state which is
only possible to have when love has lost what it held dearest."

"All acting!" Paula put in.

"But there was no audience, dear friend. Orion would not have got up
such a performance for his mother and little Mary."

"But he is a poet--and a highly-gifted one too. He sings beautiful songs
of his own invention to the lyre; his ecstatic and versatile mind works
him up into any frame of feeling; but his soul is perverted; it is
soaked in wickedness as a sponge drinks up water. He is a vessel full
of beautiful gifts, but he has forfeited all that was good and noble in
him--all!"

The words came in eager haste from her indignant lips. Her cheeks glowed
with her vehemence, and she thought she had won over the physician; but
he gravely shook his head, and said:

"Your righteous anger carries you too far. How often have you blamed me
for severity and suspicions but now I have to beg you to allow me to ask
your sympathy for an experience to which you would probably have raised
no objection the day before yesterday:

"I have met with evil-doers of every degree. Think, for instance, how
many cases of wilful poisoning I have had to investigate."

"Even Homer called Egypt the land of poison," exclaimed Paula. "And
it seems almost incredible that Christianity has not altered it in the
least. Kosmas, who had seen the whole earth, could nowhere find more
malice, deceit, hatred, and ill-will than exist here."

"Then you see in what good schools my experience of the wickedness
of men has ripened," said Philippus smiling, "and they have taught
me chiefly that there is never a criminal, a sinner, or a scapegrace,
however infamous he may be, however cruel or lost to virtue, in whom
some good quality or other may not be discovered.--Do you remember
Nechebt, the horrible woman who poisoned her two brothers and her own
father? She was captured scarcely three weeks ago; and that very monster
in human form could almost die of hunger and thirst for the sake of her
rascally son, who is a common soldier in the imperial army; at last she
took to concocting poisons, not to improve her own wretched condition,
but to send the shameless wretch means for a fresh debauch. I have known
a thousand similar cases, but I will only mention that of one of the
wildest and blood-thirstiest of robbers, who had evaded the vigilance of
the watch again and again, but at last fell into their hands--and how?
Because he had heard that his old mother was ill and he longed to see
the withered old woman once more and give her a kiss, since he was her
own child! In the same way Orion, however reprobate we may think him,
has at any rate one characteristic which we must approve of: a tender
affection for his father and mother. Your sponge is not utterly steeped
in wickedness; there are still some pores, some cells which resist it;
and if in him, as in so many others, the heart is one of them, then I
say hopefully, like Horace the Roman: 'Nil desperandum.' It would be
unjust to give him up altogether for lost."

To this assurance Paula found no answer; indeed, it struck her that--if
Orion had told her the truth--it was only to please his mother that
he had asked Katharina to marry him, while she herself occupied his
heart.--The physician, wishing to change the subject, was about to speak
again of the death of the Mukaukas, when one of the crippled serving
girls came to announce a woman who asked to speak with Paula. A few
minutes later she was clasped in the embrace of her faithful old friend
and nurse, who rejoiced as heartily, laughing and crying for sheer
delight, as if no tidings of misfortune had reached her; while Paula,
though so much younger, was cut to the heart, and could not shake off
the spell of her grief.

Perpetua understood this and owed her no grudge for the coolness with
which she met her joyful excitement.

She told Paula that she had been well treated in her hot cell, and that
about half an hour since Orion himself, the young Master now, had opened
the door of her prison. He had been very gracious to her, but looked
so pale and sad. The overbearing young man was quite altered; his eyes,
which were dim with weeping, had moved her, Perpetua, to tears. She
trusted that God would forgive him for his sins against herself and
Paula; he must have been possessed by some evil demon; he had not been
at all like himself; for he had a kind, warm heart, and though he had
been so hard and unjust yesterday to poor Hiram he had made it up to him
the first thing this morning, and had not only let him out of prison
but had sent him and his son home to Damascus with large gifts and two
horses. Nilus had told her this. He who hoped to be forgiven by his
neighbor must also be ready to forgive. The great Augustine, even, had
been no model of virtue in his youth and yet he had become a shining
light in the Church; and now the son of the Mukaukas would tread in his
father's footsteps. He was a handsome, engaging man, who would be the
joy of their hearts yet, they might be very sure. Why, he had been as
grave and as solemn as a bishop to-day; perhaps he had already turned
over a new leaf. He himself had put her into his mother's chariot and
desired the charioteer to drive her hither: what would Paula say to
that? Her things were to be given over to her to-morrow morning, and
packed under her own eyes, and sent after her. Nilus, the treasurer, had
come with her to deliver a message to Paula; but he had gone first to
the convent.

Paula desired the old woman to go thither and fetch him; as soon as
Perpetua had left the room, she exclaimed:

"There, you see, is some one who is quite of your opinion. What
creatures we are! Last evening my good Betta would have thought no pit
of hell too deep for our enemy, and now? To be led to a chariot by such
a fine gentleman in person is no doubt flattering; and how quickly the
old body has forgotten all her grievances, how soothed and satisfied
she is by the gracious permission to pack her precious and cherished
possessions with her own hands.--You told me once that the Jacobites had
made a Saint Orion out of the pagan god Osiris, and my old Betta sees a
future Saint Augustine in the governor's son. I can see that she already
regards him as her tutelary patron, and when we get back to Syria, she
will be begging me to join her in a pilgrimage to his shrine!"

"And you will perhaps consent," replied the physician, to whom Paula at
this moment, for the first time since his heart had glowed with love
for her, did not seem to be quite what a man looks for in the woman he
adores. Hitherto he had seen and heard nothing that was not high-minded
and worthy of her; but her last words had, been spoken with vehement and
indignant irony--and in Philip's opinion irony, blame which was intended
to wound and not to improve its object, was unbecoming in a noble woman.
The scornful laugh, with which she had triumphantly ended her speech,
had opened as it were a wide abyss between his mind and hers. He, as
he freely confessed to himself, was of a coarser and humbler grain than
Paula, and he was apt to be satirical oftener than was right. She had
been wont to dislike this habit in him; he had been glad that she did;
it answered to the ideal he had formed of what the woman he loved should
be. But now she had turned satirical; and her irony was no jest of the
lips. It sprang, full of passion, from her agitated soul; this it was
that grieved the leech who knew human nature, and at the same time
roused his apprehensions. Paula read his disapproval in his face, and
felt that there was a deep significance in his words, "And you will
perhaps consent."

"Men are vexed," thought she, "when, after they have decisively
expressed an opinion, we women dare unhesitatingly to assert a different
one," so, as she would on no account hurt the feelings of the friend to
whom she owed so much, she said kindly:

"I do not care to enquire into the meaning of your strange
prognostication. Thank God, by your kindness and care I have severed
every tie that could have bound me to my poor uncle's son!--Now we will
drop the subject; we have said too much about him already."

"That is quite my opinion," replied Philippus. "And, indeed, I would beg
you quite to forget my 'perhaps.' I live wholly in the present and am no
prophet; but I foresee, nevertheless, that Orion will make every effort,
cost what it may...."

"Well?"

"To approach you again, to win your forgiveness, to touch your heart,
to...."

"Let him dare" exclaimed Paula lifting her hand with a threatening
gesture.

"And when he, gifted as he is in every way, has found his better self
again and can come forward purified and worthy of the approbation of the
best...."

"Still I will never, never forget how he has sinned and what he brought
upon me!--Do you think that I have already forgotten your conversation
with Neforis? You ask nothing of your friends but honest feeling akin
to your own,--and what is it that repels me from Orion but feeling?
Thousands have altered their behavior, but--answer me frankly--surely
not what we mean by their feeling?"

"Yes, that too," said the leech with stern gravity. "Feeling, too, may
change. Or do you range yourself on the side of the Arab merchant
and his fellow-Moslems, who regard man as the plaything of a blind
Fate?--But our spiritual teachers tell us that the evil to which we are
predestined, which is that born into the world with us, may be averted,
turned and guided to good by what they call spiritual regeneration. But
who that lives in the tumult of the world can ever succeed in 'killing
himself' in their sense of the word, in dying while yet he lives, to be
born again, a new man? The penitent's garb does not suit the stature of
an Orion; however, there is for him another way of returning to the path
he has lost. Fortune has hitherto offered her spoilt favorite so much
pleasure, that sheer enjoyment has left him no time to think seriously
