crying: 'Oh, it is ravishing! What a coincidence!' and pointing to her
son, as if the similarity in colours had been a mere chance instead of a
contrivance of hers.

Then, with the most gracious deference in the world, so as not to hurt
the hairdresser's feelings, she showed my head, and begged permission to
touch up her niece's, kissing her as she did so. Then she signed to the
Prince to hold her little hand-mirror, and he obeyed, kneeling on one
knee before Mademoiselle; while the Queen, with hands that really were
more dexterous than those of any one I ever saw, excepting my mother,
dealt with her niece's hair, paying compliments in her son's name all
the time, and keeping him in check with her eye. She contrived to work
in some of her own jewels, rubies and diamonds, to match the
scarlet, black and white. I have since found the scene mentioned in
Mademoiselle's own memoirs, but she did not see a quarter of the humour
of it. She was serene in the certainty that her aunt was paying court
to her, and the assurance that her cousin was doing the same, though she
explains that, having hopes of the Emperor, and thinking the Prince a
mere landless exile, she only pitied him. Little did she guess how he
laughed at her, his mother, and himself, most of all at her airs, while
his mother, scolding him all the time, joined in the laugh, though she
always maintained that Mademoiselle, in spite of her overweening conceit
and vanity, would become an excellent and faithful wife, and make her
husband's interests her own.

'Rather too much so,' said the Prince, shrugging his shoulders; 'we know
what the Margaret of Anjou style of wife can do for a King of England.'

However, as he always did what any one teased him about, if it were not
too unpleasant, and as he was passionately fond of his mother, and as
amused by playing on the vanity of la grande Mademoiselle, he acted his
part capitally. It was all in dumb show, for he really could not speak
French at that time, though he could understand what was said to
him. He, like a good many other Englishmen, held that the less they
assimilated themselves to their French hosts, the more they showed their
hopes of returning home, and it was not till after his expedition to
Scotland that he set himself to learn the language.

Queen Henrietta's skill in the toilette was noted. She laughingly said
that if everything else failed her she should go into business as a
hairdresser, and she had hardly completed her work, before a message was
brought from Queen Anne to desire to see Mademoiselle in her full dress.

I do not know what would have become of me, if my good-natured royal
godmother, who never forgot anybody, had not packed me into a carriage
with some of the ladies who were accompanying Mademoiselle. That lady
had a suit of her own, and went about quite independently of her father
and her stepmother, who, though a Princess of Lorraine, was greatly
contemned and slighted by the proud heiress.

I was put au courant with all this by the chatter of the ladies in the
coach. I did no know them, and in the dark they hardly knew who was
there. Men with flambeaux ran by the side of the carriage, and now and
then the glare fell across a smiling face, glanced on a satin dress, or
gleamed back from some jewels; and then we had a long halt in the court
of the Tuileries, while Mademoiselle went to the Queen-Regent to be
inspected. We waited a long time, and I heard a great deal of gossip
before we were again set in motion, and when once off we soon found
ourselves in the court of the Hotel de Choisy, where we mounted the
stairs in the rear of Mademoiselle, pausing on the way through the
anteroom, in order to give a final adjustment to her head-dress before
a large mirror, the Prince of Wales standing obediently beside her,
waiting to hand her into the room, so that the two black, white, and
carnation figures were reflected side by side, which was, I verily
believe, the true reason of her stopping there, for Queen Henrietta's
handiwork was too skilful to require retouching. Prince Rupert was close
by, to act as interpreter, his tall, powerful figure towering above them
both, and his dark eyes looking as if his thoughts were far off, yet
keeping in control the young Prince's great inclination to grimace
and otherwise make game of Mademoiselle's magnificent affectations and
condescensions.

I was rather at a loss, for the grand salon was one sea of feathers,
bright satins and velvets, and curled heads, and though I tried to come
in with Mademoiselle's suite I did not properly belong to it, and my
own party were entirely lost to me. I knew hardly any one, and was quite
unaccustomed to the great world, so that, though the Prince's dame de
compagnie was very kind, I seemed to belong to no one in that great
room, where the ladies were sitting in long rows, and the gentlemen
parading before them, paying their court to one after another, while the
space in the middle was left free for some distinguished pair to dance
the menuet de la cour.

The first person I saw, whom I knew, was the Duchess of Longueville,
more beautiful than when I had met her before as Mademoiselle de
Bourbon, perfectly dazzling, indeed, with her majestic bearing and
exquisite complexion, but the face had entirely lost that innocent,
wistful expression that had so much enchanted me before. Half a dozen
gentlemen were buzzing round her, and though I once caught her eye she
did not know me, and no wonder, for I was much more changed than she
was. However, there I stood forlorn, in an access of English shyness,
not daring to take a chair near any of the strangers, and looking in
vain for my mother or one of my brothers.

'Will not Madame take a seat beside me?' said a kind voice. 'I think I
have had the honour of making her acquaintance,' she added, as our eyes
met; 'it is the Gildippe of happier times.'

Then I knew her for Mademoiselle d'Argennes, now duchess of Montausieur,
the same who had been so kind to me at the Hotel de Rambouillet on my
first arrival at Paris. Most gladly did I take my seat by her as an old
friend, and I learned from her that her mother was not present, and
she engaged me to go and see her at the Hotel de Rambouillet the next
morning, telling me that M. de Solivet had spoken of me, and that Madame
de Rambouillet much wished to see me. Then she kindly told me the names
of many of the persons present, among whom were more gens de la robe
than it was usual for us of the old nobility to meet. They were indeed
ennobled, and thus had no imposts to pay, but that did not put them on a
level with the children of crusaders. So said my mother and her friends,
but I could not but be struck with the fine countenance and grave
collected air of the President Matthieu de Mole, who was making his how
to the hostess.

Presently, in the violet robes of a Bishop, for which he looked much
too young, there strolled up a keen-faced man with satirical eyes, whom
Madame de Montausieur presented as 'Monseigneur le Coadjuteur.' This was
the Archbishop of Corinth, Paul de Gondi, Coadjutor to his uncle, the
Archbishop of Paris. I think he was the most amusing talker I ever
heard, only there was a great spice of malice in all that he said--or
did not say; and Madame de Montausier kept him in check, as she well
knew how to do.

At last, to my great joy, I saw my brother walking with a young man in
the black dress of an advocate. He came up to me and the Duchess bade me
present him, declaring herself delighted to make the acquaintance of a
brave English cavalier, and at the same time greeting his companion as
Monsieur Darpent. Eustace presently said that my mother had sent him in
quest of me, and he conducted me through the salon to another apartment,
where the ladies, as before, sat with their backs to the wall, excepting
those who were at card-tables, a party having been made up for Monsieur.
On my way I was struck both with the good mien and good sense of the
young lawyer, who still stood conversing with my brother after I had
been restored to my mother. The cloud cleared up from Annora's face as
she listened, making her look as lovely and as animated as when she
was in English company. The conversation was not by any means equally
pleasing to my mother, who, on the first opportunity, broke in with 'My
son,' and sent my brother off in search of some distinguished person
to whom she wished to speak, and she most expressingly frowned off his
former companion, who would have continued the conversation with my
sister and me, where upon Nan's face, which was always far too like a
window, became once more gloomy.

When we went home, it appeared that my mother was will satisfied that
I should be invited to the Hotel de Rambouillet. It was a distinguished
thing to have the entree there, though for her part she thought it very
wearisome to have to listen to declamations about she knew not what; and
there was no proper distinction of ranks kept up, any more than at the
Hotel de Choisy, where one expected it. And, after all, neither Monsieur
nor Madame de Rambouillet were of the old noblesse. The Argennes, like
the Rambouillets, only dated from the time of the League, when they had
in private confirmed the sentence of death on the Duke of Guise, which
had been carried out by his assassination. Strange to look at the
beautiful and gentle Julie, and know her to be sprung from such a stem!

Then my mother censured Eustace for bad taste in talking over his case
with his lawyer in public. He laughed, and assured her that he had never
even thought of his suit, but had been discussing one of the pictures on
the walls, a fine Veronese--appealing to me if it were not so; but
she was not satisfied; she said he should not have encouraged the
presumption of that little advocate by presenting him to his sisters.

Eustace never attempted argument with her, but went his own way; and
when Annora broke out with something about Mr. Hyde and other lawyers,
such as Harry Merrycourt, being company for any one in London, she was
instantly silenced or presuming to argue with her elders.

I had a happy morning with Mesdames de Rambouillet and De Montausier,
who showed the perfect union of mother and daughter.

In the little cabinet where Madame de Rambouillet read and studied so
much in order to be able to fill her eminent position, she drew out
from me all my story and all my perplexities, giving me advice as a wise
woman of my own church alone could do, and showing me how much I might
still do in my life at Paris. She advised me, as I had been put under
Father Vincent's guidance, to seek him at the Church of St. Sulpice,
where, on certain days of the week, he was accessible to ladies
wishing to undertake pious works. For the rest, she said that a little
resolution on my part would enable me to reserve the early part of the
day for study and the education of my son; and she fully approved of my
giving the evenings to society, and gave me at once the entree to her
circle. She insisted that I should remain on that day and dine with her,
and Madame de Montausier indited two charming billets, which were sent
to invite our family to join us there in the evening.

'It will not be a full circle,' she said; 'but I think your brother
treats as a friend a young man who is there to make his first essai.'

'M. Darpent?' I asked; and I was told that I was right, and that the
young advocate had been writing a discourse upon Cicero which he was to
read aloud to the fair critics and their friends. Madame de Montausier
added that his father was a counselor in the Parliament, who had
originally been a Huguenot, but had converted himself with all his
family, and had since held several good appointments. She thought the
young man, Clement Darpent, likely to become a man of mark, and she
did not like him the less for having retained something of the Huguenot
gravity.

The dinner was extremely pleasant; we followed it up by a walk in the
beautifully laid out gardens; and after we had rested, the reception
began, but only in the little green cabinet, as it was merely a select
few who were to be admitted to hear the young aspirant. I watched
anxiously for the appearance of my family, and presently in came Eustace
and Annora. My mother had the migraine, and my brother had taken upon
him, without asking leave, to carry off my sister!

I had never seen her look so well as she did, with that little spirit of
mischief upon her, lighting her beautiful eyes and colouring her cheeks.
Madame de Rambouillet whispered to me that she was a perfect nymph, with
her look of health and freshness. Then M. Darpent came in, and his grave
face blushed with satisfaction as he saw his friend, my Lord Walwyn,
present.

His was a fine face, though too serious for so young a man. It was a
complete oval, the hair growing back on the forehead, and the beard
being dark and pointed, the complexion a clear pale brown, the eyes with
something of Italian softness in them, rather than of French vivacity,
the brows almost as if drawn with a pencil, the mouth very grave and
thoughtful except when lighted by a smile of unusual sweetness. As a
lawyer, his dress was of plain black with a little white collar fastened
by two silken tassels (such as I remember my Lord Falkland used to
wear). It became him better than the gay coats of some of our nobles.

The circle being complete by this time, the young orator was placed in
the midst, and began to read aloud his manuscript, or rather to recite
it, for after the fire of his subject began to animate him, he seldom
looked at the paper.

It was altogether grand and eloquent discourse upon the loyalty
and nobility of holding with unswerving faith to the old laws and
constitutions of one's country against all fraud, oppression, and wrong,
tracing how Cicero's weak and vain character grew stronger at the call
of patriotism, and how eagerly and bravely the once timid man finally
held out his throat for the knife. It might be taken as the very highest
witness to the manner in which he had used his divine gift of rhetoric,
that Fulvia's first thought was to show her bitter hatred by piercing
his eloquent tongue! 'Yes, my friends,' he concluded, with his eyes
glancing round, 'that insult to the dead was the tribute of tyranny to
virtue!'

Annora's hands were clasped, her cheeks were flushed, her eyes glanced
with the dew of admiration, and there were others who were carried along
by the charm of the young orator's voice and enthusiasm; but there were
also anxious glances passing, especially between the divine Arthenice
and her son-in-law, M. de Montausier, and when there had been time for
the compliments the discourse merited to be freely given, Madame
de Rambouillet said: 'My dear friend, the tribute may be indeed the
highest, but it can scarcely be the most appreciable either by the
fortunate individual or his friends. I therefore entreat that the most
eloquent discourse of our youthful Cicero of admires who have listened
to it.'

Everybody bowed assent, but the young man himself began, with some
impetuosity: 'Madame will believe me that I had not the slightest
political intention. I spoke simply as a matter of history.'

'I am perfectly aware of it, Monsieur,' returned the Marquise; 'but all
the world does not understand as well as I do how one may be carried
away by the fervour of imagination to identify oneself and one's
surroundings with those of which one speaks.'

'Madame is very severe on the absent,' said M. Darpent.

'Monsieur thinks I have inferred more treason than he has spoken,' said
Madame de Rambouillet gaily. 'Well, be it so; I am an old woman, and
you, my friend, have your career yet to come, and I would have you
remember that though the great Cesar be dead, yet the bodkin was not in
his time.'

'I understand, Madame, after the lion comes the fox. I thank you for
your warning until the time--'

'Come, come, we do not intend to be all undone in the meantime,'
exclaimed Madame de Rambouillet. 'Come, who will give us a vaudeville or
something joyous to put out the grand serious, and send us home gay. My
dear Countess,' and she turned to a bright-looking young lady, 'relate
to us, I entreat of you, one of your charming fairy tales.'

And the Countess d'Aulnoy, at her request, seated herself in a large
arm-chair, and told us with infinite grace the story I have so often
told you, my grandchildren, of the White Cat and the three princes.




CHAPTER XIV. -- COURT APPOINTMENT



The expected descent on the Isle of Wight did not take place, for though
Prince Rupert was High Admiral, so large a portion of the fleet was
disaffected that it was not possible to effect anything. Before long,
he went back to the ships he had at Helvoetsluys, taking the Prince of
Wales with him. My brother Walwyn yielded to an earnest entreaty that he
would let us take care of him at Paris till there was some undertaking
really in hand. Besides, he was awaiting the issue of his cause
respecting the Ribaumont property in Picardy, to which the Count de
Poligny set up a claim in right of a grant by King Henry III. in the
time of the League. It must be confessed that the suit lingered a
good deal, in spite of the zeal of the young advocate, M. Clement
Darpent,--nay, my mother ad my brother De Solivet sometimes declared,
because of his zeal; for the Darpent family were well known as inclined
to the Fronde party.

They had been Huguenots, but had joined the Church some twenty years
before, as it was said, because of the increased disabilities of
Huguenots in the legal profession, and it was averred that much of the
factious Calvinist leaven still hung about them. At this time I never
saw the parents, but Eustace had contracted a warm friendship with
the son, and often went to their house. My mother fretted over this
friendship far more, as Annora used to declare, than if he had been
intimate with the wildest of the roistering cavaliers, or the most
dissipated of the petits maitres of Paris. But Eustace was a man now,
made older than his twenty-five years by what he had undergone, and
though always most respectful to my mother, he could not but follow his
own judgment and form his own friendships. And my mother's dislike to
having Clement Darpent at the Hotel de Nidemerle only led to Walwyn's
frequenting the Maison Darpent more than he might have done if he could
have seen his friend at home without vexing her.

I do not think that he much liked the old Counsellor, but he used to say
that Madame Darpent was one of the most saintly beings he had ever seen.
She had one married daughter, and two more, nuns at Port Royal, and she
was with them in heart, the element of Augustinianism in the Jansenist
teaching having found a responsive chord in her soul from her Calvinist
education. She spent her whole time, even while living in the world, in
prayers, pious exercises, and works of charity, and she would fain have
induced her son to quit secular life and become one of those recluses
who inhabited the environs of Port Royal, and gave themselves to labour
of mind and of hand, producing works of devotion and sacred research,
and likewise making a paradise of the dreary unwholesome swamp in which
stood Port Royal des Champs. Clement Darpent had, however, no vocation
for such a life, or rather he was not convinced in his own mind that
it was expedient for him. He was eight or nine years old when the
conversion of his family had taken place, and his mother had taught him
carefully her original faith. Her conversation had been, no one could
doubt, most hearty and sincere, and her children had gone with her in
all simplicity; but the seeds she had previously sown in her son's mind
sprang up as he grew older, and when Eustace became his friend, he was,
though outwardly conforming, restless and dissatisfied, by no means
disposed to return to Calvinism, and yet with too much of the old leaven
in him to remain contented in the Church. He was in danger of throwing
off all thought of faith and of Divine things in his perplexity, and I
know many of our advisers would say this was best, provided he died at
last in the bosom of the Catholic Church; but I can never think so, and,
as things stood, Eustace's advice aided him in remaining at that time
where he was, a member of the Church. My brother himself was, my mother
ardently hoped, likely to join our communion. The Abbe Walter Montagu
who had himself been a convert, strove hard to win him over, trying to
prove to him that the English Church was extinct, stifled by her own
rebellious heretic children, so soon as the grace that was left in her
began to work so as to bring her back to Catholic doctrine and practice.
His argument was effectual with many of our fugitives, but not with my
brother. He continued still to declare that he believed that his Church
was in the course of being purified, and would raised up again at last;
and his heart was too loyal to desert her, any more than his King,
because of her misfortunes. No one shall ever make me believe that he
was wrong. As to Annora, I believe she would rather have been a Huguenot
outright than one of us, and she only half trusted me for a long time.

We had begun to settle down into regular habits; indeed, except for the
evenings, our days were almost more alike than when in the country. I
had gone, as Madame de Rambouillet had advised me, to Father Vincent,
and he introduced me to the excellent Madame Goussault, who had the
sweetest old face I ever saw. She made me a member of the society for
attending the poor in the Hotel Dieu, and my regular days were set
apart, twice a week, for waiting on the sick. We all wore a uniform
dress of dark stuff, with a white apron and tight white cap, and, unless
we were very intimate, were not supposed to recognize one another.

There was good reason for this. At the next bed to that of my patient
there was a lady most tenderly, if a little awkwardly, bathing a poor
man's face with essences. Her plump form, beautiful hands, and slightly
Spanish accent, could only belong to one person, I thought, but I
could hardly believe it, and I turned my eyes away, and tried the more
diligently to teach my poor ignorant patient the meaning of his Pater
and Ave, when suddenly there was a burst of scolding and imprecation
from the other bed. The essence had gone into the man's eye, and he,
a great rough bucheron, was reviling the awkwardness and meddling of
ladies in no measured terms, while his nurse stood helplessly wringing
her white hands, imploring his pardon, but quite unaware of what was to
be done. Happily, I had a sponge and some warm water near, and I ran up
with it and washed the man's eyes, while the lady thanked me fervently,
but the man growled out:

'That is better; if women will come fussing over us with what they don't
understand--You are the right sort; but for her--'

'Do not stop him,' hastily said the lady, with her hand on my arm. 'I
love it! I rejoice in it! Do not deprive me, for the love of Heaven!'

I knew who she was then, and Madame de Montausier told me I was right;
but that I must keep the secret; and so I did, till after Queen Anne
of Austria was dead. She would not let her rank deprive her of the
privilege of waiting on the poor, unknown and unthanked; and many hours,
when those who blamed her for indolence supposed her to be in bed, she
was attending the hospital.

Cecile was never strong enough to give her attendance there, but she
made clothes which were given to the patients when they came out. We
spent our mornings much as of old; the two elder children generally went
to mass with me at St. Germain l'Auxerrois, and if the day were fine,
I would take them for a few turns in the Tuileries Gardens afterwards
before I taught them their little lessons, and gave my orders to the
servants.

Then all the family met a breakfast, after which Gaspard had half an
hour more of study with the Abbe, for he was beginning Latin, and was a
very promising scholar. He prepared his tasks with me before breakfast,
and got on admirably.

Then, unless I had to be at the hospital, we sat together at our
embroidery--Cecile, Annora, and I--while the Abbe read to us. It was
very hard to poor Nan to sit still, work, and listen. She had been used
to such an active unsettled life during the war, and had been put to so
many shifts, having at times for months together to do servant's work,
that she knew not how to be quiet. Embroidery seemed to her useless,
when she had cooked and washed, and made broths, and scraped lint for
the wounded, and she could not care for the history of the Romans, even
when Eustace had given her his word they were not Roman Catholics.

She used to say she had the cramp, or that her foot was asleep, and rush
off to play with the children, or to see if my mother wanted her. My
mother did not care for the reading, but she did want Nan to learn to
sit in her chair and embroider, like a demoiselle bien elevee, instead
of a wild maiden of the civil wars. However, my mother spent most of her
day in waiting on the Queen of England, who was very fond of her, and
liked to have her at her levee, so that we really saw very little of
her.

My brother, when not needed by his Queen, nor in consultation with
the cavaliers, or with his lawyers, would often join in our morning's
employment. He was not strong, and he liked to recline in a lager chair
that I kept ready for him, and listen while the Abbe read, or sometimes
discuss with him questions that arose in the reading, and this was a
great relief to Nan, who seldom declared that her feet tingled when he
was there.

After our dinner we either walked in the garden where the children
played, or went out to make visits. In the evening there were
