have been turmoiled and anxious, and dangerous it is to fall asleep in
such case with empty stomach."

"_Gratias agimus quam maximas, Domine reverendissime_," replied the
brethren, departing in their due order.

But the Sub-Prior remained behind, and falling on his knees before the
Abbot, as he was about to withdraw, craved him to hear under the seal
of confession the adventures of the day. The reverend Lord Abbot yawned,
and would have alleged fatigue; but to Father Eustace, of all men,
he was ashamed to show indifference in his religious duties. The
confession, therefore, proceeded, in which Father Eustace told all the
extraordinary circumstances which had befallen him during the journey.
And being questioned by the Abbot, whether he was not conscious of any
secret sin, through which he might have been subjected for a time to the
delusions of evil spirits, the Sub-Prior admitted, with frank avowal,
that he thought he might have deserved such penance for having judged
with unfraternal rigour of the report of Father Philip the Sacristan.

"Heaven," said the penitent, "may have been willing to convince me, not
only that he can at pleasure open a communication betwixt us and beings
of a different, and, as we word it, supernatural class, but also to
punish our pride of superior wisdom, or superior courage, or superior
learning."

It is well said that virtue is its own reward; and I question if duty
was ever more completely recompensed, than by the audience which
the reverend Abbot so unwillingly yielded to the confession of the
Sub-Prior. To find the object of his fear shall we say, or of his envy,
or of both, accusing himself of the very error with which he had so
tacitly charged him, was a corroboration of the Abbot's judgment,
a soothing of his pride, and an allaying of his fears. The sense
of triumph, however, rather increased than diminished his natural
good-humour; and so far was Abbot Boniface from being disposed to
tyrannize over his Sub-Prior in consequence of this discovery, that
in his exhortation he hovered somewhat ludicrously betwixt the natural
expression of his own gratified vanity, and his timid reluctance to hurt
the feelings of Father Eustace.

"My brother," said he, _ex cathedra_, "it cannot have escaped your
judicious observation, that we have often declined our own judgment
in favour of your opinion, even about those matters which most nearly
concerned the community. Nevertheless, grieved would we be, could you
think that we did this, either because we deemed our own opinion less
pregnant, or our wit more shallow, than that of our brethren. For it
was done exclusively to give our younger brethren, such as your much
esteemed self, my dearest brother, that courage which is necessary to a
free deliverance of your opinion,--we ofttimes setting apart our proper
judgment, that our inferiors, and especially our dear brother the
Sub-Prior, may be comforted and encouraged in proposing valiantly his
own thoughts. Which our deference and humility may, in some sort, have
produced in your mind, most reverend brother, that self-opinion of parts
and knowledge, which hath led unfortunately to your over-estimating your
own faculties, and thereby subjecting yourself, as is but too visible,
to the japes and mockeries of evil spirits. For it is assured that
Heaven always holdeth us in the least esteem when we deem of ourselves
most highly, and also, on the other hand, it may be that we have
somewhat departed from what became our high seat in this Abbey, in
suffering ourselves to be too much guided, and even, as it were,
controlled, by the voice of our inferior. Wherefore," continued the
Lord Abbot, "in both of us such faults shall and must be amended--you
hereafter presuming less upon your gifts and carnal wisdom, and I taking
heed not so easily to relinquish mine own opinion for that of one
lower in place and in office. Nevertheless, we would not that we should
thereby lose the high advantage which we have derived, and may yet
derive, from your wise counsels, which hath been so often recommended to
us by our most reverend Primate. Wherefore, on affairs of high moment,
we will call you to our presence in private, and listen to your opinion,
which, if it shall agree with our own, we will deliver to the Chapter
as emanating directly from ourselves; thus sparing you, dearest brother,
that seeming victory which is so apt to engender spiritual pride, and
avoiding ourselves the temptation of falling into that modest facility
of opinion, whereby our office is lessened and our person (were that of
consequence) rendered less important in the eyes of the community over
which we preside."

Notwithstanding the high notions which, as a rigid Catholic, Father
Eustace entertained of the sacrament of confession, as his Church calls
it, there was some danger that a sense of the ridiculous might have
stolen on him, when he heard his Superior, with such simple cunning,
lay out a little plan for availing himself of the Sub-Prior's wisdom and
experience, while he should take the whole credit to himself. Yet his
conscience immediately told him he was right.

"I should have thought more," he reflected, "of the spiritual Superior,
and less of the individual. I should have spread my mantle over the
frailties of my spiritual father, and done what I might to support his
character, and, of course, to extend his utility among the brethren, as
well as with others. The Abbot cannot be humbled, but what the community
must be humbled in his person. Her boast is, that over all her children,
especially over those called to places of distinction, she can diffuse
those gifts which are necessary to render them illustrious."

Actuated by these sentiments, Father Eustace frankly assented to the
charge which his Superior, even in that moment of authority, had rather
intimated than made, and signified his humble acquiescence in any mode
of communicating his counsel which might be most agreeable to the Lord
Abbot, and might best remove from himself all temptation to glory in
his own wisdom. He then prayed the reverend Father to assign him such
penance as might best suit his offence, intimating, at the same time,
that he had already fasted the whole day.

"And it is that I complain of," answered the Abbot, instead of giving
him credit for his abstinence; "it is these very penances, fasts, and
vigils, of which we complain; as tending only to generate airs and fumes
of vanity, which, ascending from the stomach into the head, do but puff
us up with vain-glory and self-opinion. It is meet and beseeming
that novices should undergo fasts and vigils; for some part of every
community must fast, and young stomachs may best endure it. Besides, in
them it abates wicked thoughts, and the desire of worldly delights. But,
reverend brother, for those to fast who are dead and mortified to the
world, as I and thou, is work of supererogation, and is but the matter
of spiritual pride. Wherefore, I enjoin thee, most reverend brother, go
to the buttery and drink two cups at least of good wine, eating withal a
comfortable morsel, such as may best suit thy taste and stomach. And
in respect that thine opinion of thy own wisdom hath at times made thee
less conformable to, and companionable with, the weaker and less learned
brethren, I enjoin thee, during the said repast, to choose for thy
companion, our reverend brother Nicolas, and without interruption or
impatience, to listen for a stricken hour to his narration, concerning
those things which befel in the times of our venerable predecessor,
Abbot Ingilram, on whose soul may Heaven have mercy! And for such holy
exercises as may farther advantage your soul, and expiate the faults
whereof you have contritely and humbly avowed yourself guilty, we
will ponder upon that matter, and announce our will unto you the next
morning."

It was remarkable, that after this memorable evening, the feelings of
the worthy Abbot towards his adviser were much more kindly and friendly
than when he deemed the Sub-Prior the impeccable and infallible person,
in whose garment of virtue and wisdom no flaw was to be discerned. It
seemed as if this avowal of his own imperfections had recommended Father
Eustace to the friendship of the Superior, although at the same time
this increase of benevolence was attended with some circumstances,
which, to a man of the Sub-Prior's natural elevation of mind and temper,
were more grievous than even undergoing the legends of the dull and
verbose Father Nicolas. For instance, the Abbot seldom mentioned him to
the other monks, without designing him our beloved Brother Eustace, poor
man!--and now and then he used to warn the younger brethren against the
snares of vainglory and spiritual pride, which Satan sets for the more
rigidly righteous, with such looks and demonstrations as did all but
expressly designate the Sub-Prior as one who had fallen at one time
under such delusions. Upon these occasions, it required all the votive
obedience of a monk, all the philosophical discipline of the schools,
and all the patience of a Christian, to enable Father Eustace to
endure the pompous and patronizing parade of his honest, but somewhat
thick-headed Superior. He began himself to be desirous of leaving the
Monastery, or at least he manifestly declined to interfere with its
affairs, in that marked and authoritative manner, which he had at first
practised.


       *       *       *       *       *

Chapter the Eleventh.


    You call this education, do you not?
    Why 'tis the forced march of a herd of bullocks
    Before a shouting drover. The glad van
    Move on at ease, and pause a while to snatch
    A passing morsel from the dewy greensward,
    While all the blows, the oaths, the indignation,
    Fall on the croupe of the ill-fated laggard
    That cripples in the rear.
                                          OLD PLAY.

Two or three years glided on, during which the storm of the approaching
alteration in church government became each day louder and more
perilous. Owing to the circumstances which we have intimated in the
end of the last chapter, the Sub-Prior Eustace appeared to have altered
considerably his habits of life. He afforded, on all extraordinary
occasions, to the Abbot, whether privately, or in the assembled Chapter,
the support of his wisdom and experience; but in his ordinary habits he
seemed now to live more for himself, and less for the community, than
had been his former practice.

He often absented himself for whole days from the convent; and as the
adventure of Glendearg dwelt deeply on his memory, he was repeatedly
induced to visit that lonely tower, and to take an interest in the
orphans who had their shelter under its roof. Besides, he felt a deep
anxiety to know whether the volume which he had lost, when so strangely
preserved from the lance of the murderer, had again found its way
back to the Tower of Glendearg. "It was strange," he thought, "that a
spirit," for such he could not help judging the being whose voice he had
heard, "should, on the one side, seek the advancement of heresy, and, on
the other, interpose to save the life of a zealous Catholic priest."

But from no inquiry which he made of the various inhabitants of the
Tower of Glendearg could he learn that the copy of the translated
Scriptures, for which he made such diligent inquiry, had again been seen
by any of them.

In the meanwhile, the good father's occasional visits were of no
small consequence to Edward Glendinning and to Mary Avenel. The former
displayed a power of apprehending and retaining whatever was taught him,
which tilled Father Eustace with admiration. He was at once acute and
industrious, alert and accurate; one of those rare combinations of
talent and industry, which are seldom united.

It was the earnest desire of Father Eustace that the excellent qualities
thus early displayed by Edward should be dedicated to the service of
the Church, to which he thought the youth's own consent might be easily
obtained, as he was of a calm, contemplative, retired habit, and seemed
to consider knowledge as the principal object, and its enlargement as
the greatest pleasure, in life. As to the mother, the Sub-Prior had
little doubt that, trained as she was to view the monks of Saint
Mary's with such profound reverence, she would be but too happy in an
opportunity of enrolling one of her sons in its honoured community. But
the good Father proved to be mistaken in both these particulars.

When he spoke to Elspeth Glendinning of that which a mother best loves
to hear--the proficiency and abilities of her son--she listened with a
delighted ear. But when Father Eustace hinted at the duty of dedicating
to the service of the Church, talents which seemed fitted to defend and
adorn it, the dame endeavoured always to shift the subject; and when
pressed farther, enlarged on her own incapacity, as a lone woman, to
manage the feu; on the advantage which her neighbours of the township
were often taking of her unprotected state, and on the wish she had that
Edward might fill his father's place, remain in the tower, and close her
eyes.

On such occasions the Sub-Prior would answer, that even in a worldly
point of view the welfare of the family would be best consulted by one
of the sons entering into the community of Saint Mary's, as it was not
to be supposed that he would fail to afford his family the important
protection which he could then easily extend towards them. What could
be a more pleasing prospect than to see him high in honour? or what more
sweet than to have the last duties rendered to her by a son, reverend
for his holiness of life and exemplary manners? Besides, he endeavoured
to impress upon the dame, that her eldest son, Halbert, whose bold
temper and headstrong indulgence of a wandering humour, rendered him
incapable of learning, was, for that reason, as well as that he was her
eldest born, fittest to bustle through the affairs of the world, and
manage the little fief.

Elspeth durst not directly dissent from what was proposed, for fear of
giving displeasure, and yet she always had something to say against it.
Halbert, she said, was not like any of the neighbour boys--he was taller
by the head, and stronger by the half, than any boy of his years within
the Halidome. But he was fit for no peaceful work that could be devised.
If he liked a book ill, he liked a plough or a pattle worse. He had
scoured his father's old broadsword--suspended it by a belt round his
waist, and seldom stirred without it. He was a sweet boy and a gentle
if spoken fair, but cross him and he was a born devil. "In a word," she
said, bursting into tears, "deprive me of Edward, good father, and ye
bereave my house of prop and pillar; for my heart tells me that Halbert
will take to his father's gates, and die his father's death."

When the conversation came to this crisis, the good-humoured monk
was always content to drop the discussion for the time, trusting some
opportunity would occur of removing her prejudices, for such he thought
them, against Edward's proposed destination.

When, leaving the mother, the Sub-Prior addressed himself to the son,
animating his zeal for knowledge, and pointing out how amply it might
be gratified should he agree to take holy orders, he found the same
repugnance which Dame Elspeth had exhibited. Edward pleaded a want of
sufficient vocation to so serious a profession--his reluctance to
leave his mother, and other objections, which the Sub-Prior treated as
evasive.

"I plainly perceive," he said one day, in answer to them, "that the
devil has his factors as well as Heaven, and that they are equally, or,
alas! the former are perhaps more active, in bespeaking for their master
the first of the market. I trust, young man, that neither idleness, nor
licentious pleasure, nor the love of worldly gain and worldly grandeur,
the chief baits with which the great Fisher of souls conceals his hook,
are the causes of your declining the career to which I would incite you.
But above all I trust--above all I hope--that the vanity of superior
knowledge--a sin with which those who have made proficiency in learning
are most frequently beset--has not led you into the awful hazard of
listening to the dangerous doctrines which are now afloat concerning
religion. Better for you that you were as grossly ignorant as the beasts
which perish, that that the pride of knowledge should induce you to lend
an ear to the voice of heretics." Edward Glendinning listened to the
rebuke with a downcast look, and failed not, when it was concluded,
earnestly to vindicate himself from the charge of having pushed his
studies into any subjects which the Church inhibited; and so the monk
was left to form vain conjectures respecting the cause of his reluctance
to embrace the monastic state.

It is an old proverb, used by Chaucer, and quoted by Elizabeth, that
"the greatest clerks are not the wisest men;" and it is as true as if
the poet had not rhymed, or the queen reasoned on it. If Father Eustace
had not had his thoughts turned so much to the progress of heresy, and
so little to what was passing in the tower, he might have read, in the
speaking eyes of Mary Avenel, now a girl of fourteen or fifteen, reasons
which might disincline her youthful companion towards the monastic vows.
I have said, that she also was a promising pupil of the good father,
upon whom her innocent and infantine beauty had an effect of which he
was himself, perhaps, unconscious. Her rank and expectations entitled
her to be taught the arts of reading and writing;--and each lesson which
the monk assigned her was conned over in company with Edward, and by
him explained and re-explained, and again illustrated, until she became
perfectly mistress of it.

In the beginning of their studies, Halbert had been their school
companion. But the boldness and impatience of his disposition soon
quarrelled with an occupation in which, without assiduity and unremitted
attention, no progress was to be expected. The Sub-Prior's visits were
at regular intervals, and often weeks would intervene between them, in
which case Halbert was sure to forget all that had been prescribed
for him to learn, and much which he had partly acquired before. His
deficiencies on these occasions gave him pain, but it was not of that
sort which produces amendment.

For a time, like all who are fond of idleness, he endeavoured to detach
the attention of his brother and Mary Avenel from their task, rather
than to learn his own, and such dialogues as the following would ensue:

"Take your bonnet, Edward, and make haste--the Laird of Colmslie is at
the head of the glen with his hounds."

"I care not, Halbert," answered the younger brother; "two brace of dogs
may kill a deer without my being there to see them, and I must help Mary
Avenel with her lesson."

"Ay! you will labour at the monk's lessons till you turn monk yourself,"
answered Halbert.--"Mary, will you go with me, and I will show you the
cushat's nest I told you of?"

"I cannot go with you, Halbert," answered Mary, "because I must study
this lesson--it will take me long to learn it--I am sorry I am so dull,
for if I could get my task as fast as Edward, I should like to go with
you."

"Should you indeed?" said Halbert; "then I will wait for you--and, what
is more, I will try to get my lesson also."

With a smile and a sigh he took up the primer, and began heavily to
con over the task which had been assigned him. As if banished from the
society of the two others, he sat sad and solitary in one of the deep
window-recesses, and after in vain struggling with the difficulties
of his task, and his disinclination to learn it, he found himself
involuntarily engaged in watching the movements of the other two
students, instead of toiling any longer.

The picture which Halbert looked upon was delightful in itself, but
somehow or other it afforded very little pleasure to him. The
beautiful girl, with looks of simple, yet earnest anxiety, was bent
on disentangling those intricacies which obstructed her progress to
knowledge, and looking ever and anon to Edward for assistance, while,
seated close by her side, and watchful to remove every obstacle from her
way, he seemed at once to be proud of the progress which his pupil made,
and of the assistance which he was able to render her. There was a bond
betwixt them, a strong and interesting tie, the desire of obtaining
knowledge, the pride of surmounting difficulties.

Feeling most acutely, yet ignorant of the nature and source of his own
emotions, Halbert could no longer endure to look upon this quiet scene,
but, starting up, dashed his book from him, and exclaimed aloud, "To the
fiend I bequeath all books, and the dreamers that make them!--I would
a score of Southrons would come up the glen, and we should learn how
little all this muttering and scribbling is worth."

Mary Avenol and his brother started, and looked at Halbert with
surprise, while he went on with great animation, his features swelling,
and the tears starting into his eyes as he spoke.--"Yes, Mary--I wish
a score of Southrons came up the glen this very day; and you should see
one good hand, and one good sword, do more to protect you, than all
the books that were ever opened, and all the pens that ever grew on a
goose's wing."

Mary looked a little surprised and a little frightened at his vehemence,
but instantly replied affectionately, "You are vexed, Halbert, because
you do not get your lesson so fast as Edward can; and so am I, for I am
as stupid as you--But come, and Edward shall sit betwixt us and teach
us."

"He shall not teach _me_," said Halbert, in the same angry mood; "I
never can teach _him_ to do any thing that is honourable and manly, and
he shall not teach _me_ any of his monkish tricks.--I hate the monks,
with their drawling nasal tone like so many frogs, and their long
black petticoats like so many women, and their reverences, and their
lordships, and their lazy vassals that do nothing but peddle in the mire
with plough and harrow from Yule to Michaelmas. I will call none lord,
but him who wears a sword to make his title good; and I will call none
man, but he that can bear himself manlike and masterful."

"For Heaven's sake, peace, brother!" said Edward; "if such words were
taken up and reported out of the house, they would be our mother's
ruin."

"Report them yourself, then, and they will be _your_ making, and
nobody's marring save mine own. Say that Halbert Glendinning will never
be vassal to an old man with a cowl and shaven crown, while there are
twenty barons who wear casque and plume that lack bold followers. Let
them grant you these wretched acres, and much meal may they bear you to
make your _brachan_." He left the room hastily, but instantly returned,
and continued to speak with the same tone of quick and irritated
feeling. "And you need not think so much, neither of you, and especially
you, Edward, need not think so much of your parchment book there, and
your cunning in reading it. By my faith, I will soon learn to read as
well as you; and--for I know a better teacher than your grim old
monk, and a better book than his printed breviary; and since you like
scholarcraft so well, Mary Avenel, you shall see whether Edward or I
have most of it." He left the apartment, and came not again.

"What can be the matter with him?" said Mary, following Halbert with her
eyes from the window, as with hasty and unequal steps he ran up the
wild glen--"Where can your brother be going, Edward?--what book?--what
teacher does he talk of?"

"It avails not guessing," said Edward. "Halbert is angry, he knows not
why, and speaks of he knows not what; let us go again to our lessons,
and he will come home when he has tired himself with scrambling among
the crags as usual."

But Mary's anxiety on account of Halbert seemed more deeply rooted.
She declined prosecuting the task in which they had been so pleasingly
engaged, under the excuse of a headache; nor could Edward prevail upon
her to resume it again that morning.

Meanwhile Halbert, his head unbonneted, his features swelled with
jealous anger, and the tear still in his eye, sped up the wild and upper
extremity of the little valley of Glendearg with the speed of a roebuck,
choosing, as if in desperate defiance of the difficulties of the way,
the wildest and most dangerous paths, and voluntarily exposing himself a
hundred times to dangers which he might have escaped by turning a little
aside from them. It seemed as if he wished his course to be as straight
as that of the arrow to its mark.

He arrived at length in a narrow and secluded _cleuch_, or deep ravine,
which ran down into the valley, and contributed a scanty rivulet to the
supply of the brook with which Glendearg is watered. Up this he sped
with the same precipitate haste which had marked his departure from
the tower, nor did he pause and look around until he had reached the
fountain from which the rivulet had its rise.

Here Halbert stopt short, and cast a gloomy, and almost a frightened
glance around him. A huge rock rose in front, from a cleft of which grew
a wild holly-tree, whose dark green branches rustled over the spring
which arose beneath. The banks on either hand rose so high, and
approached each other so closely, that it was only when the sun was at
its meridian height, and during the summer solstice, that its rays could
reach the bottom of the chasm in which he stood. But it was now summer,
and the hour was noon, so that the unwonted reflection of the sun was
dancing in the pellucid fountain.

"It is the season and the hour," said Halbert to himself; "and now I--I
might soon become wiser than Edward with all his pains! Mary should see
whether he alone is fit to be consulted, and to sit by her side, and
hang over her as she reads, and point out every word and every letter.
And she loves me better than him--I am sure she does--for she comes of
noble blood, and scorns sloth and cowardice.--And do I myself not stand
here slothful and cowardly as any priest of them all?--Why should I fear
to call upon this form--this shape?--Already have I endured the vision,
and why not again? What can it do to me, who am a man of lith and limb,
and have by my side my father's sword? Does my heart beat--do my hairs
bristle, at the thought of calling up a painted shadow, and how should
I face a band of Southrons in flesh and blood? By the soul of the first
Glendinning, I will make proof of the charm!"

He cast the leathern brogue or buskin from his right foot, planted
himself in a firm posture, unsheathed his sword, and first looking
around to collect his resolution, he bowed three times deliberately
towards the holly-tree, and as often to the little fountain, repeating
at the same time, with a determined voice, the following rhyme:

  "Thrice to the holly brake--
  Thrice to the well:--
  I bid thee awake,
  White Maid of Avenel!

  "Noon gleams on the Lake--
  Noon glows on the Fell--
  Wake thee, O wake,
  White Maid of Avenel!"

These lines were hardly uttered, when there stood the figure of a female
clothed in white, within three steps of Halbert Glendinning.

  "I guess'twas frightful there to see
  A lady richly clad as she--
  Beautiful exceedingly." [Footnote: Coleridge's Christabelle.]

       *       *       *       *      *



Chapter the Twelfth.


  There's something in that ancient superstition,
  Which, erring as it is, our fancy loves.
  The spring that, with its thousand crystal bubbles,
  Bursts from the bosom of some desert rock
  In secret solitude, may well be deem'd
  The haunt of something purer, more refined,
  And mightier than ourselves.
              OLD PLAY.

Young Halbert Glendinning had scarcely pronounced the mystical rhymes,
than, as we have mentioned in the conclusion of the last chapter, an
appearance, as of a beautiful female, dressed in white, stood within two
yards of him. His terror for the moment overcame his natural courage, as
well as the strong resolution which he had formed, that the figure which
he had now twice seen should not a third time daunt him. But it would
seem there is something thrilling and abhorrent to flesh and blood, in
the consciousness that we stand in presence of a being in form like to
ourselves, but so different in faculties and nature, that we can neither
understand its purposes, nor calculate its means of pursuing them.

Halbert stood silent and gasped for breath, his hairs erecting
themselves on his head---his mouth open--his eyes fixed, and, as the
sole remaining sign of his late determined purpose, his sword pointed
towards the apparition. At length with a voice of ineffable sweetness,
the White Lady, for by that name we shall distinguish this being, sung,
or rather chanted, the following lines:--

  "Youth of the dark eye, wherefore didst thou call me?
  Wherefore art thou here, if terrors can appal thee?
  He that seeks to deal with us must know no fear nor failing!
  To coward and churl our speech is dark, our gifts are unavailing.
  The breeze that brought me hither now, must sweep Egyptian ground,
  The fleecy cloud on which I ride for Araby is bound;
  The fleecy cloud is drifting by, the breeze sighs for my stay,
  For I must sail a thousand miles before the close of day."

The astonishment of Halbert began once more to give way to his
resolution, and he gained voice enough to say, though with a faltering
accent, "In the name of God, what art thou?" The answer was in melody of
a different tone and measure:--

  "What I am I must not show--
  What I am thou couldst not know--
  Something betwixt heaven and hell--
  Something that neither stood nor fell--
  Something that through thy wit or will
  May work thee good--may work thee ill.
  Neither substance quite nor shadow,
  Haunting lonely moor and meadow,
  Dancing; by the haunted spring,
  Riding on the whirlwind's wing;
  Aping in fantastic fashion
  Every change of human passion,

  While o'er our frozen minds they pass,
  Like shadows from the mirror'd glass.
  Wayward, fickle is our mood,
  Hovering betwixt bad and good,
  Happier than brief-dated man,
  Living twenty times his span;
  Far less happy, for we have
  Help nor hope beyond the grave!
  Man awakes to joy or sorrow;
  Ours the sleep that knows no morrow.
  This is all that I can show--
  This is all that thou mayest know."

The White Lady paused, and appeared to await an answer; but, as Halbert
hesitated how to frame his speech, the vision seemed gradually to fade,
and became more and more incorporeal. Justly guessing this to be a
symptom of her disappearance, Halbert compelled himself to say,--"Lady,
when I saw you in the glen, and when you brought back the black book of
Mary Avenel, thou didst say I should one day learn to read it."

The White Lady replied,

  "Ay! and I taught thee the word and the spell,
  To waken me here by the Fairies' Well,
  But thou hast loved the heron and hawk,
  More than to seek my haunted walk;
  And thou hast loved the lance and the sword,
  More than good text and holy word;
  And thou hast loved the deer to track,
  More than the lines and the letters black;
  And thou art a ranger of moss and of wood,
  And scornest the nurture of gentle blood."

"I will do so no longer, fair maiden," said Halbert; "I desire to learn;
and thou didst promise me, that when I did so desire, thou wouldst be
my helper; I am no longer afraid of thy presence, and I am no longer
regardless of instruction." As he uttered these words, the figure of
the White Maiden grew gradually as distinct as it had been at first;
and what had well-nigh faded into an ill-defined and colourless shadow,
again assumed an appearance at least of corporeal consistency, although
the hues were less vivid, and the outline of the figure less distinct
and defined--so at least it seemed to Halbert--than those of an ordinary
inhabitant of earth. "Wilt thou grant my request," he said, "fair Lady,
and give to my keeping the holy book which Mary of Avenel has so often
wept for?"

The White Lady replied:

  "Thy craven fear my truth accused,
  Thine idlehood my trust abused;
  He that draws to harbour late,
  Must sleep without, or burst the gate.

  There is a star for thee which burn'd.
  Its influence wanes, its course is turn'd;
  Valour and constancy alone
  Can bring thee back the chance that's flown."

"If I have been a loiterer, Lady," answered young Glendinning, "thou
shalt now find me willing to press forward with double speed. Other
thoughts have filled my mind, other thoughts have engaged my heart,
within a brief period--and by Heaven, other occupations shall
henceforward fill up my time. I have lived in this day the space of
years--I came hither a boy--I will return a man--a man, such as may
converse not only with his own kind, but with whatever God permits to be
visible to him. I will learn the contents of that mysterious volume--I
will learn why the Lady of Avenel loved it--why the priests feared,
and would have stolen it--why thou didst twice recover it from their
hands.--What mystery is wrapt in it?--Speak, I conjure thee!" The lady
assumed an air peculiarly sad and solemn, as drooping her head, and
folding her arms on her bosom, she replied:

  "Within that awful volume lies
  The mystery of mysteries!
  Happiest they of human race,
  To whom God has granted grace

  To read, to fear, to hope, to pray,
  To lift the latch, and force the way;
  And better had they ne'er been born,
  Who read, to doubt, or read to scorn."
