began again to coil up his spires, and prepare himself for fresh
gambols. But the Abbot might still have overcome, by his eloquence and
his entreaties, the malicious designs of the revellers, had not Dame
Magdalen Graeme given loose to the indignation which she had long
suppressed.

"Scoffers," she said, "and men of Belial--Blasphemous heretics, and
truculent tyrants----"

"Your patience, my sister, I entreat and I command you!" said the Abbot;
"let me do my duty--disturb me not in mine office!"

But Dame Magdalen continued to thunder forth her threats in the name
of Popes and Councils, and in the name of every Saint, from St. Michael
downward.

"My comrades!" said the Abbot of Unreason, "this good dame hath not
spoken a single word of reason, and therein may esteem herself free from
the law. But what she spoke was meant for reason, and, therefore, unless
she confesses and avouches all which she has said to be nonsense, it
shall pass for such, so far as to incur our statutes. Wherefore, holy
dame, pilgrim, or abbess, or whatever thou art, be mute with thy mummery
or beware the mill-dam. We will have neither spiritual nor temporal
scolds in our Diocese of Unreason!"

As he spoke thus, he extended his hand towards the old woman, while his
followers shouted, "A doom--a doom!" and prepared to second his purpose,
when lo! it was suddenly frustrated. Roland Graeme had witnessed with
indignation the insults offered to his old spiritual preceptor, but yet
had wit enough to reflect he could render him no assistance, but might
well, by ineffective interference, make matters worse. But when he saw
his aged relative in danger of personal violence, he gave way to the
natural impetuosity of his temper, and, stepping forward, struck his
poniard into the body of the Abbot of Unreason, whom the blow instantly
prostrated on the pavement.




Chapter the Fifteenth.


  As when in tumults rise the ignoble crowd,
  Mad are their motions, and their tongues are loud,
  And stones and brands in rattling furies fly,
  And all the rustic arms which fury can supply--
  Then if some grave and pious man appear,
  They hush their noise, and lend a listening ear.
                                  DRYDEN'S VIRGIL

A dreadful shout of vengeance was raised by the revellers, whose sport
was thus so fearfully interrupted; but for an instant, the want of
weapons amongst the multitude, as well as the inflamed features and
brandished poniard of Roland Graeme, kept them at bay, while the Abbot,
horror-struck at the violence, implored, with uplifted hands, pardon
for blood-shed committed within the sanctuary. Magdalen Graeme alone
expressed triumph in the blow her descendant had dealt to the scoffer,
mixed, however, with a wild and anxious expression of terror for her
grandson's safety. "Let him perish," she said, "in his blasphemy--let
him die on the holy pavement which he has insulted!"

But the rage of the multitude, the grief of the Abbot, the exultation of
the enthusiastic Magdalen, were all mistimed and unnecessary. Howleglas,
mortally wounded as he was supposed to be, sprung alertly up from the
floor, calling aloud, "A miracle, a miracle, my masters! as brave a
miracle as ever was wrought in the kirk of Kennaquhair. And I charge
you, my masters, as your lawfully chosen Abbot, that you touch no one
without my command--You, wolf and bear, will guard this pragmatic youth,
but without hurting him--And you, reverend brother, will, with your
comrades, withdraw to your cells; for our conference has ended like all
conferences, leaving each of his own mind, as before; and if we
fight, both you, and your brethren, and the Kirk, will have the worst
on't--Wherefore, pack up you pipes and begone."

The hubbub was beginning again to awaken, but still Father Ambrose
hesitated, as uncertain to what path his duty called him, whether to
face out the present storm, or to reserve himself for a better moment.
His brother of Unreason observed his difficulty, and said, in a tone
more natural and less affected than that with which he had hitherto
sustained his character, "We came hither, my good sir, more in mirth
than in mischief--our bark is worse than our bite--and, especially, we
mean you no personal harm--wherefore, draw off while the play is good;
for it is ill whistling for a hawk when she is once on the soar, and
worse to snatch the quarry from the ban-dog--Let these fellows once
begin their brawl, and it will be too much for madness itself, let alone
the Abbot of Unreason, to bring them back to the lure."

The brethren crowded around Father Ambrosius, and joined in urging
him to give place to the torrent. The present revel was, they said,
an ancient custom which his predecessors had permitted, and old
Father Nicholas himself had played the dragon in the days of the Abbot
Ingelram.

"And we now reap the fruit of the seed which they have so unadvisedly
sown," said Ambrosius; "they taught men to make a mock of what is
holy, what wonder that the descendants of scoffers become robbers
and plunderers? But be it as you list, my brethren--move towards the
dortour--And you, dame, I command you, by the authority which I have
over you, and by your respect for that youth's safety, that you go with
us without farther speech--Yet, stay--what are your intentions towards
that youth whom you detain prisoner?--Wot ye," he continued, addressing
Howleglas in a stern tone of voice, "that he bears the livery of the
House of Avenel? They who fear not the anger of Heaven, may at least
dread the wrath of man."

"Cumber not yourself concerning him," answered Howleglas, "we know right
well who and what he is."

"Let me pray," said the Abbot, in a tone of entreaty, "that you do him
no wrong for the rash deed--which he attempted in his imprudent zeal."

"I say, cumber not yourself about it, father," answered Howleglas, "but
move off with your train, male and female, or I will not undertake to
save yonder she-saint from the ducking-stool--And as for bearing of
malice, my stomach has no room for it; it is," he added, clapping
his hand on his portly belly, "too well bumbasted out with straw and
buckram--gramercy to them both--they kept out that madcap's dagger as
well as a Milan corslet could have done."

In fact, the home-driven poniard of Roland Graeme had lighted upon the
stuffing of the fictitious paunch, which the Abbot of Unreason wore as a
part of his characteristic dress, and it was only the force of the blow
which had prostrated that reverend person on the ground for a moment.

Satisfied in some degree by this man's assurances, and compelled--to
give way to superior force, the Abbot Ambrosius retired from the Church
at the head of the monks, and left the court free for the revellers
to work their will. But, wild and wilful as these rioters were, they
accompanied the retreat of the religionists with none of those shouts
of contempt and derision with which they had at first hailed them. The
Abbot's discourse had affected some of them with remorse, others with
shame, and all with a transient degree of respect. They remained
silent until the last monk had disappeared through the side-door which
communicated with their dwelling-place, and even then it cost
some exhortations on the part of Howleglas, some caprioles of the
hobby-horse, and some wallops of the dragon, to rouse once more the
rebuked spirit of revelry.

"And how now, my masters?" said the Abbot of Unreason; "and wherefore
look on me with such blank Jack-a-Lent visages? Will you lose your old
pastime for an old wife's tale of saints and purgatory? Why, I thought
you would have made all split long since--Come, strike up, tabor and
harp, strike up, fiddle and rebeck--dance and be merry to-day, and
let care come to-morrow. Bear and wolf, look to your prisoner--prance,
hobby--hiss, dragon, and halloo, boys--we grow older every moment we
stand idle, and life is too short to be spent in playing mumchance."

This pithy exhortation was attended with the effect desired. They
fumigated the Church with burnt wool and feathers instead of incense,
put foul water into the holy-water basins, and celebrated a parody on
the Church-service, the mock Abbot officiating at the altar; they sung
ludicrous and indecent parodies, to the tunes of church hymns; they
violated whatever vestments or vessels belonging to the Abbey they could
lay their hands upon; and, playing every freak which the whim of the
moment could suggest to their wild caprice, at length they fell to
more lasting deeds of demolition, pulled down and destroyed some carved
wood-work, dashed out the painted windows which had escaped former
violence, and in their rigorous search after sculpture dedicated to
idolatry, began to destroy what ornaments yet remained entire upon the
tombs, and around the cornices of the pillars.

The spirit of demolition, like other tastes, increases by indulgence;
from these lighter attempts at mischief, the more tumultuous part of the
meeting began to meditate destruction on a more extended scale--"Let
us heave it down altogether, the old crow's nest," became a general cry
among them; "it has served the Pope and his rooks too long;" and up
they struck a ballad which was then popular among the lower classes.
[Footnote: These rude rhymes are taken, with some trifling alterations,
from a ballad called Trim-go-trix. It occurs in a singular collection,
entitled; "A Compendious Book of Godly and Spiritual Songs, collected
out of sundrie parts of the Scripture, with sundry of other ballatis
changed out of prophane sanges for avoyding of sin and harlotrie, with
Augmentation of sundrie Gude and Godly Ballates. Edinburgh, printed by
Andro Hart." This curious collection has been reprinted in Mr. John.
Grahame Dalyell's Scottish Poems of the 16th century Edin. 1801, 2
vols.]

  "The Paip, that pagan full of pride,
  Hath blinded us ower lang.
  For where the blind the blind doth lead,
  No marvel baith gae wrang.
  Like prince and king,
  He led the ring
  Of all iniquity.
  Sing hay trix, trim-go-trix,
  Under the greenwood tree.

  "The Bishop rich, he could not preach
  For sporting with the lasses;
  The silly friar behoved to fleech
  For awmous as he passes:
  The curate his creed
  He could not read,--
  Shame fa' company!
  Sing hay trix, trim-go-trix,
  Under the greenwood tree."

Thundering out this chorus of a notable hunting song, which had been
pressed into the service of some polemical poet, the followers of the
Abbot of Unreason were turning every moment more tumultuous, and getting
beyond the management even of that reverend prelate himself, when a
knight in full armour, followed by two or three men-at-arms, entered
the church, and in a stern voice commanded them to forbear their riotous
mummery.

His visor was up, but if it had been lowered, the cognizance of the
holly-branch sufficiently distinguished Sir Halbert Glendinning, who, on
his homeward road, was passing through the village of Kennaquhair; and
moved, perhaps, by anxiety for his brother's safety, had come directly
to the church on hearing of the uproar.

"What is the meaning of this," he said, "my masters? are ye Christian
men, and the king's subjects, and yet waste and destroy church and
chancel like so many heathens?"

All stood silent, though doubtless there were several disappointed
and surprised at receiving chiding instead of thanks from so zealous a
protestant.

The dragon, indeed, did at length take upon him to be spokesman, and
growled from the depth of his painted maw, that they did but sweep
Popery out of the church with the besom of destruction.

"What! my friends," replied Sir Halbert Glendinning, "think you this
mumming and masking has not more of Popery in it than have these stone
walls? Take the leprosy out of your flesh, before you speak of purifying
stone walls--abate your insolent license, which leads but to idle vanity
and sinful excess; and know, that what you now practise, is one of
the profane and unseemly sports introduced by the priests of Rome
themselves, to mislead and to brutify the souls which fell into their
net."

"Marry come up--are you there with your bears?" muttered the dragon,
with a draconic sullenness, which was in good keeping with his
character, "we had as good have been Romans still, if we are to have no
freedom in our pastimes!"

"Dost thou reply to me so?" said Halbert Glendinning; "or is there
any pastime in grovelling on the ground there like a gigantic
kail-worm?--Get out of thy painted case, or, by my knighthood, I will
treat you like the beast and reptile you have made yourself."

"Beast and reptile?" retorted the offended dragon, "setting aside your
knighthood, I hold myself as well a born man as thyself."

The Knight made no answer in words, but bestowed two such blows with the
butt of his lance on the petulant dragon, that had not the hoops which
constituted the ribs of the machine been pretty strong, they would
hardly have saved those of the actor from being broken. In all haste the
masker crept out of his disguise, unwilling to abide a third buffet from
the lance of the enraged Knight. And when the ex-dragon stood on the
floor of the church, he presented to Halbert Glendinning the well-known
countenance of Dan of the Howlet-hirst, an ancient comrade of his own,
ere fate had raised him so high above the rank to which he was born.
The clown looked sulkily upon the Knight, as if to upbraid him for his
violence towards an old acquaintance, and Glendinning's own good-nature
reproached him for the violence he had acted upon him.

"I did wrong to strike thee," he said, "Dan; but in truth, I knew thee
not--thou wert ever a mad fellow--come to Avenel Castle, and we shall
see how my hawks fly."

"And if we show him not falcons that will mount as merrily as rockets,"
said the Abbot of Unreason, "I would your honour laid as hard on my
bones as you did on his even now."

"How now, Sir Knave," said the Knight, "and what has brought you
hither?"

The Abbot, hastily ridding himself of the false nose which mystified
his physiognomy, and the supplementary belly which made up his disguise,
stood before his master in his real character, of Adam Woodcock, the
falconer of Avenel.

"How, varlet!" said the Knight; "hast thou dared to come here and
disturb the very house my brother was dwelling in?"

"And it was even for that reason, craving your honour's pardon, that I
came hither--for I heard the country was to be up to choose an Abbot of
Unreason, and sure, thought I, I that can sing, dance, leap backwards
over a broadsword, and am as good a fool as ever sought promotion, have
all chance of carrying the office; and if I gain my election, I may
stand his honour's brother in some stead, supposing things fall roughly
out at the Kirk of Saint Mary's."

"Thou art but a cogging knave," said Sir Halbert, "and well I wot, that
love of ale and brandy, besides the humour of riot and frolic, would
draw thee a mile, when love of my house would not bring thee a yard.
But, go to--carry thy roisterers elsewhere--to the alehouse if they
list, and there are crowns to pay your charges--make out the day's
madness without doing more mischief, and be wise men to-morrow--and
hereafter learn to serve a good cause better than by acting like
buffoons or ruffians."

Obedient to his master's mandate, the falconer was collecting
his discouraged followers, and whispering into their ears--"Away,
away--_tace_ is Latin for a candle--never mind the good Knight's
puritanism--we will play the frolic out over a stand of double ale in
Dame Martin the Brewster's barn-yard--draw off, harp and tabor--bagpipe
and drum--mum till you are out of the church-yard, then let the welkin
ring again--move on, wolf and bear--keep the hind legs till you cross
the kirk-stile, and then show yourselves beasts of mettle--what devil
sent him here to spoil our holiday!--but anger him not, my hearts; his
lance is no goose-feather, as Dan's ribs can tell."

"By my soul," said Dan, "had it been another than my ancient comrade, I
would have made my father's old fox [Footnote: _Fox_, An old-fashioned
broadsword was often so called.] fly about his ears!"

"Hush! hush! man," replied Adam Woodcock, "not a word that way, as you
value the safety of your bones--what man? we must take a clink as it
passes, so it is not bestowed in downright ill-will."

"But I will take no such thing," said Dan of the Howlet-hirst, suddenly
resisting the efforts of Woodcock, who was dragging him out of the
church; when the quick military eye of Sir Halbert Glendinning detecting
Roland Graeme betwixt his two guards, the Knight exclaimed, "So ho!
falconer,--Woodcock,--knave, hast thou brought my Lady's page in mine
own livery, to assist at this hopeful revel of thine, with your wolves
and bears? Since you were at such mummings, you might, if you would,
have at least saved the credit of my household, by dressing him up as a
jackanapes--bring him hither, fellows!"

Adam Woodcock was too honest and downright, to permit blame to light
upon the youth, when it was undeserved. "I swear," he said, "by Saint
Martin of Bullions--" [Footnote: The Saint Swithin, or weeping Saint of
Scotland. If his festival (fourth July) prove wet, forty days of rain
are expected.]

"And what hast thou to do with Saint Martin?"

"Nay, little enough, sir, unless when he sends such rainy days that we
cannot fly a hawk--but I say to your worshipful knighthood, that as I
am, a true man----"

"As you are a false varlet, had been the better obtestation."

"Nay, if your knighthood allows me not to speak," said Adam, "I can hold
my tongue--but the boy came not hither by my bidding, for all that."

"But to gratify his own malapert pleasure, I warrant me," said Sir
Halbert Glendinning--"Come hither, young springald, and tell me whether
you have your mistress's license to be so far absent from the castle, or
to dishonour my livery by mingling in such a May-game?"

"Sir Halbert Glendinning," answered Roland Graeme with steadiness, "I
have obtained the permission, or rather the commands, of your lady, to
dispose of my time hereafter according to my own pleasure. I have been a
most unwilling spectator of this May-game, since it is your pleasure so
to call it; and I only wear your livery until I can obtain clothes which
bear no such badge of servitude."

"How am I to understand this, young man?" said Sir Halbert Glendinning;
"speak plainly, for I am no reader of riddles.--That my lady favoured
thee, I know. What hast thou done to disoblige her, and occasion thy
dismissal?"

"Nothing to speak of," said Adam Woodcock, answering for the boy--"a
foolish quarrel with me, which was more foolishly told over again to
my honoured lady, cost the poor boy his place. For my part, I will say
freely, that I was wrong from beginning to end, except about the washing
of the eyas's meat. There I stand to it that I was right."

With that, the good-natured falconer repeated to his master the whole
history of the squabble which had brought Roland Graeme into disgrace
with his mistress, but in a manner so favourable for the page, that Sir
Halbert could not but suspect his generous motive.

"Thou art a good-natured fellow," he said, "Adam Woodcock."

"As ever had falcon upon fist," said Adam; "and, for that matter, so is
Master Roland; but, being half a gentleman by his office, his blood is
soon up, and so is mine."

"Well," said Sir Halbert, "be it as it will, my lady has acted hastily,
for this was no great matter of offence to discard the lad whom she
had trained up for years; but he, I doubt not, made it worse by his
prating--it jumps well with a purpose, however, which I had in my mind.
Draw off these people, Woodcock,--and you, Roland Graeme, attend me."

The page followed him in silence into the Abbot's house, where, stepping
into the first apartment which he found open, he commanded one of his
attendants to let his brother, Master Edward Glendinning, know that he
desired to speak with him. The men-at-arms went gladly off to join their
comrade, Adam Woodcock, and the jolly crew whom he had assembled at Dame
Martin's, the hostler's wife, and the Page and Knight were left alone in
the apartment. Sir Halbert Glendinning paced the floor for a moment in
silence and then thus addressed his attendant--

"Thou mayest have remarked, stripling, that I have but seldom
distinguished thee by much notice;--I see thy colour rises, but do not
speak till thou nearest me out. I say I have never much distinguished
thee, not because I did not see that in thee which I might well have
praised, but because I saw something blameable, which such praises might
have made worse. Thy mistress, dealing according to her pleasure in her
own household, as no one had better reason or title, had picked thee
from the rest, and treated thee more like a relation than a domestic;
and if thou didst show some vanity and petulance under such distinction,
it were injustice not to say that thou hast profited both in thy
exercises and in thy breeding, and hast shown many sparkles of a gentle
and manly spirit. Moreover, it were ungenerous, having bred thee up
freakish and fiery, to dismiss thee to want or wandering, for showing
that very peevishness and impatience of discipline which arose from thy
too delicate nurture. Therefore, and for the credit of my own household,
I am determined to retain thee in my train, until I can honourably
dispose of thee elsewhere, with a fair prospect of thy going through the
world with credit to the house that brought thee up."

If there was something in Sir Halbert Glendinning's speech which
flattered Roland's pride, there was also much that, according to his
mode of thinking, was an alloy to the compliment. And yet his conscience
instantly told him that he ought to accept, with grateful deference, the
offer which was made him by the husband of his kind protectress; and his
prudence, however slender, could not but admit he should enter the world
under very different auspices as a retainer of Sir Halbert Glendinning,
so famed for wisdom, courage, and influence, from those under which
he might partake the wanderings, and become an agent in the visionary
schemes, for such they appeared to him, of Magdalen, his relative.
Still, a strong reluctance to re-enter a service from which he had been
dismissed with contempt, almost counterbalanced these considerations.

Sir Halbert looked on the youth with surprise, and resumed--"You seem to
hesitate, young man. Are your own prospects so inviting, that you should
pause ere you accept those which I should offer to you? or, must I
remind you that, although you have offended your benefactress, even to
the point of her dismissing you, yet I am convinced, the knowledge that
you have gone unguided on your own wild way, into a world so disturbed
as ours of Scotland, cannot, in the upshot, but give her sorrow and
pain; from which it is, in gratitude, your duty to preserve her, no less
than it is in common wisdom your duty to accept my offered protection,
for your own sake, where body and soul are alike endangered, should you
refuse it."

Roland Graeme replied in a respectful tone, but at the same time with
some spirit, "I am not ungrateful for such countenance as has been
afforded me by the Lord of Avenel, and I am glad to learn, for the
first time, that I have not had the misfortune to be utterly beneath his
observation, as I had thought--And it is only needful to show me how
I can testify my duty and my gratitude towards my early and constant
benefactress with my life's hazard, and I will gladly peril it." He
stopped.

"These are but words, young man," answered Glendinning, "large
protestations are often used to supply the place of effectual service.
I know nothing in which the peril of your life can serve the Lady of
Avenel; I can only say, she will be pleased to learn you have adopted
some course which may ensure the safety of your person, and the weal
of your soul--What ails you, that you accept not that safety when it is
offered you?"

"My only relative who is alive," answered Roland, "at least the only
relative whom I have ever seen, has rejoined me since I was dismissed
from the Castle of Avenel, and I must consult with her whether I can
adopt the line to which you now call me, or whether her increasing
infirmities, or the authority which she is entitled to exercise over me,
may not require me to abide with her."

"Where is this relation?" said Sir Halbert Glendinning.

"In this house," answered the page.

"Go then, and seek her out," said the Knight of Avenel; "more than meet
it is that thou shouldst have her approbation, yet worse than foolish
would she show herself in denying it."

Roland left the apartment to seek for his grandmother; and, as he
retreated, the Abbot entered.

The two brothers met as brothers who loved each other fondly, yet
meet rarely together. Such indeed was the case. Their mutual affection
attached them to each other; but in every pursuit, habit or sentiment,
connected with the discords of the times, the friend and counsellor of
Murray stood opposed to the Roman Catholic priest; nor, indeed, could
they have held very much society together, without giving cause of
offence and suspicion to their confederates on each side. After a close
embrace on the part of both, and a welcome on that of the Abbot, Sir
Halbert Glendinning expressed his satisfaction that he had come in time
to appease the riot raised by Howleglas and his tumultuous followers.

"And yet," he said, "when I look on your garments, brother Edward, I
cannot help thinking there still remains an Abbot of Unreason within the
bounds of the Monastery."

"And wherefore carp at my garments, brother Halbert?" said the Abbot;
"it is the spiritual armour of my calling, and, as such, beseems me as
well as breastplate and baldric becomes your own bosom."

"Ay, but there were small wisdom, methinks, in putting on armour where
we have no power to fight; it is but a dangerous temerity to defy the
foe whom we cannot resist."

"For that, my brother, no one can answer," said the Abbot, "until the
battle be fought; and, were it even as you say, methinks a brave man,
though desperate of victory, would rather desire to fight and fall, than
to resign sword and shield on some mean and dishonourable composition
with his insulting antagonist. But, let not you and I make discord of
a theme on which we cannot agree, but rather stay and partake, though a
heretic, of my admission feast. You need not fear, my brother, that your
zeal for restoring the primitive discipline of the church will, on this
occasion, be offended with the rich profusion of a conventual banquet.
The days of our old friend Abbot Boniface are over; and the Superior of
Saint Mary's has neither forests nor fishings, woods nor pastures, nor
corn-fields;--neither flocks nor herds, bucks nor wild-fowl--granaries
of wheat, nor storehouses of oil and wine, of ale and of mead. The
refectioner's office is ended; and such a meal as a hermit in romance
can offer to a wandering knight, is all we have to set before you. But,
if you will share it with us, we shall eat it with a cheerful heart,
and thank you, my brother, for your timely protection against these rude
scoffers."

"My dearest brother," said the Knight, "it grieves me deeply I cannot
abide with you; but it would sound ill for us both were one of the
reformed congregation to sit down at your admission feast; and, if I
can ever have the satisfaction of affording you effectual protection,
it will be much owing to my remaining unsuspected of countenancing or
approving your religious rites and ceremonies. It will demand whatever
consideration I can acquire among my own friends, to shelter the bold
man, who, contrary to law and the edicts of parliament, has dared to
take up the office of Abbot of Saint Mary's."

"Trouble not yourself with the task, my brother," replied Father
Ambrosius. "I would lay down my dearest blood to know that you defended
the church for the church's sake; but, while you remain unhappily her
enemy, I would not that you endangered your own safety, or diminished
your own comforts, for the sake of my individual protection.--But who
comes hither to disturb the few minutes of fraternal communication which
our evil fate allows us?"

The door of the apartment opened as the Abbot spoke, and Dame Magdalen
entered.

"Who is this woman?" said Sir Halbert Glendinning, somewhat sternly,
"and what does she want?"

"That you know me not," said the matron, "signifies little; I come
by your own order, to give my free consent that the stripling, Roland
Graeme, return to your service; and, having said so, I cumber you no
longer with my presence. Peace be with you!" She turned to go away, but
was stopped by inquiries of Sir Halbert Glendinning.

"Who are you?--what are you?--and why do you not await to make me
answer?"

"I was," she replied, "while yet I belonged to the world, a matron of no
vulgar name; now I am Magdalen, a poor pilgrimer, for the sake of Holy
Kirk."

"Yea," said Sir Halbert, "art thou a Catholic? I thought my dame said
that Roland Graeme came of reformed kin.'

"His father," said the matron, "was a heretic, or rather one who
regarded neither orthodoxy or heresy--neither the temple of the church
or of antichrist. I, too, for the sins of the times make sinners, have
seemed to conform to your unhallowed rites--but I had my dispensation
and my absolution."

"You see, brother," said Sir Halbert, with a smile of meaning towards
his brother, "that we accuse you not altogether without grounds of
mental equivocation."

"My brother, you do us injustice," replied the Abbot; "this woman,
as her bearing may of itself warrant you, is not in her perfect mind.
Thanks, I must needs say, to the persecution of your marauding barons,
and of your latitudinarian clergy."

"I will not dispute the point," said Sir Halbert; "the evils of the time
are unhappily so numerous, that both churches may divide them, and have
enow to spare." So saying, he leaned from the window of the apartment,
and winded his bugle.

"Why do you sound your horn, my brother?" said the Abbot; "we have spent
but few minutes together."

"Alas!" said the elder brother, "and even these few have been sullied
by disagreement. I sound to horse, my brother--the rather that, to avert
the consequences of this day's rashness on your part, requires hasty
efforts on mine.--Dame, you will oblige me by letting your young
relative know that we mount instantly. I intend not that he shall return
to Avenel with me--it would lead to new quarrels betwixt him and my
household; at least to taunts which his proud heart could ill brook,
and my wish is to do him kindness. He shall, therefore, go forward to
Edinburgh with one of my retinue, whom I shall send back to say what
has chanced here.--You seem rejoiced at this?" he added, fixing his eyes
keenly on Magdalen Graeme, who returned his gaze with calm indifference.

"I would rather," she said, "that Roland, a poor and friendless orphan,
were the jest of the world at large, than of the menials at Avenel."

"Fear not, dame--he shall be scorned by neither," answered the Knight.

"It may be," she replied--"it may well be--but I will trust more to his
own bearing than to your countenance." She left the room as she spoke.

The Knight looked after her as she departed, but turned instantly to his
brother, and expressing, in the most affectionate terms, his wishes for
his welfare and happiness, craved his leave to depart. "My knaves," he
said, "are too busy at the ale-stand, to leave their revelry for the
empty breath of a bugle-horn."

"You have freed them from higher restraint, Halbert," answered the
Abbot, "and therein taught them to rebel against your own."

"Fear not that, Edward," exclaimed Halbert, who never gave his brother
his monastic name of Ambrosius; "none obey the command of real duty so
well as those who are free from the observance of slavish bondage."

He was turning to depart, when the Abbot said,--"Let us not yet part, my
brother--here comes some light refreshment. Leave not the house which I
must now call mine, till force expel me from it, until you have at least
broken bread with me."

The poor lay brother, the same who acted as porter, now entered the
apartment, bearing some simple refreshment, and a flask of wine. "He had
found it," he said with officious humility, "by rummaging through every
nook of the cellar."

The Knight filled a small silver cup, and, quaffing it off, asked his
brother to pledge him, observing, the wine was Bacharac, of the first
vintage, and great age.

"Ay," said the poor lay brother, "it came out of the nook which old
brother Nicholas, (may his soul be happy!) was wont to call Abbot
Ingelram's corner; and Abbot Ingelram was bred at the Convent of
Wurtzburg, which I understand to be near where that choice wine grows."

"True, my reverend sir," said Sir Halbert; "and therefore I entreat my
brother and you to pledge me in a cup of this orthodox vintage."

The thin old porter looked with a wishful glance towards the Abbot. "_Do
veniam_," said his Superior; and the old man seized, with a trembling
hand, a beverage to which he had been long unaccustomed; drained the cup
with protracted delight, as if dwelling on the flavour and perfume, and
set it down with a melancholy smile and shake of the head, as if bidding
adieu in future to such delicious potations. The brothers smiled. But
when Sir Halbert motioned to the Abbot to take up his cup and do him
reason, the Abbot, in turn, shook his head, and replied--"This is no
day for the Abbot of Saint Mary's to eat the fat and drink the sweat.
In water from our Lady's well," he added, filling a cup with the limpid
element, "I wish you, brother, all happiness, and above all, a true
sight of your spiritual errors."

"And to you, my beloved Edward," replied Glendinning, "I wish the free
exercise of your own free reason, and the discharge of more important
duties than are connected with the idle name which you have so rashly
assumed."

The brothers parted with deep regret; and yet, each confident in his
opinion, felt somewhat relieved by the absence of one whom he respected
so much, and with whom he could agree so little.

