
The pause that followed was broken by the Earl.

"May I see the letter?"

The Colonel handed it, and tinkled the bell again, more impatiently. At
length steps were heard in the hall, and a servant open'd the door.

"Where is Giles?" ask'd the Colonel. "Why are you taking his place?"

"Giles can't be found, your honor."

"Hey?"

"He's a queer oldster, your honor, an' maybe gone to bed wi' his aches
and pains."

(I knew pretty well that Giles had done no such thing: but be sure I
kept the knowledge safe behind my screen.)

"Then go seek him, and say--No, stop: I can't wait. Order the coach
around at the barbican in twenty minutes from now--twenty minutes, mind,
without fail. And say--'twill save time--the fellow's to drive me to
Mistress Finch's house in St. Thomas' Street--sharp!"

As the man departed on his errand, the Earl laid down His Majesty's
letter.

"Hang the fellow," he said, "if they want it: the blame, if any, will
be theirs. But, in the name of Heaven, Colonel, don't fail in lending me
this thousand men! 'Twill finish the war out of hand."

"I'll do it," answered the Colonel slowly.

"And I'll remember it," said the Earl. "To-morrow, at six o'clock, I set
out."

The two men shook hands on their bargain and left the room, shutting the
door after them.

I crept forth from behind the screen, my heart thumping on my ribs. Thus
far it had been all fear and trembling with me; but now this was chang'd
to a kind of panting joy. 'Twas not that I had spied the prison keys
hanging near the fireplace, nor that behind the screen lay a heap of
the Colonel's riding boots, whereof a pair, ready spurr'd, fitted me
choicely well; but that my ears tingled with news that turn'd my escape
to a matter of public welfare: and also that the way to escape lay
plann'd in my head.

Shod in the Colonel's boots, I advanc'd again to the table. With
sealing-wax and the Governor's seal, that lay handy, I clos'd up the
King's letter, and sticking it in my breast, caught down the bunch of
keys and made for the door.

The hall was void. I snatch'd down a cloak and heavy broad-brimm'd hat
from one of the pegs, and donning them, slipp'd back the bolts of the
heavy door. It opened without noise. Then, with a last hitch of the
cloak, to bring it well about me, I stepp'd forth into the night,
shutting the door quietly on my heels.

My feet were on the pavement of the inner ward. Above, one star
only broke the blackness of the night. Across the court was a sentry
tramping. As I walk'd boldly up, he stopped short by the gate between
the wards and regarded me.

Now was my danger. I knew not the right key for the wicket: and if I
fumbled, the fellow would detect me for certain. I chose one and drew
nearer; the fellow look'd, saluted, stepp'd to the wicket, and open'd it
himself.

"Good night, Colonel!"

I did not trust myself to answer: but passed rapidly through to the
outer ward. Here, to my joy, in the arch'd passage of the barbican gate,
was the carriage waiting, the porter standing beside the door; and
here also, to my dismay, was a torch alight, and under it half a dozen
soldiers chatting. A whisper pass'd on my approach--

"The Colonel!" and they hurried into the guardroom.

"Good evening, Colonel!" The porter bow'd low, holding the door wide.

I pass'd him rapidly, climb'd into the shadow of the coach, and drew a
long breath.

Then ensued a hateful pause, as the great gates were unbarr'd. I gripp'd
ray knees for impatience.

The driver spoke a word to the porter, who came round to the coach door
again.

"To Mistress Finch's, is it not?"

"Ay," I muttered; "and quickly."

The coachman touched up his pair. The wheels mov'd; went quicker. We
were outside the Castle.

With what relief I lean'd back as the Castle gates clos'd behind us! And
with what impatience at our slow pace I sat upright again next minute!
The wheels rumbled over the bridge, and immediately we were rolling
easily down hill, through a street of some importance: but by this time
the shutters were up along the shop fronts and very few people abroad.
At the bottom we turn'd sharp to the left along a broader thoroughfare:
and then suddenly drew up.

"Are we come?" I wonder'd. But no: 'twas the city gate, and here we had
to wait for three minutes at least, till the sentries recogniz'd the
Colonel's coach and open'd the doors to us. They stood on this side
and that, presenting arms, as we rattled through; and next moment I was
crossing a broad bridge, with the dark Avon on either side of me, and
the vessels thick thereon, their lanterns casting long lines of yellow
on the jetty water, their masts and cordage looming up against the dull
glare of the city.

Soon we were between lines of building once more, shops, private
dwellings and warehouses intermix'd; then pass'd a tall church; and in
about two minutes more drew up again. I look'd out.

Facing me was a narrow gateway leading to a house that stood somewhat
back from the street, as if slipping away from between the lines of
shops that wedg'd it in on either hand. Over the grill a link was
burning. I stepp'd from the coach, open'd the gate, and crossing the
small court, rang at the house bell.

At first there was no answer. I rang again: and now had the satisfaction
to hear a light footfall coming. A bolt was pull'd and a girl appear'd
holding a candle high in her hand. Quick as thought, I stepped past her
into the passage.

"Delia!"

"Jack!"

"Hist! Close the door. Where is Mistress Finch?"

"Upstairs, expecting Colonel Essex. Oh, the happy day! Come--" she
led me into a narrow back room and setting down the light regarded
me--"Jack, my eyes are red for thee!"

"I see they are. To-morrow I was to be hang'd."

She put her hands together, catching her breath: and very lovely I
thought her, in her straight grey gown and Puritan cap.

"They have been questioning me. Didst get my letter?"

The answer was on my lip when there came a sound that made us both
start.

'Twas the dull echo of a gun firing, up at the Castle.

"Delia, what lies at the back here?"

"A garden and a garden door: after these a lane leading to Redcliff
Street."

"I must go, this moment."

"And I?"

She did not wait my answer, but running out into the passage, she came
swiftly back with a heavy key. I open'd the window.

"Delia! De-lia!" 'Twas a woman's voice calling her, at the head of the
stairs.

"Aye, Mistress Finch."

"Who was that at the door?"

I sprang into the garden and held forth a hand to Delia. "In one moment,
mistress!" call'd she, and in one moment was hurrying with me across the
dark garden beds. As she fitted the key to the garden gate, I heard the
voice again.

"De-lia!"

'Twas drown'd in a--wild _rat-a-tat!_ on the street door, and the shouts
of many voices. We were close press'd.

"Now, Jack--to the right for our lives! Ah, these clumsy skirts!"

We turn'd into the lane and rac'd down it. For my part, I swore to drown
myself in Avon rather than let those troopers retake me. I heard their
outcries about the house behind us, as we stumbled over the frozen
rubbish heaps with which the lane was bestrewn.

"What's our direction?" panted I, catching Delia's hand to help her
along.

"To the left now--for the river."

We struck into a narrow side street; and with that heard a watchman
bawl---

"_Past nine o' the night, an' a--!_"

The shock of our collision sent him to finish his say in the gutter.

"Thieves!" he yell'd.

But already we were twenty yards away, and now in a broader street,
whereof one side was wholly lin'd with warehouses. And here, to our
dismay, we heard shouts behind, and the noise of feet running.

About halfway down the street I spied a gateway standing ajar, and
pull'd Delia aside, into a courtyard litter'd with barrels and timbers,
and across it to a black empty barn of a place, where a flight of wooden
steps glimmer'd, that led to an upper story. We climb'd these stairs at
a run.

"Faugh! What a vile smell!"

The loft was pil'd high with great bales of wool, as I found by the
touch, and their odor enough to satisfy an army. Nevertheless, I was
groping about for a place to hide, when Delia touch'd me by the arm, and
pointed.

Looking, I descried in the gloom a tall quadrilateral of purple, not
five steps away, with a speck of light shining near the top of it, and
three dark streaks running down the middle, whereof one was much thicker
than the rest. 'Twas an open doorway; the speck, a star fram'd within
it; the broad streak, a ship's mast reaching up; and the lesser ones
two ends of a rope, working over a pulley above my head, and used for
lowering the bales of wool on shipboard.

Advancing, I stood on the sill and look'd down. On the black water,
twenty feet below, lay a three-masted trader, close against the
warehouse. My toes stuck out over her deck, almost.

At first glance I could see no sign of life on board: but presently was
aware of a dark figure leaning over the bulwarks, near the bows. He
was quite motionless. His back was toward us, blotted against the black
shadow; and the man engag'd only, it seem'd, in watching the bright
splash of light flung by the ship's lantern on the water beneath him.

I resolv'd to throw myself on the mercy of this silent figure; and put
out a hand to test the rope. One end of it was fix'd to a bale of wool
that lay, as it had been lower'd, on the deck. Flinging myself on the
other, I found it sink gently from the pulley, as the weight below moved
slowly upward: and sinking with it, I held on till my feet touch'd the
deck.

Still the figure in the bows was motionless.

I paid out my end of the rope softly, lowering back the bale of wool:
and, as soon as it rested again on deck, signalled to Delia to let
herself down.

She did so. As she alighted, and stood beside me, our hands bungled. The
rope slipp'd up quickly, letting down the bale with a run.

We caught at the rope, and stopp'd it just in time: but the pulley above
creak'd vociferously. I turn'd my head.

The man in the bows had not mov'd.




CHAPTER X.

CAPTAIN POTTERY AND CAPTAIN SETTLE.


"Now either I am mad or dreaming," thought I: for that the fellow had
not heard our noise was to me starkly incredible. I stepp'd along
the deck toward him: not an inch did he budge. I touch'd him on the
shoulder.

He fac'd round with a quick start.

"Sir," said I, quick and low, before he could get a word out--"Sir, we
are in your hands. I will be plain. To-night I have broke out of Bristol
Keep, and the Colonel's men are after me. Give me up to them, and they
hang me to-morrow: give my comrade up, and they persecute her vilely.
Now, sir, I know not which side you be, but there's our case in a
nutshell."

The man bent forward, displaying a huge, rounded face, very kindly about
the eyes, and set atop of the oddest body in the world: for under a
trunk extraordinary broad and strong, straddled & pair of legs that a
baby would have disown'd--so thin and stunted were they, and (to make it
the queerer) ended in feet the most prodigious you ever saw.

As I said, this man lean'd forward, and shouted into my ear so that I
fairly leap'd in the air--

"My name's Pottery--Bill Pottery, cap'n o' the _Godsend_--an' you can't
make me hear, not if you bust yoursel'!"

You may think this put me in a fine quandary.

"I be deaf as nails!" bawl'd he.

'Twas horrible: for the troopers (I thought) if anywhere near, could not
miss hearing him. His voice shook the very rigging.

"... An' o' my crew the half ashore gettin' drunk, an' the half below
in a very accomplished state o' liquor: so there's no chance for 'ee to
speak!"

He paus'd a moment, then roared again---

"What a pity! 'Cos you make me very curious--that you do!"

Luckily, at this moment, Delia had the sense to put a finger to her lip.
The man wheel'd round without another word, led us aft over the blocks,
cordage, and all manner of loose gear that encumber'd the deck, to a
ladder that, toward the stern, led down into darkness. Here he sign'd
to us to follow; and, descending first, threw open a door, letting out
a faint stream of light in our faces. 'Twas the captain's cabin, lin'd
with cupboards and lockers: and the light came from an oil lamp hanging
over a narrow deal table. By this light Captain Billy scrutiniz'd us for
an instant: then, from one of his lockers, brought out pen, paper, and
ink, and set them on the table before me.

[Illustration: "Master Pottery shaking us both by the hand."]

I caught up the pen, dipp'd it, and began to write--

"I am John Marvel, a servant of King Charles; and this night am escap'd
out of Bristol Castle. If you be--"

Thus far I had written without glancing up, in fear to read the
disappointment of my hopes. But now the pen was caught suddenly from my
fingers, the paper torn in shreds, and there was Master Pottery shaking
us both by the hand, nodding and becking, and smiling the while all over
his big red face.

But he ceas'd at last: and opening another of his lockers, drew forth
a horn lantern, a mallet, and a chisel. Not a word was spoken as he lit
the lantern and pass'd out of the cabin, Delia and I following at his
heels.

Just outside, at the foot of the steps, he stoop'd, pull'd up a trap
in the flooring, and disclos'd another ladder stretching, as it seem'd,
down into the bowels of the ship. This we descended carefully; and found
ourselves in the hold, pinching our noses 'twixt finger and thumb.

For indeed the smell here was searching to a very painful degree: for
the room was narrow, and every inch of it contested by two puissant
essences, the one of raw wood, the other of bilge water. With wool the
place was pil'd: but also I notic'd, not far from the ladder, several
casks set on their ends; and to these the captain led us.

They were about a dozen in all, stacked close together: and Master
Pottery, rolling two apart from the rest, dragg'd them to another trap
and tugg'd out the bungs. A stream of fresh water gush'd from each and
splash'd down the trap into the bilge below. Then, having drained them,
he stay'd in their heads with a few blows of his mallet.

His plan for us was clear. And in a very few minutes Delia and I were
crouching on the timbers, each with a cask inverted over us, our noses
at the bungholes and our ears listening to Master Pottery's footsteps
as they climb'd heavily back to deck. The rest of the casks were stack'd
close round us, so that even had the gloom allow'd, we could see nothing
at all.

"Jack!"

"Delia!"

"Dost feel heroical at all?"

"Not one whit. There's a trickle of water running down my back, to begin
with."

"And my nose it itches; and oh, what a hateful smell! Say something to
me, Jack."

"My dear," said I, "there is one thing I've been longing these weeks to
say: but this seems an odd place for it."

"What is't?"

I purs'd up my lips to the bunghole, and---

"I love you," said I.

There was silence for a moment: and then, within Delia's cask, the sound
of muffled laughter.

"Delia," I urg'd, "I mean it, upon my oath. Wilt marry me, sweetheart?"

"Must get out of this cask first. Oh, Jack, what a dear goose thou art!"
And the laughter began again.

I was going to answer, when I heard a loud shouting overhead. 'Twas the
sound of someone hailing the ship, and thought I, "the troopers are on
us!"

They were, in truth. Soon I heard the noise of feet above and a string
of voices speaking one after another, louder and louder. And next Master
Pottery began to answer up and drown'd all speech but his own. When he
ceas'd, there was silence for some minutes: after which we heard a party
descend to the cabin, and the trampling of their feet on the boards
above us. They remain'd there some while discussing: and then came
footsteps down the second ladder, and a twinkle of light reach'd me
through the bunghole of my cask.

"Quick!" said a husky voice; "overhaul the cargo here!"

I heard some half dozen troopers bustling about the hold and tugging out
the bales of wool.

"Hi!" call'd Master Pottery: "an' when you've done rummaging my ship,
put everything back as you found it."

"Poke about with your swords," commanded the husky voice. "What's in
those barrels yonder?"

"Water, sergeant," answers a trooper, rolling out a couple.

"Nothing behind them?"

"No; they're right against the side."

"Drop 'em then. Plague on this business! 'Tis my notion they're a mile
a-way, and Cap'n Stubbs no better than a fool to send us back here. He's
grudging promotion, that's what he is! Hurry, there--hurry!"

Ten minutes later, the searchers were gone; and we in our casks drawing
long breaths of thankfulness and strong odors. And so we crouch'd
till, about midnight, Captain Billy brought us down a supper of ship's
biscuit: which we crept forth to eat, being sorely cramp'd.

He could not hear our thanks: but guess'd them.

"Now say not a word! To-morrow we sail for Plymouth Sound: thence for
Brittany. Hist! We be all King's men aboard the _Godsend_, tho' hearing
nought I says little. Yet I have my reasoning heresies, holding the
Lord's Anointed to be an anointed rogue, but nevertheless to be serv'd:
just as aboard the _Godsend_ I be Cap'n Billy an' you plain Jack, be
your virtues what they may. An' the conclusion is--damn all mutineers
an' rebels! Tho', to be sure, the words be a bit lusty for a young
gentlewoman's ears."

We went back to our casks with lighter hearts. Howbeit 'twas near five
in the morning, I dare say, before my narrow bedchamber allow'd me to
drop asleep.
