win terms not only for ourselves but for our countrymen.

"The first step is to gather at our place of refuge those belonging
to us. Therefore do you choose among yourselves twenty swift runners
and send them to our villages, bidding the wives and families of
all here to leave their homes at once, taking only such gear as they
can carry lightly, and to make with all speed for Soto, a village
in the district of the Baci, and but a mile or two from the edge
of the great swamp country. It is there that the herds have been
driven, and there they will find a party ready to escort them. Let
all the other women and children be advised to quit their homes
also, and to travel north together with the old men and boys. Bid
the latter drive the herds before them. It may be months before
they can return to their homes. It were best that they should pass
altogether beyond the district of our people, for it is upon the
Iceni that the vengeance of the Romans will chiefly fall. By presents
of cattle they can purchase an asylum among the Brigantes, and had
best remain there till they hear that Roman vengeance is satisfied.

"Let them as they journey north advise all the people in our
villages to follow their example. Let those who will not do this
take shelter in the hearts of the forests. To our own people my
orders are distinct: no herd, either of cattle or swine, is to be
left behind. Let the Romans find a desert where they can gather
no food; let the houses be burnt, together with all crops that
have been gathered. Warn all that there must be no delay. Let the
boys and old men start within five minutes from the time that you
deliver my message, to gather the herds and drive them north. Let
the women call their children round them, take up their babes, make
a bundle of their garments, and pile upon a wagon cooking pots and
such things as are most needed, and then set fire to their houses
and stacks and granaries and go. Warn them that even the delay of
an hour may be fatal, for that the Roman cavalry will be spreading
like a river in flood over the country. Beg them to leave the beaten
tracks and journey through the woods, both those who go north and
those who will meet us at Soto. Quick! choose the messengers; and
such of you as choose had best hand to the one who is bound for his
village a ring or a bracelet, or some token that your wives will
recognize, so that they may know that the order comes from you."

Twenty young men were at once chosen, and Boduoc and two of the
older men divided the district of the Sarci among them, allotting
to each the hamlets they should visit. As soon as this was decided
the rest of the band gave the messengers their tokens to their
families, and then the runners started at a trot which they could
maintain for many hours. The rest of the band then struck off in
the direction in which they were bound. With only an occasional
half hour for food and a few hours at night for sleep they pressed
northward. Fast as they went the news of the disaster had preceded
them, carried by fugitives from the battle.

At each hamlet through which they passed, Aska repeated the advice
that had been sent to the Iceni. "Abandon your homes, drive the
swine and the cattle before you, take to the forests, journey far
north, and seek refuge among the Brigantes. A rallying place for
fighting men will be found at Soto, on the edge of the great swamps;
let all who can bear arms and love freedom better than servitude
or death gather there."

Upon the march swine were taken and killed for food without
hesitation. Many were found straying in the woods untended, the
herdsmen having fled in dismay when the news of the defeat reached
them. As yet the full extent of the disaster was unknown. Some of
the fugitives had reported that scarce a man had escaped; but the
very number of fugitives who had preceded the band showed that this
was an exaggeration. But it was not until long afterwards that the
truth was known. Of the great multitude, estimated at two hundred
and thirty thousand, fully a third had fallen, among whom were
almost all the women and children whose presence on the battlefield
had proved so fatal, and of whom scarce one had been able to
escape; for the Romans, infuriated by the massacres at Camalodunum,
Verulamium, and London had spared neither age nor sex.

On their arrival at Soto they obtained for the first time news of
the queen. A chief of one of the northern subtribes of the Iceni
had driven through on his chariot and had told the headman of the
hamlet that he had been one of the few who had accompanied Boadicea
in her flight.

At the call of the queen, he said, the men threw themselves on
the line of wagons in such number and force that a breach was made
through them, horses and wagons being overthrown and dragged bodily
aside. The chariot with the queen and her two daughters passed
through, with four others containing the ladies who accompanied
her. Three or four chiefs also passed through in their chariots,
and then the breach was filled by the struggling multitude, that
poured out like a torrent. The chariots were well away before the
Roman horse swept round the wagons, and travelled without pursuit
to a forest twenty miles away. As soon as they reached this the
queen ordered the charioteers to dig graves, and then calling upon
the god of her country to avenge her, she and her daughters and
the ladies with them had all drunk poison, brewed from berries that
they gathered in the wood. The chiefs would have done so also, but
the queen forbade them.

"It is for you," she said, "to look after your people, and to wage
war with Rome to the last. We need but two men to lay us in our
graves and spread the sods over us; so that after death at least
we shall be safe from further dishonour at the hands of the Romans."

When they had drunk the poison the men were ordered to leave them
for an hour and then to return. When they did so the ladies were
all dead, lying in a circle round Boadicea. They were buried in
the shallow holes that had been dug, the turf replaced, and dead
leaves scattered over the spot, so that no Roman should ever know
where the queen of the Iceni and her daughters slept.

Although Beric had given up all hope of again seeing his mother
alive, the news of her death was a terrible blow to him, and he
wept unrestrainedly until Aska placed a hand on his shoulder. "You
must not give way to sorrow, Beric. You have her people to look to.
She has gone to the Green Island, where she will dwell in happiness,
and where your father has been long expecting her. It is not at a
death that we Britons weep, knowing as we do that those that have
gone are to be envied. Arouse yourself! there is much to be done.
The cattle will probably be here in the morning. We have to question
the people here as to the great swamps, and get them to send to the
Fen people for guides who will lead us across the marshes to some
spot where we can dwell above the level of the highest waters."

Beric put aside his private grief for the time, and several of the
natives of the village who were accustomed to penetrate the swamps
in search of game were collected and questioned as to the country.
None, however, could give much useful information. There was a
large river that ran through it, with innumerable smaller streams
that wandered here and there. None had penetrated far beyond the
margin, partly because they were afraid of losing their way, partly
because of the enmity of the Fen people.

These were of a different race to themselves, and were a remnant
of those whom the Iceni had driven out of their country, and who,
instead of going west, had taken refuge in the swamps, whither the
invaders had neither the power nor inclination to follow them.

"It is strange," Aska said, "that just as they fled before us
centuries ago, so we have now to fly before the Romans. Still, as
they have maintained themselves there, so may we. But it will be
necessary that we should try and secure the goodwill of these people
and assure them that we do not come among them as foes."

"There is no quarrel between us now," the headman of the hamlet
said. "There has not been for many generations. They know that we
do not seek to molest them, while they are not strong enough to
molest us. There is trade between all the hamlets near the swamps
and their people; they bring fish and wildfowl, and baskets which
they weave out of rushes, and sell to us in exchange for woven
cloth, for garments, and sometimes for swine which they keep upon
some of their islands.

"It is always they who come to us, we go not to them. They are
jealous of our entering their country, and men who go too far in
search of game have often been shot at by invisible foes. They take
care that their arrows don't strike, but shoot only as a warning that
we must go no farther. Sometimes some foolhardy men have declared
that they will go where they like in spite of the Fenmen, and they
have gone, but they have never returned. When we have asked the
men who come in to trade what has become of them they say 'they do
not know, most likely they had lost their way and died miserably,
or fallen into a swamp and perished there;' and as the men have
certainly lost their lives through their own obstinacy nothing can
be done."

"Then some of these men speak our tongue, I suppose?" Aska said.

"Yes, the men who come are generally the same, and these mostly
speak a little of our language. From time to time some of our
maidens have taken a fancy to these Fenmen, and in spite of all their
friends could do have gone off. None of these have ever returned,
though messages have been brought saying they were well. We think
that the men who do the trading are the children of women who went
to live among them years ago."

"Then it is through one of these men that we must open communications
with them," Aska said.

"Some of them are here almost daily. No one has been today, and
therefore we may expect one tomorrow morning. This is one of the
chief places of trade with them. The women of the hamlets round
bring here the cloth they have woven to exchange it for their
goods, others from beyond them do the same, so that from all this
part of the district goods are brought in here, while the fish and
baskets of the Fenmen go far and wide."



CHAPTER VIII: THE GREAT SWAMPS


Soon after daybreak next morning the headman came into the hut he
had placed at the disposal of Aska and Beric with news that two of
the Fenmen had arrived. They at once went out and found that the
two men had just laid down their loads, which were so heavy that
Beric wondered they could possibly have been carried by them. One
had brought fish, the other wildfowl, slung on poles over their
shoulders. These men were much shorter than the Iceni, they were
swarthier in complexion, and their hair was long and matted. Their
only clothing was short kilts made of the materials for which they
bartered their game.

"They both speak the language well," the headman said, "I will tell
them what you want."

The men listened to the statement that the chiefs before them desired
to find with their followers a refuge in the Fens, and that they
were willing to make presents to the Fenmen of cattle and other
things, so that there should be friendship between them, and that
they should be allowed to occupy some island in the swamps where
they might live secure from pursuit. The men looked at each other
as the headman began to speak, shaking their heads as if they
thought the proposal impossible.

"We will tell our people," they said, "but we do not think that
they will agree; we have dwelt alone for long years without trouble
with others. The coming of strangers will bring trouble. Why do
they seek to leave their land?"

"Our people have been beaten in battle by the Romans," Aska said,
taking up the conversation, "and we need a refuge till the troubles
are over."

"The Romans have won!" one of the men exclaimed in a tone that
showed he was no stranger to what was going on beyond the circle
of the Fens.

"They have won," Aska repeated, "and there will be many fugitives
who will seek for shelter in the Fens. We would fain be friends with
your people, but shelter we must have. Our cause after all is the
same, for when the Romans have destroyed the Iceni, and conquered
all the countries round, they will hunt you down also, for they
let none remain free in the lands where they are masters. The Fen
country is wide, there must be room for great numbers to shelter,
and surely there must be places where we could live without
disturbance to your people."

"There is room," the man said briefly. "We will take your message
to our people, our chiefs will decide."

Aska and Beric wore few other ornaments than those denoting their
position and authority. Many of their followers, however, had jewels
and bracelets, the spoil of the Roman towns. Beric left the group
and spoke to Boduoc, who in two or three minutes returned with
several rings and bracelets.

"You could have a score for every one of these," he said; "they
are of no value to the men now, and indeed their possession would
bring certain death upon any one wearing them did he fall into the
hands of the Romans."

Beric returned to the Fenmen. "Here," he said, "are some presents
for your chiefs, tell them that we have many more like them."

The men took them with an air of indifference.

"They are of no use," they said, "though they may please women. If
you want to please men you should give them hatchets and arms."

"We will do that," Aska said, "we have more than we require;" for
indeed after the battle with Cerealis and the sack of the towns
all the men had taken Roman swords and carried them in addition
to their own weapons, regarding them not only as trophies but as
infinitely superior to their own more clumsy implements for cutting
wood and other purposes. At a word from Beric four of these were
brought and handed to the men, who took them with lively satisfaction.

"Could you take us with you to see your chiefs?" Beric asked.

They shook their heads. "No strangers can enter the swamps; but
the chiefs will come to see you."

"It is very urgent that no time shall be lost," Beric said, "the
Romans may be here very shortly."

"By the time the sun is at its highest the chiefs will be here or
we will bring you an answer," they said. "Come with us now, we will
show you where to expect them, for they will not leave the edge of
our land."

After half an hour's walking through a swampy soil they arrived at
the edge of a sluggish stream of water. Here tied to a bush was a
boat constructed of basket work covered with hide. In it lay two
long poles. The men took their places in the coracle, pushed out
into the stream, and using their poles vigorously were soon lost
to sight among the thick grove of rush and bushes. Aska and Beric
returned to the hamlet.

"Have you any idea of the number of these people?" they asked the
headman.

"No," he said, "no one has any idea; the swamps are of a vast extent
from here away to the north. We know that long ago when the Iceni
endeavoured to penetrate there they were fiercely attacked by great
numbers, and most of those who entered perished miserably, but for
ages now there has been no trouble. The land was large enough for
us, why should we fight to conquer swamps which would be useless
to us? We believe that there are large numbers, although they have,
from the nature of the country, little dealings with each other;
but live scattered in twos and threes over their country, since,
living by fishing and fowling, they would not care to dwell in
large communities. They never talk much about themselves, but I
have heard that they say that parts of the swamps are inhabited by
strange monsters, huge serpents and other creatures, and that into
these none dare penetrate."

"All the better," Beric said; "we are not afraid of monsters of
any kind, and they might therefore let us settle in one of these
neighbourhoods where we could clear out these enemies of theirs
for them. It strikes me that our greatest difficulty will be to
get our cattle across the morasses to firm ground. We shall have
to contrive some plan for doing so. It will be no easy matter to
feed so large a number as we shall be on fish and wildfowl."

At noon the two chiefs returned to the spot where the men had left
them, taking with them Boduoc and another of their followers. A
few minutes after they arrived there they heard sounds approaching,
and in a short time four boats similar to those they had seen, and
each carrying two men in addition to those poling, made their way
one after another through the bushes that nearly met across the
stream. Most of the men were dressed like the two who had visited
the village, but three of them were in attire somewhat similar to
that of the Iceni. These were evidently the chiefs. Several of the
men were much shorter and darker than those they had first seen,
while the chiefs were about the same stature. All carried short bows
and quivers of light arrows, and spears with the points hardened
in the fire, for the Iceni living near the swamps had been strictly
forbidden to trade in arms or metal implements with the Fenmen.
The chiefs, however, all carried swords of Iceni make. Before the
chiefs stepped ashore their followers landed, and at once, to the
surprise of Beric, scattered among the bushes. In two or three
minutes they returned and said something in their own language to
their chiefs, who then stepped ashore.

"They were afraid of an ambush," Aska muttered, "and have satisfied
themselves that no one is hidden near."

The chiefs were all able to speak the language of the Iceni, and
a long conversation ensued between them and Beric. They protested
at first that it was impossible for them to grant the request made;
that for long ages no stranger had penetrated the swamps, and that
although the intention of those who addressed them might be friendly,
such might not always be the case, and that when the secrets of
the paths and ways were once known they would never be free from
danger of attack by their neighbours.

"There is more room to the north," they said; "the Fen country
is far wider there, there is room for you all, while here the dry
lands are occupied by us, and there is no room for so many strangers.
We wish you well; we have no quarrel with you. Ages have passed
now since you drove our forefathers from the land; that is all
forgotten. But as we have lived so long, so will we continue. We
have no wants; we have fish and fowl in abundance, and what more
we require we obtain in barter from you."

"Swords like those we sent you are useful," Aska said. "They are
made by the Romans, and are vastly better than any we have. With
one of those you might chop down as many saplings in a day as
would build a hut, and could destroy any wild beasts that may lurk
in your swamps. The people who are coming now are not like us. We
were content with the land we had taken, and you dwelt among us
undisturbed for ages; but the Romans are not like us, they want
to possess the whole earth, and when they have overrun our country
they will never rest content till they have hunted you out also.
There are thousands of us who will seek refuge in your swamps. You
may oppose us, you may kill numbers of us, but in the end, step
by step, we shall find our way in till we reach an island of firm
land where we can establish ourselves. It is not that we have any
ill will towards you, or that we covet your land, but with the Romans
behind us, slaying all they encounter, we shall have no choice but
to go forward.

"It will be for your benefit as well as ours. Alone what could you
do against men who fight with metal over their heads and bodies
that your arrows could not penetrate, and with swords and darts
that would cut and pierce you through and through? But with us--who
have met and fought them in fair battle, and have once even
defeated them with great slaughter--to help you to guard your
swamps, it would be different, and even the Romans, brave as they
are, would hesitate before they tried to penetrate your land of mud
and water. Surely there must be some spots in your morasses that
are still uninhabited. I have heard that there are places that are
avoided because great serpents and other creatures live there, but
so long as the land is dry enough for our cattle to live and for
us to dwell we are ready to meet any living thing that may inhabit
it."

The chiefs looked awestruck at this offer on the part of the
strangers, and then entered into an animated conversation together.

"The matter is settled," Aska said in a low voice to Beric. "There
are places they are afraid to penetrate, and I expect that, much as
they object to our entering their country, they would rather have
us as neighbours than these creatures that they are so much afraid
of."

When the chiefs' consultation was finished, the one who had before
spoken turned to them and said: "What will you give if we take you
to such a place?"

"How far distant is it?" Aska asked.

"It is two days' journey from here," the chief said. "The distance
is not great, but the channels are winding and difficult. There is
land many feet above the water, but how large I cannot say. Three
miles to the west from here is the great river you call the Ouse,
it is on the other side of that where we dwell. None of us live
on this side of that river. Three hours' walk north from here is
a smaller river that runs into the great one. At the point where
the two rivers join you will cross the Ouse, and then journey west
in boats for a day; that will take you near the land we speak of."

"But how are we to get the boats? We have no time to make them."

"We will take you in our boats. This man," and he pointed to one
of those who had been with them in the morning, "will go with you
as a guide through the swamps to the river to the north. There we
will meet you with twenty boats, and will take a party to the spot
we speak of. Then we will sell you the boats--we can build more--and
you can take the rest of your party over as you like. What
will you give us?"

"We will give you twenty swords like those I sent you, and twenty
spearheads, and a hundred copper arrowheads, and twenty cattle."

The chiefs consulted together. "We want grain and we want skins,"
their spokesman said. "We have need of much grain, for if the Romans
take your land and kill your people, where shall we buy grain? And
we want skins, for it takes two skins to make a boat, and we shall
have to build twenty to take the place of those we give you."

"We can give the skins," Aska said, after a consultation with Beric;
"and I doubt not we can give grain. How much do you require?"

"Five boat loads filled to the brim."

"To all your other terms we agree," Aska said; "and you shall have
as much grain as we can obtain. If we fall short of that quantity
we will give for each boat load that is wanting three swords, six
spearheads, and ten arrowheads."

The bargain was closed. The Fenmen had come resolved not to allow
the strangers to enter their land, but their offer to occupy
any spot, even if tenanted by savage beasts, entirely changed the
position. In the recesses of the swamps to the east of the Ouse lay
a tract of country which they avoided with a superstitious fear.
In the memory of man none had dared to approach that region, for
there was a tradition among them that, when they had first fled from
the Iceni, a large party had penetrated there, and of these but a
few returned, with tales of the destruction of their companions by
huge serpents, and monsters of strange shapes, some of which were
clothed in armour impenetrable to their heaviest weapons. From that
time the spot had been avoided. Legends had multiplied concerning
the creatures that dwelt there, and it now seemed to the chiefs
that they must be gainers in any case by the bargain.

If the monsters conquered and devoured the Iceni, as no doubt they
would do, they would be well rid of them. If the Iceni destroyed
the monsters a large tract of country now closed would be open
for fishing and fowling. They therefore accepted, without further
difficulty, the terms the strangers offered. It was, moreover,
agreed that any further parties of Iceni should be free to join the
first comers without hindrance, and that guides should be furnished
to all who might come to the borders of the swamps to join their
countrymen. They were to act in concert in case of any attack by
the Romans, binding themselves to assist each other to the utmost
of their powers.

"But how are we to convey our cattle over?" Beric asked.

The native shook his head. "It is too far for them to swim, and
the ground in most places is a swamp, in which they would sink."

"That must be an after matter, Beric," Aska said. "We will talk
that over after we have arrived. Evidently we can do nothing now.
The great thing is to get to this place they speak of, and to
prepare it to receive the women and other fugitives. When will you
have the boats at the place you name?"

"Three hours after daylight tomorrow."

"We will be there. You shall receive half the payments we have
agreed upon before we start, the rest shall be paid you when you
return with the boats and hand them over for the second detachment
to go."

The native nodded, and at once he and his companions took their
places in their coracles, leaving the native who was to act as
guide behind them.

"They are undersized little wretches," Boduoc said, as they started
for the village; "no wonder that our forefathers swept them out of
the land without any difficulty. But they are active and sturdy,
and, knowing their swamps as they do, could harass an invader
terribly. I don't think that at present they like our going into
their country, but they will be glad enough of our aid if the Romans
come."

When they reached the village they found that the herds had just
arrived. The headman was surprised when they told him that the
Fenmen had agreed to allow them a shelter in the swamps, and he and
eight or ten men who had straggled in since Beric's party arrived,
expressed their desire to accompany the party with their families.
Other women in the village would likewise have gone, but Aska
