coloured slightly, kept her eyes on the ground, and seemed embarrassed
though in a trifling degree, as she returned his military salutation.
This must have been owing to her recollection of the audacious
stranger in the neighbouring turret at the Fleur de Lys; but did that
discomposure express displeasure? This question he had no means to
determine.

The companion of the youthful Countess, dressed like herself simply
and in deep mourning, was at the age when women are apt to cling
most closely to that reputation for beauty which has for years been
diminishing. She had still remains enough to show what the power of
her charms must once have been, and, remembering past triumphs, it was
evident from her manner that she had not relinquished the pretensions to
future conquests. She was tall and graceful, though somewhat haughty
in her deportment, and returned the salute of Quentin with a smile of
gracious condescension, whispering the next instant something into her
companion's ear, who turned towards the soldier as if to comply with
some hint from the elder lady, but answered, nevertheless, without
raising her eyes. Quentin could not help suspecting that the observation
called on the young lady to notice his own good mien; and he was (I do
not know why) pleased with the idea that the party referred to did not
choose to look at him, in order to verify with her own eyes the truth
of the observation. Probably he thought there was already a sort
of mysterious connexion beginning to exist between them, which gave
importance to the slightest trifle.

This reflection was momentary, for he was instantly wrapped up in
attention to the meeting of the Princess Joan with these stranger
ladies. She had stood still upon their entrance, in order to receive
them, conscious, perhaps, that motion did not become her well; and
as she was somewhat embarrassed in receiving and repaying their
compliments, the elder stranger, ignorant of the rank of the party whom
she addressed, was led to pay her salutation in a manner rather as if
she conferred than received an honour through the interview.

"I rejoice," she said, with a smile which was meant to express
condescension at once and encouragement, "that we are at length
permitted the society of such a respectable person of our own sex as
you appear to be. I must say that my niece and I have had but little for
which to thank the hospitality of King Louis.--Nay, niece, never pluck
my sleeve--I am sure I read in the looks of this young lady sympathy
for out situation.--Since we came hither, fair madam, we have been used
little better than mere prisoners; and after a thousand invitations to
throw our cause and our persons under the protection of France, the
Most Christian King has afforded us at first but a base inn for our
residence, and now a corner of this moth eaten palace, out of which we
are only permitted to creep towards sunset, as if we were bats or owls,
whose appearance in the sunshine is to be held matter of ill omen."

"I am sorry," said the Princess, faltering with the awkward
embarrassment of the interview, "that we have been unable, hitherto, to
receive you according to your deserts.--Your niece, I trust, is better
satisfied?"

"Much--much better than I can express," answered the youthful Countess.
"I sought but safety and I have found solitude and secrecy besides. The
seclusion of our former residence, and the still greater solitude of
that now assigned to us, augment, in my eye, the favour which the King
vouchsafed to us unfortunate fugitives."

"Silence, my silly cousin," said the elder lady, "and let us speak
according to our conscience, since at last we are alone with one of our
own sex--I say alone, for that handsome young soldier is a mere statue,
since he seems not to have the use of his limbs, and I am given
to understand he wants that of his tongue, at least in civilized
language--I say, since no one but this lady can understand us, I must
own there is nothing I have regretted equal to taking this French
journey. I looked for a splendid reception, tournaments, carousals,
pageants, and festivals; instead of which, all has been seclusion and
obscurity! and the best society whom the King introduced to us, was a
Bohemian vagabond, by whose agency he directed us to correspond with
our friends in Flanders.--Perhaps," said the lady, "it is his politic
intention to mew us up here until our lives' end, that he may seize on
our estates, after the extinction of the ancient house of Croye. The
Duke of Burgundy was not so cruel; he offered my niece a husband, though
he was a bad one."

"I should have thought the veil preferable to an evil husband," said the
Princess, with difficulty finding opportunity to interpose a word.

"One would at least wish to have the choice, madam," replied the voluble
dame. "It is, Heaven knows, on account of my niece that I speak; for
myself, I have long laid aside thoughts of changing my condition. I see
you smile, but by my halidome, it is true--yet that is no excuse for the
King, whose conduct, like his person, hath more resemblance to that
of old Michaud, the moneychanger of Ghent, than to the successor of
Charlemagne."

"Hold!" said the Princess, with some asperity in her tone; "remember you
speak of my father."

"Of your father!" replied the Burgundian lady, in surprise.

"Of my father," repeated the Princess, with dignity, "I am Joan of
France.--But fear not, madam," she continued, in the gentle accent which
was natural to her, "you designed no offence, and I have taken none.
Command my influence to render your exile and that of this interesting
young person more supportable. Alas! it is but little I have in my
power, but it is willingly offered."

Deep and submissive was the reverence with which the Countess Hameline
de Croye, so was the elder lady called, received the obliging offer of
the Princess's protection. She had been long the inhabitant of courts,
was mistress of the manners which are there acquired, and held firmly
the established rule of courtiers of all ages, who, although their usual
private conversation turns upon the vices and follies of their patrons,
and on the injuries and neglect which they themselves have sustained,
never suffer such hints to drop from them in the presence of the
Sovereign or those of his family. The lady was, therefore, scandalised
to the last degree at the mistake which had induced her to speak so
indecorously in presence of the daughter of Louis. She would have
exhausted herself in expressing regret and making apologies, had she
not been put to silence and restored to equanimity by the Princess,
who requested, in the most gentle manner, yet which, from a Daughter of
France, had the weight of a command, that no more might be said in the
way either of excuse or of explanation.

The Princess Joan then took her own chair with a dignity which became
her, and compelled the two strangers to sit, one on either hand, to
which the younger consented with unfeigned and respectful diffidence,
and the elder with an affectation of deep humility and deference which
was intended for such.

They spoke together, but in such a low tone that the sentinel could not
overhear their discourse, and only remarked that the Princess seemed to
bestow much of her regard on the younger and more interesting lady; and
that the Countess Hameline, though speaking a great deal more, attracted
less of the Princess's attention by her full flow of conversation and
compliment, than did her kinswoman by her brief and modest replies to
what was addressed to her.

The conversation of the ladies had not lasted a quarter of an hour, when
the door at the lower end of the hall opened, and a man entered shrouded
in a riding cloak. Mindful of the King's injunction, and determined not
to be a second time caught slumbering, Quentin instantly moved towards
the intruder, and, interposing between him and the ladies, requested him
to retire instantly.

"By whose command?" said the stranger, in a tone of contemptuous
surprise.

"By that of the King," said Quentin, firmly, "which I am placed here to
enforce."

"Not against Louis of Orleans," said the Duke, dropping his cloak.

The young man hesitated a moment; but how enforce his orders against
the first Prince of the Blood, about to be allied, as the report now
generally went, with the King's own family?

"Your Highness," he said, "is too great that your pleasure should be
withstood by me. I trust your Highness will bear me witness that I have
done the duty of my post so far as your will permitted."

"Go to--you shall have no blame, young soldier," said Orleans; and
passing forward, paid his compliments to the Princess, with that air of
constraint which always marked his courtesy when addressing her.

He had been dining, he said, with Dunois, and understanding there was
society in Roland's Gallery, he had ventured on the freedom of adding
one to the number.

The colour which mounted into the pale cheek of the unfortunate Joan,
and which for the moment spread something of beauty over her features,
evinced that this addition to the company was anything but indifferent
to her. She hastened to present the Prince to the two Ladies of Croye,
who received him with the respect due to his eminent rank; and the
Princess, pointing to a chair, requested him to join their conversation
party.

The Duke declined the freedom of assuming a seat in such society; but
taking a cushion from one of the settles, he laid it at the feet of the
beautiful young Countess of Croye, and so seated himself, that, without
appearing to neglect the Princess, he was enabled to bestow the greater
share of his attention on her lovely neighbour.

At first, it seemed as if this arrangement rather pleased than offended
his destined bride. She encouraged the Duke in his gallantries towards
the fair stranger, and seemed to regard them as complimentary to
herself. But the Duke of Orleans, though accustomed to subject his mind
to the stern yoke of his uncle when in the King's presence, had enough
of princely nature to induce him to follow his own inclinations whenever
that restraint was withdrawn; and his high rank giving him a right to
overstep the ordinary ceremonies, and advance at once to familiarity,
his praises of the Countess Isabelle's beauty became so energetic, and
flowed with such unrestrained freedom, owing perhaps to his having drunk
a little more wine than usual--for Dunois was no enemy to the worship of
Bacchus--that at length he seemed almost impassioned, and the presence
of the Princess appeared well nigh forgotten.

The tone of compliment which he indulged was grateful only to one
individual in the circle; for the Countess Hameline already anticipated
the dignity of an alliance with the first Prince of the Blood, by means
of her whose birth, beauty, and large possessions rendered such an
ambitious consummation by no means impossible, even in the eyes of a
less sanguine projector, could the views of Louis XI have been left
out of the calculation of chances. The younger Countess listened to the
Duke's gallantries with anxiety and embarrassment, and ever and anon
turned an entreating look towards the Princess, as if requesting her to
come to her relief. But the wounded feelings and the timidity of Joan of
France rendered her incapable of an effort to make the conversation more
general; and at length, excepting a few interjectional civilities of the
Lady Hameline, it was maintained almost exclusively by the Duke himself,
though at the expense of the younger Countess of Croye, whose beauty
formed the theme of his high flown eloquence.

Nor must I forget that there was a third person, the unregarded
sentinel, who saw his fair visions melt away like wax before the sun,
as the Duke persevered in the warm tenor of his passionate discourse.
At length the Countess Isabelle de Croye made a determined effort to cut
short what was becoming intolerably disagreeable to her, especially from
the pain to which the conduct of the Duke was apparently subjecting the
Princess.

Addressing the latter, she said, modestly, but with some firmness, that
the first boon she had to claim from her promised protection was, "that
her Highness would undertake to convince the Duke of Orleans that the
ladies of Burgundy, though inferior in wit and manners to those of
France, were not such absolute fools as to be pleased with no other
conversation than that of extravagant compliment."

"I grieve, lady," said the Duke, preventing the Princess's answer, "that
you will satirize, in the same sentence, the beauty of the dames of
Burgundy and the sincerity of the Knights of France. If we are hasty and
extravagant in the expression of our admiration, it is because we love
as we fight, Without letting cold deliberation come into our bosoms, and
surrender to the fair with the same rapidity with which we defeat the
valiant."

"The beauty of our countrywomen," said the young Countess, with more of
reproof than she had yet ventured to use towards the high born suitor,
"is as unfit to claim such triumphs, as the valour of the men of
Burgundy is incapable of yielding them."

"I respect your patriotism, Countess," said the Duke; "and the last
branch of your theme shall not be impugned by me, till a Burgundian
knight shall offer to sustain it with lance in rest. But for the
injustice which you have done to the charms which your land produces, I
appeal from yourself to yourself.--Look there," he said, pointing to a
large mirror, the gift of the Venetian republic, and then of the highest
rarity and value, "and tell me, as you look, what is the heart that can
resist the charms there represented?"

The Princess, unable to sustain any longer the neglect of her lover,
here sunk backwards on her chair with a sigh, which at once recalled
the Duke from the land of romance, and induced the Lady Hameline to ask
whether her Highness found herself ill.

"A sudden pain shot through my forehead," said the Princess, attempting
to smile; "but I shall be presently better."

Her increasing paleness contradicted her words, and induced the Lady
Hameline to call for assistance, as the Princess was about to faint.

The Duke, biting his lip, and cursing the folly which could not keep
guard over his tongue, ran to summon the Princess's attendants, who
were in the next chamber, and when they came hastily, with the usual
remedies, he could not but, as a cavalier and gentleman, give his
assistance to support and to recover her. His voice, rendered almost
tender by pity and self reproach, was the most powerful means of
recalling her to herself, and just as the swoon was passing away, the
King himself entered the apartment.



CHAPTER XII: THE POLITICIAN

     This is a lecturer, so skill'd in policy,
     That (no disparagement to Satan's cunning)
     He well might read a lesson to the devil,
     And teach the old seducer new temptations.

     OLD PLAY


As Louis entered the gallery, he bent his brows in the manner we have
formerly described as peculiar to him, and sent, from under his gathered
and gloomy eyebrows, a keen look on all around; in darting which,
as Quentin afterwards declared, his eyes seemed to turn so small,
so fierce, and so piercing, as to resemble those of an aroused adder
looking through the bush of heath in which he lies coiled.

When, by this momentary and sharpened glance, the King had reconnoitered
the cause of the bustle which was in the apartment, his first address
was to the Duke of Orleans.

"You here, my fair cousin?" he said;--and turning to Quentin, added
sternly, "Had you not charge?"

"Forgive the young man, Sire," said the Duke; "he did not neglect his
duty; but I was informed that the Princess was in this gallery."

"And I warrant you would not be withstood when you came hither to pay
your court," said the King, whose detestable hypocrisy persisted in
representing the Duke as participating in a passion which was felt only
on the side of his unhappy daughter; "and it is thus you debauch the
sentinels of my guard, young man?--But what cannot be pardoned to a
gallant who only lives par amours [by his love affairs]?"

The Duke of Orleans raised his head, as if about to reply in some manner
which might correct the opinion conveyed in the King's observation; but
the instinctive reverence, not to say fear, of Louis, in which he had
been bred from childhood, chained up his voice.

"And Joan hath been ill?" said the King; "but do not be grieved, Louis;
it will soon pass away; lend her your arm to her apartment, while I will
conduct these strange ladies to theirs."

The order was given in a tone which amounted to a command, and Orleans
accordingly made his exit with the Princess at one extremity of the
gallery, while the King, ungloving his right hand, courteously handed
the Countess Isabelle and her kinswoman to their apartment, which
opened from the other. He bowed profoundly as they entered, and remained
standing on the threshold for a minute after they had disappeared;
then, with great composure, shut the door by which they had retired
and turning the huge key, took it from the lock, and put it into his
girdle--an appendage which gave him still more perfectly the air of some
old miser, who cannot journey in comfort unless he bear with him the key
of his treasure closet.

With slow and pensive step, and eyes fixed on the ground, Louis now
paced towards Quentin Durward, who, expecting his share of the royal
displeasure, viewed his approach with no little anxiety.

"Thou hast done wrong," said the King, raising his eyes, and fixing them
firmly on him when he had come within a yard of him,--"thou hast done
foul wrong, and deservest to die.--Speak not a word in defence!--What
hadst thou to do with Dukes or Princesses?--what with any thing but my
order?"

"So please your Majesty," said the young soldier, "what could I do?"

"What couldst thou do when thy post was forcibly passed?" answered the
King, scornfully,--"what is the use of that weapon on thy shoulder? Thou
shouldst have levelled thy piece, and if the presumptuous rebel did
not retire on the instant, he should have died within this very hall!
Go--pass into these farther apartments. In the first thou wilt find a
large staircase, which leads to the inner Bailley; there thou wilt
find Oliver Dain [the inner bailey contained the stables and often the
chapel. It communicated directly with the keep]. Send him to me--do thou
begone to thy quarters.--As thou dost value thy life, be not so loose of
thy tongue as thou hast been this day slack of thy hand."

Well pleased to escape so easily, yet with a soul which revolted at the
cold blooded cruelty which the King seemed to require from him in the
execution of his duty, Durward took the road indicated; hastened down
stairs, and communicated the royal pleasure to Oliver, who was waiting
in the court beneath. The wily tonsor bowed, sighed, and smiled, as,
with a voice even softer than ordinary, he wished the youth a good
evening; and they parted, Quentin to his quarters, and Oliver to attend
the King.

In this place, the Memoirs which we have chiefly followed in compiling
this true history were unhappily defective; for, founded chiefly on
information supplied by Quentin, they do not convey the purport of the
dialogue which, in his absence, took place between the King and his
secret counsellor. Fortunately the Library of Hautlieu contains a
manuscript copy of the Chronique Scandaleuse of Jean de Troyes [the
Marquis de Hautlieu is the name of an imaginary character in whose
library Scott declares himself to have found the memorials which form
the basis of the novel of Quentin Durward], much more full than that
which has been printed; to which are added several curious memoranda,
which we incline to think must have been written down by Oliver himself
after the death of his master, and before he had the happiness to be
rewarded with the halter which he had so long merited. From this we
have been able to extract a very full account of the obscure favourite's
conversation with Louis upon the present occasion, which throws a light
upon the policy of that Prince, which we might otherwise have sought for
in vain.

When the favourite attendant entered the Gallery of Roland, he found the
King pensively seated upon the chair which his daughter had left some
minutes before. Well acquainted with his temper, he glided on with his
noiseless step until he had just crossed the line of the King's sight,
so as to make him aware of his presence, then shrank modestly backward
and out of sight, until he should be summoned to speak or to listen. The
Monarch's first address was an unpleasant one: "So, Oliver, your fine
schemes are melting like snow before the south wind!--I pray to Our
Lady of Embrun that they resemble not the ice heaps of which the Switzer
churls tell such stories, and come rushing down upon our heads."

"I have heard with concern that all is not well, Sire," answered Oliver.

"Not well!" exclaimed the King, rising and hastily marching up and down
the gallery. "All is ill, man--and as ill nearly as possible; so much
for thy fond romantic advice, that I, of all men, should become a
protector of distressed damsels! I tell thee Burgundy is arming, and on
the eve of closing an alliance with England. And Edward, who hath his
hands idle at home, will pour his thousands upon us through that
unhappy gate of Calais. Singly, I might cajole or defy them; but united,
united--and with the discontent and treachery of that villain Saint
Paul!--All thy fault, Oliver, who counselled me to receive the women,
and to use the services of that damned Bohemian to carry messages to
their vassals."

"My lord," said Oliver, "you know my reasons. The Countess's domains
lie between the frontiers of Burgundy and Flanders--her castle is almost
impregnable--her rights over neighbouring estates are such as, if well
supported, cannot but give much annoyance to Burgundy, were the lady but
wedded to one who should be friendly to France."

"It is, it is a tempting bait," said the King; "and could we have
concealed her being here, we might have arranged such a marriage for
this rich heiress as would have highly profited--France. But that
cursed Bohemian, how couldst thou recommend such a heathen hound for a
commission which required trust?"

"Please you," said Oliver, "to remember it was your Grace's self who
trusted him too far--much farther than I recommended. He would have
borne a letter trustily enough to the Countess's kinsman, telling him to
hold out her castle, and promising speedy relief; but your Highness must
needs put his prophetic powers to the test; and thus he became possessed
of secrets which were worth betraying to Duke Charles."

"I am ashamed, I am ashamed," said Louis. "And yet, Oliver, they say
that these heathen people are descended from the sage Chaldeans, who
did read the mysteries of the stars in the plains of Shinar [they lie
between the Tigris and Euphrates]."

Well aware that his master, with all his acuteness and sagacity, was but
the more prone to be deceived by soothsayers, astrologers, diviners,
and all that race of pretenders to occult science, and that he even
conceived himself to have some skill in these arts. Oliver dared to
press this point no farther; and only observed that the Bohemian had
been a bad prophet on his own account, else he would have avoided
returning to Tours, and saved himself from the gallows he had merited.

"It often happens that those who are gifted with prophetic knowledge,"
answered Louis, with much gravity, "have not the power of foreseeing
those events in which they themselves are personally interested."

"Under your Majesty's favour," replied the confidant, "that seems as if
a man could not see his own hand by means of the candle which he holds,
and which shows him every other object in the apartment."

"He cannot see his own features by the light which shows the faces of
others," replied Louis; "and that is the more faithful illustration of
the case.--But this is foreign to my purpose at present. The Bohemian
hath had his reward, and peace be with him.--But these ladies!--Not
only does Burgundy threaten us with war for harbouring them, but their
presence is like to interfere with my projects in my own family. My
simple cousin of Orleans hath barely seen this damsel, and I venture to
prophesy that the sight of her is like to make him less pliable in the
matter of his alliance with Joan."

"Your Majesty," answered the counsellor, "may send these ladies of
Croye back to Burgundy, and so make your peace with the Duke. Many
might murmur at this as dishonourable; but if necessity demands the
sacrifice--"

"If profit demanded the sacrifice, Oliver, the sacrifice should be
made without hesitation," answered the King. "I am an old, experienced
salmon, and use not to gulp the angler's hook because it is busked up
with a feather called honour. But what is worse than a lack of honour,
there were, in returning those ladies to Burgundy, a forfeiture of those
views of advantage which moved us to give them an asylum. It were heart
breaking to renounce the opportunity of planting a friend to ourselves,
and an enemy to Burgundy, in the very centre of his dominions, and so
near to the discontented cities of Flanders. Oliver, I cannot relinquish
the advantages which our scheme of marrying the maiden to a friend of
our own house seems to hold out to us."

"Your Majesty," said Oliver, after a moment's thought, "might confer her
hand on some right trusty friend, who would take all blame on himself,
and serve your Majesty secretly, while in public you might disown him."

"And where am I to find such a friend?" said Louis. "Were I to bestow
her upon any one of our mutinous and ill ruled nobles, would it not be
rendering him independent? and hath it not been my policy for years
to prevent them from becoming so?--Dunois indeed--him, and him only, I
might perchance trust.--He would fight for the crown of France, whatever
were his condition. But honours and wealth change men's natures.--Even
Dunois I will not trust."

"Your Majesty may find others," said Oliver, in his smoothest manner,
and in a tone more insinuating than that which he usually employed in
conversing with the King, who permitted him considerable freedom; "men
dependent entirely on your own grace and favour, and who could no more
exist without your countenance than without sun or air--men rather of
head than of action--men who"

"Men who resemble thyself, ha!" said King Louis. "No, Oliver, by my
faith that arrow was too rashly shot!--What! because I indulge thee with
my confidence, and let thee, in reward, poll my lieges a little now
and then, dost thou think it makes thee fit to be the husband of that
beautiful vision, and a Count of the highest class to boot?--thee--thee,
I say, low born, and lower bred, whose wisdom is at best a sort of
dinning, and whose courage is more than doubtful."

"Your Majesty imputes to me a presumption of which I am not guilty, in
supposing me to aspire so highly," said Oliver.

"I am glad to hear it, man," said the King; "and truly, I hold your
judgment the healthier that you disown such a reverie. But methinks thy
speech sounded strangely in that key.--Well, to return.--I dare not wed
this beauty to one of my subjects--I dare not return her to Burgundy--I
dare not transmit her to England or to Germany, where she is likely to
become the prize of some one more apt to unite with Burgundy than with
France, and who would be more ready to discourage the honest malcontents
in Ghent and Liege, than to yield them that wholesome countenance which
might always find Charles the Hardy enough to exercise his valour on,
without stirring from his domains--and they were in so ripe a humour for
insurrection, the men of Liege in especial, that they alone, well
heated and supported, would find my fair cousin work for more than a
twelvemonth; and backed by a warlike Count of Croye--O, Oliver! the plan
is too hopeful to be resigned without a struggle.--Cannot thy fertile
brain devise some scheme?"

Oliver paused for a long time--then at last replied, "What if a bridal
could be accomplished betwixt Isabelle of Croye and young Adolphus, the
Duke of Gueldres?"

"What!" said the King, in astonishment "sacrifice her, and she, too, so
lovely a creature, to the furious wretch who deposed, imprisoned, and
has often threatened to murder his own father!--No, Oliver, no that were
too unutterably cruel even for you and me, who look so steadfastly to
our excellent end, the peace and the welfare of France, and respect so
little the means by which it is attained. Besides, he lies distant from
us and is detested by the people of Ghent and Liege.--No, no--I will
none of Adolphus of Gueldres--think on some one else."

"My invention is exhausted, Sire," said the counsellor; "I can remember
no one who, as husband to the Countess of Croye, would be likely to
answer your Majesty's views. He must unite such various qualities--a
friend to your Majesty--an enemy to Burgundy--of policy enough to
conciliate the Ghentois and Liegeois, and of valour sufficient to defend
his little dominions against the power of Duke Charles--of noble birth
besides--that your Highness insists upon; and of excellent and virtuous
character to the boot of all."

"Nay, Oliver," said the King, "I leaned not so much--that is so very
much, on character; but methinks Isabelle's bridegroom should be
something less publicly and generally abhorred than Adolphus of
Gueldres. For example, since I myself must suggest some one--why not
William de la Marck?"

"On my halidome, Sire," said Oliver, "I cannot complain of your
demanding too high a standard of moral excellence in the happy man, if
the Wild Boar of Ardennes can serve your turn. De la Marck!--why,
he is the most notorious robber and murderer on all the
frontiers--excommunicated by the Pope for a thousand crimes."

"We will have him released from the sentence, friend Oliver--Holy Church
is merciful."

"Almost an outlaw," continued Oliver, "and under the ban of the Empire,
by an ordinance of the Chamber at Ratisbon."

[Ratisbon was the seat of the German Reichstag from 1663 to 1806.]

"We will have the ban taken off, friend Oliver," continued the King, in
the same tone; "the Imperial Chamber will hear reason."

[A supreme court of appeals established in 1495 by Maximilian I: the
first law court established in Germany.]

"And admitting him to be of noble birth," said Oliver, "he hath the
manners, the face, and the outward form, as well as the heart, of a
Flemish butcher--she will never accept of him."

"His mode of wooing, if I mistake him not," said Louis, "will render it
difficult for her to make a choice."

"I was far wrong indeed, when I taxed your Majesty with being over
scrupulous," said the counsellor. "On my life, the crimes of Adolphus
are but virtues to those of De la Marck!--And then how is he to meet
with his bride? Your Majesty knows he dare not stir far from his own
forest of Ardennes."

"That must be cared for," said the King; "and, in the first place,
the two ladies must be acquainted privately that they can be no longer
maintained at this Court, except at the expense of a war between France
and Burgundy, and that, unwilling to deliver them up to my fair
cousin of Burgundy, I am desirous they should secretly depart from my
dominions."

"They will demand to be conveyed to England," said Oliver "and we shall
have her return to Flanders with an island lord, having a round, fair
face, long brown hair, and three thousand archers at his back."

"No--no," replied the king; "we dare not (you understand me) so far
offend our fair cousin of Burgundy as to let her pass to England. It
would bring his displeasure as certainly as our maintaining her here.
No, no--to the safety of the Church alone we will venture to commit
her; and the utmost we can do is to connive at the Ladies Hameline and
Isabelle de Croye departing in disguise, and with a small retinue, to
take refuge with the Bishop of Liege, who will place the fair Isabelle
for the time under the safeguard of a convent."

"And if that convent protect her from William de la Marck, when he knows
of your Majesty's favourable intentions, I have mistaken the man."

"Why, yes," answered the King, "thanks to our secret supplies of money,
De la Marck hath together a handsome handful of as unscrupulous soldiery
as ever were outlawed; with which he contrives to maintain himself among
the woods, in such a condition as makes him formidable both to the Duke
of Burgundy and the Bishop of Liege. He lacks nothing but some territory
which he may call his own; and this being so fair an opportunity to
establish himself by marriage, I think that, Pasques dieu! he will find
means to win and wed, without more than a hint on our part. The Duke
of Burgundy will then have such a thorn in his side as no lancet of our
time will easily cut out from his flesh. The Boar of Ardennes, whom he
has already outlawed, strengthened by the possession of that fair lady's
lands, castles, and seigniory, with the discontented Liegeois to boot,
who, by may faith, will not be in that case unwilling to choose him for
their captain and leader--let Charles then think of wars with France
when he will, or rather let him bless his stars if she war not with
him.--How dost thou like the scheme, Oliver, ha?"

"Rarely," said Oliver, "save and except the doom which confers that
lady on the Wild Boar of Ardennes.--By my halidome, saving in a little
outward show of gallantry, Tristan, the Provost Marshal, were the more
proper bridegroom of the two."

"Anon thou didst propose Master Oliver the barber," said Louis; "but
friend Oliver and gossip Tristan, though excellent men in the way of
counsel and execution, are not the stuff that men make counts of.--Know
you not that the burghers of Flanders value birth in other men precisely
because they have it not themselves?--A plebeian mob ever desire an
aristocratic leader. Yonder Ked, or Cade, or--how called they him?--in
England, was fain to lure his rascal rout after him by pretending to the
blood of the Mortimers [Jack Cade was the leader of Cade's Rebellion.
Calling himself Mortimer, and claiming to be a cousin of Richard, Duke
of York, in 1450, at the head of twenty thousand men, he took formal
possession of London. His alleged object was to procure representation
for the people, and so reduce excessive taxation.]. William de la Marck
comes of the blood of the Princes of Sedan, as noble as mine own.--And
now to business. I must determine the ladies of Croye to a speedy and
secret flight, under sure guidance. This will be easily done--we have
but to hint the alternative of surrendering them to Burgundy. Thou must
find means to let William de la Marck know of their motions, and let him
choose his own time and place to push his suit. I know a fit person to
travel with them."

"May I ask to whom your Majesty commits such an important charge?" asked
the tonsor.

"To a foreigner, be sure," replied the King, "one who has neither kin
nor interest in France, to interfere with the execution of my pleasure;
and who knows too little of the country and its factions, to suspect
more of my purpose than I choose to tell him--in a word, I design to
employ the young Scot who sent you hither but now."

Oliver paused in a manner which seemed to imply a doubt of the prudence
of the choice, and then added, "Your Majesty has reposed confidence in
that stranger boy earlier than is your wont."

"I have my reasons," answered the King. "Thou knowest" (and he crossed
himself) "my devotion for the blessed Saint Julian. I had been saying my
orisons to that holy Saint late in the night before last, wherein (as he
is known to be the guardian of travellers) I made it my humble petition
that he would augment my household with such wandering foreigners as
might best establish throughout our kingdom unlimited devotion to our
