bidden to make Mr. Sampson comfortable--most comfortable; nothing would
satisfy Mr. Warrington but that Sampson should go down to his stables
and see his horses; he had several horses now; and when at the stable
Sampson recognised his own horse which Harry had won from him; and the
fond beast whinnied with pleasure, and rubbed his nose against his old
master's coat; Harry rapped out a brisk energetic expression or two, and
vowed by Jupiter that Sampson should have his old horse back again:
he would give him to Sampson, that he would; a gift which the chaplain
accepted by seizing Harry's hand, and blessing him,--by flinging his
arms round the horse's neck, and weeping for joy there, weeping tears
of Bordeaux and gratitude. Arm-in-arm the friends walked to Madame
Bernstein's from the stable, of which they brought the odours into her
ladyship's apartment. Their flushed cheeks and brightened eyes showed
what their amusement had been. Many gentlemen's cheeks were in the habit
of flushing in those days, and from the same cause.

Madame Bernstein received her nephew's chaplain kindly enough. The old
lady relished Sampson's broad jokes and rattling talk from time to time,
as she liked a highly-spiced dish or a new entree composed by her cook,
upon its two or three first appearances. The only amusement of which she
did not grow tired, she owned, was cards. "The cards don't cheat," she
used to say. "A bad hand tells you the truth to your face: and there is
nothing so flattering in the world as a good suite of trumps." And when
she was in a good humour, and sitting down to her favourite pastime, she
would laughingly bid her nephew's chaplain say grace before the meal.
Honest Sampson did not at first care to take a hand at Tunbridge Wells.
Her ladyship's play was too high for him, he would own, slapping his
pocket with a comical piteous look, and its contents had already been
handed over to the fortunate youth at Castlewood. Like most persons of
her age, and indeed her sex, Madame Bernstein was not prodigal of money.
I suppose it must have been from Harry Warrington, whose heart was
overflowing with generosity as his purse with guineas, that the chaplain
procured a small stock of ready coin, with which he was presently
enabled to appear at the card-table.

Our young gentleman welcomed Mr. Sampson to his coin, as to all the rest
of the good things which he had gathered about him. 'Twas surprising how
quickly the young Virginian adapted himself to the habits of life of
the folks amongst whom he lived. His suits were still black, but of the
finest cut and quality. "With a star and ribbon, and his stocking down,
and his hair over his shoulder, he would make a pretty Hamlet," said the
gay old Duchess Queensberry. "And I make no doubt he has been the death
of a dozen Ophelias already, here and amongst the Indians," she added,
thinking not at all the worse of Harry for his supposed successes among
the fair. Harry's lace and linen were as fine as his aunt could desire.
He purchased fine shaving-plate of the toy-shop women, and a couple of
magnificent brocade bedgowns, in which his worship lolled at ease, and
sipped his chocolate of a morning. He had swords and walking-canes, and
French watches with painted backs and diamond settings, and snuff boxes
enamelled by artists of the same cunning nation. He had a levee of
grooms, jockeys, tradesmen, daily waiting in his anteroom, and admitted
one by one to him and Parson Sampson, over his chocolate, by Gumbo, the
groom of the chambers. We have no account of the number of men whom Mr.
Gumbo now had under him. Certain it is that no single negro could have
taken care of all the fine things which Mr. Warrington now possessed,
let alone the horses and the postchaise which his honour had bought.
Also Harry instructed himself in the arts which became a gentleman in
those days. A French fencing-master, and a dancing-master of the same
nation, resided at Tunbridge during that season when Harry made
his appearance: these men of science the young Virginian sedulously
frequented, and acquired considerable skill and grace in the peaceful
and warlike accomplishments which they taught. Ere many weeks were over
he could handle the foils against his master or any frequenter of the
fencing-school,--and, with a sigh, Lady Maria (who danced very elegantly
herself) owned that there was no gentleman at court who could walk a
minuet more gracefully than Mr. Warrington. As for riding, though Mr.
Warrington took a few lessons on the great horse from a riding-master
who came to Tunbridge, he declared that their own Virginian manner was
well enough for him, and that he saw no one amongst the fine folks
and the jockeys who could ride better than his friend Colonel George
Washington of Mount Vernon.

The obsequious Sampson found himself in better quarters than he had
enjoyed for ever so long a time. He knew a great deal of the world, and
told a great deal more, and Harry was delighted with his stories, real
or fancied. The man of twenty looks up to the man of thirty, admires
the latter's old jokes, stale puns, and tarnished anecdotes, that are
slopped with the wine of a hundred dinner-tables. Sampson's town and
college pleasantries were all new and charming to the young Virginian. A
hundred years ago,--no doubt there are no such people left in the world
now,--there used to be grown men in London who loved to consort with
fashionable youths entering life; to tickle their young fancies with
merry stories; to act as Covent Garden Mentors and masters of ceremonies
at the Round-house; to accompany lads to the gaming-table, and perhaps
have an understanding with the punters; to drink lemonade to Master
Hopeful's Burgundy, and to stagger into the streets with perfectly
cool heads when my young lord reeled out to beat the watch. Of this, no
doubt, extinct race, Mr. Sampson was a specimen: and a great comfort it
is to think (to those who choose to believe the statement) that in Queen
Victoria's reign there are no flatterers left, such as existed in the
reign of her royal great-grandfather, no parasites pandering to the
follies of young men; in fact, that all the toads have been eaten off
the face of the island (except one or two that are found in stones,
where they have lain perdus these hundred years), and the toad-eaters
have perished for lack of nourishment.

With some sauces, as I read, the above-mentioned animals are said to
be exceedingly fragrant, wholesome, and savoury eating. Indeed, no man
could look more rosy and healthy, or flourish more cheerfully, than
friend Sampson upon the diet. He became our young friend's confidential
leader, and, from the following letter, which is preserved in the
Warrington correspondence, it will be seen that Mr. Harry not only
had dancing and fencing masters, but likewise a tutor, chaplain, and
secretary:--


TO MRS. ESMOND WARRINGTON OF CASTLEWOOD AT HER HOUSE AT RICHMOND,
VIRGINIA

Mrs. Bligh's Lodgings, Pantiles, Tunbridge Wells,

"August 25th, 1756.

"HONOURED MADAM--Your honoured letter of 20 June, per Mr. Trail of
Bristol, has been forwarded to me duly, and I have to thank your
goodness and kindness for the good advice which you are pleased to give
me, as also for the remembrances of dear home, which I shall love never
the worse for having been to the home of our ancestors in England.

"I writ you a letter by the last monthly packet, informing my honoured
mother of the little accident I had on the road hither, and of the
kind friends who I found and whom took me in. Since then I have been
profiting of the fine weather and the good company here, and have made
many friends among our nobility, whose acquaintance I am sure you will
not be sorry that I should make. Among their lordships I may mention the
famous Earl of Chesterfield, late Ambassador to Holland, and Viceroy of
the Kingdom of Ireland; the Earl of March and Ruglen, who will be Duke
of Queensberry at the death of his Grace; and her Grace the Duchess, a
celebrated beauty of the Queen's time, when she remembers my grandpapa
at Court. These and many more persons of the first fashion attend my
aunt's assemblies, which are the most crowded at this crowded place.
Also on my way hither I stayed at Westerham, at the house of an officer,
Lieut.-Gen. Wolfe, who served with my grandfather and General Webb
in the famous wars of the Duke of Marlborough. Mr. Wolfe has a son,
Lieut.-Col. James Wolfe, engaged to be married to a beautiful lady now
in this place, Miss Lowther of the North--and though but 30 years old he
is looked up to as much as any officer in the whole army, and has served
with honour under his Royal Highness the Duke wherever our arms have
been employed.

"I thank my honoured mother for announcing to me that a quarter's
allowance of 52l. 10s. will be paid me by Mr. Trail. I am in no present
want of cash, and by practising a rigid economy, which will be necessary
(as I do not disguise) for the maintenance of horses, Gumbo, and the
equipage and apparel requisite for a young gentleman of good family,
hope to be able to maintain my credit without unduly trespassing upon
yours. The linnen and clothes which I brought with me will with due care
last for some years--as you say. 'Tis not quite so fine as worn here by
persons of fashion, and I may have to purchase a few very fine shirts
for great days: but those I have are excellent for daily wear.

"I am thankful that I have been quite without occasion to use your
excellent family pills. Gumbo hath taken them with great benefit, who
grows fat and saucy upon English beef, ale, and air. He sends his humble
duty to his mistress, and prays Mrs. Mountain to remember him to all
his fellow-servants, especially Dinah and Lily, for whom he has bought
posey-rings at Tunbridge Fair.

"Besides partaking of all the pleasures of the place, I hope my honoured
mother will believe that I have not been unmindful of my education.
I have had masters in fencing and dancing, and my Lord Castlewood's
chaplain, the Reverend Mr. Sampson, having come hither to drink the
waters, has been so good as to take a vacant room at my lodging. Mr. S.
breakfasts with me, and we read together of a morning--he saying that I
am not quite such a dunce as I used to appear at home. We have read
in Mr. Rapin's History, Dr. Barrow's Sermons, and, for amusement,
Shakspeare, Mr. Pope's Homer, and (in French) the translation of an
Arabian Work of Tales, very diverting. Several men of learning have been
staying here besides the persons of fashion; and amongst the former was
Mr. Richardson, the author of the famous books which you and Mountain
and my dearest brother used to love so. He was pleased when I told him
that his works were in your closet in Virginia, and begged me to convey
his respectful compliments to my lady-mother. Mr. R. is a short fat man,
with little of the fire of genius visible in his eye or person.

"My aunt and my cousin, the Lady Maria, desire their affectionate
compliments to you, and with best regards for Mountain, to whom I
enclose a note, I am,--Honoured madam, your dutiful son, H. ESMOND
WARRINGTON."

Note in Madam Esmond's Handwriting,

"From my son. Received October 15 at Richmond. Sent 16 jars preserved
peaches, 224 lbs. best tobacco, 24 finest hams, per Royal William of
Liverpool, 8 jars peaches, 12 hams for my nephew, the Rt. Honourable
the Earl of Castlewood. 4 jars, 6 hams for the Baroness Bernstein, ditto
ditto for Mrs. Lambert of Oakhurst, Surrey, and 1/2 cwt. tobacco.
Packet of Infallible Family Pills for Gumbo. My Papa's large silver-gilt
shoe-buckles for H., and red silver-laced saddle-cloth."


II. (enclosed in No. I.)

"For Mrs. Mountain.

"What do you mien, you silly old Mountain, by sending an order for your
poor old divadends dew at Xmas? I'd have you to know I don't want your
7l. 10, and have toar your order up into 1000 bitts. I've plenty of
money. But I'm obleaged to you all same. A kiss to Fanny from--Your
loving HARRY."

Note in Madam Esmond's Handwriting

"This note, which I desired M. to show to me, proves that she hath a
good heart, and that she wished to show her gratitude to the family, by
giving up her half-yearly divd. (on L500 3 per ct.) to my boy. Hence
I reprimanded her very slightly for daring to send money to Mr. E.
Warrington, unknown to his mother. Note to Mountain not so well spelt as
letter to me.

"Mem. to write to Revd. Mr. Sampson desire to know what theolog. books
he reads with H. Recommend Law, Baxter, Drelincourt.--Request H. to say
his catechism to Mr. S., which he has never quite been able to master.
By next ship peaches (3), tobacco 1/2 cwt. Hams for Mr. S."


The mother of the Virginians and her sons have long long since passed
away. So how are we to account for the fact, that of a couple of letters
sent under one enclosure and by one packet, one should be well spelt,
and the other not entirely orthographical? Had Harry found some
wonderful instructor, such as exists in the present lucky times, and
who would improve his writing in six lessons? My view of the case, after
deliberately examining the two notes, is this: No. 1, in which there
appears a trifling grammatical slip ("the kind, friends who I found and
whom took me in"), must have been re-written from a rough copy which
had probably undergone the supervision of a tutor or friend. The more
artless composition, No. 2, was not referred to the scholar who prepared
No. 1 for the maternal eye, and to whose corrections of "who" and "whom"
Mr. Warrington did not pay very close attention. Who knows how he
may have been disturbed? A pretty milliner may have attracted Harry's
attention out of window--a dancing bear with pipe and tabor may have
passed along the common--a jockey come under his windows to show off a
horse there? There are some days when any of us may be ungrammatical and
spell ill. Finally, suppose Harry did not care to spell so elegantly for
Mrs. Mountain as for his lady-mother, what affair is that of the
present biographer, century, reader? And as for your objection that Mr.
Warrington, in the above communication to his mother, showed some little
hypocrisy and reticence in his dealings with that venerable person, I
dare say, young folks, you in your time have written more than one prim
letter to your papas and mammas in which not quite all the transactions
of your lives were narrated, or if narrated, were exhibited in the most
favourable light for yourselves--I dare say, old folks! you, in your
time, were not altogether more candid. There must be a certain distance
between me and my son Jacky. There must be a respectful, an amiable, a
virtuous hypocrisy between us. I do not in the least wish that he should
treat me as his equal, that he should contradict me, take my arm-chair,
read the newspaper first at breakfast, ask unlimited friends to dine
when I have a party of my own, and so forth. No; where there is not
equality there must be hypocrisy. Continue to be blind to my faults; to
hush still as mice when I fall asleep after dinner; to laugh at my old
jokes; to admire my sayings; to be astonished at the impudence of those
unbelieving reviewers; to be dear filial humbugs, O my children! In my
castle I am king. Let all my royal household back before me. 'Tis not
their natural way of walking, I know: but a decorous, becoming, and
modest behaviour highly agreeable to me. Away from me they may do, nay,
they do do, what they like. They may jump, skip, dance, trot, tumble
over heads and heels, and kick about freely, when they are out of the
presence of my majesty. Do not then, my dear young friends, be surprised
at your mother and aunt when they cry out, "Oh, it was highly immoral
and improper of Mr. Warrington to be writing home humdrum demure letters
to his dear mamma, when he was playing all sorts of merry pranks!"--but
drop a curtsey, and say, "Yes, dear grandmamma (or aunt, as may be),
it was very wrong of him: and I suppose you never had your fun when you
were young." Of course, she didn't! And the sun never shone, and the
blossoms never budded, and the blood never danced, and the fiddles never
sang, in her spring-time. Eh, Babet! mon lait de poule et mon bonnet
de nuit! Ho, Betty! my gruel and my slippers! And go, ye frisky, merry
little souls! and dance, and have your merry little supper of cakes and
ale!




CHAPTER XXXI. The Bear and the Leader


Our candid readers know the real state of the case regarding Harry
Warrington and that luckless Cattarina; but a number of the old ladies
at Tunbridge Wells supposed the Virginian to be as dissipated as any
young English nobleman of the highest quality, and Madame de Bernstein
was especially incredulous about her nephew's innocence. It was the old
lady's firm belief that Harry was leading not only a merry life, but a
wicked one, and her wish was father to the thought that the lad might
be no better than his neighbours. An old Roman herself, she liked her
nephew to do as Rome did. All the scandal regarding Mr. Warrington's
Lovelace adventures she eagerly and complacently accepted. We have seen
how, on one or two occasions, he gave tea and music to the company at
the Wells; and he was so gallant and amiable to the ladies (to ladies of
a much better figure and character than the unfortunate Cattarina), that
Madame Bernstein ceased to be disquieted regarding the silly love affair
which had had a commencement at Castlewood, and relaxed in her vigilance
over Lady Maria. Some folks--many old folks--are too selfish to interest
themselves long about the affairs of their neighbours. The Baroness had
her trumps to think of, her dinners, her twinges of rheumatism: and her
suspicions regarding Maria and Harry, lately so lively, now dozed, and
kept a careless, unobservant watch. She may have thought that the danger
was over, or she may have ceased to care whether it existed or not, or
that artful Maria, by her conduct, may have quite cajoled, soothed, and
misguided the old Dragon, to whose charge she was given over. At Maria's
age, nay, earlier indeed, maidens have learnt to be very sly, and at
Madame Bernstein's time of life dragons are not so fierce and alert.
They cannot turn so readily, some of their old teeth have dropped out,
and their eyes require more sleep than they needed in days when they
were more active, venomous, and dangerous. I, for my part, know a few
female dragons, de par le monde, and, as I watch them and remember what
they were, admire the softening influence of years upon these whilom
destroyers of man- and woman-kind. Their scales are so soft that any
knight with a moderate power of thrust can strike them: their claws,
once strong enough to tear out a thousand eyes, only fall with a feeble
pat that scarce raises the skin: their tongues, from their toothless old
gums, dart a venom which is rather disagreeable than deadly. See them
trailing their languid tails, and crawling home to their caverns
at roosting-time! How weak are their powers of doing injury! their
maleficence how feeble! How changed are they since the brisk days when
their eyes shot wicked fire; their tongue spat poison; their breath
blasted reputation; and they gobbled up a daily victim at least!

If the good folks at Oakhurst could not resist the testimony which
was brought to them regarding Harry's ill-doings, why should Madame
Bernstein, who in the course of her long days had had more experience of
evil than all the Oakhurst family put together, be less credulous
than they? Of course every single old woman of her ladyship's society
believed every story that was told about Mr. Harry Warrington's
dissipated habits, and was ready to believe as much more ill of him as
you please. When the little dancer went back to London, as she did,
it was because that heartless Harry deserted her. He deserted her for
somebody else, whose name was confidently given,--whose name?--whose
half-dozen names the society at Tunbridge Wells would whisper about;
where there congregated people of all ranks and degrees, women of
fashion, women of reputation, of demi-reputation, of virtue, of no
virtue,--all mingling in the same rooms, dancing to the same fiddles,
drinking out of the same glasses at the Wells, and alike in search of
health, or society, or pleasure. A century ago, and our ancestors, the
most free or the most straitlaced, met together at a score of such merry
places as that where our present scene lies, and danced, and frisked,
and gamed, and drank at Epsom, Bath, Tunbridge, Harrogate, as they do at
Homburg and Baden now.

Harry's bad reputation, then, comforted his old aunt exceedingly, and
eased her mind in respect to the boy's passion for Lady Maria. So easy
was she in her mind, that when the chaplain said he came to escort
her ladyship home, Madame Bernstein did not even care to part from her
niece. She preferred rather to keep her under her eye, to talk to her
about her wicked young cousin's wild extravagances, to whisper to her
that boys would be boys, to confide to Maria her intention of getting
a proper wife for Harry,--some one of a suitable age,--some one with a
suitable fortune,--all which pleasantries poor Maria had to bear with as
much fortitude as she could muster.

There lived, during the last century, a certain French duke and marquis,
who distinguished himself in Europe, and America likewise, and has
obliged posterity by leaving behind him a choice volume of memoirs,
which the gentle reader is specially warned not to consult. Having
performed the part of Don Juan in his own country, in ours, and in
other parts of Europe, he has kindly noted down the names of many
court-beauties who fell victims to his powers of fascination; and very
pleasant reading no doubt it must be for the grandsons and descendants
of the fashionable persons amongst whom our brilliant nobleman moved,
to find the names of their ancestresses adorning M. le Duc's sprightly
pages, and their frailties recorded by the candid writer who caused
them.

In the course of the peregrinations of this nobleman, he visited North
America, and, as had been his custom in Europe, proceeded straightway to
fall in love. And curious it is to contrast the elegant refinements of
European society, where, according to monseigneur, he had but to lay
siege to a woman in order to vanquish her, with the simple lives and
habits of the colonial folks, amongst whom this European enslaver of
hearts did not, it appears, make a single conquest. Had he done so, he
would as certainly have narrated his victories in Pennsylvania and New
England, as he described his successes in this and his own country.
Travellers in America have cried out quite loudly enough against the
rudeness and barbarism of transatlantic manners; let the present writer
give the humble testimony of his experience that the conversation of
American gentlemen is generally modest, and, to the best of his belief,
the lives of the women pure.

We have said that Mr. Harry Warrington brought his colonial modesty
along with him to the old country; and though he could not help hearing
the free talk of the persons amongst whom he lived, and who were men
of pleasure and the world, he sat pretty silent himself in the midst of
their rattle; never indulged in double entendre in his conversation
with women; had no victories over the sex to boast of; and was shy and
awkward when he heard such narrated by others.

This youthful modesty Mr. Sampson had remarked during his intercourse
with the lad at Castlewood, where Mr. Warrington had more than once
shown himself quite uneasy whilst cousin Will was telling some of his
choice stories; and my lord had curtly rebuked his brother, bidding
him keep his jokes for the usher's table at Kensington, and not give
needless offence to their kinsman. Hence the exclamation of "Reverentia
pueris," which the chaplain had addressed to his neighbour at the
ordinary on Harry's first appearance there. Mr. Sampson, if he had not
strength sufficient to do right himself, at least had grace enough not
to offend innocent young gentlemen by his cynicism.

The chaplain was touched by Harry's gift of the horse; and felt a
genuine friendliness towards the lad. "You see, sir," says he, "I am of
the world, and must do as the rest of the world does. I have led a rough
life, Mr. Warrington, and can't afford to be more particular than my
neighbours. Video meliora, deteriora sequor, as we said at college. I
have got a little sister, who is at boarding-school, not very far from
here, and, as I keep a decent tongue in my head when I am talking with
my little Patty, and expect others to do as much, sure I may try and do
as much by you."

The chaplain was loud in his praises of Harry to his aunt, the old
Baroness. She liked to hear him praised. She was as fond of him as she
could be of anything; was pleased in his company, with his good looks,
his manly courageous bearing, his blushes, which came so readily, his
bright eyes, his deep youthful voice. His shrewdness and simplicity
constantly amused her; she would have wearied of him long before, had he
been clever, or learned, or witty, or other than he was. "We must find
a good wife for him, Chaplain," she said to Mr. Sampson. "I have one or
two in my eye, who, I think, will suit him. We must set him up here;
he never will bear going back to his savages again, or to live with his
little Methodist of a mother."

Now about this point Mr. Sampson, too, was personally anxious, and
had also a wife in his eye for Harry. I suppose he must have had some
conversations with his lord at Castlewood, whom we have heard expressing
some intention of complimenting his chaplain with a good living or other
provision, in event of his being able to carry out his lordship's wishes
regarding a marriage for Lady Maria. If his good offices could help that
anxious lady to a husband, Sampson was ready to employ them: and he now
waited to see in what most effectual manner he could bring his influence
to bear.

Sampson's society was most agreeable, and he and his young friend were
intimate in the course of a few hours. The parson rejoiced in
high spirits, good appetite, good humour; pretended to no sort of
squeamishness, and indulged in no sanctified hypocritical conversation;
nevertheless, he took care not to shock his young friend by any needless
outbreaks of levity or immorality of talk, initiating his pupil, perhaps
from policy, perhaps from compunction, only into the minor mysteries,
as it were; and not telling him the secrets with which the unlucky adept
himself was only too familiar. With Harry, Sampson was only a brisk,
lively, jolly companion, ready for any drinking bout, or any sport, a
cock-fight, a shooting-match, a game at cards, or a gallop across the
common; but his conversation was decent, and he tried much more to
amuse the young man, than to lead him astray. The chaplain was quite
successful: he had immense animal spirits as well as natural wit, and
aptitude as well as experience in that business of toad-eater which
had been his calling and livelihood from his very earliest years,--ever
since he first entered college as a servitor, and cast about to see by
whose means he could make his fortune in life. That was but satire just
now, when we said there were no toad-eaters left in the world. There are
many men of Sampson's profession now, doubtless; nay, little boys at our
public schools are sent thither at the earliest age, instructed by their
parents, and put out apprentices to toad-eating. But the flattery is not
so manifest as it used to be a hundred years since. Young men and old
have hangers-on, and led captains, but they assume an appearance of
equality, borrow money, or swallow their toads in private, and walk
abroad arm-in-arm with the great man, and call him by his name without
his title. In those good old times, when Harry Warrington first came
to Europe, a gentleman's toad-eater pretended to no airs of equality at
all; openly paid court to his patron, called him by that name to other
folks, went on his errands for him,--any sort of errands which the
patron might devise,--called him sir in speaking to him, stood up in
his presence until bidden to sit down, and flattered him ex officio. Mr.
Sampson did not take the least shame in speaking of Harry as his young
patron,--as a young Virginian nobleman recommended to him by his other
noble patron, the Earl of Castlewood. He was proud of appearing at
Harry's side, and as his humble retainer, in public talked about him to
the company, gave orders to Harry's tradesmen, from whom, let us hope,
he received a percentage in return for his recommendations, performed
all the functions of aide-de-camp--others, if our young gentleman
demanded them from the obsequious divine, who had gaily discharged the
duties of ami du prince to ever so many young men of fashion, since
his own entrance into the world. It must be confessed that, since his
arrival in Europe, Mr. Warrington had not been uniformly lucky in the
friendships which he had made.

"What a reputation, sir, they have made for you in this place!" cries
Mr. Sampson, coming back from the coffee-house to his patron. "Monsieur
de Richelieu was nothing to you!"

"How do you mean, Monsieur de Richelieu?--Never was at Minorca in my
life," says downright Harry, who had not heard of those victories at
home, which made the French duke famous.

Mr. Sampson explained. The pretty widow Patcham who had just arrived
was certainly desperate about Mr. Warrington: her way of going on at
the rooms, the night before, proved that. As for Mrs. Hooper, that was a
known case, and the Alderman had fetched his wife back to London for no
other reason. It was the talk of the whole Wells.

"Who says so?" cries out Harry, indignantly. "I should like to meet the
man who dares say so, and confound the villain!"

"I should not like to show him to you," says Mr. Sampson, laughing. "It
might be the worse for him."

"It's a shame to speak with such levity about the character of ladies or
of gentlemen either," continues Mr. Warrington, pacing up and down the
room in a fume.

"So I told them," says the chaplain, wagging his head and looking very
much moved and very grave, though, if the truth were known, it had never
come into his mind at all to be angry at hearing charges of this nature
against Harry.

"It's a shame, I say, to talk away the reputation of any man or woman as
people do here. Do you know, in our country, a fellow's ears would not
be safe; and a little before I left home, three brothers shot down a
man, for having spoken ill of their sister."

"Serve the villain right!" cries Sampson.

"Already they have had that calumny about me set a-going here,
Sampson,--about me and the poor little French dancing-girl."

"I have heard," says Mr. Sampson, shaking powder out of his wig.

"Wicked; wasn't it?"

"Abominable."

"They said the very same thing about my Lord March. Isn't it shameful?"

"Indeed it is," says Mr. Sampson, preserving a face of wonderful
gravity.

"I don't know what I should do if these stories were to come to my
mother's ears. It would break her heart, I do believe it would. Why,
only a few days before you came, a military friend of mine, Mr. Wolfe,
told me how the most horrible lies were circulated about me. Good
heavens! What do they think a gentleman of my name and country can
be capable of--I a seducer of women? They might as well say I was a
horse-stealer or a housebreaker. I vow if I hear any man say so, I'll
have his ears!"

"I have read, sir, that the Grand Seignior of Turkey has bushels of ears
sometimes sent in to him," says Mr. Sampson, laughing. "If you took all
those that had heard scandal against you or others, what basketsful you
would fill!"

"And so I would, Sampson, as soon as look at 'em:--any fellow's who said
a word against a lady or a gentleman of honour!" cries the Virginian.

"If you'll go down to the Well, you'll find a harvest of 'em. I just
came from there. It was the high tide of Scandal. Detraction was at its
height. And you may see the nymphas discentes and the aures satyrorum
acutas," cries the chaplain, with a shrug of his shoulders.

"That may be as you say, Sampson," Mr. Warrington replies, "but if ever
I hear any man speak against my character I'll punish him. Mark that."

"I shall be very sorry for his sake, that I should; for you'll mark him
in a way he won't like, sir; and I know you are a man of your word."

"You may be sure of that, Sampson. And now shall we go to dinner, and
afterwards to my Lady Trumpington's tea?"

"You know, sir, I can't resist a card or a bottle," says Mr. Sampson.
"Let us have the last first and then the first shall come last." And
with this the two gentlemen went off to their accustomed place of
refection.

That was an age in which wine-bibbing was more common than in our
politer time; and, especially since the arrival of General Braddock's
army in his native country, our young Virginian had acquired rather
a liking for the filling of bumpers and the calling of toasts; having
heard that it was a point of honour among the officers never to decline
a toast or a challenge. So Harry and his chaplain drank their claret in
peace and plenty, naming, as the simple custom was, some favourite lady
with each glass.

The chaplain had reasons of his own for desiring to know how far
the affair between Harry and my Lady Maria had gone; whether it was
advancing, or whether it was ended; and he and his young friend were
just warm enough with the claret to be able to talk with that great
eloquence, that candour, that admirable friendliness, which good wine
taken in rather injudicious quantity inspires. O kindly harvests of
the Aquitanian grape! O sunny banks of Garonne! O friendly caves of
Gledstane and Morol, where the dusky flasks lie recondite! May we not
say a word of thanks for all the pleasure we owe you? Are the Temperance
men to be allowed to shout in the public places? are the Vegetarians to
bellow "Cabbage for ever?" and may we modest Enophilists not sing the
praises of our favourite plant? After the drinking of good Bordeaux
wine, there is a point (I do not say a pint) at which men arrive, when
all the generous faculties of the soul are awakened and in full vigour;
when the wit brightens and breaks out in sudden flashes; when the
intellects are keenest; when the pent-up words and confined thoughts get
a night-rule, and rush abroad and disport themselves; when the kindliest
affection, come out and shake hands with mankind, and the timid Truth
jumps up naked out of his well and proclaims himself to all the world.
How, by the kind influence of the wine-cup, we succour the poor and
humble! How bravely we rush to the rescue of the oppressed! I say, in
the face of all the pumps which ever spouted, that there is a moment in
a bout of good wine at which, if a man could but remain, wit, wisdom,
courage, generosity, eloquence, happiness were his; but the moment
passes, and that other glass somehow spoils the state of beatitude.
There is a headache in the morning; we are not going into Parliament
for our native town; we are not going to shoot those French officers
who have been speaking disrespectfully of our country; and poor Jeremy
Diddler calls about eleven o'clock for another half-sovereign, and we
are unwell in bed, and can't see him, and send him empty away.

Well, then, as they sate over their generous cups, the company having
departed, and the bottle of claret being brought in by Monsieur Barbeau,
the chaplain found himself in an eloquent state, with a strong desire
for inculcating sublime moral precepts whilst Harry was moved by an
extreme longing to explain his whole private history, and to impart all
his present feelings to his new friend. Mark that fact. Why must a
man say everything that comes uppermost in his noble mind, because,
forsooth, he has swallowed a half-pint more wine than he ordinarily
drinks? Suppose I had committed a murder (of course I allow the sherry,
and champagne at dinner), should I announce that homicide somewhere
about the third bottle (in a small party of men) of claret at dessert?
Of course: and hence the fidelity to water-gruel announced a few pages
back.

"I am glad to hear what your conduct has really been with regard to the
Cattarina, Mr. Warrington; I am glad from my soul," says the impetuous
chaplain. "The wine is with you. You have shown that you can bear down
calumny, and resist temptation. Ah! my dear sir, men are not all so
fortunate. What famous good wine this is!" and he sucks up a glass with
"A toast from you, my dear sir, if you please?"

"I give you 'Miss Fanny Mountain, of Virginia,'" says Mr. Warrington,
filling a bumper as his thoughts fly straightway, ever so many thousand
miles, to home.

"One of your American conquests, I suppose?" says the chaplain.

"Nay, she is but ten years old, and I have never made any conquests at
all in Virginia, Mr. Sampson," says the young gentleman.

"You are like a true gentleman, and don't kiss and tell, sir."

"I neither kiss nor tell. It isn't the custom of our country, Sampson,
to ruin girls, or frequent the society of low women. We Virginian
gentlemen honour women: we don't wish to bring them to shame," cries the
young toper, looking very proud and handsome. "The young lady whose
name I mentioned hath lived in our family since her infancy, and I would
shoot the man who did her a wrong;--by Heaven, I would!"

"Your sentiments do you honour! Let me shake hands with you! I will
shake hands with you, Mr. Warrington," cried the enthusiastic Sampson.
"And let me tell you 'tis the grasp of honest friendship offered you,
and not merely the poor retainer paying court to the wealthy patron. No!
with such liquor as this, all men are equal;--faith, all men are rich,
whilst it lasts! and Tom Sampson is as wealthy with his bottle as your
honour with all the acres of your principality!"

"Let us have another bottle of riches," says Harry, with a laugh.
"Encore du cachet jaune, mon bon Monsieur Barbeau!" and exit Monsieur
Barbeau to the caves below.

"Another bottle of riches! Capital, capital! How beautifully you speak
French, Mr. Harry!"

"I do speak it well," says Harry. "At least, when I speak, Monsieur
Barbeau understands me well enough."

"You do everything well, I think. You succeed in whatever you try. That
is why they have fancied here you have won the hearts of so many women,
sir."

"There you go again about the women! I tell you I don't like these
stories about women. Confound me, Sampson, why is a gentleman's
character to be blackened so?"

"Well, at any rate, there is one, unless my eyes deceive me very much
indeed, sir!" cries the chaplain.

"Whom do you mean?" asked Harry, flushing very red.

"Nay, I name no names. It isn't for a poor chaplain to meddle with his
betters' doings, or to know their thoughts," says Mr. Sampson.

"Thoughts! what thoughts, Sampson?"

"I fancied I saw, on the part of a certain lovely and respected lady at
Castlewood, a preference exhibited. I fancied, on the side of a certain
distinguished young gentleman, a strong liking manifested itself: but I
may have been wrong, and ask pardon."

"Oh, Sampson, Sampson!" broke out the young man. "I tell you I am
miserable. I tell you I have been longing for some one to confide in,
or ask advice of. You do know, then, that there has been something
going on--something between me and--help Mr. Sampson, Monsieur
Barbeau--and--and some one else?"

"I have watched it this month past," says the chaplain.

"Confound me, sir, do you mean you have been a spy on me?" says the
other hotly.

"A spy! You made little disguise of the matter, Mr. Warrington, and
her ladyship wasn't a much better hand at deceiving. You were always
together. In the shrubberies, in the walks, in the village, in the
galleries of the house,--you always found a pretext for being together,
and plenty of eyes besides mine watched you."

"Gracious powers! What did you see, Sampson?" cries the lad.

"Nay, sir, 'tis forbidden to kiss and tell. I say so again," says the
chaplain.

The young man turned very red. "Oh, Sampson!" he cried, "can I--can I
confide in you?"

"Dearest sir--dear generous youth--you know I would shed my heart's
blood for you!" exclaimed the chaplain, squeezing his patron's hand, and
turning a brilliant pair of eyes ceilingwards.

"Oh, Sampson! I tell you I am miserable. With all this play and wine,
whilst I have been here, I tell you I have been trying to drive away
care. I own to you that when we were at Castlewood there were things
passed between a certain lady and me."

The parson gave a slight whistle over his glass of Bordeaux.

"And they've made me wretched, those things have. I mean, you see, that
if a gentleman has given his word, why, it's his word, and he must stand
by it, you know. I mean that I thought I loved her,--and so I do very
much, and she's a most dear, kind, darling, affectionate creature, and
very handsome, too,--quite beautiful; but then, you know, our ages,
Sampson! Think of our ages, Sampson! She's as old as my mother!"

"Who would never forgive you."

"I don't intend to let anybody meddle in my affairs, not Madam Esmond
nor anybody else," cries Harry: "but you see, Sampson, she is old--and,
oh, hang it! Why did Aunt Bernstein tell me----?"

"Tell you what?"

"Something I can't divulge to anybody, something that tortures me!"

"Not about the--the----" the chaplain paused: he was going to say about
her ladyship's little affair with the French dancing-master; about other
little anecdotes affecting her character. But he had not drunk wine
enough to be quite candid, or too much, and was past the real moment of
virtue.

"Yes, yes, every one of 'em false--every one of 'em!" shrieks out Harry.

"Great powers, what do you mean?" asks his friend.

"These, sir, these!" says Harry, beating a tattoo on his own white
teeth. "I didn't know it when I asked her. I swear I didn't know it.
Oh, it's horrible--it's horrible! and it has caused me nights of agony,
Sampson. My dear old grandfather had a set a Frenchman at Charleston
made them for him, and we used to look at 'em grinning in a tumbler, and
when they were out, his jaws used to fall in--I never thought she had
'em."

"Had what, sir?" again asked the chaplain.

"Confound it, sir, don't you see I mean teeth?" says Harry, rapping the
table.

"Nay, only two."

"And how the devil do you know, sir?" asks the young man, fiercely.

"I--I had it from her maid. She had two teeth knocked out by a stone
which cut her lip a little, and they have been replaced."

"Oh, Sampson, do you mean to say they ain't all sham ones?" cries the
boy.

"But two, sir, at least so Peggy told me, and she would just as soon
have blabbed about the whole two-and-thirty--the rest are as sound as
yours, which are beautiful."

"And her hair, Sampson, is that all right, too?" asks the young
gentleman.

"'Tis lovely--I have seen that. I can take my oath to that. Her ladyship
can sit upon it; and her figure is very fine; and her skin is as white
as snow; and her heart is the kindest that ever was; and I know, that is
I feel sure, it is very tender about you, Mr. Warrington."

"Oh, Sampson! Heaven, Heaven bless you! What a weight you've taken off
my mind with those--those--never mind them! Oh, Sam! How happy--that is,
no, no--ob, how miserable I am! She's as old as Madam Esmond--by George
she is--she's as old as my mother. You wouldn't have a fellow marry
a woman as old as his mother? It's too bad: by George it is. It's too
bad." And here, I am sorry to say, Harry Esmond Warrington, Esquire, of
Castlewood, in Virginia, began to cry. The delectable point, you see,
must have been passed several glasses ago.

"You don't want to marry her, then?" asks the chaplain.

"What's that to you, sir? I've promised her, and an Esmond--a Virginia
Esmond mind that--Mr. What's-your-name--Sampson--has but his word!"
The sentiment was noble, but delivered by Harry with rather a doubtful
articulation.

"Mind you, I said a Virginia Esmond," continued poor Harry, lifting up
his finger. "I don't mean the younger branch here. I don't mean Will,
who robbed me about the horse, and whose bones I'll break. I give you
Lady Maria--Heaven bless her, and Heaven bless you, Sampson, and you
deserve to be a bishop, old boy!"

"There are letters between you, I suppose?" says Sampson.

"Letters! Dammy, she's always writing me letters!--never lets me into a
window but she sticks one in my cuff. Letters! that is a good idea! Look
here! Here's letters!" And he threw down a pocket-book containing a heap
of papers of the poor lady's composition.

"Those are letters, indeed. What a post-bag!" says the chaplain.

"But any man who touches them--dies--dies on the spot!" shrieks Harry,
starting from his seat, and reeling towards his sword; which he draws,
and then stamps with his foot, and says, "Ha! ha!" and then lunges at
M. Barbeau, who skips away from the lunge behind the chaplain, who looks
rather alarmed. I know we could have had a much more exciting picture
than either of those we present of Harry this month, and the lad, with
his hair dishevelled, raging about the room flamberge au vent, and
pinking the affrighted innkeeper and chaplain, would have afforded a
good subject for the pencil. But oh, to think of him stumbling over a
stool, and prostrated by an enemy who has stole away his brains! Come,
Gumbo! and help your master to bed!




CHAPTER XXXII. In which a Family Coach is ordered


Our pleasing duty now is to divulge the secret which Mr. Lambert
whispered in his wife's ear at the close of the antepenultimate chapter,
and the publication of which caused such great pleasure to the whole of
the Oakhurst family. As the hay was in, the corn not ready for cutting,
and by consequence the farm horses disengaged, why, asked Colonel
Lambert, should they not be put into the coach, and should we not all
pay a visit to Tunbridge Wells, taking friend Wolfe at Westerham on our
way?

Mamma embraced this proposal, and I dare say the honest gentleman who
made it. All the children jumped for joy. The girls went off straightway
to get together their best calamancoes, paduasoys, falbalas, furbelows,
capes, cardinals, sacks, negligees, solitaires, caps, ribbons, mantuas,
clocked stockings, and high-heeled shoes, and I know not what articles
of toilet. Mamma's best robes were taken from the presses, whence they
only issued on rare, solemn occasions, retiring immediately afterwards
to lavender and seclusion; the brave Colonel produced his laced hat and
waistcoat and silver-hilted hanger; Charley rejoiced in a rasee holiday
suit of his father's, in which the Colonel had been married, and which
Mrs. Lambert cut up, not without a pang. Ball and Dumpling had their
tails and manes tied with ribbon, and Chump, the old white cart-horse,
went as unicorn leader, to help the carriage-horses up the first hilly
five miles of the road from Oakhurst to Westerham. The carriage was an
ancient vehicle, and was believed to have served in the procession which
had brought George I. from Greenwich to London, on his first arrival to
assume the sovereignty of these realms. It had belonged to Mr. Lambert's
father, and the family had been in the habit of regarding it, ever since
they could remember anything, as one of the most splendid coaches in the
three kingdoms. Brian, coachman, and--must it also be owned?--ploughman,
of the Oakhurst family, had a place on the box, with Mr. Charley by his
side. The precious clothes were packed in imperials on the roof. The
Colonel's pistols were put in the pockets of the carriage, and the
blunderbuss hung behind the box, in reach of Brian, who was an old
soldier. No highwayman, however, molested the convoy; not even an
innkeeper levied contributions on Colonel Lambert, who, with a slender
purse and a large family, was not to be plundered by those or any other
depredators on the king's highway; and a reasonable cheap modest lodging
had been engaged for them by young Colonel Wolfe, at the house where he
was in the habit of putting up, and whither he himself accompanied them
on horseback.

It happened that these lodgings were opposite Madame Bernstein's; and as
the Oakhurst family reached their quarters on a Saturday evening, they
could see chair after chair discharging powdered beaux and patched and
brocaded beauties at the Baroness's door, who was holding one of her
many card-parties. The sun was not yet down (for our ancestors began
their dissipations at early hours, and were at meat, drink, or cards,
any time after three o'clock in the afternoon until any time in the
night or morning), and the young country ladies and their mother from
their window could see the various personages as they passed into the
Bernstein rout. Colonel Wolfe told the ladies who most of the characters
were. 'Twas almost as delightful as going to the party themselves, Hetty
and Theo thought, for they not only could see the guests arriving, but
look into the Baroness's open casements and watch many of them there. Of
a few of the personages we have before had a glimpse. When the Duchess
of Queensberry passed, and Mr. Wolfe explained who she was, Martin
Lambert was ready with a score of lines about "Kitty, beautiful and
young," from his favourite Mat Prior.

"Think that that old lady was once like you, girls!" cries the Colonel.

"Like us, papa? Well, certainly we never set up for being beauties!"
says Miss Hetty, tossing up her little head.

"Yes, like you, you little baggage; like you at this moment, who want to
go to that drum yonder:--

    'Inflamed with rage at sad restraint
       Which wise mamma ordained,
     And sorely vexed to play the saint
       Whilst wit and beauty reigned.'"

"We were never invited, papa; and I am sure if there's no beauty more
worth seeing than that, the wit can't be much worth the hearing," again
says the satirist of the family.

"Oh, but he's a rare poet, Mat Prior!" continues the Colonel; "though,
mind you, girls, you'll skip over all the poems I have marked with a
cross. A rare poet! and to think you should see one of his heroines!
'Fondness prevailed, mamma gave way' (she always will, Mrs. Lambert!)--

    'Fondness prevailed, mamma gave way,
       Kitty at heart's desire
     Obtained the chariot for a day,
       And set the world on fire!'"

"I am sure it must have been very inflammable," says mamma.

"So it was, my dear, twenty years ago, much more inflammable than it is
now," remarks the Colonel.

"Nonsense, Mr. Lambert," is mamma's answer.

"Look, look!" cries Hetty, running forward and pointing to the little
square, and the covered gallery, where was the door leading to Madame
Bernstein's apartments, and round which stood a crowd of street urchins,
idlers, and yokels, watching the company.

"It's Harry Warrington!" exclaims Theo, waving a handkerchief to the
young Virginian: but Warrington did not see Miss Lambert. The Virginian
was walking arm-in-arm with a portly clergyman in a crisp rustling silk
gown, and the two went into Madame de Bernstein's door.

"I heard him preach a most admirable sermon here last Sunday," says Mr.
Wolfe; "a little theatrical, but most striking and eloquent."

"You seem to be here most Sundays, James," says Mrs. Lambert.

"And Monday, and soon till Saturday," adds the Colonel. "See, Harry has
beautified himself already, hath his hair in buckle, and I have no doubt
is going to the drum too."

"I had rather sit quiet generally of a Saturday evening," says sober Mr.
Wolfe; "at any rate, away from card-playing and scandal; but I own, dear
Mrs. Lambert, I am under orders. Shall I go across the way and send Mr.
Warrington to you?"

"No, let him have his sport. We shall see him to-morrow. He won't care
to be disturbed amidst his fine folks by us country-people," said meek
Mrs. Lambert.

"I am glad he is with a clergyman who preaches so well," says Theo,
softly; and her eyes seemed to say, You see, good people, he is not so
bad as you thought him, and as I, for my part, never believed him to be.
"The clergyman has a very kind, handsome face."

"Here comes a greater clergyman," cries Mr. Wolfe. "It is my Lord of
Salisbury, with his blue ribbon, and a chaplain behind him."

"And whom a mercy's name have we here?" breaks in Mrs. Lambert, as a
sedan-chair, covered with gilding, topped with no less than five earl's
coronets, carried by bearers in richly laced clothes, and preceded by
three footmen in the same splendid livery, now came up to Madame de
Bernstein's door. The Bishop, who had been about to enter, stopped, and
ran back with the most respectful bows and curtseys to the sedan-chair,
giving his hand to the lady who stepped thence.

"Who on earth is this?" asks Mrs. Lambert.

"Sprechen sie Deutsch? Ja, meinherr. Nichts verstand," says the waggish
Colonel.

"Pooh, Martin."

"Well, if you can't understand High Dutch, my love, how can I help it?
Your education was neglected at school. Can you understand heraldry?--I
know you can."

"I make." cries Charley, reciting the shield, "three merions on a field
or, with an earl's coronet."

"A countess's coronet, my son. The Countess of Yarmouth, my son."

"And pray who is she?"

"It hath ever been the custom of our sovereigns to advance persons
of distinction to honour," continues the Colonel, gravely, "and this
eminent lady hath been so promoted by our gracious monarch, to the rank
of Countess of this kingdom."

"But why, papa?" asked the daughters together.

"Never mind, girls!" said mamma.

But that incorrigible Colonel would go on.

"Y, my children, is one of the last and the most awkward letters of the
whole alphabet. When I tell you stories, you are always saying Why. Why
should my Lord Bishop be cringing to that lady? Look at him rubbing his
fat hands together, and smiling into her face! It's not a handsome face
any longer. It is all painted red and white like Scaramouch's in the
pantomime. See, there comes another blue-riband, as I live. My Lord
Bamborough. The descendant of the Hotspurs. The proudest man in England.
He stops, he bows, he smiles; he is hat in hand, too. See, she taps him
with her fan. Get away, you crowd of little blackguard boys, and don't
tread on the robe of the lady whom the King delights to honour."

"But why does the King honour her?" ask the girls once more.

"There goes that odious last letter but one! Did you ever hear of her
Grace the Duchess of Kendal? No. Of the Duchess of Portsmouth? Non plus.
Of the Duchess of La Valliore? Of Fair Rosamond, then?"

"Hush, papa! There is no need to bring blushes on the cheeks of my
dear ones, Martin Lambert!" said the mother, putting her finger to her
husband's lips.

"'Tis not I; it is their sacred Majesties who are the cause of the
shame," cries the son of the old republican. "Think of the bishops of
the Church and the proudest nobility of the world cringing and bowing
before that painted High Dutch Jezebel. Oh, it's a shame! a shame!"

"Confusion!" here broke out Colonel Wolfe, and making a dash at his hat,
ran from the room. He had seen the young lady whom he admired and her
guardian walking across the Pantiles on foot to the Baroness's party,
and they came up whilst the Countess of Yarmouth-Walmoden was engaged
in conversation with the two lords spiritual and temporal, and these two
made the lowest reverences and bows to the Countess, and waited until
she had passed in at the door on the Bishop's arm.

Theo turned away from the window with a sad, almost awestricken face.
Hetty still remained there, looking from it with indignation in her
eyes, and a little red spot on each cheek.

"A penny for little Hetty's thoughts," says mamma, coming to the window
to lead the child away.

"I am thinking what I should do if I saw papa bowing to that woman,"
says Hetty.

Tea and a hissing kettle here made their appearance, and the family sate
down to partake of their evening meal,--leaving, however, Miss Hetty,
from her place, command of the window, which she begged her brother
not to close. That young gentleman had been down amongst the crowd to
inspect the armorial bearings of the Countess's and other sedans, no
doubt, and also to invest sixpence in a cheese-cake, by mamma's order
and his own desire, and he returned presently with this delicacy wrapped
up in a paper.

"Look, mother," he comes back and says, "do you see that big man in
brown beating all the pillars with a stick? That is the learned Mr.
Johnson. He comes to the Friars sometimes to see our master. He was
sitting with some friends just now at the tea-table before Mrs. Brown's
tart-shop. They have tea there, twopence a cup; I heard Mr. Johnson say
he had had seventeen cups--that makes two-and-tenpence--what a sight of
money for tea!"

"What would you have, Charley?" asks Theo.

"I think I would have cheese-cakes," says Charley, sighing, as his teeth
closed on a large slice, "and the gentleman whom Mr. Johnson was with,"
continues Charley, with his mouth quite full, "was Mr. Richardson who
wrote----"

"Clarissa!" cry all the women in a breath, and run to the window to see
their favourite writer. By this time the sun was sunk, the stars were
twinkling overhead, and the footman came and lighted the candles in the
Baroness's room opposite our spies.

Theo and her mother were standing together looking from their place of
observation. There was a small illumination at Mrs. Brown's tart-
and tea-shop, by which our friends could see one lady getting Mr.
Richardson's hat and stick, and another tying a shawl round his neck,
after which he walked home.

"Oh dear me! he does not look like Grandison!" cries Theo.

"I rather think I wish we had not seen him, my dear," says mamma, who
has been described as a most sentimental woman and eager novel-reader;
and here again they were interrupted by Miss Hetty, who cried:

"Never mind that little fat man, but look yonder, mamma."

And they looked yonder. And they saw, in the first place, Mr. Warrington
undergoing the honour of a presentation to the Countess of Yarmouth, who
was still followed by the obsequious peer and prelate with blue ribands.
And now the Countess graciously sate down to a card-table, the Bishop
and the Earl and a fourth person being her partners. And now Mr.
Warrington came into the embrasure of the window with a lady whom they
recognised as the lady whom they had seen for a few minutes at Oakhurst.

"How much finer he is!" remarks mamma.

"How he is improved in his looks! What has he done to himself?" asks
Theo.

"Look at his grand lace frills and rules! My dear, he has not got on our
shirts any more," cries the matron.

"What are you talking about, girls?" asks papa, reclining on his sofa,
where, perhaps, he was dozing after the fashion of honest house-fathers.

The girls said how Harry Warrington was in the window, talking with his
cousin Lady Maria Esmond.

"Come away!" cries papa. "You have no right to be spying the young
fellow. Down with the curtains, I say!"

And down the curtains went, so that the girls saw no more of Madame
Bernstein's guests or doings for that night.

I pray you be not angry at my remarking, if only by way of contrast
between these two opposite houses, that while Madame Bernstein and her
guests--bishop, dignitaries, noblemen, and what not--were gambling or
talking scandal, or devouring champagne and chickens (which I hold to be
venial sin), or doing honour to her ladyship the king's favourite, the
Countess of Yarmouth-Walmoden, our country friends in their lodgings
knelt round their table, whither Mr. Brian the coachman came as silently
as his creaking shoes would let him, whilst Mr. Lambert, standing up,
read in a low voice, a prayer that Heaven would lighten their darkness
and defend them from the perils of that night, and a supplication that
it would grant the request of those two or three gathered together.

Our young folks were up betimes on Sunday morning, and arrayed
themselves in those smart new dresses which were to fascinate the
Tunbridge folks, and, with the escort of brother Charley, paced the
little town, and the quaint Pantiles, and the pretty common, long ere
the company was at breakfast, or the bells had rung to church. It
was Hester who found out where Harry Warrington's lodging must be, by
remarking Mr. Gumbo in an undress, with his lovely hair in curl-papers,
drawing a pair of red curtains aside, and opening a window-sash, whence
he thrust his head and inhaled the sweet morning breeze. Mr. Gumbo did
not happen to see the young people from Oakhurst, though they beheld him
clearly enough. He leaned gracefully from the window; he waved a large
feather brush, with which he condescended to dust the furniture of
the apartment within; he affably engaged in conversation with a
cherry-cheeked milkmaid, who was lingering under the casement, and
kissed his lily hand to her. Gumbo's hand sparkled with rings, and his
person was decorated with a profusion of jewellery--gifts, no doubt, of
the fair who appreciated the young African. Once or twice more before
breakfast-time the girls passed near that window. It remained opened,
but the room behind it was blank. No face of Harry Warrington appeared
there. Neither spoke to the other of the subject on which both were
brooding. Hetty was a little provoked with Charley, who was clamorous
about breakfast, and told him he was always thinking of eating. In reply
to her sarcastic inquiry, he artlessly owned he should like another
cheese-cake, and good-natured Theo, laughing, said she had a sixpence,
and if the cake-shop were open of a Sunday morning Charley should have
one. The cake-shop was open: and Theo took out her little purse, netted
by her dearest friend at school, and containing her pocket-piece, her
grandmother's guinea, her slender little store of shillings--nay, some
copper money at one end; and she treated Charley to the meal which he
loved.

A great deal of fine company was at church. There was that funny old
Duchess, and old Madame Bernstein, with Lady Maria at her side; and Mr.
Wolfe, of course, by the side of Miss Lowther, and singing with her out
of the same psalm-book; and Mr. Richardson with a bevy of ladies. One
of them is Miss Fielding, papa tells them after church, Harry Fielding's
sister. "Oh, girls, what good company he was! And his books are worth
a dozen of your milksop Pamelas and Clarissas, Mrs. Lambert: but what
woman ever loved true humour? And there was Mr. Johnson sitting amongst
the charity children. Did you see how he turned round to the altar
at the Belief, and upset two or three of the scared little urchins in
leather breeches? And what a famous sermon Harry's parson gave, didn't
he? A sermon about scandal. How, he touched up some of the old harridans
who were seated round! Why wasn't Mr. Warrington at church? It was a
shame he wasn't at church."

"I really did not remark whether he was there or not," says Miss Hetty,
tossing her head up.

But Theo, who was all truth, said, "Yes, I thought of him, and was sorry
he was not there; and so did you think of him, Hetty."

"I did no such thing, miss," persists Hetty.

"Then why did you whisper to me it was Harry's clergyman who preached?"

"To think of Mr. Warrington's clergyman is not to think of Mr.
Warrington. It was a most excellent sermon, certainly, and the children
sang most dreadfully out of tune. And there is Lady Maria at the window
opposite, smelling at the roses; and that is Mr. Wolfe's step, I know
his great military tramp. Right left--right left! How do you do, Colonel
Wolfe?"

"Why do you look so glum, James?" asks Colonel Lambert, good-naturedly.
"Has the charmer been scolding thee, or is thy conscience pricked by the
sermon. Mr. Sampson, isn't the parson's name? A famous preacher, on my
word!"
