Then Hatch offered himself, and he also was refused.

"I want you here, good Bennet; y' are my right hand, indeed," returned
the knight; and then several coming forward in a group, Sir Daniel at
length selected one and gave him the letter.

"Now," he said, "upon your good speed and better discretion we do all
depend.  Bring me a good answer back, and before three weeks, I will have
purged my forest of these vagabonds that brave us to our faces.  But mark
it well, Throgmorton: the matter is not easy.  Ye must steal forth under
night, and go like a fox; and how ye are to cross Till I know not,
neither by the bridge nor ferry."

"I can swim," returned Throgmorton.  "I will come soundly, fear not."

"Well, friend, get ye to the buttery," replied Sir Daniel.  "Ye shall
swim first of all in nut-brown ale."  And with that he turned back into
the hall.

"Sir Daniel hath a wise tongue," said Hatch, aside, to Dick.  "See, now,
where many a lesser man had glossed the matter over, he speaketh it out
plainly to his company.  Here is a danger, 'a saith, and here difficulty;
and jesteth in the very saying.  Nay, by Saint Barbary, he is a born
captain!  Not a man but he is some deal heartened up!  See how they fall
again to work."

This praise of Sir Daniel put a thought in the lad's head.

"Bennet," he said, "how came my father by his end?"

"Ask me not that," replied Hatch.  "I had no hand nor knowledge in it;
furthermore, I will even be silent, Master Dick.  For look you, in a
man's own business there he may speak; but of hearsay matters and of
common talk, not so.  Ask me Sir Oliver--ay, or Carter, if ye will; not
me."

And Hatch set off to make the rounds, leaving Dick in a muse.

"Wherefore would he not tell me?" thought the lad.  "And wherefore named
he Carter?  Carter--nay, then Carter had a hand in it, perchance."

He entered the house, and passing some little way along a flagged and
vaulted passage, came to the door of the cell where the hurt man lay
groaning.  At his entrance Carter started eagerly.

"Have ye brought the priest?" he cried.

"Not yet awhile," returned Dick.  "Y' 'ave a word to tell me first.  How
came my father, Harry Shelton, by his death?"

The man's face altered instantly.

"I know not," he replied, doggedly.

"Nay, ye know well," returned Dick.  "Seek not to put me by."

"I tell you I know not," repeated Carter.

"Then," said Dick, "ye shall die unshriven.  Here am I, and here shall
stay.  There shall no priest come near you, rest assured.  For of what
avail is penitence, an ye have no mind to right those wrongs ye had a
hand in? and without penitence, confession is but mockery."

"Ye say what ye mean not, Master Dick," said Carter, composedly.  "It is
ill threatening the dying, and becometh you (to speak truth) little.  And
for as little as it commends you, it shall serve you less.  Stay, an ye
please.  Ye will condemn my soul--ye shall learn nothing!  There is my
last word to you."  And the wounded man turned upon the other side.

Now, Dick, to say truth, had spoken hastily, and was ashamed of his
threat.  But he made one more effort.

"Carter," he said, "mistake me not.  I know ye were but an instrument in
the hands of others; a churl must obey his lord; I would not bear heavily
on such an one.  But I begin to learn upon many sides that this great
duty lieth on my youth and ignorance, to avenge my father.  Prithee,
then, good Carter, set aside the memory of my threatenings, and in pure
goodwill and honest penitence give me a word of help."

The wounded man lay silent; nor, say what Dick pleased, could he extract
another word from him.

"Well," said Dick, "I will go call the priest to you as ye desired; for
howsoever ye be in fault to me or mine, I would not be willingly in fault
to any, least of all to one upon the last change."

Again the old soldier heard him without speech or motion; even his groans
he had suppressed; and as Dick turned and left the room, he was filled
with admiration for that rugged fortitude.

"And yet," he thought, "of what use is courage without wit?  Had his
hands been clean, he would have spoken; his silence did confess the
secret louder than words.  Nay, upon all sides, proof floweth on me.  Sir
Daniel, he or his men, hath done this thing."

Dick paused in the stone passage with a heavy heart.  At that hour, in
the ebb of Sir Daniel's fortune, when he was beleaguered by the archers
of the Black Arrow and proscribed by the victorious Yorkists, was Dick,
also, to turn upon the man who had nourished and taught him, who had
severely punished, indeed, but yet unwearyingly protected his youth?  The
necessity, if it should prove to be one, was cruel.

"Pray Heaven he be innocent!" he said.

And then steps sounded on the flagging, and Sir Oliver came gravely
towards the lad.

"One seeketh you earnestly," said Dick.

"I am upon the way, good Richard," said the priest.  "It is this poor
Carter.  Alack, he is beyond cure."

"And yet his soul is sicker than his body," answered Dick.

"Have ye seen him?" asked Sir Oliver, with a manifest start.

"I do but come from him," replied Dick.

"What said he? what said he?" snapped the priest, with extraordinary
eagerness.

"He but cried for you the more piteously, Sir Oliver.  It were well done
to go the faster, for his hurt is grievous," returned the lad.

"I am straight for him," was the reply.  "Well, we have all our sins.  We
must all come to our latter day, good Richard."

"Ay, sir; and it were well if we all came fairly," answered Dick.

The priest dropped his eyes, and with an inaudible benediction hurried
on.

"He, too!" thought Dick--"he, that taught me in piety!  Nay, then, what a
world is this, if all that care for me be blood-guilty of my father's
death?  Vengeance!  Alas! what a sore fate is mine, if I must be avenged
upon my friends!"

The thought put Matcham in his head.  He smiled at the remembrance of his
strange companion, and then wondered where he was.  Ever since they had
come together to the doors of the Moat House the younger lad had
disappeared, and Dick began to weary for a word with him.

About an hour after, mass being somewhat hastily run through by Sir
Oliver, the company gathered in the hall for dinner.  It was a long, low
apartment, strewn with green rushes, and the walls hung with arras in a
design of savage men and questing bloodhounds; here and there hung spears
and bows and bucklers; a fire blazed in the big chimney; there were
arras-covered benches round the wall, and in the midst the table, fairly
spread, awaited the arrival of the diners.  Neither Sir Daniel nor his
lady made their appearance.  Sir Oliver himself was absent, and here
again there was no word of Matcham.  Dick began to grow alarmed, to
recall his companion's melancholy forebodings, and to wonder to himself
if any foul play had befallen him in that house.

After dinner he found Goody Hatch, who was hurrying to my Lady Brackley.

"Goody," he said, "where is Master Matcham, I prithee?  I saw ye go in
with him when we arrived."

The old woman laughed aloud.

"Ah, Master Dick," she said, "y' have a famous bright eye in your head,
to be sure!" and laughed again.

"Nay, but where is he, indeed?" persisted Dick.

"Ye will never see him more," she returned--"never.  It is sure."

"An I do not," returned the lad, "I will know the reason why.  He came
not hither of his full free will; such as I am, I am his best protector,
and I will see him justly used.  There be too many mysteries; I do begin
to weary of the game!"

But as Dick was speaking, a heavy hand fell on his shoulder.  It was
Bennet Hatch that had come unperceived behind him.  With a jerk of his
thumb, the retainer dismissed his wife.

"Friend Dick," he said, as soon as they were alone, "are ye a moon-struck
natural?  An ye leave not certain things in peace, ye were better in the
salt sea than here in Tunstall Moat House.  Y' have questioned me; y'
have baited Carter; y' have frighted the Jack-priest with hints.  Bear ye
more wisely, fool; and even now, when Sir Daniel calleth you, show me a
smooth face for the love of wisdom.  Y' are to be sharply questioned.
Look to your answers."

"Hatch," returned Dick, "in all this I smell a guilty conscience."

"An ye go not the wiser, ye will soon smell blood," replied Bennet.  "I
do but warn you.  And here cometh one to call you."

And indeed, at that very moment, a messenger came across the court to
summon Dick into the presence of Sir Daniel.



CHAPTER II--THE TWO OATHS


Sir Daniel was in the hall; there he paced angrily before the fire,
awaiting Dick's arrival.  None was by except Sir Oliver, and he sat
discreetly backward, thumbing and muttering over his breviary.

"Y' have sent for me, Sir Daniel?" said young Shelton.

"I have sent for you, indeed," replied the knight.  "For what cometh to
mine ears?  Have I been to you so heavy a guardian that ye make haste to
credit ill of me?  Or sith that ye see me, for the nonce, some worsted,
do ye think to quit my party?  By the mass, your father was not so!
Those he was near, those he stood by, come wind or weather.  But you,
Dick, y' are a fair-day friend, it seemeth, and now seek to clear
yourself of your allegiance."

"An't please you, Sir Daniel, not so," returned Dick, firmly.  "I am
grateful and faithful, where gratitude and faith are due.  And before
more is said, I thank you, and I thank Sir Oliver; y' have great claims
upon me both--none can have more; I were a hound if I forgot them."

"It is well," said Sir Daniel; and then, rising into anger: "Gratitude
and faith are words, Dick Shelton," he continued; "but I look to deeds.
In this hour of my peril, when my name is attainted, when my lands are
forfeit, when this wood is full of men that hunger and thirst for my
destruction, what doth gratitude? what doth faith?  I have but a little
company remaining; is it grateful or faithful to poison me their hearts
with your insidious whisperings?  Save me from such gratitude!  But,
come, now, what is it ye wish?  Speak; we are here to answer.  If ye have
aught against me, stand forth and say it."

"Sir," replied Dick, "my father fell when I was yet a child.  It hath
come to mine ears that he was foully done by.  It hath come to mine
ears--for I will not dissemble--that ye had a hand in his undoing.  And
in all verity, I shall not be at peace in mine own mind, nor very clear
to help you, till I have certain resolution of these doubts."

Sir Daniel sat down in a deep settle.  He took his chin in his hand and
looked at Dick fixedly.

"And ye think I would be guardian to the man's son that I had murdered?"
he asked.

"Nay," said Dick, "pardon me if I answer churlishly; but indeed ye know
right well a wardship is most profitable.  All these years have ye not
enjoyed my revenues, and led my men? Have ye not still my marriage?  I
wot not what it may be worth--it is worth something.  Pardon me again;
but if ye were base enough to slay a man under trust, here were, perhaps,
reasons enough to move you to the lesser baseness."

"When I was lad of your years," returned Sir Daniel, sternly, "my mind
had not so turned upon suspicions.  And Sir Oliver here," he added, "why
should he, a priest, be guilty of this act?"

"Nay, Sir Daniel," said Dick, "but where the master biddeth there will
the dog go.  It is well known this priest is but your instrument.  I
speak very freely; the time is not for courtesies.  Even as I speak, so
would I be answered.  And answer get I none!  Ye but put more questions.
I rede ye be ware, Sir Daniel; for in this way ye will but nourish and
not satisfy my doubts."

"I will answer you fairly, Master Richard," said the knight.  "Were I to
pretend ye have not stirred my wrath, I were no honest man.  But I will
be just even in anger.  Come to me with these words when y' are grown and
come to man's estate, and I am no longer your guardian, and so helpless
to resent them.  Come to me then, and I will answer you as ye merit, with
a buffet in the mouth.  Till then ye have two courses: either swallow me
down these insults, keep a silent tongue, and fight in the meanwhile for
the man that fed and fought for your infancy; or else--the door standeth
open, the woods are full of mine enemies--go."

The spirit with which these words were uttered, the looks with which they
were accompanied, staggered Dick; and yet he could not but observe that
he had got no answer.

"I desire nothing more earnestly, Sir Daniel, than to believe you," he
replied.  "Assure me ye are free from this."

"Will ye take my word of honour, Dick?" inquired the knight.

"That would I," answered the lad.

"I give it you," returned Sir Daniel.  "Upon my word of honour, upon the
eternal welfare of my spirit, and as I shall answer for my deeds
hereafter, I had no hand nor portion in your father's death."

He extended his hand, and Dick took it eagerly.  Neither of them observed
the priest, who, at the pronunciation of that solemn and false oath, had
half arisen from his seat in an agony of horror and remorse.

"Ah," cried Dick, "ye must find it in your great-heartedness to pardon
me!  I was a churl, indeed, to doubt of you.  But ye have my hand upon
it; I will doubt no more."

"Nay, Dick," replied Sir Daniel, "y' are forgiven.  Ye know not the world
and its calumnious nature."

"I was the more to blame," added Dick, "in that the rogues pointed, not
directly at yourself, but at Sir Oliver."

As he spoke, he turned towards the priest, and paused in the middle of
the last word.  This tall, ruddy, corpulent, high-stepping man had
fallen, you might say, to pieces; his colour was gone, his limbs were
relaxed, his lips stammered prayers; and now, when Dick's eyes were fixed
upon him suddenly, he cried out aloud, like some wild animal, and buried
his face in his hands.

Sir Daniel was by him in two strides, and shook him fiercely by the
shoulder.  At the same moment Dick's suspicions reawakened.

"Nay," he said, "Sir Oliver may swear also.  'Twas him they accused."

"He shall swear," said the knight.

Sir Oliver speechlessly waved his arms.

"Ay, by the mass! but ye shall swear," cried Sir Daniel, beside himself
with fury.  "Here, upon this book, ye shall swear," he continued, picking
up the breviary, which had fallen to the ground.  "What!  Ye make me
doubt you!  Swear, I say; swear!"
