and of unransomed French noblemen, had been for a quarter of a century
continually pouring into England, every one of whom exerted an influence
in the direction of greater domestic refinement, while shiploads of
French furniture from Calais, Rouen, and other plundered towns, had
supplied our own artisans with models on which to shape their work.
Hence, in most English castles, and in Castle Twynham among the rest,
chambers were to be found which would seem to be not wanting either in
beauty or in comfort.

In the great stone fireplace a log fire was spurting and crackling,
throwing out a ruddy glare which, with the four bracket-lamps which
stood at each corner of the room, gave a bright and lightsome air to the
whole apartment. Above was a wreath-work of blazonry, extending up to
the carved and corniced oaken roof; while on either side stood the high
canopied chairs placed for the master of the house and for his most
honored guest. The walls were hung all round with most elaborate and
brightly colored tapestry, representing the achievements of Sir Bevis
of Hampton, and behind this convenient screen were stored the tables
dormant and benches which would be needed for banquet or high festivity.
The floor was of polished tiles, with a square of red and black diapered
Flemish carpet in the centre; and many settees, cushions, folding
chairs, and carved bancals littered all over it. At the further end was
a long black buffet or dresser, thickly covered with gold cups, silver
salvers, and other such valuables. All this Alleyne examined with
curious eyes; but most interesting of all to him was a small ebony
table at his very side, on which, by the side of a chess-board and the
scattered chessmen, there lay an open manuscript written in a right
clerkly hand, and set forth with brave flourishes and devices along the
margins. In vain Alleyne bethought him of where he was, and of those
laws of good breeding and decorum which should restrain him: those
colored capitals and black even lines drew his hand down to them, as
the loadstone draws the needle, until, almost before he knew it, he
was standing with the romance of Garin de Montglane before his eyes, so
absorbed in its contents as to be completely oblivious both of where he
was and why he had come there.

He was brought back to himself, however, by a sudden little ripple of
quick feminine laughter. Aghast, he dropped the manuscript among the
chessmen and stared in bewilderment round the room. It was as empty and
as still as ever. Again he stretched his hand out to the romance, and
again came that roguish burst of merriment. He looked up at the ceiling,
back at the closed door, and round at the stiff folds of motionless
tapestry. Of a sudden, however, he caught a quick shimmer from the
corner of a high-backed bancal in front of him, and, shifting a pace
or two to the side, saw a white slender hand, which held a mirror of
polished silver in such a way that the concealed observer could see
without being seen. He stood irresolute, uncertain whether to advance or
to take no notice; but, even as he hesitated, the mirror was whipped
in, and a tall and stately young lady swept out from behind the oaken
screen, with a dancing light of mischief in her eyes. Alleyne started
with astonishment as he recognized the very maiden who had suffered
from his brother's violence in the forest. She no longer wore her gay
riding-dress, however, but was attired in a long sweeping robe of black
velvet of Bruges, with delicate tracery of white lace at neck and at
wrist, scarce to be seen against her ivory skin. Beautiful as she had
seemed to him before, the lithe charm of her figure and the proud, free
grace of her bearing were enhanced now by the rich simplicity of her
attire.

"Ah, you start," said she, with the same sidelong look of mischief,
"and I cannot marvel at it. Didst not look to see the distressed damosel
again. Oh that I were a minstrel, that I might put it into rhyme,
with the whole romance--the luckless maid, the wicked socman, and the
virtuous clerk! So might our fame have gone down together for all time,
and you be numbered with Sir Percival or Sir Galahad, or all the other
rescuers of oppressed ladies."

"What I did," said Alleyne, "was too small a thing for thanks; and yet,
if I may say it without offence, it was too grave and near a matter
for mirth and raillery. I had counted on my brother's love, but God has
willed that it should be otherwise. It is a joy to me to see you again,
lady, and to know that you have reached home in safety, if this be
indeed your home."

"Yes, in sooth, Castle Twynham is my home, and Sir Nigel Loring my
father. I should have told you so this morning, but you said that you
were coming thither, so I bethought me that I might hold it back as
a surprise to you. Oh dear, but it was brave to see you!" she cried,
bursting out a-laughing once more, and standing with her hand pressed to
her side, and her half-closed eyes twinkling with amusement. "You drew
back and came forward with your eyes upon my book there, like the mouse
who sniffs the cheese and yet dreads the trap."

"I take shame," said Alleyne, "that I should have touched it."

"Nay, it warmed my very heart to see it. So glad was I, that I laughed
for very pleasure. My fine preacher can himself be tempted then, thought
I; he is not made of another clay to the rest of us."

"God help me! I am the weakest of the weak," groaned Alleyne. "I pray
that I may have more strength."

"And to what end?" she asked sharply. "If you are, as I understand, to
shut yourself forever in your cell within the four walls of an abbey,
then of what use would it be were your prayer to be answered?"

"The use of my own salvation."

She turned from him with a pretty shrug and wave. "Is that all?" she
said. "Then you are no better than Father Christopher and the rest of
them. Your own, your own, ever your own! My father is the king's man,
and when he rides into the press of fight he is not thinking ever of the
saving of his own poor body; he recks little enough if he leave it on
the field. Why then should you, who are soldiers of the Spirit, be
ever moping or hiding in cell or in cave, with minds full of your own
concerns, while the world, which you should be mending, is going on its
way, and neither sees nor hears you? Were ye all as thoughtless of your
own souls as the soldier is of his body, ye would be of more avail to
the souls of others."

"There is sooth in what you say, lady," Alleyne answered; "and yet I
scarce can see what you would have the clergy and the church to do."

"I would have them live as others and do men's work in the world,
preaching by their lives rather than their words. I would have them come
forth from their lonely places, mix with the borel folks, feel the pains
and the pleasures, the cares and the rewards, the temptings and the
stirrings of the common people. Let them toil and swinken, and labor,
and plough the land, and take wives to themselves----"

"Alas! alas!" cried Alleyne aghast, "you have surely sucked this poison
from the man Wicliffe, of whom I have heard such evil things."

"Nay, I know him not. I have learned it by looking from my own chamber
window and marking these poor monks of the priory, their weary life,
their profitless round. I have asked myself if the best which can be
done with virtue is to shut it within high walls as though it were some
savage creature. If the good will lock themselves up, and if the wicked
will still wander free, then alas for the world!"

Alleyne looked at her in astonishment, for her cheek was flushed, her
eyes gleaming, and her whole pose full of eloquence and conviction. Yet
in an instant she had changed again to her old expression of merriment
leavened with mischief.

"Wilt do what I ask?" said she.

"What is it, lady?"

"Oh, most ungallant clerk! A true knight would never have asked, but
would have vowed upon the instant. 'Tis but to bear me out in what I say
to my father."

"In what?"

"In saying, if he ask, that it was south of the Christchurch road that I
met you. I shall be shut up with the tire-women else, and have a week
of spindle and bodkin, when I would fain be galloping Troubadour up
Wilverley Walk, or loosing little Roland at the Vinney Ridge herons."

"I shall not answer him if he ask."

"Not answer! But he will have an answer. Nay, but you must not fail me,
or it will go ill with me."

"But, lady," cried poor Alleyne in great distress, "how can I say that
it was to the south of the road when I know well that it was four miles
to the north."

"You will not say it?"

"Surely you will not, too, when you know that it is not so?"

"Oh, I weary of your preaching!" she cried, and swept away with a toss
of her beautiful head, leaving Alleyne as cast down and ashamed as
though he had himself proposed some infamous thing. She was back again
in an instant, however, in another of her varying moods.

"Look at that, my friend!" said she. "If you had been shut up in abbey
or in cell this day you could not have taught a wayward maiden to abide
by the truth. Is it not so? What avail is the shepherd if he leaves his
sheep."

"A sorry shepherd!" said Alleyne humbly. "But here is your noble
father."

"And you shall see how worthy a pupil I am. Father, I am much beholden
to this young clerk, who was of service to me and helped me this very
morning in Minstead Woods, four miles to the north of the Christchurch
road, where I had no call to be, you having ordered it otherwise." All
this she reeled off in a loud voice, and then glanced with sidelong,
questioning eyes at Alleyne for his approval.

Sir Nigel, who had entered the room with a silvery-haired old lady upon
his arm, stared aghast at this sudden outburst of candor.

"Maude, Maude!" said he, shaking his head, "it is more hard for me to
gain obedience from you than from the ten score drunken archers who
followed me to Guienne. Yet, hush! little one, for your fair lady-mother
will be here anon, and there is no need that she should know it. We will
keep you from the provost-marshal this journey. Away to your chamber,
sweeting, and keep a blithe face, for she who confesses is shriven. And
now, fair mother," he continued, when his daughter had gone, "sit
you here by the fire, for your blood runs colder than it did. Alleyne
Edricson, I would have a word with you, for I would fain that you should
take service under me. And here in good time comes my lady, without
whose counsel it is not my wont to decide aught of import; but, indeed,
it was her own thought that you should come."

"For I have formed a good opinion of you, and can see that you are one
who may be trusted," said the Lady Loring. "And in good sooth my dear
lord hath need of such a one by his side, for he recks so little of
himself that there should be one there to look to his needs and meet his
wants. You have seen the cloisters; it were well that you should see the
world too, ere you make choice for life between them."

"It was for that very reason that my father willed that I should come
forth into the world at my twentieth year," said Alleyne.

"Then your father was a man of good counsel," said she, "and you cannot
carry out his will better than by going on this path, where all that is
noble and gallant in England will be your companions."

"You can ride?" asked Sir Nigel, looking at the youth with puckered
eyes.

"Yes, I have ridden much at the abbey."

"Yet there is a difference betwixt a friar's hack and a warrior's
destrier. You can sing and play?"

"On citole, flute and rebeck."

"Good! You can read blazonry?"

"Indifferent well."

"Then read this," quoth Sir Nigel, pointing upwards to one of the many
quarterings which adorned the wall over the fireplace.

"Argent," Alleyne answered, "a fess azure charged with three lozenges
dividing three mullets sable. Over all, on an escutcheon of the first, a
jambe gules."

"A jambe gules erased," said Sir Nigel, shaking his head solemnly. "Yet
it is not amiss for a monk-bred man. I trust that you are lowly and
serviceable?"

"I have served all my life, my lord."

"Canst carve too?"

"I have carved two days a week for the brethren."

"A model truly! Wilt make a squire of squires. But tell me, I pray,
canst curl hair?"

"No, my lord, but I could learn."

"It is of import," said he, "for I love to keep my hair well ordered,
seeing that the weight of my helmet for thirty years hath in some degree
frayed it upon the top." He pulled off his velvet cap of maintenance as
he spoke, and displayed a pate which was as bald as an egg, and shone
bravely in the firelight. "You see," said he, whisking round, and
showing one little strip where a line of scattered hairs, like the last
survivors in some fatal field, still barely held their own against the
fate which had fallen upon their comrades; "these locks need some little
oiling and curling, for I doubt not that if you look slantwise at my
head, when the light is good, you will yourself perceive that there are
places where the hair is sparse."

"It is for you also to bear the purse," said the lady; "for my sweet
lord is of so free and gracious a temper that he would give it gayly to
the first who asked alms of him. All these things, with some knowledge
of venerie, and of the management of horse, hawk and hound, with the
grace and hardihood and courtesy which are proper to your age, will make
you a fit squire for Sir Nigel Loring."

"Alas! lady," Alleyne answered, "I know well the great honor that you
have done me in deeming me worthy to wait upon so renowned a knight,
yet I am so conscious of my own weakness that I scarce dare incur duties
which I might be so ill-fitted to fulfil."

"Modesty and a humble mind," said she, "are the very first and rarest
gifts in page or squire. Your words prove that you have these, and
all the rest is but the work of use and time. But there is no call for
haste. Rest upon it for the night, and let your orisons ask for guidance
in the matter. We knew your father well, and would fain help his son,
though we have small cause to love your brother the Socman, who is
forever stirring up strife in the county."

"We can scare hope," said Nigel, "to have all ready for our start before
the feast of St. Luke, for there is much to be done in the time. You
will have leisure, therefore, if it please you to take service under me,
in which to learn your devoir. Bertrand, my daughter's page, is hot to
go; but in sooth he is over young for such rough work as may be before
us."

"And I have one favor to crave from you," added the lady of the castle,
as Alleyne turned to leave their presence. "You have, as I understand,
much learning which you have acquired at Beaulieu."

"Little enough, lady, compared with those who were my teachers."

"Yet enough for my purpose, I doubt not. For I would have you give
an hour or two a day whilst you are with us in discoursing with my
daughter, the Lady Maude; for she is somewhat backward, I fear, and hath
no love for letters, save for these poor fond romances, which do but
fill her empty head with dreams of enchanted maidens and of errant
cavaliers. Father Christopher comes over after nones from the priory,
but he is stricken with years and slow of speech, so that she gets small
profit from his teaching. I would have you do what you can with her, and
with Agatha my young tire-woman, and with Dorothy Pierpont."

And so Alleyne found himself not only chosen as squire to a knight but
also as squire to three damosels, which was even further from the part
which he had thought to play in the world. Yet he could but agree to
do what he might, and so went forth from the castle hall with his
face flushed and his head in a whirl at the thought of the strange and
perilous paths which his feet were destined to tread.



CHAPTER XII. HOW ALLEYNE LEARNED MORE THAN HE COULD TEACH.


And now there came a time of stir and bustle, of furbishing of arms and
clang of hammer from all the southland counties. Fast spread the tidings
from thorpe to thorpe and from castle to castle, that the old game was
afoot once more, and the lions and lilies to be in the field with the
early spring. Great news this for that fierce old country, whose trade
for a generation had been war, her exports archers and her imports
prisoners. For six years her sons had chafed under an unwonted peace.
Now they flew to their arms as to their birthright. The old soldiers of
Crecy, of Nogent, and of Poictiers were glad to think that they might
hear the war-trumpet once more, and gladder still were the hot youth who
had chafed for years under the martial tales of their sires. To pierce
the great mountains of the south, to fight the tamers of the fiery
Moors, to follow the greatest captain of the age, to find sunny
cornfields and vineyards, when the marches of Picardy and Normandy were
as rare and bleak as the Jedburgh forests--here was a golden prospect
for a race of warriors. From sea to sea there was stringing of bows in
the cottage and clang of steel in the castle.

Nor did it take long for every stronghold to pour forth its cavalry, and
every hamlet its footmen. Through the late autumn and the early winter
every road and country lane resounded with nakir and trumpet, with the
neigh of the war-horse and the clatter of marching men. From the Wrekin
in the Welsh marches to the Cotswolds in the west or Butser in the
south, there was no hill-top from which the peasant might not have seen
the bright shimmer of arms, the toss and flutter of plume and of pensil.
From bye-path, from woodland clearing, or from winding moor-side track
these little rivulets of steel united in the larger roads to form a
broader stream, growing ever fuller and larger as it approached the
nearest or most commodious seaport. And there all day, and day after
day, there was bustle and crowding and labor, while the great ships
loaded up, and one after the other spread their white pinions and darted
off to the open sea, amid the clash of cymbals and rolling of drums and
lusty shouts of those who went and of those who waited. From Orwell to
the Dart there was no port which did not send forth its little fleet,
gay with streamer and bunting, as for a joyous festival. Thus in the
season of the waning days the might of England put forth on to the
waters.

In the ancient and populous county of Hampshire there was no lack of
leaders or of soldiers for a service which promised either honor or
profit. In the north the Saracen's head of the Brocas and the scarlet
fish of the De Roches were waving over a strong body of archers from
Holt, Woolmer, and Harewood forests. De Borhunte was up in the east, and
Sir John de Montague in the west. Sir Luke de Ponynges, Sir Thomas West,
Sir Maurice de Bruin, Sir Arthur Lipscombe, Sir Walter Ramsey, and stout
Sir Oliver Buttesthorn were all marching south with levies from Andover,
Arlesford, Odiham and Winchester, while from Sussex came Sir John
Clinton, Sir Thomas Cheyne, and Sir John Fallislee, with a troop of
picked men-at-arms, making for their port at Southampton. Greatest of
all the musters, however, was that of Twynham Castle, for the name and
the fame of Sir Nigel Loring drew towards him the keenest and boldest
spirits, all eager to serve under so valiant a leader. Archers from the
New Forest and the Forest of Bere, billmen from the pleasant country
which is watered by the Stour, the Avon, and the Itchen, young cavaliers
from the ancient Hampshire houses, all were pushing for Christchurch to
take service under the banner of the five scarlet roses.

And now, could Sir Nigel have shown the bachelles of land which the laws
of rank required, he might well have cut his forked pennon into a
square banner, and taken such a following into the field as would have
supported the dignity of a banneret. But poverty was heavy upon him, his
land was scant, his coffers empty, and the very castle which covered him
the holding of another. Sore was his heart when he saw rare bowmen and
war-hardened spearmen turned away from his gates, for the lack of the
money which might equip and pay them. Yet the letter which Aylward had
brought him gave him powers which he was not slow to use. In it Sir
Claude Latour, the Gascon lieutenant of the White Company, assured him
that there remained in his keeping enough to fit out a hundred archers
and twenty men-at-arms, which, joined to the three hundred veteran
companions already in France, would make a force which any leader might
be proud to command. Carefully and sagaciously the veteran knight chose
out his men from the swarm of volunteers. Many an anxious consultation
he held with Black Simon, Sam Aylward, and other of his more experienced
followers, as to who should come and who should stay. By All Saints'
day, however ere the last leaves had fluttered to earth in the Wilverley
and Holmesley glades, he had filled up his full numbers, and mustered
under his banner as stout a following of Hampshire foresters as ever
twanged their war-bows. Twenty men-at-arms, too, well mounted and
equipped, formed the cavalry of the party, while young Peter Terlake of
Fareham, and Walter Ford of Botley, the martial sons of martial sires,
came at their own cost to wait upon Sir Nigel and to share with Alleyne
Edricson the duties of his squireship.

Yet, even after the enrolment, there was much to be done ere the party
could proceed upon its way. For armor, swords, and lances, there was no
need to take much forethought, for they were to be had both better and
cheaper in Bordeaux than in England. With the long-bow, however, it was
different. Yew staves indeed might be got in Spain, but it was well to
take enough and to spare with them. Then three spare cords should be
carried for each bow, with a great store of arrow-heads, besides the
brigandines of chain mail, the wadded steel caps, and the brassarts or
arm-guards, which were the proper equipment of the archer. Above all,
the women for miles round were hard at work cutting the white surcoats
which were the badge of the Company, and adorning them with the red lion
of St. George upon the centre of the breast. When all was completed and
the muster called in the castle yard the oldest soldier of the French
wars was fain to confess that he had never looked upon a better equipped
or more warlike body of men, from the old knight with his silk jupon,
sitting his great black war-horse in the front of them, to Hordle John,
the giant recruit, who leaned carelessly upon a huge black bow-stave in
the rear. Of the six score, fully half had seen service before, while a
fair sprinkling were men who had followed the wars all their lives, and
had a hand in those battles which had made the whole world ring with the
fame and the wonder of the island infantry.

Six long weeks were taken in these preparations, and it was close on
Martinmas ere all was ready for a start. Nigh two months had Alleyne
Edricson been in Castle Twynham--months which were fated to turn the
whole current of his life, to divert it from that dark and lonely bourne
towards which it tended, and to guide it into freer and more sunlit
channels. Already he had learned to bless his father for that wise
provision which had made him seek to know the world ere he had ventured
to renounce it.

For it was a different place from that which he had pictured--very
different from that which he had heard described when the master of the
novices held forth to his charges upon the ravening wolves who lurked
for them beyond the peaceful folds of Beaulieu. There was cruelty in it,
doubtless, and lust and sin and sorrow; but were there not virtues to
atone, robust positive virtues which did not shrink from temptation,
which held their own in all the rough blasts of the work-a-day world?
How colorless by contrast appeared the sinlessness which came from
inability to sin, the conquest which was attained by flying from the
enemy! Monk-bred as he was, Alleyne had native shrewdness and a mind
which was young enough to form new conclusions and to outgrow old
ones. He could not fail to see that the men with whom he was thrown in
contact, rough-tongued, fierce and quarrelsome as they were, were yet of
deeper nature and of more service in the world than the ox-eyed brethren
who rose and ate and slept from year's end to year's end in their own
narrow, stagnant circle of existence. Abbot Berghersh was a good man,
but how was he better than this kindly knight, who lived as simple a
life, held as lofty and inflexible an ideal of duty, and did with all
his fearless heart whatever came to his hand to do? In turning from the
service of the one to that of the other, Alleyne could not feel that
he was lowering his aims in life. True that his gentle and thoughtful
nature recoiled from the grim work of war, yet in those days of martial
orders and militant brotherhoods there was no gulf fixed betwixt the
priest and the soldier. The man of God and the man of the sword might
without scandal be united in the same individual. Why then should he,
a mere clerk, have scruples when so fair a chance lay in his way of
carrying out the spirit as well as the letter of his father's provision.
Much struggle it cost him, anxious spirit-questionings and midnight
prayings, with many a doubt and a misgiving; but the issue was that ere
he had been three days in Castle Twynham he had taken service under Sir
Nigel, and had accepted horse and harness, the same to be paid for out
of his share of the profits of the expedition. Henceforth for seven
hours a day he strove in the tilt-yard to qualify himself to be a worthy
squire to so worthy a knight. Young, supple and active, with all the
pent energies from years of pure and healthy living, it was not long
before he could manage his horse and his weapon well enough to earn
an approving nod from critical men-at-arms, or to hold his own against
Terlake and Ford, his fellow-servitors.

But were there no other considerations which swayed him from the
cloisters towards the world? So complex is the human spirit that it can
itself scarce discern the deep springs which impel it to action. Yet
to Alleyne had been opened now a side of life of which he had been as
innocent as a child, but one which was of such deep import that it could
not fail to influence him in choosing his path. A woman, in monkish
precepts, had been the embodiment and concentration of what was
dangerous and evil--a focus whence spread all that was to be dreaded and
avoided. So defiling was their presence that a true Cistercian might
not raise his eyes to their face or touch their finger-tips under ban of
church and fear of deadly sin. Yet here, day after day for an hour
after nones, and for an hour before vespers, he found himself in close
communion with three maidens, all young, all fair, and all therefore
doubly dangerous from the monkish standpoint. Yet he found that in their
presence he was conscious of a quick sympathy, a pleasant ease, a ready
response to all that was most gentle and best in himself, which filled
his soul with a vague and new-found joy.

And yet the Lady Maude Loring was no easy pupil to handle. An older and
more world-wise man might have been puzzled by her varying moods, her
sudden prejudices, her quick resentment at all constraint and authority.
Did a subject interest her, was there space in it for either romance
or imagination, she would fly through it with her subtle, active mind,
leaving her two fellow-students and even her teacher toiling behind her.
On the other hand, were there dull patience needed with steady toil and
strain of memory, no single fact could by any driving be fixed in her
mind. Alleyne might talk to her of the stories of old gods and heroes,
of gallant deeds and lofty aims, or he might hold forth upon moon and
stars, and let his fancy wander over the hidden secrets of the universe,
and he would have a rapt listener with flushed cheeks and eloquent eyes,
who could repeat after him the very words which had fallen from his
lips. But when it came to almagest and astrolabe, the counting of
figures and reckoning of epicycles, away would go her thoughts to horse
and hound, and a vacant eye and listless face would warn the teacher
that he had lost his hold upon his scholar. Then he had but to bring out
the old romance book from the priory, with befingered cover of sheepskin
and gold letters upon a purple ground, to entice her wayward mind back
to the paths of learning.

At times, too, when the wild fit was upon her, she would break into
pertness and rebel openly against Alleyne's gentle firmness. Yet he
would jog quietly on with his teachings, taking no heed to her mutiny,
until suddenly she would be conquered by his patience, and break into
self-revilings a hundred times stronger than her fault demanded. It
chanced however that, on one of these mornings when the evil mood was
upon her, Agatha the young tire-woman, thinking to please her mistress,
began also to toss her head and make tart rejoinder to the teacher's
questions. In an instant the Lady Maude had turned upon her two blazing
eyes and a face which was blanched with anger.

"You would dare!" said she. "You would dare!" The frightened tire-woman
tried to excuse herself. "But my fair lady," she stammered, "what have I
done? I have said no more than I heard."

"You would dare!" repeated the lady in a choking voice. "You, a
