believe, you have all now realized that though, according to his own
assertion, this visit to the enemy's country was paid in order that he
might get in the debts owing to him there, and return with funds to
perform his public service[n] here; though he was always repeating the
statement that it was monstrous to accuse those who were transferring
their means from Macedonia to Athens; yet, when the Peace had removed
all danger, he converted his real estate here into money, and took
himself off with it to Philip. {9} These then are two events which I
have foretold--events which, because their real character was exactly
and faithfully disclosed by me, are a testimony to the speeches which I
have delivered. A third, men of Athens, was the following; and when I
have given you this one instance, I will immediately proceed to the
subject on which I have come forward to speak. When we returned from
the Embassy, after receiving from Philip his oath to maintain the
Peace, {10} there were some[n] who promised that Thespiae and
Plataeae[n] would be repeopled, and said that if Philip became master
of the situation, he would save the Phocians, and would break up the
city of Thebes into villages; that Oropus would be yours, and that
Euboea would be restored to you in place of Amphipolis--with other
hopes and deceptions of the same kind, by which you were seduced into
sacrificing the Phocians in a manner that was contrary to your interest
and perhaps to your honour also. But as for me, you will find that
neither had I any share in this deception, nor yet did I hold my peace.
On the contrary, I warned you plainly, as, I know you remember, that
_I_ had no knowledge and no expectations of this kind, and that I
regarded such statements as nonsense.

{11} All these plain instances of superior foresight on my part, men of
Athens, I shall not ascribe to any cleverness, any boasted merits, of
my own. I will not pretend that my foreknowledge and discernment are
due to any causes but such as I will name; and they are two. The first,
men of Athens, is that good fortune, which, I observe, is more powerful
than all the cleverness and wisdom on earth. {12} The second is the
fact that my judgement and reasoning are disinterested. No one can
point to any personal gain in connexion with my public acts and words:
and therefore I see what is to our interest undistorted, in the light
in which the actual facts reveal it. But when you throw money into one
scale of the balance, its weight carries everything with it; your
judgement is instantly dragged down with it, and one who has acted so
can no longer think soundly or healthily about anything.

{13} Now there is one primary condition which must be observed by any
one who would furnish the city with allies or contributions or anything
else--he must do it without breaking the existing Peace: not because
the Peace is at all admirable or creditable to you, but because,
whatever its character, it would have been better, in the actual
circumstances, that it should never have been made, than that having
been made, it should now be broken through our action. For we have
sacrificed many advantages which we possessed when we made it, and
which would have rendered the war safer and easier for us then than it
is now. {14} The second condition, men of Athens, is that we shall not
draw on these self-styled Amphictyons,[n] who are now assembled, until
they have an irresistible or a plausible reason for making a united war
against us. My own belief is that if war broke out again between
ourselves and Philip about Amphipolis or any such claim of our own, in
which the Thessalians and Argives and Thebans had no interest, none of
these peoples would go to war against us, least of all--{15} and let no
one raise a clamour before he hears what I have to say--least of all
the Thebans; not because they are in any pleasant mood towards us; not
because they would not be glad to gratify Philip; but because they know
perfectly well, however stupid one may think them,[n] that if war
springs up between themselves and you, _they_ will get all the
hardships of war for their share, while another will sit by, waiting to
secure all the advantages; and they are not likely to sacrifice
themselves for such a prospect, unless the origin and the cause of the
war are such as concern all alike. {16} Nor again should we, in my
opinion, suffer at all, if we went to war with Thebes on account of
Oropus[n] or any other purely Athenian interest. For I believe that
while those who would assist ourselves or the Thebans would give their
aid if their ally's own country were invaded, they would not join
either in an offensive campaign. For this is the manner of
alliances--such, at least, as are worth considering; and the
relationship is naturally of this kind. {17} The goodwill of each
ally--whether it be towards ourselves or towards the Thebans--does not
imply the same interest in our conquest of others as in our existence.
Our continued existence they would all desire for their own sakes; but
none of them would wish that through conquest either of us should
become their own masters. What is it then that I regard with
apprehension? What is it that we must guard against? I fear lest a
common pretext should be supplied for the coming war, a common charge
against us, which will appeal to all alike. {18} For if the Argives[n]
and Messenians and Megalopolitans, and some of the other Peloponnesians
who are in sympathy with them, adopt a hostile attitude towards us
owing to our negotiations for peace with Sparta, and the belief that to
some extent we are giving our approval to the policy which the Spartans
have pursued: if the Thebans already (as we are told) detest us, and
are sure to become even more hostile, because we are harbouring those
whom they have exiled,[n] and losing no opportunity of displaying our
ill-will towards them; {19} and the Thessalians, because we are
offering a refuge to the Phocian fugitives;[n] and Philip, because we
are preventing his admission to Amphictyonic rank; my fear is that,
when each power has thus its separate reasons for resentment, they may
unite in the war against us, with the decrees of the Amphictyons for
their pretext: and so each may be drawn on farther than their several
interests would carry them, just as they were in dealing with the
Phocians. {20} For you doubtless realize that it was not through any
unity in their respective ambitions, that the Thebans and Philip and
the Thessalians all acted together just now. The Thebans, for instance,
could not prevent Philip from marching through and occupying the
passes, nor even from stepping in at the last moment to reap the credit
of all that they themselves had toiled for.[n] {21} For, as it is,
though the Thebans have gained something so far as the recovery of
their territory is concerned, their honour and reputation have suffered
shamefully, since it now appears as though they would have gained
nothing, unless Philip had crossed the Pass. This was not what they
intended. They only submitted to all this in their anxiety to obtain
Orchomenus and Coroneia, and their inability to do so otherwise. {22}
And as to Philip, some persons,[n] as you know, are bold enough to say
that it was not from any wish to do so that he handed over Orchomenus
and Coroneia to Thebes, but from compulsion; and although I must part
company with them there, I am sure that at least he did not want to do
this _more_ than he desired to occupy the passes, and to get the credit
of appearing to have determined the issue of the war, and to manage the
Pythian games by his own authority. These, I am sure, were the objects
which he coveted most greedily. {23} The Thessalians, again, did not
desire to see either the Thebans or Philip growing powerful; for in any
such contingency they thought that they themselves were menaced. But
they did desire to secure two privileges--admission to the Amphictyonic
meeting, and the recovery of rights at Delphi;[n] and in their
eagerness for these privileges, they joined Philip in the actions in
question. Thus you will find that each was led on, for the sake of
private ends, to take action which they in no way desired to take. But
this is the very thing against which we have now to be on our guard.

{24} 'Are we then, for fear of this, to submit to Philip? and do _you_
require this of us?' you ask me. Far from it. Our action must be such
as will be in no way unworthy of us, and at the same time will not lead
to war, but will prove to all our good sense and the justice of our
position: and, in answer to those who are bold enough to think that we
should refuse to submit to anything whatever,[n] [2] and who cannot
foresee the war that must follow, I wish to urge this consideration. We
are allowing the Thebans to hold Oropus; and if any one asked us to
state the reason honestly, we should say that it was to avoid war. {25}
Again, we have just ceded Amphipolis to Philip by the Treaty of
Peace;[n] we permit the Cardians[n] to occupy a position apart from the
other colonists in the Chersonese; we allow the Prince of Caria[n] to
seize the islands of Chios, Cos, and Rhodes, and the Byzantines to
drive our vessels to shore[n]--obviously because we believe that the
tranquillity afforded by peace brings more blessings than any collision
or contention over these grievances would bring: so that it would be a
foolish and an utterly perverse policy, when we have behaved in this
manner towards each of our adversaries individually, where our own most
essential interests were concerned, to go now to war with all of them
together, on account of this shadow at Delphi.[n]


FOOTNOTES

[1] The term 'the allies of Athens' was ambiguous. It might be taken
(as it was taken by Philip and his envoys) to include only the
remaining members of the League (see p. 9), who were represented by the
Synod then sitting, and whose policy Athens could control. But it was
evidently possible to put a wider interpretation upon it, as the
Assembly probably did and as Demosthenes often does (e.g. Speech on
Embassy, Sec. 278), and to understand it as including the Phocians and
others (such as Cersobleptes) with whom Athens had a treaty of
alliance. Much of the trouble which followed arose out of this
ambiguity.

[2] [Greek: oud hotioun].




THE SECOND PHILIPPIC (OR. VI)


[_Introduction_. After settling affairs at Delphi in 346, Philip
returned to Macedonia. During a considerable part of 345 and in the
early months of 344 he was occupied with campaigns against the
Illyrians, Dardani, and Triballi. But in the summer (probably) of 344
he resumed his activities in Greece, garrisoning Pherae and other towns
of Thessaly with Macedonians, appropriating the revenues derived from
the Thessalian ports, and establishing oligarchical governments
throughout the country. At the same time negotiations were going on
between himself and Athens with regard to the Thracian strongholds
which he had captured in 346. He refused to give these up, though he
offered to cut a canal across the Chersonese, for the protection of the
Athenian allies there from the attacks of the Thracians. He also sent
money and mercenaries to help the Messenians and Argives, who, like the
Megalopolitans, were anxious to secure their independence of Sparta.
Athens, which was on friendly terms with Sparta, sent envoys to the
Peloponnesian states to counteract Philip's influence, and of these
Demosthenes was one. In return, Argos and Messene complained to Athens
of her interference with their attempt to secure freedom, and Philip
sent envoys to deprecate the charges made against him by the Athenian
ambassadors in the Peloponnese. He pointed out that he had not broken
any promises made to Athens at the time of the Peace, for he had made
none. (In fact, if Demosthenes' account is correct, he had confined
himself to vague expressions of goodwill; the promises had been made by
Aeschines.) The Second Philippic, spoken late in 344, proposes a reply
to Philip, the text of which has unfortunately not come down to us. The
Peloponnesian envoys appear also to have been in Athens at the time;
and Philip's supporters had put forward various explanations of his
conduct at the time when the Peace was made. To these also Demosthenes
replies.]


{1} In all our discussions, men of Athens, with regard to the acts of
violence by which Philip contravenes the terms of the Peace, I observe
that, although the speeches on our side are always manifestly just and
sympathetic,[n] and although those who denounce Philip are always
regarded as saying what ought to be said, yet practically nothing is
done which ought to be done, or which would make it worth while to
listen to such speeches. {2} On the contrary, the condition of public
affairs as a whole has already been brought to a point at which, the
more and the more evidently a speaker can convict Philip both of
transgressing the Peace which he made with you and of plotting against
all the Hellenes, the harder it is for him to advise you how you should
act. {3} The responsibility for this rests with us all, men of Athens.
It is by deeds and actions, not by words, that a policy of encroachment
must be arrested: and yet, in the first place, we who rise to address
you will not face the duty of proposing or advising such action, for
fear of unpopularity with you, though we dilate upon the character of
Philip's acts, upon their atrocity, and so forth; and, in the second
place, you who sit and listen, better qualified though you doubtless
are than Philip for using the language of justice and appreciating it
at the mouths of others, are nevertheless absolutely inert, when it is
a question of preventing him from executing the designs in which he is
now engaged. {4} It follows as the inevitable and perhaps reasonable
consequence, that you are each more successful in that to which your
time and your interest is given--he in actions, yourselves in words.
Now if it is still enough for you, that your words are more just than
his, your course is easy, and no labour is involved in it. {5} But if
we are to inquire how the evil of the present situation is to be
corrected; if its advance is not still to continue, unperceived, until
we are confronted by a power so great that we cannot even raise a hand
in our own defence; then we must alter our method of deliberation, and
all of us who speak, and all of you who listen, must resolve to prefer
the counsels which are best, and which can save us, to those which are
most easy and most attractive.

{6} I am amazed, men of Athens, in the first place, that any one who
sees the present greatness of Philip and the wide mastery which he has
gained, can be free from alarm, or can imagine that this involves no
peril to Athens, or that it is not against you that all his
preparations are being made. And I would beg you, one and all, to
listen while I put before you in a few words the reasoning by which I
have come to entertain the opposite expectation, and the grounds upon
which I regard Philip as an enemy; that so, if my own foresight appears
to you the truer, you may believe me; but if that of the persons who
have no fears and have placed their trust in him, you may give your
adhesion to them. {7} Here then, men of Athens, is my argument. Of
what, in the first place, did Philip become master, when the Peace was
concluded? Of Thermopylae, and of the situation in Phocis. Next, what
use did he make of his power? He deliberately chose to act in the
interests of Thebes, not in those of Athens. And why? He scrutinized
every consideration in the light of his own ambition and of his desire
for universal conquest: he took no thought for peace, or tranquillity,
or justice; {8} and he saw quite correctly that our state and our
national character being what they are, there was no attraction that he
could offer, nothing that he could do, which would induce you to
sacrifice any of the other Hellenes to him for your own advantage. He
saw that you would take account of what was right; that you would
shrink from the infamy attaching to such a policy; that you would
exercise all the foresight which the situation demanded, and would
oppose any such attempt on his part, as surely as if you were at open
war with him. {9} But the Thebans, he believed--and the event proved
that he was right--in return for what they were getting would let him
do as he pleased in all that did not concern them; and far from acting
against him, or preventing him effectively, would even join him in his
campaign, if he bade them. His services to the Messenians and the
Argives at the present moment are due to his having formed the same
conception of them. And this, men of Athens, is the highest of all
tributes to yourselves: {10} for these actions of his amount to a
verdict upon you, that you alone of all peoples would never, for any
gain to yourselves, sacrifice the common rights of the Hellenes, nor
barter away your loyalty to them for any favour or benefit at his
hands. This conception of you he has naturally formed, just as he has
formed the opposite conception of the Argives and the Thebans, not only
from his observation of the present, but also from his consideration of
the past. {11} He discovers, I imagine, and is told, how when your
forefathers might have been rulers of the rest of the Hellenes, on
condition of submitting to the king themselves, they not only refused
to tolerate the suggestion, on the occasion when Alexander [n], the
ancestor of the present royal house, came as his herald to negotiate,
but chose rather to leave their country and to face any suffering which
they might have to endure; and how they followed up the refusal by
those deeds which all are so eager to tell, but to which no one has
ever been able to do justice; and for that reason, I shall myself
forbear to speak of them, and rightly; for the grandeur of their
achievements passes the power of language to describe. He knows, on the
other hand, how the forefathers of the Thebans and Argives, in the one
case, joined the barbarian army, in the other, offered no resistance to
it. {12} He knows, therefore, that both these peoples will welcome what
is to their own advantage, instead of considering the common interests
of the Hellenes: and so he thought that, if he chose you for his
allies, he would be choosing friends who would only serve a righteous
cause; while if he joined himself to them, he would win accomplices who
would further his own ambitions. That is why he chose them, as he
chooses them now, in preference to you. For he certainly does not see
them in possession of more ships than you; nor has he discovered some
inland empire, and withdrawn from the seaboard and the trading-ports;
nor does he forget the words and the promises, on the strength of which
he was granted the Peace.

{13} But some one may tell us, with an air of complete knowledge of the
matter, that what then moved Philip to act thus was not his ambition
nor any of the motives which I impute to him, but his belief that the
demands of Thebes were more righteous than your own. I reply, that this
statement, above all others, is one which he cannot possibly make
_now_. How can one who is ordering Sparta to give up Messene put
forward his belief in the righteousness of the act, as his excuse for
handing over Orchomenus and Coroneia to Thebes?

{14} 'But,' we are told (as the last remaining plea), 'he was forced to
make these concessions, and did so against his better judgement,
finding himself caught between the cavalry of Thessaly and the infantry
of Thebes.' Admirable! And so, we are informed, he intends henceforth
to be wary of the Thebans, and the tale goes round that he intends to
fortify Elateia [n]. 'Intends,' indeed! and I expect that it will
remain an intention! {15} But the help which he is giving to the
Messenians and Argives is no 'intention'; for he is actually sending
mercenaries to them and dispatching funds, and is himself expected to
arrive on the spot with a great force. Is he trying to annihilate the
Spartans, the existing enemies of Thebes, and at the same time
protecting the Phocians, whom he himself has ruined? Who will believe
such a tale? {16} For if Philip had really acted against his will and
under compulsion in the first instance--if he were now really intending
to renounce the Thebans--I cannot believe that he would be so
consistently opposing their enemies. On the contrary, his present
course plainly proves that his former action also was the result of
deliberate policy; and to any sound observation, it is plain that the
whole of his plans are being organized for one end--the destruction of
Athens. {17} Indeed, this has now come to be, in a sense, a matter of
necessity for him. Only consider. It is empire that he desires, and
you, as he believes, are his only possible rivals in this. He has been
acting wrongfully towards you for a long time, as he himself best
knows; for it is the occupation of your possessions that enables him to
hold all his other conquests securely, convinced, as he is, that if he
had let Amphipolis and Poteidaea go, he could not dwell in safety even
at home. {18} These two facts, then, he well knows--first, that his
designs are aimed at you, and secondly, that you are aware of it: and
as he conceives you to be men of sense, he considers that you hold him
in righteous detestation: and, in consequence, his energies are roused:
for he expects to suffer disaster, if you get your opportunity, unless
he can anticipate you by inflicting it upon you. {19} So he is wide
awake; he is on the alert; he is courting the help of others against
Athens--of the Thebans and those Peloponnesians who sympathize with
their wishes; thinking that their desire of gain will make them embrace
the immediate prospect, while their native stupidity will prevent them
from foreseeing any of the consequences. Yet there are examples,
plainly visible to minds which are even moderately
well-balanced[n]--examples which it fell to my lot to bring before
Messenian and Argive audiences, but which had better, perhaps, be laid
before yourselves as well.

{20} 'Can you not imagine,' I said, 'men of Messenia, the impatience
with which the Olynthians used to listen to any speeches directed
against Philip in those times, when he was giving up Anthemus to
them--a city claimed as their own by all former Macedonian kings; when
he was expelling the Athenian colonists from Poteidaea and presenting
it to the Olynthians; when he had taken upon his own shoulders their
quarrel with Athens, and given them the enjoyment of that territory?
Did they expect, do you think, to suffer as they have done? if any one
had foretold it, would they have believed him? {21} And yet,' I
continued, 'after enjoying territory not their own for a very short
time, they are robbed of their own by him for a great while to come;
they are foully driven forth--not conquered merely, but betrayed by one
another and sold; for it is not safe for a free state to be on these
over-friendly terms with a tyrant. {22} What, again, of the
Thessalians? Do you imagine,' I asked, 'that when he was expelling
their tyrants, or again, when he was giving them Nicaea and Magnesia,
they expected to see the present Council of Ten[n] established in their
midst? Did they expect that the restorer of their Amphictyonic rights
would take their own revenues from them for himself? Impossible! And
yet these things came to pass, as all men may know. {23} You
yourselves,' I continued, 'at present behold only the gifts and the
promises of Philip. Pray, if you are really in your right minds, that
you may never see the accomplishment of his deceit and treachery. There
are, as you know well,' I said, 'all kinds of inventions designed for
the protection and security of cities--palisades, walls, trenches, and
every kind of defence. {24} All these are made with hands, and involve
expense as well. But there is one safeguard which all sensible men
possess by nature--a safeguard which is a valuable protection to all,
but above all to a democracy against a tyrant. And what is this? It is
distrust. Guard this possession and cleave to it; preserve this, and
you need never fear disaster. {25} What is it that you desire?' I said.
'Is it freedom? And do you not see that the very titles that Philip
bears are utterly alien to freedom? For a king, a tyrant, is always the
foe of freedom and the enemy of law. Will you not be on your guard,' I
said, 'lest in striving to be rid of war, you find yourselves
slaves?'[n]

{26} My audience heard these words and received them with a tumult of
approbation, as well as many other speeches from the envoys, both when
I was present and again later. And yet, it seems, there is still no
better prospect of their keeping Philip's friendship and promises at a
