
"The asylum to which I would fain lead thy steps," answered Isabel,
gently, "is indeed one whose solitude is holy--whose peace is that of
heaven. But of this hereafter. Thou wilt not hesitate, then, to quit the
camp, unknown to the prince, and ere he can again seek thee?"

"Hesitate, madam? Ah rather, how shall I express my thanks?"

"I did not read that face misjudgingly," thought the queen, as she
resumed. "Be it so; we will not lose another night. Withdraw yonder,
through the inner tent; the litter shall be straight prepared for thee;
and ere midnight thou shalt sleep in safety under the roof of one of the
bravest knights and noblest ladies that our realm can boast. Thou shalt
bear with thee a letter that shall commend thee specially to the care of
thy hostess--thou wilt find her of a kindly and fostering nature. And,
oh, maiden!" added the queen, with benevolent warmth, "steel not thy
heart against her--listen with ductile senses to her gentle ministry;
and may God and His Son prosper that pious lady's counsel, so that it
may win a new strayling to the Immortal Fold!"

Leila listened and wondered, but made no answer; until, as she gained
the entrance to the interior division of the tent, she stopped
abruptly, and said, "Pardon me, gracious queen, but dare I ask thee one
question?--it is not of myself."

"Speak, and fear not."

"My father--hath aught been heard of him? He promised, that ere the
fifth day were past, he would once more see his child; and, alas! that
date is past, and I am still alone in the dwelling of the stranger."

"Unhappy child!" muttered Isabel to herself; "thou knowest not his
treason nor his fate--yet why shouldst thou? Ignorant of what would
render thee blest hereafter, continue ignorant of what would afflict
thee here. Be cheered, maiden," answered the queen, aloud. "No doubt,
there are reasons sufficient to forbid your meeting. But thou shalt not
lack friends in the dwelling-house of the stranger."

"Ah, noble queen, pardon me, and one word more! There hath been with me,
more than once, a stern old man, whose voice freezes the blood within my
veins; he questions me of my father, and in the tone of a foe who would
entrap from the child something to the peril of the sire. That man--thou
knowest him, gracious queen--he cannot have the power to harm my
father?"

"Peace, maiden! the man thou speakest of is the priest of God, and the
innocent have nothing to dread from his reverend zeal. For thyself, I
say again, be cheered; in the home to which I consign thee thou wilt see
him no more. Take comfort, poor child--weep not: all have their cares;
our duty is to bear in this life, reserving hope only for the next."

The queen, destined herself to those domestic afflictions which pomp
cannot soothe, nor power allay, spoke with a prophetic sadness which
yet more touched a heart that her kindness of look and tone had already
softened; and, in the impulse of a nature never tutored in the rigid
ceremonials of that stately court, Leila suddenly came forward, and
falling on one knee, seized the hand of her protectress, and kissed it
warmly through her tears.

"Are you, too, unhappy?" she said. "I will pray for you to _my_ God!"

The queen, surprised and moved at an action which, had witnesses been
present, would only perhaps (for such is human nature) have offended
her Castilian prejudices, left her hand in Leila's grateful clasp; and
laying the other upon the parted and luxuriant ringlets of the kneeling
maiden, said, gently,--"And thy prayers shall avail thee and me when thy
God and mine are the same. Bless thee, maiden! I am a mother; thou art
motherless--bless thee!"




CHAPTER II. THE TEMPTATION OF THE JEWESS,--IN WHICH THE HISTORY PASSES FROM THE
OUTWARD TO THE INTERNAL.

It was about the very hour, almost the very moment, in which Almamen
effected his mysterious escape from the tent of the Inquisition, that
the train accompanying the litter which bore Leila, and which was
composed of some chosen soldiers of Isabel's own body-guard, after
traversing the camp, winding along that part of the mountainous defile
which was in the possession of the Spaniards, and ascending a high and
steep acclivity, halted before the gates of a strongly fortified castle
renowned in the chronicles of that memorable war. The hoarse challenge
of the sentry, the grating of jealous bars, the clanks of hoofs upon
the rough pavement of the courts, and the streaming glare of
torches--falling upon stern and bearded visages, and imparting a ruddier
glow to the moonlit buttresses and battlements of the fortress--aroused
Leila from a kind of torpor rather than sleep, in which the fatigue and
excitement of the day had steeped her senses. An old seneschal conducted
her, through vast and gloomy halls (how unlike the brilliant chambers
and fantastic arcades of her Moorish home) to a huge Gothic apartment,
hung with the arras of Flemish looms. In a few moments, maidens, hastily
aroused from slumber, grouped around her with a respect which would
certainly not have been accorded had her birth and creed been known.
They gazed with surprise at her extraordinary beauty and foreign garb,
and evidently considered the new guest a welcome addition to the scanty
society of the castle. Under any other circumstances, the strangeness
of all she saw, and the frowning gloom of the chamber to which she was
consigned, would have damped the spirits of one whose destiny had so
suddenly passed from the deepest quiet into the sternest excitement. But
any change was a relief to the roar of the camp, the addresses of the
prince, and the ominous voice and countenance of Torquemada; and
Leila looked around her, with the feeling that the queen's promise was
fulfilled, and that she was already amidst the blessings of shelter and
repose. It was long, however, before sleep revisited her eyelids, and
when she woke the noonday sun streamed broadly through the lattice.
By the bedside sat a matron advanced in years, but of a mild and
prepossessing countenance, which only borrowed a yet more attractive
charm from an expression of placid and habitual melancholy. She was
robed in black; but the rich pearls that were interwoven in the sleeves
and stomacher, the jewelled cross that was appended from a chain
of massive gold, and, still more, a certain air of dignity and
command,--bespoke, even to the inexperienced eye of Leila, the evidence
of superior station.

"Thou hast slept late, daughter," said the lady, with a benevolent
smile; "may thy slumbers have refreshed thee! Accept my regrets that I
knew not till this morning of thine arrival, or I should have been the
first to welcome the charge of my royal mistress."

There was in the look, much more than in the words of the Donna Inez de
Quexada, a soothing and tender interest that was as balm to the heart of
Leila; in truth, she had been made the guest of, perhaps, the only lady
in Spain, of pure and Christian blood, who did not despise or execrate
the name of Leila's tribe. Donna Inez had herself contracted to a Jew a
debt of gratitude which she had sought to return to the whole race. Many
years before the time in which our tale is cast, her husband and herself
had been sojourning at Naples, then closely connected with the politics
of Spain, upon an important state mission. They had then an only son,
a youth of a wild and desultory character, whom the spirit of adventure
allured to the East. In one of those sultry lands the young Quexada
was saved from the hands of robbers by the caravanserai of a wealthy
traveller. With this stranger he contracted that intimacy which
wandering and romantic men often conceive for each other, without
any other sympathy than that of the same pursuits. Subsequently, he
discovered that his companion was of the Jewish faith; and, with the
usual prejudice of his birth and time, recoiled from the friendship
he had solicited, and shrank from the sense of the obligation he had
incurred he--quitted his companion. Wearied, at length, with travel, he
was journeying homeward, when he was seized with a sudden and virulent
fever, mistaken for plague: all fled from the contagion of the
supposed pestilence--he was left to die. One man discovered his
condition--watched, tended, and, skilled in the deeper secrets of the
healing art, restored him to life and health: it was the same Jew who
had preserved him from the robbers. At this second and more inestimable
obligation the prejudices of the Spaniard vanished: he formed a deep
and grateful attachment for his preserver; they lived together for some
time, and the Israelite finally accompanied the young Quexada to Naples.
Inez retained a lively sense of the service rendered to her only son,
and the impression had been increased not only by the appearance of
the Israelite, which, dignified and stately, bore no likeness to the
cringing servility of his brethren, but also by the singular beauty and
gentle deportment of his then newly-wed bride, whom he had wooed and won
in that holy land, sacred equally to the faith of Christian and of Jew.
The young Quexada did not long survive his return: his constitution
was broken by long travel, and the debility that followed his fierce
disease. On his deathbed he had besought the mother whom he left
childless, and whose Catholic prejudices were less stubborn than those
of his sire, never to forget the services a Jew had conferred upon him;
to make the sole recompense in her power--the sole recompense the Jew
himself had demanded--and to lose no occasion to soothe or mitigate the
miseries to which the bigotry of the time often exposed the oppressed
race of his deliverer. Donna Inez had faithfully kept the promise
she gave to the last scion of her house; and, through the power and
reputation of her husband and her own connections, and still more
through an early friendship with the queen, she had, on her return to
Spain, been enabled to ward off many a persecution, and many a charge
on false pretences, to which the wealth of some son of Israel made
the cause, while his faith made the pretext. Yet, with all the natural
feelings of a rigid Catholic, she had earnestly sought to render the
favor she had thus obtained amongst the Jews minister to her pious zeal
for their more than temporal welfare. She had endeavored, by gentle
means, to make the conversions which force was impotent to effect; and,
in some instances, her success had been signal. The good senora had thus
obtained high renown for sanctity; and Isabel thought rightly that she
could not select a protectress for Leila who would more kindly shelter
her youth, or more strenuously labor for her salvation. It was, indeed,
a dangerous situation for the adherence of the maiden to that faith
which it had cost her fiery father so many sacrifices to preserve and to
advance.

It was by little and little that Donna Inez sought rather to undermine
than to storm the mental fortress she hoped to man with spiritual
allies; and, in her frequent conversation with Leila, she was at once
perplexed and astonished by the simple and sublime nature of the belief
upon which she waged war. For whether it was that, in his desire
to preserve Leila as much as possible from contact even with Jews
themselves, whose general character (vitiated by the oppression which
engendered meanness, and the extortion which fostered avarice) Almamen
regarded with lofty though concealed repugnance; or whether it was, that
his philosophy did not interpret the Jewish formula of belief in the
same spirit as the herd,--the religion inculcated in the breast of Leila
was different from that which Inez had ever before encountered amongst
her proselytes. It was less mundane and material--a kind of passionate
rather than metaphysical theism, which invested the great ONE, indeed,
with many human sympathies and attributes, but still left Him the
August and awful God of the Genesis, the Father of a Universe though
the individual Protector of a fallen sect. Her attention had been
less directed to whatever appears, to a superficial gaze, stern and
inexorable in the character of the Hebrew God, and which the religion
of Christ so beautifully softened and so majestically refined, than to
those passages in which His love watched over a chosen people, and His
forbearance bore with their transgressions. Her reason had been worked
upon to its belief by that mysterious and solemn agency, by which--when
the whole world beside was bowed to the worship of innumerable deities,
and the adoration of graven images,--in a small and secluded portion of
earth, amongst a people far less civilised and philosophical than many
by which they were surrounded, had been alone preserved a pure and
sublime theism, disdaining a likeness in the things of heaven or
earth. Leila knew little of the more narrow and exclusive tenets of her
brethren; a Jewess in name, she was rather a deist in belief; a deist
of such a creed as Athenian schools might have taught to the imaginative
pupils of Plato, save only that too dark a shadow had been cast over
the hopes of another world. Without the absolute denial of the Sadducee,
Almamen had, probably, much of the quiet scepticism which belonged to
many sects of the early Jews, and which still clings round the wisdom of
the wisest who reject the doctrine of Revelation; and while he had not
sought to eradicate from the breast of his daughter any of the vague
desire which points to a Hereafter, he had never, at least, directed her
thoughts or aspirations to that solemn future. Nor in the sacred book
which was given to her survey, and which so rigidly upheld the unity of
the Supreme Power, was there that positive and unequivocal assurance
of life beyond "the grave where all things are forgotten," that might
supply the deficiencies of her mortal instructor. Perhaps, sharing
those notions of the different value of the sexes, prevalent, from the
remotest period, in his beloved and ancestral East, Almamen might have
hopes for himself which did not extend to his child. And thus she grew
up, with all the beautiful faculties of the soul cherished and unfolded,
without thought, without more than dim and shadowy conjectures, of the
Eternal Bourne to which the sorrowing pilgrim of the earth is bound. It
was on this point that the quick eye of Donna Inez discovered her faith
was vulnerable: who would not, if belief were voluntary, believe in
the world to come? Leila's curiosity and interest were aroused:
she willingly listened to her new guide--she willingly inclined to
conclusions pressed upon her, not with menace, but persuasion. Free from
the stubborn associations, the sectarian prejudices, and unversed in the
peculiar traditions and accounts of the learned of her race, she found
nothing to shock her in the volume which seemed but a continuation of
the elder writings of her faith. The sufferings of the Messiah, His
sublime purity, His meek forgiveness, spoke to her woman's heart; His
doctrines elevated, while they charmed, her reason: and in the Heaven
that a Divine hand opened to all,--the humble as the proud, the
oppressed as the oppressor, to the woman as to the lords of the
earth,--she found a haven for all the doubts she had known, and for the
despair which of late had darkened the face of earth. Her home lost, the
deep and beautiful love of her youth blighted,--that was a creed almost
irresistible which told her that grief was but for a day, that happiness
was eternal. Far, too, from revolting such of the Hebrew pride of
association as she had formed, the birth of the Messiah in the land
of the Israelites seemed to consummate their peculiar triumph as the
Elected of Jehovah. And while she mourned for the Jews who persecuted
the Saviour, she gloried in those whose belief had carried the name and
worship of the descendants of David over the furthest regions of the
world. Often she perplexed and startled the worthy Inez by exclaiming,
"This, your belief, is the same as mine, adding only the assurance of
immortal life--Christianity is but the Revelation of Judaism."

The wise and gentle instrument of Leila's conversion did not, however,
give vent to those more Catholic sentiments which might have scared away
the wings of the descending dove. She forbore too vehemently to point
out the distinctions of the several creeds, and rather suffered them
to melt insensibly one into the other: Leila was a Christian, while she
still believed herself a Jewess. But in the fond and lovely weakness of
mortal emotions, there was one bitter thought that often and often came
to mar the peace that otherwise would have settled on her soul. That
father, the sole softener of whose stern heart and mysterious fates she
was, with what pangs would he receive the news of her conversion! And
Muza, that bright and hero-vision of her youth--was she not setting
the last seal of separation upon all hope of union with the idol of the
Moors? But, alas! was she not already separated from him, and had not
their faiths been from the first at variance? From these thoughts she
started with sighs and tears; and before her stood the crucifix already
admitted into her chamber, and--not, perhaps, too wisely--banished so
rigidly from the oratories of the Huguenot. For the representation of
that Divine resignation, that mortal agony, that miraculous sacrifice,
what eloquence it hath for our sorrows! what preaching hath the symbol
to the vanities of our wishes, to the yearnings of our discontent!

By degrees, as her new faith grew confirmed, Leila now inclined herself
earnestly to those pictures of the sanctity and calm of the conventual
life which Inez delighted to draw. In the reaction of her thoughts, and
her despondency of all worldly happiness, there seemed, to the young
maiden, an inexpressible charm in a solitude which was to release her
for ever from human love, and render her entirely up to sacred visions
and imperishable hopes. And with this selfish, there mingled a generous
and sublime sentiment. The prayers of a convert might be heard in favour
of those yet benighted: and the awful curse upon her outcast race
be lightened by the orisons of one humble heart. In all ages, in all
creeds, a strange and mystic impression has existed of the efficacy of
self-sacrifice in working the redemption even of a whole people: this
belief, so strong in the old orient and classic religions, was yet more
confirmed by Christianity--a creed founded upon the grandest of historic
sacrifices; and the lofty doctrine of which, rightly understood,
perpetuates in the heart of every believer the duty of self-immolation,
as well as faith in the power of prayer, no matter how great the object,
how mean the supplicator. On these thoughts Leila meditated, till
thoughts acquired the intensity of passions, and the conversion of the
Jewess was completed.




CHAPTER III. THE HOUR AND THE MAN

It was on the third morning after the King of Granada, reconciled to his
people, had reviewed his gallant army in the Vivarrambla; and Boabdil,
surrounded by his chiefs and nobles, was planning a deliberate and
decisive battle, by assault on the Christian camp,--when a scout
suddenly arrived, breathless, at the gates of the palace, to communicate
the unlooked-for and welcome intelligence that Ferdinand had in the
night broken up his camp, and marched across the mountains towards
Cordova. In fact, the outbreak of formidable conspiracies had suddenly
rendered the appearance of Ferdinand necessary elsewhere; and, his
intrigues with Almamen frustrated, he despaired of a very speedy
conquest of the city. The Spanish king resolved, therefore, after
completing the devastation of the Vega, to defer the formal and
prolonged siege, which could alone place Granada within his power, until
his attention was no longer distracted to other foes, and until, it must
be added, he had replenished an exhausted treasury. He had formed, with
Torquemada, a vast and wide scheme of persecution, not only against
Jews, but against Christians whose fathers had been of that race,
and who were suspected of relapsing into Judaical practices. The two
schemers of this grand design were actuated by different motives; the
one wished to exterminate the crime, the other to sell forgiveness for
it. And Torquemada connived at the griping avarice of the king, because
it served to give to himself, and to the infant Inquisition, a power and
authority which the Dominican foresaw would be soon greater even than
those of royalty itself, and which, he imagined, by scourging earth,
would redound to the interests of Heaven.

The strange disappearance of Almamen, which was distorted and
exaggerated, by the credulity of the Spaniards, into an event of the
most terrific character, served to complete the chain of evidence
against the wealthy Jews, and Jew-descended Spaniards, of Andalusia;
and while, in imagination, the king already clutched the gold of their
redemption here, the Dominican kindled the flame that was to light them
to punishment hereafter.

Boabdil and his chiefs received the intelligence of the Spanish retreat
with a doubt which soon yielded to the most triumphant delight. Boabdil
at once resumed all the energy for which, though but by fits and starts,
his earlier youth had been remarkable.
