The Project Gutenberg EBook of Only An Irish Boy, by Horatio Alger, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Only An Irish Boy
       Andy Burke's Fortunes

Author: Horatio Alger, Jr.

Release Date: February 16, 2004 [EBook #11111]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONLY AN IRISH BOY ***




Produced by George Smith




              ONLY AN IRISH BOY
          Or, Andy Burke's Fortunes
                      by
               Horatio Alger, Jr.

 Author of "Paul the Peddler," "Phil the Fiddler,"
      "Strive and Succeed," "Slow and Sure,"
            "Try and Trust," etc.




CONTENTS

  Chapter
        I.  ANDY BURKE
       II.  A SKIRMISH
      III.  ANDY AND HIS MOTHER
       IV.  MRS. PRESTON
        V.  A PROFITABLE JOB
       VI.  THE TWO OLD MAIDS
      VII.  ANDY OBTAINS A PLACE
     VIII.  THE MIDNIGHT ALARM
       IX.  WHAT FOLLOWED
        X.  ANDY'S DEBUT AT SCHOOL
       XI.  A GAME OF BALL
      XII.  A LITTLE DIFFICULTY
     XIII.  GODFREY'S REBELLION
      XIV.  MR. STONE IS CALLED TO ACCOUNT
       XV.  MRS. PRESTON'S DISCOMFITURE
      XVI.  THE CHRISTMAS PRESENT
     XVII.  INTRODUCES AN ADVENTURER
    XVIII.  RIDING WITH A HIGHWAYMAN
      XIX.  BAFFLED A ROBBER
       XX.  HOW THE NEWS WAS RECEIVED
      XXI.  A MODEL WIFE
     XXII.  COLONEL PRESTON'S RECOVERY
    XXIII.  MRS. BURKE HAS GOOD FORTUNE
     XXIV.  ANDY'S JOURNEY
      XXV.  THE MERCHANT FROM PORTLAND
     XXVI.  SPINNING THE WEB
    XXVII.  THE DROP GAME
   XXVIII.  THE GUEST OF TWO HOTELS
     XXIX.  A STARTLING EVENT
      XXX.  COLONEL PRESTON'S WILL
     XXXI.  MRS. PRESTON'S INTENTIONS
    XXXII.  MRS. PRESTON'S REVENGE
   XXXIII.  ANDY LOSES HIS PLACE
    XXXIV.  THE WILL AT LAST
     XXXV.  MRS. PRESTON IS UNPLEASANTLY SURPRISED
    XXXVI.  ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL





ONLY AN IRISH BOY




CHAPTER I
ANDY BURKE


"John, saddle my horse, and bring him around to the door."

The speaker was a boy of fifteen, handsomely dressed, and, to judge
from his air and tone, a person of considerable consequence, in his
own opinion, at least. The person addressed was employed in the stable
of his father, Colonel Anthony Preston, and so inferior in social
condition that Master Godfrey always addressed him in imperious tones.

John looked up and answered, respectfully:

"Master Godfrey, your horse is sick of the disease, and your father
left orders that he wasn't to go out on no account."

"It's my horse," said Godfrey; "I intend to take him out."

"Maybe it's yours, but your father paid for him."

"None of your impudence, John," answered Godfrey, angrily. "Am I
master, or are you, I should like to know!"

"Neither, I'm thinking," said John, with a twinkle in his eye. "It's
your father that's the master."

"I'm master of the horse, anyway, so saddle him at once."

"The colonel would blame me," objected John.

"If you don't, I'll report you and get you dismissed."

"I'll take the risk, Master Godfrey," said the servant,
good-humoredly. "The colonel won't be so unreasonable as to send me
away for obeying his own orders."

Here John was right, and Godfrey knew it, and this vexed him the more.
He had an inordinate opinion of himself and his own consequence, and
felt humiliated at being disobeyed by a servant, without being able to
punish him for his audacity. This feeling was increased by the
presence of a third party, who was standing just outside the fence.

As this third party is our hero, I must take a separate paragraph to
describe him. He was about the age of Godfrey, possibly a little
shorter and stouter. He had a freckled face, full of good humor, but
at the same time resolute and determined. He appeared to be one who
had a will of his own, but not inclined to interfere with others,
though ready to stand up for his own rights. In dress he compared very
unfavorably with the young aristocrat, who was biting his lips with
vexation. In fact, though he is my hero, his dress was far from
heroic. He had no vest, and his coat was ragged, as well as his pants.
He had on a pair of shoes two or three times too large for him. They
had not been made to order, but had been given him by a gentleman of
nearly double his size, and fitted him too much. He wore a straw hat,
for it was summer, but the brim was semi-detached, and a part of his
brown hair found its way through it.

Now Godfrey was just in the mood for picking a quarrel with somebody,
and as there was no excuse for quarreling any further with John, he
was rather glad to pitch into the young stranger.

"Who are you?" he demanded, in his usual imperious tone, and with a
contraction of the brow.

"Only an Irish boy!" answered the other, with a droll look and a
slight brogue.

"Then what business have you leaning against my fence?" again demanded
Godfrey, imperiously.

"Shure, I didn't know it was your fence."

"Then you know now. Quit leaning against it."

"Why should I, now? I don't hurt it, do I?"

"No matter--I told you to go away. We don't want any beggars here."

"Shure, I don't see any," said the other boy, demurely.

"What are you but a beggar?"

"Shure, I'm a gintleman of indepindent fortune."

"You look like it," said Godfrey, disdainfully. "Where do you keep
it?"

"Here!" said the Irish boy, tapping a bundle which he carried over his
shoulder, wrapped in a red cotton handkerchief, with a stick thrust
through beneath the knot.

"What's your name?"

"Andy Burke. What's yours?"

"I don't feel under any obligations to answer your questions," said
Godfrey, haughtily.

"Don't you? Then what made you ask me?"

"That's different. You are only an Irish boy."

"And who are you?"

"I am the only son of Colonel Anthony Preston," returned Godfrey,
impressively.

"Are you, now? I thought you was a royal duke, or maybe Queen
Victoria's oldest boy."

"Fellow, you are becoming impertinent."

"Faith, I didn't mean it. You look so proud and gintale that it's jist
a mistake I made."

"You knew that we had no dukes in America," said Godfrey,
suspiciously.

"If we had, now, you'd be one of them," said Andy.

"Why? What makes you say so?"

"You're jist the picture of the Earl of Barleycorn's ildest son that I
saw before I left Ireland."

Godfrey possessed so large a share of ridiculous pride that he felt
pleased with the compliment, though he was not clear about its
sincerity.

"Where do you live?" he asked, with a slight lowering of his tone.

"Where do I live? Shure, I don't live anywhere now, but I'm going to
live in the village. My mother came here a month ago."

"Why didn't you come with her?"

"I was workin' with a farmer, but the work gave out and I came home.
Maybe I'll find work here."

"I think I know where your mother lives," said John, who had heard the
conversation. "She lives up the road a mile or so, in a little house
with two rooms. It's where old Jake Barlow used to live."

"Thank you, sir. I guess I'll be goin', then, as my mother'll be
expectin' me. Do you know if she's well?" and a look of anxiety came
over the boy's honest, good-natured face.

The question was addressed to John, but of this Godfrey was not quite
sure. He thought the inquiry was made of him, and his pride was
touched.

"What should I know of your mother, you beggar?" he said, with a
sneer. "I don't associate with such low people."

"Do you mane my mother?" said Andy, quickly, and he, too, looked angry
and threatening.

"Yes, I do. What are you going to do about it?" demanded Godfrey.

"You'd better take it back," said Andy, his good-humored face now dark
with passion.

"Do you think I am afraid of such a beggar as you?" sneered Godfrey.
"You appear to forget that you are speaking to a gentleman."

"Shure, I didn't know it," returned Andy, hotly. "You're no gentleman
if you insult my mother, and if you'll come out here for a minute I'll
give you a bating."

"John," said Godfrey, angrily, "will you drive that beggar away?"

Now, John's sympathies were rather with Andy than with his young
master. He had no great admiration for Godfrey, having witnessed
during the year he had been in his father's employ too much of the
boy's arrogance and selfishness to feel much attachment for him. Had
he taken any part in the present quarrel, he would have preferred
espousing the cause of the Irish boy; but that would not have been
polite, and he therefore determined to preserve his neutrality.

"That ain't my business, Master Godfrey," he said. "You must fight
your own battles."

"Go away from here," said Godfrey, imperiously advancing toward that
part of the fence against which Andy Burke was leaning.

"Will you take back what you said agin' my mother?"

"No, I won't."

"Then you're a blackguard, if you are a rich man's son."

The blood rushed to Godfrey's face on the instant. This was a palpable
insult. What! he, a rich man's son, the only son and heir of Colonel
Anthony Preston, with his broad acres and ample bank account--he to be
called a blackguard by a low Irish boy. His passion got the better of
him, and he ran through the gate, his eyes flashing fire, bent on
exterminating his impudent adversary.




CHAPTER II
A SKIRMISH


Andy Burke was not the boy to run away from an opponent of his own
size and age. Neither did he propose to submit quietly to the
thrashing which Godfrey designed to give him. He dropped his stick and
bundle, and squared off scientifically at his aristocratic foe.

Godfrey paused an instant before him.

"I'm going to give you a thrashing," he said; "the worst thrashing you
ever had."

"Are you, now?" asked Andy, undismayed. "Come on, thin; I'm ready for
you."

"You're an impudent young ruffian."

"So are you."

Godfrey's aristocratic blood boiled at this retort, and he struck out
at Andy, but the latter knew what was coming, and, swift as a flash,
warded it off, and fetched Godfrey a blow full upon his nose, which
started the blood. Now, the pain and the sight of the blood combined
filled him with added fury, and he attempted to seize Andy around the
waist and throw him. But here again he was foiled. The young Irish boy
evaded his grasp, and, seizing him in turn, by an adroit movement of
the foot, tripped him up. Godfrey fell heavily on his back.

Andy withdrew a little, and did not offer to hold him down, as Godfrey
would have been sure to do under similar circumstances. "Have you got
enough?" he asked.

"That wasn't fair," exclaimed Godfrey, jumping up hastily, deeply
mortified because he had been worsted in the presence of John, who,
sooth to say, rather enjoyed his young master's overthrow.

He rushed impetuously at Andy, but he was blinded by his own
impetuosity, and his adversary, who kept cool and self-possessed, had,
of course, the advantage. So the engagement terminated as
before--Godfrey was stretched once more on the sidewalk. He was about
to renew the assault, however, when there was an interruption. This
interruption came in the form of Colonel Preston himself, who was
returning from a business meeting of citizens interested in
establishing a savings bank in the village.

"What's all this, Godfrey?" he called out, in a commanding tone.

Godfrey knew that when his father spoke he must obey, and he therefore
desisted from the contemplated attack. He looked up at his father and
said, sulkily:

"I was punishing this Irish boy for his impertinence."

John grinned a little at this way of putting it, and his father said:

"It looked very much as if he were punishing you."

"I didn't get fair hold," said Godfrey, sulkily.

"So he was impertinent, was he? What did he say?"

"He said I was no gentleman."

Andy Burke listened attentively to what was said, but didn't attempt
to justify himself as yet.

"I have sometimes had suspicions of that myself," said his father,
quietly.

Though Godfrey was an only son, his father was sensible enough to be
fully aware of his faults. If he was indulged, it was his mother, not
his father, that was in fault. Colonel Preston was a fair and just
man, and had sensible views about home discipline; but he was
overruled by his wife, whose character may be judged from the fact
that her son closely resembled her. She was vain, haughty, and proud
of putting on airs. She considered herself quite the finest lady in
the village, but condescended to associate with the wives of the
minister, the doctor, and a few of the richer inhabitants, but even
with them she took care to show that she regarded herself superior to
them all. She was, therefore, unpopular, as was her son among his
companions. However, these two stood by each other, and Mrs. Preston
was sure to defend Godfrey in all he did, and complained because his
father did not do the same.

"I didn't think you'd turn against me, and let a low boy insult me,"
complained Godfrey.

"Why do you call him low?"

"Because he's only an Irish boy."

"Some of our most distinguished men have been Irish boys or of Irish
descent. I don't think you have proved your point."

"He's a beggar."

"I'm not a beggar," exclaimed Andy, speaking for the first time. "I
never begged a penny in all my life."

"Look at his rags," said Godfrey, scornfully.

"You would be in rags, too, if you had to buy your own clothes. I
think I should respect you very much more under the circumstances,"
returned his father.

"The colonel's a-givin' it to him," thought John, with a grin.
"'Twon't do the young master any harm."

"What is your name?" inquired Colonel Preston, turning now to our
hero, as his son seemed to have no more to say.

"Andy Burke."

"Do you live here?"

"I've just come to town, sir. My mother lives here."

"Where does she live?"

"I don't know, sir, just. He knows," pointing out John.

"I calcerlate his mother lives in old Jake Barlow's house," said John.

"Oh, the Widow Burke. Yes, I know. I believe Mrs. Preston employs her
sometimes. Well, Andy, if that's your name, how is it that I catch you
fighting with my son? That is not very creditable, unless you have
good cause."
