The Project Gutenberg eBook, Black Beauty, Young Folks' Edition, by Anna
Sewell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Black Beauty, Young Folks' Edition

Author: Anna Sewell

Release Date: March 31, 2004  [eBook #11860]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACK BEAUTY, YOUNG FOLKS'
EDITION***


E-text prepared by Paul Murray and Project Gutenberg Distributed
Proofreaders from images provided by The Internet Archive Children's
Library



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 11860-h.htm or 11860-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/8/6/11860/11860-h/11860-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/8/6/11860/11860-h.zip)





BLACK BEAUTY

YOUNG FOLKS' EDITION

1902






[Illustration]



BLACK BEAUTY




CHAPTER I


MY EARLY HOME

The first place that I can well remember was a pleasant meadow with a
pond of clear water in it. Over the hedge on one side we looked into a
plowed field, and on the other we looked over a gate at our master's
house, which stood by the roadside. While I was young I lived upon my
mother's milk, as I could not eat grass. In the daytime I ran by her
side, and at night I lay down close by her. When it was hot we used to
stand by the pond in the shade of the trees, and when it was cold we had
a warm shed near the grove.

There were six young colts in the meadow beside me; they were older than
I was. I used to run with them, and had great fun; we used to gallop all
together round the field, as hard as we could go. Sometimes we had
rather rough play, for they would bite and kick, as well as gallop.

[Illustration]

One day, when there was a good deal of kicking, my mother whinnied to me
to come to her, and then she said: "I wish you to pay attention to what
I am going to say. The colts who live here are very good colts, but they
are cart-horse colts, and they have not learned manners. You have been
well-bred and well-born; your father has a great name in these parts,
and your grandfather won the cup at the races; your grandmother had the
sweetest temper of any horse I ever knew, and I think you have never
seen me kick or bite. I hope you will grow up gentle and good, and never
learn bad ways; do your work with a good will, lift your feet up well
when you trot, and never bite or kick even in play."

[Illustration]

I have never forgotten my mother's advice. I knew she was a wise old
horse, and our master thought a great deal of her. Her name was Duchess,
but he called her Pet.

Our master was a good, kind man. He gave us good food, good lodging and
kind words; he spoke as kindly to us as he did to his little children.
We were all fond of him, and my mother loved him very much. When she saw
him at the gate she would neigh with joy, and trot up to him. He would
pat and stroke her and say, "Well, old Pet, and how is your little
Darkie?" I was a dull black, so he called me Darkie; then he would give
me a piece of bread, which was very good, and sometimes he brought a
carrot for my mother. All the horses would come to him, but I think we
were his favorites. My mother always took him to town on a market-day in
a light gig.

We had a ploughboy, Dick, who sometimes came into our field to pluck
blackberries from the hedge. When he had eaten all he wanted he would
have what he called fun with the colts, throwing stones and sticks at
them to make them gallop. We did not much mind him, for we could gallop
off; but sometimes a stone would hit and hurt us.

One day he was at this game, and did not know that the master was in the
next field, watching what was going on; over the hedge he jumped in a
snap, and catching Dick by the arm, he gave him such a box on the ear as
made him roar with the pain and surprise. As soon as we saw the master
we trotted up nearer to see what went on.

"Bad boy!" he said, "bad boy! to chase the colts. This is not the first
time, but it shall be the last. There--take your money and go home; I
shall not want you on my farm again." So we never saw Dick any more. Old
Daniel, the man who looked after the horses, was just as gentle as our
master; so we were well off.




CHAPTER II


THE HUNT

Before I was two years old a circumstance happened which I have never
forgotten. It was early in the spring; there had been a little frost in
the night, and a light mist still hung over the woods and meadows. I and
the other colts were feeding at the lower part of the field when we
heard what sounded like the cry of dogs. The oldest of the colts raised
his head, pricked his ears, and said, "There are the hounds!" and
cantered off, followed by the rest of us, to the upper part of the
field, where we could look over the hedge and see several fields beyond.
My mother and an old riding horse of our master's were also standing
near, and seemed to know all about it. "They have found a hare," said my
mother, "and if they come this way we shall see the hunt."

And soon the dogs were all tearing down the field of young wheat next to
ours. I never heard such a noise as they made. They did not bark, nor
howl, nor whine, but kept on a "yo! yo, o, o! yo, o, o!" at the top of
their voices. After them came a number of men on horseback, all
galloping as fast as they could. The old horses snorted and looked
eagerly after them, and we young colts wanted to be galloping with them,
but they were soon away into the fields lower down; here it seemed as if
they had come to a stand; the dogs left off barking and ran about every
way with their noses to the ground.

"They have lost the scent," said the old horse; "perhaps the hare will
get off."

"What hare?" I said.

"Oh, I don't know what hare; likely enough it may be one of our own
hares out of the woods; any hare they can find will do for the dogs and
men to run after"; and before long the dogs began their "yo; yo, o, o!"
again, and back they came all together at full speed, making straight
for our meadow at the part where the high bank and hedge overhang the
brook.

"Now we shall see the hare," said my mother; and just then a hare, wild
with fright, rushed by and made for the woods. On came the dogs; they
burst over the bank, leaped the stream and came dashing across the
field, followed by the huntsmen. Several men leaped their horses clean
over, close upon the dogs. The hare tried to get through the fence; it
was too thick, and she turned sharp around to make for the road, but it
was too late; the dogs were upon her with their wild cries; we heard
one shriek, and that was the end of her. One of the huntsmen rode up and
whipped off the dogs, who would soon have torn her to pieces. He held
her up by the leg, torn and bleeding, and all the gentlemen seemed well
pleased.

[Illustration]

As for me, I was so astonished that I did not at first see what was
going on by the brook; but when I did look, there was a sad sight; two
fine horses were down; one was struggling in the stream, and the other
was groaning on the grass. One of the riders was getting out of the
water covered with mud, the other lay quite still.

"His neck is broken," said my mother.

"And serves him right, too," said one of the colts.

I thought the same, but my mother did not join with us.

"Well, no," she said, "you must not say that; but though I am an old
horse, and have seen and heard a great deal, I never yet could make out
