The Project Gutenberg EBook of Making His Way, by Horatio Alger, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Making His Way
       Frank Courtney's Struggle Upward

Author: Horatio Alger, Jr.

Release Date: October 20, 2004 [EBook #13803]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAKING HIS WAY ***




Produced by Steven desJardins and PG Distributed Proofreaders.





MAKING HIS WAY

_or_

Frank Courtney's Struggle Upward

By HORATIO ALGER, Jr.


Whitman Publishing Co.
RACINE, WISCONSIN
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




TABLE OF CONTENTS


I.        Two School Friends
II.       The Telegram
III.      Frank's Bereavement
IV.       Mrs. Manning's Will
V.        Disinherited
VI.       An Unsatisfactory Interview
VII.      A School Friend
VIII.     A New Plan
IX.       The New Owner of Ajax
X.        Mark Yields to Temptation
XI.       Mark Gets into Trouble
XII.      Suspended
XIII.     Mr. Manning's New Plan
XIV.      Good-bye
XV.       Erastus Tarbox of Newark
XVI.      An Unpleasant Discovery
XVII.     The Way of the World
XVIII.    Frank Arrives in New York
XIX.      Frank Seeks Employment in Vain
XX.       An Adventure in Wall Street
XXI.      The Capture
XXII.     The Young Tea Merchant
XXIII.    Frank Meets Mr. Manning and Mark
XXIV.     A Discouraging Day
XXV.      Perplexity
XXVI.     Frank Hears Something to His Advantage
XXVII.    An Incident in a Street Car
XXVIII.   Frank Makes an Evening Call
XXIX.     Frank Is Offered a Position
XXX.      Frank as Private Secretary
XXXI.     A Letter from Mr. Tarbox
XXXII.    Mr. Percival's Proposal
XXXIII.   Preparing for a Journey
XXXIV.    Frank Reaches Jackson
XXXV.     Dick Hamlin
XXXVI.    Mr. Fairfield, the Agent
XXXVII.   Frank Receives a Letter from Mr. Percival
XXXVIII.  The Agent Is Notified
XXXIX.    An Important Discovery
XL.       Jonas Barton
XLI.      Conclusion




MAKING HIS WAY


CHAPTER I

TWO SCHOOL FRIENDS


Two boys were walking in the campus of the Bridgeville Academy. They
were apparently of about the same age--somewhere from fifteen to
sixteen--but there was a considerable difference in their attire.

Herbert Grant was neatly but coarsely dressed, and his shoes were of
cowhide, but his face indicated a frank, sincere nature, and was
expressive of intelligence.

His companion was dressed in a suit of fine cloth, his linen was of the
finest, his shoes were calfskin, and he had the indefinable air of a boy
who had been reared in luxury.

He had not the broad, open face of his friend--for the two boys were
close friends--but his features were finely chiseled, indicating a share
of pride, and a bold, self-reliant nature.

He, too, was an attractive boy, and in spite of his pride possessed a
warm, affectionate heart and sterling qualities, likely to endear him to
those who could read and understand him.

His name was Frank Courtney, and he is the hero of my story.

"Have you written your Latin exercises, Frank?" asked Herbert.

"Yes; I finished them an hour ago."

"I was going to ask you to write them with me. It is pleasanter to
study in company."

"Provided you have the right sort of company," rejoined Frank.

"Am I the right sort of company?" inquired Herbert, with a smile.

"You hardly need to ask that, Herbert. Are we not always together? If I
did not like your company, I should not seek it so persistently. I don't
care to boast, but I have plenty of offers of companionship which I
don't care to accept. There is Bob Stickney, for instance, who is always
inviting me to his room; but you know what he is--a lazy fellow, who
cares more to have a good time than to study. Then there is James
Cameron, a conceited, empty-headed fellow, who is very disagreeable to
me."

"You don't mention your stepbrother, Mark Manning."

"For two reasons--he doesn't care for my company, and of all the boys I
dislike him the most."

"I don't like him myself. But why do you dislike him so much?"

"Because he is a sneak--a crafty, deceitful fellow, always scheming for
his own interest. He hates me, but he doesn't dare to show it. His
father is my mother's husband, but the property is hers, and will be
mine. He thinks he may some day be dependent on me, and he conceals his
dislike in order to stand the better chance by and by. Heaven grant that
it may be long before my dear mother is called away!"

"How did she happen to marry again, Frank?"

"I can hardly tell. It was a great grief to me. Mr. Manning was a
penniless lawyer, who ingratiated himself with my mother, and
persecuted her till she consented to marry him. He is very soft-spoken,
and very plausible, and he managed to make mother--who has been an
invalid for years--think that it would be the best thing for her to
delegate her cares to him, and provide me with a second father."

Frank did not like his stepfather, he did not trust him.

"Your stepbrother, Mark Manning, enjoys the same advantages as yourself,
does he not?" inquired Herbert.

"Yes."

"Then his father's marriage proved a good thing for him."

"That is true. When he first came to the house he was poorly dressed,
and had evidently been used to living in a poor way. He was at once
provided with a complete outfit as good as my own, and from that time as
much has been spent on him as on me. Don't think that I am mean enough
to grudge him any part of the money expended upon him. If he were like
you, I could like him, and enjoy his society; but he is just another as
his father."

Here Herbert's attention was drawn to a boy who was approaching with a
yellow envelope in his hand.

"Frank," he said, suddenly, "there's Mark Manning. He looks as if he had
something to say to you. He has either a letter or a telegram in his
hand."




CHAPTER II

THE TELEGRAM


Frank's heart gave a great bound at the suggestion of a telegram. A
telegram could mean but one thing--that his mother had become suddenly
worse.

He hurried to meet his stepbrother.

"Is that a telegram, Mark?" he asked, anxiously.

"Yes."

"Is it anything about mother? Tell me quick!"

"Read it for yourself, Frank."

Frank drew the telegram from the envelope, and read it hastily:

"My wife is very sick. I wish you and Frank to come home at once."

"When does the next train start, Herbert?" asked Frank, pale with
apprehension.

"In an hour."

"I shall go by that train."

"I don't think I can get ready so soon," said Mark, deliberately.

"Then you can come by yourself," replied Frank, impetuously. "I beg your
pardon, Mark," he added. "I cannot expect you to feel as I do. It is not
your mother."

"It is my stepmother," said Mark.

"That is quite different. But I must not linger here. I will go at once
to Dr. Brush, and tell him of my summons home. Good-bye, Herbert, till
we meet again."

"I will go with you to the depot, Frank," said his friend,
sympathizingly. "Don't wait for me. Go ahead, and make your preparation
for the journey. I will be at your room in a quarter of an hour."

"You won't go by the next train, Mark?" said Herbert.

"No. I don't care to rush about as Frank is doing."

"You would if it were your own mother who was so ill."

"I am not sure. It wouldn't do any good, would it?"

"You would naturally feel anxious," said Herbert.

"Oh, yes, I suppose so!" answered Mark, indifferently.

Mark Manning was slender and dark, with a soft voice and rather
effeminate ways. He didn't care for the rough sports in which most boys
delight; never played baseball or took part in athletic exercises, but
liked to walk about, sprucely dressed, and had even been seen on the
campus on a Saturday afternoon with his hands incased in kid gloves.

For this, however, he was so ridiculed and laughed at that he had to
draw them off and replace them in his pocket.

As Frank and Herbert walked together to the railway station, the latter
said:

"It seems to me, Frank, that the telegram should have been sent to you,
rather than to Mark Manning. You are the one who is most interested in
the contents."

"I thought of that, Herbert, but I was too much affected by the contents
to speak of it. I am not surprised, however. It is like Mr. Manning. It
jarred upon me to have him speak of mother as his wife. She is so, but I
never could reconcile myself to the fact."

"Do you remember your father--your own father, Frank?"

"You need not have said 'your own father.' I don't recognize Mr.
Manning as a father, at all. Yes, I remember him. I was eight years old
when he died. He was a fine-looking man, always kind--a man to be loved
and respected. There was not a particle of similarity between him and
Mr. Manning. He was strong and manly."

"How did it happen that he died so young?"

"He was the victim of a railway accident. He had gone to New York on
business, and was expected back on a certain day. The train on which he
was a passenger collided with a freight train, and my poor father was
among the passengers who were killed. The news was almost too much for
my poor mother, although she had not yet become an invalid. It brought
on a fit of sickness lasting for three months. She has never been
altogether well since."

"After all, Frank, the gifts of fortune, or rather Providence, are not
so unequally distributed as at first appears. You are rich, but
fatherless. I am poor enough but my father and mother are both spared to
me."

"I would gladly accept poverty if my father could be restored to life,
and my mother be spared to me for twenty years to come."

"I am sure you would, Frank," said Herbert. "Money is valuable, but
there are some things far more so."

They had reached the station by this time, and it was nearly the time
for the train to start. Frank bought his ticket, and the two friends
shook hands and bade each other good-bye.

In an hour Frank was walking up the long avenue leading to the front
door of the mansion.

The door was opened by his stepfather.

"How is mother?" asked Frank, anxiously.

"I am grieved to say that she is very sick," said Mr. Manning, in a soft
voice. "She had a copious hemorrhage this morning, which has weakened
her very much."

"Is she in danger?" asked Frank, anxiously.

"I fear she is," said Mr. Manning.

"I suppose I can see her?"

"Yes; but it will be better not to make her talk much."

"I will be careful, sir."

Frank waited no longer, but hurried to his mother's chamber. As he
entered, and his glance fell on the bed and its occupant, he was shocked
by the pale and ghastly appearance of the mother whom he so dearly
loved. The thought came to him at once:

"She cannot live."

He found it difficult to repress a rising sob, but he did so for his
mother's sake. He thought that it might affect her injuriously if he
should display emotion.

His mother smiled faintly as he approached the bed.

"Mother," said Frank, kneeling by the bedside, "are you very weak?"

"Yes, Frank," she answered, almost in a whisper. "I think I am going to
leave you."

"Oh, don't say that, mother!" burst forth in anguish from Frank's lips.
"Try to live for my sake."

"I should like to live, my dear boy," whispered his mother; "but if it
is God's will that I should die, I must be reconciled. I leave you in
his care."

Here Mr. Manning entered the room.

"You will be kind to my boy?" said the dying mother.

"Can you doubt it, my dear?" replied her husband, in the soft tones
Frank so much disliked. "I will care for him as if he were my own."

"Thank you. Then I shall die easy."

"Don't speak any more, mother. It will tire you, and perhaps bring on
another hemorrhage."

"Frank is right, my dear. You had better not exert yourself any more at
present."

"Didn't Mark come with you?" asked Mr. Manning of Frank.
