Project Gutenberg's Penelope's Irish Experiences, by Kate Douglas Wiggin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Penelope's Irish Experiences

Author: Kate Douglas Wiggin

Posting Date: August 27, 2008 [EBook #1391]
Release Date: July, 1998

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PENELOPE'S IRISH EXPERIENCES ***




Produced by Les Bowler





PENELOPE'S IRISH EXPERIENCES

by Kate Douglas Wiggin.

Published 1901.



             To my first Irish friend, Jane Barlow.




Contents.

     Part First--Leinster.

     I.      We emulate the Rollo books.
     II.     Irish itineraries.
     III.    We sight a derelict.
     IV.     Enter Benella Dusenberry.
     V.      The Wearing of the Green.
     VI.     Dublin, then and now.


     Part Second--Munster.

     VII.    A tour and a detour.
     VIII.   Romance and reality.
     IX.     The light of other days.
     X.      The belles of Shandon.
     XI.     'The rale thing.'
     XII.    Life at Knockarney House.
     XIII.   'O! the sound of the Kerry dancin'.'
     XIV.    'Mrs. Mullarkey's iligant locks.'
     XV.     Penelope weaves a web.
     XVI.    Salemina has her chance.


     Part Third--Ulster.

     XVII.   The glens of Antrim.
     XVIII.  Limavady love-letters.
     XIX.    'In ould Donegal.'
     XX.     We evict a tenant.
     XXI.    Lachrymae Hibernicae.


     Part Fourth--Connaught.

     XXII.   The weeping west.
     XXIII.  Beams and motes.
     XXIV.   Humours of the road.
     XXV.    The wee folk.


     Part Fifth--Royal Meath.

     XXVI.   Ireland's gold.
     XXVII.  The three chatelaines of Devorgilla.
     XXVIII. Round towers and reflections.
     XXIX.   Aunt David's garden.
     XXX.    The quest of the fair strangers.
     XXXI.   Good-bye, dark Rosaleen!
     XXXII.  'As the sunflower turns.'




Part First--Leinster.



Chapter I. We emulate the Rollo books.

     'Sure a terrible time I was out o' the way,
        Over the sea, over the sea,
      Till I come to Ireland one sunny day,--
        Betther for me, betther for me:
      The first time me fut got the feel o' the ground
        I was strollin' along in an Irish city
      That hasn't its aquil the world around
        For the air that is sweet an' the girls that are pretty.'

                                              --Moira O'Neill.



                           Dublin, O'Carolan's Private Hotel.

It is the most absurd thing in the world that Salemina, Francesca, and I
should be in Ireland together.

That any three spinsters should be fellow-travellers is not in itself
extraordinary, and so our former journeyings in England and Scotland
could hardly be described as eccentric in any way; but now that I am
a matron and Francesca is shortly to be married, it is odd, to say the
least, to see us cosily ensconced in a private sitting-room of a Dublin
hotel, the table laid for three, and not a vestige of a man anywhere to
be seen. Where, one might ask, if he knew the antecedent circumstances,
are Miss Hamilton's American spouse and Miss Monroe's Scottish lover?

Francesca had passed most of the winter in Scotland. Her indulgent
parent had given his consent to her marriage with a Scotsman, but
insisted that she take a year to make up her mind as to which particular
one. Memories of her past flirtations, divagations, plans for a life of
single blessedness, all conspired to make him incredulous, and the loyal
Salemina, feeling some responsibility in the matter, had elected to
remain by Francesca's side during the time when her affections were
supposed to be crystallising into some permanent form.

It was natural enough that my husband and I should spend the first
summer of our married life abroad, for we had been accustomed to do this
before we met, a period that we always allude to as the Dark Ages; but
no sooner had we arrived in Edinburgh, and no sooner had my husband
persuaded our two friends to join us in a long, delicious Irish holiday,
than he was compelled to return to America for a month or so.

I think you must number among your acquaintances such a man as Mr.
William Beresford, whose wife I have the honour to be. Physically the
type is vigorous, or has the appearance and gives the impression of
being vigorous, because it has never the time to be otherwise, since
it is always engaged in nursing its ailing or decrepit relatives.
Intellectually it is full of vitality; any mind grows when it is
exercised, and the brain that has to settle all its own affairs and all
the affairs of its friends and acquaintances could never lack energy.
Spiritually it is almost too good for earth, and any woman who lives in
the house with it has moments of despondency and self-chastisement,
in which she fears that heaven may prove all too small to contain the
perfect being and its unregenerate family as well.

Financially it has at least a moderate bank account; that is, it
is never penniless, indeed it can never afford to be, because it is
peremptory that it should possess funds in order to disburse them to
needier brothers. There is never an hour when Mr. William Beresford is
not signing notes and bonds and drafts for less fortunate men; giving
small loans just to 'help a fellow over a hard place'; educating
friends' children, starting them in business, or securing appointments
for them. The widow and the fatherless have worn such an obvious path to
his office and residence that no bereaved person could possibly lose
his way, and as a matter of fact no one of them ever does. This special
journey of his to America has been made necessary because, first, his
cousin's widow has been defrauded of a large sum by her man of business;
and second, his college chum and dearest friend has just died in Chicago
after appointing him executor of his estate and guardian of his only
child. The wording of the will is, 'as a sacred charge and with full
power.' Incidentally, as it were, one of his junior partners has been
ordered a long sea voyage, and another has to go somewhere for mud
baths. The junior partners were my idea, and were suggested solely that
their senior might be left more or less free from business care, but
it was impossible that Willie should have selected sound, robust
partners--his tastes do not incline him in the direction of selfish
ease; accordingly he chose two delightful, estimable, frail gentlemen
who needed comfortable incomes in conjunction with light duties.

I am railing at my husband for all this, but I love him for it just the
same, and it shows why the table is laid for three.

"Salemina," I said, extending my slipper toe to the glowing peat, which
by extraordinary effort had been brought up from the hotel kitchen, as a
bit of local colour, "it is ridiculous that we three women should be in
Ireland together; it's the sort of thing that happens in a book, and of
which we say that it could never occur in real life. Three persons do
not spend successive seasons in England, Scotland and Ireland unless
they are writing an Itinerary of the British Isles. The situation is
possible, certainly, but it isn't simple, or natural, or probable. We
are behaving precisely like characters in fiction, who, having been
popular in the first volume, are exploited again and again until their
popularity wanes. We are like the Trotty books or the Elsie Dinmore
series. England was our first volume, Scotland our second, and here we
are, if you please, about to live a third volume in Ireland. We fall in
love, we marry and are given in marriage, we promote and take part
in international alliances, but when the curtain goes up again, our
accumulations, acquisitions--whatever you choose to call
them--have disappeared. We are not to the superficial eye the
spinster-philanthropist, the bride to be, the wife of a year; we are
the same old Salemina, Francesca and Penelope. It is so dramatic that my
husband should be called to America; as a woman I miss him and need him;
as a character I am much better single. I don't suppose publishers like
married heroines any more than managers like married leading ladies.
Then how entirely proper it is that Ronald Macdonald cannot leave his
new parish in the Highlands. The one, my husband, belongs to the first
volume; Francesca's lover to the second; and good gracious, Salemina,
don't you see the inference?"

"I may be dull," she replied, "but I confess I do not."

"We are three?"

"Who is three?"

"That is not good English, but I repeat with different emphasis WE are
three. I fell in love in England, Francesca fell in love in Scotland-"
And here I paused, watching the blush mount rosily to Salemina's grey
hair; pink is very becoming to grey, and that, we always say, accounts
more satisfactorily for Salemina's frequent blushes than her modesty,
which is about of the usual sort.

"Your argument is interesting, and even ingenious," she replied, "but
I fail to see my responsibility. If you persist in thinking of me as
a character in fiction, I shall rebel. I am not the stuff of which
heroines are made; besides, I would never appear in anything so cheap
and obvious as a series, and the three-volume novel is as much out of
fashion as the Rollo books."

"But we are unconscious heroines, you understand," I explained. "While
we were experiencing our experiences we did not notice them, but they
have attained by degrees a sufficient bulk so that they are visible
to the naked eye. We can look back now and perceive the path we have
travelled."

"It isn't retrospect I object to, but anticipation," she retorted; "not
history, but prophecy. It is one thing to gaze sentimentally at the road
you have travelled, quite another to conjure up impossible pictures of
the future."

Salemina calls herself a trifle over forty, but I am not certain of
her age, and think perhaps that she is uncertain herself. She has good
reason to forget it, and so have we. Of course she could consult the
Bible family record daily, but if she consulted her looking-glass
afterward the one impression would always nullify the other. Her hair is
silvered, it is true, but that is so clearly a trick of Nature that it
makes her look younger rather than older.

Francesca came into the room just here. I said a moment ago that she was
the same old Francesca, but I was wrong; she is softening, sweetening,
expanding; in a word, blooming. Not only this, but Ronald Macdonald's
likeness has been stamped upon her in some magical way, so that,
although she has not lost her own personality, she seems to have added
a reflection of his. In the glimpses of herself, her views, feelings,
opinions, convictions, which she gives us in a kind of solution, as
it were, there are always traces of Ronald Macdonald; or, to be more
poetical, he seems to have bent over the crystal pool, and his image is
reflected there.

You remember in New England they allude to a bride as 'she that was'
a so-and-so. In my private interviews with Salemina I now habitually
allude to Francesca as 'she that was a Monroe'; it is so significant
of her present state of absorption. Several times this week I have been
obliged to inquire, "Was I, by any chance, as absent-minded and dull in
Pettybaw as Francesca is under the same circumstances in Dublin?"

"Quite."

"Duller if anything."

These candid replies being uttered in cheerful unison I change the
subject, but cannot resist telling them both casually that the building
of the Royal Dublin Society is in Kildare Street, just three minutes'
from O'Carolan's, and that I have noticed it is for the promotion of
Husbandry and other useful arts and sciences.



Chapter II. Irish itineraries.

    'And I will make my journey, if life and health but stand,
     Unto that pleasant country, that fresh and fragrant strand,
     And leave your boasted braveries, your wealth and high command,
     For the fair hills of holy Ireland.'

                                      --Sir Samuel Ferguson.

Our mutual relations have changed little, notwithstanding that
betrothals and marriages have intervened, and in spite of the fact
that Salemina has grown a year younger; a mysterious feat that she has
accomplished on each anniversary of her birth since the forming of our
alliance.

It is many months since we travelled together in Scotland, but on
entering this very room in Dublin, the other day, we proceeded to show
our several individualities as usual: I going to the window to see the
view, Francesca consulting the placard on the door for hours of table
d'hote, and Salemina walking to the grate and lifting the ugly little
paper screen to say, "There is a fire laid; how nice!" As the matron I
have been promoted to a nominal charge of the travelling arrangements.
Therefore, while the others drive or sail, read or write, I am buried
in Murray's Handbook, or immersed in maps. When I sleep, my dreams
are spotted, starred, notched, and lined with hieroglyphics, circles,
horizontal dashes, long lines, and black dots, signifying hotels, coach
and rail routes, and tramways.

All this would have been done by Himself with the greatest ease in the
world. In the humbler walks of Irish life the head of the house, if he
is of the proper sort, is called Himself, and it is in the shadow of
this stately title that my Ulysses will appear in this chronicle.

I am quite sure I do not believe in the inferiority of woman, but I have
a feeling that a man is a trifle superior in practical affairs. If I am
in doubt, and there is no husband, brother, or cousin near, from whom to
seek advice, I instinctively ask the butler or the coachman rather than
a female friend; also, when a female friend has consulted the Bradshaw
in my behalf, I slip out and seek confirmation from the butcher's boy or
the milkman. Himself would have laid out all our journeyings for us, and
we should have gone placidly along in well-ordered paths. As it is,
we are already pledged to do the most absurd and unusual things, and
Ireland bids fair to be seen in the most topsy-turvy, helter-skelter
fashion imaginable.

Francesca's propositions are especially nonsensical, being provocative
of fruitless discussion, and adding absolutely nothing to the sum of
human intelligence.

"Why not start without any special route in view, and visit the towns
with which we already have familiar associations?" she asked. "We should
have all sorts of experiences by the way, and be free from the blighting
influences of a definite purpose. Who that has ever travelled fails to
call to mind certain images when the names of cities come up in general
conversation? If Bologna, Brussels, or Lima is mentioned, I think at
once of sausages, sprouts, and beans, and it gives me a feeling of
friendly intimacy. I remember Neufchatel and Cheddar by their cheeses,
Dorking and Cochin China by their hens, Whitby by its jet, or York by
its hams, so that I am never wholly ignorant of places and their subtle
associations."

"That method appeals strongly to the fancy," said Salemina drily. "What
subtle associations have you already established in Ireland?"

"Let me see," she responded thoughtfully; "the list is not a long one.
Limerick and Carrickmacross for lace, Shandon for the bells, Blarney
and Donnybrook for the stone and the fair, Kilkenny for the cats, and
Balbriggan for the stockings."

"You are sordid this morning," reproved Salemina; "it would be better if
you remembered Limerick by the famous siege, and Balbriggan as the
place where King William encamped with his army after the battle of the
Boyne."

"I've studied the song-writers more than the histories and geographies,"
I said, "so I should like to go to Bray and look up the Vicar, then to
Coleraine to see where Kitty broke the famous pitcher; or to Tara, where
the harp that once, or to Athlone, where dwelt Widow Malone, ochone, and
so on; just start with an armful of Tom Moore's poems and Lover's and
Ferguson's, and, yes," I added generously, "some of the nice moderns,
and visit the scenes they've written about."

"And be disappointed," quoth Francesca cynically. "Poets see everything
by the light that never was on sea or land; still I won't deny that they
help the blind, and I should rather like to know if there are still any
Nora Creinas and Sweet Peggies and Pretty Girls Milking their Cows."

"I am very anxious to visit as many of the Round Towers as possible,"
said Salemina. "When I was a girl of seventeen I had a very dear friend,
a young Irishman, who has since become a well-known antiquary and
archaeologist. He was a student, and afterwards, I think, a professor
here in Trinity College, but I have not heard from him for many years."

"Don't look him up, darling," pleaded Francesca. "You are so much our
superior now that we positively must protect you from all elevating
influences."

"I won't insist on the Round Towers," smiled Salemina, "and I think
Penelope's idea a delightful one; we might add to it a sort of literary
pilgrimage to the homes and haunts of Ireland's famous writers."

"I didn't know that she had any," interrupted Francesca.

This is a favourite method of conversation with that spoiled young
person; it seems to appeal to her in three different ways: she likes
to belittle herself, she likes to shock Salemina, and she likes to have
information given her on the spot in some succinct, portable, convenient
