The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Free Rangers, by Joseph A. Altsheler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Free Rangers
       A Story of the Early Days Along the Mississippi

Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Release Date: February 14, 2005 [EBook #15055]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FREE RANGERS ***




Produced by Kentuckiana Digital Library, David Garcia, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)






THE
FREE RANGERS

[Illustration]

JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

_The_
FREE RANGERS




_The_
FREE RANGERS

A STORY OF EARLY DAYS
ALONG THE MISSISSIPPI

BY

JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

AUTHOR OF "THE YOUNG TRAILERS," "THE FOREST RUNNERS," ETC.

[Illustration]

APPLETON-CENTURY-CROFTS, INC.

NEW YORK

COPYRIGHT, 1909, BY
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


_All rights reserved. This book, or parts
thereof, must not be reproduced in any
form without permission of the publishers._


Copyright, 1936, by Sallie B. Altsheler
Printed in the United States of America

"THE FREE RANGERS," WHILE AN INDEPENDENT
STORY IN ITSELF, CONTINUES THE FORTUNES OF THE
TWO BOYS AND THEIR COMRADES WHO WERE THE
CENTRAL CHARACTERS IN "THE YOUNG TRAILERS,"
"THE FOREST RUNNERS," "THE KEEPERS OF THE
TRAIL" AND "THE EYES of THE WOODS."


CONTENTS

CHAPTER                               PAGE

    I. THE CALL                          1

   II. A FOREST ENVOY                   17

  III. AN INVISIBLE CHASE               39

   IV. TAKING A "GALLEON"               54

    V. ON THE GREAT RIVER               74

   VI. BATTLE AND STORM                 96

  VII. THE LONE VOYAGER                115

 VIII. THE CHATEAU OF BEAULIEU         133

   IX. PAUL AND THE SPANIARD           153

    X. A BARBARIC ORDEAL               171

   XI. THE SPANIARD'S OFFER            181

  XII. THE SHADOW IN THE FOREST        196

 XIII. THE WHITE STALLION              214

  XIV. NEW ORLEANS                     230

   XV. BEFORE BERNARDO GALVEZ          251

  XVI. IN PRISON                       271

 XVII. THE FLAW IN THE ARMOR           285

XVIII. NORTHWARD WITH THE FLEET        302

  XIX. THE BATTLE OF THE BANK          322

   XX. THE BATTLE OF THE BAYOU         334

  XXI. THE DEFENSE OF THE FIVE         349

 XXII. THE CHOSEN TASK                 361





THE FREE RANGERS




CHAPTER I

THE CALL


The wilderness rolled away to north and to south, and also it rolled away
to east and to west, an unbroken sweep of dark, glossy green. Straight up
stood the mighty trunks, but the leaves rippled and sang low when a gentle
south wind breathed upon them. It was the forest as God made it, the
magnificent valley of North America, upon whose edges the white man had
just begun to nibble.

A young man, stepping lightly, came into a little glade. He was white, but
he brought with him no alien air. He was in full harmony with the primeval
woods, a part of them, one in whose ears the soft song of the leaves was a
familiar and loved tune. He was lean, but tall, and he walked with a
wonderful swinging gait that betokened a frame wrought to the strength of
steel by exercise, wind, weather, and life always in the open. Though his
face was browned by sun and storm his hair was yellow and his eyes blue.
He was dressed wholly in deerskin and he carried over his shoulder the
long slender rifle of the border. At his belt swung hatchet and knife.

There was a touch to the young man that separated him from the ordinary
woods rover. He held himself erect with a certain pride of manner. The
stock of his rifle, an unusually fine piece, was carved in an ornate and
beautiful way. The deerskin of his attire had been tanned with uncommon
care, and his moccasins were sewn thickly with little beads of yellow and
blue and red and green. Every piece of clothing was scrupulously clean,
and his arms were polished and bright.

The shiftless one--who so little deserved his name--paused a moment in the
glade and, dropping the stock of his rifle to the ground, leaned upon the
muzzle. He listened, although he expected to hear nothing save the song of
the leaves, and that alone he heard. A faint smile passed over the face of
Shif'less Sol. He was satisfied. All was happening as he had planned. Then
he swung the rifle back to his shoulder, and walked to the crest of a hill
near by.

The summit was bare and the shiftless one saw far. It was a splendid
rolling country, covered with forests of oak and elm, beech, hickory and
maple. Here and there faint threads of silver showed where rivers or
brooks flowed, and he drew a long deep breath. The measure of line and
verse he knew not, but deep in his being Nature had kindled the true fire
of poetry, and now his pleasure was so keen and sharp that a throb of
emotion stirred in his throat. It was a grand country and, if reserved for
any one, it must be reserved for his race and his people. Shif'less Sol
was resolved upon that purpose and to it he was ready to devote body and
life.

Yet the wilderness seemed to tell only of peace. The low song of the
leaves was soothing and all innocence. The shiftless one was far beyond
the farthest outpost of his kind, beyond the broad yellow current of the
Mississippi, deep in the heart of the primeval forest. He might travel
full three hundred miles to the eastward and find no white cabin, while to
westward his own kind were almost a world away. On all sides stretched the
vast maze of forest and river, through which roamed only wild animals and
wilder man.

Shif'less Sol, from his post on the hill, examined the whole circle of the
forest long and carefully. He seemed intent upon some unusual object. It
was shown in the concentration of his look and the thoughtful pucker of
his forehead. It was not game, because in a glade to windward, at the foot
of the hill, five buffaloes grazed undisturbed and now and then uttered
short, panting grunts to show their satisfaction. Presently a splendid
stag, walking through the woods as if he were sole proprietor, scented the
strange human odor, and threw up his head in alarm. But the figure on the
hill, the like of which the deer had never seen before, did not stir or
take notice, and His Lordship the Stag raised his head higher to see. The
figure still did not stir, and, his alarm dying, the stag walked
disdainfully away among the trees.

Birds, the scarlet tanager, the blue bird, the cat bird, the jay and
others of their kin settled on the trees near the young man with the
yellow hair, and gazed at him with curiosity and without fear. A rabbit
peeped up now and then, but beyond the new presence the wilderness was
undisturbed, and it became obvious to the animal tribe that the stranger
meant no harm. Nor did the shiftless one himself discern any alien note.
The sky, a solid curve of blue, bore nowhere a trace of smoke. It was
undarkened and unstained, the same lonely brightness that had dawned every
morning for untold thousands of years.

Shif'less Sol showed no disappointment. Again all seemed to be happening
as he wished. Presently he left the hill and, face toward the south, began
to walk swiftly and silently down the rows of trees. There was but little
undergrowth, nothing to check his speed, and he strode on and on. After a
while he came to a brook running through low soft soil and then he did a
strange thing, the very act that a white man travelling through the
dangerous forest would have avoided. He planted one foot in the yielding
soil near the water's edge, and then stepping across, planted the other in
exactly the same way on the far side.

When another yard brought him to hard ground he stopped and looked back
with satisfaction. On either side of the brook remained the firm deep
impression of a human foot, of a white foot, the toes being turned
outward. No wilderness rover could mistake it, and yet it was hundreds of
miles to the nearest settlement of Shif'less Sol's kind.

He took another look at the footsteps, smiled again and resumed his
journey. The character of the country did not change. Still the low
rolling hills, still the splendid forests of oak and elm, beech, maple and
hickory, and of all their noble kin, still the little brooks of clear
water, still the deer and the buffalo, grazing in the glades, and taking
but little notice of the strange human figure as it passed. Presently, the
shiftless one stopped again and he did another thing, yet stranger than
the pressing-in of the foot-prints beside the little stream. He drew the
hatchet from his belt and cut a chip out of the bark of a hickory. A
hundred yards further on he did the same thing, and, at three hundred
yards or so, he cut the chip for the third time. He looked well at the
marks, saw that they were clear, distinct and unmistakable, and then the
peculiar little smile of satisfaction would pass again over his face.

But these stops were only momentary. Save for them he never ceased his
rapid course, and always it led straight toward the south. When the sun
was squarely overhead, pouring down a flood of golden beams, he paused in
the shade of a mighty oak, and took food from his belt. He might have
eaten there in silence and obscurity, but once more the shiftless one
showed a singular lack of caution and woodcraft. He drew together dry
sticks, ignited a fire with flint and steel, and cooked deer meat over it.
He let the fire burn high, and a thin column of dark smoke rose far up
into the blue. Any savage, roaming the wilderness, might see it, but the
shiftless one was reckless. He let the fire burn on, after his food was
cooked, while the column of smoke grew thicker and mounted higher, and ate
the savory steaks, lying comfortably between two upthrust roots. Now and
then he uttered a little sigh of satisfaction, because he had travelled
far and hard, and he was hungry. Food meant new strength.

But he was not as reckless as he seemed. Nothing that passed in the forest
within the range of eyesight escaped his notice. He heard the leaf, when
it fell close by, and the light tread of a deer passing. He remained a
full hour between the roots, a long time for one who might have a purpose,
and, after he rose, he did not scatter the fire and trample upon the
brands after the wilderness custom when one was ready to depart. The
flames had died down, but he let the coals smoulder on, and, hundreds of
yards away, he could still see their smoke. Now, he sought the softest
parts of the earth and trod there deliberately, leaving many footprints.
Again he cut little chips from the trees as he passed, but never ceased
his swift and silent journey to the south. The hours fled by, and a dark
shade appeared in the east. It deepened into dusk, and spread steadily
toward the zenith. The sun, a golden ball, sank behind a hill in the
west, and then the shiftless one stopped.

He ascended a low hill again, and took a long scrutinizing look around the
whole horizon. But his gaze was not apprehensive. On the contrary, it was
expectant, and his face seemed to show a slight disappointment when the
wilderness merely presented its wonted aspect. Then he built another fire,
not choosing a secluded glade, but the top of the hill, the most exposed
spot that he could find, and, after he had eaten his supper, he sat beside
it, the expectant air still on his face.

Nothing came. But the shiftless one sat long. He raked up dead leaves of
last year's winter and made a pillow, against which he reclined
luxuriously. Shif'less Sol was one who drew mental and physical comfort
from every favoring circumstance, and the leaves felt very soft to his
head and shoulders. He was not in the least lonesome, although the night
had fully come, and heavy darkness lay like a black robe over the forest.
He stretched out his moccasined toes to the fire, closed his eyes for a
moment or two, and a dreamy look of satisfaction rested on his face. It
seemed to the shiftless one that he lay in the very lap of luxury, in the
very best of worlds.

But when he opened his eyes again he continued to watch the forest, or
rather he watched with his ears now, as he lay close to the earth, and his
hearing, at all times, was so acute that it seemed to border upon instinct
or divination. But no sound save the usual ones of the forest and the
night came to him, and he remained quite still, thinking.

Shif'less Sol Hyde was in an exalted mood, and the flickering firelight
showed a face refined and ennobled by a great purpose. Leading a life that
made him think little of hardship and danger he thought nothing at all of
them now, but he felt instead a great buoyancy, and a hope equally great.

He lay awake a full three hours after the dark had come, and he rose only
twice from his reclining position, each time merely to replenish the fire
which remained a red core in the circling blackness. Always he was
listening and always he heard nothing but the usual sounds of the forest
and the night. The darkness grew denser and heavier, but after a while it
began to thin and lighten. The sky became clear, and the great stars swam
in the dusky blue. Then Shif'less Sol fell asleep, head on the leaves,
feet to the fire, and slept soundly all through the night.

He was up at dawn, cooked his breakfast, and then, after another long and
searching examination of the surrounding forest, departed, leaving the
coals of the fire to smoulder, and tell as they might that some one had
passed. Shif'less Sol throughout that morning repeated the tactics of the
preceding day, leaving footprints that would last, and cutting pieces of
bark from the trees with his sharp hatchet. At the noon hour he stopped,
according to custom, and, just when he had lighted his fire, he uttered a
low cry of pleasure.

The shiftless one was gazing back upon his own trail, and the singular
look of exaltation upon his face deepened. He rose to his feet and stood,
very erect, in the attitude of one who welcomes. No undergrowth was here,
and he could see far down the aisles of trunks.

A figure, so distant that only a keen eye would notice it, was
approaching. It came on swiftly and silently, much after the manner of the
shiftless one himself, elastic, and instinct with strength.

The figure was that of a boy in years, but of a man in size, surpassing
Shif'less Sol himself in height, yellow haired, blue-eyed, and dressed,
too, in the neatest of forest garb. His whole appearance was uncommon,
likely anywhere to attract attention and admiration. The shiftless one
drew a long breath of mingled welcome and approval.

"I knew that he would be first," he murmured.

Then he sat down and began to broil a juicy deer steak on the end of a
sharpened stick.

Henry Ware came into the little glade. He had seen the fire afar and he
knew who waited. All was plain to him like the print of a book, and,
without a word, he dropped down on the other side of the fire facing
