Project Gutenberg's A Little Book for Christmas, by Cyrus Townsend Brady

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Little Book for Christmas

Author: Cyrus Townsend Brady

Release Date: March 12, 2005 [EBook #15343]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK FOR CHRISTMAS ***




Produced by Gene Smethers and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team





[Illustration: The author making his book, as pictured by his friend,
Will Crawford.]

A Little Book for Christmas

Containing a Greeting, a Word of Advice, Some Personal Adventures, a
Carol, a Meditation, and Three Christmas Stories for All Ages

By
Cyrus Townsend Brady

Author of
"And Thus He Came, A Christmas Fantasy," "Christmas When the West Was
Young," etc., etc.

With Illustrations and Decorations by
Will Crawford


G.P. Putnam's Sons
New York and London
The Knickerbocker Press
1917




DEDICATED
TO
MRS. LEONARD L. HILL
AND HER CHARMING COMPANIONS OF THE AMERICAN CRITERION SOCIETY OF NEW
YORK BY THEIR CHAPLAIN

[Illustration]




PREFACE


Christmas is one of the great days of obligation and observance in the
Church of which I am a Priest; but it is much more than that, it is one
of the great days of obligation and observance in the world. Furthermore
it is one of the evidences of the power of Him Whose birth we
commemorate that its observation is not limited by conditions of race
and creed. Those who fail to see in Him what we see nevertheless see
something and even by imperfect visions are moved to joy. The world
transmutes that joy into blessing, not merely by giving of its substance
but of its soul because men perceive that it is for the soul's good and
because they hope to receive its benefits although they well know that
giving is far better than receiving, in the very words of Him Who gave
us the greatest of all gifts--Himself.

As a Priest of the Church, as a Missionary in the Far West, as the
Rector of large and important parishes I have been brought in touch with
varied life. Christmas in all its phases is familiar to me. The author
of many books and stories as well as the preacher of many sermons, it is
natural that Christmas should have engaged a large part of my attention.
Out of the abundance of material which I have accumulated in the course
of a long ministry and a longer life I have gathered here a sheaf of
things I have written about Christmas; personal adventures, stories
suggested by the old yet ever-new theme; meditations, words of advice
which I am old enough to be entitled to give; and last but not least
good wishes and good will. I might even call this little volume _A Book
of Good Will toward Men_. And so fit it not only for Christmas but for
all other seasons as well.

If it shall add to your joy in Christmas, dear reader, and better still,
if it shall move you to add to the joy of some one else at
Christmas-tide or in any other season, I shall be well repaid for my
efforts and incidentally you will also be repaid for your purchase.

CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY.

THE HEMLOCKS, PARK HILL,
YONKERS, N.Y.
1917




NOTE OF ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author is in debt to his long-time and greatly beloved friend the
Rev. Alsop Leffingwell for the beautiful musical setting of the little
carol which this book contains.




TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                 PAGE
I.--A CHRISTMAS GREETING      1
      "_Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men_"

II.--FROM A FAR COUNTRY      13
      A story for grown-ups
      _Being a new variation of an ancient theme_

III.--ON CHRISTMAS GIVING      59
      _Being a word of much needed advice_

IV.--IT WAS THE SAME CHRISTMAS MORNING      69
      A story for girls
      _In which it is shown how different the same thing may be_

V.--A CHRISTMAS CAROL      81
      _To be sung to the music accompanying it_

VI.--THE LONE SCOUT'S CHRISTMAS      85
      A story for boys
      _Wherein is set forth the courage of youth_

VII.--LOOKING INTO THE MANGER      115
      _A Christmas meditation_

VIII.--CHRISTMAS IN THE SNOWS      141
      _Being some personal adventures in the Far West_

IX.--A CHRISTMAS WISH      173
      _For everybody everywhere_

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




ILLUSTRATIONS

                                     PAGE
THE AUTHOR MAKING HIS BOOK      _Frontispiece_

"I SOUGHT DAT SANTY CLAUS TAME DOWN DE CHIMNEY," SAID THE YOUNGER OF THE
TWAIN 46

"I AM SURE, MISS, THAT THEY DO WISH YOU A MERRY CHRISTMAS" 76

"THE STARS LOOK DOWN"      84

"THRUSTING HIS TOES INTO THE STRAPS HE STRUCK OUT BOLDLY" 96

"THE WORLD BOWS DOWN TO A MOTHER AND HER CHILD--AND THE MOTHER HERSELF
IS AT THE FEET OF THE CHILD" 124

[Illustration]




A CHRISTMAS GREETING

"_Good Will Toward Men"--St. Luke 11-14._


There was a time when the spirit of Christmas was of the present. There
is a period when most of it is of the past. There shall come a day
perhaps when all of it will be of the future. The child time, the
present; the middle years, the past; old age, the future.

Come to my mind Christmas Days of long ago. As a boy again I enter into
the spirit of the Christmas stockings hanging before my fire. I know
what the children think to-day. I recall what they feel.

Passes childhood, and I look down the nearer years. There rise before
me remembrances of Christmas Days on storm-tossed seas, where waves beat
upon the ice-bound ship. I recall again the bitter touch of
water-warping winter, of drifts of snow, of wind-swept plains. In the
gamut of my remembrance I am once more in the poor, mean, lonely little
sanctuary out on the prairie, with a handful of Christians, mostly
women, gathered together in the freezing, draughty building. In later
years I worship in the great cathedral church, ablaze with lights,
verdant and fragrant with the evergreen pines, echoing with joyful
carols and celestial harmonies. My recollections are of contrasts like
those of life--joy and sadness, poverty and ease.

And the pictures are full of faces, many of which may be seen no more by
earthly vision. I miss the clasp of vanished hands, I crave the sound
of voices stilled. As we old and older grow, there is a note of sadness
in our glee. Whether we will or not we must twine the cypress with the
holly. The recollection of each passing year brings deeper regret. How
many have gone from those circles that we recall when we were children?
How many little feet that pattered upon the stair on Christmas morning
now tread softer paths and walk in broader ways; sisters and brothers
who used to come back from the far countries to the old home--alas, they
cannot come from the farther country in which they now are, and perhaps,
saddest thought of all, we would not wish them to come again. How many,
with whom we joined hands around the Christmas tree, have gone?

Circles are broken, families are separated, loved ones are lost, but the
old world sweeps on. Others come to take our places. As we stood at the
knee of some unforgotten mother, so other children stand. As we
listened to the story of the Christ Child from the lips of some grey old
father, so other children listen and we ourselves perchance are fathers
or mothers too. Other groups come to us for the deathless story. Little
heads which recall vanished halcyon days of youth bend around another
younger mother. Smaller hands than ours write letters to Santa Claus and
hear the story, the sweetest story ever told, of the Baby who came to
Mary and through her to all the daughters and sons of women on that
winter night on the Bethlehem hills.

And we thank God for the children who take us out of the past, out of
ourselves, away from recollections that weigh us down; the children that
weave in the woof and warp of life when our own youth has passed, some
of the buoyancy, the joy, the happiness of the present; the children in
whose opening lives we turn hopefully to the future. We thank God at
this Christmas season that it pleased Him to send His beloved Son to
come to us as a little child, like any other child. We thank God that in
the lesser sense we may see in every child who comes to-day another
incarnation of divinity. We thank God for the portion of His Spirit with
which He dowers every child of man, just as we thank Him for pouring it
all upon the Infant in the Manger.

There is no age that has not had its prophet. No country, no people, but
that has produced its leader. But did any of them ever before come as a
little child? Did any of them begin to lead while yet in arms? Lodges
there upon any other baby brow "the round and top of sovereignty?" What
distinguished Christ and His Christian followers from all the world?
Behold! no mighty monarch, but "a little child shall lead them!"

You may see through the glass darkly, you may not know or understand
the blessedness of faith in Him as He would have you know it, but there
is nothing that can dim the light that radiates from that birth in the
rude cave back of the inn. Ah, it pierces through the darkness of that
shrouding night. It shines to-day. Still sparkles the Star in the East.
He is that Star.

There is nothing that can take from mankind--even doubting mankind--the
spirit of Christ and the Christmas season. Our celebrations do not rest
upon the conclusions of logic, or the demonstrations of philosophy; I
would not even argue that they depend inevitably or absolutely upon the
possession of a certain faith in Jesus, but we accept Christmas,
nevertheless; we endeavour to apply the Christmas spirit, for just once
in the year; it may be because we cannot, try as we may, crush out
utterly and entirely the divinity that is in us that makes for God. The
stories and tales for Christmas which have for their theme the hard
heart softened are not mere fictions of the imagination. They rest upon
an instinctive consciousness of a profound philosophic truth.

What is the unpardonable sin, I wonder? Is it to be persistently and
forever unkind? Does it mean perhaps the absolute refusal to accept the
principle of love which is indeed creation's final law? The lessons of
the Christmastide are so many; the appeals that now may be made to
humanity crowd to the lips from full minds and fuller hearts. Might we
not reduce them all to the explication of the underlying principle of
God's purpose to us, as expressed in those themic words of love with
which angels and men greeted the advent of the Child on the first
Christmas morning, "Good will toward men?"

Let us then show our good will toward men by doing good and bringing
happiness to someone--if not to everyone--at this Christmas season. Put
aside the memories of disappointments, of sorrows that have not
vanished, of cares that still burden, and do good in spite of them
because you would not dim the brightness of the present for any human
heart with the shadows of old regrets. Do good because of a future which
opens possibilities before you, for others, if not for yourselves.

Brethren, friends, all, let us make up our minds that we will be kindly
affectioned one to another in our homes and out of them, on this
approaching Christmas day. That the old debate, the ancient strife, the
rankling recollection, the sharp contention, shall be put aside, that
"envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness" shall be done away
with. Let us forgive and forget; but if we cannot forget let us at least
forgive. And so let there be peace between man and man at Christmas--a
truce of God.

Let us pray that Love shall come as a little child to our households.
That He shall be in our hearts and shall find His expression in all that
we do or say on this birthday of goodness and cheer for the world. Then
let us resolve that the spirit of the day shall be carried out through
our lives, that as Christ did not come for an hour, but for a lifetime,
we would fain become as little children on this day of days that we may
begin a new life of good will to men.

Let us make this a new birthday of kindness and love that shall endure.
That is a Christmas hope, a Christmas wish. Let us give to it the
gracious expression of life among men.

[Illustration]




FROM A FAR COUNTRY

[Illustration]

_Being a New Variation of an Ancient Theme_

