The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forest of Swords, by Joseph A. Altsheler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Forest of Swords
       A Story of Paris and the Marne

Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Release Date: May 3, 2005 [EBook #15760]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOREST OF SWORDS ***




Produced by Kentuckiana Digital Library, David Garcia, Jon King and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









THE FOREST OF SWORDS




BOOKS BY JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER


THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR SERIES

The Hunters of the Hills           The Shadow of the North
The Rulers of the Lakes            The Masters of the Peaks
The Lords of the Wild              The Sun of Quebec


THE YOUNG TRAILERS SERIES

The Young Trailers                 The Free Rangers
The Forest Runners                 The Riflemen of the Ohio
The Keepers of the Trail           The Scouts of the Valley
The Eyes of the Woods              The Border Watch


THE TEXAN SERIES

The Texan Star                     The Texan Triumph
The Texan Scouts


THE CIVIL WAR SERIES

The Guns of Bull Run               The Star of Gettysburg
The Guns of Shiloh                 The Rock of Chickamauga
The Scouts of Stonewall            The Shades of the Wilderness
The Sword of Antietam              The Tree of Appomattox


THE GREAT WEST SERIES

The Lost Hunters                   The Great Sioux Trail


THE WORLD WAR SERIES

The Guns of Europe                 The Hosts of the Air
The Forest of Swords


BOOKS NOT IN SERIES

Apache Gold                        A Soldier of Manhattan
The Quest of the Four              The Sun of Saratoga
The Last of the Chiefs             A Herald of the West
In Circling Camps                  The Wilderness Road
The Last Rebel                     My Captive
The Candidate


D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

New York          London




[Illustration: "He heard a shock near him and, ... saw a huddled mass
of wreckage."]




WORLD WAR SERIES


THE FOREST
OF SWORDS

A STORY OF PARIS
AND THE MARNE


BY


JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

AUTHOR OF "THE GUNS OF EUROPE,"
"THE STAR OF GETTYSBURG," ETC.


D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON
1928

COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

Printed in the United States of America




FOREWORD

"The Forest of Swords," while an independent story, based upon the World
War, continues the fortunes of John Scott, Philip Lannes, and their
friends who have appeared already in "The Guns of Europe." As was stated
in the first volume, the author was in Austria and Germany for a month
after the war began, and then went to England. He saw the arrival of the
Emperor, Francis Joseph, in Vienna, the first striking event in the
gigantic struggle, and witnessed the mobilization of their armies by
three great nations.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                PAGE

   I. IN PARIS                            1
  II. THE MESSAGE                        30
 III. IN THE FRENCH CAMP                 53
  IV. THE INVISIBLE HAND                 76
   V. SEEN FROM ABOVE                    99
  VI. IN HOSTILE HANDS                  121
 VII. THE TWO PRINCES                   146
VIII. THE SPORT OF KINGS                167
  IX. THE PUZZLING SIGNAL               186
   X. OLD FRIENDS                       209
  XI. THE CONTINUING BATTLE             231
 XII. JULIE LANNES                      247
XIII. THE MIDDLE AGES                   268
 XIV. A PROMISE KEPT                    291
  XV. THE RESCUE                        311




THE FOREST OF SWORDS




CHAPTER I

IN PARIS


John Scott and Philip Lannes walked together down a great boulevard of
Paris. The young American's heart was filled with grief and anger. The
Frenchman felt the same grief, but mingled with it was a fierce, burning
passion, so deep and bitter that it took a much stronger word than anger
to describe it.

Both had heard that morning the mutter of cannon on the horizon, and
they knew the German conquerors were advancing. They were always
advancing. Nothing had stopped them. The metal and masonry of the
defenses at Liege had crumbled before their huge guns like china
breaking under stone. The giant shells had scooped out the forts at
Maubeuge, Maubeuge the untakable, as if they had been mere eggshells,
and the mighty Teutonic host came on, almost without a check.

John had read of the German march on Paris, nearly a half-century
before, how everything had been made complete by the genius of Bismarck
and von Moltke, how the ready had sprung upon and crushed the unready,
but the present swoop of the imperial eagle seemed far more vast and
terrible than the earlier rush could have been.

A month and the legions were already before the City of Light. Men with
glasses could see from the top of the Eiffel Tower the gray ranks that
were to hem in devoted Paris once more, and the government had fled
already to Bordeaux. It seemed that everything was lost before the war
was fairly begun. The coming of the English army, far too small in
numbers, had availed nothing. It had been swept up with the others,
escaping from capture or destruction only by a hair, and was now driven
back with the French on the capital.

John had witnessed two battles, and in neither had the Germans stopped
long. Disregarding their own losses they drove forward, immense,
overwhelming, triumphant. He felt yet their very physical weight,
pressing upon him, crushing him, giving him no time to breathe. The
German war machine was magnificent, invincible, and for the fourth time
in a century the Germans, the exulting Kaiser at their head, might enter
Paris.

The Emperor himself might be nothing, mere sound and glitter, but back
of him was the greatest army that ever trod the planet, taught for half
a century to believe in the divine right of kings, and assured now that
might and right were the same.

Every instinct in him revolted at the thought that Paris should be
trodden under foot once more by the conqueror. The great capital had
truly deserved its claim to be the city of light and leading, and if
Paris and France were lost the whole world would lose. He could never
forget the unpaid debt that his own America owed to France, and he felt
how closely interwoven the two republics were in their beliefs and
aspirations.

"Why are you so silent?" asked Lannes, half angrily, although John knew
that the anger was not for him.

"I've said as much as you have," he replied with an attempt at humor.

"You notice the sunlight falling on it?" said Lannes, pointing to the
Arc de Triomphe, rising before them.

"Yes, and I believe I know what you are thinking."

"You are right. I wish he was here now."

John gazed at the great arch which the sun was gilding with glory and he
shared with Lannes his wish that the mighty man who had built it to
commemorate his triumphs was back with France--for a while at least. He
was never able to make up his mind whether Napoleon was good or evil.
Perhaps he was a mixture of both, highly magnified, but now of all
times, with the German millions at the gates, he was needed most.

"I think France could afford to take him back," he said, "and risk any
demands he might make or enforce."

"John," said Lannes, "you've fought with us and suffered with us, and so
you're one of us. You understand what I felt this morning when on the
edge of Paris I heard the German guns. They say that we can fight on,
after our foes have taken the capital, and that the English will come in
greater force to help us. But if victorious Germans march once through
the Arc de Triomphe I shall feel that we can never again win back all
that we have lost."

A note, low but deep and menacing, came from the far horizon. It might
be a German gun or it might be a French gun, but the effect was the
same. The threat was there. A shudder shook the frame of Lannes, but
John saw a sudden flame of sunlight shoot like a glittering lance from
the Arc de Triomphe.

"A sign! a sign!" he exclaimed, his imaginative mind on fire in an
instant. "I saw a flash from the arch! It was the soul of the Great
Captain speaking! I tell you, Philip, the Republic is not yet lost! I've
read somewhere, and so have you, that the Romans sold at auction at a
high price the land on which Hannibal's victorious army was camped, when
it lay before Rome!"

"It's so! And France has her glorious traditions, too! We won't give up
until we're beaten--and not then!"

The gray eyes of Lannes flamed, and his figure seemed to swell. All the
wonderful French vitality was personified in him. He put his hand
affectionately upon the shoulder of his comrade.

"It's odd, John," he said, "but you, a foreigner, have lighted the spark
anew in me."

"Maybe it's because I _am_ a foreigner, though, in reality, I'm now no
foreigner at all, as you've just said. I've become one of you."

"It's true, John, and I won't forget it. I'm never going to give up hope
again. Maybe somebody will arrive to save us at the last. Whatever the
great one, whose greatest monument stands there, may have been, he loved
France, and his spirit may descend upon Frenchmen."

"I believe it. He had the strength and courage created by a republic,
and you have them again, the product of another republic. Look at the
flying men, Lannes!"

Lannes glanced up where the aeroplanes hovered thick over Paris, and
toward the horizon where the invisible German host with its huge guns
was advancing. The look of despair came into his eyes again, but it
rested there only a moment. He remembered his new courage and banished
it.

"Perhaps I ought to be in the sky myself with the others," he said, "but
I'd only see what I don't like to see. The _Arrow_ and I can't be of any
help now."

"You brought me here in the _Arrow_, Lannes," said John, seeking to
assume a light tone. "Now what do you intend to do with me? As everybody
is leaving Paris you ought to get me out of it."

"I hardly know what to do. There are no orders. I've lost touch with the
commander of our flying corps, but you're right in concluding that we
shouldn't remain in Paris. Now where are we to go?"

"We'll make no mistake if we seek the battle front. You know I'm bound
to rejoin my company, the Strangers, if I can. I must report as soon as
possible to Captain Colton."

"That's true, John, but I can't leave Paris until tomorrow. I may have
orders to carry, I must obtain supplies for the _Arrow_, and I wish to
visit once more my people on the other side of the Seine."

"Suppose you go now, and I'll meet you this afternoon in the Place de
l'Opera."

"Good. Say three o'clock. The first to arrive will await the other
