The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Jungle Fugitives, by Edward S. Ellis


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Jungle Fugitives
       A Tale of Life and Adventure in India Including also Many Stories of American Adventure, Enterprise and Daring: The Jungle Fugitives; Lost in the Woods; In the Nick of Time; Lost in the South Sea; An Unpleasant Companion; A Stirring Incident; Cyclones and Tornadoes; Lost in a Blizzard; Throwing the Riata; A Waterspout; An Heroic Woman; The Writing Found in a Bottle; That Hornet's Nest; A Young Hero; Overreached; A Battle in the Air; Who Shall Explain It?; A Fool of a Genius


Author: Edward S. Ellis



Release Date: October 6, 2005  [eBook #16805]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JUNGLE FUGITIVES***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



THE JUNGLE FUGITIVES

A Tale of Life and Adventure in India
Including also
Many Stories of American Adventure, Enterprise and Daring

by

EDWARD S. ELLIS, A.M.

New York
Hurst and Company
Publishers

1903







CONTENTS


  THE JUNGLE FUGITIVES
  LOST IN THE WOODS
  IN THE NICK OF TIME
  LOST IN THE SOUTH SEA
  AN UNPLEASANT COMPANION
  A STIRRING INCIDENT
  CYCLONES AND TORNADOES
  LOST IN A BLIZZARD
  THROWING THE RIATA
  A WATERSPOUT
  AN HEROIC WOMAN
  THE WRITING FOUND IN A BOTTLE
  THAT HORNET'S NEST
  A YOUNG HERO
  OVERREACHED
  A BATTLE IN THE AIR
  WHO SHALL EXPLAIN IT?
  A FOOL OF A GENIUS




THE JUNGLE FUGITIVES.


CHAPTER I.

IN THE SPRING OF 1857.

All through India, with its fanatical population five times as great as
that of England, the rumblings of the coming uprising had been heard
for months.  The disaffection had been spreading and taking root.  The
emissaries of the arch-plotters had passed back and forth almost from
end to end of the vast empire, with their messages of hatred and
appeal.  The people were assured that the "Inglese loge" were
perfecting their insidious schemes for overthrowing their religion, and
the faithful everywhere were called upon to crush the infidels in the
dust.  The evil seed fell upon the rankest of soil, and grew with a
vigor and exuberance that threatened to strangle every other growth.

The plot, as agreed upon, was that a general uprising was to take place
throughout India on the last day of May, 1857, but, as is often the
case in such far-reaching schemes, the impatience of the mutineers
precipitated the tremendous tragedy.

The first serious outbreak took place at Meerut on Sunday, May 10th,
just three weeks previous to the time set for the general uprising.
That town, with its population of about 40,000 at that time, lies
thirty-two miles northeast from Delhi, which was to be the capital of
the resurrected Mogul Empire.  It was the precipitancy of this first
revolt that prevented its fullest success.  The intention was to kill
every white man, woman and child in the place.  Two regiments were
clamorous for beginning the massacre, but the Eleventh Native Infantry
held back so persistently that the others became enraged and fired a
volley among them, killing a number.  Thereupon the Eleventh announced
themselves ready to take their part in the slaughter that was to free
India from the execrated "Inglese loge."

Seeing now for the first time the real peril, the colonel of the
Eleventh made an impassioned appeal to the regiment to stand by its
colors and to take no part in the useless revolt.  While he was
speaking, a volley riddled his body, and he tumbled lifeless from his
saddle.  The Eleventh, however, covered the flight of the other
officers, but helped to release a thousand prisoners, suffering
punishment for various offenses, and then the hell fire burst forth.

The bungalows of the officers, the mess houses of the troops, and all
the buildings between the native lines and Meerut were fired, and the
whole became a roaring conflagration, whose glare at night was visible
for miles.

When an appeal was made to the Emperor of Delhi by the troopers, he
inquired their errand.  The lacklustre eyes flashed with a light that
had not been seen in them for years, the bowed form acquired new
energy, and he gave orders to admit the troopers.

Their message was enough to fan into life the slumbering fires of
ambition in the breast of a dying person.

He yielded to the dazzling dream.  A throne of silver, laid away for
years, was brought into the "hall of special audience," and the
tottering form was helped to the seat, into which he sank and looked
around upon his frenzied followers.  Mohammed Suraj-oo-deen Shah Gezee
was now the Great Mogul of India.  A royal salute of twenty-one guns
was fired by two troops of artillery from Meerut in front of the
palace, and the wild multitudes again strained their throats.  To the
thunder of artillery, the strains of martial music and the shouting of
the people, the gates of the palace were flung open, and Prince Mirza
Mogul, with his brother, Prince Abu Beker, at the head of the royal
bodyguard, rode forth, the king following in an open chariot,
surrounded by his bodyguard.

With impressive slowness this strange procession made its way through
the principal street, the populace becoming as frantic as so many ghost
dancers.  Finally a halt was made at the Juma Musjeed, the largest
mosque in India, where the banner of the Prophet was unfurled and the
Mogul Empire proclaimed.




CHAPTER II.

ON AN AFTERNOON.

Almost due east from Delhi Dr. Hugh Marlowe, a venerable American
physician, had lived for more than twenty years.  Since the death of
his wife, six years previous to the Mutiny, he had dwelt alone with his
only daughter, Mary, and their single servant, Mustad, a devout
Mussulman.  A portion of the time mentioned had been passed without the
society of his beloved child, who spent several years in New England
(where the physician himself was born and had received his education)
at one of the fashionable schools.

Shortly after her graduation, Miss Marlowe met Jack Everson, fresh from
Yale, and the acquaintance ripened into mutual love, though the filial
affection of the young woman was too profound to permit her to form an
engagement with the young man until the consent of her father was
obtained, and he would not give that consent until he had met and
conversed with the young gentleman face to face and taken his measure,
as may be said.

"If he doesn't esteem you enough to make a little journey like the one
from America to this country he isn't worth thinking about."

"But he _will_ make the journey," said the blushing daughter, patting
the bronzed cheek of the parent whom she idolized as much as he
idolized her.

"Don't be to sure of that, my young lady; romantic young girls like you
have altogether too much faith in the other sex."

"But he _has_ started," she added with a sly smile.

"He has, eh?  He will change his mind before he reaches here.  How far
has he got?"

"He was due in England many weeks ago."

"Well, well!  How soon will he arrive _here_?"

"I think he is due now."

"Very probably, but his fancy will give out before he reaches this
out-of-the-way place."

"I think not, papa."

"Of course not, of course not; I just told you that that is the way
with all foolish girls like you."

The old gentleman had assumed a stern earnestness, and he added: "I
tell you he will never show himself here!  I know what I'm talking
about."

"But he _is_ here, papa; let me introduce you to Jack Everson, a
physician like yourself."

All this time the smiling young man was standing directly behind the
old doctor, who was lazily reclining in a hammock on the shaded lawn,
smoking a cheroot, while his daughter sat on a camp stool, with one
hand resting on the edge of the hammock, so as to permit her gently to
sway it back and forth.  As she spoke the tall, muscular American
walked forward and extended his hand.

"Doctor, I am glad to make your acquaintance," he said, in his cheery
way.  The astonished physician came to an upright position like the
clicking of the blade of a jackknife, and meeting the salutation,
exclaimed:

"Well, I'll be hanged!  I never knew a girl so full of nonsense and
tricks as Mary.  You are welcome, doctor, to my house; let me have a
look at you!"

Jack Everson laughingly stepped hack a couple of paces and posed for
inspection.  The elder deliberately drew his spectacle case from his
pocket, adjusted the glasses and coolly scrutinized the young man from
head to foot.

"You'll do," he quietly remarked, removing his glasses and returning
them to the morocco case; "now, if you'll be good enough to seat
yourself, we'll talk over matters until dinner time.  When did you
arrive?"

Jack seated himself on the remaining camp stool, a few paces from the
happy young lady, accepted a cheroot from his host, and the
conversation became general.  Like most Americans, when at home or
travelling, Jack Everson kept his eyes and ears open.  He heard at
Calcutta, his starting point, at Benares, Allahabad, Cawnpore and other
places, the whisperings of the uprising that was soon to come, and his
alarm increased as he penetrated the country.

"Worse than all," he said gravely, speaking of his trip, "one of my
bearers spoke English well, and quite an intimacy sprang up between us.
Since his companions could not utter a word in our language, we
conversed freely without being understood.  He was reticent at first
concerning the impending danger and professed to know nothing of it,
but this forenoon be gave me to understand, in words that could not be
mistaken, that the whole country would soon be aflame with
insurrection."

"Did he offer any advice?" asked Dr. Marlowe, less impressed with the
news than was his visitor or his daughter.

"He did; he said that the escape of myself and of your family could be
secured only by leaving this place at the earliest moment possible."

"But whither can we go?  We are hundreds of miles from the seacoast and
should have to journey for weeks through a country swarming with
enemies."

"I asked him that question, and his answer was that we should make for
Nepaul."

"That is the province to the east of us.  It is a mountainous country,
a long way off, and hard to reach.  Why should he advise us to go
thither?"

"I questioned him, but he seemed to fear that his companions would grow
suspicious over our conversation and he said nothing more.  I thought
he would add something definite when we came to separate, and, to
loosen his tongue, I gave him an extra fee, but he added never a word,
and, unless I am mistaken, regretted what he had already said."

"It seems to me," observed the daughter, "that the man knew it is
impossible for us to get to the seacoast, and believed that by going
further into the interior we should reach the people who are not
affected by the insurrection.  Wide as it may be, there must be many
points that will not feel it."

"That is the true reason," said her parent, "but, confound it!  I have
lived in this spot for twenty years; the little town of Akwar lies
near, and there is hardly a person in it who has not been my patient.
I am known even in Meerut and Delhi, and I can hardly believe the
mutineers, for such they seem to be, will harm me or my friends."

"You once told me," replied Mary, "that when an appeal was made to the
religion of this people they knew no such thing as fear or mercy."

"And I told you the truth," said her father gravely.  "But since we
have weapons and plenty of ammunition, and know how to handle the
firearms we shall not be led like lambs to the slaughter."

"That is true enough," said Jack, "but it will be of little avail, when
our enemies are numbered by the hundred and perhaps the thousand."

"I take it, then, that you favor an abandonment of our home?"

"I do, and with the least possible delay."

"And you, my daughter, are you of the same mind?"

"I am," was the emphatic response.

"Then my decision is that we shall start for the interior and stay
there until it is safe to show ourselves again among these people,
provided it ever shall be safe."

"When shall you start?"

The parent looked at the sky.

"It is two or three hours to nightfall.  We will set out early
to-morrow morning before the sun is high in the sky."

"But will we not be more liable to discovery?" asked Jack.

"Not if we use care.  I am familiar with the country for miles in every
direction.  We shall have to travel for the first two or three days
through a thick jungle, and it is too dangerous work to undertake in
the night-time.  This, you know, is the land of the cobra and the
tiger, not to mention a few other animals and reptiles equally
unpleasant in their nature.  Last night," continued the doctor, "I saw
a glare in the sky off to the westward on the opposite side of the
river in the direction of Meerut.  I wonder what it meant?"

"By Jove!" exclaimed Jack, "that explains something that the palanquin
bearer said to me about there being so many Inglese where there are
none to-day.  I could not catch his meaning, though he mentioned
Meerut.  But he gave me to understand that it was not quite time yet
for the uprising, which would come in a few weeks."

"Those things are apt to be precipitated.  I have no doubt that the
mutineers burned the city last night.  If so, the main body will hurry
to Delhi, which, being the ancient capital of the Mogul Empire, will
become the new one.  Some of the rebels may take it into their heads to
come in this direction.  What is the matter, Dr. Everson?"




CHAPTER III.

YANKEE MARKSMANSHIP.

As Jack Everson was seated he faced the broad, sluggish Ganges, with
the low, green banks beyond.  He was looking over the water, in the
rays of the declining sun, when he saw something that caused him to
rise hastily from his seat and peer earnestly across the river toward
the opposite shore.  Observing his action, the doctor asked his
question.  Both he and his daughter, rising to their feet, gazed in the
same direction.  It was easy to see what had attracted the attention of
their guest.  A party of horsemen, fully twenty, if not more, in
number, had approached the river and were now halted on the other side,
looking across in the direction of Dr. Marlowe's home, as if debating
the question of making it a visit.

"Let me get my glass," said Mary, starting toward the house, hardly a
hundred feet distant.

"Allow me to bring it," interrupted Jack.  "It is on one of the chairs
on the veranda, and I want my rifle."

Taking the glass from him on his return, the young woman levelled it at
the group of horsemen on the other side.

"I cannot make out who they are," she said, passing the glass to her
father.

It took the parent but a few seconds to answer the question.  One
sweeping glance told him.

"They are Ghoojurs," he remarked, with as much calmness as he could
assume.

"And who are Ghoojurs?" asked Jack Everson, less excited than his
friends.

"They belong to the nomadic tribes which originally occupied India, and
are among the worst wretches in the world.  They are brigands and
robbers, who are to be dreaded at all times.  Now, if the revolt has
broken out, they will be as merciless as tigers."

"It looks as if they intended to make us a visit, doctor?"

"Alas! there can be no earthly doubt of it."

"Let us hurry into the jungle," said Mary, her face paling with fear.
"We have not a minute to waste."

"The advice is good, but before acting on it I should like to make an
experiment."

During this brief interval Jack Everson had carefully examined his
rifle to assure himself that it was in good condition.

"Heavens, man!" exclaimed Dr. Marlowe, "you are not going to try a shot
at them?"

"That is my intention."

"They are a mile distant!"

"One of my medals was won for hitting a target at exactly that
distance," replied Jack, continuing his preparations.

"It is impossible that you should succeed."

"But not impossible that I should try, so please don't bother the man
at the wheel."

"They have ridden into the water," added the young woman, still nervous
and excited.

"Which will serve to shorten the distance somewhat."

"Why not wait until they are halfway across; or, better still, not wait
at all?" inquired the doctor.

Jack Everson made no reply, but, lying down on his back, he slightly
separated his raised knees, and, by crossing his ankles, made a rest
for the barrel of his rifle.  The left arm was crooked under his head,
