The Project Gutenberg EBook of Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High School, by
Jessie Graham Flower

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High School
       Or, Fast Friends in the Sororities

Author: Jessie Graham Flower

Release Date: February 20, 2006 [EBook #17811]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRACE HARLOWE'S JUNIOR YEAR ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










Grace Harlowe's Junior Year
at High School

OR

Fast Friends in the Sororities

By
JESSIE GRAHAM FLOWER, A.M.

  Author of Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's
       Sophomore Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's Senior
                     Year at High School, etc.

  Illustrated

  PHILADELPHIA
  HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY

  COPYRIGHT, 1911, BY HOWARD E. ALTEMUS

[Illustration: Grace Snatched Off the White Mask.
   _Frontispiece--High School Girls No. 3._]




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                           PAGE

    I. A NEW ARRIVAL                                 7

   II. CONFIDENCES                                  20

  III. AN AUTUMN WALKING EXPEDITION                 30

   IV. GRACE MAKES A DISCOVERY                      42

    V. THE PHI SIGMA TAU                            53

   VI. A VISIT TO ELEANOR                           68

  VII. THE CLAIM OF THE "ARTISTIC TEMPERAMENT"      78

 VIII. ELEANOR THROWS DOWN THE GAUNTLET             85

   IX. THE RESCUE PARTY                             96

    X. JULIA PERFORMS A SACRED DUTY                106

   XI. WORRIES AND PLANS                           121

  XII. A RECKLESS CHAUFFEUR                        129

 XIII. A THANKSGIVING FROLIC                       137

  XIV. ELEANOR FINDS A WAY                         145

   XV. A WOULD-BE "LARK"                           150

  XVI. THE JUNIORS FOREVER                         163

 XVII. THE LAST STRAW                              173

XVIII. THE PLAY'S THE THING                        182

  XIX. THE TRY OUT                                 191

   XX. THE ANONYMOUS LETTER                        199

  XXI. BREAKERS AHEAD                              208

 XXII. AS YOU LIKE IT                              215

XXIII. THE JUNIOR PICNIC                           235

 XXIV. CONCLUSION                                  252




Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High School




CHAPTER I

A NEW ARRIVAL


"Next to home, there is really nothing quite so satisfying as our
dear old High School!" exclaimed Grace Harlowe, as she entered the
locker-room and beamed on her three friends who stood near by.

"It does seem good to be back, even though we have had such a perfectly
glorious summer," said Jessica Bright. "We are a notch higher, too.
We're actually juniors. This locker-room is now our property, although
I don't like it as well as the one we had last year."

"We'll get accustomed to it, and it will seem like home inside of two
weeks," said Anne Pierson philosophically. "Everything is bound to
change in this world, you know. 'We must put ourselves in harmony with
the things among which our lot is cast.'"

"Well, Marcus Aurelius, we'll try to accept your teaching," laughed
Grace, who immediately recognized the quotation as coming from a tiny
"Marcus Aurelius Year Book" that Anne kept in her desk and frequently
perused.

"I wonder what school will bring us this year?" mused Nora O'Malley, as
she retied her bow for the fifth time before the mirror and critically
surveyed the final effect. "We had a stormy enough time last year,
goodness knows. Really, girls, it is hard to believe that Miriam Nesbit
and Julia Crosby were at one time the banes of our existence. They come
next to you three girls with me, now."

"I think that we all feel the same about them," replied Grace. "Miriam
is a perfect dear now, and is just as enthusiastic over class matters as
we are."

"It looks as though everything were going to be plain sailing this
year," said Jessica. "There isn't a disturbing element in the class that
I know of. Still, one can never tell."

"Oh, here come Eva Allen and Marian Barber," called Grace delightedly,
and rushed over to the newcomers with outstretched hands.

By this time girls began to arrive rapidly, and soon the locker-room
hummed with the sound of fresh, young voices. Coats of tan were compared
and newly acquired freckles deplored, as the girls stood about in
groups, talking of the delights of the summer vacation just ended.

To the readers of "GRACE HARLOWE'S PLEBE YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL," and
"GRACE HARLOWE'S SOPHOMORE YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL," the girl chums have
become familiar figures. It will be remembered how Grace Harlowe and her
friends, Nora O'Malley and Jessica Bright, during their freshman year,
became the firm friends of Anne Pierson, the brilliant young girl who won
the freshman prize offered each year to the freshmen by Mrs. Gray. The
reader will recall the repeated efforts of Miriam Nesbit, aided by Miss
Leece, the algebra teacher, to disgrace Anne in the eyes of the faculty,
and the way each attempt was frustrated by Grace Harlowe and her
friends. Mrs. Gray's house party, the winter picnic in Upton Wood, and
Anne Pierson's struggles to escape her unworthy father all contributed
toward making the story stand out in the reader's mind.

In "GRACE HARLOWE'S SOPHOMORE YEAR," the girl chums were found leading
their class in athletics. Here, Miriam Nesbit, still unsubdued, endeavored
once more to humiliate Anne Pierson, and to oust Grace from her position
as captain of the basketball team, being aided in her plan by Julia
Crosby, captain of the junior team, against whom the sophomores had
engaged to play a series of three games. Grace's brave rescue of Julia
Crosby during a skating party and the latter's subsequent repentance
restored good feeling between the two classes, and the book ended with
the final conversion of Miriam after her long and stubbornly nursed
enmity.

David Nesbit's trial flight in his aeroplane, Grace's encounter with the
escaped lunatic, who imagined himself to be Napoleon Bonaparte, were
among the features which made the book absorbing from start to finish.

The clang of the first bell broke in upon the chattering groups, and
obedient to its summons, the girls moved slowly out of the locker-room
and down the corridor, talking in subdued tones as they strolled toward
the study hall.

Miss Thompson stood at her desk, serene and smiling, as the girls filed
in.

"How well Miss Thompson looks," whispered Grace to Anne as they neared
their seats. "Let's go up and see her when this session is over. It's
sure to be short this morning."

It was customary on the opening of school for the members of the various
classes to take their seats of the previous year. Then the sections were
rearranged, the seniors taking the seats left by the graduates, and the
other classes moving up accordingly. The first day of school amounted to
really nothing further than being assigned to one's seat and getting
used to the idea of school again. Miss Thompson usually addressed the
girls on the duty of High School students, and the girls went forth full
of new resolutions that last for at least a week.

Grace looked curiously about her. She wondered if there were to be many
new girls that year. The present freshmen, direct from the Grammar
Schools, sat on the front seats looking a trifle awed at the idea of
being academic pupils, and feeling very strange and uncomfortable under
the scrutiny of so many pairs of eyes.

Her glance wandered toward the new sophomore class, as though in search
of some one, her eyes brightening as she caught sight of the brown-eyed
girl who had won the freshman prize the previous June. The latter looked
as helpless and friendless as when Grace first saw her step up on the
platform to receive her money. "I shall certainly find out more about
that child," she decided. "What is her name? I heard it at commencement,
but I have forgotten it."

Taking a leaf from a little note-book that she always carried, Grace
wrote: "Do you see the freshman-prize girl over among the sophomores?
What is her name? I can't remember." Then, folding the paper, she tossed
it to Anne, who nodded; then wrote, "Mabel Allison," and handed it to
the girl sitting opposite her, who obligingly passed it over to Grace.

With a nod of thanks to Anne, Grace glanced at the paper and then at the
owner of the name, who sat with her hands meekly folded on her desk,
listening to Miss Thompson as though her life depended upon hearing
every word that the principal uttered.

"I want all my girls to try particularly this year to reach a higher
standard than ever before," Miss Thompson concluded, "not only in your
studies, but in your attitude toward one another. Be straightforward
and honorable in all your dealings, girls; so that when the day comes
for you to receive your diplomas and bid Oakdale High School farewell,
you can do so with the proud consciousness that you have been to your
schoolmates just what you would have wished them to be to you. I know of
no better preparation for a happy life than constant observation of the
golden rule.

"And now I hope I shall have no occasion to deliver another lecture
during the school year," said the principal, smiling. "There can be no
formation of classes to-day, as the bulletins of the various subjects
have just been posted, and will undoubtedly undergo some changes. It
would be advisable, however, to arrange as speedily as possible about
the subjects you intend to take, as we wish to begin recitations by
Friday at the latest, and I dare say the changes made in the schedule
will be slight."

Then the work of assigning each class to its particular section of the
study hall began. The seniors moved with evident pride into the places
reserved for the first class, while the freshmen looked visibly relieved
at having any place at all to call their own. Immediately after this the
classes were dismissed, and a general rush was made to the end of the
great room, where the bulletins were posted.

Grace, Nora, Anne and Jessica wished to recite in the same classes as
far as could be arranged, and a lively confab ensued as to what would
be best to take. They all decided on solid geometry and English reading,
as they could be together for these classes, but the rest was not so
easy, for Nora, who loathed history, was obliged to take ancient history
to complete her history group, the other girls having wisely completed
theirs the previous year. Jessica wanted to take physical geography,
Anne rhetoric, and Grace boldly announced a hankering for zooelogy.

"How horrible," shuddered Jessica. "How can you bear to think of cutting
up live cats and dogs and angleworms and things."

"Oh, you silly," laughed Grace. "You're thinking of vivisection. I wouldn't
cut up anything alive for all the world. The girls did dissect crabs and
lobsters, and even rabbits, last year, but they were dead long before
they ever reached the zooelogy class."

"Oh," said Jessica, somewhat reassured, "I'm glad to hear that, at any
rate."

"That makes three subjects," said Nora. "Now we want one more. Are any
of you going to be over ambitious and take five?"

"Not I," responded Grace and Jessica in chorus.

"I shall," said Anne quietly. "I'm going to learn just as much as I can
while I have the chance."

"Well," said Jessica, "you're different. Five studies aren't any harder
for you than four for us."

"Thank the lady prettily for her high opinion of your ability, Anne,"
said Grace, laughing. "She really seems to be sincere."

"She's too sincere for comfort," murmured Anne, who hated compliments.

"We haven't settled on that fourth subject yet," interposed Nora.

"Why don't you all take French, it is such a beautiful language," said
a soft voice behind them. "I'm sure you'd like it."

The four girls turned simultaneously at the sound of the strange, soft
voice, to face a girl whose beauty was almost startling. She was a
trifle taller than Grace and beautifully straight and slender. Her hair
was jet black and lay on her forehead in little silky rings, while she
had the bluest eyes the girls had ever seen. Her features were small and
regular, and her skin as creamy as the petal of a magnolia. She stood
regarding the astonished girls with a fascinating little smile that was
irresistible.

"Please excuse me for breaking in upon you, but I saw you from afar, and
you looked awfully good to me." Her clear enunciation made the slang
phrase sound like the purest English. "I have just been with your
principal in her office. She told me to come here and look over the list
of subjects. Do you think me unpardonably rude?" She looked appealingly
at the four chums.

"Why, of course not," said Grace promptly, recovering in a measure from
her first surprise. "I suppose you are going to enter our school, are
you not? Let me introduce you to my friends." She named her three chums
in turn, who bowed cordially to the attractive stranger.

"My name is Grace Harlowe. Will you tell me yours?"

"My name is Eleanor Savell," replied the new-comer, "and I have just
come to Oakdale with my aunt. We have leased a quaint old house in the
suburbs called 'Heartsease.' My aunt fell quite in love with it, so
perhaps we shall stay awhile. We travel most of the time, and I get very
tired of it," she concluded with a little pout.

"'Heartsease'?" cried the girls in chorus. "Do you live at 'Heartsease'?"

"Yes," said the stranger curiously. "Is there anything peculiar about
it?"

"Oh, no," Grace hastened to reply. "The reason we are interested is
because we know the owner of the property, Mrs. Gray, very well."

"Oh, do you know her?" replied Eleanor lightly. "Isn't she a dainty,
little, old creature? She looks like a Dresden shepherdess grown old.
For an elderly woman, she really is interesting."

"We call her our fairy godmother," said Anne, "and love her so dearly
that we never think of her as being old." There had been something about
the careless words that jarred upon Anne.

"Oh, I am sure she is all that is delightful," responded Miss Savell,
