The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Victorious Union, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Victorious Union
       SERIES: The Blue and the Gray--Afloat

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: June 25, 2006 [EBook #18678]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VICTORIOUS UNION ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Kentuckiana Digital
Library)






THE BLUE AND THE GRAY--AFLOAT

Two colors cloth  Emblematic Dies  Illustrated
Price per volume $1.50

  TAKEN BY THE ENEMY
  WITHIN THE ENEMY'S LINES
  ON THE BLOCKADE
  STAND BY THE UNION
  FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT
  A VICTORIOUS UNION

THE BLUE AND THE GRAY--ON LAND

Two colors cloth  Emblematic Dies  Illustrated
Price per volume $1.50

  BROTHER AGAINST BROTHER
  IN THE SADDLE (In Press)
  A LIEUTENANT AT EIGHTEEN (In Press)
  (Other volumes in preparation)

Any Volume Sold Separately.
Lee and Shepard Publishers  Boston




  [Illustration: "Christy leaped upon the rail." Page 181.]




                      The

               BLUE AND THE GRAY

                     Series

                 [Illustration]

                By Oliver Optic

              A VICTORIOUS UNION




         _The Blue and the Gray Series_

               A VICTORIOUS UNION

                       by
                  OLIVER OPTIC

                   Author of
"The Army And Navy Series" "Young America Abroad,
First And Second Series" "The Great Western Series"
"The Woodville Stories" "The Starry Flag Series"
"The Boat-Club Stories" "The Onward and Upward Series"
"The Yacht-Club Series" "The Lake Shore Series"
"The Riverdale Stories" "The Boat-Builder Series"
"Taken by the Enemy" "Within the Enemy's Lines"
"On the Blockade" "Stand By the Union"
"Fighting for the Right" "A Missing Million"
"A Millionaire at Sixteen" "A Young Knight-Errant"
        "Strange Sights Abroad" etc.


                     BOSTON

          LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers
                 10 Milk Street

                      1894




      Copyright, 1893, by Lee and Shepard
             _All Rights Reserved_

               A Victorious Union


       Type-Setting and Electrotyping by
          C. J. Peters & Son, Boston
     S. J. Parkhill & Co., Printers, Boston




                  To My Friend

                FRANK L. HARRIS

Who came from the cold of the Arctic regions, where he
 was a member of the Hayes expedition, and went
 into the heat of the War of the Rebellion,
          serving as a Naval officer
         until the end of the strife,

To whom I am greatly indebted for much valuable
    information relating to his profession,

                   This Book

            Is Gratefully Dedicated.




PREFACE


"A VICTORIOUS UNION" is the sixth and last of "The Blue and the Gray
Series." While the volume is not intended to be a connected historical
narrative of the particular period of the War of the Rebellion in which
its scenes are laid, the incidents accurately conform to the facts,
and especially to the spirit, of the eventful years in which they are
placed, as recorded in the chronicles of the great struggle, and as they
exist in the memory of the writer. It is more than thirty years since
the war began, and thousands upon thousands of the active participants
in the strife as soldiers and sailors, including nearly all the great
commanders, have passed on to their eternal reward. Thousands upon
thousands of men and women have been born and reached their maturity
since the most tremendous war of modern times ended in A Victorious
Union. The knowledge of the stirring events of those four years of
conflict, and of the patriotic spirit which inspired and underlaid
them, has come, or will come, to at least one-half the population
of this vast nation of sixty-five millions from the printed page or
through the listening ear. The other moiety, more or less, either as
children or adults, lived in the period of action, saw the gathering
battalions, and heard or read the daily reports from the ensanguined
battle-fields.

In some of the States that remained loyal to the Union throughout the
long struggle, a military parade had been regarded by many as something
very much in the nature of a circus display, as "fuss and feathers,"
such as tickled the vanity of both officer and private. Military
organizations, except in our small regular army, were disparaged and
ridiculed. When the war came, the Northern people were unprepared for
it to a very great degree. The change of public opinion was as sudden
as the mighty event was precipitate. Then the soldier became the most
prominent and honored member of the community, and existing military
bodies became the nucleus of the armies that were to fight the battles
of the Republic.

During the last thirty years the military spirit has been kept alive as
a constituent element of patriotism itself. The love of country has been
diligently fostered and nurtured in the young, and public opinion has
been voiced and energized in the statutes of many States, and in the
educational machinery of many municipalities. Over vast numbers of
schoolhouses in our land floats the American flag, the symbol of the
Union and the principles that underlie it.

The flag, the banner now of a reunited nation, means something more than
the sentiment of loyalty to the Union as the home of freedom; for it
implies the duty of defending the honor of that flag, the representative
idea of all we hold dear in Fatherland. In the East and the West a
considerable proportion of the high schools make military tactics a part
of their educational course. Companies, battalions, and regiments of
young men in their teens parade the streets of some of our cities,
showing in what manner the military spirit is kept alive, and, at the
same time, how the flag floating over our educational institutions,
which means so much more than ever before to our people, is to be
defended and perpetuated in the future.

The author of the six volumes of "The Blue and the Gray Series," as well
as of "The Army and Navy Series," the latter begun in the heat of the
war thirty years ago, earnestly believes in keeping active in the minds
of the young the spirit of patriotism. In the present volume, as in
those which have preceded it, he has endeavored to present to his
readers, not only a hero who is brave, skilful, and ready to give his
life for his country, but one who is unselfishly patriotic; one who is
not fighting for promotion and prize-money, but to save the Union in
whose integrity and necessity he believes as the safeguard and substance
of American liberty.

Peace has reigned in our land for nearly thirty years, and the
asperities of a relentless war have been supplanted by better and more
brotherly relations between the North and the South. The writer would
not print a word that would disturb these improving conditions; and if
he has erred at all in picturing the intercourse between Americans as
enemies, he has made sure to do so in the interests of justice and
magnanimity on both sides.

In the series of which this volume is the last, the author has confined
his narrative of adventures to the navy. It has been suggested to him
that another series, relating exclusively to incidents in the army,
should follow. After forty years of labor in this particular field, and
having already exhausted the threescore and ten of human life, he cannot
be assured that he will live long enough to complete such a series,
though still in excellent health; but he intends to make a beginning
of the work as soon as other engagements will permit.

  William T. Adams.

    Dorchester, March 16, 1893.




CONTENTS

                                              Page
CHAPTER I.
The Mission to Mobile Point                     15

CHAPTER II.
The Departure of the Expedition                 26

CHAPTER III.
A Bivouac near Fort Morgan                      37

CHAPTER IV.
The Revelations of the Revellers                48

CHAPTER V.
In the Vicinity of the Confederate Fort         59

CHAPTER VI.
Captain Sullendine of the West Wind             70

CHAPTER VII.
A Powerful Ally of the Belleviters              81

CHAPTER VIII.
On Board of the Cotton Schooner                 92

CHAPTER IX.
The Departure of the Tallahatchie              103

CHAPTER X.
The Casting off of the Towline                 114

CHAPTER XI.
A Happy Return to the Bellevite                125

CHAPTER XII.
A Lively Chase to the South-West               136

CHAPTER XIII.
The First Shot of Blumenhoff                   147

CHAPTER XIV.
The Progress of the Action                     158

CHAPTER XV.
A Flank Movement Undertaken                    169

CHAPTER XVI.
The Lieutenant's Daring Exploit                180

CHAPTER XVII.
A Magnanimous Enemy                            191

CHAPTER XVIII.
The Reign of Christianity                      202

CHAPTER XIX.
Colonel Homer Passford of Glenfield            213

CHAPTER XX.
A Very Melancholy Confederate                  224

CHAPTER XXI.
Captain Sullendine Becomes Violent             225

CHAPTER XXII.
The Disposition of the Two Prizes              246

CHAPTER XXIII.
The Welcome Home at Bonnydale                  257

CHAPTER XXIV.
Lieutenant-Commander Christopher Passford      268

CHAPTER XXV.
The Principal Officers of the St. Regis        279

CHAPTER XXVI.
The St. Regis in Commission                    290

CHAPTER XXVII.
Captain Passford Alone in his Glory            301

CHAPTER XXVIII.
Off the Coast of North Carolina                312

CHAPTER XXIX.
The First Prize of the St. Regis               323

CHAPTER XXX.
Another Sailing Contest Inaugurated            334

CHAPTER XXXI.
A Victorious Union                             345




A VICTORIOUS UNION




CHAPTER I

THE MISSION TO MOBILE POINT


"I almost wish you were the second or the third lieutenant of the
Bellevite, instead of the executive officer, Christy," said Captain
Breaker, the commander of the steamer, as they were seated together
one day on the quarter-deck.

"Do I fail in the discharge of my duty in my present position, Captain?"
asked Christy, very much astonished, not to say startled, at the remark
of the commander.

"Not in the slightest degree, my dear boy!" returned Captain Breaker
with very decided emphasis. "You have served in your present capacity
for four months; and if you were fifty years old, and had twenty years
of naval experience behind you, it would be hardly possible for you to
be more correct and dignified in the performance of the details of your
office."

"I thank you, Captain, for the partial view you take of what I have
done," added Christy, taking off his cap and bowing to his superior.

"Well, you ought to be a good officer in any situation, my dear fellow,"
continued the commander. "I doubt if there is another officer in the
navy who has enjoyed the advantages you have had in preparing himself
for the duties of his profession. You were brought up, so to say, on
board of the Bellevite. You were a good scholar in the first place.
Without including myself, you have had excellent teachers in every
department of science and philosophy, among whom your father was one
of the wisest. Poor Dashington was one of the best seamen that ever trod
a deck; and he took especial delight in showing you how to make every
knot and splice, as well as in instructing you in the higher details of
practical seamanship. Blowitt and myself assisted him, and old Boxie,
who gave his life to his country, was more than a grandfather to you."

"I have certainly been very grateful to you and to them for all they did
for me," replied Christy with a sad expression on his handsome face as
the commander recalled the three shipmates of both of them who slept in
heroes' graves.

"Perhaps the brilliant genius of our engine-room did quite as much for
you as any other person, though not many years your senior."

"Paul Vapoor is my friend and crony; and if he had been my professor in
a college he could have done no more for me. I assure you, Captain, that
I keep alive my gratitude to all my instructors, including some you have
not mentioned."

"I was only explaining why you are what you ought to be, for you have
had very exceptional opportunities, better by far than any other officer
in the service. But it is altogether to your credit that you have used
those opportunities wisely and well."

"I should have been a blockhead if I had not."

"That is very true; but the mournful wrecks of wasted opportunities
strew the tracks of many, many young men. I think you can look back
upon as few of them as any one within my knowledge," said the commander,
bestowing a look of genuine affection upon his chief officer. "More than
once, even before we entered upon this terrible war, I have told your
father how happy he ought to be in having such a son as you are."

"Come, come, Captain Breaker, you are praising me!" exclaimed Christy
impatiently.

"I am speaking only the simple truth, and I have very rarely said as
much as I say now. It was when you asked me if you had failed in the
discharge of the duties of your present position that I was led into
this line of remark; and I am sure you will not be spoiled by honest
and just praise," replied the captain.

"Then, to go back to the point where you began, why do you almost wish
that I were second or third lieutenant, instead of executive officer,
of the Bellevite, Captain?" continued Christy, rising from his seat, and
fixing an earnest gaze upon the face of the commander, for he was very
sensitive, and he could not help feeling that he had been lacking in
something that would make him a better executive officer than he was.

"Mr. Ballard, the second lieutenant, and Mr. Walbrook, the third, are
gentlemen of the highest grade, and excellent officers; but they are
both somewhat wanting in dash and cool impetuosity."
