The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fighting for the Right, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fighting for the Right

Author: Oliver Optic

Illustrator: A. B. Shute

Release Date: July 10, 2006 [EBook #18803]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Garcia, Juliet Sutherland
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Kentuckiana Digital
Library)





THE BLUE AND THE GRAY--AFLOAT

Two colors cloth  Emblematic Dies  Illustrated
Price per volume $1.50

  TAKEN BY THE ENEMY
  WITHIN THE ENEMY'S LINES
  ON THE BLOCKADE
  STAND BY THE UNION
  FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT
  A VICTORIOUS UNION

THE BLUE AND THE GRAY--ON LAND

Two colors cloth  Emblematic Dies  Illustrated
Price per volume $1.50

  BROTHER AGAINST BROTHER
  IN THE SADDLE
  A LIEUTENANT AT EIGHTEEN
  ON THE STAFF
  AT THE FRONT
  AN UNDIVIDED UNION

Any Volume Sold Separately

Lee and Shepard Publishers  Boston




  [Illustration:
  "Christy seized him by the collar with both hands." Page 75.]




                      The

               BLUE AND THE GRAY

                     Series

                 [Illustration]

                By Oliver Optic

             FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT




         _The Blue and the Gray Series_

             FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT

                       by

                  OLIVER OPTIC

                   Author of
"The Army and Navy Series" "Young America Abroad"
"The Great Western Series" "The Woodville Stories"
"The Starry Flag Series" "The Boat-Club Series"
"The Onward and Upward Series" "The Yacht-Club Series"
"The Lake Shore Series" "The Riverdale Stories"
"The Boat-Builder Series" "Taken by the Enemy"
"Within the Enemy's Lines" "On the Blockade"
"Stand by the Union" "A Missing Million"
"A Millionaire at Sixteen" etc., etc., etc.


                     BOSTON
          LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers


       Copyright, 1892 by Lee and Shepard
             _All Rights Reserved_

             Fighting for the Right


       Type-Setting and Electrotyping by
           C. J. Peters & Son, Boston




                       To

                My Grand Nephew

              RICHARD LABAN ADAMS

                   This Book

          Is Affectionately Dedicated




PREFACE


"FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT" is the fifth and last but one of "The Blue and
the Gray Series." The character of the operations in connection with the
war of the Rebellion, and the incidents in which the interest of the
young reader will be concentrated, are somewhat different from most of
those detailed in the preceding volumes of the series, though they all
have the same patriotic tendency, and are carried out with the same
devotion to the welfare of the nation as those which deal almost solely
in deeds of arms.

Although the soldiers and sailors of the army and navy of the Union won
all the honors gained in the field of battle or on the decks of the
national ships, and deserved all the laurels they gathered by their
skill and bravery in the trying days when the republic was in peril,
they were not the only actors in the greatest strife of the nineteenth
century. Not all the labor of "saving the Union" was done in the
trenches, on the march, on the gun deck of a man-of-war, or in other
military and naval operations, though without these the efforts of all
others would have been in vain. Thousands of men and women who never
"smelled gunpowder," who never heard the booming cannon, or the rattling
musketry, who never witnessed a battle on sea or land, but who kept
their minds and hearts in touch with the holy cause, labored diligently
and faithfully to support and sustain the soldiers and sailors at the
front.

If all those who fought no battles are not honored like the leaders and
commanders in the loyal cause, if they wear no laurels on their brows,
if no monuments are erected to transmit their memory to posterity, if
their names and deeds are not recorded in the Valhalla of the redeemed
nation, they ought not to be disregarded and ignored. It was not on the
field of strife alone in the South that the battle was fought and won.
The army and the navy needed a moral, as well as a material support,
which was cheerfully rendered by the great army of the people who never
buckled on a sword, or shouldered a musket. Their work can not be summed
up in deeds, for there was little or nothing that was brilliant and
dazzling in their career. They need no monuments; but their work was
necessary to the final and glorious result of the most terrible war of
modern times.

No apology is necessary for placing the hero of the story and his
skilful associate in a position at a distance from the actual field of
battle. They were working for the salvation of the Union as effectively
as they could have done in the din of the strife. They were "Fighting
for the Right," as they understood it, though it is not treason to say,
thirty years later, that the people of the South were as sincere as
those of the North; and they could hardly have fought and suffered to
the extent they did if it had been otherwise.

The incidents of the volume are more various than in the preceding
stories, which were so largely a repetition of battle scenes; but the
hero is still as earnest as ever in the cause he loves. He attains a
high position without any ambition to win it; for, like millions of
others who gave the best years of their lives to sustain the Union, who
suffered the most terrible hardships and privations, so many hundreds of
thousands giving their lives to their country, Christy fought and
labored for the cause, and not from any personal ambition. It is the
young man's high character, his devotion to duty, rather than the
incidents and adventures in which he is engaged, that render him worthy
of respect, and deserving of the honors that were bestowed upon him. The
younger participants in the war of the Rebellion, Christy Passford among
the number, are beginning to be grizzled with the snows of fifty
winters; but they are still rejoicing in "A Victorious Union."

  William T. Adams.

    Dorchester, April 18, 1892.




CONTENTS

                                              Page
CHAPTER I.
A Conference at Bonnydale                       15

CHAPTER II.
A Complicated Case                              26

CHAPTER III.
The Departure of the Chateaugay                 37

CHAPTER IV.
Monsieur Gilfleur explains                      48

CHAPTER V.
An Abundance of Evidence                        59

CHAPTER VI.
The Boarding of the Ionian                      70

CHAPTER VII.
A Bold Proposition                              81

CHAPTER VIII.
A Notable Expedition                            92

CHAPTER IX.
The Frenchman in Bermuda                       103

CHAPTER X.
Important Information obtained                 114

CHAPTER XI.
An Unexpected Rencontre                        125

CHAPTER XII.
As Impracticable Scheme                        136

CHAPTER XIII.
At the End of the Chase                        147

CHAPTER XIV.
An Easy Victory                                158

CHAPTER XV.
The Gentleman with a Grizzly Beard             169

CHAPTER XVI.
Among the Bahamas                              180

CHAPTER XVII.
The Landing at New Providence                  191

CHAPTER XVIII.
An Affray in Nassau                            202

CHAPTER XIX.
An Old Acquaintance                            213

CHAPTER XX.
A Band of Ruffians                             224

CHAPTER XXI.
A Question of Neutrality                       235

CHAPTER XXII.
On Board of the Snapper                        246

CHAPTER XXIII.
The Chateaugay in the Distance                 257

CHAPTER XXIV.
The Tables turned                              268

CHAPTER XXV.
Captain Flanger in Irons                       279

CHAPTER XXVI.
A Visit to Tampa Bay                           290

CHAPTER XXVII.
Among the Keys of Tampa                        302

CHAPTER XXVIII.
The Surrender of the Reindeer                  313

CHAPTER XXIX.
Bringing out the Prize                         324

CHAPTER XXX.
A Very Important Service                       335

CHAPTER XXXI.
An Undesired Promotion                         346




FIGHTING FOR THE RIGHT




CHAPTER I

A CONFERENCE AT BONNYDALE


"Well, Christy, how do you feel this morning?" asked Captain Passford,
one bright morning in April, at Bonnydale on the Hudson, the residence
of the former owner of the Bellevite, which he had presented to the
government.

"Quite well, father; I think I never felt any better in all my life,"
replied Lieutenant Passford, of the United States Navy, recently
commander of the little gunboat Bronx, on board of which he had been
severely wounded in an action with a Confederate fort in Louisiana.

"Do you feel any soreness at the wound in your arm?" inquired the
devoted parent with some anxiety.

"Not a particle, father."

"Or at the one in your thigh?"

"Not the slightest bit of soreness. In fact, I have been ready to return
to my duty at any time within the last month," replied Christy very
cheerfully. "It would be a shame for me to loiter around home any
longer, when I am as able to plank the deck as I ever was. In truth,
I think I am better and stronger than ever before, for I have had a long
rest."

"Your vacation has been none too long, for you were considerably run
down, the doctor said, in addition to your two wounds," added Captain
Passford, senior; for the young man had held a command, and was entitled
to the same honorary title as his father.

"These doctors sometimes make you think you are sicker than you really
are," said Christy with a laugh.

"But your doctor did not do so, for your mother and I both thought you
were rather run out by your labors in the Gulf."

"If I was, I am all right now. Do I look like a sick one? I weigh more
than I ever did before in my life."

"Your mother has taken excellent care of you, and you certainly look
larger and stronger than when you went to sea in the Bronx."

"But I am very tired of this inactive life. I have been assigned to the
Bellevite as second lieutenant, a position I prefer to a command, for
the reasons I have several times given you, father."

"I am certainly very glad to have you returned to the Bellevite, though
the honors will be easier with you than they were when you were the
commander of the Bronx."

"But I shall escape the responsibility of the command, and avoid being
pointed at as one who commands by official influence," said Christy,
rather warmly; for he felt that he had done his duty with the utmost
fidelity, and it was not pleasant to have his hard-earned honors
discounted by flings at his father's influence with the government.

"It is impossible to escape the sneers of the discontented, and there
are always plenty of such in the navy and the army. But, Christy, you
wrong yourself in taking any notice of such flings, for they have never
been thrown directly at you, if at all. You are over-sensitive, and you
have not correctly interpreted what your superiors have said to you,"
said Captain Passford seriously.

His father recalled some of the conversations between the young officer
and Captain Blowitt and others, reported to him before. He insisted that
the remarks of his superiors were highly complimentary to him, and that
he had no right to take offence at them.

"I dare say I am entirely wrong, father; but it will do me no harm to
serve in a subordinate capacity," added Christy.

"I agree with you here; but I must tell you again, as I have half a
dozen times before, that I never asked a position or promotion for you
at the Navy Department. You have won your honors and your advancement
yourself," continued the father.

"Well, it was all the same, father; you have used your time and your
money very freely in the service of the government, as you could not
help doing. I know that I did my duty, and the department promoted me
because I was your son," said Christy, laughing.

"Not at all, my son; you deserved your promotion every time, and if you
had been the son of a wood-chopper in the State of Maine, you would have
been promoted just the same," argued Captain Passford.

"Perhaps I should," answered the young officer rather doubtfully.

"After what you did in your last cruise with the Bronx, a larger and
finer vessel would have been given to you in recognition of the
brilliant service you had rendered," added the father. "I prevented this
from being done simply because you wished to take the position of second
lieutenant on board of the Bellevite."

"Then I thank you for it, father," replied Christy heartily.

"But the department thinks it has lost an able commander," continued the
captain with a smile.

"I am willing to let the department think so, father. All I really ask
of the officials now is to send me back to the Gulf, and to the
Bellevite. I believe you said that I was to go as a passenger in the
Chateaugay."

"I did; and she has been ready for over a week."

"Why don't she go, then?" asked Christy impatiently.

"On her way to the Gulf she is to engage in some special service,"
replied Captain Passford, as he took some letters from his pocket.

"Letters!" exclaimed the young lieutenant, laughing as he recalled some
such missives on two former occasions. "Do you still keep your three
agents in the island of Great Britain?"

"I don't keep them, for they are now in the employ of the government,
