The Project Gutenberg EBook of Six to Sixteen, by Juliana Horatia Ewing

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Six to Sixteen
       A Story for Girls

Author: Juliana Horatia Ewing

Release Date: September 23, 2006 [EBook #19360]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIX TO SIXTEEN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Julia Miller, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note:

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. A list of the changes
is found at the end of the text. Inconsistencies in spelling and
hyphenation have been maintained. A list of inconsistently spelled and
hyphenated words is found at the end of the text.

The following less-common character is used in this version of the book.
If it does not display properly, please try changing your font.

o  o with breve




[Illustration: "'I've got a pink silk here,' said I, 'and pink shoes.'"]




               SIX TO SIXTEEN.
             _A STORY FOR GIRLS._


                      BY
            JULIANA HORATIA EWING.


                    LONDON:
  SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
          NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.
       NEW YORK: E. & J. B. YOUNG & CO.




[Published under the direction of the General Literature Committee.]




DEDICATION.

TO MISS ELEANOR LLOYD.


MY DEAR ELEANOR,

I wish that this little volume were worthier of being dedicated to you.

It is, I fear, fragmentary as a mere tale, and cannot even plead as an
excuse for this that it embodies any complete theory on the vexed
question of the upbringing of girls. Indeed, I should like to say that
it contains no attempt to paint a model girl or a model education, and
was originally written as a sketch of domestic life, and not as a
vehicle for theories.

That it does touch by the way on a few of the many strong opinions I
have on the subject you will readily discover; though it is so long
since we held discussions together that I hardly know how far your views
will now agree with mine.

If, however, it seems to you to illustrate a belief in the joys and
benefits of intellectual hobbies, I do not think that we shall differ on
that point; and it may serve, here and there, to recall one, nearly as
dear to you as to me, for whom the pleasures of life were at least
doubled by such interests, and who found in them no mean resource under
a burden heavier than common of life's pain.

That, whatever labour I may spend on this or any other bit of
work--whatever changes or confirmations time and experience may bring to
my views of people and things--I cannot now ask her approval of the one,
or delight in the play of her strong intellect and bright wit over the
other, is an unhealable sorrow with which no one sympathizes more fully
than you.

This story was written before her death: it has been revised without her
help.

Such as it is, I beg you to accept it in affectionate remembrance of old
times and of many common hobbies of our girlhood in my Yorkshire home
and in yours.

  J. H. E.




CONTENTS.


    CHAP.                                                          PAGE

           Introduction                                               11

       I.  My Pretty Mother--Ayah--Company                            20

      II.  The Cholera Season--My Mother Goes Away--My Sixth
           Birthday                                                   26

     III.  The Bullers--Matilda takes Me up--We Fall Out--Mr. George  34

      IV.  Sales--Matters of Principle--Mrs. Minchin Quarrels with
           the Bride--Mrs. Minchin Quarrels with Everybody--Mrs.
           Minchin is Reconciled--The Voyage Home--A Death on Board   40

       V.  A Home Station--What Mrs. Buller thought of it--What
           Major Buller thought of it                                 53

      VI.  Dress and Manner--I Examine Myself--My Great-Grandmother   59

     VII.  My Great-Grandmother--The Duchess's Carriage--Mrs.
           O'Connor is Curious                                        67

    VIII.  A Family History                                           73

      IX.  Hopes and Expectations--Dreams and Daydreams--The
           Vine--Elspeth--My Great-Grandfather                        84

       X.  Thomas the Cat--My Great-Grandfather's Sketches--Adolphe
           is my Friend--My Great-great-great-Grandfather Disturbs
           my Rest--I Leave The Vine                                  96

      XI.  Matilda's News--Our Governess--Major Buller turned
           Tutor--Eleanor Arkwright                                  103

     XII.  Poor Matilda--The Awkward Age--Mrs. Buller takes Counsel
           with her Friends--The 'Milliner and Mantuamaker'--Medical
           Advice--The Major Decides                                 120

    XIII.  At School--The Lilac Bush--Bridget's Posies--Summer--
           Health                                                    138

     XIV.  Miss Mulberry--Discipline and Recreation--Madame--
           Conversation--Eleanor's Opinion of the Drawing-master--
           Miss Ellen's--Eleanor's Apology                           146

      XV.  Eleanor's Theories reduced to Practice--Studies--The
           Arithmetic-master                                         159

     XVI.  Eleanor's Reputation--The Mad Gentleman--Fancies and
           Follies--Matilda's Health--The New Doctor                 166

    XVII.  Eleanor's Health--Holy Living--The Prayer of the Son
           of Sirach                                                 175

   XVIII.  Eleanor and I are late for Breakfast--The School Breaks
           Up--Madame and Bridget                                    179

     XIX.  Northwards--The Black Country--The Stone Country          183

      XX.  The Vicarage--Keziah--The Dear Boys--The Cook--A
           Yorkshire Tea--Bed-fellows                                191

     XXI.  Gardening--Drinkings--The Moors--Wading--Batrachosperma--
           The Church--Little Margaret                               197

    XXII.  A New Home--The Arkwrights' Return--The Beasts--Going
           to Meet the Boys--Jack's Hat-box--We Come Home a Rattler  209

   XXIII.  I Correspond with the Major--My Collection--Occupations--
           Madame Again--Fete de Village--The British Hooray         219

    XXIV.  We and the Boys--We and the Boys and our Fads--The Lamp
           of Zeal--Clement on Unreality--Jack's Ointment            234

     XXV.  The "Household Album"--Sketching under Difficulties--A
           New Species?--Jack's Bargain--Theories                    242

    XXVI.  Manners and Customs--Clique--The Lessons of Experience--
           Out Visiting--House-pride--Dressmaking                    257

   XXVII.  Matilda--Ball Dresses and the Ball--Gores--Miss
           Lining--The 'Parishioner's Pennyworth'                    269

  XXVIII.  I go Back to The Vine--After Sunset--A Twilight
           Existence--Salad of Monk's-hood--A Royal Summons          279

    XXIX.  Home Again--Home News--The Very End                       293




SIX TO SIXTEEN.

INTRODUCTION.


Eleanor and I are subject to _fads_. Indeed, it is a family failing. (By
the family I mean our household, for Eleanor and I are not, even
distantly, related.) Life would be comparatively dull, up away here on
the moors, without them. Our fads and the boys' fads are sometimes the
same, but oftener distinct. Our present one we would not so much as tell
them of on any account; because they would laugh at us. It is this. We
purpose this winter to write the stories of our own lives down to the
present date.

It seems an egotistical and perhaps silly thing to record the
trivialities of our everyday lives, even for fun, and just to please
ourselves. I said so to Eleanor, but she said, "Supposing Mr. Pepys had
thought so about his everyday life, how much instruction and amusement
would have been lost to the readers of his Diary." To which I replied,
that as Mr. Pepys lived in stirring times, and amongst notable people,
_his_ daily life was like a leaf out of English history, and his case
quite different to the case of obscure persons living simply and
monotonously on the Yorkshire moors. On which Eleanor observed that the
simple and truthful history of a single mind from childhood would be as
valuable, if it could be got, as the whole of Mr. Pepys' Diary from the
first volume to the last. And when Eleanor makes a general observation
of this kind in her conclusive tone, I very seldom dispute it; for, to
begin with, she is generally right, and then she is so much more clever
than I.

One result of the confessed superiority of her opinion to mine is that I
give way to it sometimes even when I am not quite convinced, but only
helped by a little weak-minded reason of my own in the background. I
gave way in this instance, not altogether to her argument (for I am sure
_my_ biography will not be the history of a mind, but only a record of
small facts important to no one but myself), but chiefly because I think
that as one grows up one enjoys recalling the things that happened when
one was little. And one forgets them so soon! I envy Eleanor for having
kept her childish diaries. I used to write diaries too, but, when I was
fourteen years old, I got so much ashamed of them (it made me quite hot
to read my small moral reflections, and the pompous account of my
quarrels with Matilda, my sentimental admiration for the handsome
bandmaster, &c., even when alone), and I was so afraid of the boys
getting hold of them, that I made a big hole in the kitchen fire one
day, and burned them all. At least, so I thought; but one volume escaped
the flames, and the fun Eleanor and I have now in re-reading this has
made me regret that I burned the others. Of course, even if I put down
all that I can remember, it will not be like having kept my diaries.
Eleanor's biography, in this respect, will be much better than mine; but
still, I remember a good deal now that I dare say I shall forget soon,
and in sixteen more years these histories may amuse us as much as the
old diaries. We are all growing up now. We have even got to speaking of
"old times," by which we mean the times when we used to wade in the
brooks and----

But this is beside the mark, and I must not allow myself to wander off.
I am too apt to be discursive. When I had to write leading articles for
our manuscript periodical, Jack used to laugh at me, and say, "If it
wasn't for Eleanor's disentangling your sentences, you'd put parenthesis
within parenthesis till, when you got yourself into the very inside
one, you'd be as puzzled as a pig in a labyrinth, and not know how to
get back to where you started from." And I remember Clement--who
generally disputed a point, if possible--said, "How do you know she
wouldn't get back, if you let her work out each train of thought in
peace? The curt, clean-cut French style may suit some people, whose
brains won't stretch far without getting tired; but others may have more
sympathy with a Semitic cast of mind."

This excuse pleased me very much. It was pleasanter to believe that my
style was Semitic, than to allow, with Jack, that it tended towards that
of Mrs. Nickleby. Though at that time my notion of the meaning of the
word Semitic was not so precise as it might have been.

Our home is a beautiful place in the summer, and in much of spring and
autumn. In winter I fancy it would look dreary to the eyes of strangers.
At night the wind comes over the top of Deadmanstone Hill, and down the
valley, whirls the last leaves off the old trees by the church, and
sends them dancing over the closely-ranged gravestones. Then up through
the village it comes, and moans round our house all night, like some
miserable being wanting to get in. The boys say it does get in, more
than enough, especially into their bedrooms; but then boys always
grumble. It certainly makes strange noises here. I have more than once
opened the back-door late in the evening, because I fancied that one of
the dogs had been hurt, and was groaning outside.

That stormy winter after the Ladybrig murder, our fancies and the wind
together played Eleanor and me sad tricks. When once we began to listen
we seemed to hear a whole tragedy going on close outside. We could
distinguish footsteps and voices through the bluster, and then a
struggle in the shrubbery, and a _thud_, and a groan, and then a roar of
wind, half drowning the sound of flying footsteps--and then an awful
pause, and at last faint groaning, and a bump, as of some poor wounded
body falling against the house. At this point we were wont to summon
courage and rush out, with the kitchen poker and a candle shapeless with
tallow shrouds from the strong draughts. We never could see anything;
partly, perhaps, because the candle was always blown out; and when we
stood outside it became evident that what we had heard was only the
wind, and a bough of the old acacia-tree, which beat at intervals upon
the house.

When the nights are stormy there is no room so comfortable as the big
kitchen. We first used it for parochial purposes, small night-schools,
and so forth. Then one evening, as we strolled in to look for one of
the dogs, the cook said, "You can sit here, if you like, Miss Eleanor.
_We_ always sits in the pantry on winter nights; so there'll be no one
to disturb you." And as we had some writing on hand which we did not
wish to have discussed or overlooked by other members of the family, we
settled down in great peace and comfort by the roaring fire which the
maids had heaped to keep the kitchen warm in their absence.

We found ourselves so cosy and independent that we returned again and
again to our new study. The boys (who go away a great deal more than we
do, and are apt to come back dissatisfied with our "ways," and anxious
to make us more "like other people") object strongly to this habit of
ours. They say, "Who ever _heard_ of ladies sitting in the kitchen?"
And, indeed, there are many south-country kitchens in which I should not
at all like to sit. But we have this large, airy, spotlessly clean room,
with its stone floor, its yellow-washed walls, its tables scrubbed to
snowy whiteness, its quaint old dresser and clock and corner cupboards
of shiny black oak, and its huge fire-place and blazing fire all to
ourselves, and we have abundance of room, and may do anything we please,
so I think it is no wonder that we like it, though it be, in point of
fact, a kitchen. We cover the table, and (commonly) part of the floor,
with an amount of books, papers, and belongings of various sorts, such
as we should scruple to deluge the drawing-room with. The fire crackles
and blazes, so that we do not mind the wind, though there are no blinds
to the kitchen, and if we do not "cotter" the shutters, we look out upon
the black night, and the tall Scotch pine that has been tossed so wildly
for so many years, and is not torn down yet.

Keziah the cook takes much pride in this same kitchen, which partly
accounts for its being in a state so suitable to our use. She "stones"
the floor with excruciating regularity. (At least, some people hate the
scraping sound. I do not mind it myself.) She "pot-moulds" the hearth in
fantastic patterns; the chests, the old chairs, the settle, the dresser,
the clock and the corner cupboards are so many mirrors from constant
polishing. She says, with justice, that "a body might eat his dinner off
anything in the place."

We dine early, and the cooking for the late supper is performed in what
we call "the second kitchen," beyond this. I believe that what is now
the Vicarage was originally an old farmhouse, of which this same
charming kitchen was the chief "living-room." It is quite a journey,
through long, low passages, to get from the modern part of the house to
this.

One year, when the "languages fad" was strong upon us, Eleanor and I
earned many a backache by carrying the huge volumes of the _Della
Crusca_ Italian dictionary from the dining-room shelves to the kitchen.
We piled them on the oak chest for reference, and ran backwards and
forwards to them from the table where we sat and beat our brains over
the "Divina Commedia," while the wind growled in the tall old box-trees
without, and the dogs growled in dreams upon the hearth.

It is by this well-scrubbed table, in this kitchen, that our biographies
are to be written. They cannot be penned under the noses of the boys.

Eleanor finds rocking a help to composition, and she is swinging
backwards and forwards in the glossy old rocking-chair, with a pen
between her lips, and a vacant gaze in her eyes, that becomes almost a
look of inspiration when the swing of the chair turns her face towards
the ceiling. For my own part I find that I can meet the crisis of a
train of ideas best upon my feet, so I pace up and down past the old
black dresser, with its gleaming crockery, like a captain on his
quarter-deck. Suddenly Eleanor's chair stands still.

"Margery," she says, laying her head upon the table at her side, "I do
