The Project Gutenberg EBook of Louis' School Days, by E. J. May

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Louis' School Days
       A Story for Boys

Author: E. J. May

Release Date: November 17, 2006 [EBook #19855]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOUIS' SCHOOL DAYS ***




Produced by Justin Gillbank and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The University of Florida, The Internet
Archive/Children's Library)






LOUIS' SCHOOL DAYS,


A STORY FOR BOYS.

By E. J. May


[Illustration: Louis and Meredith on Brandon Hill. Page 76.]


NEW-YORK:
D. APPLETON & COMPANY, 200 BROADWAY.
1852.







PREFACE.


It was originally my intention to leave the child of my imagination
to make its way where it would, without any letter of introduction in
the form of the usual prefatory address to the reader; but having been
assured that a preface is indispensable, I am laid under the necessity
of formally giving a little insight into the character of the possible
inmate of many a happy home.

Reader, the following pages claim no interest on the score of
authenticity. They are no fiction _founded on facts_. They profess
to be nothing but fiction, used as a vehicle for illustrating certain
broad and fundamental truths in our holy religion.

It has often struck me, in recalling religious stories (to which I
acknowledge myself much indebted), that many of them fell into an error
which might have the effect of confusing the mind of a thinking child,
namely, that of drawing a perfect character as soon as the soul has
laid hold of Christ, without any mention of those struggles through
which the Christian must pass, in order to preserve a holy consistency
before men. This would seem to exclude the necessity of maintaining
a _warfare_.

The doctrine I have endeavored to maintain in the following pages is,
that man being born in "sin, a child of wrath," has, by nature, all his
affections estranged from God; that, when by grace, through faith in
Christ, a new life has been implanted within him, his affections are
restored to their rightful Lord, every thought and imagination is
brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ; and his whole being
longs to praise Him who has called him "out of darkness into light"--to
praise Him "not only with his lips, but in his life." Then commences the
struggle between light and darkness, between the flesh and the spirit,
between the old and new man; and the results of this conflict are seen
in the outward conduct of the Christian soldier.

The character of the child of God does not essentially alter, but a
new impulse is given him. Whatever good quality was in his natural
state conspicuous in him, will, in a state of grace and newness of
life, shine forth with double lustre; and he will find his besetting
sin his greatest hindrance in pressing forward to the attainment of
personal holiness. The great wide difference is, that he _desires_ to
be holy, and the Lord, who gives him this desire, gives him also the
strength to overcome his natural mind; and the more closely he waits
on his heavenly Father for His promised aid, the more holily and
consistently he will walk; and when, through the deceits of his heart,
the allurements of the world, or the temptations of Satan, he relaxes
his vigilance, and draws less largely from the fountain of his strength,
a sad falling away is the inevitable consequence. This warfare, this
danger of backsliding, ends only with the life, when, and when _only_,
he will be perfect, for he shall be like his Saviour.

As a writer for the young, I dare not plead even the humble pretensions
of my little volume in deprecation of the criticism which ought to be the
lot of every work professing to instruct others. In choosing the arena
of a boy's school for the scene of my hero's actions, I have necessarily
been compelled to introduce many incidents and phrases to which, perhaps,
some very scrupulous critics might object as out of place in a religious
work; but my readers will do well to recollect, that to be useful, a
story must be attractive, and to be attractive, it must be natural; and
I trust that they who candidly examine mine will find nothing therein
that can produce a wrong impression. It has not been without an anxious
sense of the great responsibility dependent on me in my present capacity,
that this little effort has been made. Should it be the instrument of
strengthening in one young one the best lessons he has received, it will,
indeed, not have been in vain. To the service of Him who is the strength
and help of all His people, it is dedicated.

              "Be Thou alone exalted:
          If there's a thought of favor placed on me--
              THINE be it all!
          Forgive its evil and accept its good--
          I cast it at Thy feet."

                                                      E.J.M.




CHAPTER I.


Doleful were the accounts received from time to time of Louis Mortimer's
life with his tutor at Dashwood Rectory; and, if implicit credence might
be yielded to them, it would be supposed that no poor mortal was ever so
persecuted by Latin verses, early rising, and difficult problems, as our
hero. His eldest brother, to whom these pathetic relations were made,
failed not to stimulate him with exciting passages of school life--and
these, at last, had the desired effect, drawing from Louis the following
epistle:


  "My dear Reginald,

  "Your letter was as welcome as usual. You cannot imagine what
  a treat it is to hear from you. Mr. Phillips is kind, but so
  very different from dear Mr. Daunton. What I dislike most is,
  that he says so often, 'What _did_ Mr. Daunton teach you? I
  never saw a boy so ignorant in my life!' I do not care how
  much he says of me, but I cannot bear to hear him accuse dear
  Mr. Daunton of not teaching me properly. I believe I am really
  idle often, but sometimes, when I try most, it seems to give
  least satisfaction. The other day I was busy two hours at
  some Latin verses, and I took so much pains with them--I had
  written an 'Ode to the Rising Sun,' and felt quite interested,
  and thought Mr. Phillips would be pleased; but when I took it
  to him, he just looked at it, and taking a pen dashed out word
  after word, and said, so disagreeably, 'Shocking! Shocking,
  Louis! Disgraceful, after all that I said yesterday--the pains
  that I took with you,' 'Indeed, sir,' I said, 'I tried a great
  deal,' 'Fine ideas! fine ideas! no doubt,' he said, 'but I have
  told you dozens of times that I do not want _ideas_--I want
  _feet_.' I wish those same feet would run away to Clifton with
  me, Reginald; I hope I have not been saying any thing wrong
  about Mr. Phillips--I should be very sorry to do so, for he
  is very kind in his way: he tells me I do not know what I am
  wishing for, and that school will not suit me, and a great deal
  about my having to fag much harder and getting into disgrace;
  but never mind, I should like to make the experiment, for I
  shall be with you; and, dear as Dashwood is, it is _so_ dull
  without papa and mamma--I can hardly bear to go into the
  Priory now they are away. I seem to want Freddy's baby-voice
  in the nursery; and sober Neville and Mary are quite a part
  of home--how long it seems since I saw them! Well, I hope I
  shall come to you at Easter. Do you not wish it were here?
  I had a nice letter from mamma yesterday--she was at Florence
  when she wrote, and is getting quite strong, and so is little
  Mary. I have now no more time; mamma said papa had written
  to you, or I would have told you all the news. I wanted to
  tell you very much how our pigeons are, and the rabbits, and
  Mary's hen, which I shall give in Mrs. Colthrop's care when
  I leave Dashwood. But good bye, in a great hurry. With much
  love, I remain your very affectionate brother,

                              "LOUIS FRANCIS MORTIMER.

  "P.S. Do you remember cousin Vernon's laughing at
  our embrace at Heronhurst? I wonder when I shall have
  another--I am longing so to see you."


It would not concern my readers much were I to describe the precise
locality of the renowned Dr. Wilkinson's establishment for young
gentlemen--suffice it to say, that somewhere near Durdham Down,
within a short walk of Clifton, stood Ashfield House, a large
rambling building, part of which looked gray and timeworn when
compared with the modern school-room, and sundry dormitories, that
had been added at different periods as the school grew out of its
original domains. Attached to the house was a considerable extent
of park land, which was constituted the general play-ground.

At the time of which I am writing, Dr. Wilkinson's school consisted
of nearly eighty pupils, all of whom were boarders, and who were
sent from different parts of the kingdom; for the doctor's fame, as
an excellent man, and what, in the eyes of some was even a greater
recommendation, as a first-rate classical scholar, was spread far and
wide. At the door of this house, one fine April day, Louis presented
himself; and, after descending from the vehicle which brought him from
Bristol, followed the servant into the doctor's dining-room, where we
will leave him in solitary grandeur, or, more correctly speaking,
in agitating expectation, while we take a peep at the room on the
opposite side of the hall. In this, Dr. Wilkinson was giving audience
to a gentleman who had brought back his little boy a few minutes before
Louis arrived. Having some private business to transact, the child was
sent to the school-room, and then Mr. Percy entered into a discussion
respecting the capabilities of his son, and many other particulars,
which, however interesting to himself, would fail of being so to us.

At length these topics were exhausted, and it seemed nearly decided
how much was to be done or discontinued in Master Percy's education.
Mr. Percy paused to consider if any thing were left unsaid.

"Oh! by the by, Dr. Wilkinson," he said, letting fall the pencil with
which he had been tapping the table during his cogitations, "you have
one of Sir George Vernon's grandsons with you, I believe?"

"Two of them," replied the doctor.

"Ah! indeed, I mean young Mortimer, son of Mr. Mortimer of Dashwood."

"I have his eldest son, and am expecting another to-day."

"Then it was your expected pupil that I saw this morning,"
said Mr. Percy.

"May I ask where?" said the doctor.

"At the White Lion. He came down by the London coach. I saw his trunk,
in the first place, addressed to you, and supposed him to be the young
gentleman who attained to some rather undesirable notoriety last year."

"How so?" asked the doctor.

"Oh! he very ungenerously and artfully endeavored to retain for
himself the honor of writing a clever little essay, really the work
of his brother, and actually obtained a prize from his grandfather
for it."

"How came that about?" asked Dr. Wilkinson.

"Oh! there was some mistake in the first instance, I believe, and the
mean little fellow took advantage of it."

Mr. Percy then gave a detailed account of Louis' birthday at Heronhurst,
and concluded by saying--

"I was not present, but I heard it from a spectator; I should be afraid
that you will not have a little trouble with such a character."

"It is extraordinary," said the doctor; "his brother is the most frank,
candid fellow possible."

"I hear he is a nice boy," said Mr. Percy. "There is frequently great
dissimilarity among members of the same family; but of course, this
goes no further. It is as well you should know it,--but I should not
talk of it to every one."

Dr. Wilkinson bowed slightly, and remained silent, without exhibiting
any peculiar gratification at having been made the depository of the
secret. Mr. Percy presently rose and took his leave; and Dr. Wilkinson
was turning towards the staircase, when a servant informed him that a
young gentleman waited to see him in the dining-room.

"Oh!" said the doctor to himself, "my dilatory pupil, I presume."

He seemed lost in thought for a minute, and then slowly crossing
the hall, entered the dining-room.

Louis had been very anxious for the appearance of his master, yet
almost afraid to see him; and when the door opened, and this gentleman
stood before him, he was seized with such a palpitation as scarcely to
have the power of speech.

Dr. Wilkinson was certainly a person calculated to inspire a school-boy
with awe. He was a tall, dignified man, between fifty and sixty years
of age, with a magnificent forehead and good countenance: the latter
was not, however, generally pleasing, the usual expression being stern
and unyielding. When he smiled, that expression vanished; but to a
new-comer there was something rather terrible in the compressed lips
and overhanging eyebrows, from under which a pair of the keenest black
eyes seemed to look him through.

Louis rose and bowed on his master's entrance.

"How do you do, Mortimer?" said the doctor, shaking hands with him.
"I dare say you are tired of waiting. You have not seen your brother,
I suppose?"

"No, sir," replied Louis, looking in the stern face with something
of his customary simple confidence. Doctor Wilkinson smiled, and
added, "You are very like your father,--exceedingly like what he
was at your age."

"Did you know him then, sir?" asked Louis, timidly.

"Yes, as well as I hope to know you in a short time. What is your name?"

"Louis Francis, sir."

"What! your father's name--that is just what it should be. Well, I hope,
Louis, you will now endeavor to give him the utmost satisfaction. With
such a father, and such a home, you have great privileges to account
for; and it is your place to show to your parents of what use their
care and instruction have been. In a large school you will find many
things so different from home, that, unless you are constantly on your
guard, you will often be likely to do things which may afterwards cause
you hours of pain. Remember that you are a responsible creature sent
into the world to act a part assigned to you by your Maker; and to Him
must the account of every talent be rendered, whether it be used, or
buried in the earth. As a Christian gentleman, see, Louis, that you
strive to do your part with all your might."

Dr. Wilkinson watched the attention and ready sympathy with his
admonition displayed by Louis; and in spite of the warning he had
so lately received, felt very kindly and favorably disposed towards
his new pupil.

"Come with me," he said, "I will introduce you to your school-fellows;
I have no doubt you will find your brother among them somewhere."

Louis followed Dr. Wilkinson through a door at the further end of the
hall, leading into a smaller hall which was tapestried with great-coats,
cloaks, and hats; and here an increasing murmur announced the fact of
his near approach to a party of noisy boys. As the doctor threw open
the folding-doors leading into the noble school-room, Louis felt
almost stupefied by the noise and novelty. A glass door leading into
the play-ground was wide open, and, as school was just over, there
was a great rush into the open air. Some were clambering in great
haste over desks and forms; and the shouting, singing, and whistling,
together with the occasional overthrow of a form, and the almost
incessant banging of desk-lids, from those who were putting away
slates and books, formed a scene perfectly new and bewildering to
our hero.

The entrance of Dr. Wilkinson stilled the tumult in a slight degree,
and in half a minute after, the room was nearly cleared, and a passage
was left for the new-comers towards the upper end. Here was a knot of
great boys (or, rather, craving their pardon, I should say _young men_),
all engaged in eager and merry confabulation. So intent were they that
their master's approach was wholly unnoticed by them. One of these young
gentlemen was sitting tailor fashion on the top of a desk, apparently
holding forth for the edification of his more discreet companions,
to whom he seemed to afford considerable amusement, if the peals of
laughter with which his sallies were received might be considered any
proof. A little aloof from this party, but within hearing, stood a
youth of about seventeen, of whom nothing was remarkable, but that his
countenance wore a very sedate and determined expression. He seemed
struggling with a determination not to indulge a strong propensity
to laugh; but, though pretending to be occupied with a book, his
features at length gave way at some irresistible sally, and throwing
his volume at the orator, he exclaimed--

"How can you be such an ass, Frank!"

"There now," said Frank, perfectly unmoved, "the centre of gravity is
disturbed,--well, as I was saying,--Here's the doctor!" and the young
gentleman, who was no other than Frank Digby, brother of Louis' cousin
Vernon, dismounted from his rostrum in the same instant that his auditors
turned round, thereby acknowledging the presence of their master.

"I have brought you a new school-fellow, gentlemen," said the doctor;
"where is Mortimer?"

"Here, sir," cried Reginald, popping up from behind a desk, where he
had been pinned down by a short thick-set boy, who rose as if by magic
with him.

"Here is your brother."

Louis and Reginald scrambled over all obstacles, and stood before
the doctor, in two or three seconds.

In spite of Louis' valiant protestations the preceding mid-summer
at Heronhurst, he did not dare, in the presence of only a quarter
of the hundred and twenty eyes, to embrace his brother, but contented
himself with a most energetic squeeze, and a look that said volumes;
