The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Houseful of Girls, by Sarah Tytler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Houseful of Girls

Author: Sarah Tytler

Release Date: December 10, 2006 [EBook #20081]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Jacqueline Jeremy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS.
BY
SARAH TYTLER,

AUTHOR OF

"CITOYENNE JACQUELINE," "PAPERS FOR THOUGHTFUL GIRLS,"
ETC., ETC.


LONDON:
WALTER SMITH AND INNES,
31 & 32, BEDFORD STREET, STRAND.
1889.

[_All rights reserved._]


RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
LONDON & BUNGAY.




CONTENTS.

 CHAP.                                                       PAGE

    I. A FLUTTER IN THE DOVE-COT                                1

   II. THE "COUP DE GRACE"                                     20

  III. THE HEADS OF THE HOUSE LOOK GRAVE                       35

   IV. THE CRASH                                               54

    V. PROMOTION                                               72

   VI. THE CLOUD DEEPENS                                       81

  VII. ROSE GOES WEST AND ANNIE GOES EAST                     106

 VIII. STANDING AND WAITING                                   122

   IX. A WILFUL DOG WILL HAVE HIS WAY                         136

    X. LIFE IN AN HOSPITAL WARD                               157

   XI. MRS. JENNINGS AND HER DAUGHTER HESTER                  182

  XII. A YOUNG ARTIST'S EXPERIENCE                            188

 XIII. MR. ST. FOY'S AND THE MISSES STONE'S                   196

  XIV. THE OLD TOWN, WITH ITS AIR STAGNANT YET TROUBLED.
       IS MAY TO BECOME A SCHOLAR OR A SHOP-GIRL?             214

   XV. TOM ROBINSON TAKEN INTO COUNSEL                        234

  XVI. ROSE'S FOLLY AND ANNIE'S WISDOM                        257

 XVII. MAY HAS TO FIGHT HER OWN BATTLE                        288

XVIII. DORA IS THE NEXT MESSENGER WITH BAD TIDINGS            316

  XIX. THE UNEMPLOYED--A FAMILIAR FACE                        322

   XX. REDCROSS AGAIN                                         342

  XXI. MISS FRANKLIN'S MISTAKE                                363

 XXII. A SHRED OF HOPE                                        382

XXIII. SECOND THOUGHTS AND LAST WORDS                         392




A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS

CHAPTER I.

A FLUTTER IN THE DOVE-COT.


Is there any sensation equal to that produced by the first lover and
the first proposal coming to a girl in a large family of girls? It is
delightfully sentimental, comical, complimentary, affronting, rousing,
tiresome--all in one. It is a herald of lovers, proposals, and wonderful
changes all round. It is the first thrill of real life in its strong
passions, grave vicissitudes, and big joys and sorrows as they come
in contact with idle fancies, hearts that have been light, simple
experiences which have hitherto been carefully guarded from rude shocks.

It does not signify much whether the family of girls happen to be rich
or poor, unless indeed that early and sharp poverty causes a precocity
which deepens girls' characters betimes, and by making them sooner
women, robs them of a certain amount of the thoughtlessness,
fearlessness, and impracticability of girlhood. But girlhood, like many
another natural condition, dies hard; and its sweet, bright illusions,
its wisdom and its folly, survive tolerably severe pinches of adversity.

The younger members of such a sisterhood are politely supposed to be
kept in safe ignorance of the great event which is befalling one of the
seniors. It is thought at once a delicate and prudent precaution to
prevent the veil which hides the future, with its casualties, from being
lifted prematurely and abruptly, where juvenile minds are concerned,
lest they become unhinged and unfit for the salutary discipline of
schoolroom lessons, and the mild pleasure of schoolroom treats. The
flower in the bud ought to be kept with its petals folded, in its
innocent absence of self-consciousness, to the last moment.

But there is an electric sympathy in the air which defeats precautions.
There is a freemasonry of dawning womanhood which starts into life
everywhere. How do the young people pick up with such surprising
quickness and acuteness the looks and whispers meant to pass over their
heads, the merry glances, nervous shrugs, quick blushes, and indignant
pouts, which have suddenly grown strangely prevalent in the blooming
circle? The bystanders are understood to be engrossed with their
music-lessons, their drawing-classes, their rudimentary Latin and
Greek--if anybody is going in for the higher education of women--their
pets, their games of lawn-tennis, their girl companions with whom these
other girls are for ever making appointments to walk, to practise
part-singing, to work or read together, to get up drawing-room
_tableaux_ or plays.

The general consciousness is not, in certain lights, favourable to a
lover's pretensions. For human nature is perverse, and there is such a
thing as _esprit-de-corps_ running to excess. There may be a due amount
of girlish pride in knowing that one of the sisters has inspired a
grand passion. There may be a tremulous respect for the fact that she
has passed the Rubicon, that, in place of girlish trifling, she has an
affair which has to do with the happiness or misery of a fellow
creature, not to say with her own happiness or misery, on her burdened
mind. Why, if she does not take care, she may be plunged at once, first
into the whirl of choosing her trousseau and the fascinating trial of
being the principal figure at a wedding, and then involved in the
tremendous responsibilities of housekeeping, butchers' bills, grocers'
bills, cooks' delinquencies, with the heavy obligations--not only of
ordering dinners for two, but of occasionally entertaining a room full
of company, single-handed!

And this is only one side of the shield; there is a reverse side, at
least equally prominent and alarming. The second side upholds maidenly
claims, finds nothing good enough to match with them, and is tempted to
scout and flout, laugh and mock at the rival claims of the lover upon
trial. This is true even in the most innocent of dove-cots, where satire
is still as playful and harmless as summer lightning.

"The idea of Tom Robinson's thinking of one of us!" cried Annie Millar.
"What could possess him to imagine that we should ever get over the
shop--granted that it is a Brobdingnagian shop, an imposing mart of
linen-drapery, haberdashery, silk-mercery enough to serve the whole
county?"

"To be sure it is only Dora, not you, Annie," burst in eighteen years'
old Rose, who had just left school, and was fain to drop the pretence of
being too young to notice the most interesting event in the world to a
family of girls.

"Why do you say that, Rose? Dora may not be so pretty as Annie--I don't
know, and I don't care--it is all a matter of taste; but she is as much
one of us, father's daughter, brought up like the rest of us in the Old
Doctor's House."

The speaker was May, between sixteen and seventeen. She was the tallest
of the four sisters--let them call her "Little May" as long as they
liked. She had so far forgotten herself as to follow Rose's lead.

"Hold your tongues, you two monkeys; what should you know about it?"
Annie, who had a tendency to sit upon her younger sisters, tried to
silence them. She had reached the advanced age of twenty-two, and by
virtue of being the eldest, had been considered grown up for the last
four years, when Rose and May were chits of fourteen and a little over
twelve. Of course this gave Annie a vast advantage in womanly dignity
and knowledge of the world. But at the present moment she was herself so
interested in the discussion that she could not make up her mind to drop
it till Rose and May were out of the way.

"I must say"--Annie started the subject again--"that I think it great
presumption in Tom Robinson, though he is not so ugly as that comes to,
and he's really well enough bred in spite of 'Robinson's.'"

"He is a college-bred man." Dora ventured shyly to put in a word for the
dignity of her suitor, and for her own dignity as so far involved in
his. "And so were his father and grandfather before him, father says."

"But the Robinsons had the silk-mill and the woollen-factory then as
well as the big shop," corrected Annie. "And Tom might have gone into
the Church or into some other profession if he had chosen, when things
might have been a little different. Still, if you are pleased, Dora,"
with a peal of derisive laughter, "if you do not object to the--shop."

"Of course I object," cried Dora, tingling with mortification and shame.
"That is, I should object to his having a shop, if I had ever thought of
him for a single moment in that light. I cannot imagine what put me into
his head--in that sense. Indeed I cannot believe it yet. I am sure it is
just some nonsense on the part of the rest of you to tease me."

"No, no," Annie hastened to contradict her. "It is sober reality. He has
said something to father; you know he has, mother owned it."

"He has been meeting us and throwing himself in our way everywhere,"
broke in the irrepressible Rose and May.

"He has been coming and coming here," resumed Annie, "where, as we
don't happen to have a brother, there is not even another young man to
form an excuse for his coming. We cannot so much as pretend, when
people remark on his visits, that he has come ever since we remember,
and is as familiar with us as we are with ourselves. No doubt, in a
little town like this, everybody who has the least claim to be a
gentleman or a lady, knows every other gentleman or lady--after a
fashion. But naturally father and mother were not intimate with the
late Mr. and Mrs. Robinson; and we--that is, Tom and we girls--are not
so near each other in age as to have been brought together by our
respective nurses. We did not pick daisies in company, or else pull
each other's hair, and slap each other's faces, according to our
varying moods. Tom Robinson is four or five years older than I, not to
speak of Dora."

"He stopped us this very morning," Rose again joined in the chorus,
"when May and I were going with the Hewetts to gather primroses in
Parson's Meadow. He asked if our sisters--that was you, Dora, with Annie
thrown into the bargain--thought of going on the river this afternoon."

"He might be an inch or two taller, I don't suppose he is above five
feet six or seven," suggested Annie, maliciously recalling a detail in
the description of Dora's future husband, that be he who or what he
might, he should certainly not be under six feet in height. Dora, who
was herself considerably below the middle size, would never yield her
freedom to a man who had to admit a lower scale of inches.

"And his hair might be a little less--chestnut, shall we say, Dora?"
put in Rose with exasperating sprightliness, referring to a former
well-known prejudice of Dora's against "_Judas-tinted hair_."

"Would you call his nose Roman or Grecian?" asked May naively, of a
very nondescript feature.

"And he has so little to say for himself," recommenced Annie, "though
when he does speak there is no great fault to be found with what he
says; still it would be dreadfully dull and tiresome to have to do all
the speaking for a silent partner."

"Oh, hold your tongues, you wretched girls," cried Dora, standing at
bay, stamping one small foot in a slipper with a preposterously large
rosette. "What does it signify? The man, like his words, is well
enough--better than any of us, I dare say," speaking indignantly; "but
what does it matter, when I could never look at him, never dream of him,
as anything more than a mere acquaintance? I don't wish for a lover or a
husband--at least not yet," with a gasp; "I don't wish to leave home,
and go away from all of you, though you are so unkind and teasing--not
for a long, long time, till I am quite a middle-aged woman. I don't see
why I should be plagued about it when Annie here, who is two years older
than I am, and ever so much prettier, as everybody knows, has escaped
such persecution."

"My dear," said Annie demurely, "it is because you have the opportunity
of presenting me with a pair of green garters. If it should occur again,
and you choose to avail yourself of it, I mean to accept the garters
with the best grace in the world. Isn't that good of me when you have
been coolly telling me that I have been overlooked as the eldest, and
the belle of the family--flattering my conceit with one breath and
taking it down with another? But it is not a case of Leah and Rachel.
We are not in the East, and in the West the elder sister does not
necessarily take precedence in marriage. You are quite welcome to marry
first, Dora; you are all welcome to marry before me, girls," with a
sweeping curtsey to her audience all round. "I am perfectly resigned to
your leaving your poor worthy elder sister to end her days as a solitary
spinster, a meek and useful maiden-aunt."

The Millars were the daughters of Dr. Millar of Redcross, an
old-fashioned country town in the Midlands. They were happy in having a
good father and mother still spared to them. The girls were what is
called "a fine family," in a stronger sense than that in which Jane
Austen has used the term. Their ages ranged from twenty-two to midway
between sixteen and seventeen. They were all good-looking girls, with a
family likeness. Annie, the eldest, was very pretty, with delicate,
regular features, a soft warm brunette colour, dark eyes, and a small
brown head and graceful throat, like the head and throat of a greyhound.

