The Project Gutenberg EBook of Aesop, in Rhyme, by Marmaduke Park

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Aesop, in Rhyme
       Old Friends in a New Dress

Author: Marmaduke Park

Release Date: April 19, 2007 [EBook #21189]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AESOP, IN RHYME ***




Produced by David Edwards, Jacqueline Jeremy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The University of Florida, The Internet
Archive/Children's Library)









[Illustration]




[Illustration: AEsop in Rhyme]




AESOP,

IN RHYME;

OR,

OLD FRIENDS IN A NEW DRESS.

[Illustration]

BY MARMADUKE PARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHILADELPHIA:
C. G. HENDERSON, & CO.,
N. W. CORNER ARCH AND FIFTH STREETS.
1852.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1852,

BY C. G. HENDERSON & CO.,

in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States,
in and for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

THE DOG AND THE WOLF.


A wolf there was, whose scanty fare
Had made his person lean and spare;
A dog there was, so amply fed,
His sides were plump and sleek; 'tis said
The wolf once met this prosp'rous cur,
And thus began: "Your servant, sir;
I'm pleased to see you look so well,
Though how it is I cannot tell;
I have not broke my fast to-day;
Nor have I, I'm concern'd to say,
One bone in store or expectation,
And that I call a great vexation."

"Indeed it is," the dog replied:
"I know no ill so great beside;
But if you do not like to be
So poorly fed, come live with me."
"Agreed," rejoined the wolf, "I'll go:
But pray, what work am I to do?"
"Oh, guard the house, and do not fail
To bark at thieves, and wag your tail."

So off they jogg'd, and soon arrived
At where the friendly mastiff lived.
"Well," said the wolf, "I can't deny
You have a better house than I."
"Not so," the other then replied,
"If you with me will hence abide."
"Oh," said the wolf, "how kind you are!
But what d'ye call _that_, hanging there?
Is it an iron chain, or what?"
"Friend," said the dog, "I quite forgot
To mention that; sometimes, you see,
They hook that little chain to _me_;
But it is only meant to keep
Us dogs from walking in our sleep,
And should you wear it, you would find,
It's nothing that you need to mind."

"I'll take your word," the wolf replied.
"It's truth by me shall ne'er be tried;
I'll have my liberty again,
And you your collar and your chain."


MORAL.

Our neighbors sometimes seem to be
A vast deal better off than we;
Yet seldom 'tis they really are,
Since _they_ have troubles too to bear,
Which, if the truth were really known,
Are quite as grievous as our own.




[Illustration]

THE HERDSMAN.


A herdsman, who lived at a time and a place
Which, should you not know, is but little disgrace,
Discover'd one morning, on counting his stock,
That a sheep had been stolen that night from the flock.

"Oh, I wish I had caught ye, _whoever ye be_
I'd have soon let you know, I'd have soon let ye see,
What he had to expect," said the herdsman, "I trow;
But I've thought of a scheme that will trouble you now."

So what did he do, sir, but put up a board,
Describing the thief, and proposed a reward
Of a lamb, to the man who would give information
Concerning the thief, and his true designation.

The project succeeded; for soon there applied
A certain near neighbor, with others beside.
"But tell me the thief," said the herdsman, "at least;"
"Come hither," said they, "and we'll show you the beast!"

"The _beast_!" said the rustic, who thought he should die on
The spot, when he found that the thief was a lion!
"Ill luck to my hurry, what now shall I do?
I promised a lamb to detect you 'tis true;
But now I'd consent _all_ my substance to pay,
If I could but with safety get out of your way."


MORAL.

Silly people ask things that would ruin, if sent;
They demand them in haste, and at leisure repent.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE BOYS AND THE FROGS.


Some boys, beside a pond or lake,
Were playing once at _duck and drake?_
When, doubtless to their heart's content,
Volleys of stones were quickly sent.

But there were some (there will be such)
Who did not seem amused so much;
These were the frogs, to whom the game,
In point of sport was not the same.

For scarce a stone arrived, 'tis said,
But gave some frog a broken head;
And scores in less than half an hour,
Perished beneath the dreadful shower.

At last, said one, "You silly folks, I say,
Do fling your stones another way;
Though _sport_ to _you_, to throw them thus,
Remember, pray, 'tis _death_ to us!"


MORAL.

From hence this moral may be learn'd:
Let play _be play_ to _all concern'd_.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE COCK AND THE JEWEL.


A cock there was: a sage was he
  (If Esop we may trust,)
Who wish'd to make a meal, you see,
  As other sages must.

With this intent, as heretofore,
  When on the hunt for grain;
Our hero scratch'd the litter o'er
  With all his might and main.

But scarce a minute had he scratch'd,
  When, to his great surprise,
A gem, with golden chain attach'd,
  He saw with both his eyes.

"Alack!" quoth he, "what have we here?
  A diamond, I protest!
Which lords and ladies buy so dear,
  And hold in such request.

"But one good barley-corn to me
  Has more intrinsic worth
Than all the pearls now in the sea,
  Or gold now in the earth."


MORAL.

The moral here, in Esop's mind,
  Was this, there's not a doubt:
Things have _most_ value, which we find
  We _cannot_ do without.




[Illustration]

THE MAN AND THE LION.


A man and a lion once had a dispute,
Which was reckon'd the greatest, the man or the brute;
The lion discoursed on his side at some length,
And greatly enlarged on his courage and strength.

The man, one would think, had enough to reply
On _his_ side the question, which none could deny;
But like many others who make a pretence,
He talk'd perfect nonsense, and thought it good sense.

"So," says he, "don't be prating,--look yonder, I pray,
At that sculpture of marble, now what will you say?
The lion is vanquished; but as for the man
He is striding upon him; deny it who can."

"But pray," said the lion, "who sculptured that stone?"
"One of _us_," said the man, "I must candidly own."
"But when _we_ are sculptors," the other replied,
"You will then on the man see the _lion_ astride."


MORAL.

The man might have added, if he had been wise,
"But a beast _cannot_ sculpture a stone, _if he tries_."
_That_ sufficiently shows where the difference lies.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE FOX AND THE CRANE.


"I certainly think," said a fox to a crane,
"That face, ma'am of yours is remarkably plain;
That beak that you wear is so frightful a feature,
It makes you appear a most singular creature."
The crane, much offended at what she had heard,
March'd off at full speed, without saying a word:
"Oh dear!" said the fox, "Mrs. Crane, I protest
You misunderstand me, 'twas only a jest."
"Come, don't be affronted--stay with me and dine;
You know very well 'tis this temper of mine
To say such odd things to my intimate friends;
But you know that poor Reynard no mischief intends."
So the crane thought it best not to break with him quite,
But to view his remarks in a good-natured light.
So she put on as pleasant a face as she could
When he ask'd her to dine, and replied that she would.
But alas! she perceived that his jokes were not over,
When Reynard removed from the victuals its cover
'Twas neither game, butcher's meat, chicken, not fish;
But plain gravy-soup, in a broad shallow dish.
Now this the fox lapp'd with his tongue very quick,
While the crane could scarce dip in the point of her beak;
"You make a poor dinner," said he to his guest;
"Oh, dear! by no means," said the bird, "I protest."
But the crane ask'd the fox on a subsequent day,
When nothing, it seems, for their dinner had they
But some minced meat served up in a narrow-neck'd jar;
Too long, and narrow, for Reynard by far.
"You make a poor dinner, I fear," said the bird;
"Why, I think," said the fox, "'twould be very absurd
To deny what you say, yet I cannot complain,
But confess, though a fox, that I'm matched by a crane."


MORAL.

Cunning folks who play tricks which good manners condemn,
Often find their own tricks play'd again upon them.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE TRAVELLER AND THE SATYR.


A luckless wight, in winter slow,
Travelling once a forest through
Cold and hungry, tired and wet,
Began in words like these to fret:
"Oh, what a sharp inclement day!
And what a dismal, dreary way!
No friendly cot, no cheering fields,
No food this howling forest yields;
I've nought in store or expectation!
There's nought before me but starvation."

"Not quite so bad," a voice replied;
Quickly the traveller turned aside,
And saw the satyr of the wood,
Who close beside his dwelling stood.
"Here is my cave hard by," said he,
"Walk in, you're welcome, pray be free."

The traveller did not hesitate,
Hoping for something good to eat,
But follow'd to his heart's content,
Blowing his finger as he went.

"Pray," said the satyr, "may I know
For what you blow your fingers so?"

"What! need you," said the man, "be told?--
To _warm_ my fingers, 'numb'd with cold."

"Indeed!" was all his host replied,
Intent some pottage to provide,
Which heated well, with spice infused,
Was to his shivering guest produced:

So hot it was, as Esop sung,
It made our traveller scald his tongue;
And wishing not again to do it,
Our hero could not wait, but blew it.

"What?" said his host, in accent rough,
"Is not your pottage hot enough?"
"Yes," said the man, "full well I know it,
'Tis far too hot, that's why I blow it."
"You artful villain! do you so?"
His host replied, with angry brow;
"My cave shall not a moment hold
A man that blows both hot and cold!
By none but rogues can that be done,
You double-dealing wretch, begone!"


MORAL.

The traveller scarce deserved such wrath,
For warming fingers--cooling broth.
No statutes old or new forbid it,
Although with the same mouth he did it:
Yet this beware of old and young,
What Esop meant--a _double tongue_;
Which flatters now with civil clack,
And slanders soon behind one's back.




[Illustration]

THE TRAVELLERS AND THE PURSE.


Two friends once were walking in sociable chat,
  When a purse one espied on the ground;
"Oh, see!" said he, (thank my fortune for that,)
  "What a large sum of money I've found!"

"Nay, do not say _I_" said his friend, "for you know
  'Tis but friendship to share it with me;"
"I share it with you," said the other. "How so?
  He who _found_ it the owner should be."

"Be it so," said his friend, "but what sound do I hear?
  'Stop thief!' one is calling to you;
He comes with a constable close in the rear!"
  Said the other, "Oh, what shall we do?"

"Nay, do not say _we_," said his friend, "for you know
  You claimed the sole right to the prize!
And since all the _money_ was taken by you,
  With you the _dishonesty_ lies."


MORAL.

When people are selfish, dishonest, and mean,
Their nature, in dealing, will quickly be seen.




[Illustration]

THE MOUTH AND THE LIMBS.

In days of yore, they say, 'twas then
  When all things spoke their mind;
The arms and legs of certain men,
  To treason felt inclined.

These arms and legs together met,
  As snugly as they could,
With knees and elbows, hands and feet,
  In discontented mood.

Said they, "'Tis neither right nor fair,
  Nor is there any need,
To labor with such toil and care,
  The greedy mouth to feed."

"This we're resolved no more to do,
  Though we so long have done it;"
"Ah!" said the knees and elbows too,
  "And we are bent upon it."

"I," said the tongue, "may surely speak,
  Since I his inmate am;
And for his vices while you seek,
  His virtues I'll proclaim.

"You say the mouth embezzles all,
  The fruit of your exertion;
But I on this assembly call
  To prove the base assertion.

"The food which you with labor gain,
  He too with labor chews;
Nor does he long the food retain,
  But gives it for your use.

"But he his office has resign'd
  To whom you may prefer;
He begs you therefore now to find
  Some other treasurer."

"Well, be it so," they all replied;
  "His wish shall be obeyed;
We think the hands may now be tried
  As treasurers in his stead."

The hands with joy to this agreed,
  And all to them was paid;
But they the treasure kept indeed,
  And no disbursements made.

Once more the clam'rous members met,
  A lean and hungry throng;
When all allowed, from head to feet,
  That what they'd done was wrong.

To take his office once again,
  The mouth they all implored;
Who soon accepted it, and then
  Health was again restored.


MORAL.

This tale for state affairs is meant,
  Which we need not discuss;
At present we will be content,
  To find a moral thus:

The mouth has claims of large amount,
  From arms, legs, feet, and hands;
But let them not, on that account,
 Pay _more_ than it demands.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE.

