The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Goat and Her Kid, by Harriet Myrtle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Goat and Her Kid

Author: Harriet Myrtle

Release Date: May 2, 2007 [EBook #21275]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOAT AND HER KID ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
public domain works in the International Children's Digital
Library.)









                         Transcriber's Note:

 The last story "Winter Pleasures" seems to end abruptly. But this is
 so in the book. There is no missing text.



                        The Rose-Bud Stories,

                         FOR YOUNG CHILDREN.

                             Illustrated.



                        THE GOAT AND HER KID.


                                  BY

                         MRS. HARRIET MYRTLE.




                              New York:

                         SHELDON AND COMPANY.

                                1870.



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866, by SHELDON
AND COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the
Southern District of New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Goat and her Kid.


The grass plot at the back of the cottage was a very bright green, and
sparkled with the morning dews. It was kept smooth, and level, and
short, by the garden-roller going over it once a week, and still more
by the constant nibbling of the goat, who was allowed to be there all
day, because she had a pretty little young kid that ran by her side.

But it is not to be supposed that this kid was contented with always
running close to its mother's side. Kids are very fond of dancing and
frisking about, and this one was more fond of it than any other in the
whole village.

One day a poor Italian boy came down the lane playing upon a pipe, and
beating a little tabor. He used to play these for two dolls that
danced upon a board by means of a string which went through their
bodies, and was fastened to his knee, so that when he moved his knee
quickly the dolls seemed to dance about upon the board.

The boy stopped at the gate, put down his board, placed his dolls upon
it, with the string at his knee, began to play his pipe, and beat upon
