The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lone Ranche, by Captain Mayne Reid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Lone Ranche

Author: Captain Mayne Reid

Release Date: April 27, 2007 [EBook #21240]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONE RANCHE ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





The Lone Ranche
A Tale of the Staked Plain

By Captain Mayne Reid
________________________________________________________________________
This was quite a hard book to transcribe, and I hope there are not now
too many errors remaining.  For one thing several of the people of the
book speak a very rough version of the language, so that there are many
hundreds of "words" appearing in the book, that are not in the
dictionary.  And the "new" words are not always consistently spelt.

There are numerous Spanish or Mexican words used in the book, but I
am no scholar in these tongues.  I just did my best to get them right.

Another problem was that the type used to print the book had been
damaged in many places, which meant that it was sometimes very hard to
decipher.  After much poring there remains only one damaged word in the
book, of which I am not certain.

As if this were not enough I made the mistake of scanning the book too
dark, which meant that in very many cases a full stop following the
letters `t' and sometimes `e' had not come correctly through the OCR
process; and also any stains on the pages obscured the letters under
them.  This greatly increased the amount of work needed to transcribe
the book.

I suppose this is among the very first "cowboy and Indian" books.  If
you are interested in this genre, here is the book for you.  NH
________________________________________________________________________

THE LONE RANCHE
A TALE OF THE STAKED PLAIN

BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID



CHAPTER ONE.

A TALE OF THE STAKED PLAIN.

"HATS OFF!"

Within the city of Chihuahua, metropolis of the northern provinces of
Mexico--for the most part built of mud--standing in the midst of vast
barren plains, o'ertopped by bold porphyritic mountains--plains with a
population sparse as their timber--in the old city of Chihuahua lies the
first scene of our story.

Less than twenty thousand people dwell within the walls of this North
Mexican metropolis, and in the country surrounding it a like limited
number.

Once they were thicker on the soil; but the tomahawk of the Comanche and
the spear of the Apache have thinned off the descendants of the
_Conquistadores_, until country houses stand at wide distances apart,
with more than an equal number of ruins between.

Yet this same city of Chihuahua challenges weird and wonderful memories.
At the mention of its name springs up a host of strange records, the
souvenirs of a frontier life altogether different from that wreathed
round the history of Anglo-American borderland.  It recalls the cowled
monk with his cross, and the soldier close following with his sword; the
old mission-house, with its church and garrison beside it; the fierce
savage lured from a roving life, and changed into a toiling _peon_,
afterwards to revolt against a system of slavery that even religion
failed to make endurable; the neophyte turning his hand against his
priestly instructor, equally his oppressor; revolt followed by a deluge
of blood, with ruinous devastation, until the walls of both _mission_
and military _cuartel_ are left tenantless, and the redskin has returned
to his roving.

Such a history has had the city of Chihuahua and the settlements in its
neighbourhood.  Nor is the latter portion of it all a chronicle of the
olden time.  Much of it belongs to modern days; ay, similar scenes are
transpiring even now.  But a few years ago a stranger entering its gates
would have seen nailed overhead, and whisked to and fro by the wind,
some scores of objects similar to one another, and resembling tufts of
hair, long, trailing, and black, as if taken from the manes or tails of
horses.  But it came not thence; it was human hair; and the patches of
skin that served to keep the bunches together had been stripped from
human skulls!  They were _scalps_--the scalps of Indians, showing that
the Comanche and Apache savages had not had it all their own way.

Beside them could be seen other elevated objects of auricle shape, set
in rows or circles like a festooning of child peppers strung up for
preservation.  No doubt their procurement had drawn tears from the eyes
of those whose heads had furnished them, for they were human ears!

These ghastly souvenirs were the _bounty warrants_ of a band whose deeds
have been already chronicled by this same pen.  They were the trophies
of "Scalp Hunters"--vouchers for the number of Indians they had killed.

They were there less than a quarter of a century ago, waving in the dry
wind that sweeps over the plains of Chihuahua.  For aught the writer
knows, they may be there still; or, if not the same, others of like gory
record replacing or supplementing them.

It is not with the "Scalp Hunters" we have now to do--only with the city
of Chihuahua.  And not much with it either.  A single scene occurring in
its streets is all of Chihuahuaense life to be depicted in this tale.

It was the spectacle of a religious procession--a thing far from
uncommon in Chihuahua or any other Mexican town; on the contrary, so
common that at least weekly the like may be witnessed.  This was one of
the grandest, representing the story of the Crucifixion.  Citizens of
all classes assisted at the ceremony, the soldiery also taking part in
it.  The clergy, of course, both secular and regular, were its chief
supports and propagators.  To them it brought bread, and if not butter--
since there is none in Chihuahua--it added to their incomes and
influence, by the sale of leaden crosses, images of the Virgin Mother,
and the numerous sisterhood of saints.  In the _funcion_ figured the
usual Scripture characters:--The Redeemer conducted to the place of
Passion; the crucifix, borne on the shoulders of a brawny, brown-skinned
Simon; Pilate the oppressor; Judas the betrayer--in short, every
prominent personage spoken of as having been present on that occasion
when the Son of Man suffered for our sins.

There is, or was then, an American hotel in Chihuahua, or at least one
conducted in the American fashion, though only a mere _posada_.  Among
its guests was a gentleman, stranger to the town, as the country.  His
dress and general appearance bespoke him from the States, and by the
same tokens it could be told that he belonged to their southern section.
He was in truth a Kentuckian; but so far from representing the type,
tall, rough, and stalwart, usually ascribed to the people "Kaintuck," he
was a man of medium size, with a build comparable to that of the
Belvidere Apollo.  He had a figure tersely set, with limbs well knitted;
a handsome face and features of amiable cast, at the same time
expressing confidence and courage.  A costly Guayaquil hat upon his
head, and coat to correspond, bespoke him respectable; his _tout
ensemble_ proclaimed him a man of leisure; while his air and bearing
were unmistakably such as could only belong to a born gentleman.

Why he was in Chihuahua, or whence he had come to it, no one seemed to
know or care.  Enough that he was there, and gazing at the spectacular
procession as it filed past the posada.

He was regarding it with no eye of wonderment.  In all likelihood he had
seen such before.  He could not have travelled far through Mexico
without witnessing some ceremony of a similar kind.

Whether interested in this one or no he was soon notified that he was
not regarding it in the manner proper or customary to the country.
Standing half behind one of the pillars of the hotel porch, he had not
thought it necessary to take off his hat.  Perhaps placed in a more
conspicuous position he would have done this.  Frank Hamersley--for such
was his name--was not the sort of man to seek notoriety by an exhibition
of bravado, and, being a Protestant of a most liberal creed, he would
have shrunk from offending the slightest sensibilities of those
belonging to an opposite faith--even the most bigoted Roman Catholic of
that most bigoted land.  That his "Guayaquil" still remained upon his
head was due to simple forgetfulness of its being there; it had not
occurred to him to uncover.

While silently standing with eyes turned towards the procession, he
observed scowling looks, and heard low growlings from the crowd as it
swayed slowly past.  He knew enough to be conscious of what this meant;
but he felt at the same time disinclined to humiliate himself by a too
facile compliance.  A proud American, in the midst of a people he had
learned to despise--their idolatrous observances along with them--no
wonder he should feel a little defiant and a good deal exasperated.
Enough yielding, he thought, to withdraw farther back from behind the
pillar, which he did.

It was too late.  The keen eye of a fanatic had been upon him--one who
appeared to have authority for meting out chastisement.  An officer,
bearded and grandly bedizened, riding at the head of a troop of lancers,
quickly wheeled his horse from out of the line of march, and spurred him
towards the porch of the posada.  In another instant his bared blade was
waving over the hatted head of the Kentuckian.

"_Gringo! alto su sombrero!  Abajo! a sus rodillas_!"  ("Off with your
hat, greenhorn!  Down upon your knees!") were the words that came
hissing from the moustached lips of the lancer.

As they failed to beget compliance, they were instantly followed by a
blow from the blade of his sabre.  It was given sideways, but with
sufficient sleight and force to send the Guayaquil hat whirling over the
pavement, and its wearer reeling against the wall.

It was but the stagger of a sudden and unexpected surprise.  In another
instant the "gringo" had drawn a revolving pistol, and in yet another
its bullet would have been through the brain of the swaggering
aggressor, but for a third personage, who, rushing from behind, laid
hold of the Kentuckian's arm, and restrained the firing.

At first it seemed to Hamersley the act of another enemy; but in a
moment he knew it to be the behaviour of a friend--at least a
pacificator bent upon seeing fair play.

"You are wrong, Captain Uraga," interposed he who had intermeddled,
addressing himself to the officer.  "This gentleman is a stranger in the
country, and not acquainted with our customs."

"Then it is time the heretico should be taught them, and, at the same
time, respect for the Holy Church.  But what right, Colonel Miranda,
have you to interfere?"

"The right, first of humanity, second of hospitality, and third that I
am your superior officer."

"Bah!  You mistake yourself.  Remember, senor coronel, you are not in
your own district.  If it was in Albuquerque, I might take commands from
you.  This is the city of Chihuahua."

"Chihuahua or not, you shall be made answerable for this outrage.  Don't
imagine that your patron, Santa Anna, is now Dictator, with power to
endorse such base conduct as yours.  You seem to forget, Captain Uraga,
that you carry your commission under a new regime--one that holds itself
responsible, not only to fixed laws, but to the code of decency--
responsible also for international courtesy to the great Republic of
which, I believe, this gentleman is a citizen."

"Bah!" once more exclaimed the bedizened bully.  "Preach your _palabras_
to ears that have time to listen to them.  I shan't stop the procession
for either you or your Yankee protege.  So you can both go to the
devil."

With this benevolent permission the captain of lancers struck the spurs
into his horse, and once more placed himself at the head of his troop.
The crowd collected by the exciting episode soon scattered away--the
sooner that the strange gentleman, along with his generous defender, had
disappeared from the portico, having gone inside the inn.

The procession was still passing, and its irresistible attractions swept
the loiterers along in its current--most of them soon forgetting a scene
which, in that land, where "law secures not life," is of too frequent
occurrence to be either much thought of or for long remembered.



CHAPTER TWO.

A FRIEND IN NEED.

The young Kentuckian was half frenzied by the insult he had received.
The proud blood of his republican citizenship was boiling within his
veins.  What was he to do?

In the agony of his dilemma he put the question to the gentleman who,
beyond all doubt, had restrained him from committing manslaughter.

The latter was an entire stranger to him--never seen him before.  He was
a man of less than thirty years of age, wearing a broad-brimmed hat upon
his head, a cloth jacket, slashed _calzoneras_, and a red crape scarf
around his waist--in short, the _ranchero_ costume of the country.
Still, there was a military bearing about him that corresponded to the
title by which the lancer captain had addressed him.

"Caballero," he said in reply, "if your own safety be of any consequence
to you I should advise you to take no further notice of the incident
that has arisen, however much it may have exasperated you, as no doubt
it has done."

"Pardon me, senor; but not for all the world would I follow your
advice--not for my life.  I am an American--a Kentuckian.  We do not
take blows without giving something of the same in return.  I must have
redress."

"If you seek it by the law I may as well warn you, you won't have much
chance of finding it."

"I know that.  The law!  I did not think of such a thing.  I am a
gentleman; I suppose this Captain Uraga supposes himself to be the same,
and will not refuse to give me the usual satisfaction."

"He may refuse, and very likely will, on the plea of your being a
stranger--only a barbarian, a _Tejano_ or _gringo_, as he has put it."

"I am alone here--what am I to do?"

The Kentuckian spoke half in soliloquy, his countenance expressing
extreme chagrin.

"_Fuez, senor_!" responded the Mexican colonel, "if you're determined on
a _desafio_ I think I might arrange it.  I feel that I am myself a
little compromised by my interference; and if you'll accept of me for
your second, I think I can answer for it that Captain Uraga will not
dare to deny us."

"Colonel Miranda--your name, I believe--need I attempt to express my
thanks for so much generosity?  I cannot--I could not.  You have removed
the very difficulty that was in my way; for I am not only a stranger to
you, but to every one around.  I arrived at Chihuahua but yesterday, and
do not know a soul in the place."

"Enough; you shall not be disappointed in your duel for the want of a
second.  As a preliminary, may I ask if you are skilled in the use of
the sword?"

"Sufficiently to stake my life upon it."

"I put the question, because that is the weapon your adversary will be
certain to choose.  You being the challenger, of course he has the
choice; and he will insist upon it, for a reason that may perhaps amuse
you.  It is that we Mexican gentlemen believe you Americans somewhat
_gauche_ in the handling of the rapier, though we know you to be adepts
in the use of the pistol.  I take Captain Gil Uraga to be as thorough a
poltroon as ever wore epaulettes, but he will have to meet you on my
account; and he would perhaps have done so anyhow--trusting to the
probability of your being a bad swordsman."

"In that he may find himself disappointed."

"I am glad to hear it; and now it only needs to receive your
instructions.  I am ready to act."

The instructions were given, and within two hours' time Captain Gil
Uraga, of the Zacatecas Lancers, was in receipt of a challenge from the
Kentuckian--Colonel Miranda being its bearer.

With such a voucher the lancer officer could not do otherwise than
accept, which he did with cooler confidence for the very reason Miranda
had made known.  A _Tejano_, was his reflection--what should he know of
the sword?

And swords were the weapons chosen.

Had the captain of Zacatecas Lancers been told that his intended
adversary had spent a portion of his life among the Creoles of New
Orleans, he would have been less reliant on the chances likely to turn
up in his favour.

We need not describe the duel, which, if different from other encounters
of the kind, was by being on both sides bitter, and of deadly intent.
Suffice it to say, that the young Kentuckian displayed a skill in
swordsmanship sufficient to disarrange several of Gil Uraga's front
teeth, and make an ugly gash in his cheek.  He had barely left to him
sufficient command of his mouth to cry "Basta!" and so the affair ended.

"Senor Hamersley," said the man who had so effectively befriended him,
after they had returned from the encounter, and were drinking a bottle
of Paso wine in the posada, "may I ask where you intend going when you
leave Chihuahua?"

"To Santa Fe, in New Mexico; thence to the United States, along with one
of the return caravans."

"When do you propose starting?"

"As to that, I am not tied to time.  The train with which I am to cross
the plains will not be going for six months to come.  I can get to Santa
Fe by a month's travel, I suppose?"

"Less than that.  It is not a question of how soon you may arrive there,
but when you leave here.  I advise you to start at once.  I admit that
two days is but a short time to see the sights of even so small a place
as Chihuahua.  But you have witnessed one of them--enough, I should say.
If you take my advice you will let it content you, and kick the
Chihuahua-ense dust from your feet before another twenty-four hours have
passed over your head."

"But why, Colonel Miranda?"

"Because so long as you remain here you will be in danger of losing your
life.  You don't know the character of the man with whom you have
crossed swords.  I do.  Although wearing the uniform of an officer in
our army, he is simply a _salteador_.  A coward, as I told you, too.  He
would never have met you if he had thought I would have given him a
chance to get out of it.  Perhaps he might have been tempted by the
hopes of an easy conquest from your supposed want of skill.  It would
have given him something to boast about among the dames of Chihuahua,
for Captain Gil deems himself no little of a lady-killer.  You have
spoilt his physiognomy for life; and, depend upon it, as long as life
lasts, he will neither forget nor forgive that.  I shall also come in
for a share of his spite, and it behoves both of us to beware of him."

"But what can he do to us?"

"Caballero, that question shows you have not been very long in this
country, and are yet ignorant of its customs.  In Mexico we have some
callings not congenial to your people.  Know that stilettoes can here be
purchased cheaply, with the arms of assassins to use them.  Do you
understand me?"

"I do.  But how do you counsel me to act?"

"As I intend acting myself--take departure from Chihuahua this very day.
Our roads are the same as far as Albuquerque, where you will be out of
reach of this little danger.  I am returning thither from the city of
Mexico, where I've had business with the Government.  I have an escort;
and if you choose to avail yourself of it you'll be welcome to its
protection."

"Colonel Miranda, again I know not how to thank you.  I accept your
friendly offer."

"Reserve your thanks till I have done you some service beyond the simple
duty of a gentleman, who sees another gentleman in a dilemma he had no
hand in creating.  But enough, senor; we have no time to spend in
talking.  Even now there may be a couple of poignards preparing for us.
Get your things ready at once, as I start two hours before sunset.  In
this sultry weather we are accustomed to travel in the cool of the
evening."

"I shall be ready."

That same afternoon, two hours before the going down of the sun, a party
of horsemen, wearing the uniform of Mexican dragoons of the line, issued
from the _garita_ of Chihuahua, and took the northern road leading to
Santa Fe, by El Paso del Norte.  Colonel Miranda, his ranchero dress
changed for the fatigue uniform of a cavalry officer, was at its head,
and by his side the stranger, whose cause he had so generously and
gallantly espoused.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE COLONEL COMMANDANT.

Six weeks have elapsed since the day of the duel at Chihuahua.  Two men
are standing on the _azotea_ of a large mansion-like house close to the
town of Albuquerque, whose church spire is just visible through the
foliage of trees that shade and surround the dwelling.  They are Colonel
Miranda and the young Kentuckian, who has been for some time his guest;
for the hospitality of the generous Mexican had not terminated with the
journey from Chihuahua.  After three weeks of toilsome travel, including
the traverse of the famed "Dead Man's Journey," he was continuing to
extend it in his own house and his own district, of which last he was
the military commandant, Albuquerque being at the time occupied by a
body of troops, stationed there for defence against Indian incursions.

The house on whose roof the two men stood was that in which Colonel
Miranda had been born--the patrimonial mansion of a large estate that
extended along the Rio del Norte, and back towards the Sierra Blanca,
into territories almost unknown.

Besides being an officer in the Mexican army, the colonel was one of the
_ricos_ of the country.  The house, as already said, was a large,
massive structure, having, like all Mexican dwellings of its class, a
terraced roof, or _azotea_.  What is also common enough in that country,
it was surmounted by a _mirador_, or "belvedere."  Standing less than
half a mile distant from the soldier's _cuartel_, the commandant found
it convenient to make use of it as his headquarters.  A small guard in
the _saguan_, or covered entrance below, with a sentinel stationed
outside the gate in front, indicated this.

There was no family inside, wife, woman, or child; for the colonel,
still a young man, was a bachelor.  Only _peons_ in the field, grooms
