The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Irrawaddy, by G. A. Henty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Irrawaddy
       A Story of the First Burmese War

Author: G. A. Henty

Illustrator: W. H. Overend

Release Date: April 27, 2007 [EBook #21242]
[Last updated: October 6, 2013]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE IRRAWADDY ***




Produced by Martin Robb




On The Irrawaddy:
A Story of the First Burmese War
By G. A. Henty
Illustrated by W. H. Overend.

Contents

Preface.
Chapter  1: A New Career.
Chapter  2: The Outbreak of War.
Chapter  3: A Prisoner.
Chapter  4: A Ruined Temple.
Chapter  5: With Brigands.
Chapter  6: Among Friends.
Chapter  7: On The Staff.
Chapter  8: The Pagoda.
Chapter  9: Victories.
Chapter 10: The Advance.
Chapter 11: Donabew.
Chapter 12: Harry Carried Off.
Chapter 13: Preparing A Rescue.
Chapter 14: In The Temple.
Chapter 15: The Attack.
Chapter 16: Rejoining.
Chapter 17: The Pride Of Burma Humbled.
Chapter 18: In Business Again.

Illustrations

Stanley is brought before Bandoola, the Burmese general.
Stanley gave a sudden spring, and buried his knife in the leopard.
They forced the canoe behind bushes, so as to be entirely concealed.
The Burmese make a great effort to capture Pagoda Hill.
Stanley cut down the man who was about to fire the hut.
The great snake moved his head higher and higher, hissing angrily.
In vain the Burmese tried to force their way into the chamber.
The old Burmese general was carried from point to point in a litter.



Preface.


With the exception of the terrible retreat from Afghanistan, none
of England's many little wars have been so fatal--in proportion to
the number of those engaged--as our first expedition to Burma. It
was undertaken without any due comprehension of the difficulties to
be encountered, from the effects of climate and the deficiency of
transport; the power, and still more the obstinacy and arrogance of
the court of Ava were altogether underrated; and it was considered
that our possession of her ports would assuredly bring the enemy,
who had wantonly forced the struggle upon us, to submission.
Events, however, proved the completeness of the error. The Burman
policy of carrying off every boat on the river, laying waste the
whole country, and driving away the inhabitants and the herds,
maintained our army as prisoners in Rangoon through the first wet
season; and caused the loss of half the white officers and men
first sent there. The subsequent campaign was no less fatal and,
although large reinforcements had been sent, fifty percent of the
whole died; so that less than two thousand fighting men remained in
the ranks, when the expedition arrived within a short distance of
Ava. Not until the last Burmese army had been scattered did the
court of Ava submit to the by no means onerous terms we imposed.

Great, indeed, was the contrast presented by this first invasion of
the country with the last war in 1885, which brought about the
final annexation of Burma. Then a fleet of steamers conveyed the
troops up the noble river; while in 1824 a solitary steamer was all
that India could furnish, to aid the flotilla of rowboats. No worse
government has ever existed than that of Burma when, with the boast
that she intended to drive the British out of India, she began the
war. No people were ever kept down by a more grinding tyranny, and
the occupation of the country by the British has been an even
greater blessing to the population than has that of India.

Several works, some by eyewitnesses, others compiled from official
documents, appeared after the war. They differ remarkably in the
relation of details, and still more in the spelling of the names
both of persons and places. I have chiefly followed those given in
the narratives of Mr. H. H. Wilson, and of Major Snodgrass, the
military secretary to the commander of the expedition.



Chapter 1: A New Career.


A party was assembled in a room of an hotel in Calcutta, at the end
of the year 1822. It consisted of a gentleman, a lady in deep
mourning, a boy of between fourteen and fifteen, and two girls of
thirteen and twelve.

"I think you had better accept my offer, Nellie," the gentleman was
saying. "You will find it hard work enough to make both ends meet,
with these two girls; and Stanley would be a heavy drain on you.
The girls cost nothing but their clothes; but he must go to a
decent school, and then there would be the trouble of thinking what
to do with him, afterwards. If I could have allowed you a couple of
hundred a year, it would have been altogether different; but you
see I am fighting an uphill fight, myself, and need every penny
that I can scrape together. I am getting on; and I can see well
enough that, unless something occurs to upset the whole thing, I
shall be doing a big trade, one of these days; but every half penny
of profit has to go into the business. So, as you know, I cannot
help you at present though, by the time the girls grow up, I hope I
shall be able to do so, and that to a good extent.

"I feel sure that it would not be a bad thing for Stanley. He will
soon get to be useful to me, and in three or four years will be a
valuable assistant. Speaking Hindustani as well as he does, he
won't be very long in picking up enough of the various dialects in
Kathee and Chittagong for our purpose and, by twenty, he will have
a share of the business, and be on the highway towards making his
fortune. It will be infinitely better than anything he is likely to
find in England, and he will be doing a man's work at the age when
he would still be a schoolboy in England.

"I have spoken to him about it. Of course, he does not like leaving
you, but he says that he should like it a thousand times better
than, perhaps, having to go into some humdrum office in England."

"Thank you, Tom," Mrs. Brooke said with a sigh. "It will be very
hard to part with him--terribly hard--but I see that it is by far
the best thing for him and, as you say, in a monetary way it will
be a relief to me. I think I can manage very comfortably on the
pension, in some quiet place at home, with the two girls; but
Stanley's schooling would be a heavy drain. I might even manage
that, for I might earn a little money by painting; but there would
be the question of what to do with him when he left school and,
without friends or influence, it will be hopeless to get him into
any good situation.

"You see, Herbert's parents have both died since he came out here
and, though he was distantly related to the Earl of Netherly, he
was only a second cousin, or something of that kind, and knew
nothing about the family; and of course I could not apply to them."

"Certainly not, Nellie," her brother agreed. "There is nothing so
hateful as posing as a poor relation--and that is a connection
rather than a relationship. Then you will leave the boy in my
hands?"

"I am sure that it will be best," she said, with a tremor in her
voice, "and at any rate, I shall have the comfort of knowing that
he will be well looked after."

Mrs. Brooke was the widow of a captain in one of the native
regiments of the East India Company. He had, six weeks before this,
been carried off suddenly by an outbreak of cholera; and she had
been waiting at Calcutta, in order to see her brother, before
sailing for England. She was the daughter of an English clergyman,
who had died some seventeen years before. Nellie, who was then
eighteen, being motherless as well as fatherless, had determined to
sail for India. A great friend of hers had married and gone out, a
year before. Nellie's father was at that time in bad health; and
her friend had said to her, at parting:

"Now mind, Nellie, I have your promise that, if you should find
yourself alone here, you will come out to me in India. I shall be
very glad to have you with me, and I don't suppose you will be on
my hands very long; pretty girls don't remain single many months,
in India."

So, seeing nothing better to do, Nellie had, shortly after her
father's death, sailed for Calcutta.

Lieutenant Brooke was also a passenger on board the Ava, and during
the long voyage he and Nellie Pearson became engaged; and were
married, from her friend's house, a fortnight after their arrival.
Nellie was told that she was a foolish girl, for that she ought to
have done better; but she was perfectly happy. The pay and
allowances of her husband were sufficient for them to live upon in
comfort; and though, when the children came, there was little to
spare, the addition of pay when he gained the rank of captain was
ample for their wants. They had been, in fact, a perfectly happy
couple--both had bright and sunny dispositions, and made the best
of everything; and she had never had a serious care, until he was
suddenly taken away from her.

Stanley had inherited his parents' disposition and, as his sisters,
coming so soon after him, occupied the greater portion of his
mother's care, he was left a good deal to his own devices; and
became a general pet in the regiment, and was equally at home in
the men's lines and in the officers' bungalows. The native language
came as readily to him as English and, by the time he was ten, he
could talk in their own tongue with the men from the three or four
different districts from which the regiment had been recruited. His
father devoted a couple of hours a day to his studies. He did not
attempt to teach him Latin--which would, he thought, be altogether
useless to him--but gave him a thorough grounding in English and
Indian history, and arithmetic, and insisted upon his spending a
certain time each day in reading standard English authors.

Tom Pearson, who was five years younger than his sister, had come
out to India four years after her. He was a lad full of life and
energy. As soon as he left school, finding himself the master of a
hundred pounds--the last remains of the small sum that his father
had left behind him--he took a second-class passage to Calcutta. As
soon as he had landed, he went round to the various merchants and
offices and, finding that he could not, owing to a want of
references, obtain a clerkship, he took a place in the store of a
Parsee merchant who dealt in English goods. Here he remained for
five years, by which time he had mastered two or three native
languages, and had obtained a good knowledge of business.

He now determined to start on his own account. He had lived hardly,
saving up every rupee not needed for actual necessaries and, at the
end of the five years he had, in all, a hundred and fifty pounds.
He had, long before this, determined that the best opening for
trade was among the tribes on the eastern borders of the British
territory; and had specially devoted himself to the study of the
languages of Kathee and Chittagong.

Investing the greater portion of his money in goods suitable for the
trade, he embarked at Calcutta in a vessel bound for Chittagong.
There he took passage in a native craft going up the great river to
Sylhet, where he established his headquarters; and thence--leaving
the greater portion of his goods in the care of a native merchant,
with whom his late employer had had dealings--started with a native,
and four donkeys on which his goods were packed, to trade among the
wild tribes.

His success fully equalled his anticipations and, gradually, he
extended his operations; going as far east as Manipur, and south
almost as far as Chittagong. The firm in Calcutta from whom he had,
in the first place, purchased his goods, sent him up fresh stores
as he required them; and soon, seeing the energy with which he was
pushing his business, gave him considerable credit, and he was able
to carry on his operations on an increasingly larger scale. Sylhet
remained his headquarters; but he had a branch at Chittagong,
whither goods could be sent direct from Calcutta, and from this he
drew his supplies for his trade in that province.

Much of his business was carried on by means of the waterways, and
the very numerous streams that covered the whole country, and
enabled him to carry his goods at a far cheaper rate than he could
transport them by land; and for this purpose he had a boat
specially fitted up with a comfortable cabin. He determined, from
the first, to sell none but the best goods in the market; and thus
he speedily gained the confidence of the natives, and the arrival
of his boats was eagerly hailed by the villagers on the banks of
the rivers.

He soon found that money was scarce; and that, to do a good
business, he must take native products in barter for his goods; and
that in this way he not only did a much larger trade, but obtained
a very much better price for his wares than if he had sold only for
money; and he soon consigned considerable quantities to the firm in
Calcutta and, by so doing, obtained a profit both ways. He himself
paid a visit to Calcutta, every six months or so, to choose fresh
fashions of goods; and to visit the firm, with whom his dealings,
every year, became more extensive. But, though laying the
foundations for an extensive business, he was not, as he told his
sister, at present in a position to help her; for his increasing
trade continually demanded more and more capital, and the whole of
his profits were swallowed up by the larger stocks that had to be
held at his depots at Sylhet, Chittagong, and at the mouths of the
larger rivers.

Twice since he had been out he had met his sister at Calcutta, and
when she came down after her husband's death, and heard from Tom's
agents that he would probably arrive there in the course of a
fortnight, she decided to wait there and meet him. He was greatly
grieved at her loss, and especially so as he was unable to offer
her a home; for as his whole time was spent in travelling, it was
impossible for him to do so; nor indeed, would she have accepted
it. Now that her husband was gone, she yearned to be back in
England again. It was, too, far better for the girls that she
should take them home. But when he now offered to take the boy she
felt that, hard as it would be to leave Stanley behind, the offer
was a most advantageous one for him.

The boy's knowledge of Indian languages, which would be of immense
advantage to him in such a life, would be absolutely useless in
England and, from what Tom told her of his business, there could be
little doubt that the prospects were excellent. Stanley himself,
who now saw his uncle for the first time, was attracted to him by
the energy and cheeriness of manner that had rendered him so
successful in business; and he was stirred by the enterprise and
adventure of the life he proposed for him. More than once, in the
little-frequented rivers that stretched into Kathee, his boats had
been attacked by wild tribesmen; and he had to fight hard to keep
them off. Petty chiefs had, at times, endeavoured to obstruct his
trading and, when at Manipur, he had twice been witness of
desperate fights between rival claimants for the throne. All this
was, to a boy brought up among soldiers, irresistibly fascinating;
especially as the alternative seemed to be a seat in a dull
counting house in England.

He was, then, delighted when his mother gave her consent to his
remaining with his uncle; grieved as he was at being parted from
her and his sisters. The thought that he should, in time, be able
to be of assistance to her was a pleasant one; and aided him to
support the pain of parting when, a week later, she sailed with the
girls for England.

"I suppose you have not done any shooting, Stanley?" his uncle
asked.

"Not with a gun, but I have practised sometimes with pistols.
Father thought that it would be useful."

"Very useful; and you must learn to shoot well with them, and with
fowling-piece and rifle. What with river thieves, and dacoits, and
wild tribes--to say nothing of wild beasts--a man who travels
about, as I do, wants to be able to shoot straight. The straighter
you shoot, the less likely you are to have to do so. I have come to
be a good shot myself and, whenever we row up a river, I constantly
practise--either at floating objects in the water, or at birds or
other marks in the trees. I have the best weapons that money can
buy. It is my one extravagance, and the result is that, to my
boatmen and the men about me, my shooting seems to be marvellous;
they tell others of it, and the result is that I am regarded with
great respect. I have no doubt, whatever, that it has saved me from
much trouble; for the natives have almost got to believe that I
only have to point my gun, and the man I wish to kill falls dead,
however far distant."

Two days after the departure of Mrs. Brooke, her brother and
Stanley started down the Hoogly in a native trader.

"She is a curious-looking craft, uncle."

"Yes; she would not be called handsome in home waters, but she is
uncommonly fast; and I find her much more convenient, in many ways,
than a British merchantman."

"Is she yours, uncle?"

"No, she is not mine, and I do not exactly charter her; but she
works principally for me. You see, the wages are so low that they
can work a craft like this for next to nothing. Why, the captain
and his eight men, together, don't get higher pay than the
boatswain of an English trader.

"The captain owns the vessel. He is quite content if he gets a few
rupees a month, in addition to what he considers his own rate of
pay. His wife and his two children live on board. If the craft can
earn twenty rupees a week, he considers that he is doing
splendidly. At the outside, he would not pay his men more than four
rupees a month, each, and I suppose that he would put down his
services at eight; so that would leave him forty rupees a month as
the profit earned by the ship.

"In point of fact, I keep him going pretty steadily. He makes trips
backwards and forwards between the different depots; carries me up
the rivers for a considerable distance; does a little trade on his
own account--not in goods such as I sell, you know, but purely
native stores--takes a little freight when he can get it, and
generally a few native passengers. I pay him fifteen rupees a week,
and I suppose he earns from five to ten in addition; so that the
arrangement suits us both, admirably.

"I keep the stern cabin for myself. As you see, she has four little
brass guns, which I picked up for a song at Calcutta; and there are
twenty-four muskets aft. It is an arrangement that the crew are to
practise shooting once a week, so they have all come to be pretty
fair shots; and the captain, himself, can send a two-pound shot
from those little guns uncommonly straight.

"You will be amused when you see us practising for action. The
captain's wife and the two boys load the guns, and do it very
