The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pioneers, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pioneers

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 6, 2007 [EBook #21691]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIONEERS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE PIONEERS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



PREFACE.

Sir Alexander Mackenzie was one of the most energetic and successful of
the discoverers who have traversed the vast wilderness of British
America.  He did his work single-handed, with slender means, and slight
encouragement, at a time when discovery was rare and the country almost
_terra incognita_.  The long and difficult route, so recently traversed
by the Red River Expedition, was, to Sir Alexander, but the small
beginning of his far-reaching travels.  He traced the great river which
bears his name to its outlet in the Polar Sea, and was the first to
cross the Rocky Mountains in those latitudes and descend to the Pacific
ocean.

Being a man of action, and not particularly enamoured of the pen, his
journal [For a sight of which apply to the British Museum, London, or
the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh]--full though it be of important and
most interesting facts--is a bare and unadorned though valuable record
of progress made, of work done, which is unsuited to juvenile minds,
besides being bulky and scarce.

Having spent some years in Rupert's Land, and seen something of Red
Indian and fur-trading life, I have ventured to weave the incidents of
Sir Alexander's narratives into a story which, it is hoped, may prove
interesting to the young--perchance, also, to the old.

I take this opportunity of acknowledging myself deeply indebted to Sir
Alexander's daughter, Miss Mackenzie, and to his two sons, for kindly
placing at my disposal all the information in their possession.

R.M.B.

EDINBURGH, 1872.



CHAPTER ONE.

SHOWS HOW IT BEGAN.

"The world is round," said somebody in ancient times to somebody else.

"Not at all; it is flat--flat as a pancake," replied somebody else to
somebody; "and if you were to travel far enough you might get to the end
of it and tumble over the edge, if so disposed."

Ever since the commencement of this early geographical controversy, men
have been labouring with more or less energy and success to ascertain
the form and character of the earth; a grand, glorious labour it has
been; resulting in blessings innumerable to mankind--blessings both
spiritual and temporal.

We have heard some people object to geographical discovery, especially
in the inclement parts of the earth, on the ground that it could be of
no use, and involved great risk to life and limb.  "Of no use!"  Who can
tell what discoveries shall be useful and what useless?  "The works of
God are great, sought out of all those that have pleasure therein,"
saith the Scripture.  There is no reference here to usefulness, but the
searching out of God's works, without limitation, is authorised; and
those who "take pleasure therein," will be content to leave the result
of their labours in the hands of Him who sent them forth.  As to
"risk,"--why, a carpenter cannot ascend to the top of a house to put the
rafters thereon without risk; a chemist cannot investigate the
properties of certain fumes without risk; you cannot even eat your
dinner without risk.  Only this are we sure of--that, if man had never
undertaken labour except when such was _obviously_ useful and devoid of
risk, the world would still be in the darkness of the Middle Ages.

Reuben Guff held these sentiments, or something like them; and Reuben
was a man who had seen a great deal of life in his day, although at the
time we introduce him to public notice he had not lived more than
six-and-thirty summers.  He was a bronzed, stalwart Canadian.  His
father had been Scotch, his mother of French extraction; and Reuben
possessed the dogged resolution of the Scot with the vivacity of the
Frenchman.  In regard to his tastes and occupation we shall let him
speak for himself.

Sitting under a pine-tree, in the wild wilderness that lies to the north
of Canada with the drumstick of a goose in one hand and a scalping-knife
in the other; with a log-fire in front of him, and his son, a stripling
of sixteen, by his side, he delivered himself of the following
sentiments:--

"I tell 'ee what it is, Lawrence," (the lad was named after the great
river on the banks of which he had been reared), "I was born to be a
pioneer.  Ever since I was the height of a three-fut rule I've had a
skunner at the settlements and a love for the wilderness that I couldn't
overcome nohow.  Moreover, I wouldn't overcome it if I could, for it's
my opinion that He who made us knows what He wants us to do, an' has
given us sitch feelin's and inclinations as will lead us to do it, if we
don't run mad after _notions_ of our own, as the folk in the settlements
are raither apt to do."

Here some of the "notions" referred to appeared to tickle the fancy of
the backwoodsman, for he paused to indulge in a quiet chuckle which
wrinkled up all the lines of good-humour and fun in his rough
countenance.  After applying himself for a few seconds with much energy
to the drumstick,--he resumed his discourse in a slow, deliberate style
of speech which was peculiar to him:--

"Yes, Lawrence, my lad, I've made it my business ever since I was
fifteen to explore this here wilderness, livin' by my gun and guidin'
the fur-traders on their v'yages, or consorting with the Injins, as you
know very well; and, now that we've come to the big lake it is needful
to tell 'ee that I'm still bent on followin' out my callin'.  I'm goin'
away to the nor'ard to explore, and you'll have to make up your mind
to-night whether _you_ will be my steersman or whether I'm to lay that
dooty on Swiftarrow.  I needn't say which I'd like best."

The hunter finished the drumstick at this point, threw the bone into the
fire, lighted his pipe, and awaited his son's answer in silence.

But the son appeared to be in no hurry to reply; for, after giving his
father a glance and nod, which were meant to say, "I hear and I'll
consider, but I'm too much engaged just now to speak," he continued his
occupation of devouring venison steaks, the sauce to which was evidently
hunger.

Having finished his supper and lighted his pipe he became more
communicative.

"Father," he said, "you have always advised me to think well before
speaking."

"I have, lad; it's the natur' of our forefathers an' a very good natur'
too.  I'd be sorry to see it go out of the family."

"Well, then; I've thought my best about goin' with 'ee on this trip,"
returned the youth, "an' I've resolved to go on one condition--that
Swiftarrow goes with us."

"Why so, my son? we don't need him."

"Perhaps not, but I like him; for he has taught me all that I know of
woodcraft, and I'm certain that if you and I both leave him he'll be
sure to return to the new settlement at the south end of Ontario, and
you know what the end of that would be."

"Death by drinkin'," replied Reuben Guff shaking his head slowly, while
he watched the upward flight of a ring of white smoke that had just
issued from his lips.

"Well, I won't leave him to _that_," continued the youth, with sudden
energy of manner and look, "as long as my name is Lawrence.  You know
that nothin' would please me more than goin' to explore the wilderness
with you, father; but if Swiftarrow is to be left behind, there shall be
no pioneering for me.  Besides, three are better than two on such a
trip, and the Injin will be sure to keep the pot full, no matter what
sort o' country we may have to pass through, for he's a dead shot wi'
the gun as well as wi' the bow."

"I daresay you're right, lad," replied Reuben, in a tone of one who
muses.  "There's room in the canoe for three, and it's not unlikely that
the Injin would go south to the settlement, for he is a lonely man since
his poor mother died.  I do believe that it was nothin' but his
extraor'nar' love for that old 'ooman that kep' him from goin' to the
dogs.  Leastwise it was that kep' him from goin' to the settlement,
which is much the same thing, for Swiftarrow can't resist fire-water.
Yes, lad, you're right--so we'll take him with us.  As you say, three
are better than two on such a v'yage."

Some weeks after the foregoing conversation the pioneers arrived at the
northern end of that great inland sea, Lake Superior, which, being
upwards of four hundred miles long, and one hundred and seventy-five
miles broad, presents many of the features of Ocean itself.  This end of
the lake was, at the time we write of, and still is, an absolute
wilderness, inhabited only by scattered tribes of Indians, and almost
untouched by the hand of the white man, save at one spot, where the
fur-traders had planted an isolated establishment.  At this point in the
wild woods the representatives of the fur-traders of Canada were wont to
congregate for the settlement of their affairs in the spring of every
year, and from this point also trading-parties were despatched in canoes
into the still more remote parts of the great northern wilderness,
whence they returned with rich cargoes of furs received from the "red
men" in exchange for powder and shot, guns, hatchets, knives, cloth,
twine, fish-hooks, and such articles as were suited to the tastes and
wants of a primitive and wandering people.

Here Reuben Guff and his son found Swiftarrow, as they had expected, and
proposed to him that he should accompany them on their voyage north,--a
proposal which he accepted with pleasure,--for the strong-boned Indian
had an adventurous spirit as well as a healthy frame.

Swiftarrow was a brave and powerful Indian, and was esteemed one of the
best hunters of his tribe; but no one seeing him in camp in a quiescent
state would have thought him to be possessed of much energy, for he was
slow and deliberate in his movements, and withal had a lazy look about
his eyes.  But the sight of a bear or moose-deer had the effect of
waking him up in a way that caused his dark eyes to flash and his large
frame to move with cat-like activity.

When Reuben Guff discovered him on the shore of Lake Superior, he was
seated at the door of his skin lodge, anointing his hair, which was long
and black, with bear's grease--the "genuine article," without even the
admixture of a drop of scent!--so pure, in fact, that the Indian basted
his steaks and anointed his hair with grease from the same box.

"Hallo!  Swiftarrow," exclaimed Reuben, as he sauntered up to the
savage, with his gun on his shoulder, "ye seem to be beautifyin' yerself
to-day--not goin' to get married, eh?"

Swiftarrow, whose long hair hung over his face like a glossy curtain,
tossed aside his locks and gazed earnestly at the hunter.  A slight
smile and a pleasant gleam lighted up his dark countenance as he wiped
his greasy right hand on his legging and extended it, exclaiming,
"watchee!" by which he meant, what cheer?

"What cheer? what cheer?" replied Reuben, with a broad but quiet grin,
as he shook his friend's hand heartily.

Each man understood the other's language perfectly; but each appeared to
prefer to talk in his own tongue; for while Reuben addressed the red man
in English, Swiftarrow replied in Indian.  This had been an understood
arrangement between them ever since the time when, as lads, they had
first met and formed a close friendship, on the shores of Lake Huron.

"Is my brother's trail to be through the woods or on the waters?  Does
he go hunting or trading?" inquired the Indian, after the first
salutations were over.

"Well, I may say that I'm neither goin' a-huntin' or tradin'--here, fill
yer pipe wi' baccy from my pouch; it's better than yours, I'll be bound.
In a manner, too, I'm goin' both to hunt an' trade in a small way; but
my main business on this trip is to be diskivery."

The Indian uttered a sound, which meant that he did not understand.

"I'm goin' to sarch out new lands," explained Reuben, "away to the far
north.  I've heard it said by Injins that have wandered to the nor'ard
that they've met in with red-skins, who said that there is a big river
flowin' out o' a great lake in the direction o' the north pole, an' that
it runs into the sea there.  They may be tellin' truth, or they may be
tellin' lies; I dun know; anyhow, I'm koorious to know somethin' about
it, so I'm goin' north to see for myself, and I've comed to ask if
Swiftarrow will go with me."

The hunter paused, but the Indian remained silently smoking his long
stone-headed pipe, or calumet, with a countenance so grave and
expressionless, that no idea of his sentiments could be gathered from
it.  After a brief pause, Reuben continued--

"It won't be altogether a trip of diskivery neither, for I've got some
bales of goods with me, and as we go in a small birch canoe, we'll
travel light; but I hope to come back sunk to the gunwale with furs, for
the red-skins of the far north are like enough to have plenty of pelts,
and they won't ask much for them.  As to grub, you and I could manage to
supply ourselves wi' lots o' that anywheres, and I've got plenty of
powder and lead.  Moreover, my boy Lawrence is goin' with me."

During the foregoing remarks, the Indian's countenance betrayed no sign
of feeling until the name of Lawrence was mentioned, when a gleam of
satisfaction shot from his eyes.  Removing the pipe from his lips, he
puffed a volume of smoke through his nostrils, and said:--

"Swiftarrow will go."

Backwoodsmen seldom take long to mature their plans, and are generally
prompt to carry them into execution.  Two days after the brief
conversation above narrated, the three friends pushed off in their
little birch-bark canoe and paddled up the stream which leads to the
Kakabeka Falls on the Kamenistaquoia River.  Surmounting this obstacle
by the simple process of carrying the canoe and her lading past the
falls by land, and relaunching on the still water above, they continued
their voyage day by day, encamping under the trees by night, until they
had penetrated far and deep into the heart of the northern wilderness,
and had even passed beyond the most distant establishments of the
adventurous fur-traders.

The world of forest, swamp, lake, and river, that still, however, lay
between them and the land which they sought to reach, was very wide.
Weeks, and even months, would certainly elapse before they could hope to
approach it; one day, therefore, they buried their goods and stores in a
convenient place, intending to dig them up on their return, and
meanwhile turned aside into a country which promised to afford them a
good supply of fresh provisions for the voyage north.

Here an adventure befell them which brought their voyage of discovery,
