The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fort Desolation, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fort Desolation
       Red Indians and Fur Traders of Rupert's Land

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21732]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FORT DESOLATION ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




FORT DESOLATION, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

OR, SOLITUDE IN THE WILDERNESS.

THE OUTSKIRTER.

To some minds solitude is depressing, to others it is congenial.  It was
the _former_ to our friend John Robinson; yet he had a large share of it
in his chequered life.  John--more familiarly known as Jack--was as
romantic as his name was the reverse.  To look at him you would have
supposed that he was the most ordinary of common-place men, but if you
had known him, as we did, you would have discovered that there was a
deep, silent, but ever-flowing river of enthusiasm, energy, fervour--in
a word, romance--in his soul, which seldom or never manifested itself in
words, and only now and then, on rare occasions, flashed out in a
lightning glance, or blazed up in a fiery countenance.  For the most
part Jack was calm as a mill-pond, deep as the Atlantic, straightforward
and grave as an undertaker's clerk and good-humoured as an unspoilt and
healthy child.

Jack never made a joke, but, certes, he could enjoy one; and he had a
way of showing his enjoyment by a twinkle in his blue eye and a chuckle
in his throat that was peculiarly impressive.

Jack was a type of a large class.  He was what we may call an
_outskirter_ of the world.  He was one of those who, from the force of
necessity, or of self-will, or of circumstances, are driven to the outer
circle of this world to do as Adam and Eve's family did, battle with
Nature in her wildest scenes and moods; to earn his bread, literally, in
the sweat of his brow.

Jack was a middle-sized man of strong make.  He was not sufficiently
large to overawe men by his size, neither was he so small as to invite
impertinence from "big bullies," of whom there were plenty in his
neighbourhood.  In short, being an unpretending man and a plain man,
with a good nose and large chin and sandy hair, he was not usually taken
much notice of by strangers during his journeyings in the world; but
when vigorous action in cases of emergency was required Jack Robinson
was the man to make himself conspicuous.

It is not our intention to give an account of Jack's adventurous life
from beginning to end, but to detail the incidents of a sojourn of two
months at Fort Desolation, in almost utter solitude, in order to show
one of the many phases of rough life to which outskirters are frequently
subjected.

In regard to his early life it may be sufficient to say that Jack, after
being born, created such perpetual disturbance and storm in the house
that his worthy father came to look upon him as a perfect pest, and as
soon as possible sent him to a public school, where he fought like a
Mameluke Bey, learned his lessons with the zeal of a philosopher, and,
at the end of ten years ran away to sea, where he became as sick as a
dog and as miserable as a convicted felon.

Poor Jack was honest of heart and generous of spirit, but many a long
hard year did he spend in the rugged parts of the earth ere he
recovered, (if he ever did recover), from the evil effects of this first
false step.

In course of time Jack was landed in Canada, with only a few shillings
in his pocket; from that period he became an outskirter.  The romance in
his nature pointed to the backwoods; he went thither at once, and was
not disappointed.  At first the wild life surpassed his expectations,
but as time wore on the tinsel began to wear off the face of things, and
he came to see them as they actually were.  Nevertheless, the romance of
life did not wear out of his constitution.  Enthusiasm, quiet but deep,
stuck to him all through his career, and carried him on and over
difficulties that would have disgusted and turned back many a colder
spirit.

Jack's first success was the obtaining of a situation as clerk in the
store of a general merchant in an outskirt settlement of Canada.  Dire
necessity drove him to this.  He had been three weeks without money and
nearly two days without food before he succumbed.  Having given in,
however, he worked like a Trojan, and would certainly have advanced
himself in life if his employer had not failed and left him, minus a
portion of his salary, to "try again."

Next, he became an engineer on board one of the Missouri steamers, in
which capacity he burst his boiler, and threw himself and the passengers
into the river--the captain having adopted the truly Yankee expedient of
sitting down on the safety-valve while racing with another boat!

Afterwards, Jack Robinson became clerk in one of the Ontario
steam-boats, but, growing tired of this life, he went up the Ottawa, and
became overseer of a sawmill.  Here, being on the frontier of
civilisation, he saw the roughest of Canadian life.  The lumbermen of
that district are a mixed race--French-Canadians, Irishmen, Indians,
half-castes, etcetera,--and whatever good qualities these men might
possess in the way of hewing timber and bush-life, they were sadly
deficient in the matters of morality and temperance.  But Jack was a man
of tact and good temper, and played his cards well.  He jested with the
jocular, sympathised with the homesick, doctored the ailing in a rough
and ready fashion peculiarly his own, and avoided the quarrelsome.  Thus
he became a general favourite.

Of course it was not to be expected that he could escape an occasional
broil, and it was herein that his early education did him good service.
He had been trained in an English school where he became one of the best
boxers.  The lumberers on the Ottawa were not practised in this science;
they indulged in that kicking, tearing, pommelling sort of mode which is
so repugnant to the feelings of an Englishman.  The consequence was that
Jack had few fights, but these were invariably with the largest bullies
of the district; and he, in each case, inflicted such tremendous facial
punishment on his opponent that he became a noted man, against whom few
cared to pit themselves.

There are none so likely to enjoy peace as those who are prepared for
war.  Jack used sometimes to say, with a smile, that his few battles
were the price he had to pay for peace.

Our hero was unlucky.  The saw-mill failed--its master being a drunkard.
When that went down he entered the lumber trade, where he made the
acquaintance of a young Scotchman, of congenial mind and temperament,
who suggested the setting up of a store in a promising locality and
proposed entering into partnership.  "Murray and Robinson" was forthwith
painted by the latter, (who was a bit of an artist), over the door of a
small log-house, and the store soon became well known and much
frequented by the sparse population as well as by those engaged in the
timber trade.

But "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong."  There
must have been a screw loose somewhere, for bad debts accumulated and
losses were incurred which finally brought the firm to the ground, and
left its dissevered partners to begin the world over again!

After this poor Jack Robinson fell into low spirits for a time, but he
soon recovered, and bought a small piece of land at a nominal price in a
region so wild that he had to cut his own road to it, fell the trees
with his own hand, and, in short, reclaim it from the wilderness on the
margin of which it lay.  This was hard work, but Jack liked hard work,
and whatever work he undertook he always did it well.  Strange that such
a man could not get on! yet so it was, that, in a couple of years, he
found himself little better off than he had been when he entered on his
new property.  The region, too, was not a tempting one.  No adventurous
spirits had located themselves beside him, and only a few had come
within several miles of his habitation.

This did not suit our hero's sociable temperament, and he began to
despond very much.  Still his sanguine spirit led him to persevere, and
there is no saying how long he might have continued to spend his days
and his energies in felling trees and sowing among the stumps and hoping
for better days, had not his views been changed and his thoughts turned
into another channel by a letter.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE LETTER, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

One fine spring morning Jack was sitting, smoking his pipe after
breakfast, at the door of his log cabin, looking pensively out upon the
tree-stump-encumbered field which constituted his farm.  He had
facetiously named his residence the Mountain House, in consequence of
there being neither mountain nor hill larger than an inverted wash-hand
basin, within ten miles of him!  He was wont to defend the misnomer on
the ground that it served to keep him in remembrance of the fact that
hills really existed in other parts of the world.

Jack was in a desponding mood.  His pipe would not "draw" that morning;
and his mind had been more active than usual for a few days past,
revolving the past, the present, and the future.  In short, Jack was
cross.  There could be no doubt whatever about it; for he suddenly, and
without warning, dashed his pipe to pieces against a log, went into the
house for another, which he calmly filled, as he resumed his former
seat, lit, and continued to smoke for some time in sulky silence.  We
record this fact because it was quite contrary to Jack's amiable and
patient character, and showed that some deep emotions were stirring
within him.

The second pipe "drew" well.  Probably it was this that induced him to
give utterance to the expression--

"I wonder how long this sort of thing will last?"

"Just as long as you've a mind to let it, and no longer," answered a man
clad in the garb of a trapper, whose mocassin foot had given no
indication of his approach until he was within a couple of paces of the
door.

"Is that you, Joe?" said Jack, looking up, and pointing to a log which
served as a seat on the other side of the doorway.

"It's all that's of me," replied Joe.

"Sit down and fill your pipe out of my pouch, Joe.  It's good 'baccy,
you'll find.  Any news?  I suppose not.  There never is; and if there
was, what would be the odds to me?"

"In the blues?" remarked the hunter, regarding Jack with a peculiar
smile through his first puff of smoke.

"Rather!" said Jack.

"Grog?" inquired Joe.

"Haven't tasted a drop for months," replied Jack.

"All square _here_?" inquired the hunter, tapping his stomach.

"Could digest gun-flints and screw nails!"

The two smoked in silence for some time; then Joe drew forth a soiled
letter, which he handed to his companion, saying--

"It's bin lying at the post-office for some weeks, and as the postmaster
