The Project Gutenberg EBook of Silver Lake, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Silver Lake

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 6, 2007 [EBook #21703]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SILVER LAKE ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




SILVER LAKE, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE HUNTERS.

It was on a cold winter morning long ago, that Robin Gore, a bold hunter
of the backwoods of America, entered his parlour and sat him down to
breakfast.

Robin's parlour was also his dining-room, and his drawing-room, besides
being his bedroom and his kitchen.  In fact, it was the only room in his
wooden hut, except a small apartment, opening off it, which was a
workshop and lumber-room.

Robin's family consisted of himself, and his wife, and his son Roy, who
was twelve years of age--and his daughter Nelly, who was eight, or
thereabout.  In addition to these, his household comprised a nephew,
Walter and an Irishman, Larry O'Dowd.  The former was tall, strong,
fearless, and twenty.  The latter was stout, short, powerful, and forty.

The personal history of Robin Gore, to the point at which we take it up,
runs briefly thus:--

He had been born in a backwood's settlement, had grown up and married in
the little hamlet in which he had been born, and hunted around it
contentedly until he was forty years of age.  But, as population
increased, he became restive.  He disliked restraint; resolved to take
his wife and family into the wilderness and, after getting his nephew
and an Irish adventurer to agree to accompany him, carried his
resolution into effect.

He travelled several hundreds of miles into the woods--beyond the most
remote settlement--built three wooden huts, surrounded them with a tall
stockade, set up a flagstaff in the centre thereof, and styled the whole
affair, "Fort Enterprise."

"I'm sorry to bring you to such a lonesome spot, Molly, my dear," said
Robin, as he sat on the trunk of a fallen tree, on the afternoon of the
day on which he arrived at the scene of his future home; "it'll be
rayther tryin' at first, but you'll soon get used to it, and we won't be
bothered hereaway wi' all the new-fangled notions o' settlement folk.
We'll dwell in the free wilderness, where there are no tyrannical laws
to hamper a man, an' no nonsensical customs to fix the fashion of his
coat an' leggins.  Besides, you'll have Roy an' Nelly an' Walter an'
Larry to keep you company, lass, not to mention our neighbours to look
in upon now and again."

"Very true, Robin," replied the wife, "I have no doubt it will be quite
cheery and homelike in course of time."

She looked out upon the broad bosom of the lake which lay before the
site of their forest home, and sighed.  It was evident that Mrs Gore
had a strong partiality for the laws and customs which her husband
abhorred.

The "neighbours" to whom Robin referred lived in a leather tent twenty
miles distant from the Fort.  They were an Indian, named "The Black
Swan," his wife, named "The White Swan," and a half-caste trapper, whose
proper name was unknown to all save himself.  His cognomen in the
wilderness was "Slugs," a name which originated in his frequent use of
clipped pieces of lead instead of shot in the loading of his gun.

But to return to the point from which we started:--

It was on a cold winter morning that Robin Gore entered his parlour and
sat him down to breakfast.

It was not only cold--very cold; colder than ever was experienced in our
favoured British isles--but it was also very dark.  Robin had risen
before daybreak in order to visit his traps, and shoot some game as
early in the day as possible.  The larder chanced to be nearly empty
that day, a fact which was all the more to be regretted that it was New
Year's day, and, as Robin remarked, "that day didn't occur more than
once in the year."  This statement Larry O'Dowd disputed, affirming that
it occurred "at laste twice ivery year--wance at the beginnin' an' wance
at the end of it!"

"Come along, lad," said Robin, trimming the candle as his nephew Walter
entered, "we'll ha' to make the most of our time to-day, for we dine at
sharp five p.m., an' our dinner--leastwise the most of it--is at this
moment alive an' kickin', if it's not sleepin', in the forest, and has
got to be found and shot yet.  Hallo! boy, where are _you_ bound for?"

"For the woods, father, with you and Walter," replied his son Roy,
sitting down and coolly helping himself to a portion of bear's meat,
with which the hunter was regaling himself.

"Nonsense, boy," said Robin, somewhat gruffly.

"You'll not be able to keep up with us," added Walter, "for we've little
time before us, an' a long way to go."

"If I break down I can turn back," retorted Roy.

"Very good; please yourself;" said Robin in a tone of indifference,
although his glance seemed to indicate that he was not sorry to see his
boy determined to attempt an expedition which he knew from experience
would be very trying to a lad of his years.

Breakfast over, the three hunters clothed themselves in habiliments
suitable to the climate--leathern coats and trousers which were
impervious to the wind; cloth leggings to keep the snow from the
trousers; leather mocassins, or shoes with three pairs of blanket socks
inside of them; fur-caps with ear-pieces; leather mittens with an
apartment for the fingers and a separate chamber for the thumb,
powder-horns, shot-pouches, guns, and snow-shoes.  These latter were
light wooden frames, netted across with deerskin threads, about five
feet long and upwards of a foot wide.  The shoes were of this enormous
size, in order that they might support the wearers on the surface of the
snow, which was, on an average, four feet deep in the woods.  They were
clumsy to look at, but not so difficult to walk in as one might suppose.

In silence the three hunters entered the dark woods in front of Fort
Enterprise.  Robin went first and beat the track, Walter followed in his
footsteps, Roy brought up the rear.  The father sank about six inches at
every step, but the snow which fell upon his snow-shoes was so fine and
dry, owing to the intense frost, that it fell through the net-work of
the shoes like dust.  Walter and Roy, treading in the footsteps, had
less labour in walking, but Walter, being almost as strong as his uncle,
took his turn at beating the track every two hours.

Through the woods they went, over mound and hollow, across frozen swamp
and plain, through brush and break, until near noon, when they halted
for rest and refreshment.  While Walter cut firewood, Robin and Roy
cleared away the snow, using their snow-shoes as shovels, and prepared
their meal.  It was simple; a few mouthfuls of dried meat and a tin can
of hot tea--the backwoodsman's greatest luxury, next to his pipe.  It
was short, too.  Half an hour sufficed to prepare and consume it.

"Let's see, now, what we have got," said Robin, counting the game before
resuming the march.

"More than enough," said Walter, lighting his pipe for a hurried whiff,
"ten brace of white grouse, four rabbits, six red foxes and a black one,
and two wolves.  We can't eat all that."

"Surely we won't eat the foxes and wolves!" cried Roy, laughing.

"Not till we're starvin'," replied his father.  "Come, let's go on--are
ye tired, lad?"

"Fresh as Walter," said the boy, proudly.

"Well, we won't try you too much.  We'll just take a sweep round by the
Wolf's Glen, an' look at the traps there--after which make for home and
have our New Year's dinner.  Go ahead, Walter, and beat the track; it is
your turn this time."

Without speaking, Walter slipped his feet into the lines of his
snow-shoes, extinguished his pipe, and led the way once more through the
pathless forest.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE STARVED INDIAN.

In the depths of the same forest, and not far from the locality to which
we have introduced our reader, a Red Indian was dragging his limbs
wearily along over the untrodden snow.

The attenuated frame of this son of the soil, his hollow cheeks and
glaring eye-balls, his belt drawn with extreme tightness round his
waist, to repress the gnawings of hunger, as well as his enfeebled gait,
proved that he was approaching the last stage of starvation.

For many weeks Wapaw had been travelling in the woods, guided on his way
by the stars, and by those slight and delicate signs of the wilderness--
such as the difference of thickness in the bark on the north, from that
on the south side of a tree--which are perceptible only to the keen eye
of an Indian, or a white man whose life has been spent in the
wilderness.

But Wapaw was a very different man, when he quitted his tribe, from what
he was at the time we introduce him to our reader.  Strong, wiry,
upright, and lithe as a panther, he left his wigwam and his wife, and
turned his face towards the rising sun; but the season was a severe one,
and game was scarce; from the very beginning of his journey he had found
it difficult to supply himself with a sufficiency of food.  Towards the
middle of it he was on short allowance, and much reduced in strength;
and now near its termination, he was, as we have said, almost in the
last stage of starvation.

Fort Enterprise was Wapaw's goal.  He had never been there before, but
from the description of the place and its locality, given by those of
his kindred who had visited Robin Gore, he was able to direct his march
with unerring certainty towards it.  Of course, as he drew near to it he
could not ascertain his exact distance--whether he was a day or several
days' journey off--but from the tracks of Robin's snow-shoes, which he
crossed more than once, he guessed that he was nearing the Fort, and
pushed on with renewed hope and energy.

Robin, however, was an active hunter.  He often made long and rapid
marches from his lonely dwelling--sometimes staying away a week or two
at a time even in winter; so that Wapaw thought himself nearer Fort
Enterprise than he really was, when he first discovered the bold
hunter's tracks.  When, at length, he did arrive at less than a day's
journey from the Fort, he was not aware of its close proximity, and,
having tasted nothing whatever for two days, he felt the approach of
that terrible state of exhaustion which precedes death.

It was a somewhat stormy day when the poor Indian's strength finally
broke down.  Hitherto he had pushed forward with some degree of hope,
but on the morning of this day a broken branch caught his snow-shoe and
tripped him.  At any other time the fall would have been a trifle, but
in his weak condition it acted like the last straw which breaks the
camel's back.  Wapaw rose with difficulty, and brushing the snow from
his eyes, looked earnestly at his snow-shoes, well knowing that if they
had been broken in the fall his power of advancing would have been taken
away and his fate sealed, for he had neither strength nor energy left to
repair them.  They were uninjured, however; so he once more attempted to
stagger on.

A slight rising ground lay before him.  To ascend this was a labour so
great that he almost sank in the midst of it.  He reached the top,
however, and gazed eagerly before him.  He had gazed thus at the top of
every rising ground that he had reached during the last two days, in the
hope of seeing some sign of the Fort.

A deep sigh escaped him as he rested his hands on the muzzle of his gun,
and his grave countenance was overspread with a look of profound
melancholy.  For the first time in his life, the once stout and active
Wapaw had reached the point of giving way to despair.  A wide open plain
stretched out before him.  The cold wind was howling wildly across it,
driving the keen snow-drift before it in whirling clouds.  Even a strong
man might have shrunk from exposing himself on such a plain and to such
a blast on that bitter arctic day.  Wapaw felt that, in his case, to
cross it would be certain death; so, with the calm philosophy of a Red
Indian, he made up his mind to lay him down and die!

His manner of preparing for his end was somewhat singular.  Turning
aside into the woods, he set about making an encampment with as much
vigour as he could summon up.  Clearing away the snow from the roots of
a large spreading pine-tree, he strewed branches on the ground, and thus
made a rude couch.  On this he spread his blanket.  Then he cut some
firewood with the axe that hung at his side, and soon kindled, by means
of flint, steel, and tinder, a good fire.  Seating himself before the
warm blaze, the exhausted man rested awhile, with his legs drawn
together and his head resting on his knees.

He sat so long thus that he nearly fell asleep.  Presently he roused
himself, and proceeded to make a close examination of his wallet and
firebag--the latter being a beautifully ornamented pouch, which Indians
and fur-traders wear at their belts, for the purpose of containing the
materials for producing fire, besides pipes and tobacco.

Poor Wapaw had already searched his wallet and firebag twice, without
finding a crumb of food or a morsel of tobacco.  He knew well that they
were empty, yet he turned them inside out, and examined the seams and
corners with as much earnestness as if he really expected to find relief
from his sufferings there.

There was no expression of pain on the red man's face--only a look of
profound melancholy.

He laid aside the firebag after a little while, and then quietly drew
his knife, and cut a piece of leather from the skirt of his hunting
coat.

The leather had been dried and smoked, and contained no substance
whatever that could sustain life.  Wapaw was aware of this--nevertheless
he singed a portion of it until it was reduced almost to ashes, and
mingling a little snow with this, ate it greedily.

Then, raising his eyes to the sky with a long earnest gaze, he sat
immovable, until the sinking fire and the increasing cold recalled his
wandering faculties.

There was a wild, glassy look about the Indian's eyes now, which
probably resulted from exhaustion.  He seemed to struggle several times
to rouse himself before he succeeded; shuddering with intense cold, he
crept to the little pile of firewood, and placed several billets on the
fire, which speedily blazed up again, and the dying man cowered over it,
regardless of the smoke which ever and anon wreathed round his drooping
head.

In a few minutes Wapaw started up as if new energy had been infused into
him.  He placed his gun, axe, firebag, and powder-horn by themselves on
the ground; then he wrapped himself in his blanket and lay slowly down
beside them with his feet towards the fire.  For a few minutes he lay on
his back, gazing earnestly upwards, while his lips moved slowly, but no
sound issued from them.  Then he turned wearily on his side, and,
covering his head with the blanket and turning his face towards the
ground, he resigned himself to death.

But God had ordained that, at that time, the red man should not die.

About the time when he lay down, our hunters emerged upon the plain
which had caused the Indian to despair.

"It's of no use goin' farther," observed Robin, as he and his companions
stood at the edge of the forest and looked across the plain; "the wind
blows too hard, and the drift is keen; besides there ain't much to be
got hereaway, even in seasons of plenty."

"Father! is that smoke risin' over the bluff yonder?" asked Roy,
pointing with his finger as he spoke.

"No doubt of it, lad."

"Indians, may be," said Walter.

Robin shook his head.  "Don't think so," said he, "for the redskins
don't often come to see me at this time o' the year.  But we'll go see;
an' look to your primin', lads--if it's a war-party we'll ha' to fight,
mayhap, if we don't run."

The three hunters crossed the plain in the teeth of the howling drift,
and cautiously approached the bluff referred to by Roy, and from behind
which the smoke ascended.

"It's a camp fire," whispered Robin, as he glanced back at his
companions, "but I see no one there.  They must have just left the
place."

There was a shade of anxiety in the hunter's voice as he spoke, for he
thought of Fort Enterprise, its defenceless condition, and the
possibility of the Indians having gone thither.

"They can't have gone to the Fort," said Walter, "else we should have
seen their tracks on the way hither."

"Come," said Robin, stepping forward quickly, "we can see their tracks
now, anyhow, and follow them up, and if they lead to the Fort."

The hunter did not finish his sentence, for at that moment he caught
sight of the recumbent form of Wapaw in the camp.

"Hist!  A redskin alone, and asleep!  Well, I never did 'xpect to see
that."

"Mayhap, he's a decoy-duck," suggested Walter.  "Better look sharp out."

Robin and Roy heeded not the caution.  They at once went forward, and
the father lifted the blanket from the Indian's head.

"Dead!" exclaimed Roy, in a solemn tone.

"Not yet, lad! but I do b'lieve the poor critter's a'most gone wi'
starvation.  Come, bestir you, boys--rouse up the fire, and boil the
kettle."

Walter and Roy did not require a second bidding.  The kettle was ere
long singing on a blazing fire.  The Indian's limbs were chafed and
warmed; a can of hot tea was administered, and Wapaw soon revived
sufficiently to look up and thank his deliverers.

"Now, as good luck has it, I chanced to leave my hand-sled at the Wolf's
Glen.  Go, fetch it, Roy," said Robin.

The lad set off at once, and, as the glen was not far distant, soon
returned with a flat wooden sledge, six feet long by eighteen inches
broad, on which trappers are wont to pack their game in winter.  On this
sledge Wapaw was firmly tied, and dragged by the hunters to Fort
Enterprise.

"Hast got a deer, father?" cried little Nelly, as she bounded in advance
of her mother to meet the returning party.

"No, Nelly--'tis dearer game than that."

"What? a redskin!" exclaimed Dame Gore in surprise; "is he dead?"

"No, nor likely to die," said Robin, "he's in a starvin' state though,
an'll be none the worse of a bit of our New Year's dinner.  Here is game
enough for one meal an' more; come, lass, get it ready as fast as may
be."

So saying the bold hunter passed through the Fort gate, dragging the red
man behind him.



CHAPTER THREE.

PREPARATIONS FOR A FEAST.

"Why so grave, Robin?" inquired Mrs Gore, when her husband returned to
the parlour after seeing Wapaw laid in a warm corner of the kitchen, and
committed to the care of Larry O'Dowd.

"Molly, my dear, it's of no use concealin' things from you, 'cause when
bad luck falls we must just face it.  This Injun--Wapaw, he calls
himself--tells me he has com'd here a-purpose, as fast as he could, to
say that his tribe have resolved to attack me, burn the Fort, kill all
the men, and carry you off into slavery."

"God help me! can this be true?"

"True enough, I don't doubt, 'cause Wapaw has the face of an honest man,
and I believe in faces.  He says some of the worst men of his tribe are
in power just now; that they want the contents of my store without
paying for them; that he tried to get them to give up the notion, but
failed.  On seeing that they were bent on it, he said he was going off
to hunt, and came straight here to warn me.  He says they talked of
starting for the Fort two days after he did, and that he pushed on as
fast as he could travel, so it's not likely they'll be here for two or
three days yet.  I'll get ready for them, hows'ever, and when the
reptiles do come they'll meet with a warm reception, I warrant them;
meanwhile, do you go and get dinner ready.  We won't let such varmints
interfere with our New Year's feast."

While Robin's wife went to her larder, his children were in the kitchen
tending the Indian with earnest solicitude, and Larry was preparing a
little soup for him.

"Do you like rabbit soup?" asked Nelly, kneeling beside the pallet of
pine branches on which Wapaw lay.

The Indian smiled, and said something in his native tongue.

"Sure he don't onderstan' ye," exclaimed Larry, as he bustled in an
energetic way amongst his pots and pans.

"Let me try him with Cree," said Roy, kneeling beside his sister, "I
know a little--a _very_ little Cree."

Roy tried his "very little Cree," but without success.

"It's o' no use," he said, "father must talk to him, for _he_ knows
every language on earth, I believe."

Roy's idea of the number of languages "on earth" was very limited.

"Och! don't bother him, see, here is a lingo that every wan
