The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Coral Island, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Coral Island

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21721]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CORAL ISLAND ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE CORAL ISLAND, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

BEGINNING--MY EARLY LIFE AND CHARACTER--I THIRST FOR ADVENTURE IN
FOREIGN LANDS, AND GO TO SEA.

Roving has always been, and still is, my ruling passion, the joy of my
heart, the very sunshine of my existence.  In childhood, in boyhood, and
in man's estate I have been a rover; not a mere rambler among the woody
glens and upon the hill-tops of my own native land, but an enthusiastic
rover throughout the length and breadth of the wide, wide world.

It was a wild, black night of howling storm, the night on which I was
born on the foaming bosom of the broad Atlantic Ocean.  My father was a
sea-captain; my grandfather was a sea-captain; my great-grandfather had
been a marine.  Nobody could tell positively what occupation _his_
father had followed; but my dear mother used to assert that he had been
a midshipman, whose grandfather, on the mother's side, had been an
admiral in the Royal Navy.  At any rate, we knew that as far back as our
family could be traced, it had been intimately connected with the great
watery waste.  Indeed, this was the case on both sides of the house; for
my mother always went to sea with my father on his long voyages, and so
spent the greater part of her life upon the water.

Thus it was, I suppose, that I came to inherit a roving disposition.
Soon after I was born, my father, being old, retired from a seafaring
life, purchased a small cottage in a fishing village on the west coast
of England, and settled down to spend the evening of his life on the
shores of that sea which had for so many years been his home.  It was
not long after this that I began to show the roving spirit that dwelt
within me.  For some time past my infant legs had been gaining strength,
so that I came to be dissatisfied with rubbing the skin off my chubby
knees by walking on them, and made many attempts to stand up and walk
like a man--all of which attempts, however, resulted in my sitting down
violently and in sudden surprise.  One day I took advantage of my dear
mother's absence to make another effort; and, to my joy, I actually
succeeded in reaching the doorstep, over which I tumbled into a pool of
muddy water that lay before my father's cottage door.  Ah, how vividly I
remember the horror of my poor mother when she found me sweltering in
the mud amongst a group of cackling ducks, and the tenderness with which
she stripped off my dripping clothes and washed my dirty little body!
From this time forth my rambles became more frequent and, as I grew
older, more distant, until at last I had wandered far and near on the
shore and in the woods around our humble dwelling, and did not rest
content until my father bound me apprentice to a coasting-vessel and let
me go to sea.

For some years I was happy in visiting the seaports, and in coasting
along the shores, of my native land.  My Christian name was Ralph; and
my comrades added to this the name of Rover, in consequence of the
passion which I always evinced for travelling.  Rover was not my real
name; but as I never received any other, I came at last to answer to it
as naturally as to my proper name.  And as it is not a bad one, I see no
good reason why I should not introduce myself to the reader as Ralph
Rover.  My shipmates were kind, good-natured fellows, and they and I got
on very well together.  They did, indeed, very frequently make game of
and banter me, but not unkindly; and I overheard them sometimes saying
that Ralph Rover was a "queer, old-fashioned fellow."  This, I must
confess, surprised me much; and I pondered the saying long, but could
come at no satisfactory conclusion as to that wherein my
old-fashionedness lay.  It is true I was a quiet lad, and seldom spoke
except when spoken to.  Moreover, I never could understand the jokes of
my companions even when they were explained to me, which dulness in
apprehension occasioned me much grief.  However, I tried to make up for
it by smiling and looking pleased when I observed that they were
laughing at some witticism which I had failed to detect.  I was also
very fond of inquiring into the nature of things and their causes, and
often fell into fits of abstraction while thus engaged in my mind.  But
in all this I saw nothing that did not seem to be exceedingly natural,
and could by no means understand why my comrades should call me "an
old-fashioned fellow."

Now, while engaged in the coasting trade I fell in with many seamen who
had travelled to almost every quarter of the globe; and I freely confess
that my heart glowed ardently within me as they recounted their wild
adventures in foreign lands--the dreadful storms they had weathered, the
appalling dangers they had escaped, the wonderful creatures they had
seen both on the land and in the sea, and the interesting lands and
strange people they had visited.  But of all the places of which they
told me, none captivated and charmed my imagination so much as the Coral
Islands of the Southern Seas.  They told me of thousands of beautiful,
fertile islands that had been formed by a small creature called the
coral insect, where summer reigned nearly all the year round, where the
trees were laden with a constant harvest of luxuriant fruit, where the
climate was almost perpetually delightful; yet where, strange to say,
men were wild, bloodthirsty savages, excepting in those favoured isles
to which the Gospel of our Saviour had been conveyed.  These exciting
accounts had so great an effect upon my mind that, when I reached the
age of fifteen, I resolved to make a voyage to the South Seas.

I had no little difficulty, at first, in prevailing on my dear parents
to let me go; but when I urged on my father that he would never have
become a great captain had he remained in the coasting trade, he saw the
truth of what I said and gave his consent.  My dear mother, seeing that
my father had made up his mind, no longer offered opposition to my
wishes.  "But, oh Ralph!" she said on the day I bade her adieu, "come
back soon to us, my dear boy; for we are getting old now, Ralph, and may
not have many years to live."

I will not take up my readers' time with a minute account of all that
occurred before I took my final leave of my dear parents.  Suffice it to
say that my father placed me under the charge of an old messmate of his
own, a merchant captain, who was on the point of sailing to the South
Seas in his own ship, the _Arrow_.  My mother gave me her blessing and a
small Bible; and her last request was that I would never forget to read
a chapter every day and say my prayers, which I promised, with tears in
my eyes, that I would certainly do.

Soon afterwards I went on board the _Arrow_, which was a fine, large
ship, and set sail for the islands of the Pacific Ocean.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE DEPARTURE--THE SEA--MY COMPANIONS--SOME ACCOUNT OF THE WONDERFUL
SIGHTS WE SAW ON THE GREAT DEEP--A DREADFUL STORM AND A FRIGHTFUL WRECK.

It was a bright, beautiful, warm day when our ship spread her canvas to
the breeze and sailed for the regions of the south.  Oh, how my heart
bounded with delight as I listened to the merry chorus of the sailors
while they hauled at the ropes and got in the anchor!  The captain
shouted; the men ran to obey; the noble ship bent over to the breeze,
and the shore gradually faded from my view; while I stood looking on,
with a kind of feeling that the whole was a delightful dream.

The first thing that struck me as being different from anything I had
yet seen during my short career on the sea, was the hoisting of the
anchor on deck and lashing it firmly down with ropes, as if we had now
bid adieu to the land for ever and would require its services no more.

"There, lass!" cried a broad-shouldered jack-tar, giving the fluke of
the anchor a hearty slap with his hand after the housing was
completed--"there, lass, take a good nap now, for we sha'n't ask you to
kiss the mud again for many a long day to come!"

And so it was.  That anchor did not "kiss the mud" for many long days
afterwards; and when at last it did, it was for the last time!

There were a number of boys in the ship, but two of them were my special
favourites.  Jack Martin was a tall, strapping, broad-shouldered youth
of eighteen, with a handsome, good-humoured, firm face.  He had had a
good education, was clever and hearty and lion-like in his actions, but
mild and quiet in disposition.  Jack was a general favourite, and had a
peculiar fondness for me.  My other companion was Peterkin Gay.  He was
little, quick, funny, decidedly mischievous, and about fourteen years
old.  But Peterkin's mischief was almost always harmless, else he could
not have been so much beloved as he was.

"Hallo, youngster!" cried Jack Martin, giving me a slap on the shoulder
the day I joined the ship, "come below and I'll show you your berth.
You and I are to be messmates; and I think we shall be good friends, for
I like the look o' you."

Jack was right.  He and I, and Peterkin afterwards, became the best and
staunchest friends that ever tossed together on the stormy waves.

I shall say little about the first part of our voyage.  We had the usual
amount of rough weather and calm; also we saw many strange fish rolling
in the sea, and I was greatly delighted one day by seeing a shoal of
flying-fish dart out of the water and skim through the air about a foot
above the surface.  They were pursued by dolphins, which feed on them;
and one flying-fish, in its terror, flew over the ship, struck on the
rigging, and fell upon the deck.  Its wings were just fins elongated;
and we found that they could never fly far at a time, and never mounted
into the air like birds, but skimmed along the surface of the sea.  Jack
and I had it for dinner, and found it remarkably good.

When we approached Cape Horn, at the southern extremity of America, the
weather became very cold and stormy, and the sailors began to tell
stories about the furious gales and the dangers of that terrible cape.

"Cape Horn," said one, "is the most horrible headland I ever doubled.
I've sailed round it twice already, and both times the ship was a'most
blow'd out o' the water."

"I've been round it once," said another; "an' that time the sails were
split, and the ropes frozen in the blocks so that they wouldn't work,
and we wos all but lost."

"An' I've been round it five times," cried a third; "an' every time wos
wuss than another, the gales wos so tree-mendous!"

"And I've been round it, no times at all," cried Peterkin with an
impudent wink in his eye, "an' that time I wos blow'd inside out!"

Nevertheless we passed the dreaded cape without much rough weather, and
in the course of a few weeks afterwards were sailing gently, before a
warm tropical breeze, over the Pacific Ocean.  Thus we proceeded on our
voyage--sometimes bounding merrily before a fair breeze; at other times
floating calmly on the glassy wave and fishing for the curious
inhabitants of the deep, all of which, although the sailors thought
little of them, were strange, and interesting, and very wonderful to me.

At last we came among the Coral Islands of the Pacific; and I shall
never forget the delight with which I gazed--when we chanced to pass
one--at the pure white, dazzling shores, and the verdant palm-trees,
which looked bright and beautiful in the sunshine.  And often did we
three long to be landed on one, imagining that we should certainly find
perfect happiness there!  Our wish was granted sooner than we expected.

One night, soon after we entered the tropics, an awful storm burst upon
our ship.  The first squall of wind carried away two of our masts, and
left only the foremast standing.  Even this, however, was more than
enough, for we did not dare to hoist a rag of sail on it.  For five days
the tempest raged in all its fury.  Everything was swept off the decks,
except one small boat.  The steersman was lashed to the wheel lest he
should be washed away, and we all gave ourselves up for lost.  The
captain said that he had no idea where we were, as we had been blown far
out of our course; and we feared much that we might get among the
dangerous coral reefs which are so numerous in the Pacific.  At daybreak
on the sixth morning of the gale we saw land ahead; it was an island
encircled by a reef of coral, on which the waves broke in fury.  There
was calm water within this reef, but we could see only one narrow
opening into it.  For this opening we steered; but ere we reached it a
tremendous wave broke on our stern, tore the rudder completely off, and
left us at the mercy of the winds and waves.

"It's all over with us now, lads!" said the captain to the men.  "Get
the boat ready to launch; we shall be on the rocks in less than
half-an-hour."

The men obeyed in gloomy silence, for they felt that there was little
hope of so small a boat living in such a sea.

"Come, boys," said Jack Martin, in a grave tone, to me and Peterkin, as
we stood on the quarter-deck awaiting our fate--"come, boys; we three
shall stick together.  You see it is impossible that the little boat can
reach the shore, crowded with men.  It will be sure to upset, so I mean
rather to trust myself to a large oar.  I see through the telescope that
the ship will strike at the tail of the reef, where the waves break into
the quiet water inside; so if we manage to cling to the oar till it is
driven over the breakers, we may perhaps gain the shore.  What say you?
Will you join me?"

We gladly agreed to follow Jack, for he inspired us with confidence--
although I could perceive, by the sad tone of his voice, that he had
little hope; and indeed, when I looked at the white waves that lashed
the reef and boiled against the rocks as if in fury, I felt that there
was but a step between us and death.  My heart sank within me; but at
that moment my thoughts turned to my beloved mother, and I remembered
those words, which were among the last that she said to me: "Ralph, my
dearest child, always remember, in the hour of danger, to look to your
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.  He alone is both able and willing to
save your body and your soul."  So I felt much comforted when I thought
thereon.

The ship was now very near the rocks.  The men were ready with the boat,
and the captain beside them giving orders, when a tremendous wave came
towards us.  We three ran towards the bow to lay hold of our oar, and
had barely reached it when the wave fell on the deck with a crash like
thunder.  At the same moment the ship struck; the foremast broke off
close to the deck and went over the side, carrying the boat and men
along with it.  Our oar got entangled with the wreck, and Jack seized an
axe to cut it free; but owing to the motion of the ship, he missed the
cordage and struck the axe deep into the oar.  Another wave, however,
washed it clear of the wreck.  We all seized hold of it, and the next
instant we were struggling in the wild sea.  The last thing I saw was
the boat whirling in the surf, and all the sailors tossed into the
foaming waves.  Then I became insensible.

On recovering from my swoon I found myself lying on a bank of soft
grass, under shelter of an overhanging rock, with Peterkin on his knees
by my side, tenderly bathing my temples with water, and endeavouring to
stop the blood that flowed from a wound in my forehead.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE CORAL ISLAND--OUR FIRST COGITATIONS AFTER LANDING AND THE RESULT OF
THEM--WE CONCLUDE THAT THE ISLAND IS UNINHABITED.

There is a strange and peculiar sensation experienced in recovering from
a state of insensibility which is almost indescribable: a sort of
dreamy, confused consciousness; a half-waking, half-sleeping condition,
accompanied with a feeling of weariness, which, however, is by no means
disagreeable.  As I slowly recovered, and heard the voice of Peterkin
inquiring whether I felt better, I thought that I must have overslept
myself, and should be sent to the masthead for being lazy; but before I
could leap up in haste, the thought seemed to vanish suddenly away, and
I fancied that I must have been ill.  Then a balmy breeze fanned my
cheek; and I thought of home, and the garden at the back of my father's
cottage with its luxuriant flowers, and the sweet-scented honeysuckle
that my dear mother trained so carefully upon the trellised porch.  But
the roaring of the surf put these delightful thoughts to flight, and I
was back again at sea, watching the dolphins and the flying-fish, and
reefing topsails off the wild and stormy Cape Horn.  Gradually the roar
of the surf became louder and more distinct.  I thought of being wrecked
far, far away from my native land, and slowly opened my eyes to meet
those of my companion Jack, who, with a look of intense anxiety, was
gazing into my face.

"Speak to us, my dear Ralph!" whispered Jack tenderly.  "Are you better
now?"

I smiled and looked up, saying, "Better!  Why, what do you mean, Jack?
I'm quite well."

"Then what are you shamming for, and frightening us in this way?" said
Peterkin, smiling through his tears; for the poor boy had been really
under the impression that I was dying.

I now raised myself on my elbow, and putting my hand to my forehead,
found that it had been cut pretty severely, and that I had lost a good
