The Project Gutenberg EBook of Battles with the Sea, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Battles with the Sea

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21717]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BATTLES WITH THE SEA ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




BATTLES WITH THE SEA, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

HEROES OF THE LIFEBOAT AND ROCKET.

SKIRMISHES WITH THE SUBJECT GENERALLY.

It ought to be known to all English boys that there is a terrible and
costly war in which the British nation is at all times engaged.  No
intervals of peace mark the course of this war.  Cessations of
hostilities there are for brief periods, but no treaties of peace.  "War
to the knife" is its character.  Quarter is neither given nor sought.
Our foe is unfeeling, unrelenting.  He wastes no time in diplomatic
preliminaries; he scorns the courtesies of national life.  No
ambassadors are recalled, no declarations of war made.  Like the Red
Savage he steals upon us unawares, and, with a roar of wrathful fury,
settles down to his deadly work.

How does this war progress?  It is needful to put and reiterate this
question from time to time, because new generations of boys are always
growing up, who, so far from being familiar with the stirring episodes
of this war, and the daring deeds of valour performed, scarcely realise
the fact that such a war is being carried on at all, much less that it
costs hundreds of lives and millions of money every year.

It may be styled a naval war, being waged chiefly in boats upon the sea.
It is a war which will never cease, because our foe is invincible, and
we will never give in; a war which, unlike much ordinary warfare, is
never unjust or unnecessary; which cannot be avoided, which is conducted
on the most barbarous principles of deathless enmity, but which,
nevertheless, brings true glory and honour to those heroes who are ever
ready, night and day, to take their lives in their hands and rush into
the thick of the furious fray.

Although this great war began--at least in a systematic manner--only
little more than fifty years ago, it will not end until the hearts of
brave and generous Britons cease to beat, and the wild winds cease to
blow, for the undying and unconquerable enemy of whom we write is--the
Storm!

"Death or victory!" the old familiar warwhoop, is not the final war-cry
here.  Death is, indeed, always faced--sometimes met--and victory is
often gained; but, final conquests being impossible, and the "piping
times of peace" being out of the question, the signal for the onset has
been altered, and the world's old battle-cry has been exchanged for the
soul-stirring shout of "Rescue the perishing!"

Though our foe cannot be slain, he can, like the genii of Eastern story,
be baffled.

In the days of old, the Storm had it nearly all his own way.  Hearts,
indeed, were not less brave, but munitions of war were wanting.  In this
matter, as in everything else, the world is better off now than it was
then.  Our weapons are more perfect, our engines more formidable.  We
can now dash at our enemy in the very heart of his own terrible
strongholds; fight him where even the boldest of the ancient Vikings did
not dare to venture, and rescue the prey from the very jaws of death
amid the scenes of its wildest revelry.

The heroes who recruit the battalions of our invincible army are the
bronzed and stalwart men of our sea-coast towns, villages, and hamlets--
men who have had much and long experience of the foe with whom they have
to deal.  Their panoply is familiar to most of us.  The helmet, a
sou'wester; the breastplate, a lifebelt of cork; the sword, a strong
short oar; their war-galley, a splendid _lifeboat_; and their shield--
the Hand of God.

In this and succeeding chapters I purpose to exhibit and explain in
detail our Lifeboats, and the great, the glorious work which they
annually accomplish; also the operations of the life-saving Rocket,
which has for many years rescued innumerable lives, where, from the
nature of circumstances, Lifeboats could not have gone into action.  I
hold that we--especially those of us who dwell in the interior of our
land--are not sufficiently alive to the deeds of daring, the thrilling
incidents, the terrible tragedies and the magnificent rescues which are
perpetually going on around our shores.  We are not sufficiently
impressed, perhaps, with the _nationality_ of the work done by the Royal
National Lifeboat Institution, which manages our fleet of 270 lifeboats.
We do not fully appreciate, it may be, the personal interest which we
ourselves have in the great war, and the duty--to say nothing of
privilege--which lies upon us to lend a helping hand in the good cause.

Before going into the marrow of the subject, let us put on the wings of
imagination, and soar to such a height that we shall be able to take in
at one eagle glance all the coasts of the United Kingdom--a sweep of
about 5000 miles all round!  It is a tremendous sight, for a storm is
raging!  Black clouds are driving across the murky sky; peals of thunder
rend the heavens; lightning gleams at intervals, revealing more clearly
the crested billows that here roar over the sands, or there churn and
seethe among the rocks.  The shrieking gale sweeps clouds of spray high
over our windward cliffs, and carries flecks of foam far inland, to tell
of the dread warfare that is raging on the maddened sea.

Near the shore itself numerous black specks are seen everywhere, like
ink-spots on the foam.  These are wrecks, and the shrieks and the
despairing cries of the perishing rise above even the roaring of the
gale.  Death is busy, gathering a rich harvest, for this is a notable
night in the great war.  The Storm-fiend is roused.  The enemy is abroad
in force, and has made one of his most violent assaults, so that from
Shetland to Cornwall, ships and boats are being battered to pieces on
the rocks and sands, and many lives are being swallowed up or dashed
out; while, if you turn your gaze further out to sea, you will descry
other ships and boats and victims hurrying onward to their doom.  Here,
a stately barque, with disordered topsails almost bursting from the
yards as she hurries her hapless crew--all ignorant, perchance, of its
proximity--towards the dread lee-shore.  Elsewhere, looming through the
murk, a ponderous merchantman, her mainmast and mizzen gone, and just
enough of the foremast left to support the bellying foresail that bears
her to destruction.

Think you, reader, that this sketch is exaggerated?  If so, let us
descend from our lofty outlook, and take a nearer view of facts in
detail.  I quote the substance of the following from a newspaper article
published some years ago.

The violence of the storm on Wednesday and Thursday night was terrific.
The damage to shipping has been fearful.  On sea the tremendous gale
proved disastrous beyond precedent.  Falmouth Harbour was the scene of
several collisions, and one barque and a tug steamer sank at their
anchors.  A wreck is reported at Lelant, to which the Penzance lifeboat
with a stout-hearted crew had started, when our despatch left, to rescue
thirteen men who could be descried hanging in the shrouds.  A fine new
ship is on Hayle bar, and another vessel is believed to be wrecked there
also.  Doubtless we have not yet heard of all the wrecks on the Cornish
coast; but it is in the magnificent bay which includes Torquay,
Paignton, and Brixham that the most terrible havoc has occurred.  On
Wednesday, about sixty sail were anchored in Torbay.  Eleven have gone
ashore at Broadsands, five of which are total wrecks.  The names of
those we could ascertain were the Fortitude, of Exeter; the Stately, of
Newcastle; the Dorset, of Falmouth, and a French brigantine.  At five
o'clock on Thursday evening some of the crews were being drawn ashore by
lines and baskets.  At Churston Cove one schooner is ashore and a total
wreck; there is also another, the Blue Jacket, which may yet be saved.
At Brixham there are two fine ships ashore inside the breakwater.  At
the back of the pier ten vessels have been pounded to matchwood, and all
that remains are a shattered barque, her masts still standing, two
brigs, and a schooner, all inextricably mingled together.  Twelve
trawlers have been sunk and destroyed.  Out of the sixty ships at anchor
on Wednesday night there were not more than ten left on Thursday
afternoon.  Many of these are disabled, some dismasted.  A fishing-boat
belonging to Brixham was upset in the outer harbour about eight o'clock,
and two married fishermen of the town and a boy were drowned.  At Elbury
a new brig, the Zouave, of Plymouth, has gone to pieces, and six out of
her crew of ten are drowned.  Eleven other vessels are on shore at
Elbury, many of the men belonging to which cannot be accounted for.  One
noble woman, named Wheaton, wife of a master mariner, saved two lives by
throwing a rope from the window of her house, which is built on the
rocks overhanging the bay at Furzeham Hill.  Scores of poor shipwrecked
men are wandering distractedly about Brixham and Churston, the greater
part of them having lost all they possessed.  The total loss of life
arising from these disasters is variously estimated at from seventy to a
hundred.

Is not this a tremendous account of the doings of one gale?  And let it
be observed that we have lifted only one corner of the curtain and
revealed the battlefield of only one small portion of our far-reaching
coasts.  What is to be said of the other parts of our shores during that
same wild storm?  It would take volumes instead of chapters to give the
thrilling incidents of disaster and heroism in full detail.  To convey
the truth in all its force is impossible, but a glimmering of it may be
obtained by a glance at the Wreck Chart which is published by the Board
of Trade every year.

Every black spot on that chart represents a wreck more or less
disastrous, which occurred in the twelve months.  It is an appalling
fact that about two thousand ships, upwards of seven hundred lives, and
nearly two millions sterling, are lost _every_ year on the shores of the
United Kingdom.  Some years the loss is heavier, sometimes lighter, but
in round numbers this is our annual loss in the great war.  That it
would be far greater if we had no lifeboats and no life-saving rockets
it will be our duty by-and-by to show.

The black spots on the Wreck Chart to which we have referred show at a
single glance that the distribution of wrecks is very unequal--naturally
so.  Near the great seaports we find them thickly strewn; at other
places, where vessels pass in great numbers on their way to these ports,
the spots are also very numerous, while on unfrequented parts they are
found only here and there in little groups of two, three, or four.  Away
on the nor'-west shores of Scotland, for instance, where the seal and
the sea-mew have the ocean and rugged cliffs pretty much to themselves,
the plague-spots are few and far between; but on the east coast we find
a fair sprinkling of them, especially in the mouths of the Forth and
Tay, whither a goodly portion of the world's shipping crowds, and to
which the hardy Norseman now sends many a load of timber--both log and
batten--instead of coming, as he did of old, to batten on the land.  It
is much the same with Ireland, its more important seaports being on the
east.

But there is a great and sudden increase of the spots when we come to
England.  They commence at the border, on the west, where vessels from
and to the busy Clyde enter or quit the Irish Sea.  Darkening the
fringes of the land on both sides, and clustering round the Isle of Man,
they multiply until the ports have no room to hold them, and, as at
Liverpool, they are crowded out into the sea.  From the deadly shores of
Anglesea, where the Royal Charter went down in the great and memorable
storm of November, 1859, the signs of wreck and disaster thicken as we
go south until we reach the Bristol Channel, which appears to be choked
with them, and the dangerous cliffs of Cornwall, which receive the
ill-fated vessels of the fleets that are perpetually leaving or entering
the two great channels.  But it is on the east coast of England that the
greatest damage is done.  From Berwick to the Thames the black spots
cluster like bees.  On the coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk, off Great
Yarmouth, where lie the dangerous Haisborough Sands, the spots are no
longer in scattered groups, but range themselves in dense battalions;
and further south, off the coast of Kent, round which the world's
commerce flows unceasingly into the giant metropolis, where the famous
Goodwin Sands play their deadly part in the great war, the dismal spots
are seen to cluster densely, like gnats in a summer sky.

Now, just where the black spots are thickest on this wreck chart,
lifeboats and rocket apparatus have been stationed in greatest numbers.
As in ordinary warfare, so in battles with the sea, our "Storm Warriors"
[See an admirable book, with this title, written by the Reverend John
Gilmore, of Ramsgate.  (Macmillan and Company)] are thrown forward in
force where the enemy's assaults are most frequent and dangerous.  Hence
we find the eastern shores of England crowded at every point with
life-saving apparatus, while most of the other dangerous parts of the
coast are pretty well guarded.

Where and how do our coast heroes fight?  I answer--sometimes on the
cliffs, sometimes on the sands, sometimes on the sea, and sometimes even
on the pierheads.  Their operations are varied by circumstances.  Let us
draw nearer and look at them while in action, and observe how the enemy
assails them.  I shall confine myself at present to a skirmish.

When the storm-fiend is abroad; when dark clouds lower; when blinding
rain or sleet drives before the angry gale, and muttering thunder comes
rolling over the sea, men with hard hands and weather-beaten faces, clad
in oilskin coats and sou'-westers, saunter down to our quays and
headlands all round the kingdom.  These are the lifeboat crews and
rocket brigades.  They are on the lookout.  The enemy is moving, and the
sentinels are being posted for the night--or rather, they are posting
themselves, for nearly all the fighting men in this war are volunteers!

They require no drilling to prepare them for the field; no bugle or drum
to sound the charge.  Their drum is the rattling thunder; their trumpet
the roaring storm.  They began to train for this warfare when they were
not so tall as their fathers' boots, and there are no awkward squads
among them now.  Their organisation is rough-and-ready, like themselves,
and simple too.  The heavens call them to action; the coxswain grasps
the helm, the oars are manned, the word is given, and the rest is
straightforward fighting--over everything, through everything, in the
teeth of everything, until the victory is gained, and rescued men,
women, and children are landed in safety on the shore.
