The Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosopher Jack, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Philosopher Jack

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21756]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHER JACK ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




PHILOSOPHER JACK, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

TREATS OF OUR HERO AND OTHERS.

If the entire circuit of a friend's conversation were comprised in the
words "Don't" and "Do,"--it might perhaps be taken for granted that his
advice was not of much value; nevertheless, it is a fact that
Philosopher Jack's most intimate and valuable--if not valued--friend
never said anything to him beyond these two words.  Nor did he ever
condescend to reason.  He listened, however, with unwearied patience to
reasoning, but when Jack had finished reasoning and had stated his
proposed course of action, he merely said to him, "Don't," or "Do."

"For what end was I created?" said the philosopher, gloomily.

Wise and momentous question when seriously put, but foolish remark, if
not worse, when flung out in bitterness of soul!

Jack, whose other name was Edwin, and his age nineteen, was a student.
Being of an argumentative turn of mind, his college companions had
dubbed him Philosopher.  Tall, strong, active, kindly, hilarious,
earnest, reckless, and impulsive, he was a strange compound, with a
handsome face, a brown fluff on either cheek, and a moustache like a
lady's eyebrow.  Moreover, he was a general favourite, yet this favoured
youth, sitting at his table in his own room, sternly repeated the
question--in varied form and with increased bitterness--"Why was I born
at all?"

Deep wrinkles of perplexity sat on his youthful brow.  Evidently he
could not answer his own question, though in early life his father had
carefully taught him the "Shorter Catechism with proofs," while his good
old mother had enforced and exemplified the same.  His taciturn friend
was equally unable, or unwilling, to give a reply.

After prolonged meditation, Jack relieved his breast of a deep sigh and
re-read a letter which lay open on his desk.  Having read it a third
time with knitted brows, he rose, went to the window, and gazed
pathetically on the cat's parade, as he styled his prospect of slates
and chimney cans.

"So," said he at last, "my dreams are over; prospects gone; hopes
collapsed--all vanished like the baseless fabric of a vision."

He turned from the cat's parade, on which the shades of evening were
descending, to the less romantic contemplation of his empty fire-grate.

"Now," said he, re-seating himself at his table and stretching his long
legs under it, "the question is, What am I to do? shall I kick at fate,
throw care, like physic, to the dogs, cut the whole concern, and go to
sea?"

"Don't," said his taciturn friend, speaking distinctly for the first
time.

"Or," continued Jack, "shall I meekly bow to circumstances, and struggle
with my difficulties as best I may?"

"Do," replied his friend, whose name, by the way, was Conscience.

For a long time the student sat gazing at the open letter in silence.
It was from his father, and ran thus:--

  "Dear Teddie,--It's a long time now that I've been thinkin' to write
  you, and couldn't a-bear to give you such a heavy disappointment but
  can't putt it off no longer, and, as your mother, poor soul, says,
  it's the Lord's will and can't be helped--which, of course, it
  shouldn't be helped if that's true--but--well, howsomever, it's of no
  use beatin' about the bush no longer.  The seasons have been bad for
  some years past, and it's all I've been able to do to make the two
  ends meet, with your mother slavin' like a nigger patchin' up the
  child'n's old rags till they're like Joseph's coat after the wild
  beast had done its worst on it--though we _are_ given to understand
  that the only wild beasts as had to do with that coat was Joseph's own
  brothers.  Almost since ever I left the North of England--a small
  boy--and began to herd cattle on the Border hills, I've had a strange
  wish to be a learned man, and ever since I took to small farmin', and
  perceived that such was not to be my lot in life, I've had a powerful
  desire to see my eldest son--that's you, dear boy--trained in
  scientific pursoots, all the more that you seemed to have a natural
  thirst that way yourself.  Your mother, good soul, in her own broad
  tongue--which I've picked up somethin' of myself through livin' twenty
  year with her--was used to say she `wad raither see her laddie trained
  in ways o' wisdom than o' book-learnin',' which I'm agreed to myself,
  though it seems to me the two are more or less mixed up.  Howsomever,
  it's all up now, my boy; you'll have to fight your own battle and pay
  your own way, for I've not got one shillin' to rub on another, except
  what'll pay the rent; and, what with the grey mare breakin' her leg
  an' the turnips failin', the look-out ahead is darkish at the best."

The letter finished with some good advice and a blessing.

To be left thus without resources, just when the golden gates of
knowledge were opening, and a few dazzling gleams of the glory had
pierced his soul, was a crushing blow to the poor student.  If he had
been a true philosopher, he would have sought counsel on his knees, but
his philosophy was limited; he only took counsel with himself and the
immediate results were disastrous.

"Yes," said he, with an impulsive gush, "I'll go to sea."

"Don't," said his quiet friend.

But, regardless of this advice, Edwin Jack smote the table with his
clenched fist so violently that his pen leapt out of its ink-bottle and
wrote its own signature on one of his books.  He rose in haste and rang
the bell.

"Mrs Niven," he said to his landlady, "let me know how much I owe you.
I'm about to leave town--and--and won't return."

"Ech!  Maister Jack; what for?" exclaimed the astonished landlady.

"Because I'm a beggar," replied the youth, with a bitter smile, "and I
mean to go to sea."

"Hoots!  Maister Jack, ye're jokin'."

"Indeed I am very far from joking, Mrs Niven; I have no money, and no
source of income.  As I don't suppose you would give me board and
lodging for nothing, I mean to leave."

"Toots! ye're haverin'," persisted Mrs Niven, who was wont to treat her
"young men" with motherly familiarity.  "Tak' time to think o't, an'
ye'll be in anither mind the morn's mornin'.  Nae doot ye're--"

"Now, my good woman," interrupted Jack, firmly but kindly, "don't bother
me with objections or advice, but do what I bid you--there's a good
soul; be off."

Mrs Niven saw that she had no chance of impressing her lodger in his
present mood; she therefore retired, while Jack put on a rough
pilot-cloth coat and round straw hat in which he was wont at times to go
boating.  Thus clad, he went off to the docks of the city in which he
dwelt; the name of which city it is not important that the reader should
know.

In a humble abode near the said docks a bulky sea-captain lay stretched
in his hammock, growling.  The prevailing odours of the neighbourhood
were tar, oil, fish, and marine-stores.  The sea-captain's room partook
largely of the same odours, and was crowded with more than an average
share of the stores.  It was a particularly small room, with charts,
telescopes, speaking-trumpets, log-lines, sextants, portraits of ships,
sou'-westers, oil-cloth coats and leggings on the walls; model ships
suspended from the beams overhead; sea-boots, coils of rope, kegs, and
handspikes on the floor; and great shells, earthenware ornaments,
pagodas, and Chinese idols on the mantel-piece.  In one corner stood a
child's crib.  The hammock swung across the room like a heavy cloud
about to descend and overwhelm the whole.  This simile was further borne
out by the dense volumes of tobacco smoke in which the captain enveloped
himself, and through which his red visage loomed over the edge of the
hammock like a lurid setting sun.

For a few minutes the clouds continued to multiply and thicken.  No
sound broke the calm that prevailed, save a stertorous breathing, with
an occasional hitch in it.  Suddenly there was a convulsion in the
clouds, and one of the hitches developed into a tremendous cough.  There
was something almost awe-inspiring in the cough.  The captain was a huge
and rugged man.  His cough was a terrible compound of a choke, a gasp, a
rend, and a roar.  Only lungs of sole-leather could have weathered it.
Each paroxysm suggested the idea that the man's vitals were being torn
asunder; but not content with that, the exasperated mariner made matters
worse by keeping up a continual growl of indignant remonstrance in a
thunderous undertone.

"Hah! that _was_ a splitter.  A few more hug--sh! ha! like that will
burst the biler entirety.  Polly--hallo!"

The lurid sun appeared to listen for a moment, then opening its mouth it
shouted, "Polly--ahoy!" as if it were hailing the maintop of a
seventy-four.

Immediately there was a slight movement in one corner of the room, and
straightway from out a mass of marine-stores there emerged a fairy!  At
least, the little girl, of twelve or thereabouts, who suddenly appeared,
with rich brown tumbling hair, pretty blue eyes, faultless figure, and
ineffable sweetness in every lineament of her little face, might easily
have passed for a fairy or an angel.

"What! caught you napping?" growled the captain in the midst of a
paroxysm.

"Only a minute, father; I couldn't help it," replied Polly, with a
little laugh, as she ran to the fireplace and took up a saucepan that
simmered there.

"Here, look alive! shove along! hand it up!  I'm chokin'!"

The child held the saucepan as high as she could towards the hammock.
The captain, reaching down one of his great arms, caught it and took a
steaming draught.  It seemed to relieve him greatly.

"You're a trump for gruel, Polly," he growled, returning the saucepan.
"Now then, up with the pyramid, and give us a nor'-wester."

The child returned the saucepan to the fireplace, and then actively
placed a chair nearly underneath the hammock.  Upon the chair she set a
stool, and on the top she perched herself.  Thus she was enabled to
grasp the lurid sun by two enormous whiskers, and, putting her lips out,
gave it a charming "nor'-wester," which was returned with hyperborean
violence.  Immediately after, Polly ducked her head, and thus escaped
being blown away, like a Hindoo mutineer from a cannon's mouth, as the
captain went off in another fit.

"Oh! father," said Polly, quite solemnly, as she descended and looked up
from a comparatively safe distance, "isn't it awful?"

"Yes, Poll, it's about the wust 'un I've had since I came from
Barbadoes; but the last panful has mollified it, I think, and your
nor'-wester has Pollyfied it, so, turn into your bunk, old girl, an'
take a nap.  You've much need of it, poor thing."

"No, father, if I get into my crib I'll sleep so heavy that you won't be
able to wake me.  I'll just lie down where I was before."

"Well, well--among the rubbish if ye prefer it; no matter s'long as you
have a snooze," growled the captain as he turned over, while the fairy
disappeared into the dark recess from which she had risen.

Just then a tap was heard at the door.  "Come in," roared the captain.
A tall, broad-shouldered, nautical-looking man entered, took off his
hat, and stood before the hammock, whence the captain gave him a stern,
searching glance, and opened fire on him with his pipe.

"Forgive me if I intrude, Captain Samson," said the stranger; "I know
you, although you don't know me.  You start to-morrow or next day, I
understand, for Melbourne?"

"Wind and weather permittin'," growled the captain.  "Well, what then?"

"Have you completed your crew?" asked the stranger.

"Nearly.  What then?" replied the captain with a touch of ferocity, for
he felt sensations of an approaching paroxysm.

"Will you engage _me_?" asked Philosopher Jack, for it was he.

"In what capacity?" demanded the captain somewhat sarcastically.

"As an ordinary seaman--or a boy if you will," replied Edwin, with a
smile.

"No," growled Samson, decisively, "I won't engage you; men with kid
gloves and white hands don't suit me."

From the mere force of habit the young student had pulled on his gloves
on leaving his lodging, and had only removed that of the right hand on
entering the captain's dwelling.  He now inserted a finger at the wrist
of the left-hand glove, ripped it off, and flung it with its fellow
under the grate.  Thereafter he gathered some ashes and soot from the
fireplace, with which he put his hands on a footing with those of a
coal-heaver.

"Will you take me now, captain?" he said, returning to the hammock, and
spreading out his hands.

The captain gave vent to a short laugh, which brought on a tremendous
fit, at the conclusion of which he gasped, "Yes, my lad, p'r'aps I will;
but first I must know something about you."

"Certainly," said the philosopher, and at once gave the captain a brief
outline of his circumstances.

"Well, you know your own affairs best" said Captain Samson when he had
finished; "I'm no judge of such a case, but as you're willin' to ship,
I'm willin' to ship you.  Come here before ten to-morrow.  Good night.
There, it's a-comin'--hash--k--!"

In the midst of another furious paroxysm Edwin Jack retired.

Not long after, the captain raised himself on one elbow, listened
intently for a few seconds, and, having satisfied himself that Polly was
asleep, slipped from his hammock--as only seamen know how--and proceeded
to dress with the utmost caution.  He was evidently afraid of the little
sleeper among the rubbish.  It was quite interesting to observe the
quiet speed with which he thrust his great limbs into his ample
garments, gazing anxiously all the time at Polly's corner.

Issuing from his own door with the step of an elephantine mouse, the
captain went rapidly through several streets to the house of an intimate
friend, whom he found at supper with his wife and family.

"Evenin', Bailie Trench; how are 'ee, Mrs T? how's everybody?" said the
captain, in a hearty rasping voice, as he shook hands right and left,
while one of his huge legs was taken possession of, and embraced, by the
bailie's only daughter, a pretty little girl of six.

"Why, Samson," exclaimed the bailie, after quiet had been restored, and
his friend had been thrust into a chair with little Susan on his knee,
"I thought you were laid up with influenza--eh?"

"So I was, bailie, an' so I am," replied the captain; "leastwise I'm
still on the sick-list, and was in my hammock till about half an hour
ago, but I'm gettin' round fast.  The night air seems to do me a world
o' good--contrariwise to doctor's expectations."

"Have some supper?" said Mrs Trench, who was a weakish lady with watery
eyes.

"No supper, Mrs T, thank 'ee; the fact is, I've come on business.  I
should be on my beam-ends by rights.  I'm absent without leave, an' have
only a few minutes to spare.  The passenger I spoke of has changed his
mind and his berth is free, so I'm glad to be able to take your son Ben
after all.  But he'll have to get ready quick, for the _Lively Poll_
sails the day after to-morrow or next day--all bein' well."

The eyes of young Benjamin Trench sparkled.  He was a tall, thin, rather
quiet lad of eighteen.

"I can be ready to-night if you wish it, Captain Samson," he said, with
a flush on his usually pale face.

Beside Mrs Trench there sat a sturdy little boy.  He was the bosom
friend of Ben--a bright ruddy fellow of fourteen, overflowing with
animal spirits, and with energy enough for three lads of his size.  This
youth's countenance fell so visibly when Ben spoke of going away, that
Mrs Trench could not help noticing it.

"Why, what's the matter, Wilkins?" she asked.

"Oh, nothing!" returned the boy, "only I don't like to hear Ben speak of
leaving us all and going to Australia.  And I would give all the world
to go with him.  Won't you take me as a cabin boy, Captain Samson?"

"Sorry I can't, lad," said the captain, with a grin, "got a cabin boy
already."

"Besides, your father would not let you," said Mrs Trench, "and it
would never do to go without his leave.  Only misfortune could come of
that."

"Humph! it's very hard," pouted the boy.  "I wanted him to get me into
the navy, and he wouldn't; and now I want him to get me into the
merchant service, and he won't.  But I'll go in spite of him."

"No, you won't, Watty," said Ben, laying his hand on his friend's
shoulder.

"Yes, Ben, I will," returned little Wilkins, with such an air of
determination that every one except Ben laughed.

"Now, bailie," said the captain, rising, "I'm off.  The truth is, I
wouldn't have come if it had not been important to let you know at once
to get your boy ready; but I had no one to send except Polly, and I
wouldn't send her out at night by herself for all the wealth of Indy.
Moreover, _she_ wouldn't have let me out to-night for any consideration
whatever.  She's very strict with me, is my little keeper.  I wouldn't
for the world she should wake and find me gone.  So, good-night all."

Ten minutes more, and the guilty man entered his dwelling on tiptoe.  In
order to get into his hammock with extreme caution he forsook his
ancient method of a spring, and mounted on an empty cask.  The cask was
not equal to the emergency.  He went through the head of it with a
hideous crash!  Spurning it from him, he had just time to plunge into
his place of repose and haul the clothes over him, when Polly emerged
from her lair with wondering eyes.

"What ever was that, father?"

"Nothin', my dear, nothin' in partickler--only a cask I kicked over.
Now, then, Poll, since you're keepin' me awake in this fashion, it's
your dooty to soothe me with an extra panful, and another nor'-wester--
so, up wi' the pyramid; and after you've done it you must turn into your
crib.  I'll not want you again to-night; the cough's much better.
There--thank 'ee.  Pollyfy me now--that's right.  Good-night."

Oh, base mariner! little did you merit such a pleasant termination to
your evening's work; but you are not the only wicked man in this world
who receives more than he deserves.

Two days after the incidents just related a noble ship spread her canvas
to a favouring breeze, and bowing farewell to her port of departure,
commenced the long long voyage to the Antipodes.

She was not a passenger ship, but a trader; nevertheless there were a
few passengers on her quarter-deck, and among these towered the colossal
figure of Captain Samson.  Beside him, holding his hand, stood a
fairy-like little creature with brown curls and pretty blue eyes.  Not
far from her, leaning over the bulwarks, Benjamin Trench frantically
waved a handkerchief and wiped his eyes.  The signal was responded to,
with equal feeling, by the bailie, his wife, and little Susan.  A good
number of people, young and old, assembled at the pier-head, among whom
many waved handkerchiefs, and hands, and scarfs, and hats to the crew.

Among the sailors who gazed wistfully towards the pier was one who made
no farewell signal, and received no parting wave.  Philosopher Jack had
concealed his intention of going to sea from all his college chums, and
a bitter feeling of loneliness oppressed his heart as he thought of his
old father and mother, and the lowly cottage on the Border hills.  He
had not, indeed, acted in direct opposition to the wishes of his
parents, but he had disobeyed the well-known Scripture command to do
them "honour," for he had resolved on his course of action without
consulting them, or asking their advice.  He felt that he had very
selfishly forsaken them in their old age; in the hour of their sore
distress, and at a time when they stood woefully in need of his strong
muscles, buoyant spirit, and energetic brain.  In short, Edwin Jack
began to feel that he required all his philosophy, and something more,
to enable him to face the future with the unflinching courage of a man.

So the ship moved slowly on, revealing on her stern the "_Lively Poll_"
in letters of burnished gold--past the pier-head, down the broad river,
out upon the widening firth, beyond lighthouse, buoy, and beacon, until
at last the fresh Atlantic breezes filled her snowy sails.

And ever as she rose and sank upon the rolling waves, their swish and
thud fell strangely on the ear of one who lay deep down in the recesses
of the hull, where--among barrels of pork, and casks of tar, and cans of
oil, and coils of rope, and other unsavoury stores--he consorted with
rats and mice and an uneasy conscience, in thick darkness.  This was a
"stowaway."  He was a sturdy, bright, ruddy little fellow of fourteen.
Down in that unwholesome place, with a few ship-biscuits and a bottle of
water to keep him alive, he would have looked like a doubled-up
overgrown hedgehog if there had been light enough to reveal him.

Thus, with its little world of hopes and fears, its cares and pleasures,
and its brave, trembling, trusting, sorrowing, joyful, anxious, reckless
hearts, the good ship passed from the shores of Britain, until her sails
quivered like a petrel's wings on the horizon, and then vanished into
the boundless bosom of the mighty sea.



CHAPTER TWO.

TELLS OF A GHOST AND AN OVERWHELMING DISASTER.

It may seem strange, nevertheless it is true, that ignorance is a
misfortune which now and then results in good.  Of course we do not make
this remark in commendation of ignorance, but if Baldwin Burr had not
been ignorant and densely stupid, Philosopher Jack would not have had
the pleasure of instructing him, and the seaman himself would not have
enjoyed that close intimacy which frequently subsists between teacher
and pupil.  Even Polly Samson derived benefit from Baldwin's want of
knowledge, for, being remarkably intelligent for her years, and having
been well taught, she took great pleasure in enlightening his darkness.

"How is it," she asked one day, while sitting on the cabin skylight and
looking up in the man's rugged countenance, "how is it that you are so
stupid?"

Burr, who was steering, gave the wheel a turn, looked up at the
mast-head, then round the horizon, then down at his questioner with a
bland smile, and said--

"Well now, Miss Polly, d'ee know, that's wot I can't exactly tell.
P'r'aps it's 'cause of a nat'ral want of brains, or, maybe, 'cause the
brains is too much imbedded in fat--for I'm a fleshy man, as you see--
or, p'r'aps it's 'cause I never went to school, my parients bein' poor,
uncommon poor, though remarkably honest.  I've sometimes thought, w'en
meditatin' on the subject, that my havin' bin born of a Friday may have
had somethin' to do with it."

"Oh, Baldwin," said Polly with a little laugh, "surely you can't believe
that.  Father says it's all nonsense about Friday being an unlucky day."

"P'r'aps it is, an' p'r'aps it ain't," returned the cautious seaman.  "I
regard your father, my dear, as a deeply learned man, and would give in,
if I could, to wotever he says, but facts is facts, and opinions is
opinions, you can't change that, nohow you fix it.  Wot's the cap'n's
opinions, now, as to ghosts?"

"He don't believe in 'em at all," was Polly's prompt answer.  "No more
do I, for father knows everything, and he's always right."

"He's a lucky man to have you, Polly, and there's a lucky boy knockin'
about the world somewheres lookin' out for you.  A good daughter, it's
said, inwariably makes a good wife; which you don't understand just now,
but you'll come to in course of time.  Hows'ever, as I wos observin',
I've been of the same opinion as your father till two nights ago, when I
heard a ghost right under the deck, it seemed to me, blow my hammock,
where there's nothin' but ship's stores and rats."

"Heard a ghost!" exclaimed Polly, with opening eyes.

"Ay, an' seed 'im too," said Burr.  "Night before yesterday I heer'd 'im
as plain as I hear myself.  He wos groanin', an' it's quite impossible
that a tar-barrel, or a cask, or a rat, could groan.  The only thing
that puzzled me wos that he seemed to snore; more than that he sneezed
once or twice.  Now, I never heard it said that a ghost could sleep or
catch cold.  Did you, Polly?"

Polly laughed and said that she never did, and asked eagerly what the
ghost was like.

"It was wery much like an or'nary man of small size," said the seaman,
"but it were too dark to make out its face.  I know the figure of every
soul in the ship by this time, an' I could swear before a maginstrate,
or a bench of bishops, that the ghost is neither one of the crew nor a
passenger."

"Why didn't you speak to it?" asked Polly.

"So I did speak to it, but it wouldn't answer; then I made a grab at it,
but it was as active as a kitten, dodged round the mainmast, flew for'ed
on inwisible wings, and went slap down the fore-scuttle, head first,
with a crash that would have broke the neck of anything but a ghost."

At this interesting point the conversation was interrupted by Edwin
Jack, whose turn it was to relieve the man at the wheel.  He nodded to
Polly as he came up, took his post, and received the ship's "course"
from Burr, who thrust his hands into his pockets, and left the
quarter-deck.

Edwin was by this time a considerably changed man, although but a few
days at sea.  The rough blue trousers, guernsey, and pea-jacket, took as
naturally to his strong limbs as if he had been born and bred a sailor;
and already some huge blisters, a few scars, and not a little tar, had
rendered his hands creditable.

Steering at the time was a mere matter of form, as a dead calm
prevailed.  Our philosopher therefore amused himself and Polly with
commentaries on the ghost-subject which Burr had raised.

Late that night, when the stars were shining in a cloudless sky, and
winking at their reflections in the glassy ocean, the ghost appeared to
Edwin Jack.  It was on this wise:

Jack, being one of the watch on deck, went to the port bulwarks near the
foremast shrouds, leant over, and, gazing down into the reflected sky,
thought sadly of past, present, and future.  Tiring at last of his
meditations, he went towards a man who appeared to be skulking under the
shadow of the long-boat and remarked that it was a fine night, but the
man made no reply.

"A most enjoyable night, shipmate," he said, going closer.

"I'm glad you think so," said the ghost, "it's anything but enjoyable to
_me_.  The state of the weather hasn't much effect, either one way or
another, on a fellow who is half-dead with hunger, half-choked with a
cold caught among the rats and stores, and half-killed by a tumble down
the fore-scuttle, or whatever may be the name of that vile ladder that
leads to the regions below."

"Surely," exclaimed Jack in surprise, seizing the ghost by the shoulders
and looking close into its face, "I have heard your voice before now,
and, eh?--no, I don't know you."

"Yes, Philosopher Jack, you do know me," returned the ghost; "I've had
the honour of playing cricket with you on the green, though you've
