The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shawl-Straps, by Louisa M. Alcott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Shawl-Straps
       A Second Series of Aunt Jo's Scrap-Bag

Author: Louisa M. Alcott

Release Date: July 9, 2007 [EBook #22022]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAWL-STRAPS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)






SHAWL-STRAPS.

A Second Series

OF

AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

BY

LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF
'LITTLE WOMEN,' 'AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL,' 'LITTLE MEN,'
'HOSPITAL SKETCHES.'

LONDON:
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & COMPANY
_LIMITED_,
St. Dunstan's House,
FETTER LANE, FLEET STREET, E.C.

1895.

_All rights reserved._


_LOW'S STANDARD SERIES OF BOOKS BY POPULAR WRITERS._

Small crown 8vo. cloth gilt, 2_s._; gilt edges, 2_s._ 6_d._ each

 1.  ALCOTT, L. M. Little Men.
 2.  WHITNEY, Mrs. Hitherto.
 3.  SAMUELS. Forecastle to Cabin. Illustrated.
 4.  ROBINSON, P. In my Indian Garden.
 5.  ALCOTT, L. M. Little Women and Little Women Wedded.
 6.  WHITNEY, Mrs. We Girls.
 7.  ---- The other Girls: a Sequel.
 8.  ALDEN, W. L. Jimmy Brown.
 9.  ALCOTT, L. M. Under the Lilacs. Illustrated.
10.  ---- Jimmy's Cruise.
11.  ROBINSON, PHIL. Under the Punkah.
12.  ALCOTT, L. M. An Old-Fashioned Girl.
13.  ---- A Rose in Bloom.
14.  ---- Eight Cousins. Illustrated.
15.  ---- Jack and Jill.
16.  ---- Lulu's Library. Illustrated.
17.  ---- Silver Pitchers.
18.  ---- Work and Beginning Again.
19.  WHITNEY, Mrs. Leslie Goldthwaite.
20.  ---- Faith Gartney's Girlhood.
21.  ---- Real Folks.
22.  STOWE, Mrs. Dred.
23.  ---- My Wife and I.
24.  DE WITT, Madame. An Only Sister.
25.  ALCOTT, L. M. Aunt Jo's Scrap Bag.
26.  ---- Shawl Straps.
27.  STOWE, Mrs. Ghost in the Mill.
28.  BUNYAN, JOHN. Pilgrim's Progress (Extra volume), gilt, 2_s._
29.  STOWE, Mrs. We and Our Neighbours.
30.  SAINTINE. Picciola.
31.  HOLM, SAXE. Draxy Miller's Dowry.
32.  SANDEAU, JULES. Seagull Rock.
33.  WARNER, C. D. In the Wilderness.
34.  ---- My Summer in a Garden.
35.  ALCOTT, L. M. Spinning-wheel Stories.
36.  ALDEN, W. L. Trying to find Europe.
37.  WHITNEY, Mrs. The Gayworthys.
38.  TOOLEY, Mrs. Life of Mrs. Stowe.
39.  ROE, E. P. Nature's Serial Story.
40.  ALCOTT. Recollections.
41.  STOWE, H. B. Minister's Wooing.

* *
 *  A New Illustrated List of Books for Boys and Girls,
with Portraits of Celebrated Authors, sent post free on application.


London: SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & COMPANY, LTD.,
St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, Fleet Street, E.C.




PREFACE.


There is a sort of fate about writing books of travel which it is
impossible to escape. It is vain to declare that no inducement will
bribe one to do it, that there is nothing new to tell, and that nobody
wants to read the worn-out story: sooner or later the deed is done, and
not till the book is safely shelved does peace descend upon the victim
of this mysterious doom.

The only way in which this affliction may be lightened to a
long-suffering public is to make the work as cheerful and as short as
possible. With this hope the undersigned bore has abstained from giving
the dimensions of any church, the population of any city, or description
of famous places, as far as in her lay; but confined herself to the
personal haps and mishaps, adventures and experiences, of her wanderers.

To explain the undue prominence given to Miss Lavinia, it should be
stated that she is an old and intimate friend of the compiler of this
frivolous work; and therefore her views on all subjects, though less
valuable, were easier to obtain than those of the younger and more
interesting shawl-strappists.

                                                       L. M. A.
_November 1872._




CONTENTS.

                       PAGE
  I.  OFF                 1

 II.  BRITTANY           24

III.  FRANCE             92

 IV.  SWITZERLAND       175

  V.  ITALY             205

 VI.  LONDON            265




SHAWL-STRAPS.




I.

_OFF._


'On the first day of February we three will sail from Boston for
Messina, in the little fruit-ship "Wasp." We shall probably be a month
going, unless we cross in a gale as I did, splitting sails every night,
and standing on our heads most of the way,' said Amanda, folding up her
maps with an air of calm decision.

'Hurrah! what fun!' cried Matilda, waving a half-finished dressing-case
over her head.

But Lavinia, with one sepulchral groan, fell flat upon her bed, and lay
there, dumb with the horrors of such a voyage.

'Just the thing for you, my poor old dear. Think of the balmy airs of
Sicily, the oranges, the flowers. Then a delicious month or two at
Sorrento, with no east winds, no slush, no spring cleaning. We shall be
as merry as grigs, and get as buxom as dairy-maids in a month,' said the
sprightly Amanda.

'You promised to go, and if you back out we are lost, for we _must_ have
a duenna. You can lie round in Europe just as well as here, and I have
no doubt it will do you a world of good,' added Matilda.

'I shall keep my word; but you will bury me in the Atlantic, so make up
your minds to it. Do you suppose that I, a poor, used-up old invalid,
who can't look at a sail-boat without a qualm, can survive thirty days
of standing on my head, and thirty nights of sail-splitting, as we go
slamming and lurching across two or three awful oceans?' demanded
Lavinia, with the energy of despair.

Before anyone could reply, Amanda's little Mercury appeared with a note.

'The "Wasp" will _not_ take passengers, and no other fruit-ship sails
this spring,' read Amanda.

'Oh dear!' sighed Matilda.

'Saved!' cried Lavinia.

'Be calm: we shall go, sooner or later, if I buy a ship and sail her
myself;' with which indomitable remark Amanda went forth to grapple with
and conquer untoward circumstances.

A month of plans, vicissitudes, and suspense followed, during which
Amanda strove manfully; Matilda suffered agonies of hope and fear; and
Lavinia remained a passive shuttlecock, waiting to be tossed wherever
Fate's battledore chose to send her.

'Exactly two weeks from to-day, we sail with a party of friends in the
French steamer "Lafayette," from New York for Brest. Will you be ready?'
demanded Amanda, after a protracted wrestle with aforesaid adverse
circumstances.

'But that is exactly what we didn't mean to do. It's expensive and
fashionable; France and not Italy, north and not south.'

'That's because I'm in the party. If you take a Jonah nothing will go
well. Leave me behind, and you will have a charming trip,' said Lavinia,
who had an oyster-like objection to being torn from her bed.

'No matter, we are going, live or die, sink or swim; and I shall expect
to meet you, all booted and spurred and fit for the fight, April
first,' said the unwavering Amanda.

'A most appropriate day for three lone women to start off on a
wild-goose chase after health and pleasure,' groaned Lavinia from among
her pillows.

'Very well, then; I leave you now, and shall expect to meet on the
appointed day?'

'If I'm spared,' answered the sufferer.

'I'll bring her, never fear,' added the sanguine Mat, as she rattled the
trays out of an immense trunk.

How they ever did it no one knows; but in a week everything was ready,
and the sisters had nothing left to do but to sit and receive the
presents that showered upon them from all quarters. How kind everyone
was, to be sure! Six fine dressing-cases arrived, and were hung upon the
walls; four smelling-bottles--one for each nostril; bed-socks,
rigolettes, afghans, lunch-baskets, pocket-flasks, guide-books,
needle-cases, bouquets in stacks, and a great cake with their names on
top in red and blue letters three inches long.

Friendly fingers sewed for them; even the gentlemen of the house--and
there were eight--had a 'bee,' and hemmed handkerchiefs for Mat, marked
towels; and one noble being actually took off his coat and packed the
trunks in layers of mosaic-work wonderful to behold. A supper celebrated
the last evening; and even the doleful Lavinia, touched by such
kindness, emerged from her slough of despond and electrified the ball by
dancing a jig with great spirit and grace.

Devoted beings were up at dawn to share the early breakfast, lug trunks,
fly up and down with last messages, cheer heartily as the carriage
drove off, and then adjourn _en masse_ to the station, there to shake
hands all round once more, and wave and wring handkerchiefs as the train
at last bore the jocund Mat and the resigned Lavinia toward the
trysting-place and Amanda.

All along the route more friends kept bursting into the cars as they
stopped at different places; more gifts, more hand-shakes and kisses,
more good wishes and kind prophecies, till at last in a chaos of smiles,
tears, smelling-bottles, luncheon, cloaks, books, and foot-warmers, the
travellers left the last friendly face behind and steamed away to New
York.

'How de-licious this is!' cried the untravelled Matilda, as they stepped
upon the deck of the 'Lafayette,' and she sniffed the shippy fragrance
that caused Lavinia to gasp and answer darkly,--

'Wait till to-morrow.'

While Mat surveyed the steamer under the care of Devoted Being No. 10,
who appeared to see them off, Lavinia arranged the stateroom, stowing
away all useless gear and laying forth dressing-gowns, slippers,
pocket-handkerchiefs, with an anguished smile. _She_ had crossed the
ocean twice, and was a wiser, sadder woman for it. At eight she turned
in, and ten minutes later Amanda came aboard with a flock of gay
friends. But no temptations of the flesh could lure the wary spinster
from her den; for the night was rough and cold, and the steamer a Babel
of confusion.

'It's perfectly delightful! I wish you'd been there, Livy. We had
supper, and songs, and funny stories, and all sorts of larks. There are
quantities of nice people aboard, and we shall have a perfectly splendid
trip. I shall be up bright and early, put on my scarlet stockings, my
new boots, and pretty sea-suit, and go in for a jolly day,' said the
ardent Matilda, as she came skipping down at midnight and fell asleep
full of rosy visions of the joys of a


     Life on the ocean wave.


'Deluded child!' sighed Lavinia, closing her dizzy eyes upon the swaying
garments on the wall, and feebly wishing she had hung herself along with
them.

In the gray dawn she was awakened by sounds of woe, and peering forth
beheld the festive Matilda with one red stocking on and one off, her
blonde locks wildly dishevelled, her face of a pale green, and her hands
clasping lemons, cologne, and salts, as she lay with her brow upon the
cool marble of the toilet-table.

'How do you like it, dear?' asked the unfeeling Lavinia.

'Oh, what is it? I feel as if I was dying. If somebody would only stop
the swing _one_ minute. Is it sea-sickness? It's awful, but it will do
me good. Oh, yes! I hope so. I've tried everything, and feel worse and
worse. Hold me! save me! Oh, I wish I hadn't come!'

'Shipmates ahoy! how are you, my loves?' and Amanda appeared, rosy,
calm, and gay, with her pea-jacket on, skirts close reefed, hat well to
windward, and everything taut and ship-shape; for she was a fine sailor,
and never missed a meal.

Wails greeted her, and faint inquiries as to the state of things in the
upper world.

'Blowing a gale; rain, hail, and snow,--very dirty weather; and we are
flying off the coast in fine style,' was the cheerful reply.

'Have we split any sails?' asked Lavinia, not daring to open her eyes.

'Dozens, I dare say. Shipping seas every five minutes. All the
passengers ill but me, and every prospect of a north-easter all the way
over,' continued the lively Amanda, lurching briskly about the passage
with her hands in her pockets.

Matilda dropped her lemons and her bottles to wring her hands, and
Lavinia softly murmured--


     'Lord, what fools we mortals be,
     That we ever go to sea!'


'Breakfast, ladies?' cried the pretty French stewardess, prancing in
with tea-cups, bowls of gruel, and piles of toast balanced in some
miraculous manner all over her arms.

'Oh, take it away! I shall never eat again,' moaned Matilda, clinging
frantically to the marble, as the water-pitcher went down the middle
with a hair-brush, and all the boots and shoes had a grand promenade
round the room.

'Don't speak to me; don't look at me; don't even _think_ of me for three
days at least. Go and enjoy yourself, and leave us to our doom;' with
which tragical remark Lavinia drew her curtains, and was seen no more.

Great heavens, what a week that was! Rain, wind, fog; creak, pitch,
toss; noise, smells, cold. Broken sleep by day, woe in every variety by
night; food and drink a delusion and a snare; society an affliction;
life a burden; death a far-off blessing not to be had at any price.
Slowly, slowly the victims emerge from the lower depths of gloom, feebly
smile, faintly joke, pick fearfully but wistfully at once-rejected
dishes; talk about getting up, but don't do it; read a little, look at
their sallow countenances in hand-glasses, and speculate upon the good
effects of travel upon the constitution. Then they suddenly become
daring, gay, and social; rise, adorn themselves, pervade the cabins,
sniff the odours of engine and kitchen without qualms, play games, go to
table; and, just as the voyage is over, begin to enjoy it.

Alas for poor Lavinia! no such resurrection was possible for her. Long
after Mat had bravely donned the scarlet hose, cocked up her beaver and
gone forth to festive scenes, her shipmate remained below in chrysalis
state, fed by faithful Marie, visited by the ever-cheerful Amanda, and
enlivened by notes and messages from fellow-sufferers in far-off cells.

Mr. and Mrs. Harry Walmars, jun., called, and had private theatricals in
the passage. Dried-ginger parties were held about the invalid's berth,
poems were composed, and conundrums circulated. A little newspaper was
concocted, replete with wit and spirit, by these secluded ladies, and
called the 'Sherald,' to distinguish it from the 'Herald,' got up by
sundry gentlemen whose shining hours were devoted to flirtation, cards,
and wine.

'Perfect gentlemen, I assure you, my dear; for, drunk or sober, they
wear yellow kids from morning till night, smoke the best cigars, and
dance divinely,' as Mrs. Twaddle said, sitting erect in the saloon,
shrouded in fur and velvet, with five diamond-rings well displayed, as
she recounted the diseases she had enjoyed, and did the honours of a
remarkable work-basket, containing eight different sorts of scissors.

'We shall be in to-morrow, so you'd better be digging up the treasures
you have buried, you old magpie,' said Mat, appearing to the pensive
Livy on the eleventh day.

'The sun is out; come on deck, and help us get up the last edition of
our paper. How will this do? Query--If steamers are named the "Asia,"
the "Russia," and the "Scotia," why not call one the "Nausea?"' added
Amanda, popping her head into the den. Lavinia threw a pillow at her,
but the undaunted joker continued--

'Also this: Financial--This being a feminine paper, gold is no longer at
Pa, but at Ma.'

'Good! Add this: Argument in favour of the Superiority of Women--The
sluggard was _not_ told to go to his uncle.'

'Thank you,' and Amanda departed to twine with her forty-third bosom
friend, while Lavinia disinterred, from holes and corners of her berth,
money, nuts, and raisins; books, biscuits, and literary efforts much the
worse for deluges of soap and daubs of butter.

The cry of 'Land!' on the morrow caused passengers unseen before to
appear like worms after a shower; all heroically did up their back hair,
put on their best suits, and walked forth with the delusive hope that no
one would know how ill they had been.

A French Marquis, with a sickly little son, whose diet of fried potatoes
and sour wine accounted for his having the temper of a young fiend,
appeared, and were made much of by dear, title-loving Americans.

A Spanish opera-singer, stout, saffron-coloured, and imperious, likewise
emerged from obscurity, with a meek little husband, who waited on her
like a servant, and a big bald parrot, who swore like a trooper.

Several nuns languished in corners of the saloon, surveying the
vanities of life with interest, and telling their beads devoutly when
they saw anyone looking at them.

A mysterious lady in green velvet with many diamonds, and a shabby,
speechless companion, sailed about the ship, regardless of the rumours
told of her--deserted husbands, stolen jewellery, lovers waiting on the
other side, and many equally pleasant little tales.

The gentlemen with orange gloves and copper-coloured noses got
themselves up in the most superb style, though few were going to land at
Brest, and took tender farewells of such ladies as did, each professing
desolation and despair at the termination of a twelve days' flirtation.

'I am not fond of dirt, but I could kneel down and kiss this mud, so
grateful am I to feel solid ground under my feet, after leading the
life of a fly for so long,' said Lavinia with emotion, as the three
trudged up the wharf at Brest into a sort of barn which served for a
custom-house.

'Now let each sit upon her luggage and clamour till some one comes and
examines it, else it will get whisked away heaven only knows where,'
ordered Amanda, who was the leader in right of her knowledge of tongues.

Each perched accordingly on her one big trunk, and tried to 'clamour.'
But nothing came of it save loss of time and temper, for no one paid the
slightest heed to them; and it was maddening to see trunk after trunk
passed and sent off, followed by its rejoicing owner. Especially hard to
bear was the sight of the green-velvet sinner, who, with a smile or two,
won the sternest official to pass her five trunks without turning a
key, and sailed away with a scornful glance at the virtuous Three
planted on their property and feebly beckoning for help.

'I shall bear this no longer. Mat, sit there and guard the small things,
while you and I, Livy, charge boldly among these imbeciles and drag them
to their duty;' and Amanda marched away to clutch a cockaded victim by
the shoulder with an awe-inspiring countenance.

Lavinia picked out a feeble, gray officer, and dogged him like an
Indian, smiling affably, and pointing to her luggage with a persistent
mildness that nearly drove the poor man mad.

No matter where he went, or what he did; no matter how thick the crowd
about him, or how loud the din; still, like a relentless ghost, that
mild old lady was ever at his side, mutely pointing and affably
smiling. Of course he gave in, lifted one tray, saw much flannel, nearly
blew his venerable nose off sniffing at one suspicious bottle, and
slamming down the lid, scrawled a mysterious cross, bowed and fled.

Proudly returning to Amanda, the victorious one found her friend in a
high state of indignation; for no officer there would touch her trunk
because some American Express had put little leaden stamps here and
there for some unknown purpose. Not even in her best French could the
irate lady make the thick-headed men understand that it was not a high
crime against the nation to undo a strap till some superior officer
arrived to take the responsibility of so rash a step.

If they had comprehended the dire threats, the personal remarks, and
unmitigated scorn of those three fair travellers, the blue-coated
imbeciles would have been reduced to submission. Fortunately the great
man came in time to save them from utter rout; for the ladies were just
trying to decide whether to go and leave the luggage to its fate, or to
haul it forth and depart _vi et armis_, when a stout old party came,
saw, said, 'It is nothing; pass the trunk; a thousand pardons, Madame,'
and peace was restored.

Instantly the porters, who till then had stood back, eyeing the
innocent, black ark, as if it was an infernal machine liable to explode
at a touch, threw themselves upon it, bore it forth, and heaving it atop
of an omnibus, returned to demand vast sums for having waited so long.

Then was Amanda sublime; then did her comrades for the first time learn
the magnitude of her powers, and realise the treasure they possessed.
Stowing Matilda and the smaller traps in the bus, and saying to Lavinia,
'Stand by me,' this dauntless maid faced one dozen blue-bloused,
black-bearded, vociferous, demonstrative Frenchmen; and, calmly offering
the proper sum, refused to add one sou more.

Vainly the drivers perjured themselves in behalf of the porters; vainly
the guard looked on, with imposing uniforms, and impertinent
observations; vainly Mat cried imploringly, 'Pay anything, and let us
get off before there is a mob'--still the indomitable Amanda held forth
the honest franc; and, when no one would take it, laid it on the post,
and entering the omnibus, drove calmly away.

'What should we do without you?' sighed Lavinia, with fervent gratitude.

'Be cheated right and left, and never know it, dear,' responded Amanda,
preparing for another fight with the omnibus-driver.

And she had it; for, unwarned by the fate of the porters, this
short-sighted man insisted on carrying the ladies to a dirty little
hotel to dine, though expressly ordered to go at once to the station.
Nothing would induce them to alight, though the landlord came out in
