The Project Gutenberg EBook of Animal Heroes, by Ernest Thompson Seton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Animal Heroes

Author: Ernest Thompson Seton

Posting Date: March 21, 2009 [EBook #2284]
Release Date: August, 2000

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANIMAL HEROES ***




Produced by Bill Stoddard.  HTML version by Al Haines.








Animal Heroes


by

Ernest Thompson Seton




Note to Reader

A hero is an individual of unusual gifts and achievements. Whether it
be man or animal, this definition applies; and it is the histories of
such that appeal to the imagination and to the hearts of those who hear
them.

In this volume every one of the stories, though more or less composite,
is founded on the actual life of a veritable animal hero. The most
composite is the White Reindeer. This story I wrote by Utrovand in
Norway during the summer of 1900, while the Reindeer herds grazed in
sight on the near uplands.

The Lynx is founded on some of my own early experiences in the
backwoods.

It is less than ten years since the 'Jack Warhorse' won his hero-crown.
Thousands of "Kaskadoans" will remember him, and by the name Warhorse
his coursing exploits are recorded in several daily papers.

The least composite is Arnaux. It is so nearly historical that several
who knew the bird have supplied additional items of information.

The nest of the destroying Peregrines, with its owners and their young,
is now to be seen in the American Museum of Natural History of New
York. The Museum authorities inform me that Pigeon badges with the
following numbers were found in the nest: 9970-S, 1696, U. 63, 77, J.
F. 52, Ex. 705, 6-1894, C 20900. Perhaps some Pigeon-lover may learn
from these lines the fate of one or other wonderful flier that has long
been recorded "never returned."




CONTENTS

  THE SLUM CAT
  ARNAUX--The Chronicle of a Homing Pigeon
  BADLANDS BILLY--The Wolf that Won
  THE BOY AND THE LYNX
  LITTLE WARHORSE--The History of a Jack-rabbit
  SNAP--The Story of a Bull-Terrier
  THE WINNIPEG WOLF
  THE LEGEND OF THE WHITE REINDEER




THE SLUM CAT

LIFE I

I

"M-e-a-t! M-e-a-t!" came shrilling down Scrimper's Alley. Surely the
Pied Piper of Hamelin was there, for it seemed that all the Cats in the
neighborhood were running toward the sound, though the Dogs, it must be
confessed, looked scornfully indifferent.

"Meat! Meat!" and louder; then the centre of attraction came in view--a
rough, dirty little man with a push-cart; while straggling behind him
were a score of Cats that joined in his cry with a sound nearly the
same as his own. Every fifty yards, that is, as soon as a goodly throng
of Cats was gathered, the push-cart stopped. The man with the magic
voice took out of the box in his cart a skewer on which were pieces of
strong-smelling boiled liver. With a long stick he pushed the pieces
off. Each Cat seized on one, and wheeling, with a slight depression of
the ears and a little tiger growl and glare, she rushed away with her
prize to devour it in some safe retreat.

"Meat! Meat!" And still they came to get their portions. All were well
known to the meat-man. There was Castiglione's Tiger; this was Jones's
Black; here was Pralitsky's "Torkershell," and this was Madame Danton's
White; there sneaked Blenkinshoff's Maltee, and that climbing on the
barrow was Sawyer's old Orange Billy, an impudent fraud that never had
had any financial backing,--all to be remembered and kept in account.
This one's owner was sure pay, a dime a week; that one's doubtful.
There was John Washee's Cat, that got only a small piece because John
was in arrears. Then there was the saloon-keeper's collared and
ribboned ratter, which got an extra lump because the 'barkeep' was
liberal; and the rounds-man's Cat, that brought no cash, but got
unusual consideration because the meat-man did. But there were others.
A black Cat with a white nose came rushing confidently with the rest,
only to be repulsed savagely. Alas! Pussy did not understand. She had
been a pensioner of the barrow for months. Why this unkind change? It
was beyond her comprehension. But the meat-man knew. Her mistress had
stopped payment. The meat-man kept no books but his memory, and it
never was at fault.

Outside this patrician 'four hundred' about the barrow, were other
Cats, keeping away from the push-cart because they were not on the
list, the Social Register as it were, yet fascinated by the heavenly
smell and the faint possibility of accidental good luck. Among these
hangers-on was a thin gray Slummer, a homeless Cat that lived by her
wits--slab-sided and not over-clean. One could see at a glance that she
was doing her duty by a family in some out-of-the-way corner. She kept
one eye on the barrow circle and the other on the possible Dogs.

She saw a score of happy Cats slink off with their delicious 'daily'
and their tiger-like air, but no opening for her, till a big Tom of her
own class sprang on a little pensioner with intent to rob. The victim
dropped the meat to defend herself against the enemy, and before the
'all-powerful' could intervene, the gray Slummer saw her chance, seized
the prize, and was gone.

She went through the hole in Menzie's side door and over the wall at
the back, then sat down and devoured the lump of liver, licked her
chops, felt absolutely happy, and set out by devious ways to the
rubbish-yard, where, in the bottom of an old cracker-box, her family
was awaiting her. A plaintive mewing reached her ears. She went at
speed and reached the box to see a huge Black Tom-cat calmly destroying
her brood. He was twice as big as she, but she went at him with all her
strength, and he did as most animals will do when caught wrong-doing,
he turned and ran away. Only one was left, a little thing like its
mother, but of more pronounced color--gray with black spots, and a
white touch on nose, ears, and tail-tip. There can be no question of
the mother's grief for a few days; but that wore off, and all her care
was for the survivor. That benevolence was as far as possible from the
motives of the murderous old Tom there can be no doubt; but he proved a
blessing in deep disguise, for both mother and Kit were visibly
bettered in a short time. The daily quest for food continued. The
meat-man rarely proved a success, but the ash-cans were there, and if
they did not afford a meat-supply, at least they were sure to produce
potato-skins that could be used to allay the gripe of hunger for
another day.

One night the mother Cat smelt a wonderful smell that came from the
East River at the end of the alley. A new smell always needs
investigating, and when it is attractive as well as new, there is but
one course open. It led Pussy to the docks a block away, and then out
on a wharf, away from any cover but the night. A sudden noise, a growl
and a rush, were the first notice she had that she was cut off by her
old enemy, the Wharf Dog. There was only one escape. She leaped from
the wharf to the vessel from which the smell came. The Dog could not
follow, so when the fish-boat sailed in the morning Pussy unwillingly
went with her and was seen no more.


II

The Slum Kitten waited in vain for her mother. The morning came and
went. She became very hungry. Toward evening a deep-laid instinct drove
her forth to seek food. She slunk out of the old box, and feeling her
way silently among the rubbish, she smelt everything that seemed
eatable, but without finding food. At length she reached the wooden
steps leading down into Jap Malee's bird-store underground. The door
was open a little. She wandered into a world of rank and curious smells
and a number of living things in cages all about her. A negro was
sitting idly on a box in a corner. He saw the little stranger enter and
watched it curiously. It wandered past some Rabbits. They paid no heed.
It came to a wide-barred cage in which was a Fox. The gentleman with
the bushy tail was in a far corner. He crouched low; his eyes glowed.
The Kitten wandered, sniffing, up to the bars, put its head in, sniffed
again, then made toward the feed-pan, to be seized in a flash by the
crouching Fox. It gave a frightened "mew," but a single shake cut that
short and would have ended Kitty's nine lives at once, had not the
negro come to the rescue. He had no weapon and could not get into the
cage, but he spat with such copious vigor in the Fox's face that he
dropped the Kitten and returned to the corner, there to sit blinking
his eyes in sullen fear.

The negro pulled the Kitten out. The shake of the beast of prey seemed
to have stunned the victim, really to have saved it much suffering. The
Kitten seemed unharmed, but giddy. It tottered in a circle for a time,
then slowly revived, and a few minutes later was purring in the negro's
lap, apparently none the worse, when Jap Malee, the bird-man, came home.

Jap was not an Oriental; he was a full-blooded Cockney, but his eyes
were such little accidental slits aslant in his round, flat face, that
his first name was forgotten in the highly descriptive title of "Jap."
He was not especially unkind to the birds and beasts whose sales were
supposed to furnish his living, but his eye was on the main chance; he
knew what he wanted. He didn't want the Slum Kitten.

The negro gave it all the food it could eat, then carried it to a
distant block and dropped it in a neighboring iron-yard.


III

One full meal is as much as any one needs in two or three days, and
under the influence of this stored-up heat and power, Kitty was very
lively. She walked around the piled-up rubbish, cast curious glances on
far-away Canary-birds in cages that hung from high windows; she peeped
over fences, discovered a large Dog, got quietly down again, and
presently finding a sheltered place in full sunlight, she lay down and
slept for an hour. A slight 'sniff' awakened her, and before her stood
a large Black Cat with glowing green eyes, and the thick neck and
square jaws that distinguish the Tom; a scar marked his cheek, and his
left ear was torn. His look was far from friendly; his ears moved
backward a little, his tail twitched, and a faint, deep sound came from
his throat. The Kitten innocently walked toward him. She did not
remember him. He rubbed the sides of his jaws on a post, and quietly,
slowly turned and disappeared. The last that she saw of him was the end
of his tail twitching from side to side; and the little Slummer had no
idea that she had been as near death to-day, as she had been when she
ventured into the fox-cage.

As night came on the Kitten began to feel hungry. She examined
carefully the long invisible colored stream that the wind is made of.
She selected the most interesting of its strands, and, nose-led,
followed. In the corner of the iron-yard was a box of garbage. Among
this she found something that answered fairly well for food; a bucket
of water under a faucet offered a chance to quench her thirst.

The night was spent chiefly in prowling about and learning the main
lines of the iron-yard. The next day she passed as before, sleeping in
the sun. Thus the time wore on. Sometimes she found a good meal at the
garbage-box, sometimes there was nothing. Once she found the big Black
Tom there, but discreetly withdrew before he saw her. The water-bucket
was usually at its place, or, failing that, there were some muddy
little pools on the stone below. But the garbage-box was very
unreliable. Once it left her for three days without food. She searched
along the high fence, and seeing a small hole, crawled through that and
found herself in the open street. This was a new world, but before she
had ventured far, there was a noisy, rumbling rush--a large Dog came
bounding, and Kitty had barely time to run back into the hole in the
fence. She was dreadfully hungry, and glad to find some old
potato-peelings, which gave a little respite from the hunger-pang. In
the morning she did not sleep, but prowled for food. Some Sparrows
chirruped in the yard. They were often there, but now they were viewed
with new eyes. The steady pressure of hunger had roused the wild hunter
in the Kitten; those Sparrows were game--were food. She crouched
instinctively and stalked from cover to cover, but the chirpers were
alert and flew in time. Not once, but many times, she tried without
result except to confirm the Sparrows in the list of things to be eaten
if obtainable.

On the fifth day of ill luck the Slum Kitty ventured forth into the
street, desperately bent on finding food. When far from the haven hole
some small boys opened fire at her with pieces of brick. She ran in
fear. A Dog joined in the chase, and Kitty's position grew perilous;
but an old-fashioned iron fence round a house-front was there, and she
slipped in between the rails as the Dog overtook her. A woman in a
window above shouted at the Dog. Then the boys dropped a piece of
cat-meat down to the unfortunate; and Kitty had the most delicious meal
of her life. The stoop afforded a refuge. Under this she sat patiently
till nightfall came with quiet, then sneaked back like a shadow to her
old iron-yard.

Thus the days went by for two months. She grew in size and strength and
in an intimate knowledge of the immediate neighborhood. She made the
acquaintance of Downey Street, where long rows of ash-cans were to be
seen every morning. She formed her own ideas of their proprietors. The
big house was to her, not a Roman Catholic mission, but a place whose
garbage-tins abounded in choicest fish scrapings. She soon made the
acquaintance of the meat-man, and joined in the shy fringe of Cats that
formed the outer circle. She also met the Wharf Dog as well as two or
three other horrors of the same class. She knew what to expect of them
and how to avoid them; and she was happy in being the inventor of a new
industry. Many thousand Cats have doubtless hung, in hope, about the
tempting milk-cans that the early milk-man leaves on steps and
window-ledges, and it was by the merest accident that Kitty found one
with a broken lid, and so was taught to raise it and have a satisfying
drink. Bottles, of course, were beyond her, but many a can has a misfit
lid, and Kitty was very painstaking in her efforts to discover the
loose-jointed ones. Finally she extended her range by exploration till
she achieved the heart of the next block, and farther, till once more
