The Project Gutenberg EBook of Where We Live, by Emilie Van Beil Jacobs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Where We Live
       A Home Geography

Author: Emilie Van Beil Jacobs

Release Date: October 7, 2007 [EBook #22911]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHERE WE LIVE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









WHERE WE LIVE


A HOME GEOGRAPHY

GENERAL EDITION


by

EMILIE V. JACOBS

Supervising Principal of the Richardson L. Wright School,
Philadelphia




PHILADELPHIA, 1913, 1914
CHRISTOPHER SOWER COMPANY
124 North Eighteenth Street




CONTENTS

                                         Page
  Foreword                                  5
  Introduction                              7

  PART ONE
     I. Our School                         11
    II. The Streets and Roads              17
   III. The Buildings                      22
    IV. The Town as a Whole                31
     V. The People                         36
    VI. Industries and Occupations         42
   VII. Animals and Plants                 46
  VIII. Transportation and Communication   50
    IX. Physiography of the Neighborhood   54
     X. Direction                          66

  PART TWO
     I. The Earth as a Whole               73
    II. The Seasons                        79
   III. The Zones                          82
    IV. North America                      93
     V. Countries of North America        100
    VI. Trips                             105




MAPS


    I. The Western Hemisphere           74-75
   II. The Eastern Hemisphere           74-75
  III. The World                           82
   IV. Surface Map of North America        96
    V. North America                      100




FOREWORD


Once upon a time as four blind men sat by the roadside they heard the
tramp of an elephant's feet, and said one to another, "Here comes an
elephant; now we shall know what he is like." The first blind man put
out his hand and touched the elephant's broad side. The second took hold
of a leg. The third grasped a tusk, and the fourth clutched the animal's
tail.

"Now do you know what an elephant looks like?" asked a friend.

"Yes," cried the first. "The elephant is broad and flat like a barn
door."

"What!" exclaimed the second. "The elephant is big and round like the
trunk of a tree."

"Not so!" cried the third. "The elephant is hard and smooth like a
polished stone."

"What are you all talking about?" cried the fourth. "The elephant is
just like a piece of rope."

Much so-called teaching of geography leads to just such incomplete and
fantastic ideas about geographical concepts. Very many children have
only vague, incomplete and incorrect conceptions of the things they see.
Like these physically and mentally blind men we are too often satisfied
with mere wordy descriptions of subjects when we might study the subject
at first hand if we would.

This little book is intended to prevent the giving of information by
description, but to suggest ways of directing attention to those things
which lie within reach of the child's senses, things which he might pass
by, things which are needed now to stimulate an intelligent interest in
his surroundings, things which are needed later for an appreciation and
enjoyment of his study of the larger facts and concepts of geography. If
the larger geographical concepts are to have accuracy and richness for
the child he must have his attention directed to his surroundings. The
trite expression "from the known to the unknown" is good pedagogy, but
there must be a "known" on which to build.

The book is based upon the author's actual experience in the class-room
studying the children at their geography tasks. It has been her
experience that the efforts of the teachers to build broad geographical
concepts were of no avail because the pupils did not have accurate
intimate knowledge of the necessary home geography upon which to build.
To correct this defect she set about collecting and classifying the
necessary material. With the use of this material she not only found
that the class teachers had much less difficulty in presenting the study
of the earth as a whole, but that an interest beyond all expectation was
apparent in the children.

The following pages are valuable more on account of the things they
suggest than for any geographical facts which they incidentally present.
The book is not a text-book on geography; it is a compendium of
suggestion on the study of the subject. It makes little effort to
present facts, but rather it tells how to gather, classify and study
facts. It is intended to be used with children during the age when they
especially delight in the making of collections, and is intended to turn
to a definite use this childish instinct.

Map study is based entirely upon the child's experiences as he makes
plans of his schoolroom, schoolhouse, streets and city. The suggestions
regarding the study of things foreign to the child are based entirely
upon his experience in the study of the types with which he has become
familiar in his study of his surroundings.

  Milton C. Cooper,
  Superintendent of District Nine, Philadelphia.




INTRODUCTION


Geographical knowledge should progress from the known to the unknown,
from the familiar to the unfamiliar. The world is the home of mankind.
We can best understand the larger world by a preliminary consideration
of our own small intimate home. We therefore begin to study geography
with an account of the child's immediate environment. The school stands
for the common home of the class. From the school we gradually widen out
our teaching to include the immediate neighborhood with its buildings,
and finally the whole town or community.

We study the various types of people whom we meet every day, and the
industries in which they engage in their efforts to obtain the three
main necessities of human life,--food, clothing and shelter. The animals
and plants sharing the world with man and contributing to his sustenance
next focus our attention.

The home neighborhood has its physiographical features distinguishing it
from other places and influencing the life of its inhabitants. The land
and water divisions in the immediate environment are studied as types,
while those not closely related to our home are reserved for
consideration as each one occurs in its local geographical place in the
course of study.

We must know something of direction in order to conveniently locate the
streets, buildings and physiographical features near our home. Finally,
we will try to realize the great size of the earth, of which our home is
but a small portion, by a consideration of the relationship of our
community to the rest of the world and to some of this world's great
diversities.

As geography is a study of cause and effect, the early lessons should be
mainly oral. Later, in order to obtain a broad knowledge of geographical
data, not one but many books should be read. This little book aims to
serve as a bridge between the oral lesson and the descriptive text-book.
The presentation of many questions leads the pupil to think out cause
and effect, and to connect his present knowledge with the realm of the
unknown. Special care has been exercised to present facts only when
facts are absolutely necessary, and only after allowing the pupil the
opportunity to first exercise his own reasoning faculties in obtaining
the information.

The excursion is an essential part of every geography course, and every
effort should be made to use this effective means of teaching.

Four types of valuable exercises may be suggested in the use of this
book:

1. The pupils may read the questions orally and give the answers orally.

2. They may read the questions silently, answering them orally.

3. They may read the questions orally and write the answers.

4. Finally, they may silently read the questions and write the answers.

All definitions have been carefully avoided as tending to hamper the
free acquisition of ideas.


  PART I

  TOPICS

   1. Our School.
   2. The Streets and Roads.
   3. The Buildings.
   4. The Town as a Whole.
   5. The People.
   6. Industries and Occupations.
   7. Animals and Plants.
   8. Transportation and Communication
   9. Physiography of the Neighborhood
  10. Direction.


  PART II

   1. The Earth as a Whole.
   2. The Seasons.
   3. The Zones.
   4. North America.
   5. Countries of North America.
   6. Trips.




PART ONE

[Illustration: THE CAPITOL AT WASHINGTON.]




WHERE WE LIVE--A HOME GEOGRAPHY


CHAPTER I

OUR SCHOOL


1

What is the name of our school?

Where have you seen this name?

[Illustration: A TOWN SCHOOL.]

Why was this name given to our school?

On what street or road does our school stand?

