The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ted and the Telephone, by Sara Ware Bassett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Ted and the Telephone

Author: Sara Ware Bassett

Illustrator: William F. Stecher

Release Date: November 2, 2007 [EBook #23292]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TED AND THE TELEPHONE ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, La Monte H.P. Yarroll and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Dialect spellings, contractions and discrepancies have
been retained.


TED AND THE TELEPHONE

By Sara Ware Bassett

_The Invention Series_

PAUL AND THE PRINTING PRESS
STEVE AND THE STEAM ENGINE
TED AND THE TELEPHONE


[Illustration: "Would you like to go to college if you could?"
persisted the elder man.  FRONTISPIECE.
                                              _See page_ 178.]





The Invention Series

TED AND THE TELEPHONE


By

SARA WARE BASSETT



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
WILLIAM F. STECHER



BOSTON
LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY
1922

_Copyright, 1922_,
BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.

_All rights reserved_

Published April, 1922

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




TO THE MEMORY OF

EDWIN T. HOLMES

WHO PLAYED A PART IN THE WONDERFUL
TELEPHONE STORY, THIS
BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED.

S. W. B.




It gives me much pleasure to acknowledge the generosity of Mr. Thomas
Augustus Watson, the associate of and co-worker with Mr. Alexander
Graham Bell, who has placed at my disposal his "Birth and Babyhood of
the Telephone."

Also the courtesy of Mrs. Edwin T. Holmes who has kindly allowed me to
make use of her husband's book: "A Wonderful Fifty Years."

THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                    PAGE

   I  AN UNHERALDED CHAMPION                                  1

  II  TED RENEWS OLD TIMES                                   11

 III  GOING TO HOUSEKEEPING                                  21

  IV  THE FIRST NIGHT IN THE SHACK                           35

   V  A VISITOR                                              49

  VI  MORE GUESTS                                            60

 VII  MR. LAURIE                                             76

VIII  DIPLOMACY AND ITS RESULTS                              94

  IX  THE STORY OF THE FIRST TELEPHONE                      106

   X  WHAT CAME AFTERWARD                                   122

  XI  THE REST OF THE STORY                                 141

 XII  CONSPIRATORS                                          152

XIII  WHAT TED HEARD                                        163

 XIV  THE FERNALDS WIN THEIR POINT                          173

  XV  WHAT CAME OF THE PLOT                                 189

 XVI  ANOTHER CALAMITY                                      199

XVII  SURPRISES                                             213




ILLUSTRATIONS


"Would you like to go to college if you could?" persisted the
elder man                                        _Frontispiece_

"You can't be spreadin' wires an' jars an' things round my
room!" protested Mr. Turner                              Page 9

Soon he came within sight of the shack which stood at the
water's edge                                             "   27

He heard an answering shout and a second later saw Ted Turner
dash through the pines                                   "   88




TED AND THE TELEPHONE




CHAPTER I

AN UNHERALDED CHAMPION


Ted Turner lived at Freeman's Falls, a sleepy little town on the bank
of a small New Hampshire river. There were cotton mills in the town; in
fact, had there not been probably no town would have existed. The mills
had not been attracted to the town; the town had arisen because of the
mills. The river was responsible for the whole thing, for its swift
current and foaming cascades had brought the mills, and the mills in
turn had brought the village.

Ted's father was a shipping clerk in one of the factories and his
two older sisters were employed there also. Some day Ted himself
expected to enter the great brick buildings, as the boys of the town
usually did, and work his way up. Perhaps in time he might become a
superintendent or even one of the firm. Who could tell? Such miracles
did happen. Not that Ted Turner preferred a life in the cotton mills
to any other career. Not at all. Deep down in his soul he detested
the humming, panting, noisy place with its clatter of wheels, its
monotonous piecework, and its limited horizon. But what choice had he?
The mills were there and the only alternative before him. It was the
mills or nothing for people seldom came to live at Freeman's Falls if
they did not intend to enter the factories of Fernald and Company. It
was Fernald and Company that had led his father to sell the tumble-down
farm in Vermont and move with his family to New Hampshire.

"There is no money in farming," announced he, after the death of Ted's
mother. "Suppose we pull up stakes and go to some mill town where we
can all find work."

And therefore, without consideration for personal preferences, they had
looked up mill towns and eventually settled on Freeman's Falls, not
because they particularly liked its location but because labor was
needed there. A very sad decision it was for Ted who had passionately
loved the old farm on which he had been born, the half-blind gray
horse, the few hens, and the lean Jersey cattle that his father
asserted ate more than they were worth. To be cooped up in a
manufacturing center after having had acres of open country to roam
over was not an altogether joyous prospect. Would there be any
chestnut, walnut, or apple trees at Freeman's Falls, he wondered.

Alas, the question was soon answered. Within the village there were
almost no trees at all except a few sickly elms and maples whose
foliage was pale for want of sunshine and grimy with smoke. In fact,
there was not much of anything in the town save the long dingy
factories that bordered the river; the group of cheap and gaudy shops
on the main street; and rows upon rows of wooden houses, all identical
in design, walling in the highway. It was not a spot where green things
flourished. There was not room for anything to grow and if there had
been the soot from the towering chimneys would soon have settled upon
any venturesome leaf or flower and quickly shrivelled it beneath a
cloak of cinders. Even the river was coated with a scum of oil and
refuse that poured from the waste pipes of the factories into the
stream and washed up along the shores which might otherwise have been
fair and verdant.

Of course, if one could get far enough away there was beauty in plenty
for in the outlying country stretched vistas of splendid pines, fields
lush with ferns and flowers, and the unsullied span of the river, where
in all its mountain-born purity it rushed gaily down toward the
village. Here, well distant from the manufacturing atmosphere, were the
homes of the Fernalds who owned the mills, the great estates of Mr.
Lawrence Fernald and Mr. Clarence Fernald who every day rolled to their
offices in giant limousines. Everybody in Freeman's Falls knew them by
sight,--the big boss, as he was called, and his married son; and
everybody thought how lucky they were to own the mills and take the
money instead of doing the work. At least, that was what gossip said
they did.

Unquestionably it was much nicer to live at Aldercliffe, the stately
colonial mansion of Mr. Lawrence Fernald; or at Pine Lea, the home of
Mr. Clarence Fernald, where sweeping lawns, bright awnings, gardens,
conservatories, and flashing fountains made a wonderland of the place.
Troupes of laughing guests seemed always to be going and coming at both
houses and there were horses and motor-cars, tennis courts, a golf
course, and canoes and launches moored at the edge of the river.
Freeman's Falls was a very stupid spot when contrasted with all this
jollity. It must be far pleasanter, too, when winter came to hurry off
to New York for the holidays or to Florida or California, as Mr.
Clarence Fernald frequently did.

With money enough to do whatever one pleased, how could a person help
being happy? And yet there were those who declared that both Mr.
Lawrence and Mr. Clarence Fernald would have bartered their fortunes to
have had the crippled heir to the Fernald millions strong like other
boys. Occasionally Ted had caught a glimpse of this Laurie Fernald, a
fourteen-year-old lad with thin, colorless face and eyes that were
haunting with sadness. In the village he passed as "the poor little
chap" or as "poor Master Laurie" and the employees always doffed their
caps to him because they pitied him. Whether one liked Mr. Fernald or
Mr. Clarence or did not, every one united in being sorry for Mr.
Laurie. Perhaps the invalid realized this; at any rate, he never failed
to return the greetings accorded him with a smile so gentle and sweet
that it became a pleasure in the day of whomsoever received it.

It was said at the factories that the reason the Fernalds went to New
York and Florida and California was because of Mr. Laurie; that was the
reason, too, why so many celebrated doctors kept coming to Pine Lea,
and why both Mr. Fernald and Mr. Clarence were often so sharp and
unreasonable. In fact, almost everything the Fernalds did or did not
do, said or did not say, could be traced back to Mr. Laurie. From the
moment the boy was born--nay, long before--both Mr. Lawrence Fernald
for whom he was named, and his father, Mr. Clarence Fernald, had
planned how he should inherit the great mills and carry on the business
they had founded. For years they had talked and talked of what should
happen when Mr. Laurie grew up. And then had come the sudden and
terrible illness, and after weeks of anxiety everybody realized that if
Mr. Laurie lived he would be fortunate, and that he would never be able
to carry on any business at all.

In what hushed tones the townspeople talked of the tragedy and how they
speculated on what the Fernalds would do _now_. And how surprised the
superintendent of one of the mills (who, by the way, had six husky boys
of his own) had been to have Mr. Lawrence Fernald bridle with rage when
he said he was sorry for him. A proud old man was Mr. Fernald, senior.
He did not fancy being pitied, as his employees soon found out. Possibly
Mr. Clarence Fernald did not like it any better but whether he did or
not he at least had the courtesy not to show his feelings.

