The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Buffalo Runners, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Buffalo Runners
       A Tale of the Red River Plains

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Illustrator: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23372]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BUFFALO RUNNERS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Buffalo Runners, A tale of the Red River Plains, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________

Here once again Ballantyne is on familiar ground.  The theme is the
trials and tribulations suffered by the early settlers, the pioneers, in
the lands to the east of the Rockies, in particular in the Red River
basin, where it flows northwards into Lake Winnipeg.  There are problems
with bad men of their own settlement; bad men from the other main fur
company (our heroes worked with the Hudson Bay Company), the
Nor'westers; Sioux and Salteaux Indians; a plague of grass-hoppers; a
plague of mice; storms that destroyed fishing-gear such as nets; Cree
Indians as well as the other two tribes; bad decisions and actions by
the advisors of Lord Selkirk, who was in charge of the whole operation
of settlement; accidental wounds.  The heroes of the tale are two young
boys, one of whom is "disabled" and weak, but both are shining examples
of goodness and bravery.  The women of the tale are of course all
beautiful and devoted members of their various households.  The men of
the tale vary between the competent and the incompetent; the lazy and
idle, and the industrious;  the cunning, and the stupid.

It might be quite a good idea to read the book more than once, so that
you can get it clear in your mind who is on whose side!

________________________________________________________________________

THE BUFFALO RUNNERS; A TALE OF THE RED RIVER PLAINS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

A TALE OF THE RED RIVER PLAINS.

HELP!

A blizzard was blowing wildly over the American prairies one winter day
in the earlier part of the present century.

Fresh, free and straight, it came from the realms of Jack Frost, and
cold--bitterly cold--like the bergs on the Arctic seas, to which it had
but recently said farewell.

Snow, fine as dust and sharp as needles, was caught up bodily by the
wind in great masses--here in snaky coils, there in whirling eddies,
elsewhere in rolling clouds; but these had barely time to assume
indefinite forms when they were furiously scattered and swept away as by
the besom of destruction, while earth and sky commingled in a smother of
whitey-grey.

All the demons of the Far North seemed to have taken an outside passage
on that blizzard, so tremendous was the roaring and shrieking, while the
writhing of tormented snow-drifts suggested powerfully the madness of
agony.

Two white and ghostly pillars moved slowly but steadily through all this
hurly-burly in a straight line.  One of the pillars was short and broad;
the other was tall and stately.  Both were very solid--agreeably so,
when contrasted with surrounding chaos.  Suddenly the two pillars
stopped--though the gale did not.

Said the short pillar to the tall one--

"Taniel Tavidson, if we will not get to the Settlement this night; it
iss my belief that every one o' them will perish."

"Fergus," replied the tall pillar, sternly, "they shall _not_ perish if
I can help it.  At all events, if they do, I shall die in the attempt to
save them.  Come on."

Daniel Davidson became less like a white pillar as he spoke, and more
like a man, by reason of his shaking a good deal of the snow off his
stalwart person.  Fergus McKay followed his comrade's example, and
revealed the fact--for a few minutes--that beneath the snow-mask there
stood a young man with a beaming countenance of fiery red, the flaming
character of which, however, was relieved by an expression of ineffable
good-humour.

The two men resumed their march over the dreary plain in silence.
Indeed, conversation in the circumstances was out of the question.  The
brief remarks that had been made when they paused to recover breath were
howled at each other while they stood face to face.

The nature of the storm was such that the gale seemed to rush at the
travellers from all quarters at once--including above and below.  Men of
less vigour and resolution would have been choked by it; but men who
don't believe in choking, and have thick necks, powerful frames, vast
experience, and indomitable wills are not easily choked!

"It blows hard--whatever," muttered Fergus to himself, with that
prolonged emphasis on the last syllable of the last word which is
eminently suggestive of the Scottish Highlander.

Davidson may have heard the remark, but he made no reply.

Day declined, but its exit was not marked by much difference in the very
feeble light, and the two men held steadily on.  The moon came out.  As
far as appearances went she might almost as well have stayed in, for
nobody saw her that night.  Her mere existence somewhere in the sky,
however, rendered the indescribable chaos visible.  Hours passed by, but
still the two men held on their way persistently.

They wore five-feet-long snow-shoes.  Progress over the deep snow
without these would have been impossible.  One traveller walked behind
the other to get the benefit of his beaten track, but the benefit was
scarcely appreciable, for the whirling snow filled each footstep up
almost as soon as it was made.  Two days and a night had these men
travelled with but an hour or two of rest in the shelter of a copse,
without fire, and almost without food, yet they pushed on with the
energy of fresh and well-fed men.

Nothing but some overpowering necessity could have stimulated them to
such prolonged and severe exertion.  Even self-preservation might have
failed to nerve them to it, for both had well-nigh reached the limit of
their exceptional powers, but each was animated by a stronger motive
than self.  Fergus had left his old father in an almost dying state on
the snow-clad plains, and Davidson had left his affianced bride.

The buffalo-hunt had failed that year; winter had set in with unwonted
severity and earlier than usual.  The hunters, with the women and
children who followed them in carts to help and to reap the benefit of
the hunt, were starving.  Their horses died or were frozen to death;
carts were snowed up; and the starving hunters had been scattered in
making the best of their way back to the Settlement of Red River from
which they had started.

When old McKay broke down, and his only daughter Elspie had firmly
asserted her determination to remain and die with him, Fergus McKay and
Daniel Davidson felt themselves to be put upon their mettle--called on
to face a difficulty of the most appalling nature.  To remain on the
snow-clad prairie without food or shelter would be death to all, for
there was no living creature there to be shot or trapped.  On the other
hand, to travel a hundred miles or so on foot--and without food, seemed
an impossibility.  Love, however, ignores the impossible!  The two young
men resolved on the attempt.  They were pretty well aware of the extent
of their physical powers.  They would put them fairly to the test for
once--even though for the last time!  They prepared for the old man and
his daughter a shelter in the heart of a clump of willows, near to which
spot they had found a group of the hapless hunters already dead and
frozen.

Here, as far from the frozen group as possible, they made an encampment
by digging down through the snow till the ground was reached.  As much
dried wood as could be found was collected, and a fire made.  The young
men left their blankets behind, and, of the small quantity of provisions
that remained, they took just sufficient to sustain life.  Then, with
cheery words of encouragement, they said good-bye, and set out on their
journey to the Settlement for help.

The object at which they aimed was almost gained at the point when we
introduce them to the reader.

"Taniel!" said Fergus, coming to a sudden halt.

"Well?" exclaimed the other.

"It iss sleepy that I am.  Maybe if I wass to lie down--"

He ceased to speak.  Davidson looked anxiously into his face, and saw
that he had already begun to give way to irresistible drowsiness.
Without a moment's hesitation he seized the Highlander by the throat,
and shook him as if he had been a mere baby.

"Iss it for fightin' ye are?" said Fergus, whose good-nature was not
proof against such rough and unexpected treatment.

"Yes, my boy, that's just what I am for, and I think you'll get the
worst of it too."

"What iss that you say?  Ay, ay!  You will hev to bend your back then,
Taniel, for it iss not every wan that can give Fergus McKay the worst of
it!"

Davidson made no reply, but gave his comrade a shake so violent that it
put to flight the last vestige of his good-humour and induced him to
struggle so fiercely that in a few minutes the drowsiness was also, and
effectually, driven away.

"You'll do now," said Davidson, relaxing his grip and panting somewhat.

"Ay, Taniel, I will be doin' now.  An' you're a frund in need whatever,"
returned the restored Highlander with a smile of appreciation.

About an hour later the travellers again stopped.  This time it was
Davidson who called a halt.

"Fergus," he said, "we have been successful so far, thank God.  But we
must part here.  Half-an-hour will take me to my father's house, and I
want you to go down to the hut of Francois La Certe; it is nearer than
our house, you know--and get him to help you."

"Surely, Tan, that will be wasted time," objected the Highlander.  "Of
all the lazy useless scamps in Rud Ruver, Francois La Certe iss the
laziest an' most useless."

"Useful enough for our purpose, however," returned Davidson.  "Send him
up to Fort Garry with a message, while you lie down and rest.  If you
don't rest, you will yourself be useless in a short time.  La Certe is
not such a bad fellow as people think him, specially when his feelings
are touched."

"That may be as you say, Tan.  I will try--_whatever_."

So saying, the two men parted and hurried on their several ways.



CHAPTER TWO.

A LAZY COUPLE DESCRIBED--AND ROUSED.

Francois La Certe was seated on the floor of his hut smoking a long clay
pipe beside an open wood fire when Fergus McKay approached.  His wife
was seated beside him calmly smoking a shorter pipe with obvious
enjoyment.

The man was a Canadian half-breed.  His wife was an Indian woman.  They
were both moderately young and well matched, for they thoroughly agreed
in everything conceivable--or otherwise.  In the length and breadth of
the Settlement there could not have been found a lazier or more
good-natured or good-for-nothing couple than La Certe and his spouse.
Love was, if we may venture to say so, the chief element in the
character of each.  Love of self was the foundation.  Then, happily,
love of each other came next.  Rising gracefully, the superstructure may
be described as, love of tobacco, love of tea, love of ease, and love of
general comfort, finishing off with a top-dressing, or capital, of
pronounced, decided, and apparently incurable love of indolence.  They
had only one clear and unmistakable hatred about them, and that was the
hatred of work.  They had a child about four years of age which was
like-minded--and not unlike-bodied.

In the wilderness, as in the city, such individuals are well-known by
the similarity of their characteristics.  It is not that they can't
work, but they won't work--though, of course, if taxed with this
disposition they would disclaim it with mild indignation, or an
expression of hurt remonstrance, for they are almost too lazy to become
enraged.  "Take life easy, or, if we can't take it easy, let us take it
as easy as we can," is, or ought to be, their motto.  In low life at
home they slouch and smile.  In high life they saunter and affect
easy-going urbanity--slightly mingled with mild superiority to things in
general.  Whatever rank of life they belong to they lay themselves out
with persistent resolution to do as little work as they can; to make
other people do as much work for them as possible; to get out of life as
much of enjoyment as may be attainable--consistently, of course, with
the incurable indolence--and, to put off as long as may be the evil day
which, they perceive or suspect, must inevitably be coming.

The curious thing about this race of beings is, that, whether in high or
low station, they are never ashamed of themselves--or of their position
as drones in the world's hive.  They seem rather to apologise for their
degradation as a thing inevitable, for which they are not accountable--
and sometimes, in the case of the rich, as a thing justifiable.

"I'm glad I did not go to the plains this fall," said La Certe, stirring
the logs on the fire with his toe and emitting a prolonged sigh of
mingled smoke and contentment, while a blast from the bleak nor'-west
shook every blackened rafter in his little hut.

"Heel hee!" responded his wife, whose Indian name--translated--was
Slowfoot, and might have been Slowtongue with equal propriety, for she
was quite an adept at the art of silence.  She frequently caused a
giggle to do duty for speech.  This suited her husband admirably, for he
was fond of talking--could tell a good story, sing a good song, and
express his feelings in a good hearty laugh.

"Yes, it will be hard for the poor boys who have gone to the plains, the
weather is so awful, to say nothing of the women."

"Ho," replied Slowfoot--though what she meant to express by this no
mortal knows--nor, perhaps, cares.  It meant nothing bad, however, for
she smiled seraphically and sent forth a stream of smoke, which,
mingling with that just emitted by her husband, rose in a curling
harmony to the roof.

Slowfoot was not a bad-looking woman as North American Indians go.  She
was brown unquestionably, and dirty without doubt, but she had a
pleasant expression, suggestive of general good-will, and in the budding
period of life must have been even pretty.  She was evidently older than
her husband, who might, perhaps, have been a little over thirty.

"I should not wonder," continued La Certe, "if the buffalo was drove
away, and the people starved this year.  But the buffalo, perhaps, will
return in time to save them."

"Hm!" responded the wife, helping herself to some very strong tea, which
she poured out of a tin kettle into a tin mug and sweetened with maple
sugar.

"Do you know if Cloudbrow went with them?" asked the half-breed, pushing
forward his mug for a supply of the cheering beverage.

"No, he stopped in his house," replied the woman, rousing herself for a
moment to the conversational point, but relapsing immediately.

The man spoke in patois French, the woman in her native Cree language.
For convenience we translate their conversation as near as may be into
the English in which they were wont to converse with the Scotch settlers
who, some time before, had been sent out by the Earl of Selkirk to
colonise that remote part of the northern wilderness.

La Certe's father was a French Canadian, his mother an Indian woman, but
both having died while he was yet a boy he had been brought or left to
grow up under the care of an English woman who had followed the fortunes
of the La Certe family.  His early companions had been half-breeds and
Indians.  Hence he could speak the English, French, and Indian languages
with equal incorrectness and facility.

"You don't like Cloudbrow," remarked the man with an inquiring glance
over the rim of his mug.  "Why you not like him?"

"Hee! hee!" was Slowfoot's lucid reply.  Then, with an unwonted frown on
her mild visage, she added with emphasis--

"No!  I _not_ like him."

"I know that," returned the husband, setting down his mug and resuming
his pipe, "but why?"

To this the lady answered with a sound too brief to spell, and the
gentleman, being accustomed to his wife's little eccentricities, broke
into a hilarious laugh, and assured her that Cloudbrow was not a bad
fellow--a capital hunter and worthy of more regard than she was aware
of.

"For," said he, "Cloudbrow is willing to wait till spring for payment of
the horse an' cart I hired from him last year.  You know that I could
not pay him till I go to the plains an' get another load of meat an'
leather.  You will go with me, Slowfoot, an' we will have grand times of
it with buffalo-humps an' marrow bones, an' tea an' tobacco.  Ah! it
makes my mouth water.  Give me more tea.  So.  That will do.  What a
noise the wind makes!  I hopes it won't blow over the shed an' kill the
horse.  But if it do I cannot help that.  Cloudbrow could not ask me to
pay for what the wind does."

There came another gust of such violence, as he spoke, that even
Slowfoot's benignant expression changed to a momentary glance of
anxiety, for the shingles on the roof rattled, and the rafters creaked
as if the hut were groaning under the strain.  It passed, however, and
the pair went on smoking with placid contentment, for they had but
recently had a "square" meal of pemmican and flour.
