The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fred Fenton on the Track, by Allen Chapman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fred Fenton on the Track
       or, The Athletes of Riverport School

Author: Allen Chapman

Release Date: December 7, 2007 [EBook #23763]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRED FENTON ON THE TRACK ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  [Illustration: FRED WAS APPARENTLY IN NO GREAT DISTRESS.
  _Page 197_]




Fred Fenton on the Track

Or

The Athletes of Riverport School

BY

ALLEN CHAPMAN

AUTHOR OF "FRED FENTON THE PITCHER," "TOM FAIRFIELD SERIES," "BOYS OF
PLUCK SERIES," "THE DAREWELL CHUMS SERIES," ETC.

ILLUSTRATED

NEW YORK

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

PUBLISHERS




BOOKS FOR BOYS BY ALLEN CHAPMAN


=FRED FENTON ATHLETIC SERIES=

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, 40 cents, postpaid.

        FRED FENTON THE PITCHER
        FRED FENTON IN THE LINE
        FRED FENTON ON THE CREW
        FRED FENTON ON THE TRACK


=TOM FAIRFIELD SERIES=

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, 40 cents, postpaid.

        TOM FAIRFIELD'S SCHOOLDAYS
        TOM FAIRFIELD AT SEA
        TOM FAIRFIELD IN CAMP
        TOM FAIRFIELD'S PLUCK AND LUCK


=THE DAREWELL CHUMS SERIES=

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.

        THE DAREWELL CHUMS
        THE DAREWELL CHUMS IN THE CITY
        THE DAREWELL CHUMS IN THE WOODS
        THE DAREWELL CHUMS ON A CRUISE
        THE DAREWELL CHUMS IN A WINTER CAMP


=BOYS OF PLUCK SERIES=

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.

        THE YOUNG EXPRESS AGENT
        TWO BOY PUBLISHERS
        MAIL ORDER FRANK
        A BUSINESS BOY'S PLUCK
        THE YOUNG LAND AGENT


CUPPLES & LEON CO. PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

Copyrighted 1913, by CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

FRED FENTON ON THE TRACK




CONTENTS


        CHAPTER                                                     PAGE

           I. THE CROSS COUNTRY RUNNERS                                1

          II. A STRANGE SOUND FROM A WELL                              9

         III. OUT OF THE DEPTHS                                       17

          IV. FRED GETS A SHOCK                                       25

           V. HOW GOOD SPRANG FROM EVIL                               32

          VI. THE NEWS CORNEY BROUGHT                                 40

         VII. WHERE IS COLON?                                         49

        VIII. A CLUE IN THE DITCH                                     58

          IX. THE COVERED WAGON                                       66

           X. THE AMBUSH                                              75

          XI. THE HAUNTED MILL                                        83

         XII. A BROKEN DOOR                                           92

        XIII. HOW GABE MADE GOOD                                     100

         XIV. PRACTICE FOR THE RACE                                  109

          XV. THE ACCIDENT                                           117

         XVI. A GLOOMY PROSPECT                                      126

        XVII. AN UNEXPECTED ALLY                                     134

       XVIII. FORCED TO LEND A HAND                                  142

         XIX. GLORIOUS NEWS                                          150

          XX. A WELCOME GUEST                                        158

         XXI. THE ATHLETIC MEET                                      167

        XXII. FRED ON THE TRACK                                      174

       XXIII. A CLOSE COUNT                                          182

        XXIV. THE LONE RUNNER                                        191

         XXV. THE ALASKA CLAIM                                       200




FRED FENTON ON THE TRACK




CHAPTER I

THE CROSS-COUNTRY RUNNERS


"I see you're limping again, Fred."

"That's right, Bristles. I stubbed my toe at the very start of this
cross-country run, and that lost me all chance of coming in ahead.
That's why I fell back, and have been loafing for a stretch."

"And let me catch up with you; eh? Well, I reckon long-legged Colon will
have a cinch in this race, Fred."

"Seems that way. He can get over ground for a certain time like a deer,
you know."

"Huh! more like a kangaroo, I call it; because it always seems to me he
takes big jumps every chance he gets."

Both boys laughed heartily at the picture drawn by Andy Carpenter, who
was known all through the country around the town of Riverport as
"Bristles," on account of the odd way in which his heavy hair stood up.

His companion, Fred Fenton, had assumed a leading place in school
athletic sports since coming to the town on the Mohunk something like a
year previous to the early Fall day when we meet them taking part in
this cross-country run.

That Fred was a pretty fine fellow, as boys go, nearly everybody seemed
agreed. He was modest, and yet could stand up for his rights when
imposed upon; and at the same time he was always ready to lend a helping
hand to a companion in trouble.

Fred had himself occasion to know what it meant to lie awake nights, and
wonder if fortune would ever take a turn for the better. His father had
been left a valuable property away up in Alaska, by a brother who had
died; but there was a lot of red tape connected with the settlement; and
a powerful syndicate of capitalists had an eye on the mine, which was
really essential to their interests, as it rounded out property they
already owned.

A certain man, Hiram Masterson by name, who had been in Alaska for
years, and who had come back to the States to visit an uncle, Sparks
Lemington, living in Riverport, had at first been inclined to side with
the syndicate. Later on he changed his mind, and determined to give
evidence for the Fentons which would, in all probability, cause the
claim to be handed over to them.

How this change came about in the mind of Hiram Masterson, through an
obligation which he found himself under to Fred Fenton, has already been
told at length in the first volume of this series, called: "Fred Fenton,
the Pitcher; Or, The Rivals of Riverport School."

Then it turned out that Hiram suddenly and mysteriously disappeared; and
those who were so deeply interested in his remaining in Riverport
learned that he had really been carried off by agents of the rich
association of mine owners, of whom Sparks Lemington was one. How the
search for the missing witness was carried on, as well as an account of
interesting matters connected with the football struggles in the three
towns bordering the Mohunk, will be found in the second book in the
series, entitled "Fred Fenton in the Line; Or, The Football Boys of
Riverport School."

Once again when hope ran high in the breasts of the Fentons they were
doomed to disappointment, and long waiting. A brief letter was received
from Hiram, written from Hong Kong, telling them that he was on the way
home by slow stages, and would doubtless appear under another name, to
avoid recognition by his uncle, Sparks Lemington. What new expectations
this letter raised in the humble Fenton home; together with the story of
the boat races on the Mohunk, has been related at length in the third
volume, just preceding this, and issued under the name of "Fred Fenton
on the Crew; Or, The Young Oarsman of Riverport School."

But now several months had passed, and as yet Hiram had not come. This
was telling heavily on Fred, who counted the days as they dragged past,
and kept wondering if, after all, the missing witness had died abroad,
and they would never get the benefit of his evidence.

He knew his father was once more falling back into his old condition of
mental distress, and he saw the lines gather on the usually smooth
forehead of his mother. But Fred was by nature a light-hearted lad, who
tried to look on the brighter side of things. He put these dismal
thoughts resolutely aside as much as he could and took his part in the
various pleasures that the young people of the town enjoyed.

Those who were at his side in all sorts of athletic rivalries never
suspected that the boy often worried. And even pretty Flo Temple, the
doctor's daughter, whom Fred always took to picnics, and on boat rides
on moonlight nights, as well as to singing school and choir meetings, if
she thought him a trifle more serious than seemed necessary, did not
know what an effort it required for Fred to hide his anxieties.

Of course both Bristles and Fred were in running costume, in that they
wore as scanty an outfit of clothes as possible. They were jogging
along leisurely, and this allowed plenty of time for talk between them.

Bristles was one of Fred's best chums. Not a great while back he had
fallen into what he called a "peck of trouble, with the pot boiling
over," and Fred had been of great help to him. In fact, had it not been
for him the mystery of who was taking some of Miss Muster's opals might
never have been cleared up; and the elderly spinster, who was Bristles'
mother's aunt, must have always believed that her grand-nephew was the
guilty one.

But Fred had proved otherwise. He had even been smart enough to have the
rich old maid on the spot when Gabe Larkins, the butcher's hired boy,
was secreting his last bit of plunder. In her gratitude at finding that
the culprit was not her own nephew, Miss Muster had even forgiven Gabe,
who had promised to turn over a new leaf.

Somehow the thoughts of Bristles seemed to go back to several things
which had happened to himself and Fred not a great while previous.

"That was a great time we had, Fred," he went on to say, as they fell
into a walk, with a hill to climb; "I mean when we worked in double
harness, and ran up against so many queer adventures last summer, in
boat-racing time. Remember how we managed to rescue little Billy
Lemington when he fell out of his brother's canoe; and how he begged us
not to tell a single soul, because his father would whip him for
disobeying?"

"Do you think Buck ever knew the truth of that canoe business?" remarked
Fred. "I recollect your telling me he accused you of taking his canoe,
and using it, because some fellow saw us putting it back in the place he
kept it, and reported to Buck. And he was some mad, too, threatening all
sorts of things if ever we touched his boat again."

"Say, d'ye know, between you and me and the henhouse, Fred, I don't
believe he's ever heard the truth about that little affair to this day!"
exclaimed Bristles, earnestly. "Want to know why I say that, do you?
Well, just yesterday he threw it at me. We were with some fellows on the
school campus, when the talk turned to canoes, and I happened to say I
knew mighty little about the cranky things, as I'd had no experience in
one."

"Oh! I can see how ready Buck would be to take advantage of that
opening, and give you one of his sneering stabs with his tongue,"
observed Fred, quickly.

"Just what he did, Fred," asserted the other, frowning; "he turned on me
like a flash, and remarked that he guessed I forgot a certain occasion
when I had enjoyed _one_ canoe ride, anyhow, if it was in a stolen boat.
I came mighty near telling the whole thing, how we had saved his little
brother from drowning, or at least how you had, while I helped get you
both ashore. But I stopped myself just in time, and let it pass by."

"Well," Fred went on to say, looking around at the dusty road they had
just reached; "here's where we draw in close again to Riverport, to
strike off again on the second leg of the run after we pass the Hitchen
hotel at the crossroads. I suppose I ought not to keep on, with my toe
hurting as it does; but you know I just hate to give up anything I
start. Perhaps I'll be game enough to hold out to the end; and, besides,
the pain seems to be passing off lately. I could even sprint a little,
if I had to."

"Too late now to dream of heading off Colon, who has kept on the jump
right along, while we took things easy. But I always like to be with
you, Fred. You're a cheery sort of a feller, you know; and I feel better
every time I chat with you."

Poor Fred,--who was secretly nursing deep anxiety to his heart, not
willing to confide in even his best friends, lest in some way Squire
Lemington get wind of the fact that they had heard from Hiram
Masterson,--winced, and then smiled. Well, if he could put on a
cheerful front, in spite of all that tried to weigh his spirits down, so
much the better.

"We must turn at the crossroads, Bristles," he remarked. "The course
heads into the northwest from there, up to Afton's pond; then due east
two miles to Watch Hill; where we turn again and follow the turnpike
home again."

"Oh! I guess I can stand for it, if you keep me company all the way,
Fred; though I never was built for a runner, I reckon. But listen to all
that shouting; would you? Some feller is excited, it sounds like. There,
just what I expected was the matter; there's a horse taken the bit
between his teeth, and is running away. I can see a boy sprinting after
him, and that's his voice we get. Now, I wonder what it's up to us to
do; step aside and let the runaway nag pass by; or try something to stop
him? What say, Fred; can we block the road, and make him hold up,
without taking too much risk?"




CHAPTER II

A STRANGE SOUND FROM A WELL


"Hi! there! Stop that horse! Head him off!"

The excited boy who was chasing wildly along in the rear of the runaway
shouted these words as he waved his arms to the two lads coming so
suddenly on the scene.

"Why, it's Gabe Larkins, as sure as you live!" ejaculated Bristles,
recognizing the boy who drove the butcher's cart, and who had been
concerned in the affair of Miss Muster's vanishing opals.

"Never mind who the boy is!" Fred called out; "if we want to head that
runaway off we've got to be moving. Stand over there, wave your arms and
shout 'Whoa!' as loud as you can. I'll try to cover this side of the
road and do the same. The beast has just taken a notion to bolt home,
that's all, and isn't badly frightened. We may be able to stop him right
here."

"How far do we go, Fred?" cried Bristles, who was always ready and
willing to do his share of any exciting business.

"Be careful, and keep ready to jump aside if he refuses to let up on his
speed, Bristles."

"All right; I'm on, Fred!" And with that Bristles started to make as
great and hostile a demonstration with arms and voice as he was capable
of exhibiting.

His chum was doing likewise; so that between them they seemed to
entirely block the road. The runaway horse was, as Fred had said, not
worked up to the frantic stage where nothing would stay his progress.
Indeed, seeing that these determined figures in running costume acted as
though they meant to keep him from passing, the beast gradually
slackened his pace.

The butcher's cart came to a standstill not twenty feet away from the
boys; and the animal even started to back up into a fence corner, when
the driver arrived on the scene, and took hold of the trailing lines.
After that he soon gained the mastery over the horse.

"Got the slip on you that time, did he, Gabe?" remarked Fred,
pleasantly; for he had been given to understand by Miss Muster, who was
keeping track of the boy, that Gabe Larkins was doing what he could to
make good; and Fred believed in extending a helping hand to every fellow
who wanted to better his ways.

"Oh! he's a slick one, I tell you, fellers!" declared the panting and
angered boy, as he reined in the animal that had given him such a scare
and a race. "Nine times out of ten I tie him when I go to deliver meat.
He knows when I forget, and this is the fourth time he's run away on me.
Smashed a wheel once, and nigh 'bout scraped all the paint off'n one
side of the pesky cart another time. Old Bangs says as how he means to
fire me if it ever happens again."

"Well, we're right glad, then, Gabe, that we've been able to keep you
from losing your job," Fred went on to say. "But that horse has a trick
of going off if he isn't tied. I've heard about him before, and the
trouble he gave the boy who was ahead of you. If I was driving him I'd
never leave him unfastened."

"And I ain't a-goin' to no more, you just make sure of that!" Gabe
declared, as no doubt he had done after every previous accident, only to
grow careless again. "But it was nice in you fellers to shoo him that
way. I sure thought he'd run right over you, but he didn't. Must 'a
knowed from the way you talked to him you didn't mean to hurt him any."

"Well, we must be going on, Gabe, as we're in the cross-country run,"
said Bristles, who had been trying to study the face of the butcher's
boy.

"Say, I'd like to be along with you, sure I would," remarked Gabe,
wistfully. "Used to be some runner myself; but don't get no chanct
nowadays. But I reckon it's all right, 'cause she says I'm a-doin' fine.
Mebbe some day I can have a little fun like the rest of the fellers. I'm
a heap 'bliged to both of you for holdin' up the hoss. G'lang, Rube!"

Swish! came the whip down on the withers of the late frisky runaway, and
Gabe went helter-skelter down the road, headed for his next stopping
place.

During the late summer the public spirited citizens of Riverport, led by
Judge Colon, had started to raise funds in order to equip a much needed
gymnasium with the latest appliances required by those who would train
their muscles, and make themselves healthier by judicious exercise.

Mechanicsburg, up the river three miles, had done that for her school;
and Riverport was trying to at least equal the generous spirit of the
business men of the other town.

"Oh! the gym's just booming right along," declared Bristles,
enthusiastically. "You know they've already got a long lease on the big
rink where they used to have roller skating years ago. A cinder path has
been laid around the whole of the circuit, equal to any outdoor track
going. Great times we're going to have this winter, I tell you, Fred!"

"And, Bristles, how about the money for all the outfit--punching bags,
parallel bars, boxing gloves, basketball stuff, and all the other things
needed in an up-to-date gym?"

"Heard last night," said the other, joyfully, "that it had all been
subscribed, and the order sent on. We'll soon be in the swim for keeps.
But, while the good weather lasts let's keep outdoors. We can practice
all sorts of stunts, so as to be ready to contest with those
Mechanicsburg boys in an athletic meet. Great times ahead of us yet, old
fellow! Hope we manage to snatch some of the prizes away from our old
rivals; though they say it's just wonderful how clever they're sprinting
and jumping up-river."

"We heard that sort of talk about football, and then when the boat race
was planned didn't they say Mechanicsburg had a crew that was just a
wonder?" Fred remarked, with a pleasant and cheery laugh.

"You're right, they did, Fred; and yet we licked the spots out of 'em
both times. And we can do it some more, if we keep on practicing our
stunts as Brad wants us to. Ten to one now they haven't got as fast a
sprinter as our long legged Colon in their whole school. And when it
comes to long-distance racing they'll have to look pretty far to find
anybody who can hold out like Fred Fenton."

"Oh! let up on that kind of talk, Bristles; perhaps I might hold up my
end of the log; and again there's a chance they've got a better man up
there. I remember some of their fellows got around the bases like fun;
and could carry the ball across the gridiron once they got hold of it.
You never can tell what the best runner might be up against in a long
race. Look at me to-day, stubbing my toe at the start; if this had been
the big occasion that would have put me out of the procession in a
hurry."

"Let's start on a little sprint again, now that we're getting close to
the cross-road tavern. I can see it yonder through the trees. Old Adam
will think we're handicap runners, catching up on the leaders. Here we
go, Fred!"

Reaching the tavern at the spot where the roads crossed, they halted to
get a cool drink, and ask a few questions. Somehow they saw nothing of
any of the other runners, though the proprietor of the place told them
several had come and gone. They found the names of Colon, Dave Hendricks
and Corney Shays on the official pad that had been left at this
important point, in order that each contestant might place his signature
on it when he arrived, proving that he had fully covered the
requirements of the run.

Once more the two lads started on their way at a good pace, since their
short rest had refreshed them considerably.

"Look at the gray squirrel!" exclaimed Bristles, who was beginning to
get winded after a mile of this jogging work, because he had not yet
learned never to open his mouth while running, if it could be avoided.

"He's laying in his store of shagbark hickories for the winter,"
declared Fred; "and you better believe he picks only the good ones. I
never yet found a bad nut in any store laid away by a squirrel. They
know what's juicy and sweet, all right."

"Hold on!" said Bristles, coming to a stop.

"What's the matter now; hear any more runaways?" asked Fred, laughing;
but at the same time coming to a walk in order to accommodate his
panting chum.

"No, but there's an old farmhouse through the trees there, and I can see
a fine well. Makes me feel dry again just to glimpse it. Come on, let's
have a drink," and Bristles led the way between the trees toward the
lonely looking place.

"A queer spot, Fred," he remarked. "Looks like it's deserted; and yet
there's smoke coming out of the chimney; and I saw a pig run around the
corner of that little stable. Here's our well; draw a bucket while I get
my wind. Oh! did you hear that, Fred? It sounded just for all the world
like a groan; and, as sure as anything, it came right out of this same
well!"




CHAPTER III

OUT OF THE DEPTHS


The two boys turned to look at one another; and if they showed signs of
alarm it was hardly to be wondered at.

"Oh! there it is again, Fred!" whispered Bristles, as a second sound,
that was certainly very like a groan, came from the well.

Fred caught his breath. It was an unpleasant experience, to be sure; and
might have tried the nerves of much older persons than two half-grown
lads; but, after all, why should they be afraid?

"Somebody may have fallen down the well, and can't get out again," Fred
remarked, with just the least tremor to his usually steady voice.

"Say, that's so," Bristles hastened to admit, as he cast a quick glance
at the almost ropeless wooden windlass; "don't you see the bucket's away
down? Whoever it is, Fred, they just can't climb up again. It takes you
to get on the inside track of things, Fred."

"If that's so, it might account for the fact that nobody seems to be
around the place," Fred went on to say.

"P'raps an old man lives here all alone, and he tripped over these
stones when he went to lift the bucket of water out, and fell in
himself. Gee! Fred, then it's up to us to get him out!"

The other stepped directly up to the edge of the old well. He saw that
the coping was uneven, some of the stones being loose. It looked very
much as if what Bristles had suggested might be the truth, and that some
person, when striving to raise a heavy bucket, had lost his balance,
slipped on the treacherous footing, and toppled into the well.

And, even as Fred Fenton bent down, he was thrilled to hear a third
groan come out of the depths. Nevertheless, instead of starting back, he
bent over further, as though hoping to look down and discover the truth.

"Can you see him?" asked Bristles, very white in the face, but bent on
sticking it out as long as his chum did.

