The Project Gutenberg EBook of Work and Win, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Work and Win
       or, Noddy Newman on a Cruise

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: December 7, 2007 [EBook #23758]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORK AND WIN ***




Produced by David Garcia, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Kentuckiana Digital Library)











[Illustration: WORK AND WIN

OLIVER OPTIC]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Signature: William T. Adams]





WORK AND WIN

OR

NODDY NEWMAN ON A CRUISE

A Story for Young People

BY

OLIVER OPTIC

        AUTHOR OF "BOAT CLUB," "ALL ABOARD," "NOW
        OR NEVER," ETC., ETC.

        NEW YORK
        HURST & COMPANY
        PUBLISHERS




        To

        MY YOUNG FRIEND,

        Edward C. Bellows,

        THIS BOOK

        IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED.




PREFACE.


In the preparation of this volume, the author has had in his mind the
intention to delineate the progress of a boy whose education had been
neglected, and whose moral attributes were of the lowest order, from
vice and indifference to the development of a high moral and religious
principle in the heart, which is the rule and guide of a pure and true
life.

The incidents which make up the story are introduced to illustrate the
moral status of the youth, at the beginning, and to develop the
influences from which proceeded a gentle and Christian character.
Mollie, the captain's daughter, whose simple purity of life, whose
filial devotion to an erring parent, and whose trusting faith in the
hour of adversity, won the love and respect of Noddy, was not the least
of these influences. If the writer has not "moralized," it was because
the true life, seen with the living eye, is better than any precept,
however skilfully it may be dressed by the rhetorical genius of the
moralist.

Once more the author takes pleasure in acknowledging the kindness of his
young friends, who have so favorably received his former works; and he
hopes that "WORK AND WIN," the fourth of the Woodville Stories, will
have as pleasant a welcome as its predecessors.

                                              WILLIAM T. ADAMS.
        HARRISON SQUARE. MASS.,
           November 10, 1865.




CONTENTS.


        CHAPTER                                PAGE

            I. The Mischief-Makers               9

           II. The Circus at Whitestone         21

          III. A Moral Question                 33

           IV. Noddy's Confession               45

            V. Squire Wriggs at Woodville       57

           VI. Noddy's Engagement               70

          VII. The Ring-Master                  81

         VIII. Good-by to Woodville             93

           IX. An Attempt to Work and Win      105

            X. Poor Mollie                     117

           XI. The Schooner Roebuck            129

          XII. The Drunken Captain             141

         XIII. The Shark                       154

          XIV. The Yellow Fever                167

           XV. The Demon of the Cup            180

          XVI. Night and Storm                 193

         XVII. After the Storm                 206

        XVIII. The Beautiful Island            217

          XIX. The Visitors                    228

           XX. Homeward Bound                  239

          XXI. The Clergyman and his Wife      247




WORK AND WIN;

OR,

NODDY NEWMAN ON A CRUISE.




CHAPTER I.

THE MISCHIEF-MAKERS.


"Here, Noddy Newman! you haven't washed out the boat-house yet," said
Ben, the boatman, as the young gentleman thus addressed was ambling down
towards the river.

"Hang the boat-house!" exclaimed Noddy, impatiently, as he stopped short
in his walk, and seemed to be in doubt whether he should return or
continue on his way.

"You know what Miss Bertha says--don't you?"

"Yes, I know what she says," added Noddy, rubbing his head, as though he
were trying to reconcile his present purpose, whatever it was, with the
loyalty he owed to Bertha. "I suppose it don't make much difference to
her whether I wash out the boat-house now or by and by."

"I don't know anything about that, my boy," said the old man. "Miss
Bertha told me to find some regular work for you to do every day. I
found it, and she say you must wash out the boat-house every morning
before nine o'clock. If you don't do it, I shall report you to her.
That's all I've got to say about it."

"I calculate to wash out the boat-house."

"You've only half an hour to do it in, then. You've not only got to wash
it out every morning, but you have got to do it before nine o'clock.
Them's the orders. I always obey orders. If Miss Bertha should tell me
to tie you up, and give you as big a licking as you deserve, I should do
it."

"No, you wouldn't."

"I haven't got any such orders, mind ye, Noddy; so we won't dispute
about that. Now, go and wash out the boat-house like a good boy, and
don't make any fuss about it."

Noddy deliberated a few moments more. He evidently disliked the job, or
did not wish to do it at that particular time; but Miss Bertha's
influence was all-powerful; and though he would have fought, tooth and
nail, against anything like compulsion on the part of Ben, he could not
resist the potent spell which the name of his young mistress cast upon
him.

"Hang the old boat-house!" exclaimed he, as he stamped his foot upon the
ground, and then slowly retraced his steps towards the boatman.

"Hang it, if you like, Noddy, but wash it out first," said Ben, with a
smile, as he observed the effect of the charm he had used to induce the
wayward youth to do his duty.

"I wish the boat-house was burned up!" added Noddy, petulantly.

"No, you don't."

"Yes, I do. I wish it was a pile of ashes at this moment."

"Don't say so, Noddy. What would Miss Bertha think to hear you talk like
that?"

"You can tell her, if you like," replied Noddy, as he rushed desperately
into the boat-house to do the disagreeable job.

Noddy Newman was an orphan; and no one in the vicinity of Woodville even
knew what his real name was. Two years before, Bertha Grant had taken
the most tender care of him, after an accident by which he had been
severely injured. Previous to that time he had been a vagabond, roaming
about the woods and the villages, sleeping in barns and out-buildings,
and stealing his food when he could obtain it by no other means. Efforts
had been made to commit him to the poorhouse; but he had cunningly
avoided being captured, and retained his freedom until the accident
placed him under the influence of Bertha Grant, who had before vainly
attempted to induce him to join her mission-school in the Glen.

Noddy had been two years at Woodville. He was neither a servant nor a
member of the family, but occupied a half-way position, eating and
sleeping with the men employed on the estate, but being the constant
companion of Bertha, who was laboring to civilize and educate him. She
had been partially successful in her philanthropic labors; for Noddy
knew how to behave himself with propriety, and could read and write with
tolerable facility. But books and literature were not Noddy's _forte_,
and he still retained an unhealthy relish for his early vagabond habits.

Like a great many other boys,--even like some of those who have been
brought up judiciously and carefully,--Noddy was not very fond of work.
He was bold and impulsive, and had not yet acquired any fixed ideas in
regard to the objects of life. Bertha Grant had obtained a powerful
influence over him, to which he was solely indebted for all the progress
he had made in learning and the arts of civilized life. Wayward as he
always had been, and as he still was, there was a spirit in him upon
which to build a hope that something might yet be made of him, though
this faith was in a great measure confined to Bertha and the old
boatman.

He had a great many good qualities--enough, in the opinion of his gentle
instructress, to redeem him from his besetting sins, which were neither
few nor small. He was generous, which made him popular among those who
were under no moral responsibility for his future welfare. He was bold
and daring, and never hesitated to do anything which the nerve or muscle
of a boy of fourteen could achieve. His feats of strength and daring,
often performed from mere bravado, won the admiration of the
thoughtless, and Noddy was regarded as a "character" by people who only
wanted to be amused.

Noddy had reached an age when the future became an interesting problem
to those who had labored to improve his manners and his morals. Mr.
Grant had suggested to Bertha the propriety of having him bound as an
apprentice to some steady mechanic; and, at the time of our story, she
and her father were in search of such a person. The subject of this kind
solicitude did not relish the idea of learning a trade, though he had
not positively rebelled at the disposition which it was proposed to make
of him.

He had always lived near the river; and during his residence at
Woodville he had been employed, so far as he could be employed at all,
about the boats. He was a kind of assistant to the boatman, though there
was no need of such an official on the premises. For his own good,
rather than for the labor he performed, he was required to do certain
work about the boat-house, and in the boats when they were in use.

We could recite a great many scrapes, of which Noddy had been the hero,
during the two years of his stay at Woodville; but such a recital would
hardly be profitable to our readers, especially as the young man's
subsequent career was not devoid of stirring incidents.

Noddy drew a bucket of water at the pier, and carried it into the
boat-house. Ben, satisfied now that the work was actually in progress,
left the pier, and walked up to the house to receive his morning
instructions. He was hardly out of sight before Miss Fanny Grant
presented herself at the door.

Miss Fanny was now a nice young lady of twelve. She was as different
from her sister Bertha as she could be. She was proud, and rather
wayward. Like some other young ladies we have somewhere read about, she
was very fond of having her own way, even when her own way had been
proved to be uncomfortable and dangerous. But when we mention Miss
Fanny's faults, we do not wish to be understood that she had no virtues.
If she did wrong very often, she did right in the main, and had made a
great deal of progress in learning to do wisely and well, and, what was
just as good, in doing it after she had learned it.

Fanny Grant walked up to the boat-house with a very decided step, and it
