The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Union Scout, by Joel Chandler Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Little Union Scout

Author: Joel Chandler Harris

Illustrator: George Gibbs

Release Date: December 15, 2007 [EBook #23871]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE UNION SCOUT ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






[Illustration: A LITTLE UNION SCOUT
By JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS]

[Illustration: I drank in the melody with a new sense of its wild and
melancholy beauty (_Page 56_)]




A LITTLE UNION SCOUT



By

JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS

AUTHOR OF GABRIEL TOLLIVER,
THE MAKING OF A STATESMAN
AND WALLY WANDEROON



_Illustrated by George Gibbs_


NEW YORK
McCLURE, PHILLIPS & CO.
MCMIV

_Copyright, 1904, by_
JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS

Published, April, 1904

Copyright, 1904, by The Curtis Publishing Company




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


I drank in the melody with a new sense of its wild
and melancholy beauty                                 _Frontispiece_

                                                          Facing page

"He's tryin' to git away!" yelled Forrest in a voice
that could be heard all over the field                             10

"I want you to catch this fellow and fetch him to me"              38

Whistling Jim ran into him head down like a bull                   64

I was wild with remorse and grief                                  96

"If hate could kill you, you would fall dead from this horse"     110

The leader ... had an evil-looking eye                            138

He had me covered                                                 156




A LITTLE UNION SCOUT




I


A young lady, just returned from college, was making a still-hunt in
the house for old things--old furniture, old china, and old books. She
had a craze for the antique, and the older things were the more
precious they were in her eyes. Among other things she found an old
scrap-book that her mother and I thought was safe under lock and key.
She sat in a sunny place and read it page by page, and, when she had
finished, her curiosity was aroused. The clippings in the old
scrap-book were all about the adventures of a Union scout whose name
was said to be Captain Frank Leroy. The newspaper clippings that had
been preserved were queerly inconsistent. The Northern and Western
papers praised the scout very highly, and some of them said that if
there were more such men in the army the cause of the Union would
progress more rapidly; whereas the Southern papers, though paying a
high tribute to the dash and courage of the scout, were highly abusive.
He was "one of Lincoln's hirelings" and as villanous as he was bold.

The girl graduate at once jumped to the conclusion that there was a
story behind the old scrap-book, else why should it be preserved by her
father, who had been a Confederate soldier? This idea no sooner took
shape than she became insistently inquisitive. As for her father, the
very sight of the scrap-book awoke the echoes of a hundred
experiences--long and dangerous rides in the lonely night, battles,
sharp skirmishes and bitter sufferings.

The story, such as it was, took shape in my mind, and I am afraid that
the young girl had small difficulty in persuading me to tell it. Memory
brought before me the smiling features of Harry Herndon, my life-long
friend and comrade, the handsome face of Jack Bledsoe, one of our
college mates from Missouri, and the beautiful countenance of his
sister, Katherine Bledsoe. These and a hundred other faces came
crowding from the past, and the story was told almost before I knew it.

When Harry Herndon and I went to the wars we were somewhat belated. The
excitement of '61 found us at college, where we had orders to remain
until we had finished the course, and the orders came from one whom we
had never dared to disobey--Harry's grandmother. And then, when we were
ready to go, she cut in ahead of our plans and sent us to the West with
letters to General Dabney Maury, whom she had known when he was a boy
and later when he was a young officer in the regular army.

We were not ill-equipped for two raw youngsters; we had Whistling Jim,
the negro, three fine horses, and more money than I had ever seen
before. We went to General Maury and were most courteously received.
The Virginia Herndons--Harry belonged to the Maryland branch--were
related to him--and he liked the name. We caught the barest glimpse of
service at Corinth, and were fortunate enough to be in a few
skirmishes, where we distinguished ourselves by firing at nothing
whatever.

In the course of a few weeks General Maury was made commander of the
Department of the Gulf, with headquarters at Mobile, where we saw
service as clerks and accountants. For my part, the life suited me
passing well, but Harry Herndon fretted so that we were soon
transferred to the command of General Forrest, who was sadly in need of
men. As it happened, we had little difficulty in finding our man. We
had heard that he was in the neighborhood of Chattanooga, giving his
men and horses a much-needed rest; but on the way news came to us that,
in spite of his brilliant achievements in the field, he had been
deprived of the choicest regiments of his brigade--men whom he had
trained and seasoned to war. After this mutilation of his command, he
had been ordered to Murfreesborough to recruit and organize a new
brigade.

Toward Murfreesborough, therefore, we made our way, falling in with a
number of Forrest's men who had been on a brief visit to their homes in
Alabama and were now returning to their command. As we shortly
discovered, the Union commanders in Tennessee mistook General Forrest's
movement to the neighborhood of Chattanooga for a retreat; for, shortly
after he moved in that direction, an ambitious Federal officer asked
and received permission to enter Northern Alabama with a force large
enough to worry the Confederate leader if he could be found. The
organization and equipment of this force required a longer time than
the Federal commander had counted on, and by the time it was ready to
move General Forrest, with the remnant of his command, was on his way
to Murfreesborough.

In some way--the sources of his information were as mysterious as his
movements--General Forrest learned that a Federal force was making its
way toward Northern Alabama, and he did not hesitate to give it his
attention. Within a very short time he had followed and overtaken it,
passing it on a road that lay parallel to its line of march. Then it
was that the Federal commander began to hear rumors and reports all
along his route that Forrest was making a rapid retreat before him. It
was stated that his men were discontented and that the condition of his
horses was something terrible.

One day, along toward evening, the Federal commander went into camp in
the neighborhood of a wooded hill that commanded the approach from the
south. He felt sure that the next day would witness the rout and
capture of the Confederate who had for so long harassed the Federals in
Tennessee. As he came to the hill he passed within a few hundred yards
of Forrest's men, who were concealed in the woods. The Federals went
into camp, while Forrest, leaving a part of his command in the enemy's
rear, silently passed around his right flank.

Now, it happened that Harry Herndon and myself, accompanied by
Whistling Jim and the companions we had picked up on the way, were
coming up from the south. It happened also that we were following the
road leading through the valley to the left of the hill on which the
opposing forces were stationed. It was very early in the morning, and
as we rode along there was not a sound to be heard, save the jingling
of our bridles.

The valley had more length than breadth, and was shaped something like
a half-moon, the road following the contour of the crescent. We had
proceeded not more than a hundred yards along the road within the
compass of the valley when a six-pounder broke the silence with a bang,
and a shell went hurtling through the valley. It seemed to be so
uncomfortably near that I involuntarily ducked my head.

"Marse Cally Shannon," said Whistling Jim, the negro, addressing me,
"what you reckon make dem white folks bang aloose at we-all, when we
ain't done a blessed thing? When it come ter dat, we ain't ez much ez
speaken ter um, an' here dey come, bangin' aloose at us. An' mo' dan
dat, ef dat ar bung-shell had 'a' hit somebody, it'd 'a' fetched sump'n
mo' dan blood."

Whistling Jim's tone was plaintive, but he seemed no more frightened
than Harry was. Following the bang of the gun came the sharp rattle of
musketry. We learned afterward that this firing occurred when the
advance guard of the Federal commander collided with Forrest's famous
escort. We had no idea of the result of the collision, or that there
had been a collision. We had paused to make sure of our position and
whereabouts. Meanwhile, the little six-pounder was barking away
furiously, and presently we heard a strident voice cut the morning air:
"Go and tell Freeman to put his battery right in on that gun. I give
you five minutes."

"That's our man!" cried one of the troopers who had fallen in with us
on our journey. Joy shone in his face as he urged his horse forward,
and we followed right at his heels. In a moment we saw him leap from
his horse and throw the bridle-reins to a trooper who was holding a
string of horses. We gave ours to Whistling Jim to hold and ran forward
with the man we had been following.

We came right upon General Forrest--I knew him from the newspaper
portraits, poor as they were. He was standing with his watch in his
hand. He looked us over with a coldly critical eye, but gave us no
greeting. He replaced the watch in his pocket and waved his hand to a
bugler who was standing expectantly by his side. The clear notes rang
out, and instantly there ensued a scene that baffles description. There
was a rush forward, and Harry and I were carried with it.

I could hear loud commands, and shouting, and the rattle of carbines,
muskets, and pistols made my ears numb--but what happened, or when or
where, I could no more tell you than the babe at its mother's breast. I
could only catch glimpses of the fighting through the smoke, and though
I was as close to General Forrest as any of his men--right by his side,
in fact--I could not tell you precisely what occurred. I could hear
cries and curses and the explosion of firearms, but beyond that all was
mystery.

I had time during the _melee_ to take note of the actions of General
Forrest, and I observed that a great change had come over him. His
face, which was almost as dark as an Indian's when in perfect repose,
was now inflamed with passion and almost purple. The veins on his neck
stood out as though they were on the point of bursting, and his blazing
eyes were bloodshot. Above the din that was going on all around him his
voice could be heard by friend and foe alike. I cannot even describe my
own feelings.

A courier rode up. He had lost his hat, and there was a spot of blood
on his chin. He reported that the Federals were making a desperate
effort on the extreme right. "He's tryin' to git away!" yelled Forrest
in a voice that could be heard all over the field. "Tell Freeman to
take his guns thar and shove 'em in right on top of 'em. We've got the
bulge on 'em here, and we're coming right along."

[Illustration: "He's tryin' to git away!" yelled Forrest in a voice
that could be heard all over the field.]

And, sure enough, we began to find less and less resistance in front of
us, and presently I could see them running out into the valley, filling
the road by which we had come.




II


No pursuit was made at the time, and the Federals, finding that they
were not harried, proceeded in a leisurely way toward the river. We
followed slowly and at night went into camp, the men and horses getting
a good rest. Scouts were coming in to make reports at all hours of the
night, so that it was practically true, as one of the old campaigners
remarked, that a horse couldn't whicker in the enemy's camp "but what
the General 'd hear it sooner or later."

Early the next morning we were on the road, and I had time for
reflecting that, after all, war was not a matter of flags and music.
The General was very considerate, however--a fact that was due to a
letter that General Maury had intrusted to Harry Herndon's care. We
were permitted to ride as temporary additions to General Forrest's
escort, and he seemed to single us out from among the rest with various
little courtesies, which I imagined was something unusual.

He was somewhat inquisitive about Whistling Jim, Harry's body-servant,
who he thought was a little too free and easy with white men. But he
seemed satisfied when Harry told him that the negro's forebears for
many generations back had belonged to the Herndons. We halted for a
light dinner, and when we had finished General Forrest made a careful
inspection of his men as they filed into the road.

We had gone but a few miles when we came to a point where the roads
forked. On one he sent a regiment, with Freeman's battery, with
instructions to reach the river ahead of the Federals and hold the ford
at all hazards until the main body could come up. This done, we swung
into the road that had been taken by the Federals and went forward at a
somewhat brisker pace.

"I'm going to give your nigger the chance of his life," remarked
General Forrest somewhat grimly, "and he'll either fling up his hands
and go to the Yankees, or he'll take to the woods."

"He may do one or the other," replied Harry; "but if he does either
I'll be very much surprised." General Forrest laughed; he was evidently
very sure that a negro would never stand up before gun-fire. A scout
came up to report that the Federals were moving much more rapidly than
they had moved in the morning.

"I reckon he's got wind of the column on the other road," the General
commented. "I allowed he'd hear of it. He's a mighty smart man, and
he's got as good men as can be found--Western fellows. If he had known
the number of my men in the woods back yander he'd 'a' whipped me out
of my boots." And then his eye fell again on Whistling Jim, who was
laughing and joking with some of the troopers. He called to the negro
in stern tones, and ordered him to ride close to his young master. "We
are going to have a little scrimmage purty soon, and a nigger that's
any account ought to be right where he can help his master if he gets
hurt."

Whistling Jim's face, which had grown very serious when he heard his
name called by the stern commander, suddenly cleared up and became
illuminated by a broad grin. "You hear dat, Marse Harry!" he exclaimed.
"I'm gwine in right behime you!" He reflected a moment, and then
uttered an exclamation of "Well, suh!"

About four o'clock in the afternoon the troopers under General Forrest
came in contact with Federals. This was in the nature of a surprise to
the Union commander, for there were persistent reports that Forrest had
passed on the other road, with the evident intention of harrying the
Federals at a point where they had no intention of crossing. So well
assured was he that these reports were trustworthy that he was
seriously considering the advisability of detaching a force
sufficiently large to capture the Confederate. He therefore paid small
attention to the attacks on his rear-guard. But presently the pressure
became so serious that he sent a member of his staff to investigate it.

Before the officer could perform this duty the rear-guard was compelled
to retreat on the main body in the most precipitate manner. Then the
attack ceased as suddenly as it began, and the Federal commander
concluded that, under all the circumstances, it would be best to cross
the river and get in touch with his base of supplies.

He went forward as rapidly as his troops could march, and he had a
feeling of relief when he came in sight of the river. It was higher
than it had been when he crossed it three or four days before, but
still fordable; but as his advance guard began to cross, Freeman's
battery, operated by young Morton, opened on them from the ambuscade in
which it had been concealed. The thing to do, of course, was to charge
the battery and either capture it or silence it, and the Federal
commander gave orders to that effect. But Forrest, looking at the
matter from a diametrically opposite point of view, knew that the thing
to do was to prevent the capture of the battery, and so he increased
the pressure upon the Federal rear to such an extent that his opponent
had no time to attend to the Confederate battery.

The Union commander was a very able man and had established a
reputation as a good fighter. So now, with perfect coolness, he managed
to present a very strong front where the rear had been, and he made
desperate efforts to protect his flank. But he was too late. Forrest
said afterward that it was as pretty a move as he had ever seen, and
that if it had been made five minutes sooner it would probably have
saved the day.

Just as the movement was about to be completed it was rendered useless
by the charge of Forrest's escort, a picked body of men, led by the
General in person. In the circumstances such charges were always
irresistible. Before the Federals could recover, the Confederate
general, by means of a movement so sudden that no commander could have
foreseen it, joined his force with that which was supporting Freeman's
battery and charged all along the line, bringing the eight and
twelve-pounders right to the front. No men, however brave, could stand
before a battery at close range, and the inevitable result ensued--they
got out of the way, and stood not on the order of their going. They
floundered across the river as best they could, and if they had not
been American troops they would have been demoralized and rendered
useless for fighting purposes; but, being what they were, they showed
their courage on many a hard-fought field as the war went on.

When night fell we retired a mile or two from the river and went into
camp. Forrest was in high good-humor. He had accomplished all that he
had set out to accomplish, and more. He had emphasized the fact that it
was dangerous work for the Federals to raid Northern Alabama while he
was in striking distance, and he had captured army stores and secured
horses that were comparatively fresh. The most welcome capture was the
arms, for many of his men were armed with flintlock muskets.

He was very talkative. "That nigger of yours done about as well as any
of the balance of us," he said to Harry Herndon.

"I didn't see him at all during the fighting," replied Harry, "but I
