The Project Gutenberg EBook of The New Girl at St. Chad's, by Angela Brazil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The New Girl at St. Chad's
       A Story of School Life

Author: Angela Brazil

Illustrator: John Campbell

Release Date: December 24, 2007 [EBook #24025]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW GIRL AT ST. CHAD'S ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: A CHANCE FOR RETALIATION]


Transcriber's Note: This sentence is incomplete, as printed:
"Where did you get it, Flossie?" enquired



The New Girl at St. Chad's

A Story of School Life



By

ANGELA BRAZIL


Author of

"A Fourth Form Friendship" "The Manor House School"
"The Nicest Girl in the School" &c.



_ILLUSTRATED BY JOHN CAMPBELL_



BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
LONDON GLASGOW AND BOMBAY

1912




Contents


Chap.                                                    Page

    I. Honor Introduces Herself                             9

   II. Honor's Home                                        25

  III. The Wearing of the Green                            39

   IV. Janie's Charge                                      57

    V. A Riding Lesson                                     75

   VI. The Lower Third                                     93

  VII. St. Chad's Celebrates an Occasion                  106

 VIII. A Mysterious Happening                             126

   IX. Diamond cut Diamond                                138

    X. Honor Finds Favour                                 150

   XI. A Relapse                                          166

  XII. St. Kolgan's Abbey                                 182

 XIII. Miss Maitland's Window                             199

  XIV. A Stolen Meeting                                   212

   XV. Sent to Coventry                                   227

  XVI. A Rash Step                                        243

 XVII. Janie turns Detective                              258

XVIII. The End of the Term                                271




Illustrations


                                                           Page

A Chance for Retaliation                     _Frontispiece_ 146

Honor Concludes the Purchase of Firefly                      33

An Interview With Miss Cavendish                             54

The Liberation of Pete                                       96

An Unlucky Escapade                                         209

"Startled by the voices, she jumped up"                     253




THE NEW GIRL AT ST. CHAD'S




CHAPTER I

Honor Introduces Herself


"Any new girls?"

It was Madge Summers who asked the question, seated on the right-hand
corner of Maisie Talbot's bed, munching caramels. It was a very small
bed, but at that moment it managed to accommodate no less than seven
of Maisie's most particular friends, who were closely watching the
progress of her unpacking, and discussing the latest school news,
interspersed with remarks on her belongings.

Maisie extricated herself from the depths of her box, and handed a pile
of stockings to Lettice, her younger sister.

"What's the use of asking me?" she replied. "Our cab only drove up half
an hour ago. I feel almost new myself yet."

"So do I, and horribly in the blues too," said Pauline Reynolds. "It's
always a wrench to leave home. I'm perfectly miserable for at least
three days at the beginning of each term. I feel as if----"

"Oh, don't all begin to expatiate about your feelings!" broke in Chatty
Burns. "We know Pauline's symptoms only too well: the first day she
shows aggressively red eyes and a damp pocket-handkerchief; the second
day she writes lengthy letters home, begging to be allowed to return
immediately and have lessons with a private governess; the third day
she wanders about, trying to get sympathy from anyone who is
weak-minded enough to listen to her, till in desperation somebody drags
her into the playground, and makes her have a round at hockey. That
cheers her up, and she begins to think life isn't quite such a desert.
By the fourth morning she has recovered her spirits, and come to the
conclusion that Chessington College is a very decent kind of place; and
she begins to be alarmed lest her mother, on the strength of the
pathetic letter, should have decided to let her leave at once, and
should have already engaged a private governess."

"You're most unsympathetic, Chatty!" said Pauline, smiling in spite of
herself. "You don't know what it is to be home-sick."

"I wouldn't parade such a woebegone face, whatever might be the depths
of my misery," returned Chatty briskly.

"I'm always glad to come back," declared Dorothy Arkwright. "I like
school. It's fun to meet everybody again, and arrange about cricket,
and the Debating Society, and the Natural History Club. There's so much
going on at St. Chad's."

"No one has answered my question yet," remarked Madge Summers. "Are
there any new girls?"

Chatty wriggled herself into a more comfortable position between
Adeline Vaughan and Ruth Latimer.

"I think there are about a dozen altogether. Vivian Holmes says there
are four at St. Bride's, three at St. Aldwyth's, two at the School
House, and two at St. Hilary's. I saw one of them arriving at the same
time as I did, and Miss Cavendish was gushing over another in the
library; and Marian Spencer has brought a sister--she introduced her to
me just now."

"But what about St. Chad's?"

"We've only one, I believe, though Flossie Taylor, the Hammond-Smiths'
cousin, has moved here from St. Bride's. She was always destined for a
Chaddite, you know, only there wasn't room for her till the Richardsons
left."

"She's no great acquisition," said Dorothy Arkwright. "I hate girls to
change their quarters. When once they start at a house, they ought to
stick to it."

"Well, she wants to be with her cousins, I suppose," put in Madge
Summers. "Who's our new girl?"

"I don't know. I haven't heard anything about her."

"Perhaps she hasn't arrived yet."

"Sh! Sh!" said Pauline Reynolds, squeezing Madge's arm by way of
remonstrance, and pointing to the closely-drawn curtains of the cubicle
at the farther end of the room. "She's here now."

"Where?"

"There, you goose!"

"What has she shut herself up like that for?"

"How should I know?"

"Perhaps she's unpacking," suggested Dorothy Arkwright.

"If she is, she'll finish it quicker than Lettice and I can," returned
Maisie Talbot. "Why can't you be hanging up some of those skirts,
instead of sitting staring at me? Yes, this is a whole box of Edinburgh
rock, but you shan't have a single piece, any of you, unless you get
off my bed at once."

"Poor old Maisie, don't grow excited!" murmured Ruth Latimer,
appropriating the box and handing it round, though no one attempted to
move.

"But look here! what about this new girl?" persisted Madge. "Hasn't
anybody seen her?"

"No. She's been in there ever since she arrived."

"Don't talk so loud; she'll hear you."

"I don't care if she does."

"I want to know what she's doing."

"I can tell you, then," said Chatty Burns, in a whisper that was more
audible by far than her ordinary voice.

"What?"

"Crying! New girls always cry, and some old ones too, if you take
Pauline as a specimen."

"I'm not crying now!" protested Pauline indignantly. "And how can you
tell that the new girl is?"

"I'm as certain as if I'd proved a proposition in Euclid. Why should
she have drawn her curtains so closely? If she's not lying on her bed,
with a clean pocket-handkerchief to her eyes, I'll give you six
caramels in exchange for three peppermint creams!"

"Then you're just mistaken!" cried a voice from the end cubicle. The
chintz curtain was pulled aside, and out marched a figure with so
jaunty an air as to banish utterly the idea of possible homesickness or
tears.

It was a girl of about fifteen, a remarkably pretty girl (so her
schoolmates decided, without an instant's hesitation), and rather out
of the common. She had a clear, olive complexion, a lovely colour in
her cheeks, a bewitching pair of dimples, and a perfect colt's mane of
thick, curly, brown hair. Perhaps her nose was a little too tip-tilted,
and her mouth a trifle too wide for absolute beauty; but she showed
such a nice row of even, white teeth when she laughed that one could
overlook the latter deficiency. Her eyes were beyond praise, large and
grey, with a dark line round the iris, and shaded by long lashes; and
they were so soft, and wistful, and winning, and yet so twinkling and
full of fun, that they seemed as if they could compel admiration, and
make friends with their first glance. The girl walked across the room
in an easy, confident fashion, and stood, with a broad smile on her
face, beaming at the seven others seated on Maisie's bed.

"Why shouldn't I pull my curtains?" she asked. "If I'd been pulling
faces, now, you might have had some cause for complaint. You look
rather a nice set; I think I'm going to like you."

The girls were so surprised that they could only stare. It seemed
reversing the usual order of things for a new-comer, who ought to be
shy and confused, to be so absolutely and entirely self-possessed, and
to pass judgment with such calm assurance upon these old members of St.
Chad's, some of whom were already in their third year at Chessington
College.

"Perhaps I'd better introduce myself," continued the stranger. "My name
is Honor Fitzgerald, and I come from Kilmore, near Ballycroghan, in
County Kerry."

"Then you're Irish!" gasped Chatty Burns.

"Quite right. First class for geography! County Kerry is exactly in the
bottom left-hand corner of the map of Ireland. It's a more hospitable
place than this is. I've been here nearly two hours, and nobody has
offered me any refreshments yet. I'm simply starving!"

She looked so humorously and suggestively at the Edinburgh rock that
Madge Summers promptly offered it to her, regardless of the fact that
the box belonged to Maisie Talbot.

"Come along here," said Ruth Latimer, trying to make a place for the
new girl on the bed by pushing the others vigorously nearer the end.

"No room unless I sit on your knee, while you get up and walk about,"
declared Honor. "There! I knew you would!" as Madge Summers fell with a
crash on to the floor.

    "Seven little schoolgirls, eating sugar sticks;
    One tumbled overboard, and then there were six!"

"Thank you. I think I prefer to 'take the chair', as the dentist says.
There only seems to be one in each cubicle, but as I'm the visitor----"

"Take care!" screamed Maisie. "My clean blouses!"

"What am I doing? I declare, I never saw them. There, I'll nurse them
for you while I eat this delicious-looking piece of pink rock."

The new girl was so utterly different from anybody else who had ever
come to St. Chad's that the others waited with curiosity to hear what
she would say next.

"Well?" she enquired coolly at last. "I suppose you're thinking me
over. I should like to know your opinion of me. They tell me at home
that my nose turns up, and my tongue is too long. But I didn't turn up
my nose at the Edinburgh rock, did I?--and as for my tongue, it fits my
mouth, as a general rule, though it runs away sometimes."

"When did you come?"

"What class are you in?"

"Have you seen Miss Cavendish yet?"

"How old are you?"

"Have you been to school before?"

"Do you know anyone here?"

"Why did you come to St. Chad's?"

The questions were fired off all together from seven pairs of lips.

"One at a time, please!" returned Honor. "I'm older than I look, and
younger than I seem. You mayn't believe me, yet I assure you I've only
had three birthdays."

"Rubbish!" said Chatty Burns.

"It's a fact, all the same."

"But how could that be?" demanded Pauline Reynolds incredulously.

"Because I was born on the twenty-ninth of February, and I can't have a
birthday except in a leap year. That accounts for anything odd there is
about me; so if you find me queer, you must just say: 'She's a
twenty-ninth of February girl', and make excuses for me. As for the
other questions, I've never been to school before; I've seen Miss
Cavendish, but I haven't heard yet what class I'm to be in; five
minutes ago I didn't know anybody here, but now I know--how many are
there of you?--one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine!"

"Have you unpacked yet?" asked Maisie, returning to her box, which
Lettice had been steadily emptying.

"Only about half."

"I think we had better come and help you, then."

"Better finish our own first!" grunted Lettice, for which remark she
was promptly snubbed by her elder sister.

"Miss Maitland will be up at eight o'clock to look at our drawers,"
said Chatty Burns. "She'll expect you to have everything put away, and
your coats and dresses hung in the wardrobe."

"We have to be so fearfully tidy here!" sighed Adeline Vaughan. "A
warden comes round each morning, and woe betide you if you leave hairs
in your brush, or have forgotten to fold your nightdress!"

"It's just as bad at St. Hilary's," said Madge.

"And worse at St. Bride's," added Ruth Latimer.

"My father wanted me to be at the School House," said Honor, "but Miss
Cavendish wrote that it was full, so I was entered at St. Chad's
instead."

"Yes, you generally need to have your name down for two years before
you can get a vacancy at the School House," said Dorothy Arkwright.
"It's the popular favourite with parents, because Miss Cavendish
herself is the Head; but really, St. Chad's is far nicer. We all stand
up for our own house, and I know you'll like it."

"There's the tea-bell! Come along! we must go at once," interrupted
Chatty Burns.

"Won't they wait for us?" enquired Honor, beginning to wash her hands
with much deliberation.

"Wait! She asks if they'll wait!" exclaimed Adeline Vaughan.

"One can see you've never been to school before!" commented Maisie
Talbot. "No, you certainly haven't time to comb your hair now. You had
better follow the rest of us as fast as you can."

St. Chad's could accommodate forty pupils, and Honor found a place
assigned to her in the dining-hall near the end of a long table, which
