The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rinkitink in Oz, by L. Frank Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rinkitink in Oz

Author: L. Frank Baum

Illustrator: John R. Neill

Release Date: May 24, 2008 [EBook #25581]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RINKITINK IN OZ ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Greg Bergquist
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: THIS BOOK BELONGS TO]

[Illustration: RINKITINK IN OZ]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




  RINKITINK IN OZ

  BY

  L. FRANK BAUM

  AUTHOR OF

  The Road to Oz, Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz, The
    Emerald City of Oz, The Land of Oz, Ozma of Oz,
        The Patchwork Girl of Oz, Tik-Tok of
              Oz, The Scarecrow of Oz


  [Illustration]

  ILLUSTRATED BY
  JOHN R. NEILL

  The Reilly & Britton Co.
  Chicago




[Illustration]

  Copyright 1916
  By L. Frank Baum

  ALL RIGHTS
  RESERVED




  To
  My New Grandson--
  Robert Alison Baum

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




INTRODUCING THIS STORY

[Illustration]


Here is a story with a boy hero, and a boy of whom you have never before
heard. There are girls in the story, too, including our old friend
Dorothy, and some of the characters wander a good way from the Land of
Oz before they all assemble in the Emerald City to take part in Ozma's
banquet. Indeed, I think you will find this story quite different from
the other histories of Oz, but I hope you will not like it the less on
that account.

If I am permitted to write another Oz book it will tell of some
thrilling adventures encountered by Dorothy, Betsy Bobbin, Trot and the
Patchwork Girl right in the Land of Oz, and how they discovered some
amazing creatures that never could have existed outside a fairyland. I
have an idea that about the time you are reading this story of Rinkitink
I shall be writing that story of Adventures in Oz.

Don't fail to write me often and give me your advice and suggestions,
which I always appreciate. I get a good many letters from my readers,
but every one is a joy to me and I answer them as soon as I can find
time to do so.

  L. FRANK BAUM
  Royal Historian of Oz

  "OZCOT"
  at HOLLYWOOD
  in CALIFORNIA
  1916.




LIST OF CHAPTERS


  1 The Prince of Pingaree                      17

  2 The Coming of King Rinkitink                29

  3 The Warriors from the North                 44

  4 The Deserted Island                         56

  5 The Three Pearls                            71

  6 The Magic Boat                              92

  7 The Twin Islands                           109

  8 Rinkitink Makes a Great Mistake            127

  9 A Present for Zella                        142

  10 The Cunning of Queen Cor                  153

  11 Zella Goes to Coregos                     167

  12 The Excitement of Bilbil the Goat         175

  13 Zella Saves the Prince                    180

  14 The Escape                                192

  15 The Flight of the Rulers                  210

  16 Nikobob Refuses a Crown                   216

  17 The Nome King                             226

  18 Inga Parts with his Pink Pearl            237

  19 Rinkitink Chuckles                        265

  20 Dorothy to the Rescue                     275

  21 The Wizard Finds an Enchantment           281

  22 Ozma's Banquet                            291

  23 The Pearl Kingdom                         301

  24 The Captive King                          307

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




The Prince of Pingaree

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 1


If you have a map of the Land of Oz handy, you will find that the great
Nonestic Ocean washes the shores of the Kingdom of Rinkitink, between
which and the Land of Oz lies a strip of the country of the Nome King
and a Sandy Desert. The Kingdom of Rinkitink isn't very big and lies
close to the ocean, all the houses and the King's palace being built
near the shore. The people live much upon the water, boating and
fishing, and the wealth of Rinkitink is gained from trading along the
coast and with the islands nearest it.

Four days' journey by boat to the north of Rinkitink is the Island of
Pingaree, and as our story begins here I must tell you something about
this island. At the north end of Pingaree, where it is widest, the land
is a mile from shore to shore, but at the south end it is scarcely half
a mile broad; thus, although Pingaree is four miles long, from north to
south, it cannot be called a very big island. It is exceedingly pretty,
however, and to the gulls who approach it from the sea it must resemble
a huge green wedge lying upon the waters, for its grass and trees give
it the color of an emerald.

The grass came to the edge of the sloping shores; the beautiful trees
occupied all the central portion of Pingaree, forming a continuous grove
where the branches met high overhead and there was just space beneath
them for the cosy houses of the inhabitants. These houses were scattered
everywhere throughout the island, so that there was no town or city,
unless the whole island might be called a city. The canopy of leaves,
high overhead, formed a shelter from sun and rain, and the dwellers in
the grove could all look past the straight tree-trunks and across the
grassy slopes to the purple waters of the Nonestic Ocean.

At the big end of the island, at the north, stood the royal palace of
King Kitticut, the lord and ruler of Pingaree. It was a beautiful
palace, built entirely of snow-white marble and capped by domes of
burnished gold, for the King was exceedingly wealthy. All along the
coast of Pingaree were found the largest and finest pearls in the whole
world.

These pearls grew within the shells of big oysters, and the people raked
the oysters from their watery beds, sought out the milky pearls and
carried them dutifully to their King. Therefore, once every year His
Majesty was able to send six of his boats, with sixty rowers and many
sacks of the valuable pearls, to the Kingdom of Rinkitink, where there
was a city called Gilgad, in which King Rinkitink's palace stood on a
rocky headland and served, with its high towers, as a lighthouse to
guide sailors to the harbor. In Gilgad the pearls from Pingaree were
purchased by the King's treasurer, and the boats went back to the island
laden with stores of rich merchandise and such supplies of food as the
people and the royal family of Pingaree needed.

The Pingaree people never visited any other land but that of Rinkitink,
and so there were few other lands that knew there was such an island.
To the southwest was an island called the Isle of Phreex, where the
inhabitants had no use for pearls. And far north of Pingaree--six days'
journey by boat, it was said--were twin islands named Regos and Coregos,
inhabited by a fierce and warlike people.

Many years before this story really begins, ten big boatloads of those
fierce warriors of Regos and Coregos visited Pingaree, landing suddenly
upon the north end of the island. There they began to plunder and
conquer, as was their custom, but the people of Pingaree, although
neither so big nor so strong as their foes, were able to defeat them and
drive them all back to the sea, where a great storm overtook the raiders
from Regos and Coregos and destroyed them and their boats, not a single
warrior returning to his own country.

This defeat of the enemy seemed the more wonderful because the
pearl-fishers of Pingaree were mild and peaceful in disposition and
seldom quarreled even among themselves. Their only weapons were their
oyster rakes; yet the fact remains that they drove their fierce enemies
from Regos and Coregos from their shores.

King Kitticut was only a boy when this remarkable battle was fought,
and now his hair was gray; but he remembered the day well and, during
the years that followed, his one constant fear was of another invasion
of his enemies. He feared they might send a more numerous army to his
island, both for conquest and revenge, in which case there could be
little hope of successfully opposing them.

This anxiety on the part of King Kitticut led him to keep a sharp
lookout for strange boats, one of his men patrolling the beach
constantly, but he was too wise to allow any fear to make him or his
subjects unhappy. He was a good King and lived very contentedly in his
fine palace, with his fair Queen Garee and their one child, Prince Inga.

The wealth of Pingaree increased year by year; and the happiness of the
people increased, too. Perhaps there was no place, outside the Land of
Oz, where contentment and peace were more manifest than on this pretty
island, hidden in the bosom of the Nonestic Ocean. Had these conditions
remained undisturbed, there would have been no need to speak of Pingaree
in this story.

Prince Inga, the heir to all the riches and the kingship of Pingaree,
grew up surrounded by every luxury; but he was a manly little fellow,
although somewhat too grave and thoughtful, and he could never bear to
be idle a single minute. He knew where the finest oysters lay hidden
along the coast and was as successful in finding pearls as any of the
men of the island, although he was so slight and small. He had a little
boat of his own and a rake for dragging up the oysters and he was very
proud indeed when he could carry a big white pearl to his father.

There was no school upon the island, as the people of Pingaree were far
removed from the state of civilization that gives our modern children
such advantages as schools and learned professors, but the King owned
several manuscript books, the pages being made of sheepskin. Being a man
of intelligence, he was able to teach his son something of reading,
writing and arithmetic.

When studying his lessons Prince Inga used to go into the grove near his
father's palace and climb into the branches of a tall tree, where he had
built a platform with a comfortable seat to rest upon, all hidden by the
canopy of leaves. There, with no one to disturb him, he would pore over
the sheepskin on which were written the queer characters of the
Pingarese language.

King Kitticut was very proud of his little son, as well he might be, and
he soon felt a high respect for Inga's judgment and thought that he was
worthy to be taken into the confidence of his father in many matters of
state. He taught the boy the needs of the people and how to rule them
justly, for some day he knew that Inga would be King in his place. One
day he called his son to his side and said to him:

