The Project Gutenberg EBook of Just So Stories, by Rudyard Kipling

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Just So Stories

Author: Rudyard Kipling

Posting Date: December 22, 2008 [EBook #2781]
Release Date: July 2004

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUST SO STORIES ***




Produced by David Reed





JUST SO STORIES

By Rudyard Kipling




TABLE OF CONTENTS:

     HOW THE WHALE GOT HIS THROAT
     HOW THE CAMEL GOT HIS HUMP
     HOW THE RHINOCEROS GOT HIS SKIN
     HOW THE LEOPARD GOT HIS SPOTS
     THE ELEPHANT'S CHILD
     THE SING-SONG OF OLD MAN KANGAROO
     THE BEGINNING OF THE ARMADILLOS
     HOW THE FIRST LETTER WAS WRITTEN
     HOW THE ALPHABET WAS MADE
     THE CRAB THAT PLAYED WITH THE SEA
     THE CAT THAT WALKED BY HIMSELF
     THE BUTTERFLY THAT STAMPED




HOW THE WHALE GOT HIS THROAT

IN the sea, once upon a time, O my Best Beloved, there was a Whale, and
he ate fishes. He ate the starfish and the garfish, and the crab and the
dab, and the plaice and the dace, and the skate and his mate, and the
mackereel and the pickereel, and the really truly twirly-whirly eel. All
the fishes he could find in all the sea he ate with his mouth--so! Till
at last there was only one small fish left in all the sea, and he was a
small 'Stute Fish, and he swam a little behind the Whale's right ear,
so as to be out of harm's way. Then the Whale stood up on his tail and
said, 'I'm hungry.' And the small 'Stute Fish said in a small 'stute
voice, 'Noble and generous Cetacean, have you ever tasted Man?'

'No,' said the Whale. 'What is it like?'

'Nice,' said the small 'Stute Fish. 'Nice but nubbly.'

'Then fetch me some,' said the Whale, and he made the sea froth up with
his tail.

'One at a time is enough,' said the 'Stute Fish. 'If you swim to
latitude Fifty North, longitude Forty West (that is magic), you will
find, sitting _on_ a raft, _in_ the middle of the sea, with nothing on
but a pair of blue canvas breeches, a pair of suspenders (you must _not_
forget the suspenders, Best Beloved), and a jack-knife, one
ship-wrecked Mariner, who, it is only fair to tell you, is a man of
infinite-resource-and-sagacity.'

So the Whale swam and swam to latitude Fifty North, longitude Forty
West, as fast as he could swim, and _on_ a raft, _in_ the middle of the
sea, _with_ nothing to wear except a pair of blue canvas breeches, a
pair of suspenders (you must particularly remember the suspenders, Best
Beloved), _and_ a jack-knife, he found one single, solitary shipwrecked
Mariner, trailing his toes in the water. (He had his mummy's leave to
paddle, or else he would never have done it, because he was a man of
infinite-resource-and-sagacity.)

Then the Whale opened his mouth back and back and back till it nearly
touched his tail, and he swallowed the shipwrecked Mariner, and the
raft he was sitting on, and his blue canvas breeches, and the suspenders
(which you _must_ not forget), _and_ the jack-knife--He swallowed them
all down into his warm, dark, inside cup-boards, and then he smacked his
lips--so, and turned round three times on his tail.

But as soon as the Mariner, who was a man of
infinite-resource-and-sagacity, found himself truly inside the Whale's
warm, dark, inside cup-boards, he stumped and he jumped and he thumped
and he bumped, and he pranced and he danced, and he banged and he
clanged, and he hit and he bit, and he leaped and he creeped, and he
prowled and he howled, and he hopped and he dropped, and he cried and he
sighed, and he crawled and he bawled, and he stepped and he lepped, and
he danced hornpipes where he shouldn't, and the Whale felt most unhappy
indeed. (_Have_ you forgotten the suspenders?)

So he said to the 'Stute Fish, 'This man is very nubbly, and besides he
is making me hiccough. What shall I do?'

'Tell him to come out,' said the 'Stute Fish.

So the Whale called down his own throat to the shipwrecked Mariner,
'Come out and behave yourself. I've got the hiccoughs.'

'Nay, nay!' said the Mariner. 'Not so, but far otherwise. Take me to my
natal-shore and the white-cliffs-of-Albion, and I'll think about it.'
And he began to dance more than ever.

 'You had better take him home,' said the 'Stute Fish to the Whale.
 'I ought to have warned you that he is a man of infinite-resource-and-sagacity.'

So the Whale swam and swam and swam, with both flippers and his tail,
as hard as he could for the hiccoughs; and at last he saw the Mariner's
natal-shore and the white-cliffs-of-Albion, and he rushed half-way
up the beach, and opened his mouth wide and wide and wide, and said,
'Change here for Winchester, Ashuelot, Nashua, Keene, and stations on
the _Fitch_burg Road;' and just as he said 'Fitch' the Mariner walked
out of his mouth. But while the Whale had been swimming, the Mariner,
who was indeed a person of infinite-resource-and-sagacity, had taken his
jack-knife and cut up the raft into a little square grating all running
criss-cross, and he had tied it firm with his suspenders (_now_, you
know why you were not to forget the suspenders!), and he dragged that
grating good and tight into the Whale's throat, and there it stuck! Then
he recited the following _Sloka_, which, as you have not heard it, I
will now proceed to relate--

  By means of a grating
  I have stopped your ating.

For the Mariner he was also an Hi-ber-ni-an. And he stepped out on the
shingle, and went home to his mother, who had given him leave to trail
his toes in the water; and he married and lived happily ever afterward.
So did the Whale. But from that day on, the grating in his throat,
which he could neither cough up nor swallow down, prevented him eating
anything except very, very small fish; and that is the reason why whales
nowadays never eat men or boys or little girls.

The small 'Stute Fish went and hid himself in the mud under the
Door-sills of the Equator. He was afraid that the Whale might be angry
with him.

The Sailor took the jack-knife home. He was wearing the blue canvas
breeches when he walked out on the shingle. The suspenders were left
behind, you see, to tie the grating with; and that is the end of _that_
tale.


     WHEN the cabin port-holes are dark and green
       Because of the seas outside;
     When the ship goes _wop_ (with a wiggle between)
     And the steward falls into the soup-tureen,
       And the trunks begin to slide;
     When Nursey lies on the floor in a heap,
     And Mummy tells you to let her sleep,
     And you aren't waked or washed or dressed,
     Why, then you will know (if you haven't guessed)
     You're 'Fifty North and Forty West!'




HOW THE CAMEL GOT HIS HUMP

NOW this is the next tale, and it tells how the Camel got his big hump.

In the beginning of years, when the world was so new and all, and the
Animals were just beginning to work for Man, there was a Camel, and he
lived in the middle of a Howling Desert because he did not want to work;
and besides, he was a Howler himself. So he ate sticks and thorns and
tamarisks and milkweed and prickles, most 'scruciating idle; and when
anybody spoke to him he said 'Humph!' Just 'Humph!' and no more.

Presently the Horse came to him on Monday morning, with a saddle on his
back and a bit in his mouth, and said, 'Camel, O Camel, come out and
trot like the rest of us.'

'Humph!' said the Camel; and the Horse went away and told the Man.

Presently the Dog came to him, with a stick in his mouth, and said,
'Camel, O Camel, come and fetch and carry like the rest of us.'

'Humph!' said the Camel; and the Dog went away and told the Man.

Presently the Ox came to him, with the yoke on his neck and said,
'Camel, O Camel, come and plough like the rest of us.'

'Humph!' said the Camel; and the Ox went away and told the Man.

At the end of the day the Man called the Horse and the Dog and the Ox
together, and said, 'Three, O Three, I'm very sorry for you (with the
world so new-and-all); but that Humph-thing in the Desert can't work,
or he would have been here by now, so I am going to leave him alone, and
you must work double-time to make up for it.'

That made the Three very angry (with the world so new-and-all), and they
held a palaver, and an _indaba_, and a _punchayet_, and a pow-wow on
the edge of the Desert; and the Camel came chewing on milkweed _most_
'scruciating idle, and laughed at them. Then he said 'Humph!' and went
away again.

Presently there came along the Djinn in charge of All Deserts, rolling
in a cloud of dust (Djinns always travel that way because it is Magic),
and he stopped to palaver and pow-pow with the Three.

'Djinn of All Deserts,' said the Horse, 'is it right for any one to be
idle, with the world so new-and-all?'

'Certainly not,' said the Djinn.

'Well,' said the Horse, 'there's a thing in the middle of your Howling
Desert (and he's a Howler himself) with a long neck and long legs, and
he hasn't done a stroke of work since Monday morning. He won't trot.'

'Whew!' said the Djinn, whistling, 'that's my Camel, for all the gold in
Arabia! What does he say about it?'

'He says "Humph!"' said the Dog; 'and he won't fetch and carry.'

'Does he say anything else?'

'Only "Humph!"; and he won't plough,' said the Ox.

'Very good,' said the Djinn. 'I'll humph him if you will kindly wait a
minute.'

The Djinn rolled himself up in his dust-cloak, and took a bearing across
the desert, and found the Camel most 'scruciatingly idle, looking at his
own reflection in a pool of water.

'My long and bubbling friend,' said the Djinn, 'what's this I hear of
your doing no work, with the world so new-and-all?'

'Humph!' said the Camel.

The Djinn sat down, with his chin in his hand, and began to think a
Great Magic, while the Camel looked at his own reflection in the pool of
water.

'You've given the Three extra work ever since Monday morning, all on
account of your 'scruciating idleness,' said the Djinn; and he went on
thinking Magics, with his chin in his hand.

'Humph!' said the Camel.

'I shouldn't say that again if I were you,' said the Djinn; you might
say it once too often. Bubbles, I want you to work.'

And the Camel said 'Humph!' again; but no sooner had he said it than he
saw his back, that he was so proud of, puffing up and puffing up into a
great big lolloping humph.

'Do you see that?' said the Djinn. 'That's your very own humph that
you've brought upon your very own self by not working. To-day is
Thursday, and you've done no work since Monday, when the work began. Now
you are going to work.'

'How can I,' said the Camel, 'with this humph on my back?'

'That's made a-purpose,' said the Djinn, 'all because you missed those
three days. You will be able to work now for three days without eating,
because you can live on your humph; and don't you ever say I never
did anything for you. Come out of the Desert and go to the Three, and
behave. Humph yourself!'

And the Camel humphed himself, humph and all, and went away to join the
Three. And from that day to this the Camel always wears a humph (we call
it 'hump' now, not to hurt his feelings); but he has never yet caught up
with the three days that he missed at the beginning of the world, and he
has never yet learned how to behave.


     THE Camel's hump is an ugly lump
       Which well you may see at the Zoo;
     But uglier yet is the hump we get
       From having too little to do.

     Kiddies and grown-ups too-oo-oo,
     If we haven't enough to do-oo-oo,
         We get the hump--
         Cameelious hump--
     The hump that is black and blue!

     We climb out of bed with a frouzly head
       And a snarly-yarly voice.
     We shiver and scowl and we grunt and we growl
       At our bath and our boots and our toys;

     And there ought to be a corner for me
     (And I know there is one for you)
         When we get the hump--
         Cameelious hump--
     The hump that is black and blue!

     The cure for this ill is not to sit still,
       Or frowst with a book by the fire;
     But to take a large hoe and a shovel also,
       And dig till you gently perspire;

     And then you will find that the sun and the wind.
     And the Djinn of the Garden too,
         Have lifted the hump--
         The horrible hump--
     The hump that is black and blue!

     I get it as well as you-oo-oo--
     If I haven't enough to do-oo-oo--
         We all get hump--
         Cameelious hump--
     Kiddies and grown-ups too!




HOW THE RHINOCEROS GOT HIS SKIN

ONCE upon a time, on an uninhabited island on the shores of the Red Sea,
there lived a Parsee from whose hat the rays of the sun were reflected
in more-than-oriental splendour. And the Parsee lived by the Red Sea
with nothing but his hat and his knife and a cooking-stove of the kind
that you must particularly never touch. And one day he took flour and
water and currants and plums and sugar and things, and made himself one
cake which was two feet across and three feet thick. It was indeed a
Superior Comestible (that's magic), and he put it on stove because he
was allowed to cook on the stove, and he baked it and he baked it till
it was all done brown and smelt most sentimental. But just as he
was going to eat it there came down to the beach from the Altogether
Uninhabited Interior one Rhinoceros with a horn on his nose, two piggy
eyes, and few manners. In those days the Rhinoceros's skin fitted him
quite tight. There were no wrinkles in it anywhere. He looked exactly
like a Noah's Ark Rhinoceros, but of course much bigger. All the same,
he had no manners then, and he has no manners now, and he never will
have any manners. He said, 'How!' and the Parsee left that cake and
climbed to the top of a palm tree with nothing on but his hat, from
which the rays of the sun were always reflected in more-than-oriental
splendour. And the Rhinoceros upset the oil-stove with his nose, and
the cake rolled on the sand, and he spiked that cake on the horn of his
nose, and he ate it, and he went away, waving his tail, to the desolate
and Exclusively Uninhabited Interior which abuts on the islands of
Mazanderan, Socotra, and Promontories of the Larger Equinox. Then the
Parsee came down from his palm-tree and put the stove on its legs and
recited the following Sloka, which, as you have not heard, I will now
proceed to relate:--

  Them that takes cakes
  Which the Parsee-man bakes
  Makes dreadful mistakes.

And there was a great deal more in that than you would think.

Because, five weeks later, there was a heat wave in the Red Sea, and
everybody took off all the clothes they had. The Parsee took off his
hat; but the Rhinoceros took off his skin and carried it over his
shoulder as he came down to the beach to bathe. In those days it
buttoned underneath with three buttons and looked like a waterproof. He
said nothing whatever about the Parsee's cake, because he had eaten
it all; and he never had any manners, then, since, or henceforward.
He waddled straight into the water and blew bubbles through his nose,
leaving his skin on the beach.

Presently the Parsee came by and found the skin, and he smiled one smile
that ran all round his face two times. Then he danced three times round
the skin and rubbed his hands. Then he went to his camp and filled his
hat with cake-crumbs, for the Parsee never ate anything but cake, and
never swept out his camp. He took that skin, and he shook that skin, and
he scrubbed that skin, and he rubbed that skin just as full of old,
dry, stale, tickly cake-crumbs and some burned currants as ever it could
