The Project Gutenberg EBook of Homespun Tales, by Kate Douglas Wiggin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Homespun Tales

Author: Kate Douglas Wiggin

Posting Date: February 1, 2009 [EBook #3492]
Release Date: October, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOMESPUN TALES ***




Produced by A Elizabeth Warren





HOMESPUN TALES

By Kate Douglas Wiggin




Introduction

These three stories are now brought together under one cover because
they have not quite outworn their welcome; but in their first estate
two of them appeared as gift-books, with decorative borders and wide
margins, a style not compatible with the stringent economies of
the present moment. Luckily they belong together by reason of their
background, which is an imaginary village, any village you choose,
within the confines, or on the borders of York County, in the State of
Maine.

In the first tale the river, not "Rose," is the principal character; no
one realizes this better than I. If an author spends her summers on
the banks of Saco Water it fills the landscape. It flows from the White
Mountains to the Atlantic in a tempestuous torrent, breaking here and
there into glorious falls of amber glimpsed through snowy foam; its
rapids dash through rocky cliffs crowned with pine trees, under which
blue harebells and rosy columbines blossom in gay profusion. There is
the glint of the mirror-like lake above the falls, and the sound of the
surging floods below; the witchery of feathery elms reflected in its
clear surfaces, and the enchantment of the full moon on its golden
torrents, never twice alike and always beautiful! How is one to forget,
evade, scorn, belittle it, by leaving its charms untold; and who could
keep such a river out of a book? It has flowed through many of mine
and the last sound I expect to hear in life will be the faint, far-away
murmur of Saco Water!

The old Tory Hill Meeting House bulks its way into the foreground of the
next story, and the old Peabody Pew (which never existed) has somehow
assumed a quasi-historical aspect never intended by its author. There
is a Dorcas Society, and there is a meeting house; my dedication assures
the reader of these indubitable facts; and the Dorcas Society, in a
season of temporary bankruptcy, succeeding a too ample generosity,
did scrub the pews when there was no money for paint. Rumors of our
strenuous, and somewhat unique, activities spread through our parish
to many others, traveling so far (even over seas) that we became
embarrassed at our easily won fame. The book was read and people
occasionally came to church to see the old Peabody Pew, rather resenting
the information that there had never been any Peabodys in the parish
and, therefore, there could be no Peabody Pew. Matters became worse
when I made, very reverently, what I suppose must be called a dramatic
version of the book, which we have played for several summers in the old
meeting house to audiences far exceeding our seating capacity. Inasmuch
as the imaginary love-tale of my so-called Nancy Wentworth and Justin
Peabody had begun under the shadow of the church steeple, and after the
ten years of parting the happy reunion had come to them in the selfsame
place, it was possible to present their story simply and directly,
without offense, in a church building. There was no curtain, no stage,
no scenery, no theatricalism. The pulpit was moved back, and four young
pine trees were placed in front of it for supposed Christmas decoration.
The pulpit platform, and the "wing pews" left vacant for the village
players, took the place of a stage; the two aisles served for exits and
entrances; and the sexton with three rings of the church bell, announced
the scenes. The Carpet Committee of the Dorcas Society furnished the
exposition of the first act, while sewing the last breadths of the new,
hardly-bought ingrain carpet. The scrubbing of the pews ends the act,
with dialogue concerning men, women, ministers, church-members and their
ways, including the utter failure of Justin Peabody, Nancy's hero, to
make a living anywhere, even in the West. The Dorcas members leave the
church for their Saturday night suppers of beans and brown bread, but
Nancy returns with her lantern at nightfall to tack down the carpet in
the old Peabody pew and iron out the tattered, dog's eared leaves of the
hymn-book from which she has so often sung "By cool Siloam's shady rill"
with her lover in days gone by. He, still a failure, having waited for
years for his luck to turn, has come back to spend Christmas in the home
of his boyhood; and seeing a dim light in the church, he enters quietly
and surprises Nancy at her task of carpeting the Peabody Pew, so that
it shall look as well as the others at next day's services. The rest
is easy to imagine. One can deny the reality of a book, but when two or
three thousand people have beheld Justin Peabody and Nancy Wentworth in
the flesh, and have seen the paint of the old Peabody Pew wiped with
a damp cloth, its cushion darned and its carpet tacked in place, it is
useless to argue; any more than it would be to deny the validity of the
egg of Columbus or the apple of William Tell.

As for "Susanna and Sue" the story would never have been written had I
not as a child and girl been driven once a year to the Shaker meeting at
the little village of Alfred, sixteen miles distant. The services were
then open to the public, but eventually permission to attend them was
withdrawn, because of the careless and sometimes irreverent behavior
of young people who regarded the Shaker costumes, the solemn dances
or marches, the rhythmic movements of the hands, the almost hypnotic
crescendo of the singing, as a sort of humorous spectacle. I learned
to know the brethren and sisters, and the Elder, as years went by,
and often went to the main house to spend a day or two as the guest of
Eldress Harriet, a saint, if ever there was one, or, later, with dear
Sister Lucinda.

The shining cleanliness and order, the frugality and industry, the
serenity and peace of these people, who had resigned the world and
"life on the plane of Adam," vowing themselves to celibacy, to public
confession of sins, and the holding of goods in common,--all this has
always had a certain exquisite and helpful influence upon my thought,
and Mr. W. D. Howells paid a far more beautiful tribute to them in "The
Undiscovered Country."

It is needless to say that I read every word of the book to my Shaker
friends before it was published. They took a deep interest in it,
evincing keen delight in my rather facetious but wholly imaginary
portrait of "Brother Ansel," a "born Shaker," and sadly confessing that
my two young lovers, "Hetty" and "Nathan," who could not endure the
rigors of the Shaker faith and fled together in the night to marry and
join the world's people,--that this tragedy had often occurred in their
community.

Here, then, are the three simple homespun tales. I believe they are true
to life as I see it. I only wish my readers might hear the ripple of the
Maine river running through them; breathe the fragrance of New England
for-ests, and though never for a moment getting, through my poor pen,
the atmosphere of Maine's rugged cliffs and the tang of her salt sea
air, they might at least believe for an instant that they had found a
modest Mayflower in her pine woods.

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN. July, 1920.



CONTENTS


    ROSE O' THE RIVER

    I. The Pine and the Rose
    II. The "Old Kennebec"
    III. The Edgewood "Drive"
    IV. "Blasphemious Swearin'"
    V. The Game of Jackstraws
    VI. Hearts and Other Hearts
    VII. The Little House
    VIII. The Garden of Eden
    IX. The Serpent
    X. The Turquoise Ring
    XI. Rose Sees the World
    XII. Gold and Pinchbeck
    XIII. A Country Chevalier
    XIV. Housebreaking
    XV. The Dream Room


    THE OLD PEABODY PEW


    SUSANNA AND SUE

    I. Mother Ann's Children
    II. A Son of Adam
    III. Divers Doctrines
    IV. Louisa's Mind
    V. the Little Quail Bird
    VI. Susanna Speaks in Meeting
    VII. "The Lower Plane"
    VIII. Concerning Backsliders
    IX. Love Manifold
    X. Brother and Sister
    XI. "The Open Door"
    XII. The Hills of Home





ROSE O' THE RIVER




I. The Pine And the Rose


It was not long after sunrise, and Stephen Waterman, fresh from his
dip in the river, had scrambled up the hillside from the hut in the
alder-bushes where he had made his morning toilet.

An early ablution of this sort was not the custom of the farmers along
the banks of the Saco, but the Waterman house was hardly a stone's throw
from the water, and there was a clear, deep swimming-hole in the Willow
Cove that would have tempted the busiest man, or the least cleanly, in
York County. Then, too, Stephen was a child of the river, born, reared,
schooled on its very brink, never happy unless he were on it, or in it,
or beside it, or at least within sight or sound of it.

The immensity of the sea had always silenced and overawed him, left him
cold in feeling. The river wooed him, caressed him, won his heart.
It was just big enough to love. It was full of charms and changes, of
varying moods and sudden surprises. Its voice stole in upon his ear with
a melody far sweeter and more subtle than the boom of the ocean. Yet it
was not without strength, and when it was swollen with the freshets of
the spring and brimming with the bounty of its sister streams, it could
dash and roar, boom and crash, with the best of them.

Stephen stood on the side porch, drinking in the glory of the sunrise,
with the Saco winding like a silver ribbon through the sweet loveliness
of the summer landscape.

And the river rolled on toward the sea, singing its morning song,
creating and nourishing beauty at every step of its onward path. Cradled
in the heart of a great mountain-range, it pursued its gleaming way,
here lying silent in glassy lakes, there rushing into tinkling little
falls, foaming great falls, and thundering cataracts. Scores of bridges
spanned its width, but no steamers flurried its crystal depths. Here and
there a rough little rowboat, tethered to a willow, rocked to and fro in
some quiet bend of the shore. Here the silver gleam of a rising perch,
chub, or trout caught the eye; there a pickerel lay rigid in the clear
water, a fish carved in stone: here eels coiled in the muddy bottom
of some pool; and there, under the deep shadows of the rocks, lay fat,
sleepy bass, old, and incredibly wise, quite untempted by, and wholly
superior to, the rural fisherman's worm.

The river lapped the shores of peaceful meadows; it flowed along banks
green with maple, beech, sycamore, and birch; it fell tempestuously over
dams and fought its way between rocky cliffs crowned with stately firs.
It rolled past forests of pine and hemlock and spruce, now gentle,
now terrible; for there is said to be an Indian curse upon the Saco,
whereby, with every great sun, the child of a paleface shall be drawn
into its cruel depths. Lashed into fury by the stony reefs that impeded
its progress, the river looked now sapphire, now gold, now white, now
leaden gray; but always it was hurrying, hurrying on its appointed way
to the sea.

After feasting his eyes and filling his heart with a morning draught
of beauty, Stephen went in from the porch and, pausing at the stairway,
called in stentorian tones: "Get up and eat your breakfast, Rufus! The
boys will be picking the side jams today, and I'm going down to work on
the logs. If you come along, bring your own pick-pole and peavey." Then,
going to the kitchen pantry, he collected, from the various shelves,
a pitcher of milk, a loaf of bread, half an apple pie, and a bowl of
blueberries, and, with the easy methods of a household unswayed by
feminine rule, moved toward a seat under an apple tree and took his
morning meal in great apparent content. Having finished, and washed his
dishes with much more thoroughness than is common to unsuperintended
man, and having given Rufus the second call to breakfast with the vigor
and acrimony that usually mark that unpleasant performance, he strode to
a high point on the riverbank and, shading his eyes with his hand, gazed
steadily downstream.

Patches of green fodder and blossoming potatoes melted into soft fields
that had been lately mown, and there were glimpses of tasseling corn
rising high to catch the sun. Far, far down on the opposite bank of the
river was the hint of a brown roof, and the tip of a chimney that sent a
slender wisp of smoke into the clear air. Beyond this, and farther back
from the water, the trees apparently hid a cluster of other chimneys,
for thin spirals of smoke ascended here and there. The little brown
roof could never have revealed itself to any but a lover's eye; and that
discerned something even smaller, something like a pinkish speck, that
moved hither and thither on a piece of greensward that sloped to the
waterside.

"She's up!" Stephen exclaimed under his breath, his eyes shining, his
lips smiling. His voice had a note of hushed exaltation about it, as if
"she," whoever she might be, had, in condescending to rise, conferred a
priceless boon upon a waiting universe. If she were indeed "up" (so his
tone implied), then the day, somewhat falsely heralded by the sunrise,
had really begun, and the human race might pursue its appointed tasks,
inspired and uplifted by the consciousness of her existence. It might
properly be grateful for the fact of her birth; that she had grown to
woman's estate; and, above all, that, in common with the sun, the lark,
the morning-glory, and other beautiful things of the early day, she was
up and about her lovely, cheery, heart-warming business.

The handful of chimneys and the smoke-spirals rising here and there
among the trees on the river-bank belonged to what was known as the
Brier Neighborhood. There were only a few houses in all, scattered along
a side road leading from the river up to Liberty Center. There were no
great signs of thrift or prosperity, but the Wiley cottage, the only
one near the water, was neat and well cared for, and Nature had done her
best to conceal man's indolence, poverty, or neglect.

Bushes of sweetbrier grew in fragrant little forests as tall as the
fences. Clumps of wild roses sprang up at every turn, and over all the
stone walls, as well as on every heap of rocks by the wayside, prickly
blackberry vines ran and clambered and clung, yielding fruit and thorns
impartially to the neighborhood children.

The pinkish speck that Stephen Waterman had spied from his side of the
river was Rose Wiley of the Brier Neighborhood on the Edgewood side. As
there was another of her name on Brigadier Hill, the Edgewood minister
called one of them the climbing Rose and the other the brier Rose, or
sometimes Rose of the river. She was well named, the pinkish speck. She
had not only some of the sweetest attributes of the wild rose, but the
parallel might have been extended as far as the thorns, for she had
wounded her scores,--hearts, be it understood, not hands. The wounding
was, on the whole, very innocently done; and if fault could be imputed
anywhere, it might rightly have been laid at the door of the kind powers
who had made her what she was, since the smile that blesses a single
heart is always destined to break many more.

She had not a single silk gown, but she had what is far better, a
figure to show off a cotton one. Not a brooch nor a pair of earrings was
numbered among her possessions, but any ordinary gems would have looked
rather dull and trivial when compelled to undergo comparison with her
bright eyes. As to her hair, the local milliner declared it impossible
for Rose Wiley to get an unbecoming hat; that on one occasion, being
in a frolicsome mood, Rose had tried on all the headgear in the village
emporium,--children's gingham "Shakers," mourning bonnets for aged
dames, men's haying hats and visored caps,--and she proved superior
to every test, looking as pretty as a pink in the best ones and simply
ravishing in the worst. In fact, she had been so fashioned and
finished by Nature that, had she been set on a revolving pedestal in a
show-window, the bystanders would have exclaimed, as each new charm came
into view: "Look at her waist! See her shoulders! And her neck and chin!
And her hair!" While the children, gazing with raptured admiration,
would have shrieked, in unison, "I choose her for mine."

All this is as much as to say that Rose of the river was a beauty, yet
it quite fails to explain, nevertheless, the secret of her power. When
she looked her worst the spell was as potent as when she looked her
best. Hidden away somewhere was a vital spark which warmed every one
who came in contact with it. Her lovely little person was a trifle below
medium height, and it might as well be confessed that her soul, on the
morning when Stephen Waterman saw her hanging out the clothes on the
river-bank, was not large enough to be at all out of proportion; but
when eyes and dimples, lips and cheeks, enslave the onlooker, the soul
is seldom subjected to a close or critical scrutiny. Besides, Rose Wiley
was a nice girl, neat as wax, energetic, merry, amiable, economical. She
was a dutiful granddaughter to two of the most irritating old people
in the county; she never patronized her pug-nosed, pasty-faced girl
friends; she made wonderful pies and doughnuts; and besides, small
souls, if they are of the right sort, sometimes have a way of growing,
to the discomfiture of cynics and the gratification of the angels.

So, on one bank of the river grew the brier rose, a fragile thing,
swaying on a slender stalk and looking at its pretty reflection in the
water; and on the other a sturdy pine tree, well rooted against wind and
storm. And the sturdy pine yearned for the wild rose; and the rose, so
far as it knew, yearned for nothing at all, certainly not for rugged
pine trees standing tall and grim in rocky soil. If, in its present
stage of development, it gravitated toward anything in particular, it
would have been a well-dressed white birch growing on an irreproachable
lawn.

And the river, now deep, now shallow, now smooth, now tumultuous,
now sparkling in sunshine, now gloomy under clouds, rolled on to the
engulfing sea. It could not stop to concern itself with the petty
comedies and tragedies that were being enacted along its shores, else it
would never have reached its destination. Only last night, under a full
moon, there had been pairs of lovers leaning over the rails of all the
bridges along its course; but that was a common sight, like that of the
ardent couples sitting on its shady banks these summer days, looking
only into each other's eyes, but exclaiming about the beauty of the
water. Lovers would come and go, sometimes reappearing with successive
installments of loves in a way wholly mysterious to the river. Meantime
it had its own work to do and must be about it, for the side jams were
to be broken and the boom "let out" at the Edgewood bridge.




II. "Old Kennebec"


It was just seven o'clock that same morning when Rose Wiley smoothed the
last wrinkle from her dimity counterpane, picked up a shred of corn-husk
from the spotless floor under the bed, slapped a mosquito on the
window-sill, removed all signs of murder with a moist towel, and before
running down to breakfast cast a frowning look at her pincushion.
Almira, otherwise "Mite," Shapley had been in her room the afternoon
before and disturbed with her careless hand the pattern of Rose's pins.
They were kept religiously in the form of a Maltese cross; and if, while
she was extricating one from her clothing, there had been an alarm
of fire, Rose would have stuck the pin in its appointed place in the
design, at the risk of losing her life.

Entering the kitchen with her light step, she brought the morning
sunshine with her. The old people had already engaged in differences of
opinion, but they commonly suspended open warfare in her presence.
There were the usual last things to be done for breakfast, offices that
