The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lost Prince, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Lost Prince

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Posting Date: August 12, 2008 [EBook #384]
Release Date: January, 1996
[Last updated: December 9, 2011]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST PRINCE ***




Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines








THE LOST PRINCE

Francis Hodgson Burnett



CONTENTS


      I  The New Lodgers at No. 7 Philibert Place
     II  A Young Citizen of the World
    III  The Legend of the Lost Prince
     IV  The Rat
      V  "Silence Is Still the Order"
     VI  The Drill and the Secret Party
    VII  "The Lamp Is Lighted!"
   VIII  An Exciting Game
     IX  "It Is Not a Game"
      X  The Rat--and Samavia
     XI  Come with Me
    XII  Only Two Boys
   XIII  Loristan Attends a Drill of the Squad
    XIV  Marco Does Not Answer
     XV  A Sound in a Dream
    XVI  The Rat to the Rescue
   XVII  "It Is a Very Bad Sign"
  XVIII  "Cities and Faces"
    XIX  "That Is One!"
     XX  Marco Goes to the Opera
    XXI  "Help!"
   XXII  A Night Vigil
  XXIII  The Silver Horn
   XXIV  "How Shall We Find Him?"
    XXV  A Voice in the Night
   XXVI  Across the Frontier
  XXVII  "It is the Lost Prince!  It Is Ivor!"
 XXVIII  "Extra!  Extra!  Extra!"
   XXIX  'Twixt Night and Morning
    XXX  The Game Is at an End
   XXXI  "The Son of Stefan Loristan"




THE LOST PRINCE



I

THE NEW LODGERS AT NO. 7 PHILIBERT PLACE

There are many dreary and dingy rows of ugly houses in certain parts of
London, but there certainly could not be any row more ugly or dingier
than Philibert Place.  There were stories that it had once been more
attractive, but that had been so long ago that no one remembered the
time.  It stood back in its gloomy, narrow strips of uncared-for, smoky
gardens, whose broken iron railings were supposed to protect it from
the surging traffic of a road which was always roaring with the rattle
of busses, cabs, drays, and vans, and the passing of people who were
shabbily dressed and looked as if they were either going to hard work
or coming from it, or hurrying to see if they could find some of it to
do to keep themselves from going hungry.  The brick fronts of the
houses were blackened with smoke, their windows were nearly all dirty
and hung with dingy curtains, or had no curtains at all; the strips of
ground, which had once been intended to grow flowers in, had been
trodden down into bare earth in which even weeds had forgotten to grow.
One of them was used as a stone-cutter's yard, and cheap monuments,
crosses, and slates were set out for sale, bearing inscriptions
beginning with "Sacred to the Memory of."  Another had piles of old
lumber in it, another exhibited second-hand furniture, chairs with
unsteady legs, sofas with horsehair stuffing bulging out of holes in
their covering, mirrors with blotches or cracks in them.  The insides
of the houses were as gloomy as the outside.  They were all exactly
alike.  In each a dark entrance passage led to narrow stairs going up
to bedrooms, and to narrow steps going down to a basement kitchen.  The
back bedroom looked out on small, sooty, flagged yards, where thin cats
quarreled, or sat on the coping of the brick walls hoping that sometime
they might feel the sun; the front rooms looked over the noisy road,
and through their windows came the roar and rattle of it.  It was
shabby and cheerless on the brightest days, and on foggy or rainy ones
it was the most forlorn place in London.

At least that was what one boy thought as he stood near the iron
railings watching the passers-by on the morning on which this story
begins, which was also the morning after he had been brought by his
father to live as a lodger in the back sitting-room of the house No. 7.

He was a boy about twelve years old, his name was Marco Loristan, and
he was the kind of boy people look at a second time when they have
looked at him once.  In the first place, he was a very big boy--tall
for his years, and with a particularly strong frame. His shoulders were
broad and his arms and legs were long and powerful.  He was quite used
to hearing people say, as they glanced at him, "What a fine, big lad!"
And then they always looked again at his face.  It was not an English
face or an American one, and was very dark in coloring.  His features
were strong, his black hair grew on his head like a mat, his eyes were
large and deep set, and looked out between thick, straight, black
lashes.  He was as un-English a boy as one could imagine, and an
observing person would have been struck at once by a sort of SILENT
look expressed by his whole face, a look which suggested that he was
not a boy who talked much.

This look was specially noticeable this morning as he stood before the
iron railings.  The things he was thinking of were of a kind likely to
bring to the face of a twelve-year-old boy an unboyish expression.

He was thinking of the long, hurried journey he and his father and
their old soldier servant, Lazarus, had made during the last few
days--the journey from Russia.  Cramped in a close third-class railway
carriage, they had dashed across the Continent as if something
important or terrible were driving them, and here they were, settled in
London as if they were going to live forever at No. 7 Philibert Place.
He knew, however, that though they might stay a year, it was just as
probable that, in the middle of some night, his father or Lazarus might
waken him from his sleep and say, "Get up--dress yourself quickly.  We
must go at once."  A few days later, he might be in St. Petersburg,
Berlin, Vienna, or Budapest, huddled away in some poor little house as
shabby and comfortless as No. 7 Philibert Place.

He passed his hand over his forehead as he thought of it and watched
the busses.  His strange life and his close association with his father
had made him much older than his years, but he was only a boy, after
all, and the mystery of things sometimes weighed heavily upon him, and
set him to deep wondering.

In not one of the many countries he knew had he ever met a boy whose
life was in the least like his own.  Other boys had homes in which they
spent year after year; they went to school regularly, and played with
other boys, and talked openly of the things which happened to them, and
the journeys they made.  When he remained in a place long enough to
make a few boy-friends, he knew he must never forget that his whole
existence was a sort of secret whose safety depended upon his own
silence and discretion.

This was because of the promises he had made to his father, and they
had been the first thing he remembered.  Not that he had ever regretted
anything connected with his father.  He threw his black head up as he
thought of that.  None of the other boys had such a father, not one of
them.  His father was his idol and his chief.  He had scarcely ever
seen him when his clothes had not been poor and shabby, but he had also
never seen him when, despite his worn coat and frayed linen, he had not
stood out among all others as more distinguished than the most
noticeable of them.  When he walked down a street, people turned to
look at him even oftener than they turned to look at Marco, and the boy
felt as if it was not merely because he was a big man with a handsome,
dark face, but because he looked, somehow, as if he had been born to
command armies, and as if no one would think of disobeying him.  Yet
Marco had never seen him command any one, and they had always been
poor, and shabbily dressed, and often enough ill-fed.  But whether they
were in one country or another, and whatsoever dark place they seemed
to be hiding in, the few people they saw treated him with a sort of
deference, and nearly always stood when they were in his presence,
unless he bade them sit down.

"It is because they know he is a patriot, and patriots are respected,"
the boy had told himself.

He himself wished to be a patriot, though he had never seen his own
country of Samavia.  He knew it well, however.  His father had talked
to him about it ever since that day when he had made the promises.  He
had taught him to know it by helping him to study curious detailed maps
of it--maps of its cities, maps of its mountains, maps of its roads.
He had told him stories of the wrongs done its people, of their
sufferings and struggles for liberty, and, above all, of their
unconquerable courage.  When they talked together of its history,
Marco's boy-blood burned and leaped in his veins, and he always knew,
by the look in his father's eyes, that his blood burned also.  His
countrymen had been killed, they had been robbed, they had died by
thousands of cruelties and starvation, but their souls had never been
conquered, and, through all the years during which more powerful
nations crushed and enslaved them, they never ceased to struggle to
free themselves and stand unfettered as Samavians had stood centuries
before.

"Why do we not live there," Marco had cried on the day the promises
were made.  "Why do we not go back and fight?  When I am a man, I will
be a soldier and die for Samavia."

"We are of those who must LIVE for Samavia--working day and night," his
father had answered; "denying ourselves, training our bodies and souls,
using our brains, learning the things which are best to be done for our
people and our country.  Even exiles may be Samavian soldiers--I am
one, you must be one."

"Are we exiles?" asked Marco.

"Yes," was the answer.  "But even if we never set foot on Samavian
soil, we must give our lives to it.  I have given mine since I was
sixteen.  I shall give it until I die."

"Have you never lived there?" said Marco.

A strange look shot across his father's face.

"No," he answered, and said no more.  Marco watching him, knew he must
not ask the question again.

The next words his father said were about the promises.  Marco was
quite a little fellow at the time, but he understood the solemnity of
them, and felt that he was being honored as if he were a man.

"When you are a man, you shall know all you wish to know," Loristan
said.  "Now you are a child, and your mind must not be burdened.  But
you must do your part.  A child sometimes forgets that words may be
dangerous.  You must promise never to forget this.  Wheresoever you
are; if you have playmates, you must remember to be silent about many
things.  You must not speak of what I do, or of the people who come to
see me.  You must not mention the things in your life which make it
different from the lives of other boys.  You must keep in your mind
that a secret exists which a chance foolish word might betray.  You are
a Samavian, and there have been Samavians who have died a thousand
deaths rather than betray a secret.  You must learn to obey without
question, as if you were a soldier.  Now you must take your oath of
allegiance."

He rose from his seat and went to a corner of the room.  He knelt down,
turned back the carpet, lifted a plank, and took something from beneath
it.  It was a sword, and, as he came back to Marco, he drew it out from
its sheath.  The child's strong, little body stiffened and drew itself
up, his large, deep eyes flashed.  He was to take his oath of
allegiance upon a sword as if he were a man.  He did not know that his
small hand opened and shut with a fierce understanding grip because
those of his blood had for long centuries past carried swords and
fought with them.

Loristan gave him the big bared weapon, and stood erect before him.

"Repeat these words after me sentence by sentence!" he commanded.

And as he spoke them Marco echoed each one loudly and clearly.

"The sword in my hand--for Samavia!

"The heart in my breast--for Samavia!

"The swiftness of my sight, the thought of my brain, the life of my
life--for Samavia.

"Here grows a man for Samavia.

"God be thanked!"

Then Loristan put his hand on the child's shoulder, and his dark face
looked almost fiercely proud.

"From this hour," he said, "you and I are comrades at arms."

And from that day to the one on which he stood beside the broken iron
railings of No. 7 Philibert Place, Marco had not forgotten for one hour.



II

A YOUNG CITIZEN OF THE WORLD

He had been in London more than once before, but not to the lodgings in
Philibert Place.  When he was brought a second or third time to a town
or city, he always knew that the house he was taken to would be in a
quarter new to him, and he should not see again the people he had seen
before.  Such slight links of acquaintance as sometimes formed
themselves between him and other children as shabby and poor as himself
were easily broken.  His father, however, had never forbidden him to
make chance acquaintances.  He had, in fact, told him that he had
reasons for not wishing him to hold himself aloof from other boys.  The
only barrier which must exist between them must be the barrier of
silence concerning his wanderings from country to country.  Other boys
as poor as he was did not make constant journeys, therefore they would
miss nothing from his boyish talk when he omitted all mention of his.
When he was in Russia, he must speak only of Russian places and Russian
people and customs.  When he was in France, Germany, Austria, or
England, he must do the same thing. When he had learned English,
French, German, Italian, and Russian he did not know.  He had seemed to
grow up in the midst of changing tongues which all seemed familiar to
him, as languages are familiar to children who have lived with them
until one scarcely seems less familiar than another.  He did remember,
however, that his father had always been unswerving in his attention to
his pronunciation and method of speaking the language of any country
they chanced to be living in.

"You must not seem a foreigner in any country," he had said to him.
"It is necessary that you should not.  But when you are in England, you
must not know French, or German, or anything but English."

Once, when he was seven or eight years old, a boy had asked him what
his father's work was.

"His own father is a carpenter, and he asked me if my father was one,"
Marco brought the story to Loristan.  "I said you were not.  Then he
asked if you were a shoemaker, and another one said you might be a
bricklayer or a tailor--and I didn't know what to tell them."  He had
been out playing in a London street, and he put a grubby little hand on
his father's arm, and clutched and almost fiercely shook it.  "I wanted
to say that you were not like their fathers, not at all.  I knew you
were not, though you were quite as poor.  You are not a bricklayer or a
shoemaker, but a patriot--you could not be only a bricklayer--you!"  He
said it grandly and with a queer indignation, his black head held up
and his eyes angry.

Loristan laid his hand against his mouth.

"Hush! hush!" he said.  "Is it an insult to a man to think he may be a
carpenter or make a good suit of clothes?  If I could make our clothes,
we should go better dressed.  If I were a shoemaker, your toes would
not be making their way into the world as they are now."  He was
smiling, but Marco saw his head held itself high, too, and his eyes
were glowing as he touched his shoulder.  "I know you did not tell them
I was a patriot," he ended.  "What was it you said to them?"

"I remembered that you were nearly always writing and drawing maps, and
I said you were a writer, but I did not know what you wrote--and that
you said it was a poor trade.  I heard you say that once to Lazarus.
Was that a right thing to tell them?"

"Yes.  You may always say it if you are asked.  There are poor fellows
enough who write a thousand different things which bring them little
money.  There is nothing strange in my being a writer."

So Loristan answered him, and from that time if, by any chance, his
father's means of livelihood were inquired into, it was simple enough
and true enough to say that he wrote to earn his bread.

In the first days of strangeness to a new place, Marco often walked a
great deal.  He was strong and untiring, and it amused him to wander
through unknown streets, and look at shops, and houses, and people.  He
did not confine himself to the great thoroughfares, but liked to branch
off into the side streets and odd, deserted-looking squares, and even
courts and alleyways.  He often stopped to watch workmen and talk to
them if they were friendly.  In this way he made stray acquaintances in
his strollings, and learned a good many things.  He had a fondness for
wandering musicians, and, from an old Italian who had in his youth been
a singer in opera, he had learned to sing a number of songs in his
strong, musical boy-voice.  He knew well many of the songs of the
people in several countries.

It was very dull this first morning, and he wished that he had
something to do or some one to speak to.  To do nothing whatever is a
depressing thing at all times, but perhaps it is more especially so
when one is a big, healthy boy twelve years old. London as he saw it in
the Marylebone Road seemed to him a hideous place.  It was murky and
shabby-looking, and full of dreary-faced people.  It was not the first
