The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cast Upon the Breakers, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cast Upon the Breakers

Author: Horatio Alger

Release Date: January 16, 2006 [EBook #399]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAST UPON THE BREAKERS ***




Produced by Charles Keller and David Widger





CAST UPON THE BREAKERS

by Horatio Alger, Jr.





CHAPTER I.


A FAITHLESS GUARDIAN.


"Well, good by, Rodney! I leave school tomorrow. I am going to learn a
trade."

"I am sorry to part with you, David. Couldn't you stay another term?"

"No: my uncle says I must be earning my living, and I have a chance to
learn the carpenter's trade."

"Where are you going?"

"To Duffield, some twenty miles away. I wish I were in your shoes. You
have no money cares, and can go on quietly and complete your education."

"I don't know how I am situated, David. I only know that my guardian
pays my expenses at this boarding school."

"Yes, you are a star boarder, and have the nicest room in the
institution. I am only a poor day scholar. Still I feel thankful that I
have been allowed to remain as long as I have. Who is your guardian?"

"A Mr. Benjamin Fielding, of New York."

"Is he a business man?"

"I believe so."

"Do you know how much you will inherit when you come of age?" asked
David, after a short pause.

"I haven't an idea."

"It seems to me your guardian ought to have told you."

"I scarcely know my guardian. Five years ago I spent a week at his home.
I don't remember much about it except that he lives in a handsome house,
and has plenty of servants. Since then, as you know, I have passed most
of my time here, except that in the summer I was allowed to board at the
Catskills or any country place I might select."

"Yes, and I remember one year you took me with you and paid all my
expenses. I shall never forget your kindness, and how much I enjoyed
that summer."

Rodney Ropes smiled, and his smile made his usually grave face look very
attractive.

"My dear David," he said, "it was all selfishness on my part. I knew I
should enjoy myself much better with a companion."

"You may call that selfishness, Rodney, but it is a kind of selfishness
that makes me your devoted friend. How long do you think you shall
remain at school?"

"I don't know. My guardian has never told me his plans for me. I wish he
would."

"I shall miss you, Rodney, but we will correspond, won't we?"

"Surely. You know I shall always feel interested in you and your
welfare."

David was a plain boy of humble parentage, and would probably be a hard
working mechanic. In fact he was looking for nothing better.

But Rodney Ropes looked to be of genteel blood, and had the air of
one who had been brought up a gentleman. But different as they were in
social position the two boys had always been devoted friends.

The boarding school of which Rodney was, as his friend expressed
himself, a star pupil, was situated about fifty miles from the city of
New York. It was under the charge of Dr. Sampson, a tall, thin man
of fair scholarship, keenly alive to his own interest, who showed
partiality for his richer pupils, and whenever he had occasion to
censure bore most heavily upon boys like David Hull, who was poor.

Rodney occupied alone the finest room in the school. There was a great
contrast between his comfortable quarters and the extremely plain
dormitories occupied by less favored pupils.

In the case of some boys the favoritism of the teacher would have led
them to put on airs, and made them unpopular with their school
fellows. But Rodney had too noble a nature to be influenced by such
considerations. He enjoyed his comfortable room, but treated his school
fellows with a frank cordiality that made him a general favorite.

After David left his room Rodney sat down to prepare a lesson in Cicero,
when he was interrupted by the entrance through the half open door of a
younger boy.

"Rodney," he said, "the doctor would like to see you in his office."

"Very well, Brauner, I will go down at once."

He put aside his book and went down to the office of Dr. Sampson on the
first floor.

The doctor was sitting at his desk. He turned slightly as Rodney
entered.

"Take a seat, Ropes," he said curtly.

His tone was so different from his usual cordiality that Rodney was
somewhat surprised.

"Am I in disgrace?" he asked himself. "Dr. Sampson doesn't seem as
friendly as usual."

After a brief interval Dr. Sampson wheeled round in his office chair.

"I have a letter for you from your guardian, Ropes," he said. "Here it
is. Do me the favor to read it here."

With some wonder Rodney took the letter and read as follows:


DEAR RODNEY--I have bad news to communicate. As you know, I was left by
your father in charge of you and your fortune. I have never told you
the amount, but I will say now that it was about fifty thousand dollars.
Until two years since I kept it intact but then began a series of
reverses in which my own fortune was swallowed up. In the hope of
relieving myself I regret to say that I was tempted to use your money.
That went also, and now of the whole sum there remains but enough to
pay the balance of your school bills, leaving you penniless. How much I
regret this I cannot tell you. I shall leave New York at once. I do not
care at present to say where I shall go, but I shall try to make good
the loss, and eventually restore to you your lost fortune. I may be
successful or I may not. I shall do my best and I hope in time to have
better news to communicate.

One thing I am glad to say. I have a casket containing your mother's
jewels. These are intact. I shall send you the casket by express,
knowing that you will wish to keep them out of regard for your mother's
memory. In case you are reduced to the necessity of pawning or selling
them, I am sure that your mother, could she be consulted, would advise
you to do so. This would be better than to have you suffer from want.

There is nothing further for me to write except to repeat my regret, and
renew my promise to make up your lost fortune if I shall ever to able to
do so. Your Guardian, BENJAMIN FIELDING.


Rodney read this like one dazed. In an instant he was reduced from the
position of a favorite of fortune to a needy boy, with his living to
make.

He could not help recalling what had passed between his friend David and
himself earlier in the day. Now he was as poor as David--poorer, in fact
for David had a chance to learn a trade that would yield him a living,
while he was utterly without resources, except in having an unusually
good education.

"Well," said Dr. Sampson, "have you read your letter?"

"Yes, sir."

"Your guardian wrote to me also. This is his letter," and he placed the
brief epistle in Rodney's hands.


DR. SAMPSON--I have written my ward, Rodney Ropes, an important
letter which he will show you. The news which it contains will make it
necessary for him to leave school. I inclose a check for one hundred and
twenty five dollars. Keep whatever is due you, and give him the balance.
BENJAMIN FIELDING.


"I have read the letter, but I don't know what it means," said Dr.
Sampson. "Can you throw any light upon it?"

"Here is my letter, doctor. You can read it for yourself."

Dr. Sampson's face changed as he read Rodney's letter. It changed and
hardened, and his expression became quite different from that to which
Rodney had been accustomed.

"This is a bad business, Ropes," said the doctor in a hard tone.

He had always said Rodney before.

"Yes, sir."

"That was a handsome fortune which your father left you."

"Yes, sir. I never knew before how much it amounted to."

"You only learn when you have lost it. Mr. Fielding has treated you
shamefully."

"Yes, sir, I suppose he has, but he says he will try to make it up to me
in the future."

"Pish! that is all humbug. Even if he is favored by fortune you will
never get back a cent."

"I think I shall, sir."

"You are young. You do not know the iniquities of business men. I do."

"I prefer to hope for the best."

"Just as you please."

"Have you anything more to say to me?"

"Only that I will figure up your account and see how much money is to
come to you out of the check your guardian has sent. You can stay here
till Monday; then you will find it best to make new arrangements."

"Very well, sir."

Rodney left the room, realizing that Dr. Sampson's feelings had been
changed by his pupil's reverse of fortune.

It was the way of the world, but it was not a pleasant way, and Rodney
felt depressed.



CHAPTER II.


THE CASKET OF JEWELS.


It was not till the latter part of the afternoon that the casket
arrived. Rodney was occupied with a recitation, and it was only in
the evening that he got an opportunity to open it. There was a pearl
necklace, very handsome, a pair of bracelets, two gold chains, some
minor articles of jewelry and a gold ring.

A locket attracted Rodney's notice, and he opened it. It contained the
pictures of his father and mother.

His father he could barely remember, his mother died before he was old
enough to have her image impressed upon his memory. He examined the
locket and his heart was saddened. He felt how different his life would
have been had his parents lived.

He had never before realized the sorrow of being alone in the world.
Misfortune had come upon him, and so far as he knew he had not a friend.
Even Dr. Sampson, who had been paid so much money on his account, and
who had always professed so great friendship for him, had turned cold.

As he was standing with the locket in his hand there was a knock at the
door.

"Come in!" he called out.

The door opened and a stout, coarse looking boy, dressed in an expensive
manner, entered.

"Good evening, John," said Rodney, but not cordially.

Next to himself, John Bundy, who was the son of a wealthy saloon keeper
in the city of New York, had been a favorite with Dr. Sampson.

If there was anything Dr. Sampson bowed down to and respected it was
wealth, and Mr. Bundy, senior, was reputed to be worth a considerable
fortune.

In Rodney's mood John Bundy was about the last person whom he wanted to
see.

"Ha!" said John, espying the open casket, "where did you get all that
jewelry?"

"It contains my mother's jewels," said Rodney gravely.

"You never showed it to me before."

"I never had it before. It came to me by express this afternoon."

"It must be worth a good pile of money," said John, his eyes gleaming
with cupidity.

"I suppose it is."

"Have you any idea what it is worth?"

"I have no thought about it."

