The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lightfoot the Deer, by Thornton W. Burgess

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Lightfoot the Deer

Author: Thornton W. Burgess

Posting Date: August 24, 2009 [EBook #4670]
Release Date: November, 2003
First Posted: February 26, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGHTFOOT THE DEER ***




Produced by Kent Fielden.  HTML version by Al Haines.









LIGHTFOOT THE DEER


BY

THORNTON W. BURGESS



CONTENTS

       I: Peter Rabbit Meets Lightfoot
      II: Lightfoot's New Antlers
     III: Lightfoot Tells How His Antlers Grew
      IV: The Spirit Of Fear
       V: Sammy Jay Brings Lightfoot Word
      VI: A Game Of Hide And Seek
     VII: The Merry Little Breezes Help Lightfoot
    VIII: Wit Against Wit
      IX: Lightfoot Becomes Uncertain
       X: Lightfoot's Clever Trick
      XI: The Hunted Watches The Hunter
     XII: Lightfoot Visits Paddy The Beaver
    XIII: Lightfoot And Paddy Become Partners
     XIV: How Paddy Warned Lightfoot
      XV: The Three Watchers
     XVI: Visitors To Paddy's Pond
    XVII: Sammy Jay Arrives
   XVIII: The Hunter Loses His Temper
     XIX: Sammy Jay Is Modest
      XX: Lightfoot Hears A Dreadful Sound
     XXI: How Lightfoot Got Rid Of The Hounds
    XXII: Lightfoot's Long Swim
   XXIII: Lightfoot Finds A Friend
    XXIV: The Hunter Is Disappointed
     XXV: The Hunter Lies In Wait
    XXVI: Lightfoot Does The Wise Thing
   XXVII: Sammy Jay Worries
  XXVIII: The Hunting Season Ends
    XXIX: Mr. And Mrs. Quack Are Startled
     XXX: The Mystery Is Solved
    XXXI: A Surprising Discovery
   XXXII: Lightfoot Sees The Stranger
  XXXIII: A Different Game Of Hide And Seek
   XXXIV: A Startling New Footprint
    XXXV: Lightfoot Is Reckless
   XXXVI: Sammy Jay Takes A Hand
  XXXVII: The Great Fight
 XXXVIII: An Unseen Watcher
   XXXIX: Lightfoot Discovers Love
      XL: Happy Days In The Green Forest




CHAPTER I: Peter Rabbit Meets Lightfoot


Peter Rabbit was on his way back from the pond of Paddy the
Beaver deep in the Green Forest.  He had just seen Mr. and
Mrs. Quack start toward the Big River for a brief visit before
leaving on their long, difficult journey to the far-away
Southland.  Farewells are always rather sad, and this particular
farewell had left Peter with a lump in his throat,--a queer,
choky feeling.

"If I were sure that they would return next spring, it wouldn't
be so bad," he muttered.  "It's those terrible guns.  I know what
it is to have to watch out for them.  Farmer Brown's boy used to
hunt me with one of them, but he doesn't any more.  But even when
he did hunt me it wasn't anything like what the Ducks have to go
through.  If I kept my eyes and ears open, I could tell when a
hunter was coming and could hide in a hole if I wanted to.  I
never had to worry about my meals.  But with the Ducks it is a
thousand times worse.  They've got to eat while making that long
journey, and they can eat only where there is the right kind of
food.  Hunters with terrible guns know where those places are and
hide there until the Ducks come, and the Ducks have no way of
knowing whether the hunters are waiting for them or not.  That
isn't hunting.  It's--it's--"

"Well, what is it? What are you talking to yourself about,
Peter Rabbit?"

Peter looked up with a start to find the soft, beautiful eyes of
Lightfoot the Deer gazing down at him over the top of a little
hemlock tree.

"It's awful," declared Peter. "It's worse than unfair.
It doesn't give them any chance at all."

"I suppose it must be so if you say so," replied Lightfoot,
"but you might tell me what all this awfulness is about."

Peter grinned.  Then he began at the beginning and told Lightfoot
all about Mr. and Mrs. Quack and the many dangers they must face
on their long journey to the far-away Southland and back again in
the spring, all because of the heartless hunters with terrible
guns.  Lightfoot listened and his great soft eyes were filled with
pity for the Quack family.

"I hope they will get through all right," said he, "and I hope
they will get back in the spring.  It is bad enough to be hunted
by men at one time of the year, as no one knows better than I do,
but to be hunted in the spring as well as in the fall is more
than twice as bad.  Men are strange creatures.  I do not
understand them at all.  None of the people of the Green Forest
would think of doing such terrible things.  I suppose it is quite
right to hunt others in order to get enough to eat, though I am
thankful to say that I never have had to do that, but to hunt
others just for the fun of hunting is something I cannot
understand at all.  And yet that is what men seem to do it for.
I guess the trouble is they never have been hunted themselves and
don't know how it feels.  Sometimes I think I'll hunt one some day
just to teach him a lesson.  What are you laughing at, Peter?"

"At the idea of you hunting a man," replied Peter.  "Your heart
is all right, Lightfoot, but you are too timid and gentle to
frighten any one.  Big as you are I wouldn't fear you."

With a single swift bound Lightfoot sprang out in front of
Peter.  He stamped his sharp hoofs, lowered his handsome head
until the sharp points of his antlers, which people call horns,
pointed straight at Peter, lifted the hair along the back of
his neck, and made a motion as if to plunge at him.  His eyes,
which Peter had always thought so soft and gentle, seemed to
flash fire.

"Oh!" cried Peter in a faint, frightened-sounding voice and
leaped to one side before it entered his foolish little head that
Lightfoot was just pretending.

Lightfoot chuckled.  "Did you say I couldn't frighten any one?"
he demanded.

"I--I didn't know you could look so terribly fierce," stammered
Peter.  "Those antlers look really dangerous when you point them
that way.  Why--why--what is that hanging to them?  It looks
like bits of old fur.  Have you been tearing somebody's coat,
Lightfoot?"  Peter's eyes were wide with wonder and suspicion.




CHAPTER II: Lightfoot's New Antlers


Peter Rabbit was puzzled.  He stared at Lightfoot the Deer a wee
bit suspiciously.  "Have you been tearing somebody's coat?" he
asked again.  He didn't like to think it of Lightfoot, whom he
always had believed quite as gentle, harmless, and timid as
himself.  But what else could he think?

Lightfoot slowly shook his head.  "No," said he, "I haven't torn
anybody's coat."

"Then what are those rags hanging on your antlers?"  demanded
Peter.

Lightfoot chuckled.  "They are what is left of the coverings of my
new antlers," he explained.

"What's that?  What do you mean by new antlers?"  Peter was sitting
up very straight, with his eyes fixed on Lightfoot's antlers as
though he never had seen them before.

"Just what I said," retorted Lightfoot.  "What do you think of
them?  I think they are the finest antlers I've ever had.  When I
get the rest of those rags off, they will be as handsome a set as
ever was grown in the Green Forest."

Lightfoot rubbed his antlers against the trunk of a tree till
some of the rags hanging to them dropped off.

Peter blinked very hard.  He was trying to understand and he
couldn't.  Finally he said so.

"What kind of a story are you trying to fill me up with?" he
demanded indignantly.  "Do you mean to tell me that those are not
the antlers that you have had as long as I've known you?  How can
anything hard like those antlers grow?  And if those are new
ones, where are the old ones?  Show me the old ones, and perhaps
I'll believe that these are new ones.  The idea of trying to make
me believe that antlers grow just like plants!  I've seen Bossy
the Cow all summer and I know she has got the same horns she had
last summer.  New antlers indeed!"

"You are quite right, Peter, quite right about Bossy the Cow.
She never has new horns, but that isn't any reason why I shouldn't
have new antlers, is it?" replied Lightfoot patiently.  "Her horns
are quite different from my antlers.  I have a new pair every
year.  You haven't seen me all summer, have you, Peter?"

"No, I don't remember that I have," replied Peter, trying very
hard to remember when he had last seen Lightfoot.

"I KNOW you haven't," retorted Lightfoot. "I know it because I
have been hiding in a place you never visit."

"What have you been hiding for?" demanded Peter.

"For my new antlers to grow," replied Lightfoot.  "When my new
antlers are growing, I want to be away by myself.  I don't like
to be seen without them or with halfgrown ones.  Besides, I am
very uncomfortable while the new antlers are growing and I want
to be alone."  Lightfoot spoke as if he really meant every word he
said, but still Peter couldn't, he just COULDN'T believe that
those wonderful great antlers had grown out of Lightfoot's head
in a single summer.  "Where did you leave your old ones and when
did they come off?"  he asked, and there was doubt in the very
tone of his voice.

"They dropped off last spring, but I don't remember just where,"
replied Lightfoot.  "I was too glad to be rid of them to notice
where they dropped.  You see they were loose and uncomfortable,
and I hadn't any more use for them because I knew that my new
ones would be bigger and better.  I've got one more point on each
than I had last year."  Lightfoot began once more to rub his
antlers against the tree to get off the queer rags hanging to
them and to polish the points.  Peter watched in silence for a
few minutes.  Then, all his suspicions returning, he said:

"But you haven't told me anything about those rags hanging to
your antlers."

"And you haven't believed what I have already told you," retorted
Lightfoot.  "I don't like telling things to people who won't
believe me."




CHAPTER III: Lightfoot Tells How His Antlers Grew


It is hard to believe what seems impossible.  And yet what seems
impossible to you may be a very commonplace matter to some one
else.  So it does not do to say that a thing cannot be possible
just because you cannot understand how it can be.  Peter Rabbit
wanted to believe what Lightfoot the Deer had just told him, but
somehow he couldn't.  If he had seen those antlers growing, it
would have been another matter.  But he hadn't seen Lightfoot
since the very last of winter, and then Lightfoot had worn just
such handsome antlers as he now had.  So Peter really couldn't be
blamed for not being able to believe that those old ones had been
