The Project Gutenberg EBook of Grace Harlowe's Senior Year at High School, by 
Jessie Graham Flower

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Grace Harlowe's Senior Year at High School
       or The Parting of the Ways

Author: Jessie Graham Flower

Release Date: January 30, 2007 [EBook #4940]
[This file was first posted on April 2, 2002]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRACE HARLOWE'S SENIOR YEAR ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks, Mary Meehan, David
Newman and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team









                 Grace Harlowe's Senior Year at High School

                                    OR

                          The Parting of the Ways

                       BY JESSIE GRAHAM FLOWER, A. M.

Author of Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's
Sophomore Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High
School, etc.




[Illustration: "Who is that Girl?"]




CONTENTS


       I. A Puzzling Resemblance

      II. What the Day Brought Forth

     III. What Happened in Room Forty-Seven

      IV. Grace Turns in the Fire Alarm

       V. Nora Becomes a Prize "Suggester"

      VI. The Thanksgiving Bazaar

     VII. A Thief in the Night

    VIII. Marian Asserts Her Independence

      IX. The Judge's House Party

       X. Christmas with Judge

      XI. Santa Claus Visits the Judge

     XII. The mistletoe Bough

    XIII. Tom and Grace Scent Trouble

     XIV. Grace and Anne Plan a Study Campaign

      XV. The Phi Sigma Taus Meet with a Loss

     XVI. The Unexpected Happens

    XVII. Anne Becomes Famous

   XVIII. The Theatre Party

     XIX. Grace Meets with a Rebuff

      XX. Marian's Confession

     XXI. What Happened at the Haunted House

    XXII. Grace and Eleanor Make a Formal Call

   XXIII. The Message of the Violin

    XXIV. The Parting of the Ways




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"Who is that Girl?"

The Girls Circled Around the Judge

Hippy Sat With A Piece of Fudge in Either Hand

Grace Held Her Breath in Astonishment




Grace Harlowe's Senior Year at High School




CHAPTER I

A PUZZLING RESEMBLANCE


"Oakdale won't seem like the same place. What shall we do without you?"
exclaimed Grace Harlowe mournfully.

It was a sunny afternoon in early October, and Grace Harlowe with her
three chums, Anne Pierson, Nora O'Malley and Jessica Bright, stood
grouped around three young men on the station platform at Oakdale. For
Hippy Wingate, Reddy Brooks and David Nesbit were leaving that afternoon
to begin a four years' course in an eastern college, and a number of
relatives and friends had gathered to wish them godspeed.

Those who have read "Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School"
need no introduction to these three young men or to the girl chums. The
doings of these merry girls made the record of their freshman year
memorable indeed. The winning of the freshman prize by Anne Pierson,
despite the determined opposition and plotting of Miriam Nesbit, also
aspiring to that honor, Mrs. Gray's Christmas party, the winter picnic
that ended in an adventure with wolves, and many other stirring events
furnished plenty of excitement for the readers of that volume.

In "Grace Harlowe's Sophomore Year at High School" the interest
of the story was centered around the series of basketball games played
by the sophomore and junior classes for the High School championship. In
this volume was narrated the efforts of Miriam Nesbit, aided by Julia
Crosby, the disagreeable junior captain, to discredit Anne, and force
Grace to resign the captaincy of her team. The rescue of Julia by Grace
from drowning during a skating party served to bring about a
reconciliation between the two girls and clear Anne's name of the
suspicion resting upon it. The two classes, formerly at sword's points,
became friendly, and buried the hatchet, although Miriam Nesbit, still
bitterly jealous of Grace's popularity, planned a revenge upon Grace
that nearly resulted in making her miss playing on her team during the
deciding game. Grace's encounter with an escaped lunatic, David Nesbit's
trial flight in his aeroplane, were incidents that also held the
undivided attention of the reader.

In "Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High School" the four chums
appeared as members of the famous sorority, the "Phi Sigma Tau,"
organized by Grace for the purpose of helping needy High School girls.

In that volume Eleanor Savelli, the self-willed, temperamental daughter
of an Italian violin virtuoso, furnished much of the interest of the
book. The efforts of Grace and her chums to create in this girl a
healthy, wholesome enjoyment for High School life, and her repudiation
of their friendship, and subsequent attempts to revenge herself for
fancied slights and insults, served to make the story absorbing.

The walking expedition through Upton Wood, the rescue of Mabel Allison,
an orphan, by the Phi Sigma Tau, from the tender mercies of a cruel and
ignorant woman with whom she lived, proved interesting reading.

The class play in which Eleanor plotted to oust Anne Pierson, the star,
from the production and obtain the leading part for herself, the
discovery of the plot at the eleventh hour by Grace, enabling her to
balk Eleanor's scheme, were among the incidents that aroused anew the
admiration of the reader for capable, wide-awake Grace Harlowe.

The seven young people on the platform looked unusually solemn, and a
brief silence followed Grace's wistful question. Saying good-bye
threatened to be a harder task than any of them had imagined it to be.
Even Hippy, usually ready of speech, wore a look of concern decidedly
out of place on his fat, good-humored face.

"Do say something funny, Hippy!" exclaimed Nora in desperation. "This
silence is awful. In another minute we'll all be weeping. Can't you
offer something cheerful?"

Hippy fixed a reflective eye upon Nora for an instant, then recited in a
husky voice:

    "Remember well, and bear in mind,
    That fat young men are hard to find."

There was a shout of laughter went up at this and things began to take a
brighter turn.

"Now will you be good, Nora?" teased David.

"Humph!" sniffed Nora. "I knew his sadness was only skin deep."

"After all," said Anne Pierson, "why should we look at the gloomy side.
You are all coming home for Thanksgiving and the time will slip by
before we realize it. It's our duty to send you boys away in good
spirits, instead of making you feel blue and melancholy."

"Anne always thinks about her duty," laughed Jessica, "but she's right,
nevertheless. Let's all be as cheerful as possible."

"I hear the train coming," cried Grace, always on the alert. "Do write
to us, won't you, boys! Please don't forget to send us some pictures of
the college."

"Yes, don't let that new Eastman of yours go to waste, Reddy," said
Nora.

"I will make Hippy pose the minute we strike the college campus,"
laughed Reddy, "and you shall have the first results, providing they are
not too terrifying."

"I want pictures of the college, not the inmates," retorted Nora.

"Inmates!" cried Hippy. "One would think she was speaking of a lunatic
asylum or a jail. I forgive you, Nora, but it was a cruel thrust. Here
comes the train. Get busy, you fellows, and make your fond farewells to
your families, who will no doubt be tickled pink to get rid of you for a
while."

With that he made a rush to where his father and brother stood. David
turned to his mother and sister Miriam, kissing them affectionately,
while Reddy grasped his father's hand with silent affection in his eyes.

The last good-byes were reserved for the four chums, who felt lumps rise
in their throats in spite of their recently avowed declaration to be
cheerful.

Nora shoved a white box tied up with blue ribbon into Hippy's hand just
as he was about to board the train.

"It's walnut fudge," she said. "But it isn't all for you. Be generous,
and let David and Reddy have some, too."

"Good-bye. Good-bye. Don't forget us," chorused the chums as the train
pulled out, while the young men waved farewell from the open windows.

"I hope I won't be called upon to say good-bye to any more of my friends
for a blue moon!" exclaimed Grace. "I hate good-byes. When it comes my
turn to go to college I believe I shall slip away quietly without saying
a word to a soul except mother."

"You know you couldn't leave your little playmates in such a heartless
manner," said Jessica. "We'd visit you in nightmares the whole of your
freshman year if you even attempted such a thing."

"Oh, well, if you are going to use threats I expect I shall have to
forego my vanishing act," said Grace, with a smile.

The four girls had walked the length of the platform and were about to
turn in at the entrance leading to the street when Grace suddenly
clutched Anne, pointing, and crying out, "Oh, look! look!"

Three pairs of eyes were turned instantly in the direction of her
finger, just in time to see a dark blue touring car crash against a tree
at the foot of the hilly street leading down to the station.

Its two occupants, the chauffeur and a woman who sat in the tonneau,
were thrown out with considerable force and lay motionless at one side
of the street.

In a twinkling the four girls had reached the woman's side. Grace knelt
beside her, then sat down on the pavement, raising the stranger's head
until it rested in her lap. The woman lay white and still, although on
placing a hand to her heart Grace found that it was beating faintly.
Calling for water, she dashed it in the woman's face, without any
noticeable results.

By this time a crowd had collected and several men were busy with the
chauffeur, who was conscious, but moaned as though in pain.

"Do go for a doctor, please," Grace cried to her chums. "I am afraid
this woman is badly hurt."

"Here's Dr. Gale now," exclaimed Anne as the old doctor came hurrying
across the street.

"Hello, what's the matter here?" he called. "It's a good thing I
happened to be driving by."

"Oh, Dr. Gale, do look at this poor woman. She must have struck her
head, for she lies as though she were dead."

Kneeling beside the stranger, the doctor busied himself with her, and
after a little time the woman opened her eyes and gazed vaguely about,
then again relapsed into unconsciousness.

"Whom does she resemble?" thought Grace. "Her face has a familiar look,
though I am sure I have never before seen her."

"Stand back and give her air," ordered the doctor, and the circling
crowd fell back a little.

"Grace, look out for her while I order the ambulance and see to this
man."

The doctor bustled over to the injured chauffeur, and began his
examination.

"Broken arm," he said briefly. "Send them both to the hospital."

The ambulance proved large enough to hold both victims of the accident
and the attendant took them in charge, and signaled the driver, who
headed for the city hospital, leaving the crowd to examine the big car.

"It's pretty badly damaged," said one man. "It must have hit that tree
with a terrific crash. Skidded, I suppose."

"Come on, girls," said Anne. "There is no use in staying here any
longer. We've had excitement enough for one day."

"I should say so," shuddered Jessica. "I hope that woman doesn't die. We
must go to the hospital to-morrow and inquire for her."

"Of course," responded Anne. "What a sweet face she had, and her eyes
