The Project Gutenberg EBook of Old Granny Fox, by Thornton W. Burgess

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Old Granny Fox

Author: Thornton W. Burgess

Release Date: January, 2004  [EBook #4980]
Posting Date: April 23, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD GRANNY FOX ***




Produced by Kent Fielden








OLD GRANNY FOX


By Thornton W. Burgess




CHAPTER I: Reddy Fox Brings Granny News

   Pray who is there who would refuse
   To bearer be of happy news?
      --Old Granny Fox.

Snow covered the Green Meadows and the Green Forest, and ice bound the
Smiling Pool and the Laughing Brook. Reddy and Granny Fox were hungry
most of the time. It was not easy to find enough to eat these days, and
so they spent nearly every minute they were awake in hunting. Sometimes
they hunted together, but usually one went one way, and the other went
another way so as to have a greater chance of finding something. If
either found enough for two, the one finding it took the food back to
their home if it could be carried. If not, the other was told where to
find it.

For several days they had had very little indeed to eat, and they were
so hungry that they were willing to take almost any chance to get a good
meal. For two nights they had visited Farmer Brown's henhouse, hoping
that they would be able to find a way inside. But the biddies had been
securely locked up, and try as they would, they couldn't find a way in.

"It's of no use," said Granny, as they started back home after the
second try, "to hope to get one of those hens at night. If we are going
to get any at all, we will have to do it in broad daylight. It can
be done, for I have done it before, but I don't like the idea. We are
likely to be seen, and that means that Bowser the Hound will be set to
hunting us."

"Pooh!" exclaimed Reddy. "What of it? It's easy enough to fool him."

"You think so, do you?" snapped Granny. "I never yet saw a young Fox
who didn't think he knew all there is to know, and you're just like the
rest. When you've lived as long as I have you will have learned not to
be quite so sure of your own opinions. I grant you that when there is no
snow on the ground, any Fox with a reasonable amount of Fox sense in his
head can fool Bowser, but with snow everywhere it is a very different
matter. If Bowser once takes it into his head to follow your trail these
days, you will have to be smarter than I think you are to fool him. The
only way you will be able to get away from him will be by going into
a hole in the ground, and when you do that you will have given away a
secret that will mean we will never have any peace at all. We will never
know when Farmer Brown's boy will take it into his head to smoke us out.
I've seen it done. No, Sir, we are not going to try for one of those
hens in the daytime unless we are starving."

"I'm starving now," whined Reddy.

"No such thing!" Granny snapped. "I've been without food longer than
this many a time. Have you been over to the Big River lately?"

"No," replied Reddy. "What's the use? It's frozen over. There isn't
anything there."

"Perhaps not," replied Granny, "but I learned a long time ago that it
is a poor plan to overlook any chance. There is a place in the Big River
which never freezes because the water runs too swiftly to freeze, and
I've found more than one meal washed ashore there. You go over there now
while I see what I can find in the Green Forest. If neither of us finds
anything, it will be time enough to think about Farmer Brown's hens
to-morrow."

Much against his will Reddy obeyed. "It isn't the least bit of use," he
grumbled, as he trotted towards the Big River. "There won't be anything
there. It is just a waste of time."

Late that afternoon he came hurrying back, and Granny knew by the way
that he cocked his ears and carried his tail that he had news of some
kind. "Well, what is it?" she demanded.

"I found a dead fish that had been washed ashore," replied Reddy. "It
wasn't big enough for two, so I ate it."

"Anything else?" asked Granny.

"No-o," replied Reddy slowly; "that is, nothing that will do us any
good. Quacker the Wild Duck was swimming about out in the open water,
but though I watched and watched he never once came ashore."

"Ha!" exclaimed Granny. "That is good news. I think we'll go Duck
hunting."



CHAPTER II: Granny And Reddy Fox Go Hunting

   When you're in doubt what course is right,
   The thing to do is just sit tight.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Jolly, round, bright Mr. Sun had just got well started on his daily
climb up in the blue, blue sky that morning when he spied two figures
trotting across the snow-covered Green Meadows, one behind the other.
They were trotting along quite as if they had made up their minds just
where they were going. They had. You see they were Granny and Reddy Fox,
and they were bound for the Big River at the place where the water ran
too swiftly to freeze. The day before Reddy had discovered Quacker the
Wild Duck swimming about there, and now they were on their way to try to
catch him.

Granny led the way and Reddy meekly followed her. To tell the truth,
Reddy hadn't the least idea that they would have a chance to catch
Quacker, because Quacker kept out in the water where he was as safe from
them as if they were a thousand miles away. The only reason that Reddy
had willingly started with Granny was the hope that he might find a dead
fish washed up on the shore as he had the day before.

"Granny certainly is growing foolish in her old age," thought Reddy, as
he trotted along behind her. "I told her that Quacker never once came
ashore all the time I watched yesterday. I don't believe he ever comes
ashore, and if she knows anything at all she ought to know that she
can't catch him out there in the water. Granny used to be smart enough
when she was young, I guess, but she certainly is losing her mind now.
It's a pity, a great pity. I can just imagine how Quacker will laugh at
her. I have to laugh myself."

He did laugh, but you may be sure he took great pains that Granny should
not see him laughing. Whenever she looked around he was as sober as
could be. In fact, he appeared to be quite as eager as if he felt sure
they would catch Quacker. Now old Granny Fox is very wise in the ways of
the Great World, and if Reddy could have known what was going on in her
mind as she led the way to the Big River, he might not have felt quite
so sure of his own smartness. Granny was doing some quiet laughing
herself.

"He thinks I'm old and foolish and don't know what I'm about, the young
scamp!" thought she. "He thinks he has learned all there is to learn. It
isn't the least use in the world to try to tell him anything. When young
folks feel the way he does, it is a waste of time to talk to them.
He has got to be shown. There is nothing like experience to take the
conceit out of these youngsters."

Now conceit is the feeling that you know more than any one else. Perhaps
you do. Then again, perhaps you don't. So sometimes it is best not to
be too sure of your own opinion. Reddy was sure. He trotted along behind
old Granny Fox and planned smart things to say to her when she found
that there wasn't a chance to catch Quacker the Duck. I am afraid,
very much afraid, that Reddy was planning to be saucy. People who think
themselves smart are quite apt to be saucy.

Presently they came to the bank of the Big River. Old Granny Fox told
Reddy to sit still while she crept up behind some bushes where she could
peek out over the Big River. He grinned as he watched her. He was still
grinning when she tiptoed back. He expected to see her face long with
disappointment. Instead she looked very much pleased.

"Quacker is there," said she, "and I think he will make us a very good
dinner. Creep up behind those bushes and see for yourself, then come
back here and tell me what you think we'd better do to get him."

So Reddy stole up behind the bushes, and this time it was Granny who
grinned as she watched. As he crept along, Reddy wondered if it could be
that for once Quacker had come ashore. Granny seemed so sure they could
catch him that this must be the case. But when he peeped through the
hushes, there was Quacker way out in the middle of the open water just
where he had been the day before.



CHAPTER III: Reddy Is Sure Granny Has Lost Her Senses

   Perhaps 'tis just as well that we
   Can't see ourselves as others see.
     --Old Granny Fox.

"Just as I thought," muttered Reddy Fox as he peeped through the bushes
on the bank of the Big River and saw Quacker swimming about in the water
where it ran too swiftly to freeze. "We've got just as much chance of
catching him as I have of jumping over the moon. That's what I'll tell
Granny."

He crept back carefully so as not to be seen by Quacker, and when he had
reached the place where Granny was waiting for him, his face wore a very
impudent look.

"Well," said Granny Fox, "what shall we do to catch him?"

"Learn to swim like a fish and fly like a bird," replied Reddy in such a
saucy tone that Granny had hard work to keep from boxing his ears.

"You mean that you think he can't be caught?" said she quietly.

"I don't think anything about it; I know he can't!" snapped Reddy. "Not
by us, anyway," he added.

"I suppose you wouldn't even try?" retorted Granny.

"I'm old enough to know when I'm wasting my time," replied Reddy with a
toss of his head.

"In other words you think I'm a silly old Fox who has lost her senses,"
said Granny sharply.

"No-o. I didn't say that," protested Reddy, looking very uncomfortable.

"But you think it," declared Granny. "Now look here, Mr. Smarty, you do
just as I tell you. You creep back there where you can watch Quacker and
all that happens, and mind that you keep out of his sight. Now go."

Reddy went. There was nothing else to do. He didn't dare disobey.
Granny watched until Reddy had readied his hiding-place. Then what do
you think she did? Why, she walked right out on the little beach just
below Reddy and in plain sight of Quacker! Yes, Sir, that is what she
did!

Then began such a queer performance that it is no wonder that Reddy was
sure Granny had lost her senses. She rolled over and over. She chased
her tail round and round until it made Reddy dizzy to watch her. She
jumped up in the air. She raced back and forth. She played with a bit
of stick. And all the time she didn't pay the least attention to Quacker
the Duck.

Reddy stared and stared. Whatever had come over Granny? She was crazy.
Yes, Sir, that must be the matter. It must be that she had gone without
food so long that she had gone crazy. Poor Granny! She was in her second
childhood. Reddy could remember how he had done such things when he was
very young, just by way of showing how fine he felt. But for a grown-up
Fox to do such things was undignified, to say the least. You know Reddy
thinks a great deal of dignity. It was worse than undignified; it was
positively disgraceful. He did hope that none of his neighbors would
happen along and see Granny cutting up so. He never would hear the end
of it if they did.

Over and over rolled Granny, and around and around she chased her tail.
The snow flew up in a cloud. And all the time she made no sound. Reddy
was just trying to decide whether to go off and leave her until she had
regained her common sense, or to go out and try to stop her, when he
happened to look out in the open water where Quacker was. Quacker was
sitting up as straight as he could. In fact, he had his wings raised to
help him sit up on his tail, the better to see what old Granny Fox was
doing.

"As I live," muttered Reddy, "I believe that fellow is nearer than he
was!"

Reddy crouched lower than ever, and instead of watching Granny he
watched Quacker the Duck.
