The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Doctor Dolittle, by Hugh Lofting

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Story of Doctor Dolittle

Author: Hugh Lofting

Posting Date: September 13, 2008 [EBook #501]
Release Date: April, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF DOCTOR DOLITTLE ***




Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.








  THE
  Story of
  DOCTOR DOLITTLE


  by

  Hugh Lofting


  BEING THE
  HISTORY OF HIS PECULIAR LIFE
  AT HOME AND ASTONISHING ADVENTURES
  IN FOREIGN PARTS NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.


  TO
  ALL CHILDREN
  CHILDREN IN YEARS AND CHILDREN IN HEART
  I DEDICATE THIS STORY




INTRODUCTION

There are some of us now reaching middle age who discover themselves to
be lamenting the past in one respect if in none other, that there are
no books written now for children comparable with those of thirty years
ago.  I say written FOR children because the new psychological business
of writing ABOUT them as though they were small pills or hatched in
some especially scientific method is extremely popular today.  Writing
for children rather than about them is very difficult as everybody who
has tried it knows.  It can only be done, I am convinced, by somebody
having a great deal of the child in his own outlook and sensibilities.
Such was the author of "The Little Duke" and "The Dove in the Eagle's
Nest," such the author of "A Flatiron for a Farthing," and "The Story
of a Short Life." Such, above all, the author of "Alice in Wonderland."
Grownups imagine that they can do the trick by adopting baby language
and talking down to their very critical audience.  There never was a
greater mistake. The imagination of the author must be a child's
imagination and yet maturely consistent, so that the White Queen in
"Alice," for instance, is seen just as a child would see her, but she
continues always herself through all her distressing adventures.  The
supreme touch of the white rabbit pulling on his white gloves as he
hastens is again absolutely the child's vision, but the white rabbit as
guide and introducer of Alice's adventures belongs to mature grown
insight.

Geniuses are rare and, without being at all an undue praiser of times
past, one can say without hesitation that until the appearance of Hugh
Lofting, the successor of Miss Yonge, Mrs. Ewing, Mrs. Gatty and Lewis
Carroll had not appeared.  I remember the delight with which some six
months ago I picked up the first "Dolittle" book in the Hampshire
bookshop at Smith College in Northampton.  One of Mr. Lofting's
pictures was quite enough for me. The picture that I lighted upon when
I first opened the book was the one of the monkeys making a chain with
their arms across the gulf. Then I looked further and discovered Bumpo
reading fairy stories to himself.  And then looked again and there was
a picture of John Dolittle's house.

But pictures are not enough although most authors draw so badly that if
one of them happens to have the genius for line that Mr. Lofting shows
there must be, one feels, something in his writing as well.  There is.
You cannot read the first paragraph of the book, which begins in the
right way "Once upon a time" without knowing that Mr. Lofting believes
in his story quite as much as he expects you to.  That is the first
essential for a story teller.  Then you discover as you read on that he
has the right eye for the right detail.  What child-inquiring mind
could resist this intriguing sentence to be found on the second page of
the book:


"Besides the gold-fish in the pond at the bottom of his garden, he had
rabbits in the pantry, white mice in his piano, a squirrel in the linen
closet and a hedgehog in the cellar."

And then when you read a little further you will discover that the
Doctor is not merely a peg on whom to hang exciting and various
adventures but that he is himself a man of original and lively
character.  He is a very kindly, generous man, and anyone who has ever
written stories will know that it is much more difficult to make
kindly, generous characters interesting than unkindly and mean ones.
But Dolittle is interesting.  It is not only that he is quaint but that
he is wise and knows what he is about.  The reader, however young, who
meets him gets very soon a sense that if he were in trouble, not
necessarily medical, he would go to Dolittle and ask his advice about
it.  Dolittle seems to extend his hand from the page and grasp that of
his reader, and I can see him going down the centuries a kind of Pied
Piper with thousands of children at his heels.  But not only is he a
darling and alive and credible but his creator has also managed to
invest everybody else in the book with the same kind of life.

Now this business of giving life to animals, making them talk and
behave like human beings, is an extremely difficult one.  Lewis Carroll
absolutely conquered the difficulties, but I am not sure that anyone
after him until Hugh Lofting has really managed the trick; even in such
a masterpiece as "The Wind in the Willows" we are not quite convinced.
John Dolittle's friends are convincing because their creator never
forces them to desert their own characteristics.  Polynesia, for
instance, is natural from first to last.  She really does care about
the Doctor but she cares as a bird would care, having always some place
to which she is going when her business with her friends is over.  And
when Mr. Lofting invents fantastic animals he gives them a kind of
credible possibility which is extraordinarily convincing.  It will be
impossible for anyone who has read this book not to believe in the
existence of the pushmi-pullyu, who would be credible enough even were
there no drawing of it, but the picture on page 145 settles the matter
of his truth once and for all.

In fact this book is a work of genius and, as always with works of
genius, it is difficult to analyze the elements that have gone to make
it.  There is poetry here and fantasy and humor, a little pathos but,
above all, a number of creations in whose existence everybody must
believe whether they be children of four or old men of ninety or
prosperous bankers of forty-five.  I don't know how Mr. Lofting has
done it; I don't suppose that he knows himself.  There it is--the first
real children's classic since "Alice." HUGH WALPOLE.



CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

     I  PUDDLEBY
    II  ANIMAL LANGUAGE
   III  MORE MONEY TROUBLES
    IV  A MESSAGE FROM AFRICA
     V  THE GREAT JOURNEY
    VI  POLYNESIA AND THE KING
   VII  THE BRIDGE OF APES
  VIII  THE LEADER OF THE LIONS
    IX  THE MONKEYS COUNCIL
     X  THE RAREST ANIMAL OF ALL
    XI  THE BLACK PRINCE
   XII  MEDICINE AND MAGIC
  XIII  RED SAILS AND BLUE WINGS
   XIV  THE RATS WARNING
    XV  THE BARBARY DRAGON
   XVI  TOO-TOO, THE LISTENER
  XVII  THE OCEAN GOSSIPS
 XVIII  SMELLS
   XIX  THE ROCK
    XX  THE FISHERMAN'S TOWN
   XXI  HOME AGAIN




THE STORY OF DOCTOR DOLITTLE



THE FIRST CHAPTER

PUDDLEBY

ONCE upon a time, many years ago when our grandfathers were little
children--there was a doctor; and his name was Dolittle--John Dolittle,
M.D.  "M.D." means that he was a proper doctor and knew a whole lot.

He lived in a little town called, Puddleby-on-the-Marsh. All the folks,
young and old, knew him well by sight.  And whenever he walked down the
street in his high hat everyone would say, "There goes the
Doctor!--He's a clever man."   And the dogs and the children would all
run up and follow behind him; and even the crows that lived in the
church-tower would caw and nod their heads.

The house he lived in, on the edge of the town, was quite small; but
his garden was very large and had a wide lawn and stone seats and
weeping-willows hanging over.  His sister, Sarah Dolittle, was
housekeeper for him; but the Doctor looked after the garden himself.

He was very fond of animals and kept many kinds of pets.  Besides the
gold-fish in the pond at the bottom of his garden, he had rabbits in
the pantry, white mice in his piano, a squirrel in the linen closet and
a hedgehog in the cellar. He had a cow with a calf too, and an old lame
horse-twenty-five years of age--and chickens, and pigeons, and two
lambs, and many other animals.  But his favorite pets were Dab-Dab the
duck, Jip the dog, Gub-Gub the baby pig, Polynesia the parrot, and the
owl Too-Too.

His sister used to grumble about all these animals and said they made
the house untidy. And one day when an old lady with rheumatism came to
see the Doctor, she sat on the hedgehog who was sleeping on the sofa
and never came to see him any more, but drove every Saturday all the
way to Oxenthorpe, another town ten miles off, to see a different
doctor.

Then his sister, Sarah Dolittle, came to him and said,

"John, how can you expect sick people to come and see you when you keep
all these animals in the house?  It's a fine doctor would have his
parlor full of hedgehogs and mice!  That's the fourth personage these
animals have driven away.  Squire Jenkins and the Parson say they
wouldn't come near your house again--no matter how sick they are.  We
are getting poorer every day.  If you go on like this, none of the best
people will have you for a doctor."

"But I like the animals better than the 'best people'," said the Doctor.

"You are ridiculous," said his sister, and walked out of the room.

So, as time went on, the Doctor got more and more animals; and the
people who came to see him got less and less.  Till at last he had no
one left--except the Cat's-meat-Man, who didn't mind any kind of
animals.  But the Cat's-meat Man wasn't very rich and he only got sick
once a year--at Christmas-time, when he used to give the Doctor
sixpence for a bottle of medicine.

Sixpence a year wasn't enough to live on--even in those days, long ago;
and if the Doctor hadn't had some money saved up in his money-box, no
one knows what would have happened.

And he kept on getting still more pets; and of course it cost a lot to
feed them.  And the money he had saved up grew littler and littler.

Then he sold his piano, and let the mice live in a bureau-drawer.  But
the money he got for that too began to go, so he sold the brown suit he
wore on Sundays and went on becoming poorer and poorer.

And now, when he walked down the street in his high hat, people would
say to one another, "There goes John Dolittle, M.D.!  There was a time
when he was the best known doctor in the West Country--Look at him
now--He hasn't any money and his stockings are full of holes!"

But the dogs and the cats and the children still ran up and followed
him through the town--the same as they had done when he was rich.



THE SECOND CHAPTER

ANIMAL LANGUAGE

IT happened one day that the Doctor was sitting in his kitchen talking
with the Cat's-meat-Man who had come to see him with a stomach-ache.

"Why don't you give up being a people's doctor, and be an
animal-doctor?" asked the Cat's-meat-Man.

The parrot, Polynesia, was sitting in the window looking out at the
rain and singing a sailor-song to herself. She stopped singing and
started to listen.

"You see, Doctor," the Cat's-meat-Man went on, "you know all about
animals--much more than what these here vets do.  That book you
wrote--about cats, why, it's wonderful!  I can't read or write
myself--or maybe _I_'D write some books.  But my wife, Theodosia, she's
a scholar, she is.  And she read your book to me.  Well, it's
wonderful--that's all can be said--wonderful. You might have been a cat
yourself.  You know the way they think.  And listen: you can make a lot
of money doctoring animals.  Do you know that?  You see, I'd send all
the old women who had sick cats or dogs to you.  And if they didn't get
sick fast enough, I could put something in the meat I sell 'em to make
'em sick, see?"

"Oh, no," said the Doctor quickly.  "You mustn't do that.  That
wouldn't be right."

"Oh, I didn't mean real sick," answered the Cat's-meat-Man.  "Just a
little something to make them droopy-like was what I had reference to.
But as you say, maybe it ain't quite fair on the animals.  But they'll
get sick anyway, because the old women always give 'em too much to eat.
And look, all the farmers 'round about who had lame horses and weak
lambs--they'd come.  Be an animal-doctor."

When the Cat's-meat-Man had gone the parrot flew off the window on to
the Doctor's table and said,

"That man's got sense.  That's what you ought to do.  Be an
animal-doctor.  Give the silly people up--if they haven't brains enough
to see you're the best doctor in the world.  Take care of animals
instead--THEY'll soon find it out. Be an animal-doctor."

"Oh, there are plenty of animal-doctors," said John Dolittle, putting
the flower-pots outside on the window-sill to get the rain.

"Yes, there ARE plenty," said Polynesia.  "But none of them are any
good at all.  Now listen, Doctor, and I'll tell you something.  Did you
know that animals can talk?"

"I knew that parrots can talk," said the Doctor.

"Oh, we parrots can talk in two languages--people's language and
bird-language," said Polynesia proudly.  "If I say, 'Polly wants a
cracker,' you understand me.  But hear this: Ka-ka oi-ee, fee-fee?"

"Good Gracious!" cried the Doctor.  "What does that mean?"

"That means, 'Is the porridge hot yet?'--in bird-language."

"My!  You don't say so!" said the Doctor. "You never talked that way to
me before."

"What would have been the good?" said Polynesia, dusting some
cracker-crumbs off her left wing.  "You wouldn't have understood me if
I had."

"Tell me some more," said the Doctor, all excited; and he rushed over
to the dresser-drawer and came back with the butcher's book and a
pencil.  "Now don't go too fast--and I'll write it down.  This is
interesting--very interesting--something quite new.  Give me the Birds'
A.B.C. first--slowly now."

So that was the way the Doctor came to know that animals had a language
of their own and could talk to one another.  And all that afternoon,
while it was raining, Polynesia sat on the kitchen table giving him
bird words to put down in the book.

At tea-time, when the dog, Jip, came in, the parrot said to the Doctor,
"See, HE'S talking to you."

"Looks to me as though he were scratching his ear," said the Doctor.

"But animals don't always speak with their mouths," said the parrot in
a high voice, raising her eyebrows.  "They talk with their ears, with
their feet, with their tails--with everything. Sometimes they don't
WANT to make a noise.  Do you see now the way he's twitching up one
side of his nose?"

"What's that mean?" asked the Doctor.

"That means, 'Can't you see that it has stopped raining?'" Polynesia
answered.  "He is asking you a question.  Dogs nearly always use their
noses for asking questions."

