The Project Gutenberg EBook of Marjorie's Three Gifts, by Louisa May Alcott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Marjorie's Three Gifts

Author: Louisa May Alcott

Release Date: March, 2004 [EBook #5352]
Posting Date: April 19, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARJORIE'S THREE GIFTS ***




Produced by Brandon Ryan








MARJORIE'S THREE GIFTS


By Louisa M. Alcott


Author of "Little Women," "Little Men," "An Old-Fashioned Girl," Etc.

BOSTON

1899





MARJORIE'S THREE GIFTS


Marjorie sat on the door-step, shelling peas, quite unconscious what
a pretty picture she made, with the roses peeping at her through the
lattice work of the porch, the wind playing hide-and-seek in her curly
hair, while the sunshine with its silent magic changed her faded gingham
to a golden gown, and shimmered on the bright tin pan as if it were a
silver shield. Old Rover lay at her feet, the white kitten purred on her
shoulder, and friendly robins hopped about her in the grass, chirping "A
happy birthday, Marjorie!"

But the little maid neither saw nor heard, for her eyes were fixed on
the green pods, and her thoughts were far away. She was recalling the
fairy-tale granny told her last night, and wishing with all her heart
that such things happened nowadays. For in this story, as a poor girl
like herself sat spinning before the door, a Brownie came by, and gave
the child a good-luck penny; then a fairy passed, and left a talisman
which would keep her always happy; and last of all, the prince rolled
up in his chariot, and took her away to reign with him over a lovely
kingdom, as a reward for her many kindnesses to others.

When Marjorie imagined this part of the story, it was impossible to help
giving one little sigh, and for a minute she forgot her work, so busy
was she thinking what beautiful presents she would give to all the poor
children in her realm when THEY had birthdays. Five impatient young peas
took this opportunity to escape from the half-open pod in her hand and
skip down the steps, to be immediately gobbled up by an audacious robin,
who gave thanks in such a shrill chirp that Marjorie woke up, laughed,
and fell to work again. She was just finishing, when a voice called out
from the lane,--

"Hi, there! come here a minute, child!" and looking up, she saw a little
old man in a queer little carriage drawn by a fat little pony.

Running down to the gate, Marjorie dropped a curtsy, saying
pleasantly,--

"What did you wish, sir?"

"Just undo that check-rein for me. I am lame, and Jack wants to drink
at your brook," answered the old man, nodding at her till his spectacles
danced on his nose.

Marjorie was rather afraid of the fat pony, who tossed his head, whisked
his tail, and stamped his feet as if he was of a peppery temper. But she
liked to be useful, and just then felt as if there were few things she
could NOT do if she tried, because it was her birthday. So she proudly
let down the rein, and when Jack went splashing into the brook, she
stood on the bridge, waiting to check him up again after he had drunk
his fill of the clear, cool water.

The old gentleman sat in his place, looking up at the little girl, who
was smiling to herself as she watched the blue dragon-flies dance among
the ferns, a blackbird tilt on the alderboughs, and listened to the
babble of the brook.

"How old are you, child?" asked the old man, as if he rather envied this
rosy creature her youth and health.

"Twelve to-day, sir;" and Marjorie stood up straight and tall, as if
mindful of her years.

"Had any presents?" asked the old man, peering up with an odd smile.

"One, sir,--here it is;" and she pulled out of her pocket a tin
savings-bank in the shape of a desirable family mansion, painted red,
with a green door and black chimney. Proudly displaying it on the rude
railing of the bridge, she added, with a happy face,--

"Granny gave it to me, and all the money in it is going to be mine."

"How much have you got?" asked the old gentleman, who appeared to like
to sit there in the middle of the brook, while Jack bathed his feet and
leisurely gurgled and sneezed.

"Not a penny yet, but I'm going to earn some," answered Marjorie,
patting the little bank with an air of resolution pretty to see.

"How will you do it?" continued the inquisitive old man.

