The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Musician, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Young Musician
       or, Fighting His Way

Author: Horatio Alger

Release Date: May, 2004 [EBook #5673]
Posting Date: June 5, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG MUSICIAN ***




Produced by Carrie Fellman








THE YOUNG MUSICIAN

or

FIGHTING HIS WAY


By Horatio Alger


Chicago



CONTENTS


     I. A Candidate for the Poorhouse

     II. Philip at Home

     III. Nick Holden's Call

     IV. The Auction

     V. An Alliance Against Philip

     VI. "A Fuss About a Fiddle"

     VII. Mr. Joe Tucker

     VIII. In the Enemy's Hands

     IX. The Poorhouse

     X. Bad Tidings

     XI. Philip's New Room

     XII. A Pauper's Meal

     XIII. A Friendly Mission

     XIV. Philip Makes His Escape

     XV. Escape and Flight

     XVI. A Night Adventure

     XVII. A Reformed Burglar

     XVIII. A Professional Engagement

     XIX. New Acquaintances

     XX. A Lively Evening

     XXI. Fortune Smiles Again

     XXII. Rival Musicians

     XXIII. An Hour of Triumph

     XXIV. Lorenzo Riccabocca

     XXV. A Change of Name

     XXVI. A Promising Plan

     XXVII. Unexpected Honors

     XXVIII. A Triumphant Success

     XXIX. Beset by Creditors

     XXX. A Timely Gift

     XXXI. The Professor's Flight

     XXXII. The Race Across Fields

     XXXIII. The Lost Wallet

     XXXIV. A New Business Proposal

     XXXV. Squire Pope Is Amazed

     XXXVI. The Pretended Guardian

     XXXVII. His Own Master

     XXXVIII. An Offer Declined

     XXXIX. An Ambitious Wayfarer

     XL. The Indian Hunter

     XXI. An Adventure in the Woods

     XLII. An Indian at Last

     XLIII. A Welcome Letter

     XLIV. A Fresh Start




CHAPTER I. A CANDIDATE FOR THE POORHOUSE.


"As for the boy," said Squire Pope, with his usual autocratic air, "I
shall place him in the poorhouse."

"But, Benjamin," said gentle Mrs. Pope, who had a kindly and sympathetic
heart, "isn't that a little hard?"

"Hard, Almira?" said the squire, arching his eyebrows. "I fail to
comprehend your meaning."

"You know Philip has been tenderly reared, and has always had a
comfortable home--"

"He will have a comfortable home now, Mrs. Pope. Probably you are not
aware that it cost the town two thousand dollars last year to maintain
the almshouse. I can show you the item in the town report."

"I don't doubt it at all, husband," said Mrs. Pope gently. "Of course
you know all about it, being a public man."

Squire Pope smiled complacently. It pleased him to be spoken of as a
public man.

"Ahem! Well, yes, I believe I have no inconsiderable influence in town
affairs," he responded. "I am on the board of selectmen, and am chairman
of the overseers of the poor, and in that capacity I shall convey Philip
Gray to the comfortable and well-ordered institution which the town has
set apart for the relief of paupers."

"I don't like to think of Philip as a pauper," said Mrs. Pope, in a
deprecating tone.

"What else is he?" urged her husband. "His father hasn't left a cent. He
never was a good manager."

"Won't the furniture sell for something, Benjamin?"

"It will sell for about enough to pay the funeral expenses and
outstanding debts-that is all."

"But it seems so hard for a boy well brought up to go to the poorhouse."

"You mean well, Almira, but you let your feelings run away with you. You
may depend upon it, it is the best thing for the boy. But I must write a
letter in time for the mail."

Squire Pope rose from the breakfast-table and walked out of the room
with his usual air of importance. Not even in the privacy of the
domestic circle did he forget his social and official importance.

Who was Squire Pope?

We already know that he held two important offices in the town of
Norton. He was a portly man, and especially cultivated dignity of
deportment. Being in easy circumstances, and even rich for the resident
of a village, he was naturally looked up to and credited with a worldly
sagacity far beyond what he actually possessed.

At any rate, he may be considered the magnate of Norton. Occasionally he
visited New York, and had been very much annoyed to find that his rural
importance did not avail him there, and that he was treated with no
sort of deference by those whom he had occasion to meet. Somehow, the
citizens of the commercial metropolis never suspected for a single
moment that he was a great man.

When Squire Pope had finished his letter, he took his hat, and with
measured dignity, walked to the village post-office.

He met several of his neighbors there, and greeted them with affable
condescension. He was polite to those of all rank, as that was essential
to his retaining the town offices, which he would have been unwilling to
resign.

From the post-office the squire, as he remembered the conversation which
had taken place at the breakfast-table, went to make an official call on
the boy whose fate he had so summarily decided.

Before the call, it may be well to say a word about Philip Gray, our
hero, and the circumstances which had led to his present destitution.

His father had once been engaged in mercantile business, but his
health failed, his business suffered, and he found it best-indeed,
necessary--to settle up his affairs altogether and live in quiet
retirement in Norton.

The expenses of living there were small, but his resources were small,
also, and he lived just long enough to exhaust them.

It was this thought that gave him solicitude on his death-bed, for he
left a boy of fifteen wholly unprovided for.

Let us go back a week and record what passed at the last interview
between Philip and his father before the latter passed into the state of
unconsciousness which preceded death.

"Are you in pain, father?" asked Philip, with earnest sympathy, as his
father lay outstretched on the bed, his face overspread by the deathly
pallor which was the harbinger of dissolution.

"Not of the body, Philip," said Mr. Gray. "That is spared me, but I own
that my mind is ill at ease."

"Do you mind telling me why, father!"

"No; for it relates to you, my son, or, rather, to your future. When my
affairs are settled, I fear there will be nothing left for your support.
I shall leave you penniless."

"If that is all, father, don't let that trouble you."

"I am afraid, Philip, you don't realize what it is to be thrown upon the
cold charities of the world."

"I shall work for my living," said Philip confidently.

"You will have to do that, I'm afraid, Philip."

"But I am not afraid to work, father. Didn't you tell me one day that
many of our most successful men had to work their way up from early
poverty!"

"Yes, that is true; but a boy cannot always get the chance to earn his
living. Of one thing I am glad; you have a good education for a boy of
your age. That is always a help."

"Thanks to you, father."

"Yes; though an invalid, I have, at all events, been able to give
private attention to your education, and to do better for you than the
village school would have done. I wish I had some relative to whom I
might consign you, but you will be alone in the world."

"Have I no relatives?" asked Philip.

"Your mother was an only child, and I had but one brother."

"What became of him, father?"

"He got into trouble when he was a young man, and left the country.
Where he went to I have no idea. Probably he went first to Europe, and I
heard a rumor, at one time, that he had visited Australia. But that was
twenty years ago, and as I have heard nothing of him since, I think it
probable that he is dead. Even if he were living, and I knew where he
was, I am not sure whether he would make a safe guardian for you."

"Have you any advice to give me, father?" asked Philip, after a pause.
"Whatever your wishes may be, I will try to observe them."

"I do not doubt it, Philip. You have always been an obedient son, and
have been considerate of my weakness. I will think it over, and try to
give you some directions which may be of service to you. Perhaps I may
be able to think of some business friend to whom I can commend you."

"You have talked enough, father," said Philip, noticing his father's
increasing pallor and the evident exertion with which he spoke. "Rest
now, and to-morrow we can talk again."

Mr. Gray was evidently in need of rest. He closed his eyes and
apparently slept. But he never awoke to consciousness. The conversation
above recorded was the last he was able to hold with his son. For two
days he remained in a kind of stupor, and at the end of that time he
died.

Philip's grief was not violent. He had so long anticipated his father's
death that it gave him only a mild shock.

Friends and neighbors made the necessary arrangements for the funeral,
and the last services were performed. Then, at length, Philip realized
that he had lost his best earthly friend, and that he was henceforth
alone in the world. He did not as yet know that Squire Pope had
considerately provided him with a home in the village poorhouse.




CHAPTER II. PHILIP AT HOME.



When the funeral was over, Frank Dunbar, whom Philip regarded as his
most intimate friend, came up to him.

"Philip," he said, "my mother would like to have you spend a few days
with us while you are deciding what to do."

"Thank you, Frank!" answered Philip. "But until the auction I shall
remain at home. I shall soon enough be without a home."

"But it will be very lonely for you," objected Frank.

"No; I shall have my thoughts for company. When I am alone I can think
best of my future plans."

"Won't you come to our house to meals, then?"

"Thank you, Frank! I will do that."

"When is the auction to be?"

"To-day is Monday. It is appointed for Thursday."

"I hope there will be something left for you."

"There will be about enough left to pay my father's small debts and his
funeral expenses. I would not like to have him indebted to others for
those. I don't think there will be anything over."

Frank looked perplexed.

"I am sorry for you, Phil," he said. "I wish we were rich, instead of
having hard work to make both ends meet. You would not lack for anything
then."

"Dear Frank," said Philip earnestly, "I never doubted your true
friendship. But I am not afraid that I shall suffer. I am sure I can
earn my living."

"But why do you shut yourself up alone, Philip?" asked Frank, not
satisfied to leave his friend in what he considered the gloomy solitude
of a house just visited by death.

"I want to look over my father's papers. I may find out something that
I ought to know, and after the auction it will be too late. Father had
some directions to give me, but he did not live long enough to do it.
For three days I have the house to myself. After that I shall perhaps
never visit it again."

"Don't be downhearted, Philip," said Frank, pressing his hand with
boyish sympathy.

"I don't mean to be, Frank. I am naturally cheerful and hopeful. I shall
miss my poor father sadly: but grieving will not bring him back. I must
work for my living, and as I have no money to depend upon, I cannot
afford to lose any time in forming my plans."

"You will come over to our house and take your meals!"

"Yes, Frank."

Frank Dunbar's father was a small farmer, who, as Frank had said, found
it hard work to make both ends meet. Among all the village boys, he
was the one whom Philip liked best, though there were many others whose
fathers were in hotter circumstances. For this, however, Philip cared
little. Rich or poor, Frank suited him, and they had always been known
as chums, to adopt the term used by the boys in the village.

It may be thought that as Philip's circumstances were no better, such
an intimacy was natural enough. But Philip Gray possessed special gifts,
which made his company sought after. He was a fine singer, and played
with considerable skill on the violin--an accomplishment derived from
his father, who had acted as his teacher. Then he was of a cheerful
temperament, and this is a gift which usually renders the possessor
popular, unless marred by positive defects or bad qualities. There were
two or three young snobs in the village who looked down upon Philip on
account of his father's poverty, but most were very glad to associate
with our hero, and have him visit their homes. He was courteous to all,
but made--no secret of his preference for Frank Dunbar.

When Philip parted from Frank, and entered the humble dwelling which
had been his own and his father's home for years, there was a sense of
loneliness and desolation which came over him at first.

His father was the only relative whom he knew, and his death, therefore,
left the boy peculiarly, alone in the world. Everything reminded him
of his dead father. But he did not allow himself to dwell upon thoughts
that would depress his spirits and unfit him for the work that lay
before him.

He opened his father's desk and began to examine his papers. There was
no will, for there was nothing to leave, but in one compartment of the
desk was a thick wallet, which he opened.

In it, among some receipted bills, was an envelope, on which was
written, in his father's well-known hand:

