The Project Gutenberg EBook of In the Pecos Country, by 
Edward Sylvester Ellis (AKA Lieutenant R.H. Jayne)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: In the Pecos Country

Author: Edward Sylvester Ellis (AKA Lieutenant R.H. Jayne)

Release Date: June, 2004  [EBook #5828]
Posting Date: April 24, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN THE PECOS COUNTRY ***




Produced by Gordon Keener





IN THE PECOS COUNTRY

By Lieutenant R. H. Jayne [pseudonym of Edward Sylvester Ellis
(1840-1916)]




CHAPTER I. A WARNING

In the valley of the Rio Pecos, years ago, an attempt at founding a
settlement was made by a number of hardy and daring New Englanders,
whose leader was a sort of Don Quixote, who traveled hundreds of miles,
passing by the richest land, the most balmy climate, where all were
protected by the strong arm of law, for the sake of locating where the
soil was only moderate, the climate no better, and where, it may be
said, the great American government was as powerless to protect its
citizens as was a child itself. The Rio Pecos, running through New
Mexico and Texas, drains a territory which at that time was one of the
most dangerous in the whole Indian country; and why these score or more
of families should have hit upon this spot of all others, was a problem
which could never be clearly solved.

The head man, Caleb Barnwell, had some odd socialistic theories, which,
antedating as they did the theories of Bellamy, were not likely to
thrive very well upon New England soil, and he pursuaded his friends to
go with him, under the belief that the spot selected was one where they
would have full opportunity to increase and multiply, as did the Mormons
during their early days at Salt Lake. Then, too, there was some reason
to suspect that rumors had reached the ears of Barnwell of the existence
of gold and silver along this river, and it was said that he had hinted
as much to those whom he believed he could trust. Be that as it may, the
score of families reached the valley of the Upper Pecos in due time, and
the settlement was begun and duly christened New Boston.

"How long do yer s'pose you folks are goin' to stay yer? Why, just long
enough for Lone Wolf to hear tell that you've arriv, and he'll down here
and clear you out quicker'n lightning."

This was the characteristic observation made by the old scout, hunter
and guide, Sut Simpson, as he reined up his mustang to chat awhile with
the new-comers, whom he looked upon as the greatest lunk-heads that he
had ever encountered in all of his rather eventful experience. He had
never seen them before; but he did not care for that, as he had the
frankness of a frontiersman and never stood upon ceremony in the
slightest degree.

"Did you ever hear tell of Lone Wolf?" he continued, as a group,
including nearly the entire population, gathered about the veteran of
the plains. "I say, war any of you ever introduced to that American
gentleman?"

He looked around, from face to face, but no one responded. Whenever he
fixed his eye upon any individual, that one shook his head to signify
that he knew nothing of the Apache chief whose name he had just
mentioned.

"What I meant to say," he continued, "is that any of you have got any
yearnin' toward Lone Wolf, feeling as if your heart would break if you
did n't get a chance to throw your arms about him, why, you need n't
feel bad, _'cause you'll get the chance_."

There was a significance in these words which made it plain to every one
of those who were looking up in the scarred face of the hunter. As they
were spoken, he winked one of his eyes and cocked his head to one side,
in a fashion that made the words still more impressive. As Sut looked
about the group, his gaze was attracted by two figures--a man and a boy.
The former was an Irishman--his nationality being evident at the first
glance--while the latter seemed about fourteen years of age, with a
bright, intelligent face, a clear, rosy, healthy complexion, and a keen
eye that was fixed steadily and inquiringly upon the horseman who was
giving utterance to such valuable information. The hunter was attracted
by both, especially as he saw from their actions that they were friends
and companions. There was something in the honest face of the Irishman
which won him, while the lad by his side would have carried his way
almost anywhere upon the score of his looks alone.

As the entire group were gazing up in the face of the scout, he spoke to
them all, although, in reality, his words were now directed more at
the two referred to than at the others. When he had completed the words
given, there was silence for a moment, and then Mickey O'Rooney, the
Irishman, recovered his wits. Stepping forward a couple of paces, he
addressed their visitor.

"From the manner of your discourse, I judge that you're acquainted with
the American gentleman that you've just referred to as Mr. Lone Wolf?"

"I rather reckon I am," replied Sut, with another of his peculiar grins.
"Me and the Wolf have met semi-occasionally for the past ten years,
and I carry a few remembrances of his love, that I expect to keep on
carrying to my grave."

As he spoke, he laid his finger upon a cicatrized wound upon his cheek,
a frightful scar several inches in length, and evidently made by a
tomahawk. It ran from the temple to the base of the nose, and was
scarcely concealed by the luxuriant grizzled beard that grew almost to
his eyes.

"That's only one," said Sut. "Here's another that mebbe you can see."

This time he removed his coon-skin hunting-cap and bending his head
down, he parted the hair with his long, horny fingers, so that all saw
very distinctly the scar of a wound that must have endangered the life
of the recipient.

"I've got half a dozen other scars strung here and there about my body,
the most of which was made by that lonely Apache chief that is called
Lone Wolf; so I reckon you'll conclude that he and me have some
acquaintance. Oh! we was as lovin' as a couple of brothers!"

Mickey O'Rooney lifted his cap, and scratched his red head in a puzzled
way, as if he were debating some weighty matter. Suddenly looking up, he
asked:

"Was this Mr. Wolf born in these parts?"

"I can't say, precisely, where he first seed the light, but it must have
been somewhere round about this part of the world. Why did you ax?"

"I was thinking p'raps he was born in Ireland, and came to this country
when he was of tender age. I once knowed a Mr. Fox, whose petaty patch
was so close to ours, that the favorite amoosement of me respected
parents was flingin' the petaties over into our field by moonlight. His
name was Fox, I say, but I never knowed anybody by the name of Wolf."

"He's a screamer," continued Sut Simpson, who seemed to enjoy talking of
such a formidable foe. "The Comanches and Apaches sling things loose in
these parts, an' the wonder to me is how you ever got this fur without
losing your top-knots, for you've had to come right through their
country."

"We have had encounters with the red men times without number," said
Caleb Barnwell, who was standing erect, with arms folded, looking
straight at the hunter. He spoke in a deep, rich, bass voice, recalling
the figures of the early Puritans, who were unappalled by the dangers of
the ocean and forest, when the question of liberty of conscience was at
stake. "We have encountered the red men time and again," he continued,
"so that I may conclude that we have become acclimated, as they say, and
understand the nature of the American Indian very well."

Sut Simpson shook his head with a displeased expression.

"If you'd understood Injin nature, you'd never come here to settle. You
might have gone through the country on your way to some other place,
for, when you're on the way, you can keep a lookout for the varmints;
but you've undertook to settle down right in the heart of the Apache
country, and that's what I call the biggest piece of tom-foolery that
was ever knowed."

This kind of talk might have discouraged ordinary people, but Barnwell
and his companions had long since become accustomed to it. They had
learned to brave ridicule before leaving their homes, and they classed
the expressions of the hunters who had called upon them with the
utterances of those who failed to "look into the future."

"We were not the dunces to suppose that this was a promised land, in
which there were no giants to dispossess," replied Barnwell, in the
same dignified manner. "Our fathers had to fight the Indians, and we are
prepared to do the same."

Sut Simpson had no patience with this sort of talk, and he threw up his
head with an impatient gesture.

"Did you ever toss a hunk of buffler meat to a hungry hound, and seen
how nice he'd catch it in his jaws, and gulp it down without winkin',
and then he'd lick his chops, and look up and whine for more. Wal,
that's just the fix you folks are in. Lone Wolf and his men will swallow
you down without winkin', and then be mad that there ain't somethin'
left to squinch thar hunger."

As the hunter uttered this significant warning, he gathered up the reins
of his mustang and rode away.



CHAPTER II. A BRIEF CONFERENCE

Sut Simpson was thoroughly impatient and angry. Knowing, as well as he
did, the dangerous character of Arizona, New Mexico, Northwestern Texas
and Indian Territory, he could not excuse such a foolhardy proceeding as
that of a small colony settling in the very heart of that section. The
nearest point where they could hope for safety was Fort Severn, fifty
miles distant. There was a company of soldiers under command of an
experienced United States officer, and they knew well enough to
keep within the protection of their stockades, except when making
reconnoissances in force.

All those who were acquainted with the veteran scout were accustomed to
defer to his judgment, where Indians were concerned, and he was so used
to receiving this deference, that when he was contradicted and gainsayed
by these new settlers, he lost his patience, and started to leave them
in a sort of mild passion.

The place fixed for the location of New Boston was in a gently sloping
valley, with the Rio Pecos running on the right. The soil was fertile,
as was shown in the abundance of rich, succulent grass which grew about
them, while, only a few hundred yards up the river, was a grove of
timber, filled in with dense undergrowth and brush--the most favorable
location possible for a band of daring red-skins, when preparing to make
a raid upon the settlement. The hunter turned the head of his mustang in
the direction of this wood, and rode away at a slow walk. He had nearly
reached the margin, when some one called to him:

"Hist, there, ye spalpeen! Won't ye howld on a minute?"

Turning his head, he saw the Irishman walking rapidly toward him, after
the manner of one who had something important to say. He instantly
checked his horse, and waited for him to come up.

"Do you know," struck in Mickey, "that I belaved in Misther Barnwell
till we reached Kansas City? There we met people that had been all
through this country and that knew all about it, and every one of the
spalpeens told us that we'd lose our sculps if we comed on. I did n't
consider it likely that all of them folks would talk in that style
unless they meant it, and half a dozen of us made up our minds that the
best thing we could do was to go back, or stop where we was. We wint
to Misther Barnwell and plaided with him, and I was ready to break a
shillalah over his head by way of convincin' him of the truth of me
remarks, but it was no use. He just grinned and shook his head. The
folks all seem to be afeard of him, as though he were St. Patrick or
some other sensible gintleman, and so we comed on."

"What made _you_ come?" asked Sut, throwing his knee upon the saddle and
looking down upon the Irishman. "You could do as you choosed."

"No, I could n't. I hired out to Mr. Moonson for a year, and there ain't
half a year gone yet, and I've got to stick to him till the time is up."

"Whose little boy is that I seed standing by you?"

"That's Mr. Moonson's boy, Fred, one of the foinest, liveliest lads ye
ever sot eyes on, and I'm much worried on his account."

"Are his parents with you?"

"Naither of 'em."

The hunter looked surprised, and the Irishman hastened to explain.

"I never knowed his mother--she havin' been dead afore I lift owld
Ireland--and his father was taken down with a sort of fever a week ago,
when we was t'other side of Fort Aubray. It was n't anything dangerous
at all but it sort of weakened him, so that it was belaved best for him
to tarry there awhile until he could regain his strength."

"Why did n't you and the younker stay with him?"

"That's what orter been done," replied the disgusted Irishman. "But
as it was n't, here we are. The owld gintleman, Mr. Moonson, had
considerable furniture and goods that went best with the train, and he
needed me to look after it. He thought the boy would be safer with the
train than with him, bein' that when he comes on, as he hopes to do, in
the course of a week, be the same more or less, he will not have more
than two or three companions. What I wanted to ax yez," said Mickey,
checking his disposition to loquacity, "is whether ye are in dead
airnest 'bout saying the copper-colored gentleman will be down here for
the purpose of blotting out the metropolis of New Boston?"

"Be here? Of course they will, just as sure as you're a livin' man. And
you won't have to wait long, either."

"How long?"

"Inside of a week, mebbe within three days. The last I heard of Lone
Wolf, he was down in the direction of the Llano Estaeado, some two or
three hundred miles from here, and it won't take him long to come that
distance."

"Is he the only Indian chief in this country, that ye talk so much about
him?"

"Oh, no! there are plenty of 'em, but Lone Wolf has a special weakness
for such parties as this."

"When he does come, what is best for us to do?"

"You'll make the best fight you can, of course, and if you get licked,
as I've no doubt you will, and you're well mounted, you must all strike
a bee-line for Fort Severn, and never stop till you reach the stockades.
You can't miss the road, for you've only got to ride toward the setting
sun, as though you meant to dash your animal right through it."

"Where will the spalpeen come from?"

The hunter pointed toward the woods before them.

"That's just the place the varmints would want--they could n't want any
nicer. You may be lookin' at that spot, and they'll crawl right in afore
you'r eyes, and lay thar for hours without your seein' 'em. You want to
get things fixed, so that you can make a good fight when they do swoop
