The Project Gutenberg EBook of Walter Sherwood's Probation, by Horatio Alger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Walter Sherwood's Probation

Author: Horatio Alger


Release Date: June, 2004 [EBook #5993]
This file was first posted on October 9, 2002
Last Updated: April 10, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WALTER SHERWOOD'S PROBATION ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team








WALTER SHERWOOD'S PROBATION

By Horatio Alger, Jr.

Author of "Facing the World," "Hector's Inheritance," "Helping Himself,"
"Jack's Ward," Etc., Etc.,




CHAPTER I

WALTER SHERWOOD'S LETTER


"Here's a letter for you, Doctor Mack," said the housekeeper, as
she entered the plain room used as a library and sitting-room by her
employer, Doctor Ezekiel Mack. "It's from Walter, I surmise." This was a
favorite word with Miss Nancy Sprague, who, though a housekeeper, prided
herself on having been a schoolmistress in her earlier days.

"Indeed, Nancy. Let me see it. Walter is really getting attentive. His
last letter came to hand only two days since. He hasn't forgotten his
old guardian."

"Oh, no, sir. He'll never do that. He has a predilection for his old
home. His heart is in the right place."

"Just so. I wish I felt as sure about his head."

Doctor Mack adjusted his spectacles, for he was rising sixty, and his
eyes required assistance, and opened the letter. As he read it his
forehead contracted, and he looked disturbed. A perusal of the letter
may help us to understand why. It ran as follows:

"DEAR GUARDIAN: You will be surprised at hearing from me so soon again,
but I am really forced to write. I find college life much more expensive
than I supposed it would be. A fellow is expected to join two or three
societies, and each costs money. I know you wouldn't have me appear
mean. Then the students have been asked to contribute to a fund for the
enlargement of the library, and almost every day there is a demand for
money for one object or another. As it is nearly the end of the term,
I calculate that with a check for an extra hundred dollars I can get
along. I am awfully sorry to ask for it, but it will come out of
the money father left me, and I am sure he would wish me to keep up
appearances, and not fall behind the rest of the boys.

"I stand fairly well in my studies, and I expect to be stroke oar of
the college boat club. Besides this, I have been elected catcher of the
college baseball club. I am thought to excel in athletic sports, and
really enjoy my college life very much. Please send me the check by
return of mail. Affectionately yours, WALTER."

Doctor Mack laid the letter on the table, and slowly removed the glasses
from his nose.

"One hundred dollars!" he repeated. "That is the second extra check he
has written for, this term. Then his regular term bills will come due in
two weeks. He is spending more than three times as much as I did when in
college. Forty years have made a difference, no doubt, but not so great
a difference as that. I hope the boy isn't falling into extravagant
habits. I care for that more than for the money. His father left a good
fortune, of which fact he is unfortunately aware, but I don't mean that
it shall spoil him. Now, what shall I do. Shall I send him the check or
not?"

Doctor Mack leaned back in his chair, and thought busily. He felt
anxious about his ward, who had entered college early and was now only
seventeen. Walter Sherwood was a boy of excellent talent and popular
manners, but he was inclined to be self-indulgent and had a large
capacity for "enjoyment." His guardian had fondly hoped that he would
lead the class in scholarship, but instead of this he was only doing
"fairly well" in his studies. To be sure, he excelled in athletic
sports, but, as Doctor Mack reflected, this was not generally considered
the chief aim in a college course, except by some of the students
themselves.

"I wish I knew just how Walter is making out," thought the doctor. Then,
after a pause, he resumed, with a sudden inspiration: "Why shouldn't
I know? I'll go over to Euclid to-morrow with out giving Walter any
intimation of my visit, and see for myself."

It may be stated here that Walter Sherwood was a member of the sophomore
class in Euclid College, situated in the town of the same name. If
the reader does not find Euclid in a list of American colleges, it is
because for special reasons I have thought it best to conceal the real
name of the college, not wishing to bring the Institution into possible
disrepute. There are some who might misjudge the college, because it
contained some students who made an unprofitable use of their time.

"Nancy," said Doctor Mack at the supper-table, "you may pack a hand-bag
for me. I shall start on a journey to-morrow morning."

"Where to, sir, if I may make so bold as to inquire?"

"I think of going to Euclid."

"To see Master Walter?"

"Exactly."

"You haven't heard any bad news, I hope?" said the housekeeper
anxiously.

"Oh, no."

"Then he isn't sick?"

"Quite the contrary. He is quite strong and athletic, I should judge,
from his letter."

"He will be glad to see you, sir."

"Well, perhaps so. But you know, Nancy, young people don't miss their
parents and guardians as much as they are missed at home. They have
plenty of excitement and society at college."

"Yes, sir, that's true, but I'm sure Master Walter won't forget his old
home. If you have room for some cookies I will put some into the bag.
Walter is fond of them."

"No, I think you needn't do It, Nancy, He has a good boarding-house, and
no doubt he gets all the cakes he wants. By the way, I want to take the
boy by surprise, so don't write and let him know I'm coming."

"No, sir, I won't."

This was exactly what the housekeeper had intended to do, for she
presumed upon her long service in the family to write a few lines
occasionally to the boy whom she had known from the age of six.

"Of course I shall be pleased to give him any message from you."

"Thank you, Doctor Mack. Tell him if he catches cold I can send him
some camomile. Camomile tea is excellent in such cases. My mother and
grandmother used it all their lives."

"You seem to forget that I am a doctor, Nancy. Not that I object to
camomile tea--in its place--though I can truly say that I never hankered
after it."

"How long will you be gone, doctor?"

"I can't say exactly. You see, Euclid is nearly two hundred miles off.
and I don't know whether I can make connections."

"Oh, well, don't hurry! No doubt Walter will want to keep you with him
as long as possible."

"I don't feel so sure of that," thought the doctor shrewdly. "Boys are
not usually so fond of the society of their guardians, though I don't
doubt Walter has a sincere regard for me. He is a warm-hearted boy."

Doctor Mack was no longer in active practice. Three years before he had
selected an assistant--a young Doctor Winthrop--in whom his patients
had come to feel confidence, so that when he wanted to go away for a few
days there was no serious objection. Unlike some elderly practitioners,
Doctor Mack did not feel in the least jealous of his young assistant,
but was very glad to note his popularity.

"If any one calls for me, Nancy," he said, "say that I am away for a day
or two and they can't do better than go to Doctor Winthrop."

"There are some that like you best, sir."

"No doubt, no doubt! They're used to me, you know. There's a good deal
in that. Any that please can wait for me, but my advice to them is to go
to Doctor Winthrop."

Nancy packed the doctor's hand-bag, putting in a change of linen, a comb
and brush, an extra pair of socks and a couple of handkerchiefs. Then,
seeing that there was plenty of room, she slipped in a small box of
cookies and a little camomile. The doctor discovered them soon after he
started on his journey, and with a smile tossed the camomile out of the
window, while he gave the cookies to a poor woman who was traveling with
a couple of small children in the same car as himself. So that Nancy
Sprague's thoughtfulness was not wholly lost, though the intended
recipient did not benefit by it.

Doctor Mack had to wait over at a junction for three hours, owing to
some irregularities of the trains, and did not reach Euclid till rather
a late hour in the afternoon. He went to the Euclid Hotel, and entered
his name,

E. MACK, Albany,

without adding M.D., and substituting Albany for the small village,
thirty miles away, where he made his home.

"Strategy, doctor, strategy!" he said to himself, "I have come to spy
out the land, and must not make myself too conspicuous. I am traveling,
as it were, incognito."




CHAPTER II

DR. MACK GETS SOME INFORMATION


The Euclid Hotel was distant about half a mile from the college
buildings. It would hardly have paid expenses but for the patronage it
received from the parents and friends of the students, who, especially
on public occasions, were drawn to visit Euclid, and naturally put up at
the hotel. Then the students, tired, perhaps, of the fare at the college
commons, dropped in often and ordered a dinner. So, take it all in
all, Euclid Hotel benefited largely by the presence of the college. No
students, however, were permitted to board there, as it was thought
by the college professors that the atmosphere of the hotel would be
detrimental to college discipline and the steady habits they desired to
inculcate in the young men under their care.

"I wonder," thought Doctor Mack, after supper was over, "whether I had
better go round to the college and make an evening call on Walter?"

He was tempted to do so, for he was fond of his young ward and would
have enjoyed seeing him. But then he wished, unobserved, to judge for
himself whether Walter was making good use of his privileges, and this
made it injudicious for him to disclose his presence in the college
town.

He strolled out into the tavern yard, and observed a young man engaged
in some light duties.

"Good evening, sir," said the young man, respectfully.

"Good evening, I suppose you are connected with the hotel?"

"Yes, sir; but I would rather be connected with the college."

"Then you have a taste for study?"

"Yes, sir. I began to prepare for college, and had made some progress
in Latin and Greek, when my father died, and that put an end to my
prospects."

"That was a pity. Has it destroyed your taste for study?"

"No, I spend an hour after I am through work in keeping up my Latin and
Greek, but of course I make slow progress."

"Naturally. Now I have no doubt there are many students who do not
appreciate their privileges as much as you do."

"I know it, sir. There are pretty lively boys in college. Have you a son
there?"

"No."

"I didn't know but what you might have."

"What do you mean by lively?"

"I mean they care more to have a good time than to get on in their
studies."

"What do they do?"

"Well, some of them belong to societies, and have a good time whenever
they meet. Frequently they give little suppers at the hotel here, and
keep it up till a late hour."

"Do the faculty know of this?"

"They may surmise something, but they don't interfere. Of course, it
pays Mr. Daniels, the landlord, for he charges a good round sum, and,
as there is no other place for the boys to go, they must pay it. There's
going to be a supper here to-night."

"Indeed!"

"It is given by one of the sophomores, Walter Sherwood."

"What name did you mention?" asked Doctor Mack, startled.

"Walter Sherwood. Do you know him?"

"I know a family by the name of Sherwood," answered Doctor Mack,
evasively. "What sort of a young man is he?"

"I don't call him a young man. He is only seventeen or eighteen--one of
the youngest members of the class. He is very popular among his mates--a
regular jolly boy he is."

"Does he stand well in his scholarship?"

The young man laughed.

"I don't think he troubles himself much about studies," he replied,
"from all I hear; but he is pretty smart, learns easily, and manages to
keep up respectably."

Doctor Mack's heart sank within him. Was this the best that could be
said about his ward, the son of his old friend?

"Do you think he is dissipated?" he asked, uneasily.

"Not that I ever heard. He is fond of having a good time, and drinks
wine at his suppers, but he isn't what you would call intemperate. He
would do better work in college if he wasn't so rich."

"So he is rich, then?"

"He must be, for he spends a good deal of money. Pendleton, one of his
classmates, told me that he spent more money than any one in the class."

"That is why he needs so many extra checks," thought the guardian
soberly.

"I am sorry he doesn't make better use of his privileges," he said
aloud.

"Yes, sir, it is a pity. If he didn't care so much for a good time he
might stand at the head of his class--so Pendleton thinks."

"If he were a poor boy, now, you think the result would be different?"
asked Doctor Mack, thoughtfully.

"Yes, sir, I have no doubt of it."

"When does the supper commence?"

"At half-past eight o'clock."

"How long will it keep up?"

"Till near midnight. The landlord makes it a point to have them close
before twelve. I hope they won't disturb you, sir."

"Are they likely to make much noise?"

"Well, sir, they make speeches, and do a good deal of singing. Then,
college songs are naturally noisy."

"Yes, so I hear."

"What is the number of your room?"

"Number nine."

"Why, you are nearly opposite the room where they will have their
supper. I am afraid you won't stand much chance of sleeping early."

"Oh, never mind! I shall get an idea of what a college supper is like."

"So you will. If you open the transom over your door you will have the
full benefit of all that goes on."

"That will suit me very well," thought Doctor Mack.

"If you would like to be farther away, the landlord would no doubt
change your room."

"Oh, no," said the doctor hastily. "It will suit me very well for once
