The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cornelli, by Johanna Spyri

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cornelli

Author: Johanna Spyri

Posting Date: February 9, 2011 [EBook #6380]
Release Date: August, 2004
First Posted: December 3, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORNELLI ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










CORNELLI

By JOHANNA SPYRI





FOREWORD



Many writers have suffered injustice in being known as the author of
but one book. Robinson Crusoe was not Defoe's only masterpiece, nor
did Bunyan confine his best powers to Pilgrim's Progress. Not one
person in ten of those who read Lorna Doone is aware that several of
Blackmore's other novels are almost equally charming. Such, too, has
been the fate of Johanna Spyri, the Swiss authoress, whose reputation
is mistakenly supposed to rest on her story of Heidi.

To be sure, Heidi is a book that in its field can hardly be overpraised.
The winsome, kind-hearted little heroine in her mountain background
is a figure to be remembered from childhood to old age. Nevertheless,
Madame Spyri has shown here but one side of her narrative ability.

If, as I believe, the present story is here first presented to readers
of English, it must be through a strange oversight, for in it we find
a deeper treatment of character, combined with equal spirit and humor
of a different kind. Cornelli, the heroine, suffers temporarily from
the unjust suspicion of her elders, a misfortune which, it is to be
feared, still occurs frequently in the case of sensitive children. How
she was restored to herself and reinstated in her father's affection
forms a narrative of unusual interest and truth to life. Whereas in
Heidi there is only one other childish figure--if we except the droll
peasant boy Peter--we have here a lively and varied array of children.
Manly, generous Dino; Mux, the irrepressible; and the two girls form
a truly lovable group. The grown-ups, too, are contrasted with much
humor and genuine feeling. The story of Cornelli, therefore, deserves
to equal Heidi in popularity, and there can be no question that it
will delight Madame Spyri's admirers and will do much to increase the
love which all children feel for her unique and sympathetic genius.

CHARLES WHARTON STORK




CONTENTS



CHAPTER

  I.    BESIDE THE ROARING ILLER-STREAM
  II.   UP IN THE TOP STORY
  III.  NEW APPEARANCES IN ILLER-STREAM
  IV.   THE UNWISHED-FOR HAPPENS
  V.    A NEWCOMER IN ILLER-STREAM
  VI.   A FRIEND IS FOUND
  VII.  A NEW SORROW
  VIII. A MOTHER
  IX.   A GREAT CHANGE
  X.    NEW LIFE IN ILLER-STREAM




CHAPTER I

BESIDE THE ROARING ILLER-STREAM



Spring had come again on the banks of the Iller-Stream, and the young
beech trees were swaying to and fro. One moment their glossy foliage
was sparkling in the sunshine, and the next a deep shadow was cast
over the leaves. A strong south wind was blowing, driving huge clouds
across the sun.

A little girl with glowing cheeks and blowing hair came running through
the wood. Her eyes sparkled with delight, while she was being driven
along by the wind, or had to fight her way against it. From her arm
was dangling a hat, which, as she raced along, seemed anxious to free
itself from the fluttering ribbons in order to fly away. The child now
slackened her pace and began to sing:

  The snow's on the meadow,
    The snow's all around,
  The snow lies in heaps
    All over the ground.
      Hurrah, oh hurrah!
    All over the ground.

  Oh cuckoo from the woods,
    Oh flowers so bright,
  Oh kindliest sun,
    Come and bring us delight!
      Hurrah, oh hurrah!
    Come and bring us delight!

  When the swallow comes back
    And the finches all sing,
  I sing and I dance
    For joy of the Spring.
      Hurrah, oh hurrah!
    For joy of the Spring.

The woods rang with her full, young voice, and her song also roused
the birds, for they, too, now carolled loudly, ready to outdo each
other. Laughingly the child sang once more with all her might:

    Hurrah, oh hurrah!
  For joy of the Spring.

and from all the branches sounded a many voiced chorus.

Right on the edge of the woods stood a splendid old beech tree with
a high, firm trunk, under which the child had often sought quiet and
shelter after running about in the sun. She had reached the tree now
and was looking up at the far-spreading branches, which were rocking
up and down.

The child, however, did not rest very long. Over where the wind struck
an open space, it blew as mightily as ever, and the roaring, high up
in the tree-tops, seemed to urge her on to new exertions. First she
began fighting her way against the wind, but soon she turned. Driven
by it, she flew down the steep incline to the path which led down to
the narrow valley. She kept on running till she had reached a small
wooden house, which looked down from a high bank to the roaring mountain
stream. A narrow stairway led up from the ground to the front door of
the little dwelling and to the porch, where on a wide railing were
some fragrant carnations.

The lively little girl now leaped up the steps, two at a time. Soon
she reached the top, and one could see that the house was familiar to
her.

"Martha, Martha, come out!" she called through the open door. "Have
you noticed yet how jolly the wind is to-day?"

A small old woman with gray hair now came out to greet the child. She
was dressed in the simplest fashion, and wore a tight-fitting cap on
her head. Her clothes were so very tidy and clean, however, that it
seemed as if she might have sat on a chair all day for fear of spoiling
them. Yet her hands told another tale, for they were roughened by hard
work.

"Oh, Martha," the child said, "I just wish you knew how wonderful the
wind is to-day up there in the woods and on the hill. One has to fight
it with all one's might, otherwise one might be blown down the mountain
side like a bird. It would be so hard then to get on one's feet again,
wouldn't it? Oh, I wish you knew what fun it is to be out in the wind
to-day."

"I think I would rather not know," said Martha, shaking the child's
hand. "It seems to me that the wind has pulled you about quite a little.
Come, we'll straighten you up again."

The child's thick dark hair was in a terrible state. What belonged on
the left side of the parting had been blown to the right, and what
belonged on the right side was thrown to the left. The little apron,
instead of being in front, hung down on the side, and from the bottom
of her skirt the braid hung loose, carrying upon it brambles and forest
leaves. First Martha combed the little girl's hair, then she pulled
the apron into place. Finally she got a thread and needle and began
to mend the braid on the dress.

"Stop, Martha, stop, please!" Cornelli called out suddenly, pulling
her skirt away. "You must not sew, for your finger is all pricked to
pieces. There is only half of it left with those horrible marks."

"That does not matter; just give me your little skirt," replied Martha,
continuing her sewing. "This kind of work does not hurt me; but when
I sew heavy shirts for the farmers and the workmen in the iron works
the material is so rough that, as I push the needle in, I often prick
off little pieces of my finger."

"Why should you have to do that, Martha? They could make their own
shirts and prick their own fingers," cried Cornelli indignantly.

"No, no, Cornelli; do not speak like that," replied the woman. "You
see, I am glad and grateful to be able to get work enough to earn my
living without help. I have to be thankful to our Lord for all the
good things he gives me, and especially for giving me enough strength
for my work."

Cornelli looked about her searchingly, in the little room. It was
modestly furnished, but most scrupulously clean.

"I do not think that God gave you so very much, really, but you keep
everything so neat, and do it all yourself," remarked Cornelli.

"I have to thank our Lord, though, that I am able to do it," returned
Martha. "You see, Cornelli, if I had not the health to do everything
the way I like it done, who could do it for me? It is a great gift to
be able to step out every morning into the sunshine and to my
carnations. Then I thank God in my heart for the joy of a new day
before me. There are many poor people who wake up only to sorrow and
tears. They have to spend all day on their sick beds and have many
troubles besides. Can you see now, Cornelli, how grateful I have to
be to our Lord because nothing prevents me from sewing, even if I have
to prick my fingers? But I believe I hear the bell in the foundry. You
know that means supper time, so run back to the house as quickly as
you can."

Martha knew well enough that she had to remind her little friend about
returning, for often time had been forgotten and Cornelli had had to
be sent for. But now the little girl began to run swiftly down the
incline beside the rushing stream. Soon she came to the large buildings
from which the sound of hissing fires, loud thumping and hammering
could be heard all day. The noise was so great that only the roaring
of the stream could drown it. Here were the works of the great iron
foundry, well known far and wide, since most of those who lived in the
neighborhood found employment there.

Glancing at the large doors and seeing that they were closed, Cornelli
flew by them with great bounds. In an isolated house, well raised above
the stream, lived the proprietor of the foundry. Beautiful flower
gardens were on three sides.

Cornelli approached the open space in front and was soon inside.
Flinging her hat into a corner, she entered the room where her father
was already sitting at table. He did not even look up, for he was
holding a large newspaper in front of him. As Cornelli's soup was
waiting for her, she ate it quickly, and since her father made no
movement behind his paper, she helped herself to everything else that
was before her.

While she was nibbling on an apple, her father looked up and said: "I
see that you have caught up with me, Cornelli. You even seem to be
further along than I am. Just the same you must not come late to your
meals. It is not right, even if you get through before me. Well, as
long as you have finished, you can take this letter to the post office.
There is something in it which concerns you and which will please you.
I have to go now, but I shall tell you about it to-night."

Cornelli was given the letter. Taking the remainder of her apple with
her, she ran outside. With leaps and bounds she followed the rushing
Iller-Stream, till the narrow path reached the wide country road. Here
stood the stately inn, which was the post office of the place. In the
open doorway stood the smiling and rotund wife of the innkeeper.

"How far are you going at this lively pace?" she smilingly asked the
child.

"I am only coming to you," Cornelli replied. She was very much out of
breath, so she paused before adding: "I have to mail a letter."

"Is that so? Just give it to me and we'll attend to it," said the
woman. Holding the hand the child had offered her, she added: "You are
well off, Cornelli, are you not? You do not know what trouble is, do
you, child?"

Cornelli shook her head.

"Yes, of course. And why should you? It does one good to see your
bright eyes. Come to see me sometimes; I like to see a happy child
like you."

Cornelli replied that she would gladly come again. She really meant
to do so, for the woman always spoke kindly to her. After saying
good-bye, she ran away again, jumping and bounding as before. The
innkeeper's wife meantime muttered to herself, while she looked after
