The Project Gutenberg EBook of Story Hour Readers — Book Three, by 
Ida Coe and Alice Christie Dillon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Story Hour Readers — Book Three

Author: Ida Coe
        Alice Christie Dillon

Posting Date: March 22, 2015 [EBook #6685]
Release Date: October, 2004
First Posted: January 12, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORY HOUR READERS — BOOK THREE ***




Produced by Naomi Parkhurst, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.










STORY HOUR READERS

THIRD YEAR

BOOK THREE

BY

IDA COE, Pd.M.

ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL, PUBLIC SCHOOLS
CITY OF NEW YORK

AND

ALICE J. CHRISTIE

PRIMARY TEACHER. PUBLIC SCHOOLS
CITY OF NEW YORK

CONTENTS

  THE LAND OF STORY BOOKS _Robert Louis Stevenson_
HANSEL AND GRETEL _Fairy Tale_
THE EAGLE AND THE FOX _Fable_
  HIAWATHA'S BROTHERS _Henry W. Longfellow_
THE BEAVERS' LODGE _Indian Folklore_
MANITOU AND THE SQUIRRELS _Indian Folklore_
THE SWIFT RUNNER _Indian Folklore_
BROTHER RABBIT _Indian Folklore_
  QUEEN MAB _Thomas Hood_
CINDERELLA _Fairy Tale_
  THE WIND _Robert Louis Stevenson_
THE BAG OF WINDS _Greek Mythology_
DIANA AND APOLLO _Greek Mythology_
  THE TREE _Adapted from Bjornson_
THE FAIRY TREE _Fairy Tale_
  HIAWATHA'S SAILING _Henry W. Longfellow_
GRAY MOLE AND THE INDIAN _Indian Folklore_
THE WATER LILIES _Indian Folklore_
  WHERE GO THE BOATS? _Robert Louis Stevenson_
WHY THE SEA IS SALT _Northern Folklore_
SENNIN THE HERMIT _From the Japanese_
GREAT AND LITTLE BEAR _Greek Mythology_
  THE BOY AND THE SHEEP _Ann Taylor_
THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF _Aesop_
THE LION'S SHARE _Aesop_
  ROBIN REDBREAST _William Allingham_
THORN ROSE _Fairy Tale_
THE WOLVES AND THE DEER _Fable_
  THE CORNFIELDS _Henry W. Longfellow_
THE GIFT OF CORN _Indian Folklore_
  A BOY'S SONG _James Hogg_
THE FROGS' TRAVELS _From the Japanese_
THE MERCHANT'S CARAVAN _East Indian Tale_
QUEEN HULDA AND THE FLAX _European Folklore_
  ALADDIN'S LAMP _Ida Coe_
ALADDIN AND THE MAGIC LAMP _Arabian Nights_
  THE WHITING AND THE SNAIL _Lewis Carroll_
THE BONFIRE IN THE SEA _Australian Folklore_
ROBINSON CRUSOE _Daniel Defoe_
  THE WONDERFUL WORLD
THE MAGIC GIRDLE _The Brothers Grimm_





THE LAND OF STORY BOOKS


At evening when the lamp is lit,
Around the fire my parents sit;
They sit at home and talk and sing,
And do not play at anything.

Now with my little gun I crawl,
All in the dark, along the wall.
And follow round the forest track
Away behind the sofa back.

There in the night, where none can spy,
All in my hunter's camp I lie,
And play at books that I have read,
Till it is time to go to bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

So, when my nurse comes in for me,
Home I return across the sea,
And go to bed with backward looks
At my dear Land of Story Books.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




HANSEL AND GRETEL


In a little cottage at the edge of a forest in Germany, lived Peter, a
poor broom maker, and his wife Gertrude. They had two children, Hansel
and Gretel.

One day Hansel and Gretel were left alone at home. Their father had gone
to the village to sell brooms. Their mother was away, too.

The children were left busily at work. The boy was mending brooms, the
girl knitting stockings.

After a time they became tired of their hard work.

"Come, Gretel, let us have some fun!" cried Hansel.

As he spoke, he threw the broom upon the floor, and pulled the stocking
from his sister's hand.

"Oh, yes!" said Gretel. "I will teach you a song, and you can learn the
steps of the dance."

Hansel and Gretel danced about the room. Gretel sang, while she and
Hansel danced,

  "First your foot you tap, tap, tap,
  Then your hands you clap, clap, clap;
  Right foot first, left foot then,
  Round about and back again."

Presently the mother returned home. She entered the room and found
Hansel and Gretel at play.

"You lazy children!" she exclaimed. "Why have you not finished your
work?"

Taking the broom that Hansel had thrown upon the floor, the mother
started to punish him, but the boy was too quick for her.

Hansel ran nimbly about, and as she was trying to catch him, the mother
upset a jug of milk. It was all the food there was in the house.

"Oh, mother!" cried Gretel. "You have spilled the milk, and we shall
have nothing to eat."

"Go out into the woods and gather some strawberries. Do not return until
you have filled the basket to the brim," commanded the mother. "Hansel,
help your sister pick the berries, and hurry back, both of you, for
there is nothing else for supper."

Towards evening the father returned from the village.

"Ho, ho, good wife!" called Peter. "I have had great luck to-day, and
have sold all my brooms. Now for a good supper! See here--bread and
butter, some potatoes, ham and eggs. But where are the children?"

"They have gone to the woods to gather strawberries," replied Gertrude.

"It is growing dark. Hansel and Gretel should have been here long ago,"
said Peter anxiously.

The wife began to prepare supper. The husband went to the door of the
cottage and looked out into the darkness.

"Alas, my children!" cried Peter. "I fear that the terrible Witch of the
Forest may find them, and that we shall never see them again!"

Meanwhile Hansel and Gretel had filled the basket with strawberries, and
then had wandered into the forest. They sat down upon a mossy bank under
a fir tree, to rest.

"Here is a fine strawberry! Taste it," said Gretel.

She put a berry into Hansel's mouth and took one for herself.

"I am so hungry! Give me another berry," said Hansel.

The children tasted another and another of the strawberries, until all
were gone.

"Oh, Hansel! We have eaten all of the strawberries," cried Gretel. "We
must fill the basket again."

The children began to hunt for more berries, but it was now growing
dark, and they could find none. To make matters worse, they had lost
their way.

Gretel began to cry, but Hansel tried to be very brave.

"I will take care of you, sister," said he.

"Hark!" said Gretel.

They could hear soft voices among the trees. The children became more
frightened than before.

"What is that, near the dark bushes?" whispered Gretel.

"It is only the stump of a tree," replied Hansel.

"It is making faces at me!" said Gretel.

Hansel made faces back again, trying to drive the strange form away.

Suddenly a light came toward them.

"Oh, here are father and mother looking for us!" cried Gretel.

But no, it was only the light of the will-o'-the-wisp.

Hansel called, "Who is there?"

Echo answered, "Who is there?"

Poor Babes in the Wood! They fled in terror, back to the mossy bank
under the fir tree. There they huddled close together.

Presently a little man with a long white beard stood before them. He was
dressed in gray clothes, and he carried a gray sack upon his back.

Hansel and Gretel were not afraid of the little man, for he seemed very
friendly.

The little man sang softly,

  "Golden slumbers close your eyes,
  Smiles awake you when you rise.
  Sleep, pretty darlings, do not cry,
  And I will sing a lullaby.
  Lullaby, lullaby, the Sandman am I."

Then the Sandman threw into their tired eyes the sand of sleep. Soon the
children had gone safely to Slumberland.

At midnight a little elf, whose home was deep in the heart of an oak
tree, came forth and rang a fairy bell. He sang,

  "Twelve small strokes on my tinkling bell--
  'Twas made of the white snail's pearly shell;--
  Midnight comes, and all is well!
      Hither, hither, wing your way,
      'Tis the dawn of the fairy day!"

At the last stroke of twelve, a troop of fairies and wood nymphs
appeared. They danced merrily to the tune of the flower bells, forming a
ring around the children.

When the sun's rays began to shine through the branches of the trees,
the fairies tripped away. Only the Dew Fairy remained. She sprinkled dew
upon the children's faces with her magic wand.

The Dew Fairy sang,

  "Awake you, O children dear,
     Wake you and rise!
   The sun glowing brightly, peeps
     Into your eyes!"

Then the Dew Fairy departed.

"O Hansel! Hear the birds singing! Where are we?" exclaimed Gretel.
"Come, Hansel, wake up!"

The children looked about them in wonder. The giant trees had
disappeared, and near them stood a little house.

"What a pretty cottage!" said Hansel. "Why, it is a candy house! The
roof is chocolate, and the windows are sugar plums. What a queer fence!
It is gingerbread!"

Soon they heard some one say, in a squeaky voice,

  "Nibble, nibble, little mouse,
  Who is nibbling my sweet house?"

The children only ate and sang and laughed.

Suddenly the door of the house flew open. An old witch came out. On her
head she wore a pointed hat, and in her hand she carried a stick.

The candy cottage belonged to the Witch of the Forest.

"Oh, ho!" cried the witch. "You dear children, who led you here? Come
in, and I will give you candies, cakes, apples, and nuts--all that you
wish to eat!"

Hansel and Gretel were frightened. They started to run away, but the old
witch waved her Elder Bush above her head. It cast a spell over the
children. They could not move.

Then the witch put Hansel into a cage. She brought from the cottage a
basket of sugar plums, candies, and nuts. She gave him the sweets to
eat.

"You will soon be fat enough to cook," she muttered. "I will bake the
girl first."

Grasping the little girl's arm, she shook her roughly, saying, "Go into
the house and set the table while I build a fire."

The old witch gathered some wood. As she threw it upon the fire, she
said, "Now for a ride through the air on my broom, while the oven is
heating!"

Astride her big broom, the witch rode high above the cottage. She
circled around like a huge bird, over the trees and back again, while
she sang a strange song.

Hansel, shut up in the cage, watched her in terror.

At last the witch flew down to the ground, on her broom. She alighted
close beside the oven, which stood in the front yard.

Calling the little girl out of the house she said, "Open the oven door.
Then creep inside and see if it is hot enough to bake the bread."

But Gretel guessed that the witch meant to shut the door upon her, so
she said, "I am afraid to creep into the oven."

"Silly child!" said the witch. "The door is wide enough. Why, even I
could pass through!"

As she spoke, she popped her head into the oven.

Gretel sprang toward her and shut the oven door. That was the end of the
old witch!

Then Gretel ran and unfastened the door of the cage.

"We are saved, Hansel!" she exclaimed. Then she danced about, singing
merrily,

  "First your foot you tap, tap, tap,
  Then your hands you clap, clap, clap;
  Right foot first, left foot then,
  Round about and back again."

Then, taking the Elder Bush, Gretel waved it above her head as the witch
had done.

Instantly the candy house became a log cabin. Sunflowers and
morning-glories were growing in the front yard, where the witch's cage
and the oven had stood.

Soon voices were heard. The sounds came nearer, and the father and
mother clasped their children in their arms.

Peter and Gertrude lived with the two children in the log cabin in the
forest, for many happy years. And the fairies always took good care of
both Hansel and Gretel.




THE EAGLE AND THE FOX


One morning the fox said to his children, "I will find some eggs for
breakfast."

Then he went to the woods.

The fox saw an eagle's nest in the top branch of a tree. "How can I
reach those eggs?" thought he. "Ha, ha! Now I have a plan."

He put some grass stalks into his ears and knocked on the tree with
them.

"Throw an egg to me," cried the fox. "If you do not throw an egg to me,
I will knock this great tree over with these grass stalks."

The eagle was terribly frightened, and she threw an egg down to the fox.

"Throw another egg down to me at once," demanded the fox, when he saw
that he had frightened the eagle.

"One egg is enough," said the eagle. "I shall not throw down any more
eggs."

"Throw another egg to me, or I shall knock the tree over with these
grass stalks, and take all your eggs," said the fox.

The eagle was still more frightened, and she threw down another egg.

Then the fox laughed and said, "How could I knock down a great tree with
these small grass stalks?"

The eagle became very angry. She flew down from her nest and grasped the
fox with her talons.

Then she lifted the fox up and flew with him far out to sea. She dropped
him upon a lonely island.

The fox was left on the lonely island. One day he said to himself, "Am I
going to die on this island?"

Then the fox began to sing softly. Seals, walruses, porpoises, and
whales swam near the island.

"What are you singing about?" asked the sea people.
