The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Grey Fairy Book, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Grey Fairy Book

Author: Various

Editor: Andrew Lang

Release Date: October, 2004  [EBook #6746]
Posting Date: December 1, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREY FAIRY BOOK ***




Produced by JC Byers, Wendy Crockett, Sally Gellert, Christine Sturrock





THE GREY FAIRY BOOK

By Various


Edited by Andrew Lang




Preface


The tales in the Grey Fairy Book are derived from many
countries--Lithuania, various parts of Africa, Germany, France, Greece,
and other regions of the world. They have been translated and adapted by
Mrs. Dent, Mrs. Lang, Miss Eleanor Sellar, Miss Blackley, and Miss hang.
'The Three Sons of Hali' is from the last century 'Cabinet des Fees,'
a very large collection. The French author may have had some Oriental
original before him in parts; at all events he copied the Eastern method
of putting tale within tale, like the Eastern balls of carved ivory. The
stories, as usual, illustrate the method of popular fiction. A certain
number of incidents are shaken into many varying combinations, like the
fragments of coloured glass in the kaleidoscope. Probably the possible
combinations, like possible musical combinations, are not unlimited in
number, but children may be less sensitive in the matter of fairies than
Mr. John Stuart Mill was as regards music.


Contents

     Donkey Skin
     The Goblin Pony
     An Impossible Enchantment
     The Story of Dschemil and Dachemila
     Janni and the Draken
     The Partnership of the Thief and the Liar
     Fortunatus and his Purse
     The Goat-faced Girl
     What came of picking Flowers
     The Story of Bensurdatu
     The Magician's Horse
     The Little Gray Man
     Herr Lazarus and the Draken
     The Story of the Queen of the Flowery Isles
     Udea and her Seven Brothers
     The White Wolf
     Mohammed with the Magic Finger
     Bobino
     The Dog and the Sparrow
     The Story of the Three Sons of Hali
     The Story of the Fair Circassians
     The Jackal and the Spring The Bear
     The Sunchild The Daughter of Buk Ettemsuch
     Laughing Eye and Weeping Eye, or the Limping Fox
     The Unlooked for Prince
     The Simpleton
     The Street Musicians
     The Twin Brothers
     Cannetella
     The Ogre
     A Fairy's Blunder
     Long, Broad, and Quickeye
     Prunella





Donkey Skin


There was once upon a time a king who was so much beloved by his
subjects that he thought himself the happiest monarch in the whole
world, and he had everything his heart could desire. His palace was
filled with the rarest of curiosities, and his gardens with the sweetest
flowers, while in the marble stalls of his stables stood a row of
milk-white Arabs, with big brown eyes.

Strangers who had heard of the marvels which the king had collected,
and made long journeys to see them, were, however, surprised to find the
most splendid stall of all occupied by a donkey, with particularly large
and drooping ears. It was a very fine donkey; but still, as far as they
could tell, nothing so very remarkable as to account for the care with
which it was lodged; and they went away wondering, for they could
not know that every night, when it was asleep, bushels of gold pieces
tumbled out of its ears, which were picked up each morning by the
attendants.

After many years of prosperity a sudden blow fell upon the king in the
death of his wife, whom he loved dearly. But before she died, the
queen, who had always thought first of his happiness, gathered all her
strength, and said to him:

'Promise me one thing: you must marry again, I know, for the good of
your people, as well as of yourself. But do not set about it in a hurry.
Wait until you have found a woman more beautiful and better formed than
myself.'

'Oh, do not speak to me of marrying,' sobbed the king; 'rather let me
die with you!' But the queen only smiled faintly, and turned over on her
pillow and died.

For some months the king's grief was great; then gradually he began to
forget a little, and, besides, his counsellors were always urging him to
seek another wife. At first he refused to listen to them, but by-and-by
he allowed himself to be persuaded to think of it, only stipulating that
the bride should be more beautiful and attractive than the late queen,
according to the promise he had made her.

Overjoyed at having obtained what they wanted, the counsellors sent
envoys far and wide to get portraits of all the most famous beauties of
every country. The artists were very busy and did their best, but, alas!
nobody could even pretend that any of the ladies could compare for a
moment with the late queen.

At length, one day, when he had turned away discouraged from a fresh
collection of pictures, the king's eyes fell on his adopted daughter,
who had lived in the palace since she was a baby, and he saw that, if
a woman existed on the whole earth more lovely than the queen, this was
she! He at once made known what his wishes were, but the young girl, who
was not at all ambitious, and had not the faintest desire to marry him,
was filled with dismay, and begged for time to think about it. That
night, when everyone was asleep, she started in a little car drawn by a
big sheep, and went to consult her fairy godmother.

'I know what you have come to tell me,' said the fairy, when the maiden
stepped out of the car; 'and if you don't wish to marry him, I will show
you how to avoid it. Ask him to give you a dress that exactly matches
the sky. It will be impossible for him to get one, so you will be quite
safe.' The girl thanked the fairy and returned home again.

The next morning, when her father (as she had always called him) came
to see her, she told him that she could give him no answer until he had
presented her with a dress the colour of the sky. The king, overjoyed
at this answer, sent for all the choicest weavers and dressmakers in the
kingdom, and commanded them to make a robe the colour of the sky without
an instant's delay, or he would cut off their heads at once. Dreadfully
frightened at this threat, they all began to dye and cut and sew, and in
two days they brought back the dress, which looked as if it had been cut
straight out of the heavens! The poor girl was thunderstruck, and did
not know what to do; so in the night she harnessed her sheep again, and
went in search of her godmother.

'The king is cleverer than I thought,' said the fairy; 'but tell him you
must have a dress of moonbeams.'

And the next day, when the king summoned her into his presence, the girl
told him what she wanted.

'Madam, I can refuse you nothing,' said he; and he ordered the dress to
be ready in twenty-four hours, or every man should be hanged.

They set to work with all their might, and by dawn next day, the dress
of moonbeams was laid across her bed. The girl, though she could not
help admiring its beauty, began to cry, till the fairy, who heard her,
came to her help.

'Well, I could not have believed it of him!' said she; 'but ask for a
dress of sunshine, and I shall be surprised indeed if he manages that!'

The goddaughter did not feel much faith in the fairy after her two
previous failures; but not knowing what else to do, she told her father
what she was bid.

The king made no difficulties about it, and even gave his finest
rubies and diamonds to ornament the dress, which was so dazzling, when
finished, that it could not be looked at save through smoked glasses!

When the princess saw it, she pretended that the sight hurt her eyes,
and retired to her room, where she found the fairy awaiting her, very
much ashamed of herself.

'There is only one thing to be done now,' cried she; 'you must demand
the skin of the ass he sets such store by. It is from that donkey he
obtains all his vast riches, and I am sure he will never give it to
you.'

The princess was not so certain; however, she went to the king, and told
him she could never marry him till he had given her the ass's skin.

The king was both astonished and grieved at this new request, but did
not hesitate an instant. The ass was sacrificed, and the skin laid at
the feet of the princess.

The poor girl, seeing no escape from the fate she dreaded, wept afresh,
and tore her hair; when, suddenly, the fairy stood before her.

'Take heart,' she said, 'all will now go well! Wrap yourself in this
skin, and leave the palace and go as far as you can. I will look after
you. Your dresses and your jewels shall follow you underground, and if
you strike the earth whenever you need anything, you will have it at
once. But go quickly: you have no time to lose.'

So the princess clothed herself in the ass's skin, and slipped from the
palace without being seen by anyone.

Directly she was missed there was a great hue and cry, and every corner,
possible and impossible, was searched. Then the king sent out parties
along all the roads, but the fairy threw her invisible mantle over the
girl when they approached, and none of them could see her.

The princess walked on a long, long way, trying to find some one who
would take her in, and let her work for them; but though the cottagers,
whose houses she passed, gave her food from charity, the ass's skin was
so dirty they would not allow her to enter their houses. For her flight
had been so hurried she had had no time to clean it.

Tired and disheartened at her ill-fortune, she was wandering, one day,
past the gate of a farmyard, situated just outside the walls of a large
town, when she heard a voice calling to her. She turned and saw the
farmer's wife standing among her turkeys, and making signs to her to
come in.

'I want a girl to wash the dishes and feed the turkeys, and clean out
the pig-sty,' said the w omen, 'and, to judge by your dirty clothes, you
would not be too fine for the work.'

The girl accepted her offer with joy, and she was at once set to work in
a corner of the kitchen, where all the farm servants came and made fun
of her, and the ass's skin in which she was wrapped. But by-and-by they
got so used to the sight of it that it ceased to amuse them, and she
worked so hard and so well, that her mistress grew quite fond of her.
And she was so clever at keeping sheep and herding turkeys that you
would have thought she had done nothing else during her whole life!

One day she was sitting on the banks of a stream bewailing her wretched
lot, when she suddenly caught sight of herself in the water. Her hair
and part of her face was quite concealed by the ass's head, which was
drawn right over like a hood, and the filthy matted skin covered her
whole body. It was the first time she had seen herself as other people
saw her, and she was filled with shame at the spectacle. Then she threw
off her disguise and jumped into the water, plunging in again and again,
till she shone like ivory. When it was time to go back to the farm, she
was forced to put on the skin which disguised her, and now seemed more
dirty than ever; but, as she did so, she comforted herself with the
thought that to-morrow was a holiday, and that she would be able for
a few hours to forget that she was a farm girl, and be a princess once
more.

So, at break of day, she stamped on the ground, as the fairy had told
her, and instantly the dress like the sky lay across her tiny bed. Her
room was so small that there was no place for the train of her dress to
spread itself out, but she pinned it up carefully when she combed her
beautiful hair and piled it up on the top of her head, as she had always
worn it. When she had done, she was so pleased with herself that
she determined never to let a chance pass of putting on her splendid
clothes, even if she had to wear them in the fields, with no one to
admire her but the sheep and turkeys.

Now the farm was a royal farm, and, one holiday, when 'Donkey Skin' (as
they had nicknamed the princess) had locked the door of her room and
clothed herself in her dress of sunshine, the king's son rode through
the gate, and asked if he might come and rest himself a little after
hunting. Some food and milk were set before him in the garden, and when
he felt rested he got up, and began to explore the house, which was
famous throughout the whole kingdom for its age and beauty. He opened
one door after the other, admiring the old rooms, when he came to a
handle that would not turn. He stooped and peeped through the keyhole to
see what was inside, and was greatly astonished at beholding a beautiful
girl, clad in a dress so dazzling that he could hardly look at it.

The dark gallery seemed darker than ever as he turned away, but he went
back to the kitchen and inquired who slept in the room at the end of the
passage. The scullery maid, they told him, whom everybody laughed
at, and called 'Donkey Skin;' and though he perceived there was some
strange mystery about this, he saw quite clearly there was nothing to be
gained by asking any more questions. So he rode back to the palace, his
head filled with the vision he had seen through the keyhole.

All night long he tossed about, and awoke the next morning in a high
fever. The queen, who had no other child, and lived in a state of
perpetual anxiety about this one, at once gave him up for lost, and
indeed his sudden illness puzzled the greatest doctors, who tried the
usual remedies in vain. At last they told the queen that some secret
sorrow must be at the bottom of all this, and she threw herself on her
knees beside her son's bed, and implored him to confide his trouble to
her. If it was ambition to be king, his father would gladly resign the
cares of the crown, and suffer him to reign in his stead; or, if it
was love, everything should be sacrificed to get for him the wife he
desired, even if she were daughter of a king with whom the country was
at war at present!

'Madam,' replied the prince, whose weakness would hardly allow him to
speak, 'do not think me so unnatural as to wish to deprive my father of
his crown. As long as he lives I shall remain the most faithful of his
subjects! And as to the princesses you speak of, I have seen none that
I should care for as a wife, though I would always obey your wishes,
whatever it might cost me.'

'Ah! my son,' cried she, 'we will do anything in the world to save your
life----and ours too, for if you die, we shall die also.'

'Well, then,' replied the prince, 'I will tell you the only thing that
will cure me----a cake made by the hand of "Donkey Skin."'

'Donkey Skin?' exclaimed the queen, who thought her son had gone mad;
'and who or what is that?'

'Madam,' answered one of the attendants present, who had been with
the prince at the farm, '"Donkey Skin" is, next to the wolf, the most
disgusting creature on the face of the earth. She is a girl who wears a
black, greasy skin, and lives at your farmer's as hen-wife.'

'Never mind,' said the queen; 'my son seems to have eaten some of her
pastry. It is the whim of a sick man, no doubt; but send at once and let
her bake a cake.'

The attendant bowed and ordered a page to ride with the message.

Now it is by no means certain that 'Donkey Skin' had not caught a
glimpse of the prince, either when his eyes looked through the keyhole,
or else from her little window, which was over the road. But whether she
had actually seen him or only heard him spoken of, directly she received
the queen's command, she flung off the dirty skin, washed herself from
head to foot, and put on a skirt and bodice of shining silver. Then,
locking herself into her room, she took the richest cream, the finest
flour, and the freshest eggs on the farm, and set about making her cake.

As she was stirring the mixture in the saucepan a ring that she
sometimes wore in secret slipped from her finger and fell into the
dough. Perhaps 'Donkey Skin' saw it, or perhaps she did not; but, any
way, she went on stirring, and soon the cake was ready to be put in the
oven. When it was nice and brown she took off her dress and put on her
dirty skin, and gave the cake to the page, asking at the same time for
news of the prince. But the page turned his head aside, and would not
even condescend to answer.

The page rode like the wind, and as soon as he arrived at the palace
he snatched up a silver tray and hastened to present the cake to the
prince. The sick man began to eat it so fast that the doctors thought he
would choke; and, indeed, he very nearly did, for the ring was in one
of the bits which he broke off, though he managed to extract it from his
mouth without anyone seeing him.

The moment the prince was left alone he drew the ring from under his
pillow and kissed it a thousand times. Then he set his mind to find how
