The Project Gutenberg EBook of Five Little Peppers Abroad, by Margaret Sidney

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Five Little Peppers Abroad

Author: Margaret Sidney

Illustrator: Fanny Y. Cory

Posting Date: April 30, 2013 [EBook #6987]
Release Date: November, 2004
First Posted: February 20, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE LITTLE PEPPERS ABROAD ***




Produced by Michelle Shephard, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










FIVE LITTLE PEPPERS ABROAD

by

MARGARET SIDNEY


Illustrated by FANNY Y. CORY




PREFACE

When the friends of the Pepper family found that the author was firm in
her decision to continue their history no further, they brought their
appeals for the details of some of those good times that made the
"little brown house" an object-lesson.

In these appeals, the parents were as vigorous as the young people for
a volume of the stories that Polly told, to keep the children happy in
those hard days when her story-telling had to be a large factor in
their home-life; and also for a book of their plays and exploits,
impossible to be embodied in the continued series of their history, so
that all who loved the "Five Little Peppers" might the better study the
influences that shaped their lives.

Those requests were complied with; the author realising that the
detailed account held values, by which stronger light might be thrown
on the family life in the "little brown house."

And now the pressure is brought to bear for a book showing the Little
Peppers over the ocean, recorded in "Five Little Peppers Midway." And
the author is very glad to comply again; for foreign travel throws a
wholly different side-light upon the Pepper family. So here is the book.

It is in no sense to be taken as a story written for a
guide-book,--although the author lives in it again her repeated
enjoyment of the sights and scenes which are accurately depicted. A
"Baedeker," if carefully studied, is really all that is needed as a
constant companion to the traveller; while for supplementary helps and
suggestions, there are many valuable books along the same line. This
volume is given up to the Peppers; and they must live their own lives
and tell their own story while abroad just as they choose.

As the author has stated many times, her part is "simply to set down
what the Peppers did and said, without trying to make them say or do
anything in particular." And so over the ocean they are just as much
the makers of their own history as when they first opened the door of
the "little brown house" to

                                 MARGARET SIDNEY.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

      I. OVER THE OCEAN
     II. TWO ENGLISH FRIENDS
    III. PHRONSIE GOES VISITING
     IV. STEAMER LIFE
      V. A FISH STORY AND OTHER THINGS
     VI. A LITTLE SURPRISE
    VII. OFF FOR HOLLAND
   VIII. "WE WILL COME AGAIN AND STAY A WEEK"
     IX. A BOX FOR THE PEPPER BOYS
      X. DANGER
     XI. THE TWO BIRTHDAYS IN OLD HOLLAND
    XII. THE HENDERSON BOX
   XIII. "THE CLEANEST PLACE IN ALL HOLLAND"
    XIV. THE ISLAND OF MARKEN
     XV. MR. KING DOES HIS DUTY
    XVI. "LET US FLY AT THOSE BOOKS"
   XVII. POLLY WROTE A NICE LITTLE NOTE
  XVIII. BAYREUTH AND OLD FRIENDS
    XIX. MR. KING HAS A LITTLE PLAN FOR POLLY
     XX. "I SHOULD MAKE HIM HAPPY," SAID PHRONSIE
    XXI. ON THE RIGI-KULM
   XXII. POLLY TRIES TO HELP
  XXIII. IN THE SHADOW OF THE MATTERHORN
   XXIV. THE ROUND ROBIN
    XXV. ON THE _MER DE GLACE_
   XXVI. "WELL, HERE WE ARE IN PARIS!"
  XXVII. "I'VE FOUND HIM!" EXCLAIMED JASPER
 XXVIII. "WELL, I GOT HIM HERE," SAID THE LITTLE EARL




ILLUSTRATIONS


"Now don't you want to get off?"

He clung to his pear with both hands and ate away with great
satisfaction

"Fan-ny!--the Earl of Cavendish!" She could go no further

Phronsie sat opposite him

"Mamsie's got her two bothers," said Polly

"Look at that girl!"

She picked up the skirt of her gown

Phronsie ducked and scuttled in as she could




_Five Little Peppers Abroad_




I

OVER THE OCEAN


"Dear me," said Polly, "I don't see wherever she can be, Jasper. I've
searched just everywhere for her." And she gave a little sigh, and
pushed up the brown rings of hair under her sailor cap.

"Don't worry, Polly," said Jasper, with a reassuring smile. "She's with
Matilda, of course. Come, Polly, let's you and I have a try at the
shuffle-board by ourselves, down on the lower deck."

"No, we can't," said Polly, with a dreadful longing at her heart for
the charms of a game; "that is, until we've found Phronsie." And she
ran down the deck. "Perhaps she is in one of the library corners,
though I thought I looked over them all."

"How do you know she isn't with Matilda, Polly?" cried Jasper, racing
after, to see Polly's little blue jacket whisking ahead of him up the
companion-way.

"Because"--Polly stopped at the top and looked over her shoulder at
him--"Matilda's in her berth. She's awfully seasick. I was to stay with
Phronsie, and now I've lost her!" And the brown head drooped, and Polly
clasped her hands tightly together.

"Oh, no, she can't be lost, Polly," said Jasper, cheerfully, as he
bounded up the stairs and gained her side; "why, she couldn't be!"

"Well, anyway, we can't find her, Jasper," said Polly, running on. "And
it's all my fault, for I forgot, and left her in the library, and went
with Fanny Vanderburgh down to her state-room. O dear me!" as she sped
on.

"Well, she's in the library now, most likely," said Jasper, cheerfully,
hurrying after, "curled up asleep in a corner." And they both ran in,
expecting to see Phronsie's yellow head snuggled into one of the
pillows.

But there was no one there except a little old gentleman on one of the
sofas back of a table, who held his paper upside down, his big
spectacles on the end of his nose, almost tumbling off as he nodded
drowsily with the motion of the steamer.

"O dear me!" exclaimed Polly; "now we shall wake him up," as they
tiptoed around, peering in every cosey corner and behind all the tables
for a glimpse of Phronsie's little brown gown.

"No danger," said Jasper, with a glance over at the old gentleman;
"he's just as fast asleep as can be. Here, Polly, I think she's
probably tucked up in here." And he hurried over to the farther side,
where the sofa made a generous angle.

Just then in stalked a tall boy, who rushed up to the little old
gentleman. "Here, Granddad, wake up." And he shook his arm smartly.
"You're losing your glasses, and then there'll be a beastly row to pay."

"O dear me!" cried Polly aghast, as she and Jasper whirled around.

"Hey--what--what!" exclaimed the old gentleman, clutching his paper as
he started forward. "Oh,--why, I haven't been asleep, Tom."

"Ha! Ha! tell that to the marines," cried Tom, loudly, dancing in
derision, "You've been sleeping like a log. You'd much better go down
and get into your state-room. But give me a sovereign first." He held
out his hand as he spoke. "Hurry up, Granddad!" he added impatiently.

The old gentleman put his hand to his head, and then rubbed his eyes.

"Bustle up," cried the boy, with a laugh, "or else I'll run my fist in
your pocket and help myself."

"Indeed, you won't," declared the old gentleman, now thoroughly awake.

"Ha! Ha!" laughed the boy. "You see if I won't, Granddad." Yet he
dropped his imperious tone, and waited, though impatiently, while the
big pocket-book was drawn out.

"What do you want with money on board the boat?" demanded the old
gentleman.

"Give me a sovereign, Granddad," cried Tom, controlling his impatience
as best he might, with many a cross look at the wrinkled old face under
the white hair.

His Grandfather slowly drew out the coin, and Tom twitched it eagerly
from the long, thin fingers.

"I don't see how you can need money on board the boat," repeated the
old gentleman.

"Never you mind what I want it for, Grand-daddy," said Tom, laughing
loudly and shaking the sovereign at him as he ran off; "that's my
business, and not yours."

Polly had not taken her eyes off their faces. Now she turned toward
Jasper. "Oh, how very dreadful!" she gasped--then would have given
everything if she had kept still, for the old gentleman whirled around
and saw them for the first time.

"Hey--who are you--and what are you listening there for--hey?" he
demanded sharply. He had little black eyes, and they now snapped in a
truly dreadful way at them.

"We came to find her little sister," said Jasper, politely, for Polly
was quite beyond speaking.

"Sister? I don't know anything about your sister," said the old
gentleman, irascibly. "And this room isn't a place for children, I can
tell you," he added, as if he owned the library and the whole ship.

Jasper made no reply.

"Phronsie isn't here." Polly clasped her hands again tighter than ever.
"And, oh, Jasper!" and she looked at the angry old face before them
with pitying eyes.

"What I say to my grandson, Tom, and what he says to me, is our own
business!" exclaimed the old gentleman in a passion, thumping the table
with his clenched hand. "And no one else has a right to hear it."

"I am so very sorry we heard it," said Polly, the colour which had
quite gone from her cheek now rushing back. "And we are going right
away, sir."

"You would much better," said the old man, nodding angrily. "And you,
boy, too; I suppose you think yourself better than my Tom. But you are
not--not a bit of it!" And suddenly he tried to start to his feet, but
lurched heavily against the table instead.

Polly and Jasper rushed over to him. "Lean on me, sir," said Jasper,
putting both arms around him, while Polly ran to his other side, he was
shaking so dreadfully.

The old gentleman essayed to wave them off. "Let me alone," he said
feebly; "I'm going after my grandson, Tom." His voice sank to a
whisper, and his head dropped to his breast. "He's got money--he's
always getting it, and I'm going to see what he's doing with it."

"Polly," said Jasper, "you help me put him back on the sofa; there,
that's it," as the old man sank feebly down against the cushions; "and
then I'll run and find his grandson."

It was just the time when everybody seemed to be in the state-rooms, or
out on deck in steamer chairs, so Polly sat there at the old man's
head, feeling as if every minute were an hour, and he kept gurgling,
"Tom's a bad boy--he gets money all the time, and I'm going to see what
he's doing with it," with feeble waves of his legs, that put Polly in a
fright lest he should roll off the sofa at every lurch of the steamer.

"Tom is coming," at last she said, putting her hand on the hot
forehead. "Please stay still, sir; you will be sick."

"But I don't want Tom to come," cried the old gentleman, irritably.
"Who said I wanted him to come? Hey?" He turned up his head and looked
at her, and Polly's hand shook worse than ever when the little snapping
eyes were full on her face, and she had all she could do to keep from
running out of the room and up on deck where she could breathe freely.

"I am so sorry," she managed to gasp, feeling if she didn't say
something, she should surely run. "Does your head feel better?" And she
smoothed his hot forehead gently just as Phronsie always did
Grandpapa's when it ached. And when she thought of Phronsie, then it
was all she could do to keep the tears back. Where could she be? And
would Jasper never come back?

And just then in ran Tom with a great clatter, complaining noisily
every step of the way. "I told you you'd much better get off to your
stateroom, Granddad!" he exclaimed. "Here, I'll help you down there."
And he laid a hasty hand on the feeble old arm.

"I think he is sick," said Polly, gently. Jasper came hurrying in.
"Phronsie is all right," he had time to whisper to Polly.

"Oh, Jasper!" the colour rushed into her cheek that had turned quite
white. "I am so glad."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Tom, abruptly. "It's only one of his crotchets.
You don't know; he gets up plenty of 'em on occasion."

"What did you want a sovereign for?" asked the old gentleman,
querulously, taking his sharp little eyes off Polly to fasten them on
his grandson's face. "Say, I _will_ know."

"And I say no matter," retorted Tom, roughly. "And you ought to come
down to your state-room where you belong. Come, Granddad!" And he tried
again to lay hold of his arm. But the little old gentleman sank back,
and looked up at Polly again. "I think I'll stay here," he said.

