The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Green Fairy Book, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Green Fairy Book

Author: Various

Editor: Andrew Lang

Release Date: January, 2005 [EBook #7277]
Posting Date: August 6, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN FAIRY BOOK ***




Produced by JC Byers, and Wendy Crockett









THE GREEN FAIRY BOOK

By Various

Edited by Andrew Lang

     To
     Stella Margaret Alleyne
     the
     Green Fairy Book
     is dedicated



To The Friendly Reader


This is the third, and probably the last, of the Fairy Books of many
colours. First there was the Blue Fairy Book; then, children, you asked
for more, and we made up the Red Fairy Book; and, when you wanted more
still, the Green Fairy Book was put together. The stories in all the
books are borrowed from many countries; some are French, some German,
some Russian, some Italian, some Scottish, some English, one Chinese.
However much these nations differ about trifles, they all agree in
liking fairy tales. The reason, no doubt, is that men were much like
children in their minds long ago, long, long ago, and so before they
took to writing newspapers, and sermons, and novels, and long poems,
they told each other stories, such as you read in the fairy books. They
believed that witches could turn people into beasts, that beasts could
speak, that magic rings could make their owners invisible, and all the
other wonders in the stories. Then, as the world became grown-up, the
fairy tales which were not written down would have been quite forgotten
but that the old grannies remembered them, and told them to the little
grandchildren: and when they, in their turn, became grannies, they
remembered them, and told them also. In this way these tales are older
than reading and writing, far older than printing. The oldest fairy
tales ever written down were written down in Egypt, about Joseph's time,
nearly three thousand five hundred years ago. Other fairy stories Homer
knew, in Greece, nearly three thousand years ago, and he made them all
up into a poem, the Odyssey, which I hope you will read some day. Here
you will find the witch who turns men into swine, and the man who bores
out the big foolish giant's eye, and the cap of darkness, and the shoes
of swiftness, that were worn later by Jack the Giant-Killer. These fairy
tales are the oldest stories in the world, and as they were first
made by men who were childlike for their own amusement, so they amuse
children still, and also grown-up people who have not forgotten how they
once were children.

Some of the stories were made, no doubt, not only to amuse, but to teach
goodness. You see, in the tales, how the boy who is kind to beasts, and
polite, and generous, and brave, always comes best through his trials,
and no doubt these tales were meant to make their hearers kind,
unselfish, courteous, and courageous. This is the moral of them. But,
after all, we think more as we read them of the diversion than of the
lesson. There are grown-up people now who say that the stories are
not good for children, because they are not true, because there are
no witches, nor talking beasts, and because people are killed in them,
especially wicked giants. But probably you who read the tales know very
well how much is true and how much is only make-believe, and I never yet
heard of a child who killed a very tall man merely because Jack killed
the giants, or who was unkind to his stepmother, if he had one, because,
in fairy tales, the stepmother is often disagreeable. If there are
frightful monsters in fairy tales, they do not frighten you now, because
that kind of monster is no longer going about the world, whatever he may
have done long, long ago. He has been turned into stone, and you may
see his remains in museums. Therefore, I am not afraid that you will
be afraid of the magicians and dragons; besides, you see that a really
brave boy or girl was always their master, even in the height of their
power.

Some of the tales here, like The Half-Chick, are for very little
children; others for older ones. The longest tales, like Heart of Ice,
were not invented when the others were, but were written in French, by
clever men and women, such as Madame d'Aulnoy, and the Count de Caylus,
about two hundred years ago. There are not many people now, perhaps
there are none, who can write really good fairy tales, because they do
not believe enough in their own stories, and because they want to be
wittier than it has pleased Heaven to make them.

So here we give you the last of the old stories, for the present, and
hope you will like them, and feel grateful to the Brothers Grimm, who
took them down from the telling of old women, and to M. Sebillot and
M. Charles Marelles, who have lent us some tales from their own French
people, and to Mr. Ford, who drew the pictures, and to the ladies, Miss
Blackley, Miss Alma Alleyne, Miss Eleanor Sellar, Miss May Sellar, Miss
Wright, and Mrs. Lang, who translated many of the tales out of French,
German, and other languages.

If we have a book for you next year, it shall not be a fairy book.
What it is to be is a secret, but we hope that it will not be dull. So
good-bye, and when you have read a fairy book, lend it to other children
who have none, or tell them the stories in your own way, which is a very
pleasant mode of passing the time.



Contents

    The Blue Bird
    The Half-Chick
    The Story of Caliph Stork
    The Enchanted Watch
    Rosanella
    Sylvain and Jocosa
    Fairy Gifts
    Prince Narcissus and the Princess Potentilla
    Prince Featherhead and the Princess Celandine
    The Three Little Pigs
    Heart of Ice
    The Enchanted Ring
    The Snuff-box
    The Golden Blackbird
    The Little Soldier
    The Magic Swan
    The Dirty Shepherdess
    The Enchanted Snake
    The Biter Bit
    King Kojata
    Prince Fickle and Fair Helena
    Puddocky
    The Story of Hok Lee and the Dwarfs
    The Story of the Three Bears
    Prince Vivien and the Princess Placida
    Little One-eye, Little Two-eyes, and Little Three-eyes
    Jorinde and Joringel
    Allerleirauh; or, the Many-furred Creature
    The Twelve Huntsmen
    Spindle, Shuttle, and Needle
    The Crystal Coffin
    The Three Snake-leaves
    The Riddle
    Jack my Hedgehog
    The Golden Lads
    The White Snake
    The Story of a Clever Tailor
    The Golden Mermaid
    The War of the Wolf and the Fox
    The Story of the Fisherman and his Wife
    The Three Musicians
    The Three Dogs






THE BLUE BIRD



Once upon a time there lived a King who was immensely rich. He had broad
lands, and sacks overflowing with gold and silver; but he did not care
a bit for all his riches, because the Queen, his wife, was dead. He shut
himself up in a little room and knocked his head against the walls
for grief, until his courtiers were really afraid that he would hurt
himself. So they hung feather-beds between the tapestry and the
walls, and then he could go on knocking his head as long as it was any
consolation to him without coming to much harm. All his subjects came
to see him, and said whatever they thought would comfort him: some were
grave, even gloomy with him; and some agreeable, even gay; but not one
could make the least impression upon him. Indeed, he hardly seemed to
hear what they said. At last came a lady who was wrapped in a black
mantle, and seemed to be in the deepest grief. She wept and sobbed until
even the King's attention was attracted; and when she said that, far
from coming to try and diminish his grief, she, who had just lost a good
husband, was come to add her tears to his, since she knew what he
must be feeling, the King redoubled his lamentations. Then he told the
sorrowful lady long stories about the good qualities of his departed
Queen, and she in her turn recounted all the virtues of her departed
husband; and this passed the time so agreeably that the King quite
forgot to thump his head against the feather-beds, and the lady did not
need to wipe the tears from her great blue eyes as often as before. By
degrees they came to talking about other things in which the King took
an interest, and in a wonderfully short time the whole kingdom was
astonished by the news that the King was married again to the sorrowful
lady.

Now the King had one daughter, who was just fifteen years old. Her name
was Fiordelisa, and she was the prettiest and most charming Princess
imaginable, always gay and merry. The new Queen, who also had a
daughter, very soon sent for her to come to the Palace. Turritella,
for that was her name, had been brought up by her godmother, the Fairy
Mazilla, but in spite of all the care bestowed upon her, she was neither
beautiful nor gracious. Indeed, when the Queen saw how ill-tempered
and ugly she appeared beside Fiordelisa she was in despair, and did
everything in her power to turn the King against his own daughter, in
the hope that he might take a fancy to Turritella. One day the King said
that it was time Fiordelisa and Turritella were married, so he would
give one of them to the first suitable Prince who visited his Court. The
Queen answered:

'My daughter certainly ought to be the first to be married; she is older
than yours, and a thousand times more charming!'

The King, who hated disputes, said, 'Very well, it's no affair of mine,
settle it your own way.'

Very soon after came the news that King Charming, who was the most
handsome and magnificent Prince in all the country round, was on his
way to visit the King. As soon as the Queen heard this, she set all
her jewellers, tailors, weavers, and embroiderers to work upon splendid
dresses and ornaments for Turritella, but she told the King that
Fiordelisa had no need of anything new, and the night before the King
was to arrive, she bribed her waiting woman to steal away all the
Princess's own dresses and jewels, so that when the day came, and
Fiordelisa wished to adorn herself as became her high rank, not even a
ribbon could she find.

However, as she easily guessed who had played her such a trick, she made
no complaint, but sent to the merchants for some rich stuffs. But they
said that the Queen had expressly forbidden them to supply her with any,
and they dared not disobey. So the Princess had nothing left to put
on but the little white frock she had been wearing the day before; and
dressed in that, she went down when the time of the King's arrival came,
and sat in a corner hoping to escape notice. The Queen received her
guest with great ceremony, and presented him to her daughter, who was
gorgeously attired, but so much splendour only made her ugliness more
noticeable, and the King, after one glance at her, looked the other way.
The Queen, however, only thought that he was bashful, and took pains to
keep Turritella in full view. King Charming then asked it there was not
another Princess, called Fiordelisa.

'Yes,' said Turritella, pointing with her finger, 'there she is, trying
to keep out of sight because she is not smart.'

At this Fiordelisa blushed, and looked so shy and so lovely, that the
King was fairly astonished. He rose, and bowing low before her, said--

'Madam, your incomparable beauty needs no adornment.'

'Sire,' answered the Princess, 'I assure you that I am not in the habit
of wearing dresses as crumpled and untidy as this one, so I should have
been better pleased if you had not seen me at all.'

'Impossible!' cried King Charming. 'Wherever such a marvellously
beautiful Princess appears I can look at nothing else.'

Here the Queen broke in, saying sharply--

'I assure you, Sire, that Fiordelisa is vain enough already. Pray make
her no more flattering speeches.'

The King quite understood that she was not pleased, but that did not
matter to him, so he admired Fiordelisa to his heart's content, and
talked to her for three hours without stopping.

The Queen was in despair, and so was Turritella, when they saw how much
the King preferred Fiordelisa. They complained bitterly to the King, and
begged and teased him, until he at last consented to have the Princess
shut up somewhere out of sight while King Charming's visit lasted.
So that night, as she went to her room, she was seized by four masked
figures, and carried up into the topmost room of a high tower, where
they left her in the deepest dejection. She easily guessed that she was
to be kept out of sight for fear the King should fall in love with her;
but then, how disappointing that was, for she already liked him very
much, and would have been quite willing to be chosen for his bride! As
King Charming did not know what had happened to the Princess, he looked
forward impatiently to meeting her again, and he tried to talk about
her with the courtiers who were placed in attendance on him. But by the
Queen's orders they would say nothing good of her, but declared that
she was vain, capricious, and bad-tempered; that she tormented her
waiting-maids, and that, in spite of all the money that the King gave
her, she was so mean that she preferred to go about dressed like a poor
shepherdess, rather than spend any of it. All these things vexed the
King very much, and he was silent.

'It is true,' thought he, 'that she was very poorly dressed, but then
she was so ashamed that it proves that she was not accustomed to be so.
I cannot believe that with that lovely face she can be as ill-tempered
and contemptible as they say. No, no, the Queen must be jealous of her
for the sake of that ugly daughter of hers, and so these evil reports
are spread.'

The courtiers could not help seeing that what they had told the King did
not please him, and one of them cunningly began to praise Fiordelisa,
when he could talk to the King without being heard by the others.

King Charming thereupon became so cheerful, and interested in all he
said, that it was easy to guess how much he admired the Princess. So
when the Queen sent for the courtiers and questioned them about all they
had found out, their report confirmed her worst fears. As to the poor
Princess Fiordelisa, she cried all night without stopping.

'It would have been quite bad enough to be shut up in this gloomy tower
before I had ever seen King Charming,' she said; 'but now when he is
here, and they are all enjoying themselves with him, it is too unkind.'

The next day the Queen sent King Charming splendid presents of jewels
and rich stuffs, and among other things an ornament made expressly in
honour of the approaching wedding. It was a heart cut out of one huge
ruby, and was surrounded by several diamond arrows, and pierced by one.
A golden true-lover's knot above the heart bore the motto, 'But one can
wound me,' and the whole jewel was hung upon a chain of immense pearls.
Never, since the world has been a world, had such a thing been made,
and the King was quite amazed when it was presented to him. The page who
brought it begged him to accept it from the Princess, who chose him to
be her knight.

'What!' cried he, 'does the lovely Princess Fiordelisa deign to think of
me in this amiable and encouraging way?'

'You confuse the names, Sire,' said the page hastily. 'I come on behalf
of the Princess Turritella.'

'Oh, it is Turritella who wishes me to be her knight,' said the King
coldly. 'I am sorry that I cannot accept the honour.' And he sent the
splendid gifts back to the Queen and Turritella, who were furiously
angry at the contempt with which they were treated. As soon as he
possibly could, King Charming went to see the King and Queen, and as he
entered the hall he looked for Fiordelisa, and every time anyone came
in he started round to see who it was, and was altogether so uneasy and
dissatisfied that the Queen saw it plainly. But she would not take any
notice, and talked of nothing but the entertainments she was planning.
The Prince answered at random, and presently asked if he was not to have
the pleasure of seeing the Princess Fiordelisa.

'Sire,' answered the Queen haughtily, 'her father has ordered that she
shall not leave her own apartments until my daughter is married.'

'What can be the reason for keeping that lovely Princess a prisoner?'
cried the King in great indignation.

'That I do not know,' answered the Queen; 'and even if I did, I might
not feel bound to tell you.'

The King was terribly angry at being thwarted like this. He felt certain
that Turritella was to blame for it, so casting a furious glance at her
he abruptly took leave of the Queen, and returned to his own apartments.
There he said to a young squire whom he had brought with him: 'I
would give all I have in the world to gain the good will of one of the
Princess's waiting-women, and obtain a moment's speech with Fiordelisa.'

'Nothing could be easier,' said the young squire; and he very soon
made friends with one of the ladies, who told him that in the evening
Fiordelisa would be at a little window which looked into the garden,
where he could come and talk to her. Only, she said, he must take very
great care not to be seen, as it would be as much as her place was worth
to be caught helping King Charming to see the Princess. The squire was
delighted, and promised all she asked; but the moment he had run off to
announce his success to the King, the false waiting-woman went and
told the Queen all that had passed. She at once determined that her own
daughter should be at the little window; and she taught her so well all
she was to say and do, that even the stupid Turritella could make no
mistake.

The night was so dark that the King had not a chance of finding out the
trick that was being played upon him, so he approached the window with
the greatest delight, and said everything that he had been longing
to say to Fiordelisa to persuade her of his love for her. Turritella
answered as she had been taught, that she was very unhappy, and that
there was no chance of her being better treated by the Queen until her
daughter was married. And then the King entreated her to marry him; and
thereupon he drew his ring from his finger and put it upon Turritella's,
and she answered him as well as she could. The King could not help
thinking that she did not say exactly what he would have expected from
his darling Fiordelisa, but he persuaded himself that the fear of being
surprised by the Queen was making her awkward and unnatural. He would
not leave her until she had promised to see him again the next night,
which Turritella did willingly enough. The Queen was overjoyed at the
success of her stratagem, end promised herself that all would now be as
she wished; and sure enough, as soon as it was dark the following night
the King came, bringing with him a chariot which had been given him by
an Enchanter who was his friend. This chariot was drawn by flying frogs,
and the King easily persuaded Turritella to come out and let him put her
into it, then mounting beside her he cried triumphantly--

'Now, my Princess, you are free; where will it please you that we shall
hold our wedding?'

And Turritella, with her head muffled in her mantle, answered that the
Fairy Mazilla was her godmother, and that she would like it to be at her
castle. So the King told the Frogs, who had the map of the whole world
in their heads, and very soon he and Turritella were set down at the
castle of the Fairy Mazilla. The King would certainly have found out his
mistake the moment they stepped into the brilliantly lighted castle, but
Turritella held her mantle more closely round her, and asked to see the
Fairy by herself, and quickly told her all that had happened, and how
she had succeeded in deceiving King Charming.

'Oho! my daughter,' said the Fairy, 'I see we have no easy task before
