The Project Gutenberg EBook of What Katy Did Next, by Susan Coolidge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: What Katy Did Next

Author: Susan Coolidge

Posting Date: January 31, 2012 [EBook #8995]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 31, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT KATY DID NEXT ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne L. Shell, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team










[Illustration: She paid a visit to the little garden.
FRONTISPIECE.]


WHAT KATY DID NEXT

BY

SUSAN COOLIDGE



This Story is Dedicated

TO

THE MANY LITTLE GIRLS

(SOME OF THEM GROWN TO BE GREAT GIRLS NOW),

_Who, during the last twelve years, have begged that something
more might be told them about KATY CARR, and what she did after
leaving school._





CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I. AN UNEXPECTED GUEST

II. AN INVITATION

III. ROSE AND ROSEBUD

IV. ON THE "SPARTACUS"

V. STORY-BOOK ENGLAND

VI. ACROSS THE CHANNEL

VII. THE PENSION SUISSE

VIII. ON THE TRACK OF ULYSSES

IX. A ROMAN HOLIDAY

X. CLEAR SHINING AFTER RAIN

XI. NEXT




ILLUSTRATIONS


SHE PAID A VISIT TO THE LITTLE GARDEN

"SHE WAS HAVING THE MEASLES ON THE
BACK SHELF OF THE CLOSET, YOU KNOW"

KATY WAS FEEDING GRETCHEN OUT OF A BIG
BOWL FULL OF BREAD AND MILK

AMY WAS LEFT IN PEACE WITH HER FAWN





CHAPTER I.

AN UNEXPECTED GUEST.


The September sun was glinting cheerfully into a pretty bedroom
furnished with blue. It danced on the glossy hair and bright eyes of two
girls, who sat together hemming ruffles for a white muslin dress. The
half-finished skirt of the dress lay on the bed; and as each crisp
ruffle was completed, the girls added it to the snowy heap, which looked
like a drift of transparent clouds or a pile of foamy white-of-egg
beaten stiff enough to stand alone.

These girls were Clover and Elsie Carr, and it was Clover's first
evening dress for which they were hemming ruffles. It was nearly two
years since a certain visit made by Johnnie to Inches Mills, of which
some of you have read in "Nine Little Goslings;" and more than three
since Clover and Katy had returned home from the boarding-school at
Hillsover.

Clover was now eighteen. She was a very small Clover still, but it would
have been hard to find anywhere a prettier little maiden than she had
grown to be. Her skin was so exquisitely fair that her arms and wrists
and shoulders, which were round and dimpled like a baby's, seemed cut
out of daisies or white rose leaves. Her thick, brown hair waved and
coiled gracefully about her head. Her smile was peculiarly sweet; and
the eyes, always Clover's chief beauty, had still that pathetic look
which made them irresistible to tender-hearted people.

Elsie, who adored Clover, considered her as beautiful as girls in
books, and was proud to be permitted to hem ruffles for the dress in
which she was to burst upon the world. Though, as for that, not much
"bursting" was possible in Burnet, where tea-parties of a middle-aged
description, and now and then a mild little dance, represented "gayety"
and "society." Girls "came out" very much, as the sun comes out in the
morning,--by slow degrees and gradual approaches, with no particular
one moment which could be fixed upon as having been the crisis of the
joyful event.

"There," said Elsie, adding another ruffle to the pile on the
bed,--"there's the fifth done. It's going to be ever so pretty, I think.
I'm glad you had it all white; it's a great deal nicer."

"Cecy wanted me to have a blue bodice and sash," said Clover, "but I
wouldn't. Then she tried to persuade me to get a long spray of pink
roses for the skirt."

"I'm so glad you didn't! Cecy was always crazy about pink roses. I only
wonder she didn't wear them when she was married!"

Yes; the excellent Cecy, who at thirteen had announced her intention to
devote her whole life to teaching Sunday School, visiting the poor, and
setting a good example to her more worldly contemporaries, had actually
forgotten these fine resolutions, and before she was twenty had become
the wife of Sylvester Slack, a young lawyer in a neighboring town!
Cecy's wedding and wedding-clothes, and Cecy's house-furnishing had been
the great excitement of the preceding year in Burnet; and a fresh
excitement had come since in the shape of Cecy's baby, now about two
months old, and named "Katherine Clover," after her two friends. This
made it natural that Cecy and her affairs should still be of interest in
the Carr household; and Johnnie, at the time we write of, was making her
a week's visit.

"She _was_ rather wedded to them," went on Clover, pursuing the subject
of the pink roses. "She was almost vexed when I wouldn't buy the spray.
But it cost lots, and I didn't want it in the least, so I stood firm.
Besides, I always said that my first party dress should be plain white.
Girls in novels always wear white to their first balls; and fresh
flowers are a great deal prettier, any way, than artificial. Katy says
she'll give me some violets to wear."

"Oh, will she? That will be lovely!" cried the adoring Elsie. "Violets
look just like you, somehow. Oh, Clover, what sort of a dress do you
think I shall have when I grow up and go to parties and things? Won't it
be awfully interesting when you and I go out to choose it?"

Just then the noise of some one running upstairs quickly made the
sisters look up from their work. Footsteps are very significant at
times, and these footsteps suggested haste and excitement.

Another moment, the door opened, and Katy dashed in, calling out,
"Papa!--Elsie, Clover, where's papa?"

"He went over the river to see that son of Mr. White's who broke his
leg. Why, what's the matter?" asked Clover.

"Is somebody hurt?" inquired Elsie, startled at Katy's agitated looks.

"No, not hurt, but poor Mrs. Ashe is in such trouble."

Mrs. Ashe, it should be explained, was a widow who had come to Burnet
some months previously, and had taken a pleasant house not far from the
Carrs'. She was a pretty, lady-like woman, with a particularly graceful,
appealing manner, and very fond of her one child, a little girl. Katy
and papa both took a fancy to her at once; and the families had grown
neighborly and intimate in a short time, as people occasionally do when
circumstances are favorable.

"I'll tell you all about it in a minute," went on Katy. "But first I
must find Alexander, and send him off to meet papa and beg him to hurry
home." She went to the head of the stairs as she spoke, and called
"Debby! Debby!" Debby answered. Katy gave her direction, and then came
back again to the room where the other two were sitting.

"Now," she said, speaking more collectedly, "I must explain as fast as I
can, for I have got to go back. You know that Mrs. Ashe's little nephew
is here for a visit, don't you?"

"Yes, he came on Saturday."

"Well, he was ailing all day yesterday, and to-day he is worse, and she
is afraid it is scarlet-fever. Luckily, Amy was spending the day with
the Uphams yesterday, so she scarcely saw the boy at all; and as soon
as her mother became alarmed, she sent her out into the garden to play,
and hasn't let her come indoors since, so she can't have been exposed
to any particular danger yet. I went by the house on my way down
street, and there sat the poor little thing all alone in the arbor,
with her dolly in her lap, looking so disconsolate. I spoke to her over
the fence, and Mrs. Ashe heard my voice, and opened the upstairs window
and called to me. She said Amy had never had the fever, and that the
very idea of her having it frightened her to death. She is such a
delicate child, you know."

"Oh, poor Mrs. Ashe!" cried Clover; "I am so sorry for her! Well, Katy,
what did you do?"

"I hope I didn't do wrong, but I offered to bring Amy here. Papa won't
object, I am almost sure."

"Why, of course he won't. Well?"

"I am going back now to fetch Amy. Mrs. Ashe is to let Ellen, who hasn't
been in the room with the little boy, pack a bagful of clothes and put
it out on the steps, and I shall send Alexander for it by and by. You
can't think how troubled poor Mrs. Ashe was. She couldn't help crying
when she said that Amy was all she had left in the world. And I nearly
cried too, I was so sorry for her. She was so relieved when I said that
we would take Amy. You know she has a great deal of confidence in papa."

"Yes, and in you too. Where will you put Amy to sleep, Katy?"

"What do you think would be best? In Dorry's room?"

"I think she'd better come in here with you, and I'll go into Dorry's
room. She is used to sleeping with her mother, you know, and she would
be lonely if she were left to herself."

"Perhaps that will be better, only it is a great bother for you,
Clovy dear."

"I don't mind," responded Clover, cheerfully. "I rather like to change
about and try a new room once in a while. It's as good as going on a
journey--almost."

She pushed aside the half-finished dress as she spoke, opened a drawer,
took out its contents, and began to carry them across the entry to
Dorry's room, doing everything with the orderly deliberation that was
characteristic of whatever Clover did. Her preparations were almost
complete before Katy returned, bringing with her little Amy Ashe.

Amy was a tall child of eight, with a frank, happy face, and long light
hair hanging down her back. She looked like the pictures of "Alice in
Wonderland;" but just at that moment it was a very woful little Alice
indeed that she resembled, for her cheeks were stained with tears and
her eyes swollen with recent crying.

"Why, what is the matter?" cried kind little Clover, taking Amy in her
arms, and giving her a great hug. "Aren't you glad that you are coming
to make us a visit? We are."

"Mamma didn't kiss me for good-by," sobbed the little girl. "She didn't
come downstairs at all. She just put her head out of the window and
said, 'Good-by; Amy, be very good, and don't make Miss Carr any
trouble,' and then she went away. I never went anywhere before without
kissing mamma for good-by."

"Mamma was afraid to kiss you for fear she might give you the fever,"
explained Katy, taking her turn as a comforter. "It wasn't because she
forgot. She felt worse about it than you did, I imagine. You know the
thing she cares most for is that you shall not be ill as your cousin
Walter is. She would rather do anything than have that happen. As soon
as he gets well she will kiss you dozens of times, see if she doesn't.
Meanwhile, she says in this note that you must write her a little letter
every day, and she will hang a basket by a string out of the window, and
you and I will go and drop the letters into the basket, and stand by the
gate and see her pull it up. That will be funny, won't it? We will play
that you are my little girl, and that you have a real mamma and a
make-believe mamma."

"Shall I sleep with you?" demanded Amy,

"Yes, in that bed over there."
