The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Village Uncle (From "Twice Told Tales"), by 
Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Village Uncle (From "Twice Told Tales")

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 2, 2010 [EBook #9210]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: August 23, 2003
Last Updated: February 5, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VILLAGE UNCLE ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.









                        TWICE TOLD TALES

                        THE VILLAGE UNCLE

                     AN IMAGINARY RETROSPECT

                      By Nathaniel Hawthorne



Come! another log upon the hearth.  True, our  little parlor is
comfortable, especially here, where  the old man sits in his old
arm-chair; but on  Thanksgiving night the blaze should dance high up the
chimney, and send a shower of sparks into the  outer darkness.  Toss
on an armful of those dry oak chips, the last relics of the Mermaid's
knee-timbers, the bones of your namesake, Susan.  Higher yet, and
clearer  be the blaze, till our cottage windows glow the ruddiest in
the village, and the light of our household mirth  flash far across
the bay to Nahant.  And now, come,  Susan, come, my children, draw
your chairs round me,  all of you.  There is a dimness over your
figures!  You  sit quivering indistinctly with each motion of the
blaze,  which eddies about you like a flood, so that you all have  the
look of visions, or people that dwell only in the fire  light, and
will vanish from existence, as completely as  your own shadows, when
the flame shall sink among  the embers.  Hark!  let me listen for the
swell of the  surf; it should be audible a mile inland, on a night
like  this.  Yes; there I catch the sound, but only an uncertain
murmur, as if a good way down over the beach; though, by the almanac,
it is high tide at eight o'clock, and the billows must now be dashing
within thirty yards of our door.  Ah! the old man's ears are failing
him; and so is his eyesight, and perhaps his mind; else you would not
all be so shadowy, in the blaze of his Thanksgiving fire.

How strangely the Past is peeping over the shoulders of the Present!
To judge by my recollections, it is but a few moments since I sat in
another room; yonder model of a vessel was not there, nor the old
chest of drawers, nor Susan's profile and mine, in that gilt frame;
nothing, in short, except this same fire, which glimmered on books,
papers, and a picture, and half discovered my solitary figure in a
looking-glass.  But it was paler than my rugged old self, and younger,
too, by almost half a century.  Speak to me, Susan; speak, my beloved
ones; for the scene is glimmering on my sight again, and as it
brightens you fade away.  O, I should be loath to lose my treasure of
past happiness, and become once more what I was then; a hermit in the
