Project Gutenberg's The Three Golden Apples, by Nathaniel Hawthorne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Three Golden Apples

Author: Nathaniel Hawthorne

Posting Date: December 21, 2010 [EBook #9257]
Release Date: November, 2005
First Posted: September 25, 2003
Last Updated: February 6, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THREE GOLDEN APPLES ***




Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines









                 A WONDER-BOOK FOR GIRLS AND BOYS

                     By Nathaniel Hawthorne


                     THE THREE GOLDEN APPLES




CONTENTS:

  TANGLEWOOD FIRESIDE--Introductory to "The Three Golden Apples"
  THE THREE GOLDEN APPLES
  TANGLEWOOD FIRESIDE--After the Story




INTRODUCTORY TO "THE THREE GOLDEN APPLES"

The snow-storm lasted another day; but what became of it afterwards, I
cannot possibly imagine.  At any rate, it entirely cleared away, during
the night; and when the sun arose, the next morning, it shone brightly
down on as bleak a tract of hill-country, here in Berkshire, as could be
seen anywhere in the world.  The frost-work had so covered the
windowpanes that it was hardly possible to get a glimpse at the scenery
outside.  But, while waiting for breakfast, the small populace of
Tanglewood had scratched peepholes with their finger-nails, and saw with
vast delight that--unless it were one or two bare patches on a
precipitous hillside, or the gray effect of the snow, intermingled with
the black pine forest--all nature was as white as a sheet.  How
exceedingly pleasant!  And, to make it all the better, it was cold
enough to nip one's nose short off!  If people have but life enough in
them to bear it, there is nothing that so raises the spirits, and makes
the blood ripple and dance so nimbly, like a brook down the slope of a
hill, as a bright, hard frost.

No sooner was breakfast over, than the whole party, well muffled in furs
and woollens, floundered forth into the midst of the snow.  Well, what a
day of frosty sport was this!  They slid down hill into the valley, a
hundred times, nobody knows how far; and, to make it all the merrier,
upsetting their sledges, and tumbling head over heels, quite as often as
they came safely to the bottom.  And, once, Eustace Bright took
Periwinkle, Sweet Fern, and Squash-blossom, on the sledge with him, by
way of insuring a safe passage; and down they went, full speed.  But,
behold, half-way down, the sledge hit against a hidden stump, and flung
all four of its passengers into a heap; and, on gathering themselves up,
there was no little Squash-blossom to be found!  Why, what could have
become of the child?  And while they were wondering and staring about,
up started Squash-blossom out of a snow-bank, with the reddest face you
ever saw, and looking as if a large scarlet flower had suddenly sprouted
up in midwinter.  Then there was a great laugh.

When they had grown tired of sliding down hill, Eustace set the children
to digging a cave in the biggest snow-drift that they could find.
Unluckily, just as it was completed, and the party had squeezed
themselves into the hollow, down came the roof upon their heads, and
buried every soul of them alive!  The next moment, up popped all their
little heads out of the ruins, and the tall student's head in the midst
of them, looking hoary and venerable with the snow-dust that had got
amongst his brown curls.  And then, to punish Cousin Eustace for
advising them to dig such a tumble-down cavern, the children attacked
him in a body, and so bepelted him with snowballs that he was fain to
take to his heels.

So he ran away, and went into the woods, and thence to the margin of
Shadow Brook, where he could hear the streamlet grumbling along, under
great overhanging banks of snow and ice, which would scarcely let it see
the light of day.  There were adamantine icicles glittering around all
its little cascades.  Thence be strolled to the shore of the lake, and
beheld a white, untrodden plain before him, stretching from his own feet
to the foot of Monument Mountain.  And, it being now almost sunset,
Eustace thought that he had never beheld anything so fresh and beautiful
as the scene.  He was glad that the children were not with him; for
their lively spirits and tumble-about activity would quite have chased
away his higher and graver mood, so that he would merely have been merry
(as he had already been, the whole day long), and would not have known
the loveliness of the winter sunset among the hills.

When the sun was fairly down, our friend Eustace went home to eat his
supper.  After the meal was over, he betook himself to the study, with a
purpose, I rather imagine, to write an ode, or two or three sonnets, or
verses of some kind or other, in praise of the purple and golden clouds
which he had seen around the setting sun.  But, before he had hammered
out the very first rhyme, the door opened, and Primrose and Periwinkle
made their appearance.

"Go away, children!  I can't be troubled with you now!" cried the
student, looking over his shoulder, with the pen between his fingers.
"What in the world do you want here?  I thought you were all in bed!"

"Hear him, Periwinkle, trying to talk like a grown man!" said Primrose.
"And he seems to forget that I am now thirteen years old, and may sit up
almost as late as I please.  But, Cousin Eustace, you must put off your
airs, and come with us to the drawing-room.  The children have talked so
much about your stories, that my father wishes to hear one of them, in
order to judge whether they are likely to do any mischief."

"Poh, poh, Primrose!" exclaimed the student, rather vexed.  "I don't
believe I can tell one of my stories in the presence of grown people.
