
"I don't see it's much of a lark to bag what doesn't belong to you,"
muttered Diggory.

"What's that you say?"

"Nothing for you to hear," returned the other.  "I don't know if you're
waiting about here to get some cake, but I'm sure I never invited you to
come."

"Look here, don't be cheeky," answered Noaks.  "If you think I want to
make friends with a lot of impudent young monkeys like you, all I can
say is you're jolly well mistaken," and so saying he turned on his heel
and walked away.

"I say, Trevanock," said Carton, two days later, "that fellow Noaks has
found a friend at last: he's picked up with Mouler.  They'll make a nice
pair, I should say.  Mouler was nearly expelled last term for telling
lies to Ellesby about some cribs."

Noaks certainly seemed to have discovered a chum in the black sheep of
the Upper Fourth, and the Triple Alliance began to congratulate
themselves that he would trouble them no further.  In a big school
like Ronleigh College there was plenty of room for everybody to go his
own way without fear of running his head into people whom he wished to
avoid.  Our three friends, however, seemed fated to find in the person
of Noaks junior a perpetual stumbling-block and cause of disquietude and
annoyance.  They had no sooner succeeded in setting him at a distance
when an incident occurred which brought them once more into violent
collision with the enemy.

The pavilion, which has already been mentioned as standing on the match
ground, was a handsome wooden structure, surrounded by some low palings,
in front of which was a small oblong patch of gravel.  On the second
Saturday morning of the term Noaks and Mouler were lounging across this
open space, when Oaks, the prefect, emerged from the pavilion, carrying
in his hand a pot of paint he had been mixing for the goal-posts, which
were just being put up.  On reaching the paling he suddenly ejaculated,
"Bother!  I've forgotten the brush;" and resting the can on the top of
the little gate-post, hurried back up the short flight of steps, and
disappeared through the open door.

"I say, there's a good cock-shy," said Noaks, nodding his head in the
direction of the paint.

"Umph! shouldn't like to try," answered Mouler.

"Why not?"

"Because Oaks would jolly well punch both our heads."

"Well, here's a new kid coming; let's set him on to do it.  You speak to
him; he knows me.  His name's Mugford."

The two cronies both picked up a handful of stones, and began throwing
at the can, taking good care that their shots should fly wide of the
mark.

Mugford, who, as we have already seen, was not blessed with the sharpest
of wits, paused for a moment to watch the contest.  The paint had been
mixed in an old fruit-tin, and at first sight it certainly seemed to
have been put on the post for the sole purpose of being knocked off
again.

"Hullo, you new kid!" exclaimed Mouler.  "Look here, we want a chap for
the third eleven next season--a fellow who can throw straight.  Come
along, and let's see if you can hit that old can."

It certainly looked easy enough, and Mugford, pleased at being taken
some notice of by a boy in the Upper Fourth, picked up some pebbles, and
joined in the bombardment.  The second shot brought the tin down with a
great clatter, and a flood of white paint spread all over the trim
little pathway.  At the same instant Oaks dashed down the steps boiling
with rage.

"Confound you!" he cried; "who did that ?"

"I did," answered Mugford, half crying; "I thought it was empty."

"Thought it was empty! why didn't you look, you young blockhead?" cried
the prefect, catching the small boy by the arm, while Noaks and Mouler
burst into a roar of laughter.

Things would probably have gone hard with the unfortunate Mugford if at
that moment a fifth party had not arrived on the scene.  The new-comer,
who, from the show of whisker at the side of his face and the tone of
authority in which he spoke, seemed to be one of the masters, was tall
and muscular, with the bronze of a season's cricketing still upon his
cheeks and neck.

"Stop a minute, Oaks," he said.  "I happened to see this little game;
let's hear what the kid's got to say for himself."

In faltering tones Mugford told his story.  Without a word the stranger
stepped up to Mouler and dealt him a sounding box on the ear.

"There!" he said, "take that for your trouble; and now cut off down town
and buy a fresh pot of paint out of your own pocket, and do it jolly
quick, too.--As for you," he added, turning to Noaks, "get a spade out
of that place under the pavilion and clean up this path.  If you weren't
a new fellow I'd serve you the same.  Look out in future."

"And you look out too," muttered Noaks, glancing at Mugford with a
fierce expression on his face as the two seniors moved off, "you beastly
young sneak.  The first chance I get I'll give you the best licking
you ever had in your life."

"Old Mug is rather a fool," remarked Jack Vance to Diggory a few hours
later; "he ought to have seen through that.  But we must stand by him
because of the Triple Alliance.  Noaks is sure to try to set on him the
first chance he gets."

"Yes," answered Diggory; "look out for squalls."



CHAPTER VIII.


THIRD FORM ORATORY.

At the end of the first fortnight our three friends had begun to find
their feet at Ronleigh, and the sense of being "outsiders" in everything
was gradually wearing off as they grew more intimate with their
schoolfellows.

Jack Vance and Diggory soon became popular members of "The Happy
Family," and their loyalty to Mugford caused the latter's path to be
much smoother than it probably would have been had he been compelled to
tread it alone.

Carton turned out a capital fellow; Rathson, the small, sandy-haired boy
mentioned in the previous chapter, and who generally went by the name of
"Rats," took a great fancy to Jack; while Maxton repeated his assertion
that young Trevanock was "the right sort," and as a further mark of his
favour presented the new-comer with a moleskin of his own curing, which
looked very nice, but, as "Rats" put it, "smelt rather fruity."

But it was not in the Third Form only that Diggory began to find
friends; for by a lucky chance he was fortunate enough to make a good
impression on the minds of the great men, who, as a rule, took no
further notice of the small fry than to exact from them a certain amount
of obedience, or in default a certain number of lines or other "impots."

One morning, soon after breakfast, a little group was gathered round
Carton's desk in the big school-room, discussing the value of some
foreign stamps, when a small boy came up to them, saying,--

"Is Trevanock here?  Well, Acton wants you now at once in his study."

"Hullo," said Carton, looking up from the sheet of specimens in front of
him--"hullo, Diggy! What have you been up to?"

"I haven't been doing anything," answered the other.  "What do you think
he wants me for?"

"I don't know, but it sounds rather like getting a licking.  At all
events, you'd better hurry up; prefects don't thank you for keeping them
waiting.  His is the third door on the right as you go down the
passage."

Diggory hastened to obey the summons, wondering what it could mean.
He found the door, and in answer to the loud "Come in!" which greeted
his knock turned the handle, and found himself for the first time inside
one of the Sixth Form studies.

It was a small, square room, and looked very cosy and comfortable with
its red window-curtains, well-filled bookshelf, and many little
knick-knacks that adorned the walls and mantelpiece.  An array of silver
cups, several photographs of cricket and football teams, and a
miscellaneous pile of bats, fencing-sticks, Indian clubs, etc., standing
in one corner, all spoke of the athlete; while carelessly thrown down
on the top of a cupboard was an article for the possession of which many
a, boy would have bartered the whole of his worldly wealth--a bit of
worn blue velvet and the tarnished remnant of what had once been a gold
tassel--the "footer cap" of Ronleigh College.

But it was not so much the furniture as the occupants of the study that
attracted Diggory's attention.  John Acton, a tall, wiry fellow, who
looked as though his whole body was as hard and tough as whip-cord, was
standing leaning on the end of the mantelpiece talking to another of the
seniors, who sat sprawling in a folding-chair on the other side of the
fire; while seated at the table, turning over the leaves of what
appeared to be a big manuscript book, was no less a personage than
Allingford, the school captain.

"I don't understand a bit what's coming to 'Thirsty,'" the football
leader was saying.  "I was rather chummy with him when we were in the
Fifth, and he was all right then, but now he seems to be running to seed
as fast as he can; and I believe it's a great deal that fellow
Fletcher.--Hullo, youngster! what d'you want?"

"I was told you wanted to see me," said Diggory nervously.

"Oh yes.  You were at The Birches, that school near Chatford, weren't
you?  Well, I want to hear about that love affair my young brother had
with the old chap's daughter.--It was an awful joke," added the speaker,
addressing his companions. "He was about fourteen, and she's a grown-up
woman; and he was awfully gone, I can tell you.--How did he pop the
question?"

"He wrote," answered Diggory.  "We tossed up whether he should do that
or speak."

There was a burst of laughter.

"Did you see the letter?"

"Yes."

"What did he say?"

"I can't tell you."

"Why not?  don't you remember?"

"Yes; but he only showed me the letter on condition I wouldn't ever tell
any one what was in it."

"Oh, that's all rot! you can tell me; I'm his brother.  Come, out with
it."

It was an awful thing to beard the lion in his den--for a new boy to
face so great a personage as the football captain, and refuse
point-blank to do as he was told.  Diggory shifted uneasily from one
foot to another, and then glancing up he became aware of the fact that
Allingford was gazing at him across the table with a curious expression,
which somehow gave him fresh encouragement to persist in his refusal to
disclose the contents of his former friend's love-letter.

"I can't tell you," he repeated; "it was a promise, you know."

The Ronleigh captain laughed. "Well done," he said. "I wish some other
fellows were a bit more careful to keep their promises.--Acton, you
beggar, you swore you'd keep up this register for me, and there's
nothing entered for last term."

"Oh, bother you, Ally!" exclaimed the other; "what a nigger-driver you
are!--Hullo, there's the bell!--Here, kid, stick those two oranges in
your pocket; go 'long!"

Diggory left the room, having gained something else besides the two
oranges; for as he closed the door Allingford laughed again, and rising
from his chair said, "He's a stanch little beggar; I think I'll keep
an eye on him."

The subject of this remark hurried away, and had just joined the crowd
of boys who were thronging into the big school for assembly, when some
one took hold of his arm, and glancing round he was startled to see Jack
Vance, looking very excited and dishevelled, and mopping his mouth with
a blood-stained handkerchief.

"I say," exclaimed the latter, "have you seen Mugford?"

"No.  What's the matter? what have you done to your mouth?"

"Why, I've had a beastly row with Noaks.  I'll 'tell you after school."

"No, tell me now," cried Diggory, pulling his companion aside into a
corner by the door.  "Quick--what was it?"

"Why, he pounced down on Mugford, out there by the fives-court, and
began twisting his arm and saying he'd pay him out for that paint-pot
business.  I went to the rescue, and the beast hit me with the
back of his hand here on the mouth.  I told him he was a cad, and said
something about his father being only a man-servant, and having stolen
our things.  I'm sorry now, for it was rather a low thing to do, but I
was in such a wax I didn't think what I was saying.  Mouler was standing
by, and he heard it, and laughed; and Noaks looked as if he'd have
killed me.  I believe he would have knocked me down, only Rowlands, the
prefect, came up and stopped the row."

There was no time for any further details, and the two boys had to rush
away to their seats in order to escape being marked as late.

One thing was certain--that the Triple Alliance were once more embroiled
in a quarrel with their ancient foe the former leader of the
Philistines, and they knew enough of their adversary's character to
feel sure that he would not pass over an event of this kind without some
attempt at revenge.

It is probable that, if this had happened at Horace House, Jack Vance
would have received a good licking as soon as the classes were
dismissed; but a few very plain and forcible words spoken by Rowlands
on the subject of knocking small boys about caused Noaks to postpone his
retaliation.

"Look here," he said, meeting Jack Vance in the quadrangle during the
interval: "just you keep your mouth shut about me and my father.
I've got two or three accounts to settle with you chaps already; just
mind what you're up to."  He clinched his fist as though about to
strike, then, with an ugly scowl, turned on his heel and walked away.

It must have been about three days after this encounter with Noaks that
our three friends were called upon to attend a mass meeting of the Third
Form, to consider the advisability of starting a periodical in
opposition to the school magazine.  Important events connected with a
later period of their life at Ronleigh render it necessary that we
should not linger too long over the account of their first term; but
some mention, however brief, should certainly be made of the memorable
gathering to which we have referred.  A notice pinned on to the
black-board, and pulled down as soon as Mr. Watford entered the
