now, Mrs. Bergmann. Everything is ready for Leonore, because she was to
leave for the hospital very shortly."

With these words she went out. The sick child sat completely dressed on
a bed in the corner of the room, half reclining on the pillows.

Mrs. Maxa had to agree with her brother who had said that she had her
mother's large, speaking eyes, the same soft brown curls, and the same
serious expression on her delicately shaped little face. Mrs. Maxa
would have easily recognized the child even without knowing her name.
Leonore only looked more serious still; in fact, her glance was extremely
sad and at that moment tears were hanging on her lashes, for she had been
crying. The boy sitting by her got up and made a bow to the new arrival.
He had his father's gay blue eyes and his clear, open brow. After giving
him her hand Mrs. Maxa stepped up to the bed to greet Leonore and was so
deeply moved that she could barely speak.

"My dear child," she said, seizing both slender hands, "you resemble your
mother so much that I have to greet you as my own beloved child. I loved
her very much and we meant a great deal to each other. You remind me of
both your father and mother, Salo. What happiness my friendship with
your parents has brought me! I want you both to be my children now, for
your parents were the best friends I ever had in the world."

This speech apparently met a response in the two children's hearts. As
answer Leonore took Mrs. Maxa's hand and held it tight between her own,
and Salo came close to her to show what confidence he felt. Then he said
joyfully: "Oh, I am so glad that you have come; you must help me comfort
Leonore. She is terribly afraid of the hospital and all the strange
people there. She even imagines that she will die there alone and
forsaken and was crying because she thinks that we won't see each other
again. I have to go so far away and I can't help it. To-morrow they are
coming to fetch me and then I have to go back to school. What shall we
do?"

"As to that," Mrs. Maxa replied, "nothing can be done. But if Leonore
has to spend a little while in the hospital, she won't be an absolute
stranger there. I won't let you be lonely for I shall often go to see
you, dear child, and it is not even quite certain that you have to go
there."

"Oh, yes, they are going to take me there this morning, maybe quite
soon," said Leonore. Listening anxiously, she again grasped Mrs. Maxa's
hand as if it were her safety anchor.

Mrs. Maxa did not gainsay her, because she did not yet know what the
doctor might decide. All she could do to calm Leonore was to tell her
that she was not dangerously ill. She might recover very quickly if she
only stayed quiet for a while. In that case she could soon see her
brother again, for the ladies had promised to take her home as soon as
she was well.

Mrs. Maxa had hardly said that when Leonore's eyes again began to fill
with tears.

"But I don't feel at home there. We really have no home anywhere," she
said with suppressed sobs.

"Yes, it is true; we have no home anywhere," Salo exclaimed passionately.
"But, Leonore, you must have faith in me!" Fighting against his rising
agitation, he quickly wiped away a tear from his eyes, which were usually
so bright. "It won't be so long till I have finished my studies and then
I can do what I please. Then I shall try to find a little house for us
both, which will be our home. I am going to get that if I have to work
for twenty years in the fields till it is paid for."

Salo's eyes had become sunny again during this speech. He looked as if
he would not have minded seizing a hoe that very moment.

Rapid steps were now heard approaching, the door was quickly opened, and
Miss Remke called out on entering: "The carriage is at the door. Let us
get ready, for I do not want the gentleman to wait. I am sure you will
be so kind as to help me lift Leonore out of bed and to carry her down
stairs."

Leonore had grown as white as a sheet from fright.

"May I ask if it is my brother's carriage, or--" Mrs. Maxa hesitated a
little.

"Yes, certainly," the lady interrupted, while she rapidly pulled some
covers and shawls out of a wardrobe. "Your brother has come himself in
order to see that the carriage is well protected. He also means to give
the coachman the directions himself, but we must not keep him waiting.
What a kind friend he is!"

Mrs. Maxa had already lifted Leonore from her bed and was carrying her
out.

"Please bring all the necessary things downstairs. I can do this easily
alone, for she is as light as a feather," she called back to the lady who
had hastened after her in order to help.

Going downstairs Mrs Maxa said, "Leonore, I am going to take you home
with me now. The doctor is letting me do what I wished: you will stay
with me till you are well again, and I shall take care of you. Shall you
like to come with me? We know each other a little already and I hope you
won't feel so strange with us."

Leonore, flinging both arms about Mrs. Maxa's neck, held her so tight
that she could feel the little girl considered her no stranger any
longer.

Suddenly Leonore called back in jubilating tones, "Salo, Salo, did you
hear?"

Salo had heard her call but comprehended nothing further. Miss Remke had
piled such heaps of shawls and covers on his arms that one always slid
down after the other and he was obliged to pick them up again. As
quickly as the circumstances allowed, he ran after his sister.

Arrived at the carriage, Mrs. Maxa immediately looked about for her
brother. She wanted to hand Leonore to him while she prepared everything
in the conveyance for the child's comfort.

He was already there. Understanding his sister's sign, he took the child
into his arms, then lifted her gently into the carriage. His glance was
suddenly arrested by the boy, who was standing beside the carriage with
his burdens.

With the most joyful surprise he exclaimed, "As sure as I am born this
must be a young Salo. It is written in his eyes. Give me your hand,
boy. Your father was my friend, my best friend in the world; so we must
be friends, too."

Salo's eyes expressed more and more surprise. This manner of being taken
to a hospital seemed very odd to him. The strangest of all, however, was
that Leonore sat in the corner of the carriage smiling contentedly, for
Mrs. Maxa had just whispered something into her ear.

"Do we have to say good-bye now, Leonore," Salo asked, jumping up the
carriage step, "and can't I see you any more?"

"Salo," Mrs. Maxa said, "I was just thinking that you could sit beside
the coachman if you want to. You can drive to Nolla with us, for you
will want to see where Leonore is going. I can have you brought back
to-morrow in time to meet your friends. Do you approve of that, Philip?"

"Certainly, certainly," the brother answered, "but if that is the plan, I
am going along. I thought at first that this trip would prove a very
mournful one. It seems more like a festal-journey to me now, so I've
come, too. Salo and I will sit high up and to-morrow I promise to bring
him back here."

With shining eyes the boy climbed to the seat which the coachman had just
relinquished. He understood now that the hospital was not to be their
destination. With many hearty handshakes and good wishes the two Remke
ladies at last let their friend and adviser go. After many more last
greetings to all the party the carriage finally rolled towards the
valley.

Leonore was so exhausted that, leaning against her companion, she fell
asleep, but she staunchly held on to Mrs. Maxa's hand, which seemed to
her that of a loving mother. It was the first time in her life that she
had felt this.

On the high seat outside the conversation was extremely lively. Young
Salo had to tell where and how he lived, and then his companion explained
in turn the places they were passing through and told him whatever
unusual had happened in the neighborhood. The uncle found out that
neither Salo nor his sister had the slightest remembrance of their
parents. The boy's earliest memory went back to an estate in Holstein
where they had lived with an elderly great-aunt, his grandmother's
sister. They were about five or six years old when the aunt died, after
which they were sent to Hanover to their present abode.

Twice a year a relation of their great-aunt came to see them, but he was
such a stiff, quiet gentleman that they could not enjoy his visits. It
was, however, this man who always decided what was to be done with them.
For the present they were to remain where they were till Salo had
finished his studies. After that the choice where to settle was left to
them.

"But I know what I shall do first of all," Salo added with sparkling
eyes.

Just then the old castle came in view.

"Oh, what a wonderful castle with great towers!" Salo exclaimed. "It is
all closed up; there can't be anybody living there. It doesn't seem to
be in ruins, though. What is it called?"

"This is Castle Wildenstein," the boy's companion curtly answered,
throwing a searching glance at the young Baron. The latter looked
innocently up at the gray towers, remarking that anybody who owned a
castle like that would simply be the happiest man in the world.

"He knows nothing about the castle of his ancestors and the whole tragic
story. So much the better," said Uncle Philip to himself.

When the carriage drove up before Mrs. Maxa's door, everything was very
quiet there, for the children were still in school. Kathy came running
towards them with astonished eyes. She did not know at all what was
going on, and that was a novelty for her.

Salo had the reins pressed into his hands before he knew it. With a
bound his new friend had jumped to the ground and called back, "If you
don't move, the horses will stay quiet, too." Quickly opening the
carriage, he lifted Leonore out and carried her up to the little room
which had been got ready for her. Mrs. Maxa followed at his heels. He
then turned hurriedly back to his young substitute, for he felt a little
uneasy at the thought of what might happen to the horses and carriage.
The boy might want to drive about and the horses might begin to jump.
But no; stiff and immovable, the boy sat at his post, firmly holding the
reins.

Even now when a party of eight feet came running towards him, Salo did
not move. The calls of "Uncle Philip, Uncle Philip!" sounded with more
vigor than usual, because the children had not expected him back so soon,
and therefore had to celebrate his coming with double energy. Uncle
Philip was immediately surrounded, and eight arms held him so tight that
there was no use in struggling.

"Just look at my young nobleman up there," he said, vainly trying to get
free. "He certainly knows what it means to remain firmly at his post and
do his duty. If he had not held the reins tightly, your wild cries would
have driven horses and carriage down the ravine long ago."

All arms suddenly dropped and all eyes were directed towards the figure
on the coachman's seat. In the unexpected joy of their uncle's return
nobody had noticed the boy. Uncle Philip, who was free now, let Salo get
down and introduced him to the children.

Salo had a friendly greeting for every one and his eyes sparkled gaily
when he shook their hands. His whole appearance was so attractive and
engaging that the children immediately took a liking to him. With lively
gestures they surrounded him like an old acquaintance, so that Salo
quickly felt that he had come among good friends. Even the reserved
Bruno, whom nobody had ever been able to approach, linked Salo's arm
confidentially in his in order to conduct the guest into the house.

Here Bruno sat down beside Salo and the two were immediately immersed in
the most eager conversation. Mea, Kurt and Lippo were hunting everywhere
for their mother, for they had not the faintest idea where she had gone.

When Uncle Philip came back, he called them together and told them where
their mother was and what she wished them to know through him. As she
had brought a sick child with her, she could have no intercourse with the
children for two or three days. The doctor had also forbidden them to go
up to the sick-room, and they were to do the best they could during that
time. If the sickness should get worse, a nurse was to come to the house
and then the mother would be free again. If the illness was to be
slight, on the contrary, the children would be admitted to the sick-room
and make Leonore's acquaintance. They could even help a little in her
care, for the mother would not then be obliged to keep them apart. Maezli
was to be sent to Apollonie every morning and was to spend the day there.
Not to be able to have a glimpse of their mother for two or three days
was depressing news indeed. The three children's faces were absolutely
disconcerted, for the obstacles were clearly insurmountable.

"Well, is this so terrible?" Uncle Philip said cheerily. "Who needs to
let his wings droop? Just think if you were in the place of the sick
girl, who has no mother at all! Can't you let her have yours for a few
days? No? Just think what is to follow. Your mother will come down then
and bring you a new playmate. Leonore is friendly and charming and has
sweeter manners than you have ever seen. Kurt is sure to make dozens of
songs about her and Mea will be carried away with enthusiasm for her.
Lippo will find an affectionate protectress in her who will be able to
appreciate his little-recognized virtues. Are you satisfied now?"

This speech really had splendid results. All three were willing enough
now to let the sick Leonore have their mother, and they were anxious
besides to do everything in their power to make Leonore's recovery
speedy. The uncle's description of the new playmate had wakened such a
lively sympathy in them that they were ready to assist him in many ways,
and he was even obliged to cool their zeal. As their guest was to remain
such a short while, Uncle Philip suggested a walk in order to show him
the surroundings, but when they looked around for Salo, they could not
find either him or Bruno.

"They thought of the same thing," Uncle Philip said. "It will be great
fun to hunt for them." So they started off.

Uncle Philip had guessed right. Bruno had found his new friend so much
to his liking that he wanted to keep him entirely to himself. While the
uncle had talked with the younger children, he had led Salo out to take
him on a stroll in the beautiful sunset. Salo was perfectly satisfied,
too, as he felt himself likewise drawn towards Bruno. In this short time
the two boys had grown as confiding as if they had known each other for
years and they were just then wandering towards the castle hill, absorbed
in lively conversation.

"Can you guess why I am taking you up there?" Bruno suddenly asked,
interrupting the talk.

"Because it is so lovely," Salo replied quickly.

He had stopped walking and was looking across the flowering meadows
towards the castle over which rosy clouds were floating on the bright
evening sky.

"No, not for that reason," said Bruno, "but because it belongs to an
uncle of yours."

Salo looked at him, full of astonishment.

"But Bruno, what an idea!" he called out laughing. "That would not be so
bad, but it can't be true. We only have one uncle, who has been living
in Spain for a number of years and who expects to stay there."

"The castle belongs to just that uncle who lives in Spain," Bruno
asserted.

He reminded Salo of the fact that their mothers had known each other
while living in the castle and had grown to be such friends there. Salo
admitted this but was firmly persuaded that the castle had long since
been sold and that his uncle would never come back, he had heard that
from his great-aunt. So Bruno had to agree with him that the castle had
probably been sold, if the uncle did not think of returning.

"Do you know, Salo," said Bruno while they continued their walk, "I
should love to do what your uncle did. I want to go away from here and
disappear for a long time. Then I would not be obliged to be fettered to
those two horrid boys. I can't stand it, and you now know yourself what
they are like."

Bruno had described his two comrades to his new friend, their mean
attitude and their frequent and contemptible tricks. Salo had repeatedly
shown his feeling by sudden exclamations and he said now with comforting
sympathy, "I am sure it must make you feel like running away if you are
obliged to spend all your days with two such boys. But don't listen to
them, pay no attention to them, and let them do and say what they please.
If they want to be mean, let them be, for they can't make you different."

"Oh, if you could be with me, that would be much easier," Bruno said. "I
should know then that you felt with me and shared my anger. When I am
compelled to be alone with them and they do sneaky acts to people who
can't defend themselves, I always get so mad that I have to beat them.
That always brings nasty talk and makes my mother unhappy, and then I
feel worse than ever. If only I could go far away and never have to meet
them any more!"

"If you had an idea what it is like not to have any home at all, you
would not wish to leave yours without even knowing where to go," said
Salo. "You would not think that anything was too hard to bear if you
could go home and tell your mother all about it. If you have that
consolation, it should make you able to stand a lot of trouble. I
shouldn't mind living with those two during school term, if I could go to
a place during the holidays that were a real home for me and Leonore.
Every time I come to her she cries about having no home in the whole wide
world. I try to think out something so that we won't have to wait so
long before we can live together. But that is hard to carry out, for the
gentleman in Holstein who decides about our upbringing wants me to study
for many years. That will take much too long. Leonore might even die
before that, and I want to do it all for her. I am so glad now that
Leonore has fallen ill and has therefore come to you," he said with a
brighter glance. "I wish she would stay sick for a while--of course not
awfully sick," he corrected himself rapidly, "I mean just sick enough so
that your mother would not let her go. I know quite well how happy
Leonore will be with her. She was so kind and friendly with us right
away. Since our old aunt died nobody has been so good and sweet with us
as your mother and that will do more good to Leonore than anything else
on earth."

Salo's words made a deep impression on Bruno. He had never before
realized that everyone did not have a lovely home like his, and a mother
besides who was always ready to greet him affectionately, who could be
told everything, could help him bear everything, who shared all his
experiences and had a sympathy like no one else. All this he had
accepted as if it could not be otherwise. Now came the realization that
things might be different. Poor Salo and his sister, for instance, had
to suffer bitterly from missing what he had always enjoyed to the full
without thinking about it. He was seized with a sudden sympathy for his
new friend, who looked so refined and charming, and who already had to
bear such sorrow for himself and his sister. Bruno now flung behind him
all the thoughts and schemes he had had in connection with his coming
fate and with all the fire of his nature he fastened on the thought of
