Ten silent minutes passed, and Henry went to the window again. He did
not open it, but there was a crack through which he could see. The
others said nothing, but watched his face. When he turned away they knew
that the moment was at hand.

"They've just come from the woods," he said, "and in a minute they'll be
at the door. Now, boys, take one last look at your rifles."

A minute later there was a sudden sharp knock at the door, but no answer
came from within. The knock was repeated, sharper and louder, and Henry,
altering his voice as much as possible, exclaimed like one suddenly
awakened from sleep:

"Who is it? What do you want?"

Back came a voice which Henry knew to be that of Braxton Wyatt:

"We've come from farther up the valley. We're scouts, we've been up to
the Indian country. We're half starved. Open and give us food!"

"I don't believe you," replied Henry. "Honest people don't come to my
door at this time in the morning."

Then ensued a few moments of silence, although Paul, with his vivid
fancy, thought he heard whispering on the other side of the door.

"Open!" cried Wyatt, "or we'll break your door down!" Henry said
nothing, nor did any of the others. They did not stir. The fire crackled
a little, but there was no other sound in the Standish house. Presently
they heard a slight noise outside, that of light feet.

"They are going for a log with which to break the door in," whispered
Henry. "They won't have to look far. The wood pile isn't fifty feet
away."

"An' then," said Shif'less Sol, "they won't have much left to do but to
take the scalps of women an' little children."

Every figure in the Standish house stiffened at the shiftless one's
significant words, and the light in the eyes grew sterner. Henry went
to the door, put his ear to the line where it joined the wall, and
listened.

"They've got their log," he said, "and in half a minute they'll rush it
against the door."

He came back to his old position. Paul's heart began to thump, and his
thumb fitted itself over the trigger of his cocked rifle. Then they
heard rapid feet, a smash, a crash, and the door flew open. A half dozen
Iroquois and a log that they held between them were hurled into the
middle of the room. The door had given away so easily and unexpectedly
that the warriors could not check themselves, and two or three fell
with the log. But they sprang like cats to their feet, and with their
comrades uttered a cry that filled the whole cabin with its terrible
sound and import.

The Iroquois, keen of eyes and quick of mind, saw the trap at once.
The five grim figures, rifle in hand and finger on trigger, all waiting
silent and motionless were far different from what they expected. Here
could be no scalps, with the long, silky hair of women and children.

There was a moment's pause, and then the Indians rushed at their foes.
Five fingers pulled triggers, flame leaped from five muzzles, and in an
instant the cabin was filled with smoke and war shouts, but the warriors
never had a chance. They could only strike blindly with their tomahawks,
and in a half minute three of them, two wounded, rushed through the door
and fled to the woods. They had been preceded already by Braxton Wyatt,
who had hung back craftily while the Iroquois broke down the door.




CHAPTER IX. WYOMING


The five made no attempt to pursue. In fact, they did not leave the
cabin, but stood there a while, looking down at the fallen, hideous with
war paint, but now at the end of their last trail. Their tomahawks lay
upon the floor, and glittered when the light from the fire fell upon
them. Smoke, heavy with the odor of burned gunpowder, drifted about the
room.

Henry threw open the two shuttered windows, and fresh currents of air
poured into the room. Over the mountains in the east came the first
shaft of day. The surface of the river was lightening.

"What shall we do with them?" asked Paul, pointing to the silent forms
on the floor.

"Leave them," said Henry. "Butler's army is burning everything before
it, and this house and all in it is bound to go. You notice, however,
that Braxton Wyatt is not here."

"Trust him to escape every time," said Shif'less Sol. "Of course he
stood back while the Indians rushed the house. But ez shore ez we live
somebody will get him some day. People like that can't escape always."

They slipped from the house, turning toward the river bank, and not long
after it was full daylight they were at Forty Fort again, where they
found Standish and his family. Henry replied briefly to the man's
questions, but two hours later a scout came in and reported the grim
sight that he had seen in the Standish home. No one could ask for
further proof of the fealty of the five, who sought a little sleep, but
before noon were off again.

They met more fugitives, and it was now too dangerous to go farther up
the valley. But not willing to turn back, they ascended the mountains
that hem it in, and from the loftiest point that they could find sought
a sight of the enemy.

It was an absolutely brilliant day in summer. The blue of the heavens
showed no break but the shifting bits of white cloud, and the hills and
mountains rolled away, solid masses of rich, dark green. The river, a
beautiful river at any time, seemed from this height a great current of
quicksilver. Henry pointed to a place far up the stream where black dots
appeared on its surface. These dots were moving, and they came on in
four lines.

"Boys," he said, "you know what those lines of black dots are?"

"Yes," replied Shif'less Sol, "it's Butler's army of Indians, Tories,
Canadians, an' English. They've come from Tioga Point on the river, an'
our Colonel Butler kin expect 'em soon."

The sunlight became dazzling, and showed the boats, despite the
distance, with startling clearness. The five, watching from their peak,
saw them turn in toward the land, where they poured forth a motley
stream of red men and white, a stream that was quickly swallowed up in
the forest.

"They are coming down through the woods on the fort, said Tom Ross.

"And they're coming fast," said Henry. "It's for us to carry the
warning."

They sped back to the Wyoming fort, spreading the alarm as they passed,
and once more they were in the council room with Colonel Zebulon Butler
and his officers around him.

"So they are at hand, and you have seen them?" said the colonel.

"Yes," replied Henry, the spokesman, "they came down from Tioga Point
in boats, but have disembarked and are advancing through the woods. They
will be here today."

There was a little silence in the room. The older men understood the
danger perhaps better than the younger, who were eager for battle.

"Why should we stay here and wait for them?" exclaimed one of the
younger captains at length-some of these captains were mere boys. "Why
not go out, meet them, and beat them?"

"They outnumber us about five to one," said Henry. "Brant, if he is
still with them, though he may have gone to some other place from Tioga
Point, is a great captain. So is Timmendiquas, the Wyandot, and they say
that the Tory leader is energetic and capable."

"It is all true!" exclaimed Colonel Butler. "We must stay in the fort!
We must not go out to meet them! We are not strong enough!"

A murmur of protest and indignation came from the younger officers.

"And leave the valley to be ravaged! Women and children to be scalped,
while we stay behind log walls!" said one of them boldly.

The men in the Wyoming fort were not regular troops, merely militia,
farmers gathered hastily for their own defense.

Colonel Butler flushed.

"We have induced as many as we could to seek refuge," he said. "It hurts
me as much as you to have the valley ravaged while we sit quiet here.
But I know that we have no chance against so large a force, and if we
fall what is to become of the hundreds whom we now protect?"

But the murmur of protest grew. All the younger men were indignant. They
would not seek shelter for themselves while others were suffering. A
young lieutenant saw from a window two fires spring up and burn like
torch lights against the sky. They were houses blazing before the Indian
brand.

"Look at that!" he cried, pointing with an accusing finger, "and we are
here, under cover, doing nothing!"

A deep angry mutter went about the room, but Colonel Butler, although
the flush remained on his face, still shook his head. He glanced at Tom
Ross, the oldest of the five.

"You know about the Indian force," he exclaimed. "What should we do?"

The face of Tom Ross was very grave, and he spoke slowly, as was his
wont.

"It's a hard thing to set here," he exclaimed, "but it will be harder to
go out an' meet 'em on their own ground, an' them four or five to one."

"We must not go out," repeated the Colonel, glad of such backing.

The door was thrust open, and an officer entered.

"A rumor has just arrived, saying that the entire Davidson family has
been killed and scalped," he said.

A deep, angry cry went up. Colonel Butler and the few who stood with
him were overborne. Such things as these could not be endured, and
reluctantly the commander gave his consent. They would go out and
fight. The fort and its enclosures were soon filled with the sounds of
preparation, and the little army was formed rapidly.

"We will fight by your side, of course," said Henry, "but we wish to
serve on the flank as an independent band. We can be of more service in
that manner."

The colonel thanked them gratefully.

"Act as you think best," he said.

The five stood near one of the gates, while the little force formed
in ranks. Almost for the first time they were gloomy upon going into
battle. They had seen the strength of that army of Indians, renegades,
Tories, Canadians, and English advancing under the banner of England,
and they knew the power and fanaticism of the Indian leaders. They
believed that the terrible Queen Esther, tomahawk in hand, had
continually chanted to them her songs of blood as they came down the
river. It was now the third of July, and valley and river were beautiful
in the golden sunlight. The foliage showed vivid and deep green on
either line of high hills. The summer sun had never shown more kindly
over the lovely valley.

The time was now three o'clock. The gates of the fort were thrown open,
and the little army marched out, only three hundred, of whom seventy
were old men, or boys so young that in our day they would be called
children. Yet they marched bravely against the picked warriors of the
Iroquois, trained from infancy to the forest and war, and a formidable
body of white rovers who wished to destroy the little colony of
"rebels," as they called them.

Small though it might be, it was a gallant army. Young and old held
their heads high. A banner was flying, and a boy beat a steady insistent
roll upon a drum. Henry and his comrades were on the left flank, the
river was on the right. The great gates had closed behind them, shutting
in the women and the children. The sun blazed down, throwing everything
into relief with its intense, vivid light playing upon the brown faces
of the borderers, their rifles and their homespun clothes. Colonel
Butler and two or three of his officers were on horseback, leading the
van. Now that the decision was to fight, the older officers, who had
opposed it, were in the very front. Forward they went, and spread out
a little, but with the right flank still resting on the river, and the
left extended on the plain.

The five were on the edge of the plain, a little detached from the
others, searching the forest for a sign of the enemy, who was already so
near. Their gloom did not decrease. Neither the rolling of the drum nor
the flaunting of the banner had any effect. Brave though the men might
be, this was not the way in which they should meet an Indian foe who
outnumbered them four or five to one.

"I don't like it," muttered Tom Ross.

"Nor do I," said Henry, "but remember that whatever happens we all stand
together."

"We remember!" said the others.

On-they went, and the five moving faster were now ahead of the main
force some hundred yards. They swung in a little toward the river. The
banks here were highland off to the left was a large swamp. The five now
checked speed and moved with great wariness. They saw nothing, and they
heard nothing, either, until they went forty or fifty yards farther.
Then a low droning sound came to their ears. It was the voice of one yet
far away, but they knew it. It was the terrible chant of Queen Esther,
in this moment the most ruthless of all the savages, and inflaming them
continuously for the combat.

The five threw themselves flat on their faces, and waited a little. The
chant grew louder, and then through the foliage they saw the ominous
figure approaching. She was much as she had been on that night when they
first beheld her. She wore the same dress of barbaric colors, she swung
the same great tomahawk about her head, and sang all the time of fire
and blood and death.

They saw behind her the figures of chiefs, naked to the breech cloth for
battle, their bronze bodies glistening with the war paint, and bright
feathers gleaming in their hair. Henry recognized the tall form of
Timmendiquas, notable by his height, and around him his little band of
Wyandots, ready to prove themselves mighty warriors to their eastern
friends the Iroquois. Back of these was a long line of Indians and their
white allies, Sir John Johnson's Royal Greens and Butler's Rangers
in the center, bearing the flag of England. The warriors, of whom the
Senecas were most numerous, were gathered in greatest numbers on their
right flank, facing the left flank of the Americans. Sangerachte and
Hiokatoo, who had taken two English prisoners at Braddock's defeat, and
who had afterwards burned them both alive with his own hand, were the
principal leaders of the Senecas. Henry caught a glimpse of "Indian"
Butler in the center, with a great blood-red handkerchief tied around
his head, and, despite the forest, he noticed with a great sinking of
the heart how far the hostile line extended. It could wrap itself like a
python around the defense.

"It's a tale that will soon be told," said Paul.

They went back swiftly, and warned Colonel Butler that the enemy was
at band. Even as they spoke they heard the loud wailing chant of Queen
Esther, and then came the war whoop, pouring from a thousand throats,
swelling defiant and fierce like the cry of a wounded beast. The
farmers, the boys, and the old men, most of whom had never been in
battle, might well tremble at this ominous sound, so great in volume
and extending so far into the forest. But they stood firm, drawing
themselves into a somewhat more compact body, and still advancing with
their banners flying, and the boy beating out that steady roll on the
drum.

The enemy now came into full sight, and Colonel Butler deployed his
force in line of battle, his right resting on the high bank of the river
and his left against the swamp. Forward pressed the motley army of the
other Butler, he of sanguinary and cruel fame, and the bulk of his
force came into view, the sun shining down on the green uniforms of the
English and the naked brown bodies of the Iroquois.

The American commander gave the order to fire. Eager fingers were
already on the trigger, and a blaze of light ran along the entire rank.
The Royal Greens and Rangers, although replying with their own fire,
gave back before the storm of bullets, and the Wyoming men, with a shout
of triumph, sprang forward. It was always a characteristic of the border
settler, despite many disasters and a knowledge of Indian craft and
cunning, to rush straight at his foe whenever he saw him. His, unless
a trained forest warrior himself, was a headlong bravery, and now this
gallant little force asked for nothing but to come to close grips with
the enemy.

The men in the center with "Indian" Butler gave back still more. With
cries of victory the Wyoming men pressed forward, firing rapidly, and
continuing to drive the mongrel white force. The rifles were cracking
rapidly, and smoke arose over the two lines. The wind caught wisps of it
and carried them off down the river.

"It goes better than I thought," said Paul as he reloaded his rifle.

"Not yet," said Henry, "we are fighting the white men only. Where are
all the Indians, who alone outnumber our men more than two to one?"

"Here they come," said Shif'less Sol, pointing to the depths of the
swamp, which was supposed to protect the left flank of the Wyoming
force.

The five saw in the spaces, amid the briars and vines, scores of dark
figures leaping over the mud, naked to the breech cloth, armed with
rifle and tomahawk, and rushing down upon the unprotected side of their
foe. The swamp had been but little obstacle to them.

Henry and his comrades gave the alarm at once. As many as possible were
called off immediately from the main body, but they were not numerous
enough to have any effect. The Indians came through the swamp in
hundreds and hundreds, and, as they uttered their triumphant yell,
poured a terrible fire into the Wyoming left flank. The defenders were
forced to give ground, and the English and Tories came on again.

The fire was now deadly and of great volume. The air was filled with
the flashing of the rifles. The cloud of smoke grew heavier, and faces,
either from heat or excitement, showed red through it. The air was
filled with bullets, and the Wyoming force was being cut down fast, as
the fire of more than a thousand rifles converged upon it.

The five at the fringe of the swamp loaded and fired as fast as they
could at the Indian horde, but they saw that it was creeping closer and
closer, and that the hail of bullets it sent in was cutting away
the whole left flank of the defenders. They saw the tall figure of
Timmendiquas, a very god of war, leading on the Indians, with his
fearless Wyandots in a close cluster around him. Colonel John Durkee,
gathering up a force of fifty or sixty, charged straight at the
warriors, but he was killed by a withering volley, which drove his men
back.

Now occurred a fatal thing, one of those misconceptions which often
decide the fate of a battle. The company of Captain Whittlesey, on the
extreme left, which was suffering most severely, was ordered to fall
back. The entire little army, which was being pressed hard now, seeing
the movement of Whittlesey, began to retreat. Even without the mistake
it is likely they would have lost in the face of such numbers.

The entire horde of Indians, Tories, Canadians, English, and renegades,
uttering a tremendous yell, rushed forward. Colonel Zebulon Butler,
seeing the crisis, rode up and down in front of his men, shouting:
"Don't leave me, my children! the victory is ours!" Bravely his officers
strove to stop the retreat. Every captain who led a company into action
was killed. Some of these captains were but boys. The men were falling
by dozens.

