"I thought it might be so.  I have a good silver watch, which I have
no occasion for."

Mrs. Hamilton left the room, and quickly returned with a neat silver
hunting-case watch, with a guilt chain.

"This is yours, Ben," she said, "if you like it."

"Do you give it to me?" asked Ben joyously.  He had only expected that
it would be loaned to him.

"Yes, I give it to you, and I hope you will find it useful."

"How can I thank you, Mrs. Hamilton, for your kindness?"

"You are more grateful than Conrad.  I gave him one just like it, and
he was evidently dissatisfied became it was not gold.  When you are
older the gold watch may come."

"I am very well pleased with the silver watch, for I have long wanted
one, but did not see any way of obtaining it."

"You are wise in having moderate desires, Ben.  But there goes the
lunch bell.  You may want to wash your hands.  When you have done so
come down to the dining room, in the rear of the sitting room."

Mrs. Hill and Conrad were already seated at the table when Ben
descended.

"Take a seat opposite Conrad, Ben," said Mrs. Hamilton, who was
sitting at one end of the table.

The lunch was plain but substantial, and Ben, who had taken an early
breakfast, enjoyed it.

"I suppose we shall not have Conrad at lunch to-morrow?" said Mrs.
Hamilton.  "He will be at the store."

Conrad made a grimace.  He world have enjoyed his freedom better.

"I won't have much of my four dollars left if I have to pay for
lunch," he said in a surly tone.

"You shall have a reasonable allowance for that purpose."

"I suppose Mr. Barclay will lunch at home," said Mrs. Hill.

"Certainly, since his work will be here.  He is to be my home clerk,
and will keep my accounts."

"You needn't have gone out of the house for a clerk, Cousin Hamilton.
I am sure Conrad would have been glad of the work."

"It will be better for Conrad to learn business in a larger
establishment," said Mrs. Hamilton quietly.

This was a new way of looking at it, and helped to reconcile Mrs. Hill
to an arrangement which at first had disappointed her.

"Have you any engagements this afternoon, Conrad?" asked Mrs.
Hamilton.  "Ben will have nothing to do, and you could show him the
city."

"I've got an engagement with a fellow," said Conrad hastily.

"I can find my way about alone, thank you," said Ben.  "I won't
trouble Conrad."

"Very well.  This evening, however, Ben, I think you may enjoy going
to the theater.  Conrad can accompany you, unless he has another
engagement."

"I'll go with him," said Conrad, more graciously, for he was fond of
amusements.

"Then we will all meet at dinner, and you two young gentlemen can
leave in good time for the theater."




CHAPTER XXI
AT THE THEATER


After dinner, Ben and Conrad started to walk to the theater.  The
distance was about a mile, but in the city there is so much always to
be seen that one does not think of distance.

Conrad, who was very curious to ascertain Ben's status in the
household, lost no time in making inquiries.

"What does my aunt find for you to do?" he asked.

It may be remarked, by the way, that no such relationship ever existed
between them, but Mrs. Hill and her son thought politic to make the
relationship seem as close as possible, as it would, perhaps, increase
their apparent claim upon their rich relative.

Ben answered the question.

"You'll have a stupid time," said Conrad.  "All the same, she ought to
have given the place to me.  How much does she pay you?"

Ben hesitated, for he knew that his answer would make his companion
discontented.

"I am not sure whether I am at liberty to tell," he answered, with
hesitation.

"There isn't any secret about it, is there?" said Conrad sharply.

No, I suppose not.  I am to receive ten dollars a week."

"Ten dollars a week!" ejaculated Conrad, stopping short in the street.

"Yes."

"And I get but four!  That's a shame!"

"I shall really have no more than you, Conrad.  I have a mother to
provide for, and I shall send home six dollars a week regularly."

"That doesn't make any difference!" exclaimed Conrad, in excitement.
"It's awfully mean of aunt to treat you so much better than she does
me."

"You mustn't say that to me," said Ben.  "She has been kind to us
both, and I don't like to hear anything said against her."

"You're not going to tell her?" said Conrad suspiciously.

"Certainly not," said Ben indignantly.  "What do you take me for?"

"Some fellows would, to set Aunt Hamilton against me."

"I am not so mean as that."

"I am glad I can depend on you.  You see, the old lady is awfully
rich--doesn't know what to do with her money--and as she has no son,
or anybody nearer than me and mother, it's natural we should inherit
her money."

"I hope she will enjoy it herself for a good many years."

"Oh, she's getting old," said Conrad carelessly.  "She can't expect to
live forever.  It wouldn't be fair for young people if their parents
lived to a hundred.  Now, would it?"

"I should be very glad to have my mother live to a hundred, if she
could enjoy life," said Ben, disgusted with his companoin's sordid
selfishness.

"Your mother hasn't got any money, and that makes a difference."

Ben had a reply, but he reflected it would be of little use to argue
with one who took such widely different views as Conrad.  Moreover,
they were already within a block or two of the theater.

The best seats were priced at a dollar and a half, and Mrs. Hamilton
had given Conrad three dollars to purchase one for Ben and one for
himself.

"It seems an awful price to pay a dollar and a half for a seat," said
Conrad.  "Suppose we go into the gallery, where the seats are only
fifty cents?"

"I think Mrs. Hamilton meant us to take higher-priced seats."

"She won't care, or know, unless we choose to tell her."

"Then you don't propose to give her back the difference?"

"You don't take me for a fool, do you?  I'll tell you what I'll do.
If you don't mind a fifty-cent seat, I'll give you twenty-five cents
out of this money."

Ben could hardly believe Conrad was in earnest in this exhibition of
meanness.

"Then," said he, "you would clear seventy-five cents on my seat and a
dollar on your own?"

"You can see almost as well in the gallery," said Conrad.  "I'll give
you fifty cents, if you insist upon it."

"I insist upon having my share of the money spent for a seat," said
Ben, contemptuously.  "You can sit where you please, of course."

"You ain't very obliging," said Conrad sullenly.  "I need the money,
and that's what made me propose it.  As you've made so much fuss about
it, we'll take orchestra seats."

This he did, though unwillingly.

"I don't think I shall ever like that boy," thought Ben.  "He's a
little too mean."

They both enjoyed the play, Ben perhaps with the most zest, for he had
never before attended a city theater.  At eleven o'clock the curtain
fell, and they went out.

"Come, Ben," said Conrad, "you might treat a fellow to soda water."

"I will," answered Ben.  "Where shall we go?"

"Just opposite.  They've got fine soda water across the street."

The boys drank their soda water, and started to go home.

"Suppose we go in somewhere and have a game of billiards?" suggested
Conrad.

"I don't play," answered Ben.

"I'll teach you; come along," urged Conrad.

"It is getting late, and I would rather not."

"I suppose you go to roost with the chickens in the country?" sneered
Conrad.  You'll learn better in the city--if you stay."

"There is another reason," continued Ben.  "I suppose it costs money
to play billiards, and I have none to spare."

"Only twenty-five cents a game."

"It will be cheaper to go to bed."

"You won't do anything a fellow wants you to," grumbled Conrad.  "You
needn't be so mean, when you are getting ten dollars a week."

"I have plenty to do with my money, and I want to save up something
every week."

On the whole the boys did not take to each other.  They took very
different views of life and duty, and there seemed to be small
prospect of their becoming intimate friends.

Mrs. Hamilton had gone to bed when they returned, but Mrs. Hill was up
watching for her son.  She was a cold, disagreeable woman, but she was
devoted to her boy.

"I am glad you have come home so soon," she said.

"I wanted to play a game of billiards, but Ben wouldn't," grumbled
Conrad.

"If you had done so, I should have had to sit up later for you,
Conrad."

"There was no use in sitting up for me.  I ain't a baby," responded
Conrad ungratefully.

"You know I can't sleep when I know you are out, Conrad."

"Then you're very foolish.  Isn't she, Ben?"

"My mother would feel just so," answered Ben.

Mrs. Hill regarded him almost kindly.  He had done her a good turn in
bringing her son home in good season.

"She may be a disagreeable woman," thought Ben, "but she is good to
Conrad," and this made him regard the housekeeper with more favor.




CHAPTER XXII
A MYSTERIOUS LETTER


From time to time, Mrs. Hamilton sent Ben on errands to different
parts of the city, chiefly to those who had been started in business
with capital which she had supplied.  One afternoon, he was sent to a
tailor on Sixth Avenue with a note, the contents of which were unknown
to him.

"You may wait for an answer," said Mrs. Hamilton.

He readily found the tailor's shop, and called for Charles Roberts,
the proprietor.

The latter read the note, and said, in a business like tone:

"Come to the back part of the shop, and I will show you some goods."

Ben regarded him in surprise.

"Isn't there some mistake?" he said.  "I didn't know I was to look at
any goods."

"As we are to make a suit for you, I supposed you would have some
choice in the matter," returned the tailor, equally surprised.

"May I look at the letter?" asked Ben.

The tailor put it into his hands.

It ran thus:

  "Mr. Roberts: You will make a suit for the bearer, from any goods he
  may select, and charge to the account of
                                    Helen Hamilton."

"Mrs. Hamilton did not tell me what was in the note," said Ben,
smiling.  "She is very kind."

Ben allowed himself to be guided by the tailor, and the result was a
handsome suit, which was sent home in due time, and immediately
attracted the attention of Conrad.  Ben had privately thanked his
patroness, but had felt under no obligation to tell Conrad.

"Seems to me you are getting extravagant!" said Conrad enviously.

"I don't know but I am," answered Ben good-naturedly.

"How much did you pay for it?"

"The price was thirty-five dollars."

"That's too much for a boy in your circumstances to pay."

"I think so myself, but I shall make it last a long time."

"I mean to make Aunt Hamilton buy me a new suit," grumbled Conrad.

"I have no objection, I am sure," said Ben.

"I didn't ask your permission," said Conrad rudely.

"I wonder what he would say if he knew that Mrs. Hamilton paid for my
suit?" Ben said to himself.  He wisely decided to keep the matter
secret, as he knew that Conrad would be provoked to hear of this new
proof of his relative's partiality for the boy whom he regarded as a
rival.

Conrad lost no time in preferring his request to Mrs. Hamilton for a
new suit.

"I bought you a suit two months since," said Mrs. Hamilton quietly.
"Why do you come to me for another so soon?"

"Ben has a new suit," answered Conrad, a little confused.

"I don't know that that has anything to do with you.  However, I will
ask Ben when he had his last new suit."

Ben, who was present, replied:

"It was last November."

"Nearly a year since.  I will take care that you are supplied with new
suits as often as Ben."

Conrad retired from the presence of his relative much disgusted.  He
did not know, but suspected that Ben was indebted to Mrs. Hamilton for
his new suit, and although this did not interfere with a liberal
provision for him, he felt unwilling that anyone beside himself should
bask in the favor of his rich relative.  He made a discovery that
troubled him about this time.

"Let me see your watch, Ben," he said one day.

Ben took out the watch and placed it in his hand.

"It's just like mine," said Conrad, after a critical examination.

"Is it?"

"Yes; don't you see?  Where did you get it?"

"It was a gift," answered Ben.

"From my aunt?"

"It was given me by Mrs. Hamilton."

"She seems to be very kind to you," sneered Conrad, with a scowl.

"She is indeed!" answered Ben earnestly.

"You've played your cards well," said Conrad coarsely.

"I don't understand you," returned Ben coldly.

"I mean that, knowing her to be rich, you have done well to get on the
