
13. The gentleman said, "I will give you eighty tomans," (nearly two
hundred and fifty dollars). "A little more, if you please," said the
fellow, somewhat entertained. "Ninety--a hundred." He shook his head and
smiled. The officer at last came to three hundred tomans, (nearly one
thousand dollars). "Well," said the Arab, "you need not tempt me further.
You are a rich nobleman, and, I am told, have loads of silver and gold.
Now," added he, "you want my mare, but you shall not have her for all you
have got." He put spurs to his horse, and was soon out of the reach of
temptation.

14. The horse can swim, when necessary, as well as most other animals,
although he is not very fond of the water. Some years ago a vessel was
driven upon the rocks, on the coast of the Cape of Good Hope, and most of
the crew fell an immediate sacrifice to the waves. Those who were left
were seen from the shore, clinging to the different pieces of the wreck.
The sea ran so high that no boat could venture off to their assistance.

15. Meanwhile, a planter had come from his farm to be a spectator of the
shipwreck. His heart was melted at the sight of the unhappy seamen, and,
knowing the bold spirit of his horse and his excellence as a swimmer, he
determined to make a desperate effort for their deliverance. Having blown
a little Brandy into his horse's nostrils, he pushed into the midst of the
breakers. At first both horse and rider disappeared, but it was not long
before they floated to the surface, and swam up to the wreck; when, taking
two men with him, each of whom held on by one of his boots, the planter
brought them safe to shore.

16. This was repeated no less than seven times, and he saved fourteen
lives; but on his return the eighth time, being much fatigued, and meeting
a tremendous wave, he lost his balance and sank in a moment. His horse
swam safely to land, but its gallant rider sank, to rise no more.


DEFINITIONS.--4. Im-mense', very large. In-hab'it-ed, occupied as a home.
Cav'al-ry, a body of military troops on horses. 5. Im--pet-u-os'i-ty,
fury, violence. 8. Dex'ter-ous-ly, skillfully. 9. Re--duced', brought
into. 10. O-rig'i-nal-ly, at first. 12. Pa-rad'ed, showed off.
8. Sym'me-try, a proper proportion of the several parts. 13. To-man', a
Persian coin valued at about three dollars. 15. Des'per-ate, without care
of safety. De-liv'er-ance, release from danger. 16. Gal'lant, brave,
heroic.


EXERCISES.--Where are wild horses found? How are they taken? For what
purpose are they taken? In what country are the finest horses raised? Why
are the horses so excellent there? Are not animals always made better by
kind treatment? Why would not the Arab sell his horse? Relate the anecdote
of the planter and the shipwrecked seamen.



XLVIII. EMULATION. (132)

1. Frank's father was speaking to a friend, one day, on the subject of
competition at school. He said that he could answer for it that envy is
not always connected with it.

2. He had been excelled by many, but did not recollect ever having felt
envious of his successful rivals; "nor did my winning many a prize from my
friend Birch," said he, "ever lessen his friendship for me."

3. In support of the truth of this, a friend who was present related an
anecdote which had fallen under his own notice in a school in his
neighborhood.

4. At this school the sons of several wealthy farmers, and others, who
were poorer, received instruction. Frank listened with great attention
while the gentleman gave the following account of the two rivals:

5. It happened that the son of a rich farmer and the son of a poor widow
came in competition for the head of their class. They were so nearly equal
that the teacher could scarcely decide between them; some days one, and
some days the other, gained the head of the class. It was determined by
seeing who should be at the head of the class for the greater number of
days in the week.

6. The widow's son, by the last day's trial, gained the victory, and kept
his place the following week, till the school was dismissed for the
holidays.

7. When they met again the widow's son did not appear, and the farmer's
son, being next to him, might now have been at the head of his class.
Instead of seizing the vacant place, however, he went to the widow's house
to inquire what could be the cause of her son's absence.

8. Poverty was the cause; the poor woman found that she was not able, with
her utmost efforts, to continue to pay for the tuition and books of her
son, and so he, poor fellow! had been compelled to give up his schooling,
and to return to labor for her support.

9. The farmer's son, out of the allowance of pocket money which his father
gave him, bought all the necessary books and paid for the tuition of his
rival. He also permitted him to be brought back again to the head of his
class, where he continued for some time, at the expense of his generous
rival.


DEFINITIONS.--Em-u-la'tion, rivalry, contest. 1. Com-pe-ti'tion, rivalry.
2. Ex-celled', surpassed, exceeded in good qualities. Ri'vals, those who
pursue the same thing. 3. An'ec-dote, a short story. 8. Tu-i'tion, payment
for teaching.


EXERCISES.--What is the subject of this lesson? What do you mean by
emulation? What is envy? What story is told about the two rivals? Is it
right to envy any person?



XLIX. THE SANDPIPER. (134)
By CELIA THAXTER.

1. Across the lonely beach we flit,
     One little sandpiper and I,
   And fast I gather, bit by bit,
     The scattered driftwood, bleached and dry.
   The wild waves reach their hands for it,
     The wild wind raves, the tide runs high,
   As up and down the beach we flit,
     One little sandpiper and I.

2. Above our heads the sullen clouds
     Scud, black and swift, across the sky;
   Like silent ghosts in misty shrouds
     Stand out the white lighthouses high.
   Almost as far as eye can reach
     I see the close-reefed vessels fly,
   As fast we flit across the beach,
     One little sandpiper and I.

3. I watch him as he skims along,
     Uttering his sweet and mournful cry;
   He starts not at my fitful song,
     Nor flash of fluttering drapery.
   He has no thought of any wrong,
     He scans me with a fearless eye;
   Stanch friends are we, well-tried and strong,
     The little sandpiper and I.

4. Comrade, where wilt thou be to-night,
     When the loosed storm breaks furiously?
   My driftwood fire will burn so bright!
     To what warm shelter canst thou fly?
   I do not fear for thee, though wroth
     The tempest rushes through the sky;
   For are we not God's children both,
     Thou, little sandpiper, and I?


DEFINITIONS.--l. Sand'pi-per, a bird of the snipe family, found along the
seacoast. Drift'wood. wood tossed on shore by the waves. Bleached,
whitened. Tide, the regular rise and fall of the ocean which occurs twice
in a little over twenty-four hours. 2. Scud, fly hastily. Shrouds, Winding
sheets, dresses of the dead. Close'reefed, with sails contracted as much
as possible. 3. Fit'ful, irregularly variable. Draper-y, garments. Scans,
looks at care-fully. Stanch, firm. 4. Wroth, angry.



L. THE RIGHT WAY. (136)

Adapted from a story by Frank H. Stockton. He was born at Philadelphia,
April 5, 1834, and when quite a young boy used to write stories for his
own pleasure. He was once a designer and engraver on wood, and afterwards
an editor; but he now devotes himself entirely to writing, not only for
young but also for grown people.

1. "O Andy!" said little Jenny Murdock, "I'm so glad you came along this
way. I can't get over."

2. "Can't get over?" said Andrew. "Why what's the matter?"

3. "The bridge is gone," said Jenny. "When I came across after breakfast
it was there, and now it's over on the other side, and how can I get back
home?"

4. "Why, so it is," said Andrew. "It was all right when I came over a
little while ago, but old Donald pulls it on the other side every morning
after he has driven his cows across, and I don't think he has any right to
do it. I suppose he thinks the bridge was made for him and his cows."

5. "Now I must go down to the big bridge, Andy, and I want you to go with
me. I'm afraid to go through all those dark woods by myself," said Jenny.

6. "But I can't go, Jenny," said Andrew, "it's nearly school time now."

7. Andrew was a Scotch boy, and a fine fellow. He was next to the head of
his school, and he was as good at play as he was at his book.

8. Jenny Murdock, his most particular friend, was a little girl who lived
very near Andrew's home. She had no brothers or sisters, but Andrew had
always been as good as a brother to her; and, therefore, when she stood by
the water's edge that morning, just ready to burst into tears, she thought
all her troubles over when she saw Andrew coming along the road.

9. He had always helped her out of her troubles before, and she saw no
reason why he should not do it now. She had crossed the creek in search of
wild flowers, and when she wished to return had found the bridge removed,
as Andrew supposed, by old Donald McKensie, who pastured his cows on this
side of the creek.

10. This stream was not very wide, nor very deep at its
edges, but the center it was four or five feet deep; and in the
spring the water ran very swiftly, so that wading across it,
either by cattle or men, was quite a difficult undertaking. As
for Jenny, she could not get across at all without a bridge,
and there was none nearer than the wagon bridge, a mile and
a half below.

11. "You will go with me, Andy, won't you?" said the little girl.

12. "And be late to school?" said he. "I have not been late yet, you know,
Jenny."

13. "Perhaps Dominie Black will think you have been sick or had to mind
the cows," said Jenny.

14. "He won't think so unless I tell him," said Andrew, "and you know I
won't do that."

15. "If we were to run all the way, would you be too late?" said Jenny.

16. "If we were to run all the way to the bridge, and I were to run all
the way back, I should not get to school till after copy time. I expect
every minute to hear the school bell ring," said Andrew.

17. "But what can I do, then?" said poor little Jenny. "I can't wait here
till school's out, and I don't want to go up to the schoolhouse, for all
the boys to laugh at me."

18. "No," said Andrew, reflecting very seriously, "I must take you home
some way or other. It won't do to leave you here, and, no matter where you
might stay, your mother would be very much troubled about you."

19. "Yes," said Jenny, "she would think I was drowned."

20. Time pressed, and Jenny's countenance became more and more overcast,
but Andrew could think of no way in which he could take the little girl
home without being late and losing his standing in the school.

21. It was impossible to get her across the stream at any place nearer
than the "big bridge;" he would not take her that way, and make up a false
story to account for his lateness at school, and he could not leave her
alone or take her with him.

22. What was to be done? While several absurd and impracticable plans were
passing through his brain, the school bell began to ring, and he must
start immediately to reach the schoolhouse in time.

23. And now his anxiety and perplexity became more intense than ever; and
Jenny, looking up into his troubled countenance, began to cry.

24. Andrew, who had never before failed to be at the school door before
the first tap of the bell, began to despair. Was there nothing to be done?

25. Yes! a happy thought passed through his mind. How strange that he
should not have thought of it before! He would ask Dominie Black to let
him take Jenny home. What could be more sensible and straightforward than
such a plan?

26. Of course, the good old schoolmaster gave Andrew the desired
permission, and everything ended happily. But the best thing about the
whole affair was the lesson that the young Scotch boy learned that day.

27. The lesson was this: when we are puzzling our brains with plans to
help ourselves out of trouble, let us always stop a moment in our
planning, and try to think if there is not some simple way out of the
difficulty, which shall be in every respect perfectly right. If we do
this, we shall probably find a way more easy and satisfactory than any
which we can devise.


DEFINITIONS.--8. Par-tic'u-lar, not ordinary, worthy of partic-ular
attention, chief. 13. Dom'i-nie, the Scotch name for school-master. 18.
Re-flect'ing, thinking earnestly. 20 Over-cast', cov-ered with gloom. 21.
Ac-count', to state the reasons. 22. Im--prac'ti-ca-ble, not possible. 23.
Anx-i'e-ty, care, trouble of mind. 27. De-vise', plan, contrive.


EXERCISES.--Why could not Jenny cross the stream? Whom did she ask to help
her? What can you tell about Andrew? Who was Jenny Murdock? What did Jenny
wish Andrew to do? Why could he not go with her? Would it have been right
for Andrew to have told an untruth even to help Jenny out of trouble? What
did he finally do? What does this lesson teach us to do in case of
trouble?



LI. THE GOLDEN RULE. (139)

1. To act with integrity and good faith was such a habit with Susan that
she had never before thought of examining the Golden Rule: "All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." But
the longer she reflected upon it, the stronger was her conviction that she
did not always obey the precept; at length, she appealed to her mother for
its meaning.

2. "It implies," said her mother, "in the first place, a total destruction
of all selfishness: for a man who loves himself better than his neighbors,
can never do to others as he would have others do to him. We are bound not
only to do, but to feel, toward others as we would have others feel toward
us. Remember, it is much easier to reprove the sin of others than to
overcome temptation when it assails ourselves.

3. "A man may be perfectly honest and yet very selfish; but the command
implies something more than mere honesty; it requires charity as well as
integrity. The meaning of the command is fully explained in the parable of
the Good Samaritan. The Levite, who passed by the wounded man without
offering him assistance, may have been a man of great honesty; but he did
not do unto the poor stranger as he would have wished others to do unto
him."

4. Susan pondered carefully and seriously on what her mother had said.
When she thought over her past conduct, a blush of shame crept to her
cheeks, and a look of sorrow into her eyes, as many little acts of
selfishness and unkindness came back to her memory. She resolved that for
the future, both in great things and small, she would remember and follow
the Golden Rule.

5. It was not long after this that an opportunity occurred of trying
Susan's principles. One Saturday evening when she went, as usual, to
farmer Thompson's inn, to receive the price of her mother's washing for
the boarders, which amounted to five dollars, she found the farmer in the
stable yard.

6. He was apparently in a terrible rage with some horse dealers with whom
he had been bargaining. He held in his hand an open pocketbook, full of
bills; and scarcely noticing the child as she made her request, except to
swear at her, as usual, for troubling him when he was busy, he handed her
a bank note.

7. Glad to escape so easily, Susan hurried out of the gate, and then,
pausing to pin the money safely in the folds of her shawl, she discovered
that he had given her two bills instead of one. She looked around; nobody
was near to share her discovery; and her first impulse was joy at the
unexpected prize.

8. "It is mine, all mine," said she to herself; "I will buy
mother a new cloak with it, and she can give her old one to
sister Mary, and then Mary can go to the Sunday school with
me next winter. I wonder if it will not buy a pair of shoes for
brother Tom, too."

9. At that moment she remembered that he must have given it to her by
mistake; and therefore she had no right to it. But again the voice of the
tempter whispered, "He gave it, and how do you know that he did not intend
to make you a present of it? Keep it; he will never know it, even if it
should be a mistake; for he had too many such bills in that great
pocketbook to miss one."

10. While this conflict was going on in her mind between good and evil,
she was hurrying homeward as fast as possible. Yet, before she came in
sight of her home, she had repeatedly balanced the comforts which the
money would buy against the sin of wronging her neighbor.

11. As she crossed the little bridge over the narrow creek before her
mother's door, her eye fell upon a rustic seat which they had occupied
during the conversation I have before narrated. Instantly the words of
Scripture, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them," sounded in her ears like a trumpet.

12. Turning suddenly round, as if flying from some unseen peril, the child
hastened along the road with breathless speed until she found herself once
more at farmer Thompson's gate. "What do you want now?" asked the gruff
old fellow, as he saw her again at his side.

13. "Sir, you paid me two bills, instead of one," said she, trembling in
every limb. "Two bills? did I? let me see; well, so I did; but did you
just find it out? Why did you not bring it back sooner?" Susan blushed and
hung her head.

14. "You wanted to keep it, I suppose," said he. "Well, I am glad your
mother was more honest than you, or I should have been five dollars poorer
and none the wiser." "My mother knows nothing about it, sir," said Susan;
"I brought it back before I went home."

15. The old man looked at the child, and, as he saw the tears rolling down
her checks, he seemed touched by her distress. Putting his band in his
pocket, he drew out a shilling and offered it to her.

16. "No, sir, I thank you," sobbed she; "I do not want to be paid for
doing right; I only wish you would not think me dishonest, for, indeed, it
was a sore temptation. Oh! sir, if you had ever seen those you love best
wanting the common comforts of life, you would know how hard it is for us
always to do unto others as we would have others do unto us,"

17. The heart of the selfish man was touched. "There be things which are
little upon the earth, but they are exceeding wise," murmured he, as he
bade the little girl good night, and entered his house a sadder, and, it
is to be hoped, a better man. Susan returned to her humble home with a
lightened heart, and through the course of a long and useful life she
never forgot her first temptation.


DEFINITIONS.--1. In-teg'ri-ty, honesty, uprightness. Con-vic'tion, strong
belief. Ap-pealed', referred to. 2. Temp-ta'tion, that which has a
tendency to induce one to do wrong. As-sails', attacks. 10. Con'flict,
struggle. Bal'anced, weighed, compared. 12. Gruff, rough. 17. Mur'mured,
spoke in a low voice. Light'ened, made cheerful or lighter.


EXERCISES.--What is the Golden Rule? What does it imply? Can a man be
perfectly honest and still not follow the Golden Rule? What parable is a
perfect illustration of its meaning? How was Susan tempted? What did she
first think of doing? What changed her intention? Relate what happened
when she returned the money. What effect did her action have?



LII. THE SNOW MAN. (143)
By Marian Douglas.

1. Look! how the clouds are flying south!
     The winds pipe loud and shrill!
   And high above the white drifts stands
     The snow man on the hill.

2. Blow, wild wind from the icy north!
     Here's one who will not fear
   To feel thy coldest touch, or shrink
     Thy loudest blast to hear.

3. Proud triumph of the schoolboy's skill!
     Far rather would I be
   A winter giant, ruling o'er
     A frosty realm, like thee,

4. And stand amid the drifted snow,
     Like thee, a thing apart,
