anything. I see so many things that you don't see, and I can't get them
out of my head all day long."

"What sort of things?" asked the boy in surprise.

"Well, for instance, twice when we have been coming home from our
afternoon walk, we have met a man with a heavy shovel on his shoulder,
and you didn't notice him because you were so busy talking with Mrs.
Stanhope. The man looked down on the ground, just as father does when
he comes home at night all tired out and says, 'We shall hardly pull
through, if I work ever so hard; I'm afraid we can't keep out of debt.'
I'm sure that man is worried just as father was, and I keep thinking if
I could only go after him and find out where he lives, I might do him
some good, perhaps."

"But you mustn't do that," cried Fani, much horrified. "Don't you
remember how Mrs. Stanhope told us in the very beginning that we must
never go into any house where we didn't know the people? and that we
mustn't speak first to people we don't know, as we do at home? You must
not go and talk to that man. Do you hear, Elsli? Mrs. Stanhope would be
very angry with you."

Elsli thought for a while. Presently she said, "I do not believe that
Mrs. Stanhope meant that I should not speak to a poor man who is in
trouble, as this man is. She only meant that we mustn't talk with people
who ask us questions about where we came from and how we live at home. I
don't believe she meant people like this man at all."

"Oh, Elsli, you can't make distinctions, that way," said Fani,
impatiently. "All we have to do is to mind what we are told, and not
speak to strange people or go to their houses. Now let's talk about
something else; this sort of talk is tiresome. Come here; I'll show you
something."

The children sat down again side by side on the stone bench, with their
heads close together, and Fani took something out of his pocket which
they both examined carefully. It was a small, nicely painted landscape,
in fresh bright colors. Elsli studied it silently.

"Do you see what it is?" asked Fani.

"Yes, indeed, I knew it at the first glance. It is Rosemount; there are
the roses and the linden trees. How beautifully you have done it, Fani!
Won't Emma be delighted when she sees it, and surprised too? I'm sure
she has no idea that you can paint so well!"

"I'm so glad she is coming," cried the lad, and his face glowed with
pleasure. "There is no one that I can talk with about being a painter as
I can with her. She understands just how I feel, and is as much
interested in it as I am myself."

"Are you still bent on being an artist?" asked Elsli.

"Yes, indeed, more and more. Every day, and after every drawing lesson,
I care about it more than ever before. I don't say anything about it,
because I see that Mrs. Stanhope doesn't like the idea. You see, Elsli,
she means to keep us with her all our lives, just as if we were her own
children. I'm sure of it, from a great many things that she has said. We
can stay here just as long as we don't do anything to displease her, and
of course we sha'n't do that. Several times when I've said that I should
like to be a painter, Mrs. Stanhope has said that it was a very good
profession for persons who had no home, and were obliged to live alone,
and could travel as much as they pleased in foreign countries. She said
I might paint at Rosemount as much as I chose, but that I must not make
it my business, because then I should have to go away to live. So you
see that she is quite decided that we are to stay here."

Elsli shook her head.

"I don't know, Fani. It seems to me that we don't belong here in this
beautiful house. Don't you feel so too, Fani? Somehow as if we were only
here on a visit, and that to-morrow we might be going away again."

"There you are again with the old story," said Fani, rather vexed, for
this doubt was very distasteful to him.

The time which they had to spend in the garden was now over, and hand in
hand they passed back up the white pebbly path, and by the sweet-scented
rose-beds, and entered the hall, which stood with wide-open doors on the
garden side.




CHAPTER II.

A JOURNEY.


Great was the excitement in the doctor's house at Buchberg. July had
come at last, and the long-looked-for journey was at hand. Only one more
day! The big trunk was packed and locked and placed in the lower hall,
ready to go. Now there were only the hand-bags and satchels to be filled
with the last needful articles. This task was not so easy as one might
expect, however. On the contrary, mother and aunty found it the most
difficult part of the whole. For the three older children had received
permission to choose each the things which he wanted most to fill up his
own bag, with the express understanding that these must be _useful_
things. But the three had their own definitions of "useful." So they
worked with all their might, running, breathless, up stairs and down,
loaded with most extraordinary articles, most of which were rejected by
the packers as utterly unsuitable, and consigned to the places whence
they came.

Fred came first with four great boxes under each arm, which were tied up
with so many strings, that no accident could have opened them if they
had gone all the way round the world. These he brought to his aunt,
while Emma was, at the same time, pressing upon her mother a heavy roll,
which she had brought under one arm, and an enormous package which she
could scarcely carry.

"Those can't go, Fred," said his aunt, decidedly. "I couldn't possibly
get those eight boxes into this bag, and what's the use? You certainly
can't need whatever there is in them."

"Yes, I do, aunty; six of them are full of living creatures which I must
carry with me to take care of them, or they would all die. The other two
have in them specimens of beetles and snails and other things of the
same kinds as those I expect to find near the Rhine, but, of course,
they are somewhat different, and I want to carry these to compare with
those, don't you see, aunty? Perhaps if we squeeze the boxes with all
our might we can get them in, except those that have the live
creatures."

"No, Fred, it can't be done," said his aunt, kindly. "Take them back
into your room; and you needn't be in the least anxious. I'll take care
of the live ones while you are gone, and, as to the others, when you
want to compare any of them with what you find, write to me about it,
and I will send you as good a description as I can make."

Meantime, Mrs. Stein had been gazing in despair at the two huge,
misshapen packages which Emma had placed upon the table to be put into
her hand-bag.

"What have you in that big roll? It is too large to go even into the
trunk! What are you thinking about?" she cried.

"Oh, mamma, can't they be tied on the outside of the bag? I could carry
them all together myself. I do want to take them with me so much. In the
roll are ever so many drawing-copies, such as we had at school, and some
that were given us on the Christmas-tree. Fani spoke of them in one of
his letters, and I'm sure he'll be delighted to have them. I put in all
ours, and I borrowed some from the master, who said I could have them if
I would take great care of them and bring them safely back again."

"What foolishness, Emma! You seem to forget that, for the last year,
Fani has had his own drawing-teacher, who gives his pupils what he
thinks best for them to copy, and, doubtless, has plenty of patterns of
all kinds. So take the roll away; it would be absurd to carry it. And
that hideous bundle, what is in it? It is twice too big to go in here."

"I was afraid it would be," said Emma, rather crestfallen. "But I
thought I could carry it in my lap, and, really, I must take it, mamma.
It is that book which I chose for a Christmas present, you know; the
'Lives of Distinguished Painters.' I want to carry it for Fani to read;
and, for fear of hurting the handsome binding, I wrapped it up in two
petticoats and a waterproof cloak and a small table-cloth, and then I
put some enamel-cloth outside the whole."

"You do get hold of most unfortunate ideas, my child! we shall never
get ready at this rate. Come, we'll take the book out of all these
wrappings, and then perhaps we can get it in. But you haven't brought
anything that you really need, though you have had such a long time to
think about it all. And here aunty and I are standing waiting and can't
get through, because you have nothing ready for us."

At this moment aunty exclaimed, in a tone of alarm:--

"For pity's sake, Oscar! what is that that you are tugging along?"

With a tremendous racket Oscar came into the room, dragging behind him a
drum, which he could not carry, because in one hand he had a large bunch
of bells and in the other a harmonica and a flute.

"Oscar dear, your own good-sense can tell you that you can't get a drum
into this bag; to say nothing of the other instruments. What in the
world do you want with them? Mrs. Stanhope wouldn't thank you for such
music!"

"It isn't for the house, aunty," answered the boy. "It is for the
festival out-of-doors. I've taken only Fred's small drum, because mine
is too large. See if it won't go in here!" and Oscar measured the drum
against his travelling-bag, only to be compelled to acknowledge that it
was too large by half. The bells, too, had to be laid aside, though the
boy complained that they were absolutely needed to call the guests
together at the festival.

"Whose flute is that?" asked the aunt; "it is a beauty."

"It belongs to Feklitus. He is learning to play on it; and he was glad
enough to lend it to me, because while it's gone he can't be made to
practise!"

Mother and aunt agreed that the flute must not be packed without the
consent of Feklitus' parents.

Fred came now with an armful of articles of various kinds for his bag,
and behind him appeared Kathri, saying:--

"Mrs. Bickel wants to see Mrs. Stein."

"This isn't a very good time to choose," said Mrs. Stein, with a sigh.
"I shall have to leave this all to you," she added, turning to her
sister; "and, children, you really must make up your minds what is
necessary to take, and not bring all sorts of useless stuff, that only
has to be carried back again."

With these words Mrs. Stein went into the room where her guest was
sitting. It was easy to see that Mrs. Bickel had something very
important on her mind. She had on her fine red and yellow shawl, and on
her hat a bunch of large white feathers, higher and bushier than Mrs.
Stein had ever seen in her life. The doctor's wife greeted her guest
with the fervent though unspoken hope that that lady would immediately
unfold the object of her coming, so that the visit might speedily come
to a close, and she herself go back to her children's packing. Not so;
Mrs. Bickel opened the conversation with a remark upon the weather,
which she thought was growing worse and worse. Mrs. Stein agreed with
her. Then followed "the cherries"; they had not ripened well this
summer. From "cherries" she came to "apples," a natural association of
ideas. Mrs. Stein burned with impatience. Her mind would run on the
travelling-bags. Could aunty pack them alone? Would not the most
important things be left out, after all, and a great many useless ones
put in? That reminded her of the flute, and she hastened to ask whether
Feklitus had his parents' permission to lend it. This gave Mrs. Bickel
the opening she had been wanting. She said that it was a good thing that
Oscar wanted to take the flute; for her husband had decided to let
Feklitus take the trip to the Rhine; and he could play on the flute to
Mrs. Stanhope; all the more, because none of the doctor's children were
musical.

She and Mr. Bickel thought, too, that it would be pleasant for their son
to be there with the others, and that it would show people that the
doctor's children had other and better acquaintances at home than the
two poor children whom Mrs. Stanhope had taken with her.

But here Mrs. Stein interrupted the stream of words to say that there
was no occasion for that, as Mrs. Stanhope had seen for herself that
Fani and Elsli were her children's most intimate friends. She then
inquired whether Mrs. Bickel wished Feklitus to go with her children.

Mrs. Bickel declared that she should not think of such a thing as that.
In that case Mrs. Stanhope would naturally ask him to stay at her house,
which of course they would not allow; as if he could not afford to pay
for his lodging! But she would be glad if Oscar would write as soon as
convenient and tell Feklitus the best way to go, and also find out the
chief hotel in the neighborhood. Then, if Oscar would meet him on his
arrival, and show him the way to it, Feklitus would take a room there,
and spend the time between meals with the children at Mrs. Stanhope's.
His father meant to go himself very soon to visit his young relatives,
as it was only proper that he should do; and he would bring the boy
home.

Mrs. Stein listened patiently to this long discourse, but her thoughts
often wandered away into the next room, to aunty and the bags. How were
they getting on all this time?

She promised Mrs. Bickel that Oscar would do what she asked, and now
she hoped the visit was coming to a close. But there was more to ask.
How many suits of clothes did she think needed for such a journey? Would
six new ones be enough? Wouldn't it be well to fill one trunk entirely
with new shirts, so that they needn't be washed away from home; hotel
laundry work was so bad. Mrs. Stein only replied that she had not so
many suits to give her children, and that Mrs. Bickel must decide such
questions for herself.

It was growing dark before the visit came to an end, and Mrs. Stein
hastened back into the other room. The packing was done, and aunty had
gone away with Oscar. The other children were complaining that they
wanted her, and they didn't see why Oscar should keep her all to
himself.

Little Rikli had been watching all the preparations with the keenest
interest, and, as it turned out, with an unfortunate effect. For mother
and aunty, having decided that the child was too young to go so far from
home, had persuaded her, by the prospect of many delightful treats and
excursions with them, to make up her mind that she would far rather stay
at home, than go on this long, uncertain journey without them. But alas!
all this delightful stir of preparation had fascinated the child, and
completely changed her views on the subject. She was seized with a
desire to go too, and she suddenly burst into a loud scream, which
increased every instant under Emma's scolding, and was only intensified
by Fred's taunting song:--

    "Hanseli is a cry-baby,
      Rikli is another;
    She's so exactly like him,
      He must be her brother."

In the midst of this hubbub, the mother entered, and at once interposed
her tranquillizing influence. She lifted Rikli from the floor, where she
sat in the midst of the luggage, and called the other two to sit quietly
down at her side. On this last evening, she said, she wanted to have a
little peaceful time with them; and Emma and Fred were very glad to
consult her about the various questions which lay on their minds, which
they had meant to ask aunty about, when Oscar so unceremoniously usurped
her.

As Rikli listened to the conversation which followed, and learned how
many things her brother and sister were in doubt about,--as to their
behavior in Mrs. Stanhope's house, and what they should say and do
there, and what they could not,--she made up her mind that it was far
better for her to stay quietly at home with her mother and aunty; and
the prospect of walks and drives with them, and of the biggest share of
all the cherry and apple cakes, seemed more attractive than the very
doubtful circumstances in which the others would be placed. So Rikli
became quite reconciled to her lot, and was in good-humor again.

Oscar had meantime led his aunt into an unused bedroom on the ground
floor, and, having locked the door for farther security from
interruption, he announced that he had something very important to
consult her about. He had been all winter hunting for suitable mottoes
for his new banner, and had pressed so many friends into the service,
that he had collected no fewer than thirty-five beautiful mottoes, any
one of which would have been perfectly satisfactory. From such wealth it
seemed impossible to choose, yet some choice must be made. One banner
would hold only one motto, and even Oscar, with all his enthusiasm,
could scarcely hope to have thirty-five banners for the sake of using
them all. Aunty must help him decide, and already before this last
afternoon they had had at least a dozen consultations on the subject, in
which they had gradually succeeded in reducing the number of candidates
to three. And now the final selection must be made, and Oscar and his
aunt could not agree upon it. His aunt wanted him to make his own
choice, but he was not willing to decide against her opinion; yet he
could not give up his own; he hoped by farther argument to bring her
over to his side.

"Now, aunty," he said, when the door was safely locked, "we must settle
this about the motto. I will repeat them all three over again, and you
really must choose. First I'll say the one you like best:--

    "'Drums beat and banners fly
      Our Festival to grace;
    Long live all men, we cry;
      But guests we forward place.'

