charge than he did now. He was helpless here when death fell like hail
from the skies, and he quivered in every muscle as he waited. A crash
came again, but the bomb had struck farther away, then a third, and a
fourth, each farther and farther in its turn, and Bougainville suddenly
uttered a shout that was full of vengeance and exultation.

John looked up. The group of black specks was still in the sky, but
another group was hovering near, and clapping his glasses to his eyes he
saw flashes of light passing between them.

"You're right, Bougainville! you're right!" he cried, although
Bougainville had not said a word. "The French flyers have come and
there's a fight in the air!"

He forgot all about the battle on earth, while he watched the combat in
the heavens. Yet it was an affair of only a few moments. The Germans
evidently feeling that they were too far away from their base, soon
retreated. One of their machines turned over on its side and fell like a
shot through space.

John shuddered, took the glasses down, and, by impulse, closed his eyes.
He heard a shock near him, and, opening his eyes again, saw a huddled
mass of wreckage, from which a foot encased in a broad German shoe
protruded. The ribs of the plane were driven deep into the earth and he
looked away. But a hum and swish suddenly came once more, and a sleek
and graceful aeroplane, which he knew to be the _Arrow_, sank to the
earth close to him. Lannes, smiling and triumphant, stepped forth and
John hailed him eagerly.

"I met Caumartin in an aerial road," said Lannes, in his best dramatic
manner, "and he described this place, at which you were waiting. As it
was directly on my way I concluded to come by for you. I was delayed by
a skirmish overhead which you may have seen."

"Yes, I saw it, or at least part of it."

"I came in at the end only. The Taubes were too presuming. They came
over into our air, but we repelled the attack, and one, as I can see
here, will never come again. I found General Vaugirard, although he is
now two or three miles to your right, and when I deliver a message that
he has given me I return. But I take you with me now."

John was overjoyed, but he would part from Bougainville with regret.

"Philip," he said, "here is Pierre Louis Bougainville, whom I met that
day on Montmartre. All the officers of this regiment have been killed
and by grace of courage and intuition he now leads it better than it was
ever led before."

Lannes extended his hand. Bougainville's met it, and the two closed in
the clasp of those who knew, each, that the other was a man. Then a drum
began to beat, and Bougainville, waving his sword aloft, led his
regiment forward again with a rush. But the _Arrow_, with a hard push
from the last of the soldiers, was already rising, Lannes at the
steering rudder and John in his old place.

"You can find your cap and coat in the locker," said Lannes without
looking back, and John put them on quickly. His joy and eagerness were
not due to flight from the field of battle, because the heavens
themselves were not safe, but because he could look down upon this field
on which the nations struggled and, to some extent, behold and measure
it with his own eyes.

The _Arrow_ rose slowly, and John leaned back luxuriously in his seat.
He had a singular feeling that he had come back home again. The sharp,
acrid odor that assailed eye and nostril departed and the atmosphere
grew rapidly purer. The rolling waves of air from the concussion of the
guns became much less violent, and soon ceased entirely. All the smoke
floated below him, while above the heavens were a shining blue,
unsullied by the dust and flame of the conflict.

"Do you go far, Philip?" John asked.

"Forty miles. I could cover the distance quickly in the _Arrow_, but on
such a day as this I can't be sure of finding at once the man for whom
I'm looking. Besides, we may meet German planes. You've your automatic
with you?"

"I'm never without it. I'm ready to help if they come at us. I've been
through so much today that I've become blunted to fear."

"I don't think we'll meet an enemy, but we must be armed and watchful."

John had not yet looked down, but he knew that the _Arrow_ was rising
high. The thunder of the battle died so fast that it became a mere
murmur, and the air was thin, pure and cold. When he felt that the
_Arrow_ had reached its zenith he put the glasses to his eyes and looked
over.

He saw a world spouting fire. Along a tremendous line curved and broken,
thousands of cannon great and small were flashing, and for miles and
miles a continuous coil of whitish smoke marked where the riflemen were
at work. Near the center of the line he saw a vast mass of men advancing
and he spoke of it to Lannes.

"I've seen it already," said the Frenchman. "That's where a great force
of ours is cutting in between the German armies. It's the movement that
has saved France, and the mind that planned it was worth a million men
to us today."

"I can well believe it. Now I see running between the hills a shining
ribbon which I take to be a river."

"That's the Marne. If we can, we'll drive the Germans back across it.
Search the skies that way and see if you can find any of the Taubes."

"I see some black specks which I take to be the German planes, but they
don't grow."

"Which indicates that they're not coming any nearer. They've had enough
of us for the present and it's to their interest too to keep over their
own army now. What do you see beneath us?"

"A great multitude of troops, French, as I can discern the uniform, and
by Jove, Lannes, I can trace far beyond the towers and spires of Paris!"

"I knew you could. It marks how near the Germans have come to the
capital, but they'll come no nearer. The great days of the French have
returned, and we'll surely drive them upon the Marne."

"Suppose we fly a little lower, Lannes. Then we can get a better view of
the field as we go along."

"I'll do as you say, John. I rose so high, because I thought attack here
was less possible, but as no enemy is in sight we'll drop down."

The _Arrow_ sank gradually, and now both could get a splendid view of a
spectacle, such as no man had ever beheld until that day. The sounds of
battle were still unheard, but they clearly saw the fire of the cannon,
the rapid-firers, and the rifles. It was like a red streak running in
curves and zigzags across fifty or maybe a hundred miles of country.

"We continue to cut in," said Lannes. "You can see how our armies off
there are marching into that great open space between the Germans.
Unless the extreme German army hastens it will be separated entirely
from the rest. Oh, what a day! What a glorious, magnificent day! A day
unlike any other in the world's story! Our heads in the dust in the
morning and high in the air by night!"

"But we haven't won yet?"

"No, but we are winning enough to know that we will win."

"How many men do you think are engaged in that battle below?"

"Along all its windings two millions, maybe, or at least a million and a
half anyhow. Perhaps nobody will ever know."

Then they relapsed into silence for a little while. The _Arrow_ flew
fast and the motor drummed steadily in their ears. Lannes let the
aeroplane sink a little lower, and John became conscious of a new sound,
akin nevertheless to the throb of the motor. It was the concussion of
the battle. The topmost and weakest waves of air hurled off in circles
by countless cannon and rifles were reaching them. But they had been
softened so much by distance that the sound was not unpleasant, and the
_Arrow_ rocked gently as if touched by a light wind.

John never ceased to watch with his glasses, and in a few minutes he
announced that men in gray were below.

"I expected that," said Lannes. "This battle line, as you know, is far
from straight, and, in order to reach our destination in the quickest
time possible, we must pass over a portion of the German army, an
extended corner or angle as it were. What are they doing there, John?"

"Firing about fifty cannon as fast as they can. Back of the cannon is a
great huddle of motors and of large automobile trucks, loaded, I should
say, with ammunition."

"You're quite sure of what you say?" asked Lannes, after a silence of a
moment or two.

"Absolutely sure. I fancy that it's an ammunition depot."

"Then, John, you and I must take a risk. We are to deliver a message,
but we can't let go an opportunity like this. You recall how you threw
the bombs on the forty-two centimeter. I have more bombs here in the
_Arrow_--I never fly now without 'em--little fellows, but tremendously
powerful. I shall dip and when we're directly over the ammunition depot
drop the bombs squarely into the middle of it."

"I'm ready," said John, feeling alternate thrills of eagerness and
horror, "but Philip, don't you go so near that if the depot blows up it
will blow us up too."

"Never fear," said Lannes, laughing, not with amusement but with
excitement, "I've no more wish to be scattered through the firmament
than you have. Besides, we've that message to deliver. Do you think the
Germans have noticed us?"

"No, a lot of smoke from their cannon fire has gathered above them and
perhaps it veils us. Besides, their whole attention must be absorbed by
the French army, and I don't think it likely that they're looking up."

"But they're bound to see us soon. We have one great advantage, however.
The target is much larger than the forty-two centimeter was, and there
are no Taubes or dirigibles here to drive us off. Ready now, John, and
when I touch the bottom of my loop you throw the bombs. Here they are!"

Four bombs were pushed to John's side and they lay ready to his grasp.
Then as the _Arrow_ began its downward curve, he laid his glasses aside
and watched. The most advanced German batteries were placed in a pit,
into which a telephone wire ran. Evidently these guns, like the French,
were fired by order from some distant point. John longed to hurl a bomb
at the pit, but the chances were ten to one that he would miss it, and
he held to the ammunition depot, spread over a full acre, as his target.

Now the Germans saw them. He knew it, as many of them looked up, and
some began to fire at the _Arrow_, but the aeroplane was too high and
swift for their bullets.

"Now!" said Lannes in sudden, sharp tones.

The aeroplane dipped with sickening velocity, but John steadied himself,
and watching his chance he threw four bombs so fast that the fourth had
left his hands before the first touched the ground. An awful, rending
explosion followed, and for a minute the _Arrow_ rocked violently, as if
in a hurricane. Then, as the waves of air decreased in violence, it
darted upward on an even keel.

John saw far below a vast scene of wreckage, amid which lay many dead or
wounded men. Motors were blown to pieces and cannon dismounted.

"Score heavily for us," said Lannes. "I scarcely hoped for such a goodly
blow as this while we were on our way!"

John would not look down again. Despite the value of the deed, he
shuddered and he was glad when the _Arrow_ in its swift flight had left
the area of devastation far behind.

"We're flying over the French now," he said. "So I expected," said
Lannes. "Can you see a hill crested with a low farm house?"

"Yes," replied John, after looking a little while. "It's straight ahead.
The house is partly hidden by trees."

"Then that's the place. You wouldn't think we'd come nearly fifty miles,
would you, John?"

"Fifty miles! It feels more like a thousand!"

Lannes laughed, this time with satisfaction, not excitement.

"You'll find there the general to whom we reported first," he said, "and
he'll be glad to see us! I can't tell you how glad he will be. His joy
will be far beyond our personal deserts. It will have little to do with
the fact that you, John Scott, and I, Philip Lannes, have come back to
him."

The circling _Arrow_ came down in a meadow just behind the house, and
officers rushed forward to meet it. Lannes and John, stepping out, left
it in charge of two of the younger men. Then, proudly waving the others
aside, they walked to the low stone farmhouse, in front of which the
elderly, spectacled general was standing. He looked at Lannes
inquiringly, but the young Frenchman, without a word, handed him a note.

John watched the general read, and he saw the transformation of the
man's face. Doubting, anxious, worn, it was illumined suddenly. In a
voice that trembled he said to the senior officers who clustered about
him:

"We're advancing in the center, and on the other flank. Already we've
driven a huge wedge between the German armies, and Paris, nay, France
herself, is saved!"

The officers, mostly old men, did not cheer, but John had never before
witnessed such relief expressed on human faces. It seemed to him that
they had choked up, and could not speak. The commander held the note in
a shaking hand and presently he turned to Lannes.

"Your fortune has been great. It's not often that one has a chance to
bear such a message as this."

"My pride is so high I can't describe it," said Lannes in a dramatic but
sincere tone.

"Go in the house and an orderly will give food and wine to you and your
comrade. In a half hour, perhaps, I may have another message for you."

Both John and Lannes needed rest and food, and they obeyed gladly. The
strain upon the two was far greater than they had realized at the time,
and for a few moments they were threatened with collapse which very
strong efforts of the will prevented. They were conscious, too, as they
stood upon the ground, of a quivering, shaking motion. They were
assailed once more by the violent waves of air coming from the
concussion of cannon and rifles past counting. The thin, whitish film
which was a compound of dust and burned gunpowder assailed them again
and lay, bitter, in their mouths and nostrils.

"The earth shakes too much," said Lannes in a droll tone. "I think we'd
better go back into the unchanging ether, where a man can be sure of
himself."

"I'm seasick," said John; "who wouldn't be, with ten thousand cannon,
more or less, and a million or two of rifles shaking the planet? I'm
going into the house as fast as I can."

It was a building, centuries old, of gray crumbling stone, with large,
low rooms, and, to John's amazement, the peasant who inhabited it and
his family were present. The farmer and his wife, both strong and dark,
were about forty, and there were four children, the oldest a girl of
about thirteen. What fear they may have felt in the morning was gone
now, and, as they knew that the French army was advancing, a joy,
reserved but none the less deep, had taken its place.

John and Lannes sat down at a small table covered with a neat white
cloth, and Madame, walking quickly and lightly, served them with bread,
cold meat and light red wine. The smaller children hovered in the
background and looked curiously at the young foreigner who wore the
French uniform.

"May I ask your name, Madame?" John asked politely.

"Poiret," she said. "My man is Jules Poiret, and this farm has been in
his family since the great revolution. You and your comrade came from
the air, as I saw, and you can tell us, can you not, whether the Poiret
farm is to become German or remain French? The enemy has been pushed
back today, but will he come so near to Paris again? Tell me truly, on
your soul, Monsieur!"

"I don't believe the Germans will ever again be so near to Paris,"
replied John with sincerity. "My friend, who is the great Philip Lannes,
the flying man, and I, have looked down upon a battle line fifty, maybe
a hundred miles long, and nearly everywhere the Germans are retreating."

She bent her head a little as she poured the coffee for them, but not
enough to hide the glitter in her eye. "Perhaps the good God intervened
at the last moment, as Father Hansard promised he would," she said
calmly. "At any rate, the Germans are gone. I gathered as much from
chance words of the generals--never before have so many generals
gathered under the Poiret roof, and it will never happen again--but I
