the mouth of the one where he went in and never came back. Not the
faintest squeak from its recesses has ever stirred the sensitive hairs
of my watchful ear. He must be starving, but not a nibble of the leather
have I heard. I doze, but I am ever on the alert. Nightmares
occasionally disturb me. I fancy I see him, made desperate by hunger,
creep anxiously to the mouth of the boot, pricking his tagged ear. Once
I had a terrible vision of his escaping, and of his tail as it vanished
round the corner.

But these are dreams. He has never returned, I suspect that the truth
is, that he had a fit from fright, in the toe of the boot, and is dead.
Some day Terence will shake out his skeleton.

It grows very cold. This place is full of draughts, and the floor is
damp.

He _must_ be dead. He never could have lasted so long without a move or
a nibble.

And it is tea-time. I think I shall join the Captain.

[Illustration]




THE HENS OF HENCASTLE.

(_Translated from the German of_ VICTOR BLUeTHGEN.)



What a hot, drowsy afternoon it was.

The blazing sun shone with such a glare upon the farmyard that it was
almost unbearable, and there was not a vestige of grass or any green
thing to relieve the eye or cast a little shade.

But the fowls in the back yard were not disturbed by the heat the least
bit in the world, for they had plenty of time in which to doze, and they
were fond of taking a _siesta_ in the hottest place that could be found.
Certainly the hottest place that afternoon, by far, was the yard in
which they reposed.

There were five of them--a cock and four hens. Two of the hens were
renowned throughout the whole village, for they wore tufts of feathers
on their heads instead of the usual red combs; and the cock was very
proud of having such distinguished-looking wives.

Besides which, he was naturally a very stately bird himself in
appearance, and had a splendid blackish-green tail and a golden speckled
hackle, which shone and glistened in the sun. He had also won many sharp
battles with certain young cocks in the neighbourhood, whom curiosity
about the tufted foreigners had attracted to the yard. The consequence
of these triumphs was that he held undisputed dominion as far as the
second fence from the farmyard, and whenever he shut his eyes and
sounded his war-clarion, the whole of his rivals made off as fast as
wings and legs could carry them.

So the five sat or stood by themselves in the yard, dozing in the
sunshine, and they felt bored.

During the middle of the day they had managed to get some winks of
sleep, but now the farmer's men began to thresh in a barn close by,
making noise enough to wake the dead, so there was small chance of
well-organized fowls being able to sleep through the din.

"I wish some one would tell a story," said one of the common hens, as
she ruffled all her feathers up on end, and then shook them straight
again, for coolness. "I am tired of scrabbling in the dust, and
fly-catching is an amusement only suited to sparrows and such vulgar
birds."

This was a hit at one of the foreign hens, who had wandered away a
little and was pecking at flies on the wall. The two common hens were
very fond of vexing the foreign ones, for their feelings were hurt at
being reckoned less beautiful and rare.

The tufted fair one heard the remark, and called out spitefully from a
distance: "If certain people were not ignorant country bumpkins, they
would be able to tell a good story themselves."

"That remark can't apply to me, for I know a great number of stories,"
replied the common hen, turning her head on one side to show her
contempt. "For instance: once upon a time there was a hen who laid
nothing but soft-shelled eggs--"

"You can't mean _me_ by that story," said the tufted one, "for I have
only laid one soft-shelled egg in my whole life. So there! But do tell
me how your interesting story ends--I am so anxious to hear the end."

"You know that best yourself," retorted the other.

"Now I'm sure, dear Father Cock, you could tell us something really
amusing if you would be so kind," said the second common hen, who was
standing near him. "Those two make one's life a burthen, with their
everlasting wrangling and bickering."

"Hush!" said the cock, who was standing motionless with one leg in the
air, an attitude he often assumed when any very hard thinking had to be
done; "I was just trying to recollect one."

After a pause, he said in a solemn voice: "I will tell you the terrible
tale of the troubles of 'The Hens of Hencastle.'

"Once upon a time--it was the village fair week, when, as you know,
every one eats and drinks as much as he possibly can, and consequently a
great many animals are killed,--the farmer's cook came into the
fowlyard, and after carefully looking over all the chickens, remarked
that seven of them would be twisting merrily on the spit next morning.
On hearing this, all the fowls were plunged into the deepest despair,
for no one felt sure that he would not be of the seven, and no one could
guess how the victims would be chosen. Two young cockerels, in their
deep perplexity, at last went to the yard-dog, Flaps by name, who was a
very great friend of theirs, and to him they cackled out their woes.

"'Why do you stop here?' asked Flaps. 'If you had any pluck at all you
would run away.'

"'Ah! Perhaps so--but who has enough courage for such a desperate step?'
sighed the young cockerels. 'Why, you yourself are no more courageous
than we, else why do you stop here chained up all day, and allow those
tiresome children to come and tease you?'

"'Well,' replied the dog, 'I earn a good livelihood by putting up with
these small discomforts, and besides that, _I_ am not going to be set
twisting on a spit. However, if you particularly wish it, we can go
away somewhere together; but if we do, I may as well tell you at once,
that you will have to feed me.'

"The cockerels, fired by this bold advice, betook themselves at once to
the henroost with the courage of young lions; and after a short but
animated discussion, persuaded the whole of the cocks and hens to run
away and to take Flaps as protector of the community.

"When darkness fell, the dog was unchained for the night as usual, and
as soon as the coast seemed clear, he went to the henhouse, pushed back
the sliding door with his nose, and let them all out.

"Then he and the whole company stole away as quietly as possible through
the yard-gate, away out into the open country.

"The fowls flew and wandered on, the livelong night, perfectly happy in
their freedom, and feeding themselves from the sheaves of corn that
stood in the stubble-fields.

"Whenever Flaps felt hungry, the hens laid him a couple of eggs or so
which he found far nicer than barley-meal and dog-biscuit.

"When they passed through thinly-populated places where they were not
likely to be observed, they marched gaily forward; but whenever there
was a chance of danger, they only travelled by night.

"Meanwhile the cook went early in the morning to kill the chickens; but
on finding the whole place as empty as Mother Hubbard's cupboard, she
fell into a violent fit of hysterics, and the kitchen-maid and pig-boy
had to put her under the pump, and work it hard for a quarter of an hour
before they could revive her.

"After some days' journeying, the wanderers arrived at a large
desolate-looking heath, in the middle of which stood an old
weather-beaten house, apparently uninhabited. Flaps was sent forward to
examine it, and he searched from garret to cellar without finding a
trace of a human being. The fowls then examined the neighbourhood for
two whole days and nights with a like result, and so they determined to
take up their abode in the dwelling.

"In they trooped, and set themselves to work to turn it into a strong
castle, well fortified against all danger. They stopped up the holes and
cracks with tufts of grass, and piled a wall of big and little stones
right round the house. When the repairs were completed they called it
Hencastle.

"During the autumn some of the fowls ventured forth into the cornfields
that lay near the haunts of men, and collected a store of grain to
supply them with food during the winter. They kept it on the floor of a
loft, and when spring came they sowed the remainder of the stock in a
field, where it produced such an abundant crop that they had plenty of
provisions for the following winter.

"Thus they lived a peaceful and happy life, which was so uneventful that
it has no history; and Mark, the watchman, who always stood on the
coping-stone of the highest chimney to act as sentinel, used constantly
to fall asleep, partly from sheer boredom, and partly from the combined
effects of old age, good living, and having nothing on earth to do.
Flaps, too, who had undertaken to guard the castle against intruders,
and who at first used to patrol the house carefully inside and out every
night, soon came to the conclusion that the game was not worth the
candle.

"One chilly evening, about the time of the first snows, when the wind
was beginning to whistle over the heath and make strange noises in the
castle, two old hens were up in the loft having a chat and picking up a
few stray grains of corn for supper. All of a sudden they heard a
mysterious 'Piep.' 'Hollo!' said one, 'what's that? no one can be
hatching out at this time of the year--it's impossible; yet surely
something said "Piep" down there in the corner.'

"Just then another 'Piep' was heard.

"'I don't think it sounds _quite_ like a young chicken,' replied the
other hen.

"In the middle of their discussion on this knotty point, they descried
a couple of mice at the edge of the corn-heap. One of them was sitting
on his hind-legs, washing his ears and whiskers with his fore-paws, but
his wife was gobbling up corn at a rapid rate, and in this sight the
wise and far-seeing old hens discerned the probability of future
troubles.

"'Hollo there! that's our corn,' they cried; 'you mustn't steal it. Of
course you may have a few grains in the depth of winter to keep you from
starving; but remember, when spring comes again, this sort of thing must
stop, and you must go away and never come here any more.'

"'Piep,' said the mice, and vanished.

"The two hens told the rest what had happened, but nobody troubled
themselves about such an insignificant matter, and some said that the
poor old things made mountains out of molehills. Anyhow, in two days
everybody, including the wise hens themselves, had forgotten all about
it. Later on, that winter, the mice had seven young ones--seven such
skinny, thread-limbed, beady-eyed little beasts that no one noticed
their arrival.

"Very soon after, almost before any hen had time to look round or think,
behold! mice were squeaking in every corner, and there were holes behind
every wainscot, plank, and rafter.

"A year passed away, and when winter returned again the mice came and
took the stored corn away in such quantities that everybody saw none
would be left to sow in the spring.

"Matters had come to a crisis; many and anxious discussions were held
amongst the fowls, for good counsel was a thing much sought after at
Hencastle.

"At first they took very energetic measures, and many a mouse fell a
victim to a well-aimed peck from a cock's beak; but alas! the mice took
energetic measures also, and resisted to the death, so that many a
fowl's leg was bitten to the bone. Much had been said, and much was
done, but the mice were more numerous than before.

"The commonwealth then decided on sending three experienced cocks out
into the world, to try and find some means for getting rid of the plague
of mice.

"The cocks journeyed for one whole day without finding anything to help
them in their trouble, but towards evening they came to a wild, rocky
mountainside, full of caves and clefts, and made up their minds to stay
there for the night; so they crept into a hole under a ledge of rock,
put their heads under their wings, and went to sleep.

"In the middle of the night they were roused by the sound of flapping
wings, followed by a whispering voice, saying, 'whish--ish,' which soon
broke out into a loud 'Whoo--hoo! whoo--hoo!' They popped their heads
out of the hole to see what was the matter, and they perceived a great
owl sitting on a stump, flapping its wings up and down, and rolling its
great round eyes about, which glared like red-hot coals in its head.

"'Mice here! Mice here! Whoo--hoo!' it shrieked.

"On hearing this the cocks nudged one another, and said, 'We are in
luck's way at last.' Then as the owl still continued to call for mice,
one of them plucked up courage and addressed it: 'If you will only come
with us, sir, you shall have as many mice as you can eat--a whole
house-full, if you like.'

"'Who may you be?' hissed the owl, and glared with its fiery eyes into
the cleft.

"'We come from Hencastle, where there are hundreds of mice, who devour
our corn day and night.

"'Whoo--hoo! I'll come, I'll come,' screamed the owl, snapping its beak
with pleasure.

"In the grey of the dawn the fowls sat on the roof-tree, listening to
Mark, the watchman, who stood on the top of, his chimney, and cried,

    "'What do I see?
    Here come the three!
    And with them, I reckon,
    A bird with no neck on.'

"Thereupon the owl and the three messengers flew up with a rush to the
top of the castle.

"'Ha! ha! I smell mice,' shrieked the new comer, and dashed through a
hole in the roof, from whence it shortly reappeared with a mouse in its
claws.

"This sight filled all the fowls with joy; and as they sat on the edge
of the roof in a row, they nudged each other, and remarked,

"'This has indeed been a happy venture.'

"For a few days everything went as smoothly as possible, but after a
time the mice began to find out that the owl could only see really well
at night, that it saw badly by day, and hardly at all when the midday
sun was shining through the window into the loft. So they only came out
at noon, and then dragged enough corn away into their holes to last them
