sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.



XXXI. SPEECH OF WALPOLE IN REPROOF OF MR. PITT. (151)

Sir Robert Walpole, 1676-1745, was educated at Eton and Cambridge. He
entered Parliament in 1700, and soon became a good debater and skillful
tactician. He was prime minister of Great Britain from 1721 to 1742, in
the reigns of George I. and George II. He was an able statesman; but has
been accused of employing corruption or bribery on a large scale, to
control Parliament and accomplish his purposes.
###


I was unwilling to interrupt the course of this debate, while it was
carried on with calmness and decency, by men who do not suffer the ardor
of opposition to cloud their reason, or transport them to such expressions
as the dignity of this assembly does not admit.

I have hitherto deferred answering the gentleman, who declaimed against
the bill with such fluency and rhetoric, and such vehemence of gesture;
who charged the advocates for the expedients now proposed, with having no
regard to any interests but their own, and with making laws only to
consume paper, and threatened them with the defection of their adherents,
and the loss of their influence, upon this new discovery of their folly
and ignorance. Nor, do I now answer him for any other purpose than to
remind him how little the clamor of rage and petulancy of invective
contribute to the end for which this assembly is called together; how
little the discovery of truth is promoted, and the security of the nation
established, by pompous diction and theatrical emotion.

Formidable sounds and furious declamation, confident assertions and lofty
periods, may affect the young and inexperienced; and perhaps the gentleman
may have contracted his habits of oratory by conversing more with those of
his own age than with such as have more opportunities of acquiring
knowledge, and more successful methods of communicating their sentiments.
If the heat of temper would permit him to attend to those whose age and
long acquaintance with business give them an indisputable right to
deference and superiority, he would learn in time to reason, rather than
declaim; and to prefer justness of argument and an accurate knowledge of
facts, to sounding epithets and splendid superlatives, which may disturb
the imagination for a moment, but leave no lasting impression upon the
mind. He would learn, that to accuse and prove are very different; and
that reproaches, unsupported by evidence, affect only the character of him
that utters them.

Excursions of fancy and flights of oratory are indeed pardonable in young
men, but in no other; and it would surely contribute more, even to the
purpose for which some gentlemen appear to speak (that of depreciating the
conduct of the administration), to prove the inconveniences and injustice
of this bill, than barely to assert them, with whatever magnificence of
language, or appearance of zeal, honesty, or compassion.



XXXII. PITT'S REPLY TO SIR ROBERT WALPOLE. (152)

William Pitt, 1708--1778, one of the ablest statesmen and orators of his
time, was born in Cornwall, and educated at Eton and Oxford. He entered
Parliament in 1735, and became a formidable opponent of the ministry of
Sir Robert Walpole. He gained great reputation by his wise and vigorous
management of military affairs in the last years of the reign of George
II. He opposed the "Stamp Act" with great earnestness, as well as the
course of the ministry in the early years of the American Revolution. In
1778, he rose from a sick bed to make his celebrated speech, in the House
of Lords, in opposition to a motion to acknowledge the independence of
America. At its close, he fell in an apoplectic fit, and was borne home to
die in a few weeks afterward. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. Mr. Pitt
possessed a fine personal presence and a powerful voice; he was very
popular with the people, and is often called the "Great Commoner." He was
created "Earl of Chatham" in 1766.
###


The atrocious crime of being a young man, which the honorable gentleman
has, with such spirit and decency, charged upon me, I shall neither
attempt to palliate nor deny; but content myself with hoping that I may be
one of those whose follies cease with their youth, and not of that number
who are ignorant in spite of experience. Whether youth can be imputed to a
man as a reproach, I will not assume the province of determining; but
surely age may become justly contemptible, if the opportunities which it
brings have passed away without improvement, and vice appears to prevail
when the passions have subsided. The wretch, who, after having seen the
consequences of a thousand errors, continues still to blunder, and whose
age has only added obstinacy to stupidity, is surely the object either of
abhorrence or contempt, and deserves not that his gray hairs should secure
him from insult. Much more is he to be abhorred, who, as he has advanced
in age, has receded from virtue, and become more wicked--with less
temptation; who prostitutes himself for money which he can not enjoy, and
spends the remains of his life in the ruin of his country.

But youth is not my only crime; I am accused of acting a theatrical part.
A theatrical part may either imply some peculiarity of gesture, or a
dissimulation of my real sentiments, and an adoption of the opinions and
language of another man. In the first sense, the charge is too trifling to
be confuted, and deserves only to be mentioned that it may be despised. I
am at liberty, like every other man, to use my own language; and though,
perhaps, I may have some ambition to please this gentleman, I shall not
lay myself under any restraint, nor very solicitously copy his diction or
his mien, however matured by age, or modeled by experience.

But, if any man shall, by charging me with theatrical behavior, imply that
I utter any sentiments but my own, I shall treat him as a calumniator and
a villain; nor shall any protection shelter him from the treatment he
deserves. I shall, on such an occasion, without scruple, trample upon all
those forms with which wealth and dignity intrench themselves, nor shall
anything but age restrain my resentment; age,--which always brings one
privilege, that of being insolent and supercilious, without punishment!

But, with regard to those whom I have offended, I am of opinion that, if I
had acted a borrowed part, I should have avoided their censure: the heat
that offended them was the ardor of conviction, and that zeal for the
service of my country which neither hope nor fear shall influence me to
suppress. I will not sit unconcerned while my liberty is invaded, nor look
in silence upon public robbery. I will exert my endeavors, at whatever
hazard, to repel the aggressor, and drag the thief to justice, whoever may
protect him in his villainies, and whoever may partake of his plunder.


XXXIII. CHARACTER OF MR. PITT. (154)

Henry Grattan, 1750-1820, an Irish orator and statesman, was born at
Dublin, and graduated from Trinity College, in his native city. By his
admiration of Mr. Pitt, the first Earl of Chatham, he was led to turn his
attention to oratory. In personal appearance, he was unprepossessing; but
his private character was without a blemish.
###


The secretary stood alone. Modern degeneracy had not reached him. Original
and unaccommodating, the features of his character had the hardihood of
antiquity. His august mind overawed majesty itself. No state chicanery, no
narrow system of vicious politics, no idle contest for ministerial
victories, sank him to the vulgar level of the great; but overbearing,
persuasive, and impracticable, his object was England, his ambition was
fame.

Without dividing, he destroyed party; without corrupting, he made a venal
age unanimous. France sunk beneath him. With one hand he smote the house
of Bourbon, and wielded in the other the democracy of England. The sight
of his mind was infinite; and his schemes were to effect, not England, not
the present age only, but Europe and posterity. Wonderful were the means
by which those schemes were accomplished; always seasonable, always
adequate, the suggestion of an understanding animated by ardor and
enlightened by prophecy.

The ordinary feelings which make life amiable and indolent, were unknown
to him. No domestic difficulties, no domestic weakness, reached him; but,
aloof from the sordid occurrences of life, and unsullied by its
intercourse, he came occasionally into our system, to counsel and decide.
A character so exalted, so strenuous, so various, so authoritative,
astonished a corrupt age, and the treasury trembled at the name of Pitt,
through all classes of venality. Corruption imagined, indeed, that she had
found defects in this statesman, and talked much of the inconsistency of
his glory, and much of the ruin of his victories; but the history of his
country, and the calamities of the enemy, answered and refuted her.

Nor were his political his only talents. His eloquence was an era in the
senate; peculiar and spontaneous; familiarly expressing gigantic
sentiments and instructive wisdom; not like the torrent of Demosthenes, or
the splendid conflagration of Tully; it resembled sometimes the thunder,
and sometimes the music of the spheres. He did not conduct the
understanding through the painful subtilty of argumentation, nor was he
ever on the rack of exertion; but rather lightened upon the subject, and
reached the point by the flashings of the mind, which, like those of the
eye, were felt, but could not be followed.

Upon the whole, there was in this man something that could create,
subvert, or reform; an understanding, a spirit, and an eloquence, to
summon mankind to society, or to break the bonds of slavery asunder, and
to rule the wildness of free minds with unbounded authority; something
that could establish or overwhelm empires, and strike a blow in the world
that should resound through the universe.

NOTES.--Demosthenes (b. 385, d. 322, B. C.) was the son of a cutler at
Athens, Greece. By diligent study and unremitting toil, he became the
greatest orator that ever lived.

Tully, Marcus Tullius Cicero (b. 106, d. 43, B. C.), was the most
remarkable of Roman orators. He held the highest office of the Republic.



XXXIV. THE SOLDIER'S REST. (156)

Sir Walter Scott, 1771-1832, the great Scotch poet and novelist, was born
in Edinburgh. Being a feeble child, he was sent to reside on his
grandfather's estate in the south of Scotland. Here he spent several
years, and gained much knowledge of the traditions of border warfare, as
well as of the tales and ballads pertaining to it. He was also a great
reader of romances in his youth. In 1779 be returned to Edinburgh, and
became a pupil in the high school. Four years later, he entered the
university; but in neither school nor college, was he distinguished for
scholarship. In 1797 he was admitted to the practice of law,--a profession
which he soon forsook for literature. His first poems appeared in 1802.
The "Lay of the Last Minstrel" was published in 1805, "Marmion" in 1808,
and "The Lady of the Lake" in 1810. Several poems of less power followed.
In 1814 "Waverley," his first novel, made its appearance, but the author
was unknown for some time. Numerous other novels followed with great
rapidity, the author reaping a rich harvest both in fame and money. In
1811 he purchased an estate near the Tweed, to which he gave the name of
Abbotsford. In enlarging his estate and building a costly house, he spent
vast sums of money. This, together with the failure of his publishers in
1826, involved him very heavily in debt. But he set to work with almost
superhuman effort to pay his debts by the labors of his pen. In about four
years, he had paid more than $300,000; but the effort was too much for his
strength, and hastened his death.

In person, Scott was tall, and apparently robust, except a slight lameness
with which he was affected from childhood. He was kindly in disposition,
hospitable in manner, fond of outdoor pursuits and of animals, especially
dogs. He wrote with astonishing rapidity, and always in the early morning.
At his death, he left two sons and two daughters. A magnificent monument
to his memory has been erected in the city of his birth. The following
selection is from "The Lady of the Lake."
###


Soldier, rest! thy warfare o'er,
  Sleep the sleep that knows not breaking;
Dream of battlefields no more,
  Days of danger, nights of waking.
In our isle's enchanted hall,
  Hands unseen thy couch are strewing,
Fairy strains of music fall,
  Every sense in slumber dewing.
Soldier, rest! thy warfare o'er,
Dream of battlefields no more;
Sleep the sleep that knows not breaking,
Morn of toil, nor night of waking.

No rude sound shall reach thine ear,
  Armor's clang, or war steed champing,
Trump nor pibroch summon here
  Mustering clan, or squadron tramping.
Yet the lark's shrill fife may come,
  At the daybreak from the fallow,
And the bittern sound his drum,
  Booming from the sedgy shallow.
Ruder sounds shall none be near,
Guards nor warders challenge here,
Here's no war steed's neigh and champing,
Shouting clans or squadrons stamping.

Huntsman, rest! thy chase is done;
  While our slumb'rous spells assail ye,
Dream not, with the rising sun,
  Bugles here shall sound reveille.
Sleep! the deer is in his den;
  Sleep! thy hounds are by thee lying;
Sleep! nor dream in yonder glen,
  How thy gallant steed lay dying.
Huntsman, rest; thy chase is done,
Think not of the rising sun,
For at dawning to assail ye,
Here no bugle sounds reveille.

NOTES.--Pibroch (pro. pe'brok). This is a wild, irregular species of
music, peculiar to the Highlands of Scotland. It is performed on a
bagpipe, and adapted to excite or assuage passion, and particularly to
rouse a martial spirit among troops going to battle.

Reveille (pro. re-val'ya) is an awakening call at daybreak. In the army it
is usually sounded on the drum.



XXXV. HENRY V. TO HIS TROOPS. (158)

William Shakespeare. 1564-1616, was born at Stratford-upon-Avon. By many
(perhaps most) critics, Shakespeare is regarded as the greatest poet the
world has ever produced; one calls him, "The most illustrious of the sons
of men." And yet it is a curious fact that less is really known of his
life and personal characteristics than is known of almost any other famous
name in history. Over one hundred years ago, a writer said, "All that is
known with any degree of certainty concerning Shakespeare is--that he was
born at Stratford-upon-Avon--married and had children there--went to
London, where he commenced acting, and wrote poems and plays--returned to
Stratford, made his will, died, and was buried." All the research of the
last one hundred years has added but very little to this meager record. He
was married, very young, to Anne Hathaway, a woman eight years his senior;
was joint proprietor of Blackfriar's Theater in 1589, and seems to have
accumulated property, and retired three or four years before his death. He
was buried in Stratford Church, where a monument has been erected to his
memory; he also has a monument, in "Poet's Corner" of Westminster Abbey.
His family soon became extinct. From all we can learn, he seems to have
been highly respected and esteemed by his cotemporaries.

His works consist chiefly of plays and sonnets. His writings show an
astonishing knowledge of human nature, expressed in language wonderful for
its point and beauty. His style is chaste and pure, judged by the standard
of his times, although expressions may sometimes be found that would not
be considered proper in a modern writer. It has been argued by some that
Shakespeare did not write the works imputed to him; but this theory seems
to have little to support it. This extract is from King Henry V., Act III,
Scene I.
###


Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more;
Or close the wall up with our English dead.
In peace there 's nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility:
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger;
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage;
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon; let the brow o'erwhelm it
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O'er hang and jutty his confounded base,
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean.

Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide,
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To its full height! On, on, you noblest English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war proof!
Fathers, that, like so many Alexanders,
Have, in these parts, from morn till even, fought,
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument;
Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
And teach them how to war.

                       And you, good yeomen,
Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not;
For there is none of you so mean and base,
That hath not noble luster in your eyes.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Straining upon the start. The game's afoot;
Follow your spirit: and, upon this charge,
Cry--"God for Harry, England, and St. George!"


NOTES.--Henry V. (1388-1422) was king of England for nine years. During
this reign almost continuous war raged in France, to the throne of which
Henry laid claim. The battle of Agincourt took place in his reign.

Fet is the old form of fetched.

Alexanders.--Alexander the Great (356-323 B. G) was king of Macedonia, and
the celebrated conqueror of Persia, India, and the greater part of the
world as then known.


XXXVI. SPEECH OF PAUL ON MARS HILL. (160)


Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars Hill, and said, Ye men of Athens! I
perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. For as I passed by,
and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, To THE
UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
God that made the world and all things therein (seeing that he is Lord of
heaven and earth) dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is
worshiped with men's hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he giveth
to all life, and breath, and all things; and hath made of one blood all
nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;
that they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and
find him, though he be not far from everyone of us: for in him we live,
and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said,
For we are also his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of
God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver,
or stone, graven by art and man's device. And the times of this ignorance
God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to repent: because he
hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that Man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given
assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. And when
they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said,
We will hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them.
Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed; among the which was
Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

                                                            --Bible.


NOTES.--At the time this oration was delivered (50 A. D.), Athens still
held the place she had occupied for centuries, as the center of the
enlightened and refined world.

Mars Hill, or the Areopagus, was an eminence in the city made famous as
the place where the court, also called Areopagus, held its sittings,

Dionysius, surnamed Areopageita, from being a member of this court, was an
eminent Greek scholar, who, after his conversion to Christianity by St.
Paul, was installed, by the latter, as the first bishop of Athens, He
afterwards suffered martyrdom.



XXXVII. GOD IS EVERYWHERE. (161)


   Oh! show me where is He,
   The high and holy One,
   To whom thou bend'st the knee,
   And prayest, "Thy will be done!"
   I hear thy song of praise,
   And lo! no form is near:
   Thine eyes I see thee raise,
   But where doth God appear?
Oh! teach me who is God, and where his glories shine,
That I may kneel and pray, and call thy Father mine.

   "Gaze on that arch above:
   The glittering vault admire.
   Who taught those orbs to move?
   Who lit their ceaseless fire?
   Who guides the moon to run
   In silence through the skies?
   Who bids that dawning sun
   In strength and beauty rise?
There view immensity! behold! my God is there:
The sun, the moon, the stars, his majesty declare.

   "See where the mountains rise:
   Where thundering torrents foam;
   Where, veiled in towering skies,
   The eagle makes his home:
   Where savage nature dwells,
   My God is present, too:
   Through all her wildest dells
   His footsteps I pursue:
He reared those giant cliffs, supplies that dashing stream,
Provides the daily food which stills the wild bird's scream.

   "Look on that world of waves,
   Where finny nations glide;
   Within whose deep, dark caves
   The ocean monsters hide:
   His power is sovereign there,
   To raise, to quell the storm;
   The depths his bounty share,
   Where sport the scaly swarm:
Tempests and calms obey the same almighty voice,
Which rules the earth and skies, and bids far worlds rejoice."
                                           --Joseph Hutton.



XXXVIII. LAFAYETTE AND ROBERT RAIKES. (163)

Thomas S. Grimke', 1786-1834, an eminent lawyer and scholar, was born in
Charleston, South Carolina, graduated at Yale in 1807, and died of cholera
near Columbus, Ohio. He descended from a Huguenot family that was exiled
from France by the revocation of the edict of Nantes. He gained
considerable reputation as a politician, but is best known as an advocate
of peace, Sunday Schools, and the Bible. He was a man of deep feeling,
earnest purpose, and pure life. Some of his views were very radical and
very peculiar. He proposed sweeping reforms in English orthography[1], and
disapproved of the classics and of pure mathematics in any scheme of
general education. The following is an extract from an address delivered
at a Sunday-school celebration.
###

[Transcriber's Footnote 1:  Orthography: Spelling using established
usage.]


It is but a few years since we beheld the most singular and memorable
pageant in the annals of time. It was a pageant more sublime and affecting
than the progress of Elizabeth through England after the defeat of the
Armada; than the return of Francis I. from a Spanish prison to his own
beautiful France; than the daring and rapid march of the conqueror at
Austerlitz from Frejus to Paris. It was a pageant, indeed, rivaled only in
the elements of the grand and the pathetic, by the journey of our own
Washington through the different states. Need I say that I allude to the
visit of Lafayette to America?

But Lafayette returned to the land of the dead, rather than of the living.
How many who had fought with him in the war of '76, had died in arms, and
lay buried in the grave of the soldier or the sailor! How many who had
survived the perils of battle, on the land and the ocean, had expired on
the deathbed of peace, in the arms of mother, sister, daughter, wife!
Those. who survived to celebrate with him the jubilee of 1825, were
stricken in years, and hoary-headed; many of them infirm in health; many
the victims of poverty, or misfortune, or affliction. And, how venerable
that patriotic company; how sublime their gathering through all the land;
how joyful their welcome, how affecting their farewell to that beloved
stranger!

But the pageant has fled, and the very materials that gave it such depths
of interest are rapidly perishing: and a humble, perhaps a nameless grave,
shall hold the last soldier of the Revolution. And shall they ever meet
again? Shall the patriots and soldiers of '76, the "Immortal Band," as
history styles them, meet again in the amaranthine bowers of spotless
purity, of perfect bliss, of eternal glory? Shall theirs be the
Christian's heaven, the kingdom of the Redeemer? The heathen points to his
fabulous Elysium as the paradise of the soldier and the sage. But the
Christian bows down with tears and sighs, for he knows that not many of
the patriots, and statesmen, and warriors of Christian lands are the
disciples of Jesus.

But we turn from Lafayette, the favorite of the old and the new world, to
the peaceful benevolence, the unambitious achievements of Robert Raikes.
Let us imagine him to have been still alive, and to have visited our land,
to celebrate this day with us. No national ships would have been offered
to bear him, a nation's guest, in the pride of the star-spangled banner,
from the bright shores of the rising, to the brighter shores of the
setting sun. No cannon would have hailed him in the stern language of the
battlefield, the fortunate champion of Freedom, in Europe and America. No
martial music would have welcomed him in notes of rapture, as they rolled
along the Atlantic, and echoed through the valley of the Mississippi. No
military procession would have heralded his way through crowded streets,
thickset with the banner and the plume, the glittering saber and the
polished bayonet. No cities would have called forth beauty and fashion,
wealth and rank, to honor him in the ballroom and theater. No states would
have escorted him from boundary to boundary, nor have sent their chief
magistrate to do him homage. No national liberality would have allotted to
him a nobleman's domain and princely treasure. No national gratitude would
have hailed him in the capitol itself, the nation's guest, because the
nation's benefactor; and have consecrated a battle ship, in memory of his
wounds and his gallantry.

Not such would have been the reception of Robert Raikes, in the land of
the Pilgrims and of Penn, of the Catholic, the Cavalier, and the Huguenot.
And who does not rejoice that it would be impossible thus to welcome this
primitive Christian, the founder of Sunday schools? His heralds would be
the preachers of the Gospel, and the eminent in piety, benevolence, and
zeal. His procession would number in its ranks the messengers of the Cross
and the disciples of the Savior, Sunday-school teachers and white-robed
scholars. The temples of the Most High would be the scenes of his triumph.
Homage and gratitude to him, would be anthems of praise and thanksgiving
to God.

Parents would honor him as more than a brother; children would reverence
him as more than a father. The faltering words of age, the firm and sober
voice of manhood, the silvery notes of youth, would bless him as a
Christian patron. The wise and the good would acknowledge him everywhere
as a national benefactor, as a patriot even to a land of strangers. He
would have come a messenger of peace to a land of peace. No images of
camps, and sieges, and battles; no agonies of the dying and the wounded;
no shouts of victory, or processions of triumph, would mingle with the
recollections of the multitude who welcomed him. They would mourn over no
common dangers, trials, and calamities; for the road of duty has been to
them the path of pleasantness, the way of peace. Their memory of the past
would be rich in gratitude to God, and love to man; their enjoyment of the
present would be a prelude to heavenly bliss; their prospects of the
future, bright and glorious as faith and hope. * * *

Such was the reception of Lafayette, the warrior; such would be that of
Robert Raikes, the Howard of the Christian church. And which is the nobler
benefactor, patriot, and philanthropist? Mankind may admire and extol
Lafayette more than the founder of the Sunday schools; but religion,
philanthropy, and enlightened common sense must ever esteem Robert Raikes
the superior of Lafayette. His are the virtues, the services, the
sacrifices of a more enduring and exalted order of being. His counsels and
triumphs belong less to time than to eternity.

The fame of Lafayette is of this world; the glory of Robert Raikes is of
the Redeemer's everlasting kingdom. Lafayette lived chiefly for his own
age, and chiefly for his and our country; but Robert Raikes has lived for
all ages and all countries. Perhaps the historian and biographer may never
interweave his name in the tapestry of national or individual renown. But
the records of every single church honor him as a patron; the records of
the universal Church, on earth as in heaven, bless him as a benefactor.

The time may come when the name of Lafayette will be forgotten; or when
the star of his fame, no longer glittering in the zenith, shall be seen,
pale and glimmering, on the verge of the horizon. But the name of Robert
Raikes shall never be forgotten; and the lambent flame of his glory is
that eternal fire which rushed down from heaven to devour the sacrifice of
Elijah. Let mortals then admire and imitate Lafayette more than Robert
Raikes. But the just made perfect, and the ministering spirits around the
throne of God, have welcomed him as a fellow-servant of the same Lord; as
a fellow-laborer in the same glorious cause of man's redemption; as a
coheir of the same precious promises and eternal rewards.


NOTES.--Armada, the great fleet sent out in 1588, by Philip II. of Spain,
for the conquest of England, was defeated in the Channel by the English
and Dutch fleets. After the victory, Queen Elizabeth made a triumphal
journey through the kingdom.

Francis I. (b. 1494, d. 1547), King of France, was taken prisoner at the
battle of Pavia, and confined at Madrid, Spain, nearly a year.
Austerlitz.--See Note on p. 150.

Lafayette (b. 1757, d. 1834), a French marquis, who served as major
general in the Revolutionary War in America, which terminated in 1783.
Lafayette revisited this country in 1824, and was received throughout the
land with the greatest enthusiasm.
