
"You must come no further," said Antoine, hastily.

"Ingrate!" muttered the priest in momentary anger, and then, ashamed,
he crossed himself, and pressing the young nobleman to his bosom with
the last gush of earthly affection that he was to feel, he kissed his
senseless face, spoke a benediction to ears that could not hear it,
and laid his burden down.

"GOD the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be with thee
now and in the dread hour of death. Adieu! we shall meet hereafter."

The look of pity, the yearning of rekindled love, the struggle of
silenced memories passed from his face and left a shining
calm--foretaste of the perpetual Light and the eternal Rest.

Before he reached the other prisoners, the large thumb had found its
old place in the little book, the lips formed the old old words; but
it might almost have been said of him already, that "his spirit was
with the GOD who gave it."

As for Monsieur the Viscount, it was perhaps well that he was not too
sensible of his position, for Antoine got him down the flight of stone
steps that led to the cell by the simple process of dragging him by
the heels. After a similar fashion he crossed the floor, and was
deposited on a pallet; the gaoler then emptied a broken pitcher of
water over his face, and locking the door securely, hurried back to
his charge.

When Monsieur the Viscount came to his senses he raised himself and
looked round his new abode. It was a small stone cell; it was
underground, with a little grated window at the top that seemed to be
level with the court; there was a pallet--painfully pressed and
worn--a chair, a stone on which stood a plate and broken pitcher, and
in one corner a huge bundle of firewood which mocked a place where
there was no fire. Stones lay scattered about, the walls were black,
and in the far dark corners the wet oozed out and trickled slowly
down, and lizards and other reptiles crawled up.

I suppose that the first object that attracts the hopes of a new
prisoner is the window of his cell, and to this, despite his weakness,
Monsieur the Viscount crept. It afforded him little satisfaction. It
was too high in the cell for him to reach it, too low in the prison to
command any view, and was securely grated with iron. Then he examined
the walls, but not a stone was loose. As he did so, his eye fell upon
the floor, and he noticed that two of the stones that lay about had
been raised up by some one and a third laid upon the top. It looked
like child's play, and Monsieur the Viscount kicked it down, and then
he saw that underneath it there was a pellet of paper roughly rolled
together. Evidently it was something left by the former occupant of
the cell for his successor. Perhaps he had begun some plan for getting
away which he had not had time to perfect on his own account,
Perhaps--but by this time the paper was spread out, and Monsieur the
Viscount read the writing. The paper was old and yellow. It was the
fly-leaf torn out of a little book, and on it was written in black
chalk, the words--

     "_Souvenez-vous du Sauveur._" (Remember the Saviour.)

He turned it over, he turned it back again; there was no other mark;
there was nothing more; and Monsieur the Viscount did not conceal from
himself that he was disappointed. How could it be otherwise? He had
been bred in ease and luxury, and surrounded with everything that
could make life beautiful; while ugliness, and want, and sickness, and
all that make life miserable, had been kept, as far as they can be
kept, from the precincts of the beautiful chateau which was his home.
What were the _consolations_ of religion to him? They are offered to
those (and to those only) who need them. They were to Monsieur the
Viscount what the Crucified Christ was to the Greeks of
old--foolishness.

He put the paper in his pocket and lay down again, feeling it the
crowning disappointment of what he had lately suffered. Presently,
Antoine came with some food; it was not dainty, but Monsieur the
Viscount devoured it like a famished hound, and then made inquiries as
to how he came and how long he had been there. When the gaoler began
to describe him, whom he called the Cure, Monsieur the Viscount's
attention quickened into eagerness, an eagerness deepened by the
tender interest that always hangs round the names of those whom we
have known in happier and younger days. The happy memories recalled by
hearing of his old tutor seemed to blot out his present misfortunes.
With French excitability, he laughed and wept alternately.

"As burly as ever, you say? The little book? I remember it, it was
his breviary. Ah! it is he. It is Monsieur the Preceptor, whom I have
not seen for years. Take me to him, bring him here, let me see him!"

But Monsieur the Preceptor was in Paradise.

That first night of Monsieur the Viscount's imprisonment was a
terrible one. The bitter chill of a Parisian autumn, the gnawings of
half-satisfied hunger, the thick walls that shut out all hope of
escape but did not exclude those fearful cries that lasted with few
intervals throughout the night, made it like some hideous dream. At
last the morning broke; at half-past two o'clock, some members of the
_commune_ presented themselves in the hall of the National Assembly
with the significant announcement:--"The prisons are empty!" and
Antoine, who had been quaking for hours, took courage, and went with
half a loaf of bread and a pitcher of water to the cell that was not
"empty." He found his prisoner struggling with a knot of white ribbon,
which he was trying to fasten in his hair. One glance at his face told
all.

"It is the fever," said Antoine; and he put down the bread and water
and fetched an old blanket and a pillow; and that day and for many
days, the gaoler hung above his prisoner's pallet with the tenderness
of a woman. Was he haunted by the vision of a burly figure that had
bent over his own sick bed in the Rue de la Croix? Did the voice
(once so familiar in counsel and benediction!) echo still in his ears?

"_The blessing of a dying priest upon you if you do well, and his
curse if you do ill to this poor child, whose home was my home in
better days._"

Be this as it may, Antoine tended his patient with all the constancy
compatible with keeping his presence in the prison a secret; and it
was not till the crisis was safely past, that he began to visit the
cell less frequently, and reassumed the harsh manners which he held to
befit his office.

Monsieur the Viscount's mind rambled much in his illness. He called
for his mother, who had long been dead. He fancied himself in his own
chateau. He thought that all his servants stood in a body before him,
but that not one would move to wait on him. He thought that he had
abundance of the most tempting food and cooling drinks, but placed
just beyond his reach. He thought that he saw two lights like stars
near together, which were close to the ground, and kept appearing and
then vanishing away. In time he became more sensible; the chateau
melted into the stern reality of his prison walls; the delicate food
became bread and water; the servants disappeared like spectres; but in
the empty cell, in the dark corners near the floor, he still fancied
that he saw two sparks of light coming and going, appearing and then
vanishing away. He watched them till his giddy head would bear it no
longer, and he closed his eyes and slept. When he awoke he was much
better, but when he raised himself and turned towards the
stone--there, by the bread and the broken pitcher, sat a dirty, ugly,
wrinkled toad, gazing at him, Monsieur the Viscount, with eyes of
yellow fire.

Monsieur the Viscount had long ago forgotten the toad which had
alarmed his childhood; but his national dislike to that animal had not
been lessened by years, and the toad of the prison seemed likely to
fare no better than the toad of the chateau. He dragged himself from
his pallet, and took up one of the large damp stones which lay about
the floor of the cell, to throw at the intruder. He expected that when
he approached it, the toad would crawl away, and that he could throw
the stone after it; but to his surprise, the beast sat quite unmoved,
looking at him with calm shining eyes, and, somehow or other, Monsieur
the Viscount lacked strength or heart to kill it. He stood doubtful
for a moment, and then a sudden feeling of weakness obliged him to
drop the stone, and sit down, while tears sprang to his eyes with the
sense of his helplessness.

"Why should I kill it?" he said, bitterly. "The beast will live and
grow fat upon this damp and loathsomeness, long after they have put
an end to my feeble life. It shall remain. The cell is not big, but it
is big enough for us both. However large be the rooms a man builds
himself to live in, it needs but little space in which to die!"

So Monsieur the Viscount dragged his pallet away from the toad, placed
another stone by it, and removed the pitcher; and then, wearied with
his efforts, lay down and slept heavily.

When he awoke, on the new stone by the pitcher was the toad, staring
full at him with topaz eyes. He lay still this time and did not move,
for the animal showed no intention of spitting, and he was puzzled by
its tameness.

"It seems to like the sight of a man," he thought. "Is it possible
that any former inmate of this wretched prison can have amused his
solitude by making a pet of such a creature? and if there were such a
man, where is he now?"

Henceforward, sleeping or waking, whenever Monsieur the Viscount lay
down upon his pallet, the toad crawled up on to the stone, and kept
watch over him with shining lustrous eyes; but whenever there was a
sound of the key grating in the lock, and the gaoler coming his
rounds, away crept the toad, and was quickly lost in the dark corners
of the room. When the man was gone, it returned to its place, and
Monsieur the Viscount would talk to it, as he lay on his pallet.

"Ah! Monsieur Crapaud," he would say, with mournful pleasantry,
"without doubt you have had a master and a kind one; but, tell me, who
was he, and where is he now? Was he old or young, and was it in the
last stage of maddening loneliness that he made friends with such a
creature as you?"

Monsieur Crapaud looked very intelligent, but he made no reply, and
Monsieur the Viscount had recourse to Antoine.

"Who was in this cell before me?" he asked at the gaoler's next visit.

Antoine's face clouded. "Monsieur le Cure had this room. My orders
were that he was to be imprisoned in secret.'"

Monsieur le Cure had this room. There was a revelation in those words.
It was all explained now. The priest had always had a love for animals
(and for ugly, common animals), which his pupil had by no means
shared. His room at the chateau had been little less than a menagerie.
He had even kept a glass beehive there, which communicated with a hole
in the window through which the bees flew in and out, and he would
stand for hours with his thumb in the breviary, watching the labours
of his pets. And this also had been his room! This dark, damp cell.
Here, breviary in hand, he had stood, and lain, and knelt. Here, in
this miserable prison, he had found something to love, and on which to
expend the rare intelligence and benevolence of his nature. Here,
finally, in the last hours of his life, he had written on the fly-leaf
of his prayer-book something to comfort his successor, and, "being
dead, yet spoke" the words of consolation which he had administered in
his lifetime. Monsieur the Viscount read that paper now with different
feelings.

There is, perhaps, no argument so strong, and no virtue that so
commands the respect of young men, as consistency. Monsieur the
Preceptor's lifelong counsel and example would have done less for his
pupil than was effected by the knowledge of his consistent career, now
that it was past. It was not the nobility of the priest's principles
that awoke in Monsieur the Viscount a desire to imitate his religious
example, but the fact that he had applied them to his own life, not
only in the time of wealth, but in the time of tribulation and in the
hour of death. All that high-strung piety--that life of prayer--those
unswerving admonitions to consider the vanity of earthly treasures,
and to prepare for death--which had sounded so unreal amidst the
perfumed elegances of the chateau, came back now with a reality gained
from experiment. The daily life of self-denial, the conversation
garnished from Scripture and from the Fathers, had not, after all,
been mere priestly affectations. In no symbolic manner, but literally,
he had "watched for the coming of his Lord," and "taken up the cross
daily;" and so, when the cross was laid on him, and when the voice
spoke which must speak to all, "The Master is come, and calleth for
thee," he bore the burden and obeyed the summons unmoved.

_Unmoved_!--this was the fact that struck deep into the heart of
Monsieur the Viscount, as he listened to Antoine's account of the
Cure's imprisonment. What had astonished and overpowered his own
undisciplined nature had not disturbed Monsieur the Preceptor. He had
prayed in the chateau--he prayed in the prison. He had often spoken in
the chateau of the softening and comforting influences of communion
with the lower animals and with nature, and in the uncertainty of
imprisonment he had tamed a toad. "None of these things had moved
him," and, in a storm of grief and admiration, Monsieur the Viscount
bewailed the memory of his tutor.

"If he had only lived to teach me!"

But he was dead, and there was nothing for Monsieur the Viscount but
to make the most of his example. This was not so easy to follow as he
imagined. Things seemed to be different with him to what they had
been with Monsieur the Preceptor. He had no lofty meditations, no
ardent prayers, and calm and peace seemed more distant than ever.
Monsieur the Viscount met, in short, with all those difficulties that
the soul must meet with, which, in a moment of enthusiasm, has
resolved upon a higher and a better way of life, and in moments of
depression is perpetually tempted to forego that resolution. His
prison life was, however, a pretty severe discipline, and he held on
with struggles and prayers; and so, little by little, and day by day,
as the time of his imprisonment went by, the consolations of religion
became a daily strength against the fretfulness of imperious temper,
the sickness of hope deferred, and the dark suggestions of despair.

The term of his imprisonment was a long one. Many prisoners came and
went within the walls of the Abbaye, but Monsieur the Viscount still
remained in his cell; indeed, he would have gained little by leaving
it if he could have done so, as he would almost certainly have been
retaken. As it was, Antoine on more than one occasion concealed him
behind the bundles of firewood, and once or twice he narrowly escaped
detection by less friendly officials. There were times when the
guillotine seemed to him almost better than this long suspense: but
while other heads passed to the block, his remained on his shoulders;
and so weeks and even months went by. And during all this time,
sleeping or waking, whenever he lay down upon his pallet, the toad
crept up on to the stone, and kept watch over him with lustrous eyes.

Monsieur the Viscount hardly acknowledged to himself the affection
with which he came to regard this ugly and despicable animal. The
greater part of his regard for it he believed to be due to its
connection with his tutor, and the rest he set down to the score of
his own humanity, and took credit to himself accordingly: whereas in
truth Monsieur Crapaud was of incalculable service to his master, who
would lie and chatter to him for hours, and almost forget his present
discomfort in recalling past happiness, as he described the chateau,
the gardens, the burly tutor, and beautiful Madame, or laughed over
his childish remembrances of the toad's teeth in Claude Mignon's
pocket; whilst Monsieur Crapaud sat well-bred and silent, with a world
of comprehension in his fiery eyes. Whoever thinks this puerile must
remember that my hero was a Frenchman, and a young Frenchman, with a
prescriptive right to chatter for chattering's sake, and also that he
had not a very highly cultivated mind of his own to converse with,
even if the most highly cultivated intellect is ever a reliable
resource against the terrors of solitary confinement.

Foolish or wise, however, Monsieur the Viscount's attachment
strengthened daily; and one day something happened which showed his
pet in a new light, and afforded him fresh amusement.

The prison was much infested with certain large black spiders, which
crawled about the floor and walls; and, as Monsieur the Viscount was
lying on his pallet, he saw one of these scramble up and over the
stone on which sat Monsieur Crapaud. That good gentleman, whose eyes,
till then, had been fixed as usual on his master, now turned his
attention to the intruder. The spider, as if conscious of danger, had
suddenly stopped still. Monsieur Crapaud gazed at it intently with his
beautiful eyes, and bent himself slightly forward. So they remained
for some seconds, then the spider turned round, and began suddenly to
scramble away. At this instant Monsieur the Viscount saw his friend's
eyes gleam with an intenser fire, his head was jerked forwards; it
almost seemed as if something had been projected from his mouth, and
drawn back again with the rapidity of lightning. Then Monsieur Crapaud
resumed his position, drew in his head, and gazed mildly and sedately
before him; _but the spider was nowhere to be seen_.

Monsieur the Viscount burst into a loud laugh.

"Eh, well! Monsieur," said he, "but this is not well-bred on your
part. Who gave you leave to eat my spiders? and to bolt them in such
an unmannerly way, moreover."

In spite of this reproof Monsieur Crapaud looked in no way ashamed of
himself, and I regret to state that henceforward (with the partial
humaneness of mankind in general), Monsieur the Viscount amused
himself by catching the insects (which were only too plentiful) in an
old oyster-shell, and then setting them at liberty on the stone for
the benefit of his friend. As for him, all appeared to be fish that
came to his net--spiders and beetles, slugs and snails from the damp
corners, flies, and wood-lice found on turning up the large stone,
disappeared one after the other. The wood-lice were an especial
amusement: when Monsieur the Viscount touched them, they shut up into
tight little balls, and in this condition he removed them to the
stone, and placed them like marbles in a row, Monsieur Crapaud
watching the proceeding with rapt attention. After awhile the balls
would slowly open and begin to crawl away; but he was a very active
wood-louse indeed who escaped the suction of Monsieur Crapaud's
tongue, as, his eyes glowing with eager enjoyment, he bolted one after
another, and Monsieur the Viscount clapped his hands and applauded.

The grated window was a very fine field for spiders and other insects,
and by piling up stones on the floor, Monsieur the Viscount contrived
to scramble up to it, and fill his friend's oyster-shell with the
prey.

One day, about a year and nine months after his first arrival at the
prison, he climbed to the embrasure of the window, as usual,
oyster-shell in hand. He always chose a time for this when he knew
that the court would most probably be deserted, to avoid the danger of
being recognized through the grating. He was, therefore, not a little
startled at being disturbed in his capture of a fat black spider by a
sound of something bumping against the iron bars. On looking up, he
saw that a string was dangling before the window with something
attached to the end of it. He drew it in, and, as he did so, he
fancied that he heard a distant sound of voices and clapped hands, as
if from some window above. He proceeded to examine his prize, and
found that it was a little round pincushion of sand, such as women use
to polish their needles with, and that, apparently, it was used as a
make-weight to ensure the steady descent of a neat little letter that
was tied beside it, in company with a small lead pencil. The letter
was directed to "_The prisoner who finds this._" Monsieur the Viscount
opened it at once. This was the letter--

"_In prison, 24th Prairial, year 2_.
