his black and white feathers with a touch of yellow at the back of his
head. There are creamy-yellow feathers down his back, too, but they are
not noticeable. When he goes south the male loses his pretty coat and,
clad like his mate in yellowish-brown, is known as the rice-bird because
he feeds on the rice crops. Here he is killed because he is considered a
robber, and eaten because he is considered a delicacy.


=Meadow-Lark=

Early spring trailing through the meadows will bring you the cheery song
of the meadow-lark: "Spring-o-the-year!" Stalk him carefully and you
will find a large brown bird with yellow breast and a black crescent on
his throat. The meadow-lark is about the size of a quail. He stands
erect when he sings, and he has a rather long beak. The nest can be
found, if you look for it, but is generally out of sight under a
loosened clod of earth or tuft of grass.


=Red-Winged Blackbird=

The red-winged blackbird with his sweet call of "O-ka-lie," or
"Ouchee-la-ree-e!" you will also find on the meadows and marshes. He
builds his nest among the reeds and is one of the first of our spring
birds in the north.


=Song Sparrow=

The little song sparrow loves the open and the hot summer sunshine.
Trailing along a country road at midday, when most of the other birds
are still, you will find the song sparrow sitting on a rail fence
singing with undiminished enthusiasm.

To make friends with the birds provide food and water for them, then sit
down and wait quietly until they appear. Let them become accustomed to
seeing you sitting still every day for a while, then begin slow, careful
movements, gradually becoming more natural, and in time the birds will
allow you to walk among them as you please, if you are careful never to
frighten them. You can do this in camp; you can do it at home if you are
not living in a city. The trustful friendship of animals and birds opens
a new path of happiness and one that all girls should be able, in some
measure, to enjoy.




CHAPTER VII

WILD FOOD ON THE TRAIL

=Edible Fruits, Nuts, Roots, and Plants=


While wild foods gathered on the trail give a delightful variety to camp
fare, be advised and do not gather, still less eat, them unless you are
absolutely sure you know what they are and that they are not poisonous.
You must be able to identify a thing with certainty before tasting in
order to enjoy it in safety. It is well worth while to make a study of
the wild-growing foods, but in the meantime this chapter will help you
to know some of them. _The italicized names are of the things I know to
be edible from personal experience._ You are probably well acquainted
with the common wild fruits such as the raspberry, strawberry,
blackberry, blueberry, and huckleberry, but there are varieties of these
and all will bear description.


=Red Raspberry=

The wild berry often has a more delicious flavor and perfume than the
cultivated one of the same species. Nothing can approach the wonderful
and delicate flavor of the little wild strawberry, unless it is the wild
red raspberry; and the fully ripe wild blackberry holds a spicy
sweetness that makes the garden blackberry taste tame and flat in
comparison.

The _wild red raspberry_ is found in open fields and growing along
fences and the sides of the road. The flowers are white and grow in
loose clusters, while the berry, when fully ripe, is a deep, translucent
red. The bush is shrubby, is generally about waist-high, and the stems
bear small, hooked prickles. The leaves are what is called compound,
being composed of three or five leaflets, usually three, which branch
out from the main stem like the leaves of the rose-bush. The edges of
the leaves are irregularly toothed.

The berry is cup-shaped and fits over a core which is called the
receptacle, and from which it loosens when ripe to drop easily into your
hand, leaving the receptacle and calyx on the stem. The sweet,
far-carrying perfume of the gathered wild red raspberry will always
identify it. The season for fruit is July and August.


=Black Raspberry=

The growth and leaves of the _wild black raspberry_ are like those of
the red raspberry, and it is found in the same localities. The fruit,
like the other, is cup or thimble shaped and grows on a receptacle from
which it loosens when fully ripe. Blackcaps, these berries are often
called. They ripen in July. The berry is sometimes a little dry, but the
flavor is sweet and fine.


=Purple-Flowering Raspberry=

The purple-flowering raspberry is acid and insipid; it can hardly be
called edible, though it is not poisonous. You will find it clambering
among the rocks on the mountainside and in rocky soil. The leaves are
large and resemble grape leaves, while the flower is large, purplish-red
in color, and grows in loose clusters.


=Mountain Raspberry, Cloudberry=

The usual home of the mountain raspberry, or cloudberry, is on the
mountain-tops among the clouds. You will find it in the White Mountains
and on the coast of Maine, and it has recently been discovered at
Montauk Point, L. I. The fruit has a pleasant flavor of a honey-like
sweetness. The receptacle of the berry is broad and flat, the color is
yellow touched with red where exposed to the sun. It does not grow in
clusters like the other raspberries, but is solitary. The leaves are
roundish with from five to nine lobes, something like the leaves of the
geranium. The plant grows low, is without prickles, and the solitary
flowers are white. In the far north, where it is found in great
profusion, the cloudberry is made into delicious jam.


=Wild Strawberry=

When crossing sandy knolls or open, uncultivated fields and pastures,
the alluring perfume of the _wild strawberry_ will sometimes lead you to
the patch which shows the bright-red little berry on its low-growing
plant. It is common everywhere, though it bears the name of wild
Virginia strawberry. In Latin it is most appropriately called
_Fragaria_, meaning fragrant. The leaves are compound with three
coarsely toothed, hairy leaflets. The small white flowers grow in sparse
clusters on rather long, hairy stems. They have many deep yellow stamens
which are surrounded by the fine white petals. In fruiting time the
leaves are often bright-red.


=Low Running Blackberry=

Among the mountains and hills, down in the valleys, and on the plains;
straggling along roadsides, clinging to fence rails, and sprawling over
rocks, you will find the wild blackberry. There are several varieties,
and blackberries of some kind are common throughout the United States.

The _low running blackberry_ belongs to the dewberry type and bears the
largest and juiciest berries. It is a trailing vine with compound leaves
of from four to seven leaflets which are double-toothed. The berries are
black and glossy and grow in small clusters. They are sweet and pulpy
when thoroughly ripe and the best ones are those which ripen slowly
under the shelter of the leaves.

Blackberries grow on a receptacle or core, but unlike the raspberry,
they do not separate from it. When ripe they drop easily from the calyx
carrying the receptacle with them. The flowers are small and white, and
grow in clusters.


=Running Swamp Blackberry=

Perhaps you have seen the blackberry with fruit so small it seems only
partially developed and, like myself, have hesitated to taste it, not
being sure that it was a true blackberry and edible. It takes a good
many of these little berries to make a mouthful, but they are harmless.
They are called the _running swamp blackberry_. They ripen in August and
grow in sandy places as well as in the swamps. There are three leaflets,
seldom more, to the stem, which are blunt at the tip, smooth, shining,
and coarsely toothed. The flowers are small and white, and the stems
prickly.


=High-Bush Blackberry=

Throughout the northern states as far west as Iowa, Kansas, and Missouri
and down to North Carolina, you may find the _high-bush blackberry_. Its
stems are sometimes ten feet high; they are furrowed and thorny and the
bush grows along country roads, by fences, and in the woods. The berries
are sweet, but quite seedy. They grow in long, loose clusters and ripen
in July.


=Mountain Blackberry=

There is another variety called the _mountain blackberry_. It has a
spicy flavor, but the fruit is small and dry. The leaves are more
elongated toward the tip than those of the others and they are finely
toothed. The branches are reddish in color.


=Thornless Blackberry=

The sweetest of all varieties is said to be the thornless blackberry. It
ripens later than the others and has no thorns. The leaves are long and
narrow.


=Eastern Wild Gooseberry=

Among the mountains from Massachusetts to North Carolina, the eastern
wild gooseberry grows. It is said that its flavor is delicious. The
fruit is purplish in color and is free from all prickles. It grows on
slender stems and, like the cultivated gooseberry, is tipped with the
dry calyx. The leaves are small, rather round, and have three or five
lobes. The flowers are greenish and insignificant. The plant is three or
four feet high, with spreading branches and smooth stems.

[Illustration: WALNUT

HIGH-BUSH BLUEBERRY

WINTERGREEN

Good food on the trail.]


=Dwarf Blueberry=

Perhaps the most satisfactory of all berries when one is really hungry
is the blueberry, of which there are several varieties. The _dwarf
blueberry_ is probably the most common. It is the earliest of the
blueberries to ripen and grows in the thin, sandy, and rocky soil which
is spurned by most other plants. You will find it upon barren hillsides,
in rocky fields, and in dry pine woods. The berries are round, blue,
about the size of peas, and are covered with bloom like the grape. They
grow in thick clusters at the end of the branch and are tipped with fine
calyx teeth. The seeds are so small as to be almost unnoticed and the
soft ripe berry will bruise easily.

The flavor of all blueberries has a nutty quality which seems to give
the berry more substance as a food. The leaf is rather narrow and
pointed at each end; the under side is a lighter green than the upper
and both are glossy. In the fall the leaves turn red and drop easily.
The bush is low and the branches usually covered with small, white dots.


=Low Blueberry=

Another variety is called the _low blueberry_. It is very much like the
dwarf blueberry, but the bush grows sometimes as high as four feet. It
is stiff and upstanding and prefers the edge of the woods and sheltered
roadsides to the dry open fields. The berries are blue with a grape-like
bloom and, like the first variety, grow in thick clusters at the end of
the branch. You can grab a good handful in passing, so many are there in
a bunch.


=High-Bush Blueberry=

On the _high-bush blueberry_ the color of the berries varies. Some
bushes bear a black, shiny berry, others a smooth, blue, and still
others blue with a bloom. The sizes differ also. The berries grow in
clusters, at times on branches almost bare of leaves; some are sweet,
others sour. The leaves are a pointed oval with the under side lighter
in color than the upper; in some cases the under side is hairy. The
flowers are pinkish and shaped somewhat like a cylinder. The bush grows
occasionally to the height of ten feet, and you will generally find it
in marshy places. I know that it grows by the edge of Teedyuskung Lake
in Pike County, Pa., where our summer camp is located, but it is found
also in pasturelands.


=Dangleberry=

Another variety is called the dangleberry. The berries grow on stems in
loose clusters; they are rather large, of a dark-blue color with a
bloom; they ripen late and are not very plentiful. The pale-green leaves
are large, white, and resinous underneath, and are oval in shape. The
flowers are greenish-pink and hang like bells on slender stems.


=Wintergreen. Checkerberry=

Almost every one knows the little cherry-red _wintergreen berry_ or
_checkerberry_, and almost every one likes its sweet aromatic flavor but
few would care to make a meal of it. The fruit is too dry for hearty
eating and the flavor too decided. The evergreen leaves are leathery in
texture and their flavor is stronger than that of the berry; they are
whitish underneath and dark, glossy green above. They are oval in shape
and have a few small teeth or none at all. The flowers are white, waxy,
and cup-shaped; they hang like bells from their short stems. The plant
grows close to the ground, generally in the woods and moist places. It
is found as far north as Maine and west to Michigan.

Do not mistake the bunchberry for the wintergreen. It, too, grows low on
the ground, but the bunchberries are in close clusters at the top of the
small plant where the leaves radiate. The berries are bright scarlet,
round and smooth, and are _not_ edible. Flower and leaf resemble those
of the dogwood-tree, to which family the bunchberry belongs.


=Partridgeberry=

Another ground berry is the partridgeberry. This may be eaten but is dry
and rather tasteless. It is a red berry and grows on a slender, trailing
vine. Its leaves are small and heart-shaped; some are veined with white.
They are evergreen. The flowers grow in pairs and are like four-pointed
stars at the ends of slender tubes. Inside they are creamy white,
outside a delicate pink. The partridgeberry likes pine forests and dry
woods.


=June-Berry. Shadbush=

There are berries on trees as well as on bushes and vines, at least they
are called berries though not always resembling them.

The June-berry is a tree from ten to thirty feet in height, while its
close relative, the shadbush, is a low tree and sometimes a shrub. The
fruit resembles the seed-vessels of the rose; it grows in clusters and
is graded in color from red to violet; it has a slight bloom and the
calyx shows at the summit. It ripens in June and is said to be sweet and
delicious in flavor. The oblong leaves are sharply toothed, rounded at
the base and pointed at the tip. The young leaves are hairy. The flowers
are white and grow in clusters.

The shadbush grows in wet places and its fruit is smaller and on shorter
stems. It is also said to be more juicy. The leaves are rather woolly.

[Illustration: PERSIMMON

SWEET VIBURNUM

Fruits found principally in the south and the middle west.]


=Red Mulberry=

Although the finest _mulberry-trees_ are said to be found along the
Mississippi and the lower Ohio Rivers, I have seen large, thrifty trees
in Connecticut and on Long Island. They grow from Massachusetts to
Florida and west to Nebraska. Birds are very fond of the mulberry. The
first rose-breasted grosbeaks I ever saw were in a great mulberry-tree
on a farm in the northern part of Connecticut. The berry is shaped much
like a blackberry; it is juicy and sweet, but lacks flavor. It grows on
a short stem and is about an inch in length. In July when the berry
ripens it is a dark purple.

There is a decided variety in the shape of the leaves on one tree; some
have seven lobes, some none at all. The edges of most are scalloped,
though I have seen leaves with smooth edges.

The _white mulberry_ is seldom found growing wild. The fruit is like the
red mulberry but perfectly white.


=Sweet Viburnum. Nanny-Berry. Sheepberry=

The fruit of the sweet viburnum, nanny-berry or sheepberry, is said to
be edible. It grows on a small tree, of the honeysuckle family, in the
woods and by the streams from Canada to Georgia and west as far as
Missouri. The tree has a rusty, scaly bark and broad, oval leaves,
pointed at the tip and finely toothed. The flower clusters are large
and, though white, they appear yellowish from the many yellow anthers at
the centre. When entirely ripe the fruit is a dark blue or black and is
covered with a bloom; before ripening it is crimson. The berry grows in
clusters on slender red stems. It is elongated and rather large. At its
summit is the calyx and stigma. The seed inside the berry is a stone
which is flattened, blunt-pointed, and grooved. The fruit ripens in
September and October.


=Large-Fruited Thorn=

The thorns, large-fruited and scarlet, are edible. As a child I knew the
fruit as _haws_ and was very fond of it. The large-fruited thorn is a
low tree with branches spreading out horizontally. You will often find
it in thickets. The bark is rough and the thorns on the branches are
long, sharp, and of a light-brown color. In flavor the fruit is sweet
and apple-like; the flesh is dry and mealy; it grows on hairy stems and
the seeds are hard, rounded, and grooved. The summit is tipped with the
calyx and it ripens in September. The leaves are thick, narrowed at the
base, and rounded at the ends, with veins underneath that are prominent
and often hairy.


=Black Haw. Stag-Bush=

The fruit of the black haw, or stag-bush, is not edible until after
frost has touched it. It is oval, dark blue with bloom, and about half
