                                                       Total 2 hours.

"Now, if you're going to put in two hours every day at your toilet, it
seems to me that you won't have much time left for games, unless you can
get your prep. excused on the ground that you're studying beauty
culture. I'd like to see Bunty's face if you asked her!"

"Don't be piggish!" said Mollie. "One has no need to cultivate a tough
skin, just because one's fond of cricket and hockey. I hate to see girls
with hard red cheeks and freckles."

It was certainly not possible to obtain Mrs. Courtenay's lavender cream
or any other toilet specialties at the Camp. Beatrice and Mollie,
however, impressed with the necessity of preserving their complexions,
commandeered some of the buttermilk which was sent daily from the farm,
and dabbed it plentifully over their faces before retiring to bed,
following the application with massage to the best of their ability.
They were emulated in these toilet rites by Agatha James, Mary Payne and
Olave Parry, who also studied the beauty hints columns, and liked to try
experiments. One day Agatha found an entirely new suggestion in a copy
of "The Ladies' Portfolio." A correspondent wrote strongly advocating
common salt as a hair tonic. It was to be rubbed in at night, and
brushed out again in the morning.

Apparently nothing could be more simple. Beatrice, being on kitchen
duty, had access to the salt-box. She purloined a good breakfastcupful,
and divided the spoils with her four confederates. They all rubbed the
salt carefully into the roots of their hair. Next morning, however, when
they essayed to brush it out again, it obstinately refused to budge, and
remained hard and gritty among their tresses. They were very much
concerned. What was to be done? The only obvious remedy was to wash
their hair. Now the one drawback of the Camp was its shortage of water.
The daily supply had to be carried in buckets from the farm, and as,
owing to the warm dry weather, the well was getting low, their allowance
at present was rather small, and had to be carefully husbanded. The
amount doled out for washing purposes certainly was quite inadequate
for the due rinsing of five plentiful heads of hair.

"I suppose we shall just have to grin and bear it till we can get home
and can mermaid properly in a bath!" sighed Mary.

"Oh, I can't! I'm going to wash mine somehow. Look here, suppose we
sneak off quietly this afternoon, and go on a water hunt?"

"There isn't a stream or a pond anywhere near."

"We haven't tried the wood!"

"Well, we're not allowed there, of course."

"I don't see why we shouldn't go. The young pheasants must be all
hatched, and running about by this time, so what harm could we do?
Besides which, nobody's troubling about preserving game during the war.
They're shooting Germans instead of birds this year."

"Very likely the gamekeeper has enlisted," suggested Beatrice, "in which
case there'd be no one to stop us."

Now the strict law of the Camp confined the girls to the pasture, but as
it was the last week of the quarantine, they were beginning to grow a
little slack about rules. The five victims of the salt cure waited until
Miss Huntley and Nurse Robinson were enjoying their afternoon siesta;
then, without waiting for any permission, they climbed the fence into
the lane, found a thin place in the hedge, and scrambled into the wood.
It was a thrillingly exciting experience. Rather scratched and panting,
they surveyed the prospect. Trees were everywhere, with a thick
undergrowth of bramble and bracken. Apparently there was no path at all.

"I suppose we shall just have to wander about till we see a pond!"
remarked Agatha.

"I believe some people can find water with a forked hazel twig," said
Olave. "They hold it loosely in their hands, and it jerks when the
water's near. I wish I knew how to do it!"

"Oh, water-finders are occult people," laughed Beatrice, "the sort that
see spooks and do table-turning, you know. Besides, they find
underground water, and tell where wells ought to be dug. We want a pond
which any one can see with the naked eye, without being endowed with
psychic powers. My natural reason tells me to go down hill, and perhaps
we'll strike it in a hollow."

The girls rambled on, thoroughly enjoying the coolness of the shade and
the beauty of the wood. As Beatrice had prophesied, when they reached
the foot of the incline they came across quite a good-sized pool, with
reeds and iris growing on its banks. They rejoiced exceedingly.

Now it is one thing to wash one's hair in a bath or a basin, but quite
another to perform that operation in a pond with shallow muddy edges.
The girls took off their shoes and stockings, tucked up their skirts and
waded into the middle, where they made gallant efforts at dipping and
rinsing their heads, and contrived to get uncommonly wet in the process.
They wrung out their dripping tresses, mopped them with handkerchiefs
(for nobody had dared to take a towel), and spread them out over their
shoulders to dry. There was an open glade close by, where they could
squat in the sunshine, and let the breeze help the process. Mary had had
the forethought to put a comb in her pocket and she lent it round in
turns. They were sitting in a row, like five mermaids, extremely
complacent and satisfied with themselves, when footsteps suddenly
crashed through the wood, and a middle-aged man approached them. For
once Beatrice's calculations were wrong. The gamekeeper had not yet
enlisted. No doubt he would have been far better employed in the
trenches somewhere in France, but here he was, still in England, and
looking extremely surly and truculent.

"You've no business to be in this wood," he began. "Can't you read the
trespass notices? There's plenty of them about. What do you mean by
coming in here, disturbing the pheasants?"

"We aren't doing any harm!" protested Olave.

"That's neither here nor there. You've no business here, and you know
it! Are you from that camp up the hill?"

"Yes."

"Then take yourselves off at once--spreading small-pox!"

"We've none of us had small-pox!" returned Beatrice indignantly. "We've
told you we weren't doing any harm. Still, if this will make things
right----" and she slipped half-a-crown into his hand.

The gamekeeper's expression changed considerably, and his tone
instantly became more respectful.

"Well, young ladies, I have to do my duty, and of course you understand
the pheasants mustn't be disturbed anyhow. Perhaps you won't mind going
back to the Camp now. I'll show you a path that will take you into the
lane."

He led the way, and the girls followed in subdued silence, feeling
rather crestfallen. Mollie was yearning to tell him that he ought to be
doing his duty by his country instead of by the pheasants. If at that
moment she could have found a white feather, I believe she would have
presented it to him. The path ended in a small gate which he unlocked.
He ushered them solemnly into the lane, pointed out a trespass notice
that was nailed conspicuously on to a tree, and then retired into the
fastnesses of the wood. The girls decided that, unless actually
compelled, they would not divulge where they had been.

"It was a bit of hard luck to be caught!" giggled Olave. "Didn't you
feel queer when he came up?"

"I thought he was a beast, and didn't deserve propitiating with a tip!"
declared Agatha.

"But we washed our hair!" rejoiced Mary, plaiting her long dark
pigtail.




CHAPTER XII

Captain Winona


To the entire satisfaction of themselves, their relations, and Dr.
Barnes, the girls passed safely through their period of quarantine, and
were certified as fit once more to take their places among the rest of
the world. They left the Camp almost with regret. They had been such a
jolly, merry party, and had enjoyed such high jinks there, that they
felt their departure closed a pleasant episode. They were going straight
home to holidays, however, which was a very different matter from
returning to work. The remainder of July and the month of August passed
very swiftly to Winona. She missed Percy, who was in training with his
regiment, but since the advent of their new governess, Letty and Mamie
had grown more sensible, and proved quite pleasant companions. Letty
especially seemed suddenly to have awakened, so far as her intellectual
capacities were concerned. She had begun to devour Scott and Dickens,
took a keen interest in nature study, and tried--sometimes with rather
comical effect--to be extremely superior and grown-up.

"She's far cleverer really than I am," thought Winona. "Pity she's not
at the Seaton High! She'd be the star of her form directly. I wish she
could get a scholarship some day."

With her school experience in coaching juniors, Winona was able to give
her family some drilling in the matter of cricket, though she did not
find that younger brothers and sisters proved such docile pupils as the
members of III.a. and III.b. It was the usual case of "a prophet is not
without honor, save in his own country," and while to High School
juniors she preserved the authority and dignity of a senior, to Letty,
Mamie, Ernie, Godfrey, and Dorrie she was "only Winona." She practiced
tennis with the Vicarage girls, and was surprised to find how much her
play had improved. Last summer they had nearly always beaten her, now it
was she who scored the victories.

"I've learnt how to play games at 'The High,' even if my report was only
moderate," she said to herself.

To make up for the long holiday caused by the small-pox scare, school
was to commence at the beginning of September. Aunt Harriet, who had not
been well, and was taking a rest in Scotland, wrote that her house in
Abbey Close was shut up for the present, but that she was making other
arrangements for her great-niece until her return. This term a hostel
was to be opened in connection with the High School, and Winona was to
be a boarder there for a few weeks. She was uncertain whether she liked
the prospect or not, but she nevertheless left home in good spirits.

The hostel was under the superintendence of Miss Kelly. It was prettily
furnished, and looked bright and pleasant. The girls had a common
sitting-room, where they could read, write, paint or play games, and the
bedrooms were divided into cubicles. So far there were only ten
boarders, though there was accommodation for eighteen, but no doubt the
numbers would be increased when the venture became better known.

The school seemed very strange without the familiar figures of Margaret
Howell, Kirsty Paterson, Patricia Marshall and the other prefects. All
of the Sixth had left except Linda Fletcher and Dorrie Pollock, and the
members of V.a. were now promoted to the top form. Linda
Fletcher was head of the school, the new prefects being Hilda Langley,
Agatha James, Bessie Kirk, Grace Olliver, Evelyn Richards and Garnet
Emerson. Linda, with her past year's experience, made an extremely
suitable "Head." She understood thoroughly what ought to be done, and at
once called a mass meeting of the whole school in the gymnasium.
Everybody clapped as Linda stood up on the platform to open the
proceedings. She had been a favorite as a prefect, so she was welcomed
in her new capacity of "General."

"Girls!" she began. "I felt it was better to lose no time in calling
this meeting to settle the affairs of the coming school year. I am in a
difficult position, because I have to follow such an extremely able and
efficient 'Head.' I'm afraid I can't hope to rival Margaret Howell
(cries of "Yes! Yes!" and "You'll do!" from the audience), but at least
I shall try to do my duty. During the past year we may fairly consider
that the 'Seaton High' made enormous strides. Owing to the exertions of
our former 'Head' and prefects a most excellent foundation has been
laid. The Dramatic Society, the Debating Club, the Literary Association,
the Photographic Union and the Natural History League all accomplished
very satisfactory work, and may be considered in a most flourishing
condition. Perhaps, though, our greatest improvement is in the direction
of games. This may not appear on the surface, for though we won five
hockey matches, it was impossible, for reasons well known to you, to
have fixtures for hockey and tennis. We feel, nevertheless, that in
spite of our inability to test our skill against that of other schools
we are conscious of the enormous all-round improvement that has taken
place in our play. It was Kirsty Paterson's policy to train recruits for
the games so that every girl in the school might be a possible champion.
How well she succeeded I hope our next season's matches may testify. Let
us all work together for the good of the school, and try to establish
the reputation of the 'Seaton High.' I need not remind you that
everything in the coming year will depend upon the energy and efficiency
of the Games Captain. As soon as I knew that I was 'Head,' I wrote to
Kirsty, who is staying in Cornwall, and asked for her opinion upon this
most important point. I want to read you an extract from her reply,
which I received this morning. She says:

"'You ask me who is to be the new Games Captain. Well, of course it is
a delicate matter to nominate my own successor, but from my knowledge of
everybody's capacities I should most decidedly suggest Winona Woodward.
She is a good all-round player herself, and has a particular aptitude
for organization, which should prove invaluable. She thoroughly
appreciates the advantage of having reserves to fall back upon, and is
most keen on keeping up the standard. I do hope the dear old "High" will
have a splendid year. I shall be frantic to hear how you get on. Send me
a p.c. with the result of the meeting.'

"Well," continued Linda, "you've heard Kirsty's opinion. It coincides
entirely with mine. Will some one kindly propose that Winona Woodward
shall be elected Games Captain?"

"I have much pleasure in making the proposal," said Bessie Kirk,
standing up promptly.

"And I have much pleasure in seconding it," murmured Grace Olliver.

"Will all who are in favor kindly hold up their hands? Carried
unanimously! I'm extremely glad, as I'm sure Winona is 'the right man
for the job,' and worthy to carry on Kirsty's traditions. I vote we give
her three cheers!"

Winona flushed crimson as the hip-hip-hoorays rang forth. She had never
expected such a complete walk-over. She had known that her name was to
be submitted for the captaincy, but she had thought that Bessie Kirk and
Marjorie Kemp held equal chances, and that the voting would probably be
fairly evenly divided. That Kirsty should have written to nominate her
was an immense gratification. Kirsty's praise at the time had been
scant, and Winona had no idea that her former chief held her in such
esteem. To Winona the occasion seemed the triumph of her life. She would
rather be Games Captain than have any other honor that could possibly be
offered to her. Glorious visions of successful matches, of shields or
cups won, and a county reputation for the school swam before her eyes.
And she--Winona Woodward--was to have the privilege of leading and
directing all this! It was indeed a thrilling prospect. Her thoughts
went back to the symposium of a year ago, when as a new and unknown
girl, she had listened to Margaret Howell's inspiring speech. How
unlikely it had seemed then that she would ever have a hand in making
school history, but how her spirit had been stirred, and how she had
longed to do her part! It was something to have realized her pet
ambition.

"It was most awfully good of you to propose me," she said to Bessie Kirk
afterwards. "You'd a splendid chance yourself."

"Not I!" returned Bessie lightly. "Kirsty's letter settled the whole
business. I shouldn't have made nearly as good a Captain as you. I don't
care to bother with the kids, and I'd hate all the business part of it,
making the fixtures and that sort of thing, you know. You'll be A1, and
we'll all play up no end. I believe we dare venture a fixture with Grant
Park this season."

Winona fully realized the responsibilities of her important position,
and began at once to pick up the threads of her new duties. She took
possession of the Games Register, with its records of past matches, and
began to make plans for hockey fixtures. The term had begun so early
that the other schools in the county had not yet re-opened; that,
however, was really an advantage, as it gave her more time for
consideration. At present the September weather was hot as summer, and
tennis and cricket were still in full swing. In order to spur on
enthusiasm Winona organized a school tennis tournament. The result was
highly satisfactory. Several new and unsuspected stars swam into view,
and she determined to keep her eye upon them as possible champions for
next summer.

"You never know what a girl's capable of till you try her!" she confided
to Garnet. "Who would ever have thought that that stupid-looking little
Emily Cooper could beat Ethel March? I was simply astounded. I've my
plans for Emily, I can tell you! And I believe Bertha March is going to
be a second Annie Hardy. She serves in exactly the same way. Oh, I've
hopes for next summer. Brilliant, glorious hopes."

The school took every opportunity of using the fine weather while it
lasted. The Photographic Union organized an outing to Linworth, a
picturesque town six miles away, where an old castle, an Elizabethan
mansion, a river and many quaint streets made subjects for their
cameras, and promised to provide materials for an exhibition later on,
when films were developed and prints taken. The Natural History League
had another delightful ramble under Miss Lever's leadership, and
secured additional specimens for the museum. On this occasion Winona and
Garnet started in better time for the station, and did not get into the
wrong train, as they had done on the expedition to Monkend Woods.

"Dollikins," as Miss Lever was affectionately nicknamed, was as great a
favorite as ever among the girls. Owing to changes on the staff, she now
had charge of IV.a. and taught mathematics throughout the
junior forms, so that the seniors saw little of her in school hours. On
a ramble she was as jolly as one of themselves.

The Sixth had a new mistress, Miss Goodson, who had only joined the
staff this term. The form was rather uncertain whether to like her or
not. It was rumored that she had been engaged specially to coach them
for the matriculation. So far the High School had been laying
foundations, and had not sent in any candidates for public examinations.
This year, however, having a certain amount of promising material in the
Sixth, Miss Bishop had decided that the time was ripe for trying to win
the educational laurels towards which their training had been directed.
Miss Goodson came from a High School in the north, and brought with her
a reputation for successful coaching. She was well up in all her
subjects, but she was a cold and not very inspiring person. She was apt
to concentrate her energies on the clever members of her form, and leave
the less brilliant to stumble along as best they could. Winona, who
certainly belonged to the second category, did not like Miss Goodson,
while Garnet was strongly in her favor.

In her new capacity of prefect, Garnet proved a success. She was as
enthusiastic over the "bookish" side of the school as Winona over the
athletic department. She was President of the Literary Association, a
member of the Debating Club Committee, and head librarian. The school
library had grown and prospered exceedingly since its installation by
Margaret Howell. It now numbered nearly five hundred volumes, and its
shelves almost filled the Prefects' Room. Garnet managed it
systematically. She had special hours at which books were issued, and
assistants whose business it was to be on duty at the specified times.

Among other improvements in the school welcomed by the girls was the
advent of a fresh drilling mistress, and some new apparatus for
gymnastics. Under Miss Barbour, "Gym" became highly popular, and it was
felt that an athletic display would probably be held at Christmas. This
was something to work for, and every one seemed much keener than
formerly. Winona was naturally an enthusiast, and tried to keep others
up to the mark. She had once seen an "Assault-at-Arms" at Percy's
college, and the memory of it made her long for the Seaton High School
to have a similar opportunity of showing its prowess. She and a select
circle of friends practiced whenever possible. Altogether among the
various athletic activities of the school, Captain Winona promised
herself a very enjoyable year in the Sixth Form.




CHAPTER XIII

The Hostel


Aunt Harriet had intended to return home towards the end of September,
but her health continued so unsatisfactory that her doctor ordered her
to Harrogate to drink the waters, and advised a long period of rest and
change before again taking up the many occupations with which she busied
herself in Seaton. Miss Beach was a restive patient, and Dr. Sidwell
knew that if he once allowed her to be within reach of committees, she
would plunge herself into work, while to keep away from the scenes of
her former activity was her only chance of recovery.

The house in Abbey Close was still shut up, and Winona for the present
term was established at the Hostel. On the whole she liked it. She
missed certain things, particularly her own bedroom, and the quiet
dining-room where she had been accustomed to prepare her lessons, but
life in a community had its compensations. It was a nuisance to have to
sleep in the same dormitory with Betty Carlisle, who snored offensively,
but, on the other hand, Winona's cubicle was next to the window, with
the little balcony that overlooked the park, and every morning she could
watch an aeroplane hovering and flitting like a beautiful dragon-fly
over the city. Seaton possessed a Government aircraft factory, and each
finished machine had to be carefully tested. All the girls in the school
were extremely interested in the exploits of Lieutenant Mainwaring, a
member of the Flying Corps, who might constantly be seen practicing. He
was a cousin of Elsie Mainwaring, a Fifth Form girl. Elsie recorded his
doings with immense pride, and provided up-to-date information of his
whereabouts. He was a very daring young fellow, and was reported to have
looped the loop. Winona had never witnessed the performance of this
feat, so she looked out eagerly each day, hoping she might have the luck
to see him do it. When the biplane came swooping over the park, she
would wave her handkerchief to it from the balcony by way of
encouragement. She was immensely patriotic, and she considered that our
airmen deserved praise almost beyond any other branch of our forces. She
often wished Percy were in the Flying Squadron. She cut out all the
pictures of aeroplanes from the Seaton _Graphic_, and pinned them up in
her cubicle. There was a portrait of Lieutenant Mainwaring among the
number, and this she placed on her dressing-table, side by side with
Percy's photograph. According to Elsie it was a very bad likeness, but
as Winona had not seen the original, except at a distance, she had no
means of judging. Curiosity led her to borrow a pair of field-glasses
from Garnet. She was standing one morning on the balcony when the
aeroplane came in sight, and hovered quite low down over the park,
exactly opposite the hostel windows. Through her glasses Winona could
plainly see the occupant. The impulse to smile and wave was
