boxes and drawing books, were being escorted by Althea Riley, one of the
prefects, along the corridor to the studio. Hitherto, by dint of
judicious curbing, they had always walked two and two in decent line and
had refrained from prohibited conversation. To-day they surged upstairs
in an unseemly rabble, chattering and talking like a flock of rooks or
jackdaws at sunset. It was in vain that Althea tried to restore order,
her efforts at discipline were simply scouted by the unruly mob, who
rushed into the studio helter-skelter, took their places anyhow, and
only controlled themselves at the entrance of Miss Godwin, the art
mistress.

Althea, flushed, indignant, and most upset, sought her fellow-prefects.

"Shall I go and complain to Miss Burd?" she asked.

"Um--I don't think I should yet," said Lispeth a little doubtfully. "You
see, Miss Burd has given us authority and she likes us to use it
ourselves as much as we can, without appealing to her. Of course in any
extremity she'll support us. I'll pin up a notice in the junior
cloak-room and see what effect that has. It may settle them."

Lispeth stayed after four o'clock until the last coat and hat had
disappeared from the hooks in the juniors' dressing-room. Then she
pinned her ultimatum on their notice board:

"In consequence of the extremely bad behavior of certain girls on the
stairs this afternoon, the prefects give notice that should any
repetition of such conduct occur, the names of the offenders will be
taken and they will be reported to Miss Burd for punishment."

"That ought to finish those kids!" she thought as she pushed in the
drawing-pins.

There was more than the usual amount of buzzing conversation next
morning as juvenile heads bumped each other in their efforts to read the
notice. The result, however, was absolutely unprecedented in the annals
of the school. It was the custom of the Sixth Form, and of many of the
Fifth, to take their lunch and eat it quietly in the gymnasium. There
was no hard and fast rule about this, but it was generally understood to
be a privilege of the upper forms only, and intermediates and juniors
were not supposed to intrude. To-day most of the elder girls were
sitting in clumps at the far end of the gymnasium, when through the open
door marched a most amazing procession of juniors. They were headed by
Phyllis Smith and Dorrie Barnes carrying between them a small blackboard
upon which was chalked:

      DOWN WITH PREFECTS!
       RIGHTS FOR JUNIORS!
    THE WHOLE SCHOOL IS EQUAL!

After these ringleaders marched a determined crowd waving flags made of
handkerchiefs fastened to the end of rulers. A band, equipped with combs
covered with tissue-paper torn from their drawing-books, played the
strains of the "Marseillaise." They advanced towards the seniors in a
very truculent fashion.

"Well, really!" exclaimed Lispeth, recovering from her momentary
amazement. "What's the meaning of all this, I'd like to know?"

"It's a strike!" said Dorrie proudly, as she and Phyllis paused so as to
display the blackboard before the eyes of the Sixth. "We don't see why
you big girls should lord it over us any longer. We'll obey the
mistresses, but we'll not obey prefects."

"You'll just jolly well do as you're told, you impudent young monkeys!"
declared Lispeth, losing her temper. "Here, clear out of this gymnasium
at once!"

"We shan't! We've as good a right here as you!"

"We ought to send wardens to the School Parliament."

"We haven't any voice in school affairs!"

"It's not fair!"

"We shan't stand it any longer!"

The shrill voices of the insurgents reached crescendo as they hurled
forth their defiance. They were evidently bent on red-hot revolution.
Lispeth rose to read the Riot Act.

"If you don't take yourselves off I shall go for Miss Burd, and
a nice row you'd get into then. I give you while I count ten.
One--two--three--four----"

Whether the strikers would have stood their ground or not is still an
unsolved problem, but at that opportune moment the big school bell began
to clang, and Miss Willough, the drill mistress, in her blue tunic,
entered the gymnasium ready to take her next class. At sight of her,
Dorrie hastily wiped the blackboard, and the juniors fled to their own
form-rooms, suppressing flags and musical instruments on the way. Miss
Willough gazed at them meditatively, but made no comment, and the Sixth,
hurrying to a literature lesson, had no time to offer explanations.

Lispeth, more upset than she cared to own, talked the matter over with
her mother when she went to dinner at one o'clock. She was a very
conscientious girl and anxious to do her duty as "Head." As a result of
the home conference she went to Miss Burd, explained the situation, and
asked to be allowed to have the whole school together for ten minutes
before four o'clock.

"It's only lately there's been this trouble," she said. "I believe if I
talk nicely to the girls I can get back my influence. That's what Mother
advised. She said 'try persuasion first.'"

"She's right, too," agreed Miss Burd. "If you can get them to obey you
willingly it's far better than if I have to step in and put my foot
down. What we want is to change the general current of thought."

Speculation was rife in the various forms as the closing bell rang at
3:45 instead of at 4 o'clock, and the girls were told to assemble in the
Lecture Hall, and were put on their honor to behave themselves. To their
surprise, the mistresses, after seeing them seated, left the room. Miss
Burd mounted the platform and announced:

"Lispeth Scott wishes to speak to you all, and I should like you to know
that anything she has to say is said with my entire approval and
sanction. I hope you will listen to her in perfect silence."

Then she followed the other mistresses.

All eyes were fixed on Lispeth as she ascended the platform. With her
tall ample figure, earnest blue eyes, light hair, and fair face flushed
with the excitement of her task she looked a typical English girl, and
made what she hoped was a typical English speech.

"I asked you to come," she began rather shyly, "because I think lately
there have been some misunderstandings in the school, and I want, if
possible, to put them straight. There has been a good deal of talk about
'equality,' and some of you say there oughtn't to be prefects. I wonder
exactly what you mean by 'equality?' Certainly all girls aren't born
with equal talents, yet each separate soul is of value to the community
and must not go to waste. The test of a school is not how many show
pupils it has turned out, but how _all_ its pupils are prepared to face
the world. I think we can only do this by sticking together and trying
to help each other. In every community, however, there must be leaders.
An army would soon go to pieces without its officers! The prefects and
wardens have been chosen as leaders, and it ought to be a point of honor
with you to uphold their authority. I assure you they don't work for
their own good, but for the good of the school. I hear it is a grievance
with the juniors that they mayn't elect wardens for the Council.
Well--they shall do that when they're older; it will be something for
them to look forward to! There's a privilege, though, that we can and
will give them. We're going to start a Junior branch of the Rainbow
League, and I think when they're doing their level best to help others,
they'll forget about themselves. Carlyle says that the very dullest
drudge has the elements of a hero in him if he once sees the chance of
aiming at something higher than happiness. Please don't say I'm
preaching, for I hate to be a prig! Only we'd all made up our minds to
do our 'bit' in 'after the war work,' and it seems such a pity if we
forget, and let the tone of the school drop--as it certainly _has_
dropped lately. I'm sure if we all think about it we can keep it up, and
Seniors and Juniors can work together without any horrid squabbles. We
big girls were juniors ourselves once, and you little ones will be
seniors some day, so that's one way of looking at it. Now that's all
I've got to say, except that any Juniors who like can stay behind now
and join the Junior Branch of the Rainbow League. We want to get up a
special Scrap-book Union, and Miss Burd says she'll give a prize for the
best scrap-book, and also for the best home-made doll. She's going to
have an exhibition on breaking-up day."




CHAPTER XII

The Rainbow League


Though Lispeth, in her agitation, had not said half the nice things she
had intended to say, her little speech had good effect. It reminded the
girls of some of the high ideals with which they had started the term,
and which, like many high and beautiful things, were in danger of
getting crowded out of the way by commoner interests. Everybody suddenly
remembered the exhibition and sale which was to come off before
Christmas, and made a spurt to send some adequate contribution. The
juniors, flattered at having a special branch of their own of the
Rainbow League, and time allotted in school to its work, dabbed away
blissfully at scrap-book making, with gummy overalls and seccotiny
fingers, but complacent faces. The prefects, with intent, dropped in
when possible to admire the efforts.

"I believe," said Lispeth to her special confidante Althea, "that
perhaps we were making rather a mistake. You can't have any influence
with those kids unless you keep well in touch with them. I was so busy,
I just let them slide before, and I suppose that was partly why they got
out of hand, though the little monkeys had no business to get up that
impudent strike! They're as different as possible now, and some of them
are quite decent kiddies. Dorrie Barnes brought me a rose this morning.
I suppose it was meant as a sort of peace-offering."

It was arranged to hold what was called "The Rainbow Fete" on
breaking-up afternoon, and parents and friends were invited to the
ceremony. There was to be both a sale and an exhibition. The best of the
toys and little fancy articles were to be at a special stall, and would
be sold for the benefit of the "War Orphans' Fund," and those that were
not quite up to standard would nevertheless be on view, and would be
sent away afterwards to help to deck Christmas trees in the slums. _THE_
stall, as the girls called it, was of course the center of attraction.
It was draped with colored muslins in the rainbow tints, and though real
irises were unobtainable, some vases of artificial ones formed a very
good substitute. The home-made toys were really most creditable to the
handicraft-workers, and had been ingeniously contrived with bobbins,
small boxes, and slight additions of wood, cardboard, and paper, aided
by the color-box. Windmills, whirligigs, carts, engines, trains, dolls'
house furniture, jigsaw puzzles, cardboard animals with movable limbs,
black velveteen cats with bead eyes, beautifully dressed rag dolls, wool
balls and rattles for babies, and dear little books of extracts, were
some of the things set out in a tempting display. Fil, whose slim
fingers excelled in dainty work, had contributed three charming booklets
of poetry and nice bits cut from magazines and newspapers, the back
being of colored linen embroidered with devices in silk. They were so
pretty that they were all snapped up beforehand, and could have been
sold three times over.

"You promised one to me--you know you did!" urged Linda Slater, much
aggrieved at the non-performance of an order.

"Well, I thought I'd have time to do four, and could only manage three,"
apologized Fil. "You see, they really take such ages, and Miss Strong
was getting raggy about my prep."

"You _might_ make me one for my birthday!" begged Evie.

"Certainly not! Those that ask shan't have!"

"Well, couldn't you do some during the Christmas holidays?"

"No, I can't and shan't!" snapped Fil. "I'm sick to death of making
booklets, and I'm not going to touch one of them during the holidays.
You seem to think I've nothing else to do except cut bits out of
magazines for your benefit!"

"There! There! Poor old sport! Don't get baity!"

"You shouldn't do them so jolly well, and then you wouldn't get asked!"

_The_ stall occupied a position of importance at the end of the lecture
hall, and the rest of the exhibits were put round on trestle tables.
They were what Ingred described as "a mixed lot." Some of the animals
were bulgy in their proportions, or shaky in their cardboard limbs, the
wheels of the carts did not quite correspond, the windmills were apt to
stick, or the puzzles would not quite fit. In spite of their
imperfections, however, they looked attractive, and would, no doubt,
give great pleasure to the little people who were to receive them, and
who were hardly likely to be very critical of their workmanship.

To make the afternoon more festive, there was to be a tea stall, to
which the girls brought contributions of cakes, and music was to be
given from the platform, so that the scene might resemble a cafe
chantant. Ingred had been chosen as one of the artistes, and arrayed in
her best brown velveteen dress, with a new pale-yellow hair ribbon, she
waited about in her usual agonies of stage fright. Learning from Dr.
Linton, however improving it might be to her touch, was hardly conducive
to self-complacency, and, after having suffered much vituperation for
her imperfect rendering of a piece, it was decidedly appalling to have
to play it in public, especially with the horrible possibility that at
any moment her master might happen to pop in to view the exhibition and
arrive in time for her performance.

"I shall have forty fits if I see him in the room, I know I shall!" she
confided to Fil. "You've no idea how he scares me. I have my lessons on
the study piano generally, and if only he would sit still I shouldn't
mind, but he _will_ get up and prowl about the room, and swing out his
arms when he's explaining things; he only _just_ missed knocking over
that pretty statuette of Venus the other day. I'm sure if Miss Burd knew
how he flourishes about, she wouldn't let him loose among her cherished
ornaments!"

"Perhaps he won't turn up to-day!"

"Oh yes! He said he should make a point of buying a toy for his little
boy. If I break down suddenly in the midst of my piece, you'll know the
reason. I'm shaking now."

"Poor old sport! Don't take it so hard!"

By three o'clock the lecture hall was filled with what Lilias Ashby (who
had undertaken to write a report for the school magazine) described as
"a distinguished crowd." Fathers indeed were as few and far between as
currants in a war pudding, but mothers, aunts, and sisters had responded
nobly to the invitations, and were being conducted round by the girls to
see their special exhibits.

Mrs. Saxon had been unable to come that afternoon, but Quenrede had
turned up, looking very pretty in a plum-colored hat, and giving herself
slight airs as of one who is now a finished young lady, and no longer a
mere schoolgirl. She chatted, in rather mincing tones, to Miss Burd
herself, while Ingred stood by in awe and amazement, and when she bought
a cup of tea from Doreen Hayward at the refreshment stall, she murmured:
"Oh, thanks _so_ much!" with the manner of a patroness, though only six
months ago she and Doreen had sat side by side in the Science Lectures.
It was a new phase of Quenrede, which, though accepted to some extent at
home, had never shown itself before with quite such aggravated symptoms.

Ingred, walking as it were in her shadow, was not sure whether to admire
or laugh. It was, of course, something to have such a pretty and
decidedly stylish sister; she appreciated the angle at which the
plum-colored hat was set, and the self-restraint that made the tiny iced
bun last such an enormous time, when a schoolgirl would have finished it
in three bites, and have taken another. A grand manner was certainly
rather an asset to the family, and Queenie was palpably impressing some
of the intermediates, who poked each other to look at her.

"It's my turn to play soon, and I'm just shivering!" whispered Ingred.

"Nonsense, child! Don't be such a little goose!" declared her sister
airily. "It's only a school party--there's really nothing to make a fuss
about!"

"_Only_ a school party!" That seemed to Ingred the absolute limit.
Quenrede last term had, in her turn, shivered and trembled when she had
been obliged to mount the platform! Could a few short months have indeed
effected so magnificent a change of front?

"All the same, it's I who've got to play, not she! It's easy enough to
tell somebody else not to mind," thought Ingred, as, in answer to Miss
Clough's beckoning finger, she made her way towards the piano to undergo
her ordeal.

One point in favor of the recital was that the audience moved about the
room and went on buying toys or cups of tea and cakes, and even talking,
instead of sitting on rows of seats doing nothing but watching and
listening. It was rather comforting to think that the concert was really
only like the performance of a band, a soothing accompaniment to
conversation. Ingred opened her music with an almost "don't care"
feeling. For one delirious moment she felt at her ease, then, alack! her
mood suddenly changed. In a last lightning glance towards the audience
she noticed among the crowd near the tea-stall the tall thin figure,
cadaverous face, and long lank hair of Dr. Linton. The sight instantly
wrecked her world of composure. If it had not been for the fact that
Miss Clough was standing near, and nodding to her to begin, she would
have run away from the platform.

"Oh, the ill luck of it!" she thought. "If I had only played last time,
instead of Gertie, I'd have had it over before he came into the room! I
know he'll be just listening to every note, and criticizing!"

With a horrid feeling, as if her breath would not come properly, and her
head was slightly spinning, and her hands dithering, Ingred began her
"Nocturne," trying with a sort of "drowning" effort to keep her mind on
the music in front of her, instead of on the music-master at the other
end of the room. For sixteen bars she succeeded, then came the hitch.
She had rejected the offered services of Doris Grainger, and had elected
to turn over her own pages. She now made a hasty dash at the leaf, her
trembling hand was not sufficiently agile, the sheet slipped, she
grabbed in vain, and the music fluttered on to the floor. The
performance came to a dead halt. Doris and Miss Clough rushed to the
rescue, but they were put politely aside by a tall figure who stepped on
to the platform, and Dr. Linton himself picked up the scattered sheets
of the unfortunate "Nocturne." He arranged them together in order,
placed them upon the stand, and, addressing his dismayed pupil, said:

"Now, then, begin again, and _I_ shall turn over for you. Bring out that
_forte_ passage properly! Remember there's a pedal on the piano!"

It was like having a lesson in public. Ingred felt too scared to begin,
and yet she was too much afraid of her master to refuse, so the bigger
fright prevailed, and--as a cat will swim to escape an enemy--she dashed
at the "Nocturne." Once restarted, it went magnificently: afterwards,
she always declared that Dr. Linton must have hypnotized her, she was
sure her unaided efforts could never have rendered it in such style. He
behaved as if he were conducting an orchestra, soothing the _piano_
passages and spurring her on to _fortissimo_ efforts, even humming the
melody in his eccentric fashion, quite unmindful of the audience. The
enthusiastic applause at the end was so evidently for both master and
pupil that he bowed instinctively in response.

Ingred, remembering, now the ordeal was over, that she was nervous,
melted from the platform, and left him to receive the laurels. He did a
characteristic but very kind act, looked round for his pupil, and then,
perceiving that she had beaten a retreat, sat down to the piano himself,
and, unasked, gave an encore for her. A solo from Dr. Linton was an
unexpected treat, especially as he was in the mood for music, and played
with a sort of rapture that carried his listeners into an ethereal world
of delicate sounds. Ingred, hidden behind a protecting barrier of
schoolfellows, could see all the sylphs dancing and the fairy pipers
piping as the crisp notes came tripping from his practised fingers. At
the end she came back as from a dream, to realize that she was not in
elf-land, but in the College Lecture Hall, and that she was sitting on a
form next to Miss Strong, who held on her knee a little red-coated,
brown-haired boy with Dr. Linton's unmistakable dark eyes.

In that instant, as the music ceased, Ingred received quite a sudden and
new impression of Miss Strong; there was a tender look on the mistress's
face, as she held her arm around the child, and she whispered something
to him that made the dark eyes dance. He slipped from her lap, and hand
in hand they went together towards the toy-stall. It was quite a pretty
