The wind that blows, that wind is best.
My little craft sails not alone,--
A thousand fleets, from every zone,
Are out upon a thousand seas,
And what for me were favoring breeze
Might dash another with the shock
Of doom upon some hidden rock.

I leave it to a higher Will
To stay or speed me, trusting still
That all is well, and sure that He
Who launched my bark will sail with me
Through storm and calm, and will not fail,
Whatever breezes may prevail,
To land me, every peril past,
Within His Haven at the last.
Then blow it east, or blow it west,
The wind that blows, that wind is best.

    _Caroline H. Mason._




The School-Master's Guests


I

The district school-master was sitting behind his great book-laden desk,
Close-watching the motions of scholars, pathetic and gay and grotesque.
As whisper the half-leafless branches, when autumn's brisk breezes have
      come,
His little scrub-thicket of pupils sent upward a half-smothered hum.
There was little Tom Timms on the front seat, whose face was withstanding
      a drouth.
And jolly Jack Gibbs just behind him, with a rainy new moon for a mouth;
There were both of the Smith boys, as studious as if they bore names that
      could bloom,
And Jim Jones, a heaven-built mechanic, the slyest young knave in the room,
With a countenance grave as a horse's, and his honest eyes fixed on a pin,
Queer-bent on a deeply-laid project to tunnel Joe Hawkins's skin.
There were anxious young novices, drilling their spelling-books into their
      brain,
Loud-puffing each half-whispered letter, like an engine just starting its
      train;
There was one fiercely muscular fellow, who scowled at the sums on his
      slate,
And leered at the innocent figures a look of unspeakable hate;
And set his white teeth close together, and gave his thin lips a short
      twist,
As to say, "I could whip you, confound you! could such things be done with
      the fist!"
There were two knowing girls in the corner, each one with some beauty
      possessed,
In a whisper discussing the problem which one the young master likes best;
A class in the front, with their readers, were telling, with difficult
      pains,
How perished brave Marco Bozzaris while bleeding at all of his veins;
And a boy on the floor to be punished, a statue of idleness stood,
Making faces at all of the others, and enjoying the scene all he could.


II

Around were the walls, gray and dingy, which every old school-sanctum hath,
With many a break on their surface, where grinned a wood-grating of lath.
A patch of thick plaster, just over the school-master's rickety chair,
Seemed threat'ningly o'er him suspended, like Damocles' sword, by a hair.
There were tracks on the desks where the knife-blades had wandered in
      search of their prey;
Their tops were as duskily spattered as if they drank ink every day.
The square stove it puffed and it crackled, and broke out in red flaming
      sores,
Till the great iron quadruped trembled like a dog fierce to rush
      out-o'-doors.
White snowflakes looked in at the windows; the gale pressed its lips to the
      cracks;
And the children's hot faces were streaming, the while they were freezing
      their backs.


III

Now Marco Bozzaris had fallen, and all of his suff'rings were o'er,
And the class to their seats were retreating, when footsteps were heard
      at the door;
And five of the good district fathers marched into the room in a row,
And stood themselves up by the fire, and shook off their white cloaks of
      snow.
And the spokesman, a grave squire of sixty, with countenance solemnly sad,
Spoke thus, while the children all listened, with all of the ears that
      they had:
"We've come here, school-master, in-tendin' to cast an inquirin' eye
      'round,
Concernin' complaints that's been entered, an' fault that has lately been
      found;
To pace off the width of your doin's, an' witness what you've been about,
An' see if it's paying to keep you, or whether we'd best turn ye out.

"The first thing I'm bid for to mention is, when the class gets up to read
You give 'em too tight of a reinin', an' touch 'em up more than they need;
You're nicer than wise in the matter of holdin' the book in one han',
An' you turn a stray _g_ in their _doin's_, an' tack an odd _d_
      on their _an'_;
There ain't no great good comes of speakin' the words so polite, as I see,
Providin' you know what the facts is, an' tell 'em off jest as they be.
An' then there's that readin' in corncert, is censured from first unto
      last;
It kicks up a heap of a racket, when folks is a-travelin' past.
Whatever is done as to readin', providin' things go to my say,
Shan't hang on no new-fangled hinges, but swing in the old-fashioned way."
And the other four good district fathers gave quick the consent that was
      due,
And nodded obliquely, and muttered: "Them 'ere is my sentiments tew."
"Then as to your spellin': I've heern tell, by the mas has looked into
      this,
That you turn the _u_ out o' your _labour_, an' make the word shorter
      than 'tis;
An' clip the _k_ off yer _musick_, which makes my son Ephraim perplexed,
An' when he spells out as he ought'r, you pass the word on to the next.
They say there's some new-grafted books here that don't take them letters
      along;
But if it is so, just depend on 't, them new-grafted books is made wrong.
You might just as well say that Jackson didn't know all there was about
      war,
As to say that old Spellin'-book Webster didn't know what them letters was
      for."
And the other four good district fathers gave quick the consent that was
      due,
And scratched their heads slyly and softly, and said: "Them's my sentiments
      tew."
"Then, also, your 'rithmetic doin's, as they are reported to me,
Is that you have left Tare an' Tret out, an' also the old Rule o' Three;
An' likewise brought in a new study, some high-steppin' scholars to please,
With saw-bucks an' crosses and pothooks, an' _w's, x's, y's_ an' _z's_.
We ain't got no time for such foolin'; there ain't no great good to be
      reached
By tiptoein' childr'n up higher than ever their fathers was teached."
And the other four good district fathers gave quick the consent that was
      due,
And cocked one eye up to the ceiling, and said: "Them's my sentiments tew."
"Another thing, I must here mention, comes into the question to-day,
Concernin' some things in the grammar you're teachin' our gals for to say.
My gals is as steady as clockwork, and never give cause for much fear,
But they come home from school t'other evenin' a-talking such stuff as this
      here:
'I love,' an' 'Thou lovest,' an' 'He loves,' an' 'We love,' an' 'You love,'
      an' 'They--'
An' they answered my questions: 'It's grammar'--'twas all I could get 'em
      to say.
Now if, 'stead of doin' your duty, you're carryin' matters on so
As to make the gals say that they love you, it's just all that I want to
      know."


IV

Now Jim, the young heaven-built mechanic, in the dusk of the evening
      before,
Had well-nigh unjointed the stovepipe, to make it come down on the floor;
And the squire bringing smartly his foot down, as a clincher to what he had
      said,
A joint of the pipe fell upon him, and larruped him square on the head.
The soot flew in clouds all about him, and blotted with black all the place
And the squire and the other four fathers were peppered with black in the
      face.
The school, ever sharp for amusement, laid down all their cumbersome books
And, spite of the teacher's endeavors, laughed loud at their visitors'
      looks.
And the squire, as he stalked to the doorway, swore oaths of a violet hue;
And the four district fathers, who followed, seemed to say: "Them's my
      sentiments tew."

    _Will Carleton._




Mother o' Mine


If I were hanged on the highest hill,
  Mother o' mine!
  Oh, mother o' mine!
I know whose love would follow me still;
  Mother o' mine!
  Oh, mother o' mine!

If I were drowned in the deepest sea,
  Mother o' mine!
  Oh, mother o' mine!
I know whose tears would flow down to me,
  Mother o' mine!
  Oh, mother o' mine!

If I were damned o' body and soul,
  Mother o' mine!
  Oh, mother o' mine!
I know whose prayers would make me whole,
  Mother o' mine!
  Oh, mother o' mine!

    _Rudyard Kipling._




Encouragement


Who dat knockin' at de do'?
Why, Ike Johnson--yes, fu' sho'!
Come in, Ike. I's mighty glad
You come down. I t'ought you's mad
At me 'bout de othah night,
An' was stayin' 'way fu' spite.
Say, now, was you mad fu' true
W'en I kin' o' laughed at you?
  Speak up, Ike, an' 'spress yo'se'f.

'Tain't no use a-lookin' sad,
An' a-mekin' out you's mad;
Ef you's gwine to be so glum,
Wondah why you evah come.
I don't lak nobidy 'roun'
Dat jes' shet dey mouf an' frown--
Oh, now, man, don't act a dunce!
Cain't you talk? I tol' you once,
  Speak up, Ike, an' 'spress yo'se'f.

Wha'd you come hyeah fu' to-night?
Body'd t'ink yo' haid ain't right.
I's done all dat I kin do--
Dressed perticler, jes' fu' you;
Reckon I'd a' bettah wo'
My ol' ragged calico.
Aftah all de pains I's took,
Cain't you tell me how I look?
  Speak up, Ike, an' 'spress yo'se'f.

Bless my soul! I 'mos' fu'got
Tellin' you 'bout Tildy Scott.
Don't you know, come Thu'sday night,
She gwine ma'y Lucius White?
Miss Lize say I allus wuh
Heap sight laklier 'n huh;
An' she'll git me somep'n new,
Ef I wants to ma'y too.
  Speak up, Ike, an' 'spress yo'se'f.

I could ma'y in a week,
If de man I wants 'ud speak.
Tildy's presents 'll be fine,
But dey wouldn't ekal mine.
Him whut gits me fu' a wife
'll be proud, you bet yo' life.
I's had offers, some ain't quit;
But I hasn't ma'ied yit!
  Speak up, Ike, an' 'spress yo'se'f.

Ike, I loves you--yes, I does;
You's my choice, and allus was.
Laffin' at you ain't no harm--
Go 'way, dahky, whah's yo' arm?
Hug me closer--dah, da's right!
Wasn't you a awful sight,
Havin' me to baig you so?
Now ax whut you want to know--
  Speak up, Ike, an' 'spress yo'se'f.

    _Paul Laurence Dunbar._




The Harp That Once Through Tara's Halls


The harp that once through Tara's halls
  The soul of music shed,
Now hangs as mute on Tara's walls
  As if that soul were fled.
So sleeps the pride of former days,
  So glory's thrill is o'er,
And hearts, that once beat high for praise,
Now feel that pulse no more.

No more to chiefs and ladies bright
  The harp of Tara swells:
The chord alone, that breaks at night,
  Its tale of ruin tells.
Thus freedom now so seldom wakes,
  The only throb she gives
Is when some heart indignant breaks,
  To show that still she lives.

    _Thomas Moore._




Aux Italiens


At Paris it was, at the opera there;--
  And she looked like a queen in a book that night,
With the wreath of pearl in her raven hair,
  And the brooch on her breast so bright.

Of all the operas that Verdi wrote,
  The best, to my taste, is the Trovatore;
And Mario can soothe, with a tenor note,
  The souls in purgatory.

The moon on the tower slept soft as snow;
  And who was not thrilled in the strangest way,
As we heard him sing, while the gas burned low,
  _Non ti scordar di me?_[A]

The emperor there, in his box of state,
  Looked grave, as if he had just then seen
The red flag wave from the city gate,
  Where his eagles in bronze had been.

The empress, too, had a tear in her eye,
  You'd have said that her fancy had gone back again,
For one moment, under the old blue sky,
  To the old glad life in Spain.

Well, there in our front-row box we sat
  Together, my bride betrothed and I;
My gaze was fixed on my opera hat,
  And hers on the stage hard by.

And both were silent, and both were sad.
  Like a queen she leaned on her full white arm,
With that regal, indolent air she had;
  So confident of her charm!

I have not a doubt she was thinking then
  Of her former lord, good soul that he was!
Who died the richest and roundest of men.
  The Marquis of Carabas.

I hope that, to get to the kingdom of heaven,
  Through a needle's eye he had not to pass;
I wish him well, for the jointure given
  To my Lady of Carabas.

Meanwhile, I was thinking of my first love,
  As I had not been thinking of aught for years,
Till over my eyes there began to move
  Something that felt like tears.

I thought of the dress that she wore last time,
  When we stood 'neath the cypress trees together,
In that lost land, in that soft clime,
  In the crimson evening weather:

Of that muslin dress (for the eve was hot);
  And her warm white neck in its golden chain;
And her full soft hair, just tied in a knot,
  And falling loose again;

And the jasmine flower in her fair young breast;
  (Oh, the faint, sweet smell of that jasmine flower!)
And the one bird singing alone to his nest;
  And the one star over the tower.

I thought of our little quarrels and strife,
  And the letter that brought me back my ring;
And it all seemed then, in the waste of life,
  Such a very little thing!

For I thought of her grave below the hill,
  Which the sentinel cypress tree stands over;
And I thought, "Were she only living still,
  How I could forgive her and love her!"

And I swear, as I thought of her thus, in that hour,
  And of how, after all, old things are best,
That I smelt the smell of that jasmine flower
  Which she used to wear in her breast.

It smelt so faint, and it smelt so sweet,
  It made me creep, and it made me cold;
Like the scent that steals from the crumbling sheet
  Where a mummy is half unrolled.

And I turned and looked: she was sitting there,
  In a dim box over the stage, and drest
In that muslin dress, with that full, soft hair,
  And that jasmine in her breast!

I was here, and she was there;
  And the glittering horse-shoe curved between:--
From my bride betrothed, with her raven hair,
  And her sumptuous, scornful mien,

To my early love, with her eyes downcast,
  And over her primrose face the shade,
(In short, from the future back to the past,)
  There was but a step to be made.

To my early love from my future bride
  One moment I looked. Then I stole to the door,
I traversed the passage; and down at her side
  I was sitting, a moment more.

My thinking of her or the music's strain,
  Or something which never will be exprest,
Had brought her back from the grave again,
  With the jasmine in her breast.

She is not dead, and she is not wed!
  But she loves me now, and she loved me then!
And the very first word that her sweet lips said,
  My heart grew youthful again.

The marchioness there, of Carabas,
  She is wealthy, and young, and handsome still;
And but for her--well, we'll let that pass;
  She may marry whomever she will.

But I will marry my own first love,
  With her primrose face, for old things are best;
And the flower in her bosom, I prize it above
  The brooch in my lady's breast.

The world is filled with folly and sin,
  And love must cling where it can, I say:
For beauty is easy enough to win;
  But one isn't loved every day,

And I think in the lives of most women and men,
  There's a moment when all would go smooth and even,
If only the dead could find out when
  To come back, and be forgiven.

But oh the smell of that jasmine flower!
  And oh, that music! and oh, the way
That voice rang out from the donjon tower,
  _Non ti scordar di me_,
    _Non ti scordar di me!_

    _Robert Bulwer Lytton._

[Footnote A: A line in the opera "II Trovatore" meaning "Do not forget
me."]




My Prairies


I love my prairies, they are mine
  From zenith to horizon line,
Clipping a world of sky and sod
  Like the bended arm and wrist of God.

I love their grasses. The skies
  Are larger, and my restless eyes
Fasten on more of earth and air
  Than seashore furnishes anywhere.

I love the hazel thickets; and the breeze,
  The never resting prairie winds. The trees
That stand like spear points high
  Against the dark blue sky

Are wonderful to me. I love the gold
  Of newly shaven stubble, rolled
A royal carpet toward the sun, fit to be
  The pathway of a deity.

I love the life of pasture lands; the songs of birds
  Are not more thrilling to me than the herd's
Mad bellowing or the shadow stride
  Of mounted herdsmen at my side.

I love my prairies, they are mine
  From high sun to horizon line.
The mountains and the cold gray sea
  Are not for me, are not for me.

    _Hamlin Garland._




Home They Brought Her Warrior Dead

(_From "The Princess"_)


Home they brought her warrior dead:
  She nor swoon'd, nor utter'd cry:
All her maidens, watching, said,
  "She must weep or she will die."
Then they praised him, soft and low,
  Call'd him worthy to be loved,
Truest friend and noblest foe;
  Yet she neither spoke nor moved.
Stole a maiden from her place,
  Lightly to the warrior stept,
Took the face-cloth from the face;
  Yet she neither moved nor wept.
Rose a nurse of ninety years,
  Set his child upon her knee--
Like summer tempest came her tears--
  "Sweet my child, I live for thee."

    _Alfred, Lord Tennyson._




September


  Sweet is the voice that calls
  From babbling waterfalls
In meadows where the downy seeds are flying;
  And soft the breezes blow,
  And eddying come and go
In faded gardens where the rose is dying.

  Among the stubbled corn
  The blithe quail pipes at morn,
The merry partridge drums in hidden places,
  And glittering insects gleam
  Above the reedy stream,
Where busy spiders spin their filmy laces.

  At eve, cool shadows fall
  Across the garden wall,
And on the clustered grapes to purple turning;
  And pearly vapors lie
  Along the eastern sky,
Where the broad harvest-moon is redly burning.

