"I'm glad of it," said his wife.

"Well, so am I, if she'll do the right thing by me; but if she don't,
then I'm sorry."

"What shall I do when you're away, Dick?"

"Get along as well as you can. Folks'll give you victuals, if you get
hard up."

"I don't like to beg."

"Wish me good luck, then, and money enough to take care of you. What are
you starin' at, young 'un?"

This he said to the child, whose eyes, as if by a species of
fascination, were fixed upon him.

"Take me home to mamma!" pleaded the child, beginning to cry.

"Shut up!" said the ruffian, harshly, striding to the bed and pinching
the boy's arm till he cried with the pain.

"Oh, don't, Dick," pleaded the woman, who was fond of children, though
she had never been a mother.

"I'll give the brat something to cry for," said her husband, and he
pinched him again.

"Oh, Dick, how can you torture the poor child?" said his wife, braver in
the little boy's defence than in her own.

"What business has it to cry, then? I'd like to choke it. If you don't
hush I'll serve you the same way."

Jasper had listened to this brutality as long as he could, but his
indignation became too hot to be repressed. Thoughtless of consequences,
he burst open the closet door and strode into the presence of the
astonished ruffian, his fists involuntarily clenched, and his eyes
kindling with indignation.




CHAPTER XX.

A STRANGE COMMISSION.


The man whom we have called Dick stopped short and gazed in astonishment
at the boy who had so fearlessly stepped upon the scene.

"Where did you come from?" he demanded, frowning.

"From that closet," answered Jasper.

"How came you there? What business have you in my house, anyway?"
demanded the ruffian.

"I entered it supposing it to be deserted," said Jasper. "While I was
below I heard that poor boy cry, and came up."

"Did you know he was here?" asked the ruffian, turning to his wife, and
speaking menacingly.

"Yes, Dick."

"Why did you let him in?"

"He came in while I was out."

"Why didn't you tell me he was here?"

"Because I didn't want him injured in any way. I was afraid you would be
angry with him."

"That is where you are right," said Dick, adding an oath. "The young
scoundrel shall pay for his impudence in entering my house like a
thief."

"You have no right to say that," said Jasper. "I have explained to you
why I came here."

"You hid in the closet, intending to come out and steal when we were out
of the way."

"What could I steal?" asked Jasper, looking around him.

"Do you mean to taunt me with my poverty?" exclaimed the ruffian,
enraged.

"No; I am poorer than you."

"You look like it."

"It is true. I was robbed in the cars by a pickpocket, and because I was
penniless and could not pay my fare I was put off at this station."

"Is this true?" demanded Dick, with a searching look.

"Yes; I wish it were not."

"How came you near this house?"

"I set out to walk to the village, and must have lost my way."

"Why did you come out of that closet?" was the next demand.

"Because I heard you abusing that little boy," said Jasper, fearlessly.

"I have a right to do what I please to my own child."

"It isn't your child."

"What do you mean by that, you impudent young jackanapes?"

Unobserved by her husband, the wife made a warning sign to Jasper not to
provoke the man, whose evil passion she so well knew.

Jasper comprehended the sign, but it did not influence him. Frank and
fearless by temperament, he thought it his duty to stand between the
little boy and this ruffian's brutality. Still he appreciated the
woman's kindness, and resolved to bear it in mind. Indeed, he saw that
she was rather to be pitied than blamed. Her natural instincts were
good, but she was under the control of a bad man.

"I heard what you were saying," said Jasper.

"You heard?"

"Yes, while I was in the closet."

"What did you hear, you young scoundrel?" demanded the ruffian.

"Enough to satisfy me that you have stolen this boy from his parents."

"It's a lie!"

"No; it is the truth. I felt sure of it before, and now I know it. You
took him in order to extort money from his friends."

"Well," said the ruffian, defiantly, "what if I did? Have you anything
to say against it?"

"Yes," said Jasper.

"I shall have to wring your neck by and by," muttered Dick. "Well, go
on. Spit out what you've got to say."

"I say it's a cruel wrong to the parents," said Jasper, boldly, "and to
the child also. But you make it worse when you try to abuse the boy."

"Come, boy, if you care so much for the brat, suppose you take his
place, and take the beating I was going to give him," suggested the
ruffian, mockingly.

"I would rather suffer than have him suffer," said Jasper, quietly; "but
perhaps you will change your mind when you hear what I have to say."

"Oh, you are going to beg off!" sneered the ruffian, with a look of
satisfaction. "I thought you'd come to your senses."

"You are mistaken as to my intention. I want to speak to you about your
sister--formerly Mrs. Thorne."

"What do you know about her?" asked the man, in extreme astonishment.

"A good deal. She is my step-mother."

"What! Are you the son of the man she married?" asked Dick, eagerly.

"I am Jasper Kent."

"That's the name. So she sent you out to me, did she? That's better than
I thought She hasn't forgotten her brother, after all."

"No; you are mistaken," said Jasper. "She never so much as told me she
had a brother."

Dick looked disappointed. Then, with sudden suspicion, he said, roughly:

"I believe you are lying. This Jasper Kent is rich--the heir of
two-thirds of his father's property. You say you are penniless."

"That is true. Both stories are true. I am my father's principal heir,
but your sister is my guardian. She has treated me in such a way that I
left the house."

"Ran away, eh?"

"No, I gave her full notice of what I should do. I told her that if I
were decently treated I would stay, but if she continued to insult me,
and give the preference in all things to her own boy, Nicholas, I would
go away."

"You haven't been such a fool as to go off and leave all your property
in her hands?"

"I shall come in possession of it when I am twenty-one. Till then I will
try to support myself."

"Come, boy, you're plucky. I'm glad you came, after all. I want to hear
more about my sister's affairs. Come down stairs, and we'll talk."

Dick appeared suddenly to have forgotten his animosity. He became even
friendly in his manner, as he gave our hero this invitation.

"Old woman," said he, addressing his wife, "can't you rake up something
for this boy to eat? I dare say he is hungry."

"I don't think we've got anything more in the house."

"I'll go out directly and get something. Come down, boy, I want to ask
you a few more questions."

They went down stairs, followed by the wife. She was happily relieved by
the unexpected good understanding between her husband and Jasper.

"Now tell me," said Dick, eagerly, when they were in the lower room,
"how much property has my sister got?"

"Probably between thirty and forty thousand dollars."

"As much as that?" said Dick, complacently. "Well, she has feathered her
nest well."

"I don't like Mrs. Kent," said Jasper. "Though she is your sister, I am
obliged to say that, but it is not at all on account of the property my
father left her. If he had given her one-half his estate I would not
have complained, as long as she treated me fairly."

"Helen was always a hard customer. She's got a will of her own,"
chuckled Dick.

"There was no hope of our getting on together," said Jasper.

"She ought to do something for me--don't you think so? I'm her only
brother."

"As to that," said Jasper, "my opinion wouldn't have any weight with
her. If you are poor and need help, it would be only natural for her to
help you."

"That's the way to talk! You won't say anything against me to her?"

"Certainly not," said Jasper. "I shall not write to her at all; and even
if I did, I wouldn't try to interfere with her disposing of her property
in any way she thinks best."

"Come, you're a trump, after all. I like you. You're plucky, too."

"Thank you."

"I'll say a good word for you to my sister when I see her."

"You'd better not," said Jasper. "If she thinks you are friendly to me
you'll stand a poor chance of any favors. Better abuse me."

Dick roared with laughter.

"I say, youngster, you're a smart 'un. I see you're friendly by your
hint. I'll abuse you to her, never fear. You must take a drink on that.
Say, old woman, where's the whisky?"

"There's not a drop in the house, Dick."

"I forgot. Curse the luck!"

Just then a man entered the house only less brutal-looking than Dick
himself.

He held a letter in his hand.

Dick seized it eagerly.

"It's from the father of the boy," he said.

The letter proved to contain fifty dollars.

    "I send this in advance," said the writer. "When the boy is safely
    delivered into my hands a hundred and fifty more will be paid to
    the one who brings him, and no questions asked.  Herman Fitch."

"Good!" said Dick, "as far as it goes. I'm ready to give up the brat,
but will his father keep faith? Perhaps he'll have the police on hand
ready to nab me."

"Haven't you anybody to send--anybody you can trust?"

Dick slapped his knee forcibly. An idea had come to him.

"I'll send him in charge of the brat," he said, pointing to Jasper.




CHAPTER XXI.

JASPER IS INTRUSTED WITH A DELICATE COMMISSION.


"Look here, boy," said Dick, "do you want a job?"

"Yes," said Jasper, "if it's honest."

"No fear of that. I want you to take that boy home to his father."

"I'll do it," said Jasper, eagerly.

"How much pay do you want?"

"None at all, except money to pay my fare in the cars."

"You're the right sort," said Dick, with satisfaction. "But there's
another matter I've got to think about. How do I know but you will
betray me?"

"How?"

"Put the police on my track."

"If you hadn't given up the boy I might," said Jasper, frankly.

Dick regarded him attentively.

"You're bold," he said. "Then you won't betray me now."

"No."

"Promise it."

"I promise--that is, if you send the boy home by me."

"All right; that's understood. Now for another matter. Read that
letter."

Jasper read the letter of Herman Fitch, already quoted.

"You see this man, the boy's father, agrees to pay one hundred and fifty
dollars when he is given up."

"I see that."

"He will give you that money--that is, if he means fair--and you will
bring it to me. Do you understand?"

"I do."

"Do you promise that?"

"I promise that, too. Where am I to find you? Here?"

"No; I'll give you an address in St. Louis."

"Does the father live in St. Louis?"

"He lives a little out of the city. His name is in the directory, so you
won't have any trouble in finding it."

"How glad he will be to see the little boy again!"

"He ought to be. You don't think he'll back out from his agreement?"
said Dick, suspiciously.

"No; he'll be so glad to see the child, he will care nothing for the
money."

"That's what I hope. When I get that money I'm going East."

"You'll take me with you, Dick?" asked his wife.

"What good'll you be?" growled Dick. "It'll cost more."

"What can I do alone, here?"

"I'll leave money for your board."

"But I'll be so lonely, Dick," she persisted.

"Oh, I'll come back! It's business I'm going for, old woman. If I can't
come back I'll send money to bring you."

"Do let me go with you, Dick."

"Oh, hush up! I can't have you always in my way. What, blubbering?
Plague take all the women, I say!"

"When do you want me to go?" said Jasper.

"There's a train this afternoon; take that, for the sooner matters are
arranged the better. Here's five dollars. It'll be more than enough to
pay your fare, but you'd better have it in case anything happens."

Jasper felt some repugnance in taking money acquired in such a way, but
it seemed necessary, and he thrust the note into his vest-pocket.

"You'll be able to carry the boy back to-night," said Dick. "To-morrow
at twelve bring the money to this address."

He handed him a greasy-looking card with the name "Mark Mortimer, No.
132 S---- Street," scrawled on it in pencil.

"Am I to ask for Mark Mortimer?" asked Jasper.

"Yes, that's me--that is, it's one of my names. Don't fail."

"I won't."

"If you should play me false, you'd better never have been born," said
the kidnapper, menacingly.

"I'll come, not on account of your threats, but because I have
promised," said Jasper, quietly.

"You're a plucky boy. You ain't one of the milk-and-water sort," said
Dick, with respect for the boy's courage.

"Thank you," said Jasper, laughing. "I am not often afraid."

"By Jove! you've got more pluck than half the men. You'd make a fine lad
for my business."

"I don't think I'd like your business, so far as I know what it is,"
said Jasper.

"Well, there's some I'd like better myself. If my sister does the right
thing by me I'll become a model citizen--run for Congress, may be. Eh,
old woman?"

"I wish you would reform, Dick," said his wife.

"Let the world give me a chance, then. Now, boy, you must be starting."

"Harry," said Jasper to the little boy, whose name he had learned, "do
you want to go with me?"

The little boy confidingly put his arms round our hero's neck.

"Will you take me to my mamma?" he asked.

"Yes, I will take you to her."

The little boy uttered a cry of delight.
