          I. BEVERLEY.


          _We think you'll have to cave in and
          apologize._

          S. YONGE.


          _But, of course, not own up to something
          you never did._

          J. CAMERON.


          _We'll get even with those Stars to make
          up for this._

          L. CARSON.


          _Don't stick in the Sanatorium all
          night._

          E. CARTMELL.


          _It's no use getting too mad, old sport!
          Come right down and talk sense._

          D. WATTS.

This united effusion was placed in an envelope, and carried by Agnes to
her dormitory, where, after scouts in the garden had assured her that
the coast was clear, she ventured on to the veranda, and gave a cooee
which brought Peachy to the window above. The latter let down her string
and drew up the letter, which she pondered upon in private. She was wise
enough to accept the good advice, and when Miss Bickford appeared later
on she tendered her apologies. The teacher had possibly repented of her
hasty accusation, for she did not refer to the matter of the inkwells,
but merely required satisfaction for "insubordination." That being given
Peachy was once more free, though she could hardly consider herself
restored to full favor.

"I used to like Miss Bickford," she grumped, "but I really don't think
she's been fair over this. Why couldn't she ask each girl separately
what she knew about it?"

"Much good that would have done. Bertha and Mabel wouldn't have told the
truth, and things would only have been in a worse muddle. We'll catch
those two sometime if we can only think of how to do it."

"Ah! That's just the question."

Even the Stars had been rather alarmed by Miss Bickford's firm
attitude, and for the present they did not dare to cheat openly or to
play any more tricks upon the form. Stopped in this direction their
ringleaders turned their attention to other matters. What was the nature
of these it was Irene's lot one day to discover. She happened to be
walking in a rather quiet part of the garden, a portion reserved mostly
for vegetables, which adjoined the great wall that separated the estate
from the highroad. As she sauntered along, doing nothing in particular,
she noticed Mabel, who was standing under an orange tree close to the
wall. At the same moment, advancing towards them came the sound of
Rachel's voice caroling an old English song. Now there is nothing in the
least wrong or unorthodox in standing under an orange tree, yet the
instant Irene glimpsed Mabel's face she was certain her schoolmate was
in that particular spot for some reason the reverse of good. She looked
uneasily at Irene, glanced in Rachel's direction, seemed to hesitate,
and finally took to her heels and bolted away through the bushes. Next
minute, over the top of the high wall descended a little parcel. It
caught in the branches of the orange tree, fell to the ground, and
rolled under a clump of cabbages. Irene took no notice, and sauntered on
in the direction of Rachel, but when the prefect had passed out of sight
she returned, groped among the vegetables, found the parcel, and slipped
it into her packet.

"Miss Mabel Hughes, I believe I've caught you tripping this time," she
chuckled. "I must send out the fiery cross and call an immediate meeting
of the Camellia Buds."

Among the secret practices of the sorority was a private signal only to
be used in times of urgent necessity. It had been suggested by Jess
Cameron, who took the idea from _The Lady of the Lake_, in which poem a
gathering of the clan is proclaimed by a runner bearing a cross of wood
charred in the fire. Two burnt matches fastened together with thread
served the Camellia Buds for their token, and it was the strictest rite
of their order that any one receiving this cryptic symbol must
immediately leave whatever she happened to be doing and proceed
post-haste to the rendezvous.

So promptly did the members of the society respond to the summons that
within ten minutes of the issue of the fiery cross they were assembled
in the summer-house in a state of much expectancy. Irene explained how a
parcel had been thrown over the wall, evidently for Mabel, who
undoubtedly had been standing waiting for it. It was not addressed to
Mabel, however, and as it bore no direction at all on the outside the
Camellia Buds considered themselves justified in opening it. It
contained a package of cheap chocolate, and a letter written in a
foreign hand in rather bad English.

         _Beautiful Signorina_,

         _Make me the compliment to accept of me this few
         chocolate. I like the letter you gave to me on
         Sunday. I will again present myself near to the
         hotel to wait upon you as you pass. Accept I pray
         you the assurance of my profoundest respects._

                                            EMANUELE SUTONI.

"Who is Emanuele Sutoni?" gasped Delia. "And what's he got to do with
us?"

"Nothing to do with us," frowned Jess. "But I'm afraid Mabel has been
trying to get up some silly love affair. If Miss Morley or Miss Rodgers
found this out she'd be expelled."

"What are we going to do about it? Tell Rachel?"

"I don't think so," pondered Jess. "You see, of course, we're perfectly
certain among ourselves that the letter was meant for Mabel, but it
isn't addressed to her so there's no real evidence. Not enough to
convince Rachel. It would be better really to tell her we've found out
and that she's got to stop it."

"I know! Let's tar and feather her!" squealed Peachy excitedly. "That's
the best way to frighten her. Of course, I don't mean _real_ tar, but
soap does just as well. She thoroughly deserves it. I vote we do it
to-night. We'll hold an inquisition in her dormitory. It will be easy
enough to square Elsie."

Peachy's grim idea appealed to the Camellia Buds. They considered it was
time that a public demonstration was made against Mabel, whose general
behavior was very unworthy of the traditions of the Villa Camellia. They
decided to have their tribunal immediately after the lights were turned
out, while the prefects, who sat up later than the Transition, were
still downstairs, and the mistresses were having cocoa in Miss Rodgers'
study. The affair was to be a surprise for Mabel, but as Elsie also
slept in the same dormitory it was necessary to secure her cooeperation,
in case she might give the alarm and summon a prefect. Elsie, however,
proved an easily won ally.

"I can't bear Mabel," she assured Irene. "You may do anything you like
to her as far as I'm concerned. I shall pretend to be asleep. Monica and
Rosamonde and Winnie can't stand her either. I don't mind telling you
that we're going to resign from the Starry Circle and found a new
sorority of our own. It isn't good enough to be mixed up with such girls
as Mabel and Bertha."

"I'm glad you've found them out," said Irene. "It was high time somebody
made a protest."

The four occupants of dormitory 3 went to bed as usual that night, but
as soon as the lights were out Lorna and Irene put on their
dressing-gowns and stockings, and slipped into the bathroom. Here they
hastily completed the details of their costumes in company with the rest
of the Camellia Buds, who had rallied for the occasion. Three minutes
afterwards a strange procession entered dormitory 3. Ten dressing-gowned
figures, each wearing a black mask and holding a piece of lighted candle
in her hand, startled the astonished eyes of Mabel Hughes, who sat up in
bed to stare at them.

"What's all this about?" she asked.

"We've come here to hold an inquisition on your conduct," replied a
solemn voice from behind one of the black masks. "Will you kindly get
out of bed and seat yourself upon this chair. We should be sorry to use
force, but I warn you you'll have to obey us."

Looking a little scared Mabel apparently thought discretion the better
part of valor. She rose, put on her dressing-gown, and took the seat
indicated. Her inquisitors grouped themselves opposite, placing their
candles in a row upon the mantelpiece. Their spokeswoman, unfolding a
large sheet of paper, proceeded to read the indictment.

          _This is to tell all whom it may concern
          that Mabel Hughes, having broken every
          rule of decent and orderly behavior, and
          being no longer worthy of the name of
          gentlewoman, is here arraigned on the
          following charges:_


          _1. That she habitually takes advantage
          of and ill-treats the juniors when
          opportunity occurs._

          _2. That she cheats abominably at her
          work._

          _3. That she endeavors to persuade
          others to cheat._

          _4. That she degrades the name of the
          Villa Camellia by receiving letters
          which are thrown to her over the wall,
          and by handing answers to them on her
          way to church._

Mabel, who had smiled scornfully at the first three charges, changed
color at the fourth.

"What do you know about letters?" she challenged sharply.

"We know all," ventured the solemn voice. "You had better confess at
once, or the affair with Emanuele will be exposed to the prefects."

"It's my own business," said Mabel sulkily.

"No, it isn't. It's ours as well, and the whole school's. We don't want
the Villa Camellia to be disgraced in the eyes of the town. You ought to
be ashamed of yourself. It's so _vulgar_. Now, will you promise to give
up all your bad habits and behave like a lady."

"I'll promise nothing," snapped Mabel.

"Then we shall be obliged to tar and feather you."

Mabel laughed, imagining it was an empty threat, but she was rapidly
undeceived. Two inquisitors, seizing her by the arms, held her tightly
in her chair, while several others smeared soap over her face and stuck
on feathers which they took out of a cushion. She would have screamed,
but every time she opened her mouth to do so she received a dab of soap
upon her tongue. When they considered her countenance was sufficiently
ornamented, they presented her with a looking-glass to view the effect.

"That's how we feel about it," the spokeswoman assured her. "This is
just to show you we won't stand your horrid ways. Will you promise now
to behave yourself, or do you want any more?"

Apparently Mabel had had enough. She seemed rather frightened. She
grumbled that she would agree to what they wished.

"Just jolly well take care that you keep your promise then," warned her
inquisitor. "If you begin any of your old tricks again we have evidence
against you, and we shall take it straight to Rachel. If I know anything
of Rachel she'll go to Miss Rodgers, and that means you're expelled. So
now you know! You'd better be careful, Mabel Hughes. That's all we came
to say. You may wash your face if you like before you get into bed
again."

The ten members of the inquisition, knowing that time was passing, and
that the prefects would soon be coming upstairs, judged it wise to break
up the meeting, and taking their candles beat a stately retreat to their
respective dormitories. Lorna and Irene, returning to their cubicles,
heard Elsie chuckling. She had not interfered in any way with the
performance, but it had evidently entertained her. She told the tale
next day to her friends, with the result that Ruth, Rosamonde, Winnie,
Monica, and Callie joined her in seceding from the Starry Circle,
leaving Mabel and Bertha as sole remaining representatives of that
sorority.

"We're fed up with you," Winnie assured the pair when they remonstrated.
"We're tired of your sneaking ways, and you may just keep them to
yourselves. We're not going to let you copy our exercises any more. And
if we see you taking those kids' biscuits again there'll be squalls. No,
we shan't tell you the name of our new sorority. We're not going to have
anything to do with you ever again. So there!"

Public opinion had for once triumphed on the right side, and Mabel and
Bertha, greatly discomfited, found their influence over the late Stars
was at an end. The threat of telling Rachel had frightened Mabel; she
was uncertain how much the Camellia Buds really knew, and judged it
discreet to drop her clandestine correspondence. She had no wish for the
matter to meet the ears of Miss Rodgers, who, she was well aware, would
take the most serious view of it. Though she cherished a grudge against
her late inquisitors, she submitted to their demands, and for the time
at any rate gave no outward cause for complaint.




CHAPTER XIII

Peachy's Pranks


"I'm sorry to have to announce it," said Peachy, "but my spirits are
fizzing over, and I guess if I don't go just the teeniest weeniest bit
on the rampage I'll fly all to pieces and make a scene. Sometimes I'm
tingling down to my toes and I've just _got_ to explode. Being good is a
lonesome job."

Peachy was sitting with Irene and Delia on one of the marble seats at
the bottom of the lemon pergola. It was a favorite spot with the girls,
for it was sheltered from the prevailing wind and the flowers grew
particularly luxuriantly. Lovely irises were blooming, white narcissus,
wallflowers, and beds of Parma violets, and the beautiful delicate
blossom of the arbutula drooped from an archway that spanned the path.
Irene, who was used by this time to Peachy's whimsical moods, laid aside
the book she was reading and laughed.

"Poor old sport! You've evidently got it badly to-day. What can we do
for you? How, where, and when do you want to rampage?"

Peachy shook her head dolefully.

"I don't know. Only wish I did. I'm tired of doing the same things over
and over again every day. Getting up in the morning and dressing myself,
having breakfast, going to classes, having dinner, grinding at prep,
playing tennis, having tea and supper, and undressing and going to bed.
I want to sleep in my clothes or go to class in my wrapper just for a
change, and I'd like tennis in the morning and tea instead of dinner.
I'm tired of the house and the garden. I want to dodge Antonio and go
through the big gate and run down the road. I tell you I want to do
absolutely anything that's weird and impossible and out of the ordinary.
Yes, I know I'm wrought up. I'm just crazy for a real frolic. Who'll
play 'Follow my Leader'?"

"If you won't do anything _too_ outrageous," ventured Delia, replacing a
dainty piece of sewing inside her workbag, and preparing to fall in with
her friend's mood. "I've had one little difference with Miss Bickford
this week, and if I have another Miss Rodgers may cut up rough and stop
my next exeat."

"Honest Injun, I'll take all the blame if blame there is. Renie, dearie,
you're coming too?"

"Got to, I suppose," chuckled Irene. "When the Queen of the South arises
and gives her orders her slaves must 'tremble and obey.'"

"Not much trembling about you. Come on and be sports, both of you. Are
you ready? Do as your Granny tells you then, and off we go."

The game of "Follow my Leader," as every schoolgirl knows, consists in
exactly imitating everything which is done by your chief, no matter what
extraordinary and peculiar antics she may perform. To submit to Peachy's
guidance in the present exalted state of her spirits was a decided leap
in the dark, but Irene and Delia were ready for fun, and prepared to
take a few risks. At first their light-hearted companion contented
herself with running in and out among the lemon trees, walking along the
low wall of the terrace, jumping the culvert, or easy physical feats,
then, having slightly worked off steam, she stood for a moment and
paused to reflect.

"Christopher Columbus! I guess I know what I'll do. I've an exploring
fit on me, and if I can't find America I'll find something else new and
undiscovered. Here goes."

Peachy, with her satellites in her train, plunged her way across the
garden in the direction of the kitchen. She had suddenly remembered an
object which had more than once set her curiosity a-galloping. In the
yard outside the scullery there was an iron staircase intended for use
as a fire-escape from the servants' bedrooms, and also as a means of
mounting the roof when workmen wished to attend to the chimney-pots. Up
here she was determined to go. Fortunately the maids were safely inside
the kitchen, and the defenses were left unguarded.

"This is my Jacob's ladder," she proclaimed. "Who'll follow me to the
sky?"

          "'Will you walk into my parlor?' said the spider to the fly,
          ''Tis the prettiest little parlor that ever you did spy!
          The way into my parlor is up a winding stair,
          And I have many curious things to show you when you're there.'"

"Go on, you lunatic," giggled Irene.

"And be quick about it if you don't want Dominica clattering at your
heels," added Delia.

So they clambered up the steep iron stairway, and, passing by the door
that led to the servants' apartments, they climbed on till they reached
the roof. This part of the Villa Camellia was _terra incognita_ to the
school. They decided hastily, however, that it would be a very desirable
acquisition. It was a large flat expanse covered with lead, and edged
with a low battlement. It was evidently used by the maids, for a
clothes-line was stretched between two chimneys, and a row of towels
hung out to dry. The view was adorable. It was like being on the top of
a mountain. They could see the town of Fossato, and a wide expanse of
water, and Vesuvius, and the distant outline of Naples all spread in a
panorama before them, besides having an excellent bird's-eye prospect of
the garden below. Peachy, who was ready to do anything wild, went
dancing about like a will-o'-the-wisp.

          "Light and airy--light and airy,
           Sure, I feel a sort of fairy,"

she extemporized. "Renie Beverley, you're not mad enough! Give me your
hand. I tell you you've got to dance. We're witches who've flown over on
our broomsticks and alighted here, and we'll have a frolic before we go
back to--wherever we came from. Hello, what's this business? It looks
like a water-tank. Give me a boost, somebody, for I'm going up to see."

It was rather a scramble even for Peachy's agile limbs, but she was
resolved thoroughly to explore the capacities of the roof, and the
cistern must not be left unvisited. She clung on to its slippery side
and peered down at her own reflection in the water below.

"No idea I looked so nice," she perked. "The blue sky makes a charming
background. Really, a pool is quite a becoming mirror. Does anybody else
want to come up and peep? It's like looking at the view-finder of a
camera. Rather painful hanging on, though. I think I'll drop if you're
neither of you coming. Oh, botheration! I've lost my hair ribbon. It's
gone right down inside the cistern. Well! It's done for now. I can't
possibly fish it out."

"It wasn't your best!" consoled Delia.

"No, but the only scarlet one I possess, and just at present I've a
wild fad for scarlet. I get crazes for various colors. Last term I'd
look at nothing but pale blue, till Bertha Ford got that new blue
chiffon dress, and that, of course, set me against it forevermore. I'd a
rage for tartan once, only Jess was rather nasty about it; she thinks no
one in the school has a right to wear Scotch plaids except herself. I've
spent all my pocket money for this week, so I can't buy another ribbon
till next Saturday. I shall have to go about in pink. Miau! I'll be such
a good little pussy-cat. I'm sure different colors make me good or bad.
Don't laugh at me! I mean it! I'm a different person according to what I
wear."

For a short time the girls loitered about on the roof, enjoying the
novelty of their position, and particularly the fact that they were on
unlicensed ground, and would undoubtedly get into trouble if they were
caught by Dominica or Anastasia. Naughty Peachy, to play the maids a
trick, took down the row of towels, folded them neatly, and placed them
in a pile behind the cistern, chuckling over the prospect of Anastasia's
consternation when she came up to fetch them and found them missing.

"I owe her something for breaking my pink alabaster vase," she
announced. "She's an awful smasher with her duster--just goes surging
ahead over our mantelpiece and sends our ornaments flying. Mary's
Pompeii pots went to smithereens yesterday. Now, Signorina Anastasia,
you won't find your towels in too big a hurry. I guess I've paid you
out."

"She'll pay _you_ out if she catches us up here," suggested Delia, who
was anxious not to forfeit her exeat. "Hadn't we better be getting a
move on?"

"Words of wisdom, my child, fall from your lips like pearls and
diamonds. The same sage thought was occurring to your humble servant.
Anastasia has what is commonly called a tart tongue, and an inconvenient
and inconsiderate habit of reporting trifles at headquarters. It would
be quite unnecessary of her to mention to Miss Rodgers that she had seen
us here, but I believe she'd go out of her way to do it."

"I'm sure she would, bad luck to her. Lead on, MacDuff! Let's descend
from the Highlands to the Lowlands."

"We may find further sport farther afield. I'm not at the end of my
resources yet. I've an idea or two more in my head," nodded Peachy,
escorting her friends down the staircase to the comparative safety of
the back yard.

