Estimating the purchasing power of money in John's time at two and
one-half times that of the present, we arrive at a ransom of between
eleven and eighteen million dollars.  If we split the difference and
call the ransom fourteen and a half millions, we still find that the
Christian monarch was slightly undervalued as compared with his heathen
fellow in misery.  However, all this is profitless, because the ransom
of John was never paid.

[9] Query: Does the reader not wish that the Peruvians had succeeded?
Indeed, how can the reader help wishing that?  Yet would it have been
better for the world if the Peruvians had succeeded in expelling the
Spaniards, or would it have been worse?  These questions afford matter
for interesting speculation.




{115}

IV

The Greatest Adventure in History


I. The Chief of all the Soldiers of Fortune

At the close of the fifteenth century, to be exact, in the year 1500,
in the town of Painala, in the Province of Coatzacualco, one of the
feudatory divisions of the great Aztec empire of Mexico, there was born
a young girl who was destined to exercise upon the fortunes of her
country an influence as great as it was baleful, as wonderful as it was
unfortunate.  She was the daughter of the Cacique of Tenepal, who was
Lord of the town and province, a feoff of the Mexican Emperor Montezuma
Xocoyotzin.  This was the second Montezuma who had occupied the
imperial throne and his last name means "The Younger," which he adopted
to distinguish him from his predecessor in the empire.

This Lord of Painala, whose name has been forgotten, unfortunately for
his country departed this life soon after the birth of his daughter,
who was called Malinal because she was born on the twelfth day of the
month, her name indicating that fact.  His property naturally devolved
upon the young daughter.  Her mother assumed the office of guardian and
regent of the state.  This lady, whose name has also been lost in
oblivion, did not long remain single.  After her second marriage, which
apparently took place with a somewhat indecent hurry, there was born to
{116} her and her new consort, a young son.  To secure to this son the
inheritance, she sold her little daughter, too young to realize the
unfortunate transaction, to some traders of Xicalango, who in turn
disposed of her to a coast tribe of Aztecs called the Tabascans.  She
lived in bondage with the Tabascans until she was nineteen years old.
She developed into a woman of rare beauty and unusual intellect.
Something of the power of high birth was evidently hers, for she
escaped the degrading servitude of the time, and was carefully trained
and prepared for some higher purpose.  This girl was to be the
instrument of the downfall of her native land.

Now it happened that when Malinal was nineteen years old, the rumor of
a strange visitation ran up and down the shore among the people who
dwelt upon the great Gulf of Mexico.  Some remarkable beings, the like
of whom had never been seen or heard of within the memory of living
man, in some remarkable boats which absolutely transcended the
imagination of the Aztecs, had been seen upon the coast and some of
them had landed at different points.  Also there had sifted from the
south, from the Isthmus of Darien and the Panama States, some account
of these white-skinned demi-gods.  Just enough rumor was current to
cause alarm and uneasiness in the Aztec Empire when the attention of
the rulers was called to some definite facts.

On Good Friday, March 23, 1519, the dreaded and expected happened, for
there landed at what is now the city of Vera Cruz, in the territory of
the Tabascans, vassals of Montezuma, a party of these strange
adventurers.  They were led by a man of mature years, whose name was
Fernando Cortes--sometimes written {117} Hernando Cortes.  Like
Pizarro, whose history has been related, he was from the forgotten
province of Estremadura.  He was born in the year 1485, in the city of
Medellin.  He was seven years old when Columbus set sail upon that
epoch-making voyage of discovery and he was thirty-four when he set
foot for the first time on the shores of Mexico.  In the intervening
years much interesting and valuable experience had been enjoyed.

The parents of Cortes belonged to the provincial nobility.  They were
worthy and respectable subjects of the King of Spain.  The
old-fashioned adjectives, "poor, but honest" could be applied to them.
The boy was a puny, sickly lad, whom they scarcely expected to reach
man's estate.  When he was fourteen years old they entered him in the
great University of Salamanca where he took his degree as Bachelor of
Laws, after a two years' course.  The law, in Spain, was considered an
entirely proper profession for the nobility, especially when the
nobility were unable, through narrow circumstances, properly to support
the profession of arms.  Cortes, therefore, was in receipt of a liberal
education for his day.  His letters, some of which will be quoted
hereafter, are evidences of his mental training.  In some respects they
are as interesting as are the famous Commentaries of Julius Caesar.

The young man, whose constitution improved as he grew older, until he
eventually became the hardiest, most enduring and bravest of his
company, which included the most intrepid men of the age, had no love
for the humdrum profession of law.  He desired to go to Italy and take
service with Gonsalvo de Cordova, who is remembered, when he is
remembered at all, as "The Great Captain"; but sickness prevented.
{118} Following that, his thoughts turned, as did those of so many
Spanish youths who were of an adventurous disposition, toward the New
World.  After many setbacks, one of which was caused by a wound
received by the hot-blooded young man while engaged in a love affair,
and which left a permanent scar upon his upper lip, he finally landed
at Santo Domingo in the Spring of 1504.  From there he went to Cuba and
served under one Diego Velasquez, the governor of that province in some
fierce fighting in the island, and received as a reward from the
governor, who was much attached to him, a large plantation with a
number of Indians to work it.  There he married and lived prosperously.
What he had done before he arrived in Mexico counted little.  What he
did afterward gave him eternal fame as one, if not the greatest, of the
conquerors and soldiers of fortune in all history.  Sir Arthur Helps
thus portrays him:

"Cortes," he says, "was an heroic adventurer, a very politic statesman,
and an admirable soldier.  He was cruel at times in conduct, but not in
disposition; he was sincerely religious, profoundly dissembling,
courteous, liberal, amorous, decisive.  There was a certain grandeur in
all his proceedings.  He was fertile in resources; and, while he looked
forward, he was at the same time almost madly audacious in his
enterprises.  This strange mixture of valor, religion, policy, and
craft, was a peculiar product of the century. . . .  There are two main
points in his character which I shall dwell upon at the outset.  These
are his soldier-like qualities and his cruelty.  As a commander, the
only fault imputed to him, was his recklessness in exposing himself to
the dangers of personal conflict with the enemy.  But then, that is an
error {119} to be commonly noticed even in the greatest generals of
that period; and Cortes, with this singular dexterity in arms, was
naturally prone to fall into this error.  As regards his peculiar
qualifications as a commander, it may be observed, that, great as he
was in carrying out large and difficult operations in actual warfare,
he was not less so in attending to those minute details upon which so
much of the efficiency of troops depends.  His companion-in-arms,
Bernal Diaz, says of him, 'He would visit the hut of every soldier, see
that his arms were ready at hand, and that he had his shoes on.  Those
whom he found had neglected anything in this way he severely
reprimanded, and compared them to mangy sheep, whose own wool is too
heavy for them.'

"I have said that he was cruel in conduct, but not in disposition.
This statement requires explanation.  Cortes was a man who always
determined to go through with the thing he had once resolved to do.
Human beings, if they came in his way, were to be swept out of it, like
any other material obstacles.  He desired no man's death, but if people
would come between him and success, they must bear the consequences.
He did not particularly value human life.  The ideas of the nineteenth
century in that respect were unknown to him.  He had come to conquer,
to civilize, to convert (for he was really a devout man from his youth
upward); and, as his chaplain takes care to tell us, knew many prayers
and psalms of the choir by heart; and the lives of thousands of
barbarians, for so he deemed them, were of no account in the balance of
his mind, when set against the great objects he had in view.  In saying
this, I am not apologizing for this cruelty; I am only endeavoring to
explain it.

"Of all the generals who have been made known {120} to us in history,
or by fiction, Claverhouse, as represented by Sir Walter Scott, most
closely resembles Cortes.  Both of them thorough gentlemen, very
dignified, very nice and precise in all their ways and habits, they
were sadly indifferent to the severity of the means by which they
compassed their ends; and bloody deeds sat easily, for the most part,
upon their well-bred natures.  I make these comments once for all; and
shall hold myself excused from making further comments of a like nature
when any of the cruelties of Cortes come before us--cruelties which one
must ever deeply deplore on their own account, and bitterly regret as
ineffaceable strains upon the fair fame and memory of a very great man.
. . .  The conquest of Mexico could hardly have been achieved at this
period under any man of less genius than that which belonged to
Hernando Cortes.  And even his genius would probably not have attempted
the achievement, or would have failed in it, but for a singular
concurrence of good and evil fortune, which contributed much to the
ultimate success of his enterprise.  Great difficulties and fearful
conflicts of fortune not only stimulate to great attempts, but
absolutely create the opportunities for them."


II. The Expedition to Mexico.

Reports brought back to Cuba by one Juan de Grijilva, who told of the
populous and wealthy cities of the main land to the westward of Cuba,
induced Velasquez to fit out an expedition for exploration,
colonization or whatever might turn up.  Casting about among his
friends, followers, and acquaintances for a suitable leader, his choice
after some hesitation {121} devolved upon Cortes.  This nascent captain
had not lived at the provincial court of Velasquez without impressing
his characteristics upon those with whom he came in contact.  After the
outfitting of the expedition had progressed considerably, Velasquez was
warned that Cortes was of too high and resolved a spirit to be trusted
with an independent command, and it was probable that upon this
opportunity he would disregard his instructions and act for his own
interests, without giving another thought to Velasquez and his backers.

Velasquez ignored the suggestions that he displace Cortes until it was
too late.  Cortes, learning that his enemies were undermining him with
the governor, hastily completed his preparations and set sail a short
time in advance of the arrival of the order displacing him from the
command.  His little squadron touched at a point in Cuba and was there
overtaken by the missive from Velasquez, which Cortes absolutely
disregarded.  He had embarked his property and had persuaded his
friends to invest and did not propose to be displaced by anybody or
anything.

The expedition consisted of eleven ships.  The flag was a small caravel
of one hundred tons burden.  There were three others of eighty tons
each, and the seven remaining were small, undecked brigantines.
Authorities vary as to the number of men in the expedition, but there
were between five hundred and fifty and six hundred Spaniards, two
hundred Indian servants, ten small pieces of artillery, four falconets
and sixteen horses.

The truth must be admitted.  There were three factors which contributed
to the downfall of that vast empire against which this expedition of
adventurers {122} was launched.  One of them was Cortes himself, the
second was Malinal, and the third was the sixteen, doubtless sorry
horses, loaded into the ships.  Fiske says:

"It was not enough that the Spanish soldier of that day was a bulldog
for strength and courage, or that his armor was proof against stone
arrows and lances, or that he wielded a Toledo blade that could cut
through silken cushions, or that his arquebus and cannon were not only
death-dealing weapons but objects of superstitious awe.  More potent
than all else together were those frightful monsters, the horses.
Before these animals men, women, and children fled like sheep, or
skulked and peeped from behind their walls in an ecstasy of terror.  It
was that paralyzing, blood-curdling fear of the supernatural, against
which no amount of physical bravery, nothing in the world but modern
knowledge, is of the slightest avail."

After touching at various places, in one of which they were lucky
enough to find and release a Spanish captive named Geronimo de Aguilar,
who had been wrecked on the Yucatan coast while on a voyage from the
Spanish settlement in Darien and had been taken captive by the Mayas
and held for several years.  The hospitable Mayas had eaten most of the
expedition.  There were then but two alive.  One had renounced his
religion, married a Maya woman, and had been elected chieftain of the
tribe, and accordingly refused to join Cortes.  Aguilar was unfettered
and glad of the opportunity.  During his sojourn among the Mayas he had
learned to speak their language fluently.

After landing at Tabasco on Good Friday, there was a great battle with
the warlike inhabitants of that section, a battle which resulted in the
complete {123} discomfiture of the Tabascans.  The artillery did much
to bring this about, but was not especially terrifying to the
aborigines because they crowded in such numbers around the Spaniards,
and made such terrific outcries, beating on their drums the while, that
they drowned out the noise of the cannonade; but when Cortes at the
head of the horsemen sallied out from the woods, and fell upon them,
the strange, terrifying spectacle presented by these mail-clad monsters
and demons, took the heart out of the Tabascans, and they abandoned the
contest, leaving, so the chroniclers say, countless numbers dead upon
the field.

They knew when they had had enough, and immediately thereafter, they
sued for peace.  Cortes was graciously pleased to grant their request,
and to accept as a peace-offering a score of slaves.  Among them was
Malinal.  In the allotment of the slaves among the officers, she fell
to the share of Alonzo de Puerto Carrero from whom Cortes speedily
acquired her.

Of all the Indians present with Cortes, Malinal alone could speak two
languages.  The Tabascans spoke a sort of degenerate Maya, with which,
as she had lived among them so long, she was of course perfectly
familiar, at the same time she had not forgotten her native Mexican.
It would have been impossible for Cortes to have communicated with the
Mexicans without Malinal, for Aguilar could turn Spanish into Maya, and
Malinal could turn Maya into Mexican.  This means of communication,
round about though it might be, was at once established.  The
intervention of Aguilar soon became unnecessary, for Malinal presently
learned to speak pure Castilian with fluency and grace.  She received
instruction from the worthy priests who accompanied the expedition and
was {124} baptised under the name of Marina, and it is by that name
that she is known in history.  Her eminence is even greater than that
unfortunate Florinda, whose father, to revenge her mistreatment by King
Roderick, the Goth, sold Spain to Tarik, the Saracen, so many centuries
before.

Marina learnt among other things to love Cortes, whose fortunes she
followed and whom she served with an absolute, unquestioning, blind
devotion and fidelity until the end.  So absolute was this attachment
of hers that Cortes became known to the Aztecs as the Lord of Marina.
The Aztecs could not pronounce the letter R.  Marina was therefore
changed to Malina, which curiously enough was nearly her original name.
The word "Tzin" is the Aztec name for Lord, consequently Cortes was
called Malintzin, or more shortly Malinche, meaning, as has been
stated, the Lord of Malina.

Sir Arthur Helps has this to say of her: "Indeed her fidelity was
assured by the love which she bore her master.  Bernal Diaz says that
she was handsome, clever, and eager to be useful (one that will have an
oar in every boat), and she looked the great lady that she was.

"There was hardly any person in history to whom the ruin of that
person's native land can be so distinctly brought home, as it can be to
the wicked mother of Donna Marina.  Cortes, valiant and skilful as he
was in the use of the sword, was not less valiant (perhaps we might
say, not less audacious) nor less skilful, in the use of the tongue.
All the craft which he afterward showed in negotiations would have been
profitless without a competent and trusty interpreter. . . .  If a
medal had been struck to commemorate the deeds of {125} Cortes, the
head of Donna Marina should have been associated with that of Cortes on
the face of the medal; for, without her aid, his conquest of Mexico
would never have been accomplished."


III. The Religion of the Aztecs

Now the Aztec Empire was a rather loose confederation of states bound
together by allegiance to a common overlord, who had his capital across
the mountains in the City of Mexico.  It had been founded by the influx
of an army of fierce marauders from the North who had overwhelmed the
Toltecs who occupied the country and had attained a degree of
civilization which is presumed to have been higher than that which
displaced it.  This Empire of Anahuac, as it was sometimes called, had
endured for two centuries.  It was a military despotism and the emperor
was a military despot.  His rule was the rule of fear.  It subsisted by
force of arms and terror was its cohering power.  It had been extended
by ruthless conquest alone until it comprised from eighteen hundred to
two thousand square leagues, about two hundred thousand square miles of
territory.  The capital, situated on an island in the midst of a salt
lake, was known as Tenochtitlan, or the City of Mexico, and what Rome
was to the Italian states, or Carthage was to the north African
literal, this city was to Anahuac, the empire of the Aztecs.  The name
Tenochtitlan is thus explained by Fiske:

"When the Aztecs, hard pressed by foes, took refuge among these
marshes, they came upon a sacrificial stone which they recognized as
one upon which some years before one of their priests had immolated a
captive {126} chief.  From a crevice in this stone, where a little
earth was imbedded, there grew a cactus, upon which sat an eagle
holding in its beak a serpent.  A priest ingeniously interpretated this
symbolism as a prophecy of signal and long-continued victory, and,
forthwith diving into the lake, he had an interview with Tlaloc, the
god of waters, who told him that upon that very spot the people were to
build their town.  The place was thereafter called Tenochtitlan, or
"the place of the cactus-rock," but the name under which it afterward
came to be best known was taken from Mexitl, one of the names of the
war god Huitzilopochtli.  The device of the rock, the cactus, with the
eagle and the serpent, formed a tribal totem for the Aztecs, and has
