The animal appeared to be fully aware of their intent; and seemed for a
moment to be irresolute as to how it should act.  Instead of placing
itself in a bold, defiant attitude--such as it had lately assumed
towards an antagonist of its own kind--it stood cowering, and apparently
paralysed with fear.  It was this very effect which the eagles, by their
screaming, had designed to produce; and certainly the fierce birds were
succeeding to the utmost of their expectations.

The spectators kept their eyes fixed upon the actors of this new drama--
watching every movement, both of the birds and the beast, with intense
interest.  All were desirous of seeing the latter punished for the cruel
act he had just committed, and which they regarded as savouring very
strongly of fratricide.

It was written in the book of fate that their desire should be
gratified, and that the destroyer should himself be destroyed.  They
were expecting to witness a somewhat prolonged combat; but in this
expectation they were disappointed.  The duration of the conflict was as
brief as the preliminaries that led to it; and these were of the
shortest kind: for scarce ten seconds had elapsed, after they had
uttered their first scream, before the bearcoots swooped down to the
level of the cliff, and commenced a joint attack upon the ibex, striking
at him alternately with beak and claws.

For a short time the quadruped was shrouded--almost hidden--under the
broad, shadowy wings of the birds; but even when its figure could be
traced, it appeared to be making no very energetic efforts at defending
itself.  The sudden attack made by such strange enemies seemed to have
completely disconcerted the ibex; and it remained as if still under the
paralysis of fear.

After a moment or two had passed, the ibex appeared to recover
self-possession; and then he, rearing up, struck out with his horns.
But the bearcoots were on the alert; and each time that the animal
attempted a forward movement, they easily avoided the blow by shying to
one side or the other; and then quickly wheeling, they would swoop back
upon it from behind.

In this way was the conflict progressing, the ibex holding the ground
upon which he had been first attacked, turning round and round, with his
two fore hoofs held close together, or else rearing aloft on his
hind-legs, and using them as a pivot.

It would have been better for the ibex had he kept to his fore-feet
altogether; as in that attitude he might have held his ground a little
longer--perhaps until he had either beaten off his winged assailants, or
wearied them out by a prolonged defence.

But to fight on "all fours" did not chance to be his fashion.  It was
contrary to the traditions of his family and race--all of whose members,
from time immemorial, had been accustomed, when battling with an enemy,
to stand erect upon their hind-legs.

Following this fashion, he had raised himself to his full perpendicular,
and was about aiming a "butt" against the breast of one of the bearcoots
that was tantalising him in front, when the other, that had made a short
retrocession in order to gain impetus, came swooping back with the
velocity of an arrow, and seizing the ibex under the chin, by a quick,
strong jerk of its talons, it struck the head of the animal so far
backward that it lost its balance, and went toppling over the cliff.  In
another instant the ibex was in mid-air--falling--falling--through that
same fearful space that had just been traversed by his own victim.

The spectators looked to see him strike the ground without receiving
further molestation from his winged assailants.  Not so, however, did it
result.  Just as the ibex had got about half-way down the face of the
precipice, the second eagle was seen shooting after him with the
velocity of a flash of lightning; and before he could reach the ground,
the bearcoot was seen striking him once more, and causing him to diverge
from his vertical descent.  The body came to the ground at length--but
at a considerable distance from where the other was lying--the eagle
descending with it to the earth, and even remaining over it with wings
and limbs extended, as if still clutching it in his talons!

Why the bearcoot was thus retaining the ibex in his clutch was not quite
so clear: for the animal was evidently dead; and apparently had been so
long before reaching the earth.  There was something strange about this
proceeding on the part of the bird--as there had also been in its mode
of descent through the last forty or fifty yards of space.  From the
manner in which it had extended its wings after striking its prey, and
from the way in which it still kept exercising them, the spectators
began to think that its singular descent, and its remaining over the
carcass in that cowering attitude, were neither of them voluntary acts
on its part.

The truth was soon made clear--proving the contrary to be the case: for
as the bearcoot continued to flap its wings, or rather, flutter them in
a violent irregular motion, it became evident that instead of desiring
to remain by the fallen body of its victim, it was doing its very best
to get away from it!  This was all the more easily believed, when it
commenced uttering a series of wild screams; not as before indicating
rage or menace, but in tones expressive of the greatest terror!

The spectators, who had already risen from their seats, ran towards the
spot--surmising that there was something amiss.

On getting close up to the still screaming and fluttering bird, they
were able to understand what had appeared so incomprehensible.

They saw that the bearcoot was in a dilemma; that its talons were buried
in the body of the ibex, and so firmly fixed, that with all the strength
of its sinewy legs, backed by the power of its elastic pinions, it was
unable to free itself!

In striking the ibex in his descent, the bird had buried its crooked
claws deeply into the soft abdomen of the animal, but in attempting to
draw them out again, had found--no doubt to its great chagrin--that the
thick coating of "poshm" which covered the skin of the ibex, had become
entangled round its shanks; and the more it fluttered to free itself,
turning round and round in the effort, the stronger and tighter became
the rope which it was twisting out of that celebrated staple--the
shawl-wool of Cashmere!

Beyond a doubt the bearcoot was in a bad fix; and, although it was soon
relieved from its tether of _poshm_, it was only to find itself more
securely tied by a stronger string taken out of the pocket of Ossaroo.

The other bearcoot having followed close after, seemed determined upon
rescuing its mate out of the hands of its captors; and uttering loud
screams, it flew, first at one, then at another of them--with its long
pointed talons menacing each of them in turn.

As all of them had weapons in their hands, they succeeded in keeping the
angry bird at bay, but it might not have fared so well with Fritz--who
in turn became the object of its furious attack, and who had no weapon
but his teeth.

These would scarce have been sufficient protection against the talons of
an eagle; and Fritz would very likely have lost one of his eyes, or
perhaps both of them, had it not been for an arrow springing from the
bow of the shikaree; which, transfixing the great bird right through the
gizzard, brought it down with a "flop" upon the surface of the earth.

It was not killed outright by the arrow; and the dog, on seeing it bite
the dust, would fain have "jumped" it.  But perceiving the strong
curving beak and the sharp talons extended towards him, Fritz was easily
persuaded to remain at a prudent distance, and leave the shikaree to
make a finish of the bearcoot with his long boar-spear.



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

A HOPE BUILT UPON THE BEARCOOT.

In this unexpected supply of food--which might be said almost literally
to have descended from heaven--Karl could not help recognising the hand
of Providence, and pointing it out to his companions.  Even the less
reflecting mind of Caspar, and the half-heathen heart of the Hindoo,
were impressed with a belief that some other agency than mere chance had
befriended them; and they were only too willing to join with Karl in a
prayerful expression of their gratitude to that Being who, although
unseen, was with them even in that lone valley.

For a time they stood contemplating with curiosity, not only the two
ibex, but also the eagles--interesting on account of the knowledge that
all four animals had but lately been roaming freely beyond the
boundaries of that mountain prison--and had just arrived, as it were,
from the outside world, with which they themselves so eagerly longed to
hold communication.  What would they not have given to have been each
provided with a pair of wings like that bearcoot--the one that still
lived?  Furnished in that fashion, they would soon have sought escape
from the valley--to them a valley of tears--and from the snowy mountains
that surrounded it.

While reflecting thus, a thought shaped itself in the mind of the
philosophic Karl, which caused his face to brighten up a little.  Only a
little: for the idea which had occurred to him was not one of the
brightest.  There was something in it, however; and, as the drowning man
will clutch even at straws, Karl caught at a singular conception, and
after examining it a while, communicated it to the others.

It was the bearcoot that had brought forth this conception.  The bird
was a true eagle, strong of wing and muscle like all of his tribe, and
one of the strongest of the genus.  Like an arrow, he could fly straight
up towards the sky.  In a few minutes--ay, in a few seconds--he could
easily shoot up to the summits of the snowy mountains that towered above
them.

"What is to hinder him?" asked Karl, pointing to the bird, "to carry--"

"To carry what?" said Caspar, interrupting the interrogation of his
brother, who spoke in a hesitating and doubtful manner.  "Not us, Karl?"
continued he, with a slight touch of jocularity in his manner--"you
don't mean that, I suppose?"

"Not us," gravely repeated Karl, "but _a rope_ that may carry _us_."

"Ha!" exclaimed Caspar, a gleam of joy overspreading his face as he
spoke.  "There's something in that."

Ossaroo, equally interested in the dialogue, at the same moment gave
utterance to a joyous ejaculation.

"What do _you_ think of it, shikaree?" inquired Karl, speaking in a
serious tone.

The reply of Ossaroo did not bespeak any very sanguine hope on his part.
Still he was ready to counsel a trial of the scheme.  They could try it
without any great trouble.  It would only need to spin some more rope
from the hemp--of which they had plenty--attach it to the leg of the
bearcoot, and give the bird its freedom.  There was no question as to
the direction the eagle would take.  He had already had enough of the
valley; and would no doubt make to get out of it at the very first
flight he should be permitted to make.

The scheme superficially considered appeared plausible enough; but as
its details were subjected to a more rigorous examination, two grand
difficulties presented themselves--so grand that they almost obliterated
the hope, so suddenly, and with too much facility, conceived.

The first of these difficulties was, that the bearcoot, notwithstanding
his great strength of wing, might not be able to carry up a rope, which
would be strong enough to carry one of themselves.  A cord he might
easily take to the top of the cliff, or even far beyond; but a mere
cord, or even a very slender rope, would be of no use.  It would need
one strong enough to support the body of a man--and that, too, while
engaged in the violent exertion of climbing.  The rope would require to
be of great length--two hundred yards or more; and every yard would add
to the weight the eagle would be required to carry up.

It is not to be supposed that they intended to "swarm" up this rope hand
by hand.  For the height of a dozen yards or so, any of them could have
accomplished that.  But there would be a hundred and fifty yards of
"swarming" to be done before they could set foot upon the top of the
cliff; and the smartest sailor that ever crawled up a main-stay--even
Sinbad himself--could not have done half the distance.  They had
foreseen this difficulty from the very first; and the ingenuity of Karl
had at once provided a remedy for it--as will be seen in the sequel.

The second question that presented itself was:--admitting that the
bearcoot might bear up a rope stout enough for the purpose, whether
there would be any possibility of getting this rope stayed at the top?

Of course, they could do nothing of themselves; and that point would be
a matter of mere chance.  There was a chance--all acknowledged that.
The bird, in fluttering over the mountain to make its escape, might
entangle the rope around a rock, or some sharp angle of the frozen snow.
There was a chance, which could be determined by trying, and only by
trying; and there were certain probabilities in favour of success.

The first difficulty--that relating to the strength and weight of the
rope--admitted of rational discussion and calculation.  There were
_data_ to go upon, and others that might be decided conjecturally, yet
sufficiently near the truth for all preliminary purposes.  They could
tell pretty nearly what stoutness of rope it would take to _hang_ any
one of them; and this would be strong enough to carry them up the cliff.
The strength of the eagle might also be presumed pretty nearly; and
there was no doubt but that the bearcoot would do his very best to get
out of the valley.  After the rough handling he had already experienced,
he would not require any further stimulus to call forth his very utmost
exertions.

On discussing the subject in its different bearings, it soon became
evident to all, that the matter of supreme importance would be the
making of the rope.  Could this be manufactured of sufficient fineness
not to overburden the bearcoot, and yet be strong enough to sustain the
weight of a man, the first difficulty would be got over.  The rope
therefore should be made with the greatest care.  Every fibre of it
should be of the best quality of hemp--every strand twisted with a
perfect uniformity of thickness--every plait manipulated with an exact
accuracy.

Ossaroo was the man to make such a cord.  He could spin it with as much
evenness as a Manchester mill.  There would be no danger that in a rope
of Ossaroo's making the most critical eye could detect either fault or
flaw.

It was finally determined on that the rope should be spun--Ossaroo
acting as director, the others becoming his attendants rather than his
assistants.

Before proceeding to work, however, it was deemed prudent to secure
against a hungry day by curing the flesh of the brace of ibex.  The dead
bearcoot was to be eaten while fresh, and needed no curing.

And so indeed it was eaten--the bird of Jove furnishing them with a
dinner, as that of Juno had given them a breakfast!



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

THE LOG ON THE LEG.

As soon as they had hung the ibex-meat upon the curing strings, and
pegged out the two skins for drying, they turned their attention to the
making of the rope by which they were to be pulled out of their prison.
By good fortune they had a large stock of hemp on hand all ready for
twisting.  It was a store that had been saved up by Ossaroo--at the time
when he had fabricated his fish-net; and as it had been kept in a little
dry grotto of the cliff, it was still in excellent preservation.  They
had also on hand a very long rope, though, unfortunately, not long
enough for their present purpose.  It was the same which they had used
in projecting their tree-bridge across the crevasse; and which they had
long ago unrove from its pulleys, and brought home to the hut.  This
rope was the exact thickness they would require: for anything of a more
slender gauge would scarcely be sufficient to support the weight of a
man's body; and considering the fearful risk they would have to run,
while hanging by it against the face of such a cliff, it was necessary
to keep on the safe side as regarded the strength of the rope.  They
could have made it of ample thickness and strength, so as to secure
against the accident of its breaking.  But then, on the opposite hand,
arose the difficulty as to the strength of the eagle's wing.  Should the
rope prove too heavy for the bearcoot to carry over the top of the
cliff, then all their labour would be in vain.

"Why not ascertain this fact before making the rope?"

This was a suggestion of Karl himself.

"But how are we to do it?" was the rejoinder of Caspar.

"I think we can manage the matter," said the botanist, apparently
busying his brain with some profound calculation.

"I can't think of a way myself," replied Caspar, looking inquiringly at
his brother.

"I fancy I can," said Karl.  "What is to hinder us to ascertain the
weight of the rope before making it, and also decide as to whether the
bird can carry so much?"

"But how are you to weigh the rope until it is made?  You know it's the
trouble of making it we wish to avoid--that is, should it prove useless
afterwards."

"Oh! as for that," rejoined Karl, "it is not necessary to have it
finished to find out what weight it would be.  We know pretty near the
length that will be needed, and by weighing a piece of that already in
our hands, we can calculate for any given length."

"You forget, brother Karl, that we have no means of weighing, even the
smallest piece.  We have neither beam, scales, nor weights."

"Pooh!" replied Karl, with that tone of confidence imparted by superior
knowledge.  "There's no difficulty in obtaining all these.  Any piece of
straight stick becomes a beam, when properly balanced; and as for
scales, they can be had as readily as a beam."

"But the weights?" interrupted Caspar.  "What about them?  Your beam and
scales would be useless, I apprehend, without proper weights?  I think
we should be `stumped' for the want of the pounds and ounces."

"I am surprised, Caspar, you should be so unreflecting, and allow your
ingenuity to be so easily discouraged and thwarted.  I believe I could
make a set of weights under any circumstances in which you might place
me--giving me only the raw material, such as a piece of timber and
plenty of stones."

"But how, brother?  Pray, tell us!"

"Why, in the first place, I know the weight of my own body."

"Granted.  But that is only one weight; how are you to get the
denominations--the pounds and ounces?"

"On the beam I should construct I would balance my body against a lot of
stones.  I should then divide the stones into two lots, and balance
these against one another.  I should thus get the half weight of my
body--a known quantity, you will recollect.  By again equally dividing
one of the lots I should find a standard of smaller dimensions; and so
on, till I had got a weight as small as might be needed.  By this
process I can find a pound, an ounce, or any amount required."

"Very true, brother," replied Caspar, "and very ingenious of you.  No
doubt your plan would do--but for one little circumstance, which you
seem to have overlooked."

"What is that?"

"Are your data quite correct?" naively inquired Caspar.

"My data!"

"Yes--the original standard from which you propose to start, and on
which you would base your calculations.  I mean the _weight of your
body_.  Do you know that?"

"Certainly," said Karl; "I am just 140 pounds weight--to an ounce."

"Ah, brother," replied Caspar, with a shake of the head, expressive of
doubt, "you _were_ 140 pounds in London--I know that myself--and so was
I nearly as much; but you forget that the fret and worry of this
miserable existence has reduced both of us.  Indeed, dear brother, I can
see that you are much thinner since we set out from Calcutta; and no
doubt you can perceive the like change in me.  Is it not so?"

Karl was forced to give an affirmative reply to the question, at the
same time that he acknowledged the truth of his brother's statement.
His data were not correct.  The weight of his body--which, not being a
constant quantity, is at all times an unsafe standard--would not serve
in the present instance.  The calculation they desired to make was of
too important a character to be based upon such an untrustworthy
foundation.  Karl perceived this plainly enough; but it did not
discourage him from prosecuting his purpose to make the attempt he had
proposed.

"Well, brother!" said he, looking smilingly towards the latter, and
apparently rather pleased at Caspar's acuteness; "I acknowledge you have
had the better of the argument this time; but that's no reason why I
should give up my plan.  There are many other ways of ascertaining the
weight of an object; and no doubt if I were to reflect a little I could
hit upon one; but as luck has it, we need not trouble ourselves further
about that matter.  If I mistake not, we have a standard of weight in
our possession, that is just the thing itself."

"What standard?" demanded Caspar.

"One of the leaden bullets of your own gun.  They are ounce bullets,
I've heard you say?"

"They are exactly sixteen to the pound, and therefore each of them an
ounce.  You are right, Karl, that is a standard.  Certainly it will do."

The subject required no further sifting; and without delay they
proceeded to ascertain the weight of two hundred yards of rope.  A
balance was soon constructed and adjusted, as nicely as if they had
meant to put gold in the scale.  Twenty yards of the rope already in
hand was set against stones--whose weight they had already determined by
reduplicating a number of bullets--and its quantity ascertained in
pounds and ounces.  Eight times that gave one hundred and sixty yards--
the probable amount of cord they should require.

This being determined upon, the next thing was to find out whether the
eagle could carry such a burden into the sky.  Of course, the bird would
not have the whole of it to carry at first, as part would rest upon the
ground; but should it succeed in reaching the top of the cliff--even at
the lowest part--there would then be the weight of at least one hundred
