ready.  Forty of our braves threw off the principal parts of their
clothing; painted their faces with stripes of vermilion and charcoal;
armed themselves with guns, bows, tomahawks, and scalping-knives, and in
a few minutes left the camp in silence, and at a quick pace.

"One or two of the youths who had been playing on the river's bank were
permitted to accompany the party, and among these were Misconna and
myself.  As we passed a group of women, assembled to see us depart, I
observed the girl who had caused so much jealousy between us.  She cast
down her eyes as we came up, and as we advanced close to the group she
dropped a white feather as if by accident.  Stooping hastily down, I
picked it up in passing, and stuck it in an ornamented band that bound
my hair.  As we hurried on, I heard two or three old hags laugh, and
say, with a sneer, `His hand is as white as the feather: it has never
seen blood.'  The next moment we were hid in the forest, and pursued our
rapid course in dead silence.

"The country through which we passed was varied, extending in broken
bits of open prairie, and partly covered with thick wood, yet not so
thick as to offer any hindrance to our march.  We walked in single file,
each treading in his comrade's footsteps, while the band was headed by
the scout who had brought the information.  The principal chief of our
tribe came next, and he was followed by the braves according to their
age or influence.  Misconna and I brought up the rear.  The sun was just
sinking as we left the belt of wood land in which our village stood,
crossed over a short plain, descended a dark hollow, at the bottom of
which the river flowed, and following its course for a considerable
distance, turned off to the right and emerged upon a sweep of
prairie-land.  Here the scout halted, and taking the chief and two or
three braves aside, entered into earnest consultation with them.

"What they said we could not hear; but as we stood leaning on our guns
in the deep shade of the forest, we could observe by their animated
gestures that they differed in opinion.  We saw that the scout pointed
several times to the moon, which was just rising above the tree-tops,
and then to the distant horizon; but the chief shook his head, pointed
to the woods, and seemed to be much in doubt, while the whole band
watched his motions in deep silence but evident interest.  At length
they appeared to agree.  The scout took his place at the head of the
line, and we resumed our march, keeping close to the margin of the wood.
It was perhaps three hours after this ere we again halted to hold
another consultation.  This time their deliberations were shorter.  In a
few seconds our chief himself took the lead, and turned into the woods,
through which he guided us to a small fountain which bubbled up at the
root of a birch tree, where there was a smooth green spot of level
ground.  Here we halted, and prepared to rest for an hour, at the end of
which time the moon, which now shone bright and full in the clear sky,
would be nearly down, and we could resume our march.  We now sat down in
a circle, and taking a hasty mouthful of dried meat, stretched ourselves
on the ground with our arms beside us, while our chief kept watch,
leaning against the birch tree.  It seemed as if I had scarcely been
asleep five minutes when I felt a light touch on my shoulder.  Springing
up, I found the whole party already astir, and in a few minutes more we
were again hurrying onwards.

"We travelled thus until a faint light in the east told us that the day
was at hand, when the scout's steps became more cautious, and he paused
to examine the ground frequently.  At last we came to a place where the
ground sank slightly, and at the distance of a hundred yards rose again,
forming a low ridge, which was crowned with small bushes.  Here we came
to a halt, and were told that our enemies were on the other side of that
ridge; that they were about twenty in number, all Chipewyan warriors,
with the exception of one paleface--a trapper and his Indian wife.  The
scout had learned, while lying like a snake in the grass around their
camp, that this man was merely travelling with them on his way to the
Rocky Mountains, and that, as they were a war-party, he intended to
leave them soon.  On hearing this the warriors gave a grim smile, and
our chief, directing the scout to fall behind, cautiously led the way to
the top of the ridge.  On reaching it we saw a valley of great extent,
dotted with trees and shrubs, and watered by one of the many rivers that
flow into the great Saskatchewan.  It was nearly dark, however, and we
could only get an indistinct view of the land.  Far ahead of us, on the
right bank of the stream, and close to its margin, we saw the faint red
light of watch-fires; which caused us some surprise, for watch-fires are
never lighted by a war-party so near to an enemy's country.  So we could
only conjecture that they were quite ignorant of our being in that part
of the country; which was, indeed, not unlikely, seeing that we had
shifted our camp during the summer.

"Our chief now made arrangements for the attack.  We were directed to
separate and approach individually as near to the camp as was possible
without risk of discovery, and then, taking up an advantageous position,
to await our chief's signal, which was to be the hooting of an owl.  We
immediately separated.  My course lay along the banks of the stream, and
as I strode rapidly along, listening to its low, solemn murmur, which
sounded clear and distinct in the stillness of a calm summer night, I
could not help feeling as if it were reproaching me for the bloody work
I was hastening to perform.  Then the recollection of what the old woman
said of me raised a desperate spirit in my heart.  Remembering the white
feather in my head, I grasped my gun and quickened my pace.  As I neared
the camp I went into the woods and climbed a low hillock to look out.  I
found that it still lay about five hundred yards distant, and that the
greater part of the ground between it and the place where I stood was
quite flat, and without cover of any kind.  I therefore prepared to
creep towards it, although the attempt was likely to be attended with
great danger, for Chipewyans have quick ears and sharp eyes.  Observing,
however, that the river ran close past the camp, I determined to follow
its course as before.  In a few seconds more I came to a dark, narrow
gap where the river flowed between broken rocks, overhung by branches,
and from which I could obtain a clear view of the camp within fifty
yards of me.  Examining the priming of my gun, I sat down on a rock to
await the chief's signal.

"It was evident, from the careless manner in which the fires were
placed, that no enemy was supposed to be near.  From my concealment I
could plainly distinguish ten or fifteen of the sleeping forms of our
enemies, among which the trapper was conspicuous, from his superior
bulk, and the reckless way in which his brawny arms were flung on the
turf, while his right hand clutched his rifle.  I could not but smile as
I thought of the proud boldness of the paleface--lying all exposed to
view in the grey light of dawn while an Indian's rifle was so close at
hand.  One Indian kept watch, but he seemed more than half asleep.  I
had not sat more than a minute when my observations were interrupted by
the cracking of a branch in the bushes near me.  Starting up, I was
about to bound into the underwood, when a figure sprang down the bank
and rapidly approached me.  My first impulse was to throw forward my
gun, but a glance sufficed to show me that it was a woman.

"`Wah!'  I exclaimed, in surprise, as she hurried forward and laid her
hand on my shoulder.  She was dressed partly in the costume of the
Indians, but wore a shawl on her shoulders and a handkerchief on her
head that showed she had been in the settlements; and from the lightness
of her skin and hair, I judged at once that she was the trapper's wife,
of whom I had heard the scout speak.

"`Has the light-hair got a medicine-bag, or does she speak with spirits,
that she has found me so easily?'

"The girl looked anxiously up in my face as if to read my thoughts, and
then said, in a low voice,--`No, I neither carry the medicine-bag nor
hold palaver with spirits; but I do think the good Manito must have led
me here.  I wandered into the woods because I could not sleep, and I saw
you pass.  But tell me,' she added, with still deeper anxiety, `does the
white-feather come alone?  Does he approach _friends_ during the dark
hours with a soft step like a fox?'

"Feeling the necessity of detaining her until my comrades should have
time to surround the camp, I said: `The white-feather hunts far from his
lands.  He sees Indians whom he does not know, and must approach with a
light step.  Perhaps they are enemies.'

"`Do Knisteneux hunt at night, prowling in the bed of a stream?' said
the girl, still regarding me with a keen glance.  `Speak truth,
stranger,' (and she started suddenly back); `in a moment I can alarm the
camp with a cry, and if your tongue is forked.--But I do not wish to
bring enemies upon you, if they are indeed such.  I am not one of them.
My husband and I travel with them for a time.  We do not desire to see
blood.  God knows,' she added in French, which seemed her native tongue,
`I have seen enough of that already.'

"As her earnest eyes looked into my face a sudden thought occurred to
me.  `Go,' said I, hastily, `tell your husband to leave the camp
instantly and meet me here; and see that the Chipewyans do not observe
your departure.  Quick! his life and yours may depend on your speed.'

"The girl instantly comprehended my meaning.  In a moment she sprang up
the bank; but as she did so the loud report of a gun was heard, followed
by a yell, and the war-whoop of the Knisteneux rent the air as they
rushed upon the devoted camp, sending arrows and bullets before them.

"On the instant I sprang after the girl and grasped her by the arm.
`Stay, white-cheek; it is too late now.  You cannot save your husband,
but I think he'll save himself.  I saw him dive into the bushes like a
caribou.  Hide yourself here; perhaps you may escape.'

"The half-breed girl sank on a fallen tree with a deep groan, and
clasped her hands convulsively before her eyes, while I bounded over the
tree, intending to join my comrades in pursuing the enemy.

"As I did so a shrill cry arose behind me, and looking back, I beheld
the trapper's wife prostrate on the ground, and Misconna standing over
her, his spear uplifted, and a fierce frown on his dark face.

"`Hold!'  I cried, rushing back and seizing his arm.  `Misconna did not
come to kill _women_.  She is not our enemy.'

"`Does the young wrestler want _another_ wife?' he said, with a wild
laugh, at the same time wrenching his arm from my gripe, and driving his
spear through the fleshy part of the woman's breast and deep into the
ground.  A shriek rent the air as he drew it out again to repeat the
thrust; but before he could do so, I struck him with the butt of my gun
on the head.  Staggering backwards, he fell heavily among the bushes.
At this moment a second whoop rang out, and another of our band sprang
from the thicket that surrounded us.  Seeing no one but myself and the
bleeding girl, he gave me a short glance of surprise, as if he wondered
why I did not finish the work which he evidently supposed I had begun.

"`Wah!' he exclaimed; and uttering another yell plunged his spear into
the woman's breast, despite my efforts to prevent him--this time with
more deadly effect, as the blood spouted from the wound, while she
uttered a piercing scream, and twined her arms round my legs as I stood
beside her, as if imploring for mercy.  Poor girl!  I saw that she was
past my help.  The wound was evidently mortal.  Already the signs of
death overspread her features, and I felt that a second blow would be
one of mercy; so that when the Indian stooped and passed his long knife
through her heart, I made but a feeble effort to prevent it.  Just as
the man rose, with the warm blood dripping from his keen blade, the
sharp crack of a rifle was heard, and the Indian fell dead at my feet,
shot through the forehead, while the trapper bounded into the open
space, his massive frame quivering, and his sunburned face distorted
with rage and horror.  From the other side of the brake six of our band
rushed forward and levelled their guns at him.  For one moment the
trapper paused to cast a glance at the mangled corpse of his wife, as if
to make quite sure that she was dead; and then uttering a howl of
despair, he hurled his axe with a giant's force at the Knisteneux, and
disappeared over the precipitous bank of the stream.

"So rapid was the action that the volley which immediately succeeded
passed harmlessly over his head, while the Indians dashed forward in
pursuit.  At the same instant I myself was felled to the earth.  The axe
which the trapper had flung struck a tree in its flight, and as it
glanced off the handle gave me a violent blow in passing.  I fell
stunned.  As I did so my head alighted on the shoulder of the woman, and
the last thing I felt, as my wandering senses forsook me, was her still
warm blood flowing over my face and neck.

"While this scene was going on, the yells and screams of the warriors in
the camp became fainter and fainter as they pursued and fled through the
woods.  The whole band of Chipewyans was entirely routed, with the
exception of four who escaped, and the trapper whose flight I have
described; all the rest were slain, and their scalps hung at the belts
of the victorious Knisteneux warriors, while only one of our party was
killed.

"Not more than a few minutes after receiving the blow that stunned me, I
recovered, and rising as hastily as my scattered faculties would permit
me, I staggered towards the camp, where I heard the shouts of our men as
they collected the arms of their enemies.  As I rose, the feather which
Wabisca had dropped fell from my brow; and as I picked it up to replace
it, I perceived that it was _red_, being entirely covered with the blood
of the half-breed girl.

"The place where Misconna had fallen was vacant as I passed, and I found
him standing among his comrades round the camp fires, examining the guns
and other articles which they had collected.  He gave me a short glance
of deep hatred as I passed, and turned his head hastily away.  A few
minutes sufficed to collect the spoils, and so rapidly had everything
been done that the light of day was still faint as we silently returned
on our track.  We marched in the same order as before, Misconna and I
bringing up the rear.  As we passed near the place where the poor woman
had been murdered, I felt a strong desire to return to the spot.  I
could not very well understand the feeling, but it lay so strong upon me
that, when we reached the ridge where we first came in sight of the
Chipewyan camp, I fell behind until my companions disappeared in the
woods, and then ran swiftly back.  Just as I was about to step beyond
the circle of bushes that surrounded the spot, I saw that some one was
there before me.  It was a man, and as he advanced into the open space
and the light fell on his face, I saw that it was the trapper.  No doubt
he had watched us off the ground, and then, when all was safe, returned
to bury his wife.  I crouched to watch him.  Stepping slowly up to the
body of his murdered wife, he stood beside it with his arms folded on
his breast and quite motionless.  His head hung down, for the heart of
the white man was heavy, and I could see, as the light increased, that
his brows were dark as the thunder-cloud, and the corners of his mouth
twitched from a feeling that the Indian scorns to show.  My heart is
full of sorrow for him now," (Redfeather's voice sank as he spoke); "it
was full of sorrow for him even _then_, when I was taught to think that
pity for an enemy was unworthy of a brave.  The trapper stood gazing
very long.  His wife was young; he could not leave her yet.  At length a
deep groan burst from his heart, as the waters of a great river, long
held down, swell up in spring and burst the ice at last.  Groan followed
groan as the trapper still stood and pressed his arms on his broad
breast, as if to crush the heart within.  At last he slowly knelt beside
her, bending more and more over the lifeless form, until he lay extended
on the ground beside it, and twining his arms round the neck, he drew
the cold cheek close to his, and pressed the blood-covered bosom tighter
and tighter, while his form quivered with agony as he gave her a last,
long embrace.  Oh!" continued Redfeather, while his brow darkened, and
his black eye flashed with an expression of fierceness that his young
listeners had never seen before, "may the curse--" He paused.  "God
forgive them! how could they know better?

"At length the trapper rose hastily.  The expression of his brow was
still the same, but his mouth was altered.  The lips were pressed
tightly like those of a brave when led to torture, and there was a
fierce activity in his motions as he sprang down the bank and proceeded
to dig a hole in the soft earth.  For half an hour he laboured,
shovelling away the earth with a large flat stone; and carrying down the
body, he buried it there, under the shadow of a willow.  The trapper
then shouldered his rifle and hurried away.  On reaching the turn of the
stream which shuts the little hollow out from view, he halted suddenly,
gave one look into the prairie he was thenceforth to tread alone, one
short glance back, and then, raising both arms in the air, looked up
into the sky, while he stretched himself to his full height.  Even at
that distance I could see the wild glare of his eye and the heaving of
his breast.  A moment after, and he was gone."

"And did you never see him again?" inquired Harry Somerville eagerly.

"No, I never saw him more.  Immediately afterwards I turned to rejoin my
companions, whom I soon overtook, and entered our village along with
them.  I was regarded as a poor warrior, because I brought home no
scalps, and ever afterwards I went by the name of _Redfeather_ in our
tribe."

"But are you still thought a poor warrior?" asked Charley, in some
concern, as if he were jealous of the reputation of his new friend.

The Indian smiled.  "No," he said: "our village was twice attacked
afterwards, and in defending it Redfeather took many scalps.  He was
made a chief!"

"Ah!" cried Charley, "I'm glad of that.  And Wabisca, what came of her?
Did Misconna get her?"

"She is my wife," replied Redfeather.

"Your wife!  Why, I thought I heard the voyageurs call your wife the
white swan."

"_Wabisca_ is _white_ in the language of the Knisteneux.  She is
beautiful in form, and my comrades call her the white swan."

Redfeather said this with an air of gratified pride.  He did not,
perhaps, love his wife with more fervour than he would have done had he
remained with his tribe; but Redfeather had associated a great deal with
the traders, and he had imbibed much of that spirit which prompts
"_white men_" to treat their females with deference and respect--a
feeling which is very foreign to an Indian's bosom.  To do so was,
besides, more congenial to his naturally unselfish and affectionate
disposition, so that any flattering allusion to his partner was always
received by him with immense gratification.

"I'll pay you a visit some day, Redfeather, if I'm sent to any place
within fifty miles of your tribe," said Charley, with the air of one who
had fully made up his mind.

"And Misconna?" asked Harry.

"Misconna is with his tribe," replied the Indian, and a frown overspread
his features as he spoke.  "But Redfeather has been following in the
track of his white friends; he has not seen his nation for many moons."



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE CANOE--ASCENDING THE RAPIDS--THE PORTAGE--DEER-SHOOTING, AND LIFE IN
THE WOODS.

We must now beg the patient reader to take a leap with us, not only
through space, but also through time.  We must pass over the events of
the remainder of the journey along the shore of Lake Winnipeg.
Unwilling though we are to omit anything in the history of our friends
that would be likely to prove interesting, we think it wise not to run
the risk of being tedious, or of dwelling too minutely on the details of
scenes which recall powerfully the feelings and memories of bygone days
to the writer, but may nevertheless appear somewhat flat to the reader.

We shall not, therefore, enlarge at present on the arrival of the boats
at Norway House, which lies at the north end of the lake, nor on what
was said and done by our friends and by several other young comrades
whom they found there.  We shall not speak of the horror of Harry
Somerville, and the extreme disappointment of his friend Charley
Kennedy, when the former was told that, instead of hunting grizzly bears
up the Saskatchewan, he was condemned to the desk again at York Fort,
the depot on Hudson's Bay--a low, swampy place near the seashore, where
the goods for the interior are annually landed and the furs shipped for
England, where the greater part of the summer and much of the winter is
occupied by the clerks who may be doomed to vegetate there in making up
the accounts of what is termed the Northern Department, and where the
brigades converge from all the wide-scattered and far-distant outposts,
and the _ship_ from England--that great event of the year--arrives,
keeping the place in a state of constant bustle and effervescence until
autumn, when ship and brigades finally depart, leaving the residents
(about thirty in number) shut up for eight long, dreary months of
winter, with a tenantless wilderness around and behind them, and the
wide, cold, frozen sea before.  This was among the first of Harry's
disappointments.  He suffered many afterwards, poor fellow!

Neither shall we accompany Charley up the south branch of the
Saskatchewan, where his utmost expectations in the way of hunting were
more than realised, and where he became so accustomed to shooting ducks
and geese, and bears and buffaloes, that he could not forbear smiling
when he chanced to meet with a red-legged gull, and remembered how he
and his friend Harry had comported themselves when they first met with
these birds on the shores of Lake Winnipeg!  We shall pass over all
this, and the summer, autumn, and winter too, and leap at once into the
spring of the following year.

On a very bright, cheery morning of that spring, a canoe might have been
seen slowly ascending one of the numerous streams which meander through
a richly-wooded, fertile country, and mingle their waters with those of
the Athabasca River, terminating their united career in a large lake of
the same name.  The canoe was small--one of the kind used by the natives
while engaged in hunting, and capable of holding only two persons
conveniently, with their baggage.  To any one unacquainted with the
nature or capabilities of a northern Indian canoe, the fragile, bright
orange-coloured machine that was battling with the strong current of a
rapid must indeed have appeared an unsafe and insignificant craft; but a
more careful study of its performances in the rapid, and of the immense
quantity of miscellaneous goods and chattels which were, at a later
period of the day, disgorged from its interior, would have convinced the
beholder that it was in truth the most convenient and serviceable craft
that could be devised for the exigencies of such a country.

True, it could only hold two men (it _might_ have taken three at a
pinch), because men, and women too, are awkward, unyielding baggage,
very difficult to stow compactly; but it is otherwise with tractable
goods.  The canoe is exceedingly thin, so that no space is taken up or
rendered useless by its own structure, and there is no end to the amount
of blankets, and furs, and coats, and paddles, and tent-covers, and
dogs, and babies, that can be stowed away in its capacious interior.
The canoe of which we are now writing contained two persons, whose
active figures were thrown alternately into every graceful attitude of
manly vigour, as with poles in hand they struggled to force their light
craft against the boiling stream.  One was a man apparently of about
forty-five years of age.  He was a square-shouldered, muscular man, and
from the ruggedness of his general appearance, the soiled hunting-shirt
that was strapped round his waist with a parti-coloured worsted belt,
the leather leggings, a good deal the worse for wear, together with the
quiet, self-possessed glance of his grey eye, the compressed lip and
sunburned brow, it was evident that he was a hunter, and one who had
seen rough work in his day.  The expression of his face was pleasing,
despite a look of habitual severity which sat upon it, and a deep scar
which traversed his brow from the right temple to the top of his nose.
It was difficult to tell to what country he belonged.  His father was a
Canadian, his mother a Scotchwoman.  He was born in Canada, brought up
in one of the Yankee settlements on the Missouri, and had, from a mere
youth, spent his life as a hunter in the wilderness.  He could speak
English, French, or Indian with equal ease and fluency, but it would
have been hard for any one to say which of the three was his native
tongue.  The younger man, who occupied the stern of the canoe, acting
the part of steersman, was quite a youth, apparently about seventeen,
but tall and stout beyond his years, and deeply sunburned.  Indeed, were
it not for this fact, the unusual quantity of hair that hung in massive
curls down his neck, and the voyageur costume, we should have recognised
our young friend Charley Kennedy again more easily.  Had any doubts
remained in our mind, the shout of his merry voice would have scattered
