converted the journey into a race, in which Chingatok--his giant arm
flourishing an appropriately huge whip--was rapidly coming to the front
when a tremendous shout in the rear caused them to pull up.  Looking
back, Alf's sledge was seen inverted and mixed, as it were, with the
team, while Alf himself and his Eskimo friends were sprawling around on
the ice.  No damage was done to life or limb, but a sledge-runner had
been partially broken, and could not be mended,--so said Oolichuk--in
less than an hour.

"This, then," said the Captain, "is our first obstruction, so here we
will make our beds for the night."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

ANOTHER ISLAND DISCOVERED--THE ENGLISHMEN AND ESKIMOS ALIKE ARE
ASTONISHED IN MORE WAYS THAN ONE.

As Chingatok had predicted, on the sixth day from Home-in-sight Island
the party came to another island, where the great pack abruptly
terminated.  It was not large, probably ten or twelve miles in length,
from the Eskimo account, but the ends of it could not be seen from the
spot where they landed.  At that point it was only two miles wide, and
on the opposite side its shores were laved by an open sea, which was
quite free from ice, with the exception of a few scattered floes and
bergs--a sea whose waves fell in slow regular cadence on a pebbly beach,
and whose horizon was an unbroken line barely distinguishable from the
sky.

Close to it a few black rocks showed above the water, around which great
numbers of gulls, puffins, and other sea-birds disported themselves in
clamorous joy; sometimes flying to the shore as if to have a look at the
newcomers, and then sheering off with a scream--it might be a laugh--to
tell their comrades what they had seen.

"Here, then, at last, is the open Polar Sea," said Captain Vane, after
the first long silent gaze of joy and admiration.  "I have no doubt of
it whatever.  And now we shall proceed, I hope without interruption, to
the Pole!"

"Of course you do not intend that we should swim there, do you, uncle?"
said Leo.

"Of course not, my boy.  In those big cases, which have cost us so much
labour to bring here, I have three large and stout india-rubber boats--"

"Ha!  I guessed as much," exclaimed Alf.

"No doubt," returned the Captain, "but you did not guess all."

"I hope not," said Leo, "for to say truth I don't much relish the idea
of rowing over an unknown sea an unknown distance at the rate of three
or four miles an hour.  I hope you have a patent steam-engine that will
drive us along somewhat faster."

"No, lad, no, I have no such steam-engine or any other miraculous
contrivance that sets the laws of nature at defiance, and appears only
in nursery tales.  This expedition has been undertaken on no haphazard
or insane plan.  It was all cut and dry before we left Old England, and
it is much simpler than you suppose."

"What, then, is to be your motive power, if not oars or sails--which
last would not work well, I fear, in an india-rubber boat?" asked Leo.

"Kites," replied the Captain.

"Kites!" repeated both Alf and Leo in surprise.

"Not paper ones, surely," said Benjy, in a tone of disappointment, not
unmingled with contempt.

"No, Ben, not paper ones," said the Captain, "but you shall see.  Let
the boxes be unlashed and carried into yonder cave.  I'll unpack them
presently.  Meanwhile, Anders, I want you to interpret for me.  Go, tell
Chingatok I wish to have a talk with him."

While the brothers went to obey their leader's order, and Benjy to
superintend the pitching of the camp, Captain Vane walked along the
shore with Anders and the giant.

"Are you sure, Chingatok, that there is no more ice in this sea?" asked
the Captain.

"No more great packs; only a little here and there, and a few
ice-mountains," answered the Eskimo.

"And no more islands?"

"No more islands till you come to the land where I and my people dwell.
There are more islands beyond that with people on them--people who are
not friendly to us."

"How far off, now, is your land from this island?" continued the
Captain, with a grave nod to Leo, who joined them at the moment.

"About three days with a kayak."

The Captain pondered for a few minutes.

"Leo," he said, "the observation which I took yesterday enables me to
place this island in latitude 86 degrees 40 minutes.  I judge that a
kayak may travel at the rate of three miles an hour, which, making
allowance for sleep and rests, gives the distance of this island from
Chingatok's native land approximately at about 100 miles, so that the
home of this giant and his tribe is actually in the near neighbourhood
of the Pole itself.  If this be so, we may consider that our success,
wind, weather, etcetera, permitting, is absolutely certain."

The Captain spoke in the deep earnest tones of one under the influence
of powerful but suppressed enthusiasm.

"Now then, Leo," he continued, "we will go and take formal possession of
this new discovery.  What shall we call it?  Good Hope is too familiar
as a cape."

"Why not Great Hope?" asked Leo.

"Good!  That will do well."

So Captain Vane took possession of Great Hope Island; having fixed its
position in latitude 86 degrees 40 minutes north, and longitude 60
degrees west.

After that he proceeded to open the cases which had so long been objects
of interest to his own party, and objects of intense curiosity to the
Eskimos, who crowded round the entrance of the shallow cavern with eager
looks, while their leader went to work with hammer and chisel on the
copper fastenings.

"Wugh!  Huk! hi! hosh! ho!" were something like the exclamations uttered
by the Eskimos when the lid of the first case flew up and revealed only
a mass of brown paper wrappings.

It was interesting to observe the utter self-oblivion of these children
of nature!  Of course the eyes and mouths of all opened wider and wider
while the work went on.  We can understand this, for it is
characteristic of the simple in all nations, but it was not so easy to
understand why shoulders should slowly rise and elbows be slightly bent,
and the ten fingers gradually expand like claws.  Anxiety might account
for the way in which some of them softly lifted one foot and then the
other; but why did little Oblooria raise her left foot by imperceptible
degrees, and remain poised upon the other as if she were a bird, except
on the supposition that she was unconsciously imitating Tekkona, who was
doing the same thing?

It was interesting, also, to note the slight substratum of consciousness
that displayed itself in Oolichuk, who, while regarding the Captain in
glaring expectancy, put his arm, inadvertently as it were, round
Oblooria's waist--also the complete absence of consciousness in the
latter, who was so engrossed with the Captain, that she did not appear
to feel the touch of Oolichuk!  These little peculiarities, however,
although extremely interesting, were not observed by any of the actors
on that occasion--except, perhaps, by Benjy, who, being sharp-witted,
had a knack of seeing round a corner at times!

When the contents of the case were turned out, they proved to consist of
several coils of rope, and a large square bundle.  The uncording of the
latter intensified the expectation of the Eskimo to boiling point, and
when the brown paper was removed, and a roll of something with a
strange, not to say bad, smell was displayed, they boiled over in a
series of exclamations to which the former "huks" and "hos" were mere
child's play.  But when the roll was unrolled, and assumed a flat shape
not unlike the skin of a huge walrus, they gave a shout.  Then, when the
Captain, opening a smaller package, displayed a pair of bellows like a
concertina, they gave a gasp.  When he applied these to a hole in the
flat object, and caused it slowly to swell, they uttered a roar, and
when, finally, they saw the flat thing transformed into a goodly-sized
boat, they absolutely squealed with delight, and began to caper about in
childlike joy.

In this manner, three cases were opened, and three boats produced.  Then
the Magician, who went about his work in perfect silence, with a knowing
smile on his lips, opened several longish boxes, which Leo had guessed
to be filled with fishing-rods or spare rifles, but which, it turned
out, contained oars for the india-rubber boats.  After that, the Captain
opened another large case, which roused the surprise of his white
followers as much as that of the natives.

"It looks like one of mother's silk dresses," remarked Benjy, as the new
wonder was dragged forth.

"Too voluminous for that," said Alf.

"A balloon!" exclaimed Leo.

"No, boys, it's only a kite," said the Captain, unfolding it.  "I
confess it does not look very like one, but its appearance will change
by and by."

And its appearance did change remarkably as it was opened out and put
together.

The construction of this kite was peculiar.  In the first place, it was
square in form, or, rather, diamond-shaped, and its size, when fully
distended, was eighteen feet by fourteen.

"The simplicity of it, you see," said the Captain, as he put it
together, "is its great recommendation."

He ceased to speak for a few moments, while engaged with a troublesome
joint, and Benjy took advantage of the pause to express a hope that
simplicity was not its _greatest_ recommendation, because he had never
heard of any one attempting to reach the Pole on the strength of
simplicity.

Without noticing this remark, the Captain went on--

"You see it would be troublesome to carry distending sticks of great
length, because they would be in the way, and apt to get broken.  Each
stick, therefore, has a joint in the middle like that of a fishing-rod.
There are four such sticks, fastened to, or radiating from, a strong
steel central hinge, so that they can be folded together, or opened out
into the form of a cross.  A small but very strong cross of bamboo fits
on the machine, behind the central hinge, and locks it in a distended
position, after the silk has been placed on it.  Strong cords run round
the outer edges of the silk, and there are loops at the corners to
attach it to the distenders.  Thus, you see, the kite can be put up, or
folded into a portable form like an umbrella, though not of course as
quickly, nor yet as easily, owing to its great size."

While he was speaking, the Captain was busily putting the several parts
of the kite together.

As he concluded, he laid the machine on its face, locked it with the
little bamboo cross, and then held it up in triumph, to the delight of
his white observers, and the blank astonishment of the Eskimos.  We say
blank, because, unlike the boat, the nature of which they understood
before it had been quite inflated, this machine was to them an absolute
mystery, and seemed to be of no use at all.

Their opinion of it was not improved when a sudden puff of wind blew it
flat on the ground, causing the Captain to fall on the top of it.

"It's a little awkward in handling," he growled, unlocking the
centre-cross.  "Hold the points down, lads, till I drag it into the
umbrella form.  There; it's all safe now.  The truth is,
unmanageableness when in hand is the only fault of my kite.  Once in the
air, it's as tractable as a lamb; getting it up is the chief difficulty,
but that is not too great to be overcome."

"Besides, you know, nothing's perfect in this world, father," said
Benjy, with a wink at Butterface, who, having acute risible tendencies,
exploded.  Some of the Eskimos, whose sympathies were strong, joined in
the laugh by way of relief to their feelings.

When the Captain had wound a strap round the closed kite, to restrain
its volatile nature, he opened another large case which contained
several reels of strong cord, somewhat resembling log-lines, but with
this peculiarity, that, alongside of each thick cord there ran a thin
red line of twine, connected with though not bound to the other by means
of little loops or rings of twine fixed about six feet apart throughout
its entire length.

"These are the cords to fly the kites," said the Captain, taking up one
of the reels, which was as large as a man's hat.  "You see I have three
sets of silk in that box, and six sets of reels and sticks, besides a
few spare pieces of the latter, so that we can afford to suffer a little
damage.  Now, the use of this peculiar sort of double line will be clear
when in action, but I may as well explain it.  The end of this stout
line is to be made fast to the band which you saw on the kite, and the
end of this thin red line to the top of its upright stick.  You remember
well enough how independent ordinary kites are.  You cannot cause them
to descend except by hauling them in by main force, and you cannot
moderate their pull.  This kite of mine is capable of exerting a pull
equal to six horses, with a sufficiently strong wind.  So, you see, it
would be impossible for a dozen men to hold it without some check on its
power.  This check is supplied by the thin red line, which is made of
the strongest silk.  By pulling it gently you bend the head of the kite
forward, so that it ceases to present a flat surface to the wind, which
flies off it more or less at the tail.  By pulling still more on the red
line, the traction-power is still further reduced, and, with a good
pull, the kite can be made to present its head altogether to the wind,
and thus to lie flat on it, when, of course, it will descend slowly to
the ground, waving from side to side, like a dropped sheet of paper."

"Are you going to try it, father?" asked Benjy eagerly.

The Captain looked up at the clouds with a critical glance.  "There's
hardly enough of wind to-day, boy.  Nevertheless we will try."

In a very short time the kite was again extended, the centre locked, the
thick cord fixed to a loop in the band, and the thin cord to the head of
the main stick.  While this was being done, the corners were held down
by Leo, Benjy, Anders, and Butterface.

"How about a tail, father?" asked Benjy, with sudden animation.

"Ha!  I forgot the tail.  I've got several tails.  It's well you
reminded me."

"It is indeed," responded the boy, "for I remember well that when my
kites lost their tails they used to whirl wildly about until they dashed
their heads on the ground.  This kite would be little better than a mad
elephant without its tail!"

A short tail, made of the strongest cat-gut, was now fixed to the lower
extremity of the kite.  It had a bag at the end, to be weighted with
stones as required.

"Now, then, Alf, do you carry the reel away fifty yards or so, and pay
out the line as you go.  Make a dozen of the Eskimos hold on with you
till I come and regulate the pull.  I must remain here to set it off."

Alf did as he was ordered.  When he was far enough out, the Captain and
Leo raised the aerial monster with caution, grasping it by the
shoulders, while Benjy held on to the tail.  Their great care was to
keep it flat, so that it presented nothing but its thin head to the
wind, but this was a difficulty, for it kept fluttering as if anxious to
get away, catching a slant of wind underneath now and then, which caused
both Leo and the Captain to stagger.

"Don't hold down the tail, Benjy," cried the Captain, looking anxiously
over his shoulder.

Unfortunately Ben did not hear the "don't."  Not only did he hold on
with increased vigour, but he gave the tail an energetic pull downwards.
The result was that the wind got fairly underneath, and the head was
jerked upward.  Leo, fearing to tear the silk, let go, and the Captain
was thrown violently off.  Benjy alone stood to his guns--or to his
tail--with loyal heroism for a moment, but when he felt himself lifted
off the ground a few inches, a feeling of horror seized him.  He let go,
and came down with a whack.

Free at last, the huge kite shot upwards like a rocket, and a terrible
howl from the Eskimo showed that all was not right at their end of the
line.  The truth was that none of them were impressed with the
importance of the duty required of them.  The sudden strain jerked the
line out of the hands of some, and threw others to the ground, and Alf,
who had for greater security taken a turn of the line round his right
arm, was dragged forward at full racing speed.  Indeed he was beginning
to take those tremendous bounds called "giant strides," which were sure
to terminate in his being dragged along the ground.

Captain Vane saw the danger, and was equal to the occasion.  There was
little time for thought or action.  Another moment and Alf would be off
the beach into the sea.

"Let go!  Alf; let go!" cried Leo, in an agony of alarm.

"No, no! hold on!" shouted the Captain.

Poor Alf could not help holding on.  The turns of the line round his arm
held him fast.

Another moment, and he was abreast of the Captain who sprang at him as
he passed like a leopard on his prey and held on.  But the pace was
little checked with this additional weight.  It was beyond the Captain's
running powers, and both he and Alf would have been thrown violently to
the ground had it not happened that they had reached the water, into
which they plunged with a tremendous splash.  They were dragged through
it, however, only for a few seconds, for by that time the Captain had
succeeded in getting hold of the red line and pulling it separately.
The result was immediate and satisfactory.  The head of the kite was
thrown forward, acting somewhat as a sail does when a ship is thrown
into the wind, and the two unfortunates came to an anchor in four feet
of water.

"We must not let it into the water, Alf," gasped the Captain, clearing
the water from his eyes.

"How can we prevent it?" spluttered Alf, shaking the wet hair off his
face.

"Ease your fingers a bit.  There; hold on."  As he spoke the Captain
gave a slight pull on the regulating line.  The kite at once caught the
wind and soared, giving the two operators an awful tug, which nearly
overturned them again.

"Too much," growled the Captain.  "You see it takes some experience to
regulate the excitable thing properly.  There, now, haul away for the
shore."

By this time they were joined by Leo and Chingatok, who ran into the
water and aided them in dragging the refractory machine ashore.

"That's a vigorous beginning, father," remarked Benjy as they came to
