myself, for they hit me all over.  I snapped at 'em, and caught 'em as
fast as I could use my hands--gave their heads a screw, and crammed 'em
into my pockets.  In a short time the pockets were all as full as they
could hold--coat, vest, and trousers.  I had to do it so fast that many
of 'em wasn't properly killed, and some came alive agin, hopped out of
my pockets, and flew away."

At that moment there arose a laugh from the men as they watched their
comrade, who happened to be performing a feat somewhat similar to that
just described by the mate.

Jack Shales had seated himself on the roof of the lantern.  This roof
being opaque, he and the mast, which rose above him, and its distinctive
ball on the top, were enveloped in darkness.  Jack appeared like a man
of ebony pictured against the dark sky.  His form and motions could
therefore be distinctly seen, although his features were invisible.  He
appeared to be engaged in resisting an attack from a host of little
birds which seemed to have made up their minds to unite their powers for
his destruction; the fact being that the poor things, fascinated by the
brilliant light, flew over, under, and round it, with eyes so dazzled
that they did not observe the man until almost too late to sheer off and
avoid him.  Indeed, many of them failed in this attempt, and flew right
against his head, or into his bosom.  These he caught, killed, and
pocketed, as fast as possible, until his pockets were full, when he
descended to empty them.

"Hallo!  Jack, mind your eye," cried Dick Moy, as his friend set foot on
the deck, "there's one of 'em agoin' off with that crooked sixpence
you're so fond of."

Jack caught a starling which was in the act of wriggling out of his coat
pocket, and gave it a final twist.

"Hold your hats, boys," he cried, hauling forth the game.  "Talk of a
Scotch moor--there's nothin' equal to the top of the Gull lantern for
real sport!"

"I say, Jack," cried Mr Welton, who, with Stanley and the others, had
crowded round the successful sportsman, "there are some strange birds on
the ball.  Gulls or crows, or owls.  If you look sharp and get inside,
you may perhaps catch them by the legs."

Billy Towler heard this remark, and, looking up, saw the two birds
referred to, one seated on the ball at the mast-head, the other at that
moment sailing round it.  Now it must be told, and the reader will
easily believe it, that during all this scene Billy had looked on not
only with intense interest, but with a wildness of excitement peculiar
to himself, while his eyes flashed, and his small hands tingled with a
desire to have, not merely a finger, but, all his ten fingers, in the
pie.  Being only a visitor, however, and ignorant of everybody and
everything connected with a floating light, he had modestly held his
tongue and kept in the background.  But he could no longer withstand the
temptation to act.  Without uttering a word, he leaped upon the
rope-ladder of the lantern, and was half way up it before any one
observed him, determined to forestall Jack Shales.  Then there was a
shouting of "Hallo! what is that scamp up to?"  "Come down, you monkey!"
"He'll break his neck!"  "Serve him right!"  "Hi! come down, will 'ee?"
and similar urgent as well as complimentary expressions, to all of which
Billy turned a deaf ear.  Another minute and he stood on the roof of the
lantern, looking up at the ball and grasping the mast, which rose--a
bare pole--twelve or fifteen feet above him.

"Och! av the spalpeen tries that," exclaimed Jerry MacGowl, "it'll be
the ind of 'im intirely."

Billy Towler did try it.  Many a London lamp-post had he shinned up in
his day.  The difference did not seem to him very great.  The ball, he
observed, was made of light bands or lathes arranged somewhat in the
form of lattice-work.  It was full six feet in diameter, and had an
opening in the under part by which a man could enter it.  Through the
lozenge-shaped openings he could see two enormous ravens perched on the
top.  Pausing merely for a second or two to note these facts and recover
breath, he shinned up the bare pole like a monkey, and got inside the
ball.

The spectators on deck stood in breathless suspense and anxiety, unable
apparently to move; but when they saw Billy clamber up the side of the
ball like a mouse in a wire cage, put forth his hand, seize one of the
ravens by a leg and drag it through the bars to him, a ringing cheer
broke forth, which was mingled with shouts of uncontrollable laughter.

The operation of drawing the ill-omened bird through the somewhat narrow
opening against the feathers, had the double effect of ruffling it out
to a round and ragged shape, very much beyond its ordinary size, and of
rousing its spirit to ten times its wonted ferocity, insomuch that, when
once fairly inside, it attacked its captor with claw, beak, and wing
furiously.  It had to do battle, however, with an infant Hercules.
Billy held on tight to its leg, and managed to restrain its head and
wings with one arm, while with the other he embraced the mast and slid
down to the lantern; but not before the raven freed its head and one of
its wings, and renewed its violent resistance.

On the lantern he paused for a moment to make the captive more secure,
and then let his legs drop over the edge of the lantern, intending to
get on the rounds of the ladder, but his foot missed the first one.  In
his effort to regain it he slipped.  At that instant the bird freed his
head, and with a triumphant "caw!" gave Billy an awful peck on the nose.
The result was that the poor boy fell back.  He could not restrain a
shriek as he did so, but he still kept hold of the raven, and made a
wild grasp with his disengaged hand.  Fortunately he caught the ladder,
and remained swinging and making vain efforts to hook his leg round one
of the ropes.

"Let go the bird!" shouted the mate, rushing underneath the struggling
youth, resolved at all hazards to be ready to break his fall if he
should let go.

"Howld on!" yelled Jerry MacGowl, springing up the ladder--as Jack
Shales afterwards said--like a Chimpanzee maniac, and clutching Billy by
the neck.

"Ye may let go now, ye spalpeen," said Jerry, as he held the upper half
of Billy's shirt, vest, and jacket in his powerful and capacious grasp,
"I'll howld ye safe enough."

At that moment the raven managed to free its dishevelled wings, the
fierce flapping of which it added to its clamorous cries and struggles
of indignation.  Feeling himself safe, Billy let go his hold, and used
the freed hand to seize the raven's other leg.  Then the Irishman
descended, and thus, amid the riotous wriggles and screams of the
dishevelled bird, and the cheers, laughter, and congratulations of his
friends, our little hero reached the deck in safety.

But this was not the end of their bird-catching on that memorable
occasion.  It was, indeed, the grand incident of the night--the
culminating point, as it were, of the battle--but there was a good deal
of light skirmishing afterwards.  Billy's spirit, having been fairly
roused, was not easily allayed.  After having had a piece of plaister
stuck on the point of his nose, which soon swelled up to twice its
ordinary dimensions, and became bulbous in appearance, he would fain
have returned to the lantern to prosecute the war with renewed energy.
This, however, Mr Welton senior would by no means permit, so the
youngster was obliged to content himself with skirmishing on deck, in
which he was also successful.

One starling he found asleep in the fold of a tarpaulin.  Another he
discovered in a snug corner under the lee of one of the men's coats, and
both were captured easily.  Then Dick Moy showed him a plan whereby he
caught half a dozen birds in as many minutes.  He placed a small
hand-lantern on the deck, and spread a white handkerchief in front of
it.  The birds immediately swarmed round this so vigorously, that they
even overturned the lantern once or twice.  Finally, settling down on
the handkerchief, they went to sleep.  It was evident that the poor
things had not been flying about for mere pleasure.  They had been
undoubtedly fascinated by the ship's glaring light, and had kept flying
round it until nearly exhausted, insomuch that they fell asleep almost
immediately after settling down on the handkerchief, and were easily
laid hold of.

During the intervals of this warfare Mr George Welton related to Billy
Towler and Stanley Hall numerous anecdotes of his experience in
bird-catching on board the floating lights.  Mr Welton had been long in
the service, and had passed through all the grades; having commenced as
a seaman, and risen to be a lamplighter and a mate--the position he then
occupied.  His office might, perhaps, be more correctly described as
second master, because the two were _never_ on board at the same time,
each relieving the other month about, and thus each being in a precisely
similar position as to command, though not so in regard to pay.

"There was one occasion," said the mate, "when I had a tough set-to with
a bird, something like what you have had to-night, youngster.  I was
stationed at the time in the Newarp light-vessel, off the Norfolk coast.
It happened not long after the light had gone up.  I observed a very
large bird settle on the roof of the lantern, so I went cautiously up,
hopin' it would turn out a good one to eat, because you must know we
don't go catchin' these birds for mere pastime.  We're very glad to get
'em to eat; and I can assure you the larks make excellent pies.  Well, I
raised my head slowly above the lantern and pounced on it.  Instantly
its claws went deep into my hands.  I seized its neck, and tried to
choke it; but the harder I squeezed, the harder it nipped, until I was
forced to sing out for help.  Leavin' go the neck, in order to have one
hand free, I descended the ladder with the bird hanging to the other
hand by its claws.  I found I had no occasion to hold tight to _it_, for
it held tight to _me_!  Before I got down, however, it had recovered a
bit, let go, and flew away, but took refuge soon after in the
lantern-house on deck.  Here I caught it a second time, and once more
received the same punishment from its claws.  I killed it at last, and
then found, to my disgust, that it was a monster sparrow-hawk, and not
fit for food!"

"Somethink floatin' alongside, sir," said Dick Moy, running aft at that
moment and catching up a boat-hook, with which he made a dart at the
object in question, and struck, but failed to secure it.

"What is it, Moy?" asked Mr Welton.

"On'y a bit o' wreck, I think.  It looked like a corp at first."

Soon after this most of the people on board the Gull went below and
turned in, leaving the deck in charge of the regular watch, which, on
that occasion, consisted of Dick and his friend Jack Shales.  Jerry
MacGowl kept them company for a time, being, as he observed,
"sintimentally inclined" that night.

Stanley Hall, attracted by the fineness of the night, also remained on
deck a short time after the others were gone.

"Do you often see dead bodies floating past?" he asked of Dick Moy.

"Not wery often, sir, but occasionally we does.  You see, we're so nigh
the Goodwin sands, where wrecks take place in the winter months pritty
constant, that poor fellers are sometimes washed past us; but they ain't
always dead.  One night we heard loud cries not far off from us, but it
was blowin' a gale, and the night was so dark we could see nothin'.  We
could no more have launched our boat than we could 'ave gone over the
falls o' Niagary without capsizin'.  When next the relief comed off, we
heard that it was three poor fellers gone past on a piece of wreck."

"Were they lost?" inquired Stanley.

"No, sir, they warn't all of 'em lost.  A brig saw 'em at daylight, but
just as they wos being picked up, one wos so exhausted he slipped off
the wreck an wos drownded.  'Nother time," continued Moy, as he paced
slowly to and fro, "we seed a corp float past, and tried to 'ook it with
the boat-'ook, but missed it.  It wos on its face, and we could see it
'ad on a belt and sheath-knife.  There wos a bald spot on the 'ead, and
the gulls wos peckin' at it, so we know'd it wos dead--wery likely a
long time."

"There's a tight little craft," remarked Shales, pointing to a vessel
which floated at no great distance off.

"W'ich d'ye mean?" asked Dick; for there were so many vessels, some at
anchor and some floating past with the tide, like phantom ships, that it
was not easy to make out which vessel was referred to; "the one wi' the
shoulder-o'-mutton mains'l?"

"No; that schooner with the raking masts an' topsail?"

"Ah, that's a purty little thing from owld Ireland," returned Jerry
MacGowl.  "I'd know her anywhere by the cut of her jib.  Av she would
only spaik, she'd let ye hear the brogue."

"Since ye know her so well, Paddy, p'raps you can tell us what's her
cargo?" said Jack Shales.

"Of coorse I can--it's fruit an' timber," replied Jerry.

"Fruit and timber!" exclaimed Stanley with a laugh; "I was not aware
that such articles were exported from Ireland."

"Ah, sure they are, yer honour," replied Jerry.  "No doubt the English,
with that low spirit of jealousy that's pecooliar to 'em, would say it
was brooms an' taties, but _we_ calls it fruit and timber!"

"After that, Jerry, I think it is time for me to turn in, so I wish you
both a good-night, lads."

"Good-night, sir, good-night," replied the men, as Stanley descended to
his berth, leaving the watch to spin yarns and perambulate the deck
until the bright beams of the floating light should be rendered
unnecessary by the brighter beams of the rising sun.



CHAPTER TEN.

TREATS OF TENDER SUBJECTS OF A PECULIAR KIND, AND SHOWS HOW BILLY TOWLER
GOT INTO SCRAPES AND OUT OF THEM.

The fact that we know not what a day may bring forth, receives frequent,
and sometimes very striking, illustration in the experience of most
people.  That the day may begin with calm and sunshine, yet end in
clouds and tempest--or _vice versa_--is a truism which need not be
enforced.  Nevertheless, it is a truism which men are none the worse of
being reminded of now and then.  Poor Billy Towler was very powerfully
reminded of it on the day following his night-adventure with the ravens;
and his master was taught that the best-laid plans of men, as well as
mice, are apt to get disordered, as the sequel will show.

Next morning the look-out on board the Gull lightship reported the
Trinity steam-tender in sight, off the mouth of Ramsgate harbour, and
the ensign was at once hoisted as an intimation that she had been
observed.

This arrangement, by the way, of hoisting a signal on board the floating
lights when any of the Trinity yachts chance to heave in sight, is a
clever device, whereby the vigilance of light-ship crews is secured,
because the time of the appearing of these yachts is irregular, and,
therefore, a matter of uncertainty.  Every one knows the natural and
almost irresistible tendency of the human mind to relax in vigilance
when the demand on attention is continual--that the act, by becoming a
mere matter of daily routine, loses much of its intensity.  The crews of
floating lights are, more than most men, required to be perpetually on
the alert, because, besides the danger that would threaten innumerable
ships should their vessels drift from their stations, or any part of
their management be neglected, there is great danger to themselves of
being run into during dark stormy nights or foggy days.  Constant
vigilance is partly secured, no doubt, by a sense of duty in the men; it
is increased by the feeling of personal risk that would result from
carelessness; and it is almost perfected by the order for the hoisting
of a flag as above referred to.

The superintendent of the district of which Ramsgate is head-quarters,
goes out regularly once every month in the tender to effect what is
styled "the relief,"--that is, to change the men, each of whom passes
two months aboard and one month on shore, while the masters and mates
alternately have a month on shore and a month on board.  At the same
time he puts on board of the four vessels of which he has charge--
namely, the _Goodwin_, the _Gull_, the _South-sandhead_, and the _Varne_
light-ships,--water, coal, provisions, and oil for the month, and such
stores as may be required; returning with the men relieved and the empty
casks and cans, etcetera, to Ramsgate harbour.  Besides this, the tender
is constantly obliged to go out at irregular intervals--it may be even
several times in a week--for the purpose of replacing buoys that have
been shifted by storms--marking, with small green buoys, the spot where
a vessel may have gone down, and become a dangerous obstruction in the
"fair way"--taking up old chains and sinkers, and placing new ones--
painting the buoys--and visiting the North and South Foreland
lighthouses, which are also under the district superintendent's care.

On all of these occasions the men on duty in the floating lights are
bound to hoist their flag whenever the tender chances to pass them
within sight, on pain of a severe reprimand if the duty be neglected,
and something worse if such neglect be of frequent occurrence.  In
addition to this, some of the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House make
periodical visits of inspection to all the floating lights round the
coasts of England; and this they do purposely at irregular times, in
order, if possible, to catch the guardians of the coast napping; and woe
betide "the watch" on duty if these inspecting Brethren should manage to
get pretty close to any light-ship without having received the salute of
recognition!  Hence the men of the floating lights are kept ever on the
alert, and the safety of the navigation, as far as human wisdom can do
it, is secured.  Hence also, at whatever time any of our floating lights
should chance to be visited by strangers, they, like our lighthouses,
will invariably be found in perfect working order, and as clean as new
pins, except, of course, during periods of general cleaning up or
painting.

Begging pardon for this digression, we return to Billy Towler, whose
delight with the novelty of his recent experiences was only equalled by
his joyous anticipations of the stirring sea-life that yet lay before
him.

The satisfaction of Mr Jones, however, at the success of his late
venture, was somewhat damped by the information that he would have to
spend the whole day on board the tender.  The district superintendent,
whose arduous and multifarious duties required him to be so often afloat
that he seemed to be more at home in the tender than in his own house
ashore, was a man whose agreeable manners, and kind, hearty, yet firm
disposition, had made him a favourite with every one in the service.
Immediately on his boarding the Gull, he informed the uninvited and
