"It will be here for a testimony against any girl who breaks her oath!"
declared Phillida. "Carmel says the real Mafia sign their names in
blood, but I think that's horrid, and red ink will do quite as well.
Just as I was coming out now, Laurette said to me; 'Oh, don't go running
away, because I want one of you younger ones to do something for me
presently.' She said it with the air of a duchess!"

"Cheek!" agreed the others. "It's high time we made up a society against
her!"

Many and various were the offences that were laid to Laurette's score.
Lilias had a private grievance, because she fancied that Laurette had
never been so civil to herself and Dulcie since it was known that their
brother was not to inherit the Chase. Gowan, who liked plain speaking,
accused Laurette of telling "fiblets"; Bertha had had a squabble over
the bathroom, and Prissie a wrestle for the piano.

"Laurette always reminds me of that rhyme that the undergrads made up
about the Master of Balliol," said Edith.

    "'Here come I, my name is Jowett,
     All there is to know, I know it;
     I'm the head of this here College,
     What I don't know isn't knowledge!'

That's Laurette's attitude exactly. She's so superior to everybody!"

"We'll take her down, don't worry yourself!" smiled Dulcie. "We must
just wait for a good opportunity, and then----"

"The secret hand will smite!" laughed Carmel, who enjoyed the fun as
much as anybody.

Laurette's aggravatingly superior pose was especially apparent in her
attitude towards the mistresses. She monopolized Miss Herbert, treated
her almost like a friend, wrote notes to her, left flowers in her
bedroom, and walked arm-in-arm with her in the garden. Perhaps the
mistress was lonely, possibly she was flattered by receiving so much
attention, at any rate she allowed Laurette to be on terms of great
intimacy, and gave her a far larger share of her confidence than was at
all wise. Laurette, after a hot affection lasting three weeks, got tired
of Miss Herbert, and suddenly cooled off. Gowan and Carmel, going into
the sitting-room one day, found her discussing her former idol with a
group of her chums.

"Do you call her pretty? Well, now, I _don't_!" she was saying
emphatically. "She may have been pretty once, but now she's getting
decidedly _passee_. I can't say I admire faded sentimental people!"

"Sentimental?" said Truie. "I shouldn't call her sentimental at all.
She's only too horribly practical, in my opinion!"

"You don't know her as I do! My dear! The things she's told me! The love
affairs she's been through! I had the whole history of them. And she
used to blush, and look most romantic. It was all I could do not to
burst out laughing. You'd scream if I were to tell you! First there was
a clergyman----"

"Here, stop!" interrupted Gowan, breaking abruptly into the
conversation, and turning two blazing blue eyes on Laurette. "Anything
Miss Herbert may have told you was certainly in confidence, and to go
and blab it over the school seems to me the meanest, sneakiest trick
I've ever heard of! You're an absolute blighter, Laurette!"

"Well, I'm sure! What business is it of yours, Gowan Barbour, or of
Carmel Ingleton's either? Cheek!"

"It _is_ our business!" flared Carmel, as indignant as Gowan. "It's
horribly mean to make friends with any one, and hear all her secrets,
and then go and make fun of them!"

"It's playing it low!" added Gowan, determined to speak her mind for
once. "And I hope somebody will make fun of _you_ some day just to
serve you right! Some day _you'll_ be _faded_ and _passee_, and people
will giggle and say you haven't 'got off' in spite of all your efforts,
and they wonder how old you really are, and they remember when you came
out, and you can't be a chicken, and they don't like to see 'mutton
dressed like lamb,' and all the rest of the kind pleasant things that
people of your type find to say. _I_ know! Well, I shan't be in the
least sorry for you! It will be a judgment!"

Laurette had made a desperate attempt to interrupt Gowan's flow of
words, but she might as well have tried to stop the brook. When Gowan
began, she never even paused for breath. Her wrath was like a whirlwind.
Laurette's three chums had turned away as if rather ashamed, and began
hastily to get out books and writing-materials. They pretended not to
notice when Laurette looked at them for support.

"Yes, you needn't think Truie and Hester and Muriel will back you up!"
continued Gowan. "Unless they're as mean as you are. There! I've
finished now, so you needn't butt in! You know exactly what I think of
you. Come along, Carmel!"

The two immediate results of this episode were a bitter feud between
Laurette and Gowan, and a sympathetic interest in Miss Herbert by all
the members of the Mafia. They felt that her confidence had been
betrayed, and they would have liked somehow to make it up to her. They
brought so many floral offerings to her bedroom that her vases were
almost inconveniently crowded.

Carmel, hearing that she was collecting post cards, sent home for some
special ones of Sicily; Dulcie tendered chocolates; Lilias crocheted her
a pincushion cover, and Bertha painted her a hair-tidy. She accepted
their little kindnesses with mild astonishment, but not a hint of the
real reason of their sudden advances flashed across her mind.

"We mustn't let her suspect!" said Dulcie.

"Rather not!" agreed Carmel.

"Not for worlds!" said Gowan emphatically.




CHAPTER XII

White Magic


October passed by with flaming crimson and gold on the trees, and orange
and mauve toadstools among the moss of the woods, and squirrels
scampering up the Scotch pines at the top of the garden, laying by their
winter store of nuts; and flocks of migrating birds twittering in the
fields, and hosts of glittering red hips and haws in the hedges, and
shrouds of fairy gossamer over the blackberry bushes. It was Carmel's
first autumn in England, and, though her artistic temperament revelled
in the beauty of the tints, the falling leaves filled her with
consternation.

"It is so sad to see them all come down," she declared. "Why the trees
will soon be quite bare! Nothing but branches left!"

"What else do you expect?" asked Gowan. "They won't keep green all the
winter."

"I suppose not. But in Sicily we have so many evergreens and shrubs that
flower all the winter. The oranges and lemons begin to get ripe soon
after Christmas, and we have agaves and prickly pears everywhere. I
can't imagine a landscape without any leaves!"

"Wait till you see the snow! It's prime then!"

"There's generally snow on Etna, but I haven't been up so high. It
doesn't fall where we live."

"Girl alive! Have you never made a snowball?"

"Never."

"Then it's a treat in store for you. I sincerely hope we shall have a
hard winter."

"We ought to, by the number of berries in the hedges," put in Bertha.
"It's an old saying that they foretell frost.

    "'Bushes red with hip and haw,
     Weeks of frost without a thaw.'

I don't know whether it always comes true, though."

"I'm a believer in superstitions," declared Gowan. "Scotch people
generally are, I think. My great-grandmother used to have second sight.
By the by; it's Hallowe'en on Friday! I vote we rummage up all the old
charms we can, and try them. It would be ever such fun."

"Topping! Only let us keep it to the Mafia, and not let the others
know."

"_Ra_ther! We don't want Laurette and Co. butting in."

The remaining members of the Mafia, when consulted, received the idea
with enthusiasm. There is a vein of superstition at the bottom of the
most practical among us, and all of them were well accustomed to
practise such rites as throwing spilt salt over the left shoulder,
curtseying to the new moon, and turning their money when they heard the
cuckoo.

"Not, of course, that it always follows," said Prissie. "On Easter
holidays a bird used to come and tap constantly at our drawing-room
window at home. It was always doing it. Of course that means 'a death in
the family,' but we all kept absolutely hearty and well. Not even a
third cousin once removed has died, and it's more than two years ago.
Mother says it was probably catching insects on the glass. She laughs at
omens!"

"I always double my thumb inside my fist if I walk under a ladder,"
volunteered Noreen.

"Well, it _is_ unlucky to go under a ladder," declared Phillida. "You
may get a pot of paint dropped on your head! I saw that happen once to a
poor lady: it simply turned upside down on her, and deluged her hat and
face and everything with dark green paint. She had to go into a shop to
be wiped. It must have been awful for her, and for her clothes as well.
I've never forgotten it."

"What could we do on Hallowe'en?" asked Edith.

"Well, we must try to think it out, and make some plans."

From the recesses of their memories the girls raked up every
superstition of which they had ever heard. These had to be divided into
the possible and the impossible. There are limits of liberty in a girls'
school, and it was manifestly infeasible, as well as very chilly, to
attempt to stray out alone at the stroke of twelve, robed merely in a
nightgown, and fetch three pails of water to place by one's bedside.
Gowan's north country recipe for divination was equally
impracticable--to go out at midnight, and "dip your smock in a
south-running spring where the lairds' lands meet," then hang it to dry
before the fire. They discussed it quite seriously, however, in all its
various aspects.

"To begin with, what exactly is a smock?" asked Carmel.

Everybody had a hazy notion, but nobody was quite sure about it.

"Usen't farm laborers to wear them once?" suggested Lilias.

"But Shakespeare says,

    "'When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
     And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
     When ring the woods with rooks and daws,
     And maidens bleach their summer smocks,'"

objected Prissie.

"Was it an upper or an under garment?" questioned Noreen.

"I'm sure I don't know. I don't fancy we any of us possess 'smocks'!"

"Then we certainly can't go and soak them in a spring!"

"And there is no 'laird' here, and even if you count an ordinary owner
of property as a 'laird,' you don't know where the boundaries are!"

"No, that floors us completely!"

An expedition to the cellar for apples would be an equally hopeless
quest, for all the harvest of the orchard had been stored in the loft,
and was under lock and key. Some minor experiments, however, might be
tried with apple skins, so they determined to pocket their next dessert,
and keep it till the magic hour of divination arrived. Hot chestnuts
would be a distinct possibility, and a little coaxing at head-quarters
would doubtless result in Jones the gardener bringing a bag full for
them from Glazebrook.

They felt quite excited when the fateful day arrived. Miss Walters had
made no objection to an order for chestnuts, and had even allowed a
modicum of toffee to be added to the list. She did not refer to the
subject of Hallowe'en, for she had some years ago suppressed the custom
of bobbing for apples, finding that the girls invariably got their hair
wet, and had colds in their heads in consequence.

The members of the Mafia, well stocked therefore with the apples and
chestnuts necessary for divination, remained in their schoolroom after
evening preparation, so as to have a gay time all to themselves. To make
matters more thrillsome they turned out the light, and sat in the
flickering glow of the fire. Gowan, having the largest acquaintance with
the occult, not to speak of having possessed a great-grandmother endowed
with second sight, was universally acknowledged priestess of the
ceremonies.

"Shall we begin with apples or chestnuts?" she asked seriously.

As some said one thing and some another, she held a specimen of each
behind her back, and commanded Carmel to choose right hand or left. The
lot fell upon chestnuts, and these were placed neatly in pairs along the
bars of the grate.

"You name them after yourself and your sweetheart," explained Gowan. "If
he pops first, he'll ask you to marry him."

"And suppose the other pops first?" asked Carmel.

"Then you won't marry him!"

"Doesn't it mean that it may be Leap Year, and the girl will 'pop the
question'?" asked Dulcie, still giggling.

"No, it doesn't."

"Suppose they neither of them pop?" said Prissie.

"It's a sign that neither cares, but it's not very likely to
happen--they nearly always pop."

"I pricked mine with my penknife, though."

"The more goose you! Take them back and try two fresh ones."

It is rather a delicate and finger-scorching process to balance
chestnuts on the bars, and as a matter of fact Prissie's tumbled into
the fire, and could not be rescued. The party was obliged to watch them
burn. They helped her to place another in position, then sat round,
keeping careful eyes on their particular representatives. It was
forbidden to reveal names, so each kept the identity of her favored
swain locked in her breast. It seemed a long time before those chestnuts
were ready! Love's delays are notoriously hard to bear. Never were omens
watched so anxiously. Slap! Bang! Pop! at last came from Carmel's
particular corner, and fragments flew about indiscriminately on to
hearth and fire.

"It's 'him'!" cried Gowan ungrammatically. "He's done it most thoroughly
too! Carmel, you'll be married the first of any of us! You'll ask us to
the wedding, won't you?"

At that moment a chorus of pops came from the grate, causing much
rejoicing or dismay from the various owners of the chestnuts, according
to the fate meted out to them by the omens. On the whole Cupid was kind,
though Lilias and Gowan were left in the lurch.

"I don't care!" said Gowan sturdily. "I've another in my mind, and
perhaps I shall get him in the apple-peels."

"And if you don't?"

"I'll meet somebody else later on."

Having eaten more or less charred pieces of chestnut, the girls produced
their apples, and once more set to work to try magic. The apple had to
be peeled entirely in one long piece, which must then be slung backwards
over the left shoulder on to the floor, where it would form the initial
of the future lover. It was a matter for skilful manipulation of
penknives, not at all easy to manage, so difficult in fact, that Noreen
and Dulcie each made a slip, and chopped their precious pieces of peel
in the middle, thus rendering them useless for purposes of divination.
Lilias, who made the first essay, was completely puzzled by the result,
which did not resemble any known letter in the alphabet, though Gowan,
anxious to interpret the oracles, construed it into a W. Edith's long
thin piece of peel made a plain C, a fact which seemed to cause her much
satisfaction, though she would betray no names. Prissie broke her luck
in half in the very act of flinging it, but insisted that the two
separate portions each formed an O.

It was Carmel's turn next, and her rather broad piece of peel twisted
itself into a most palpable E. She looked at it for a moment as if
rather taken aback, then her face cleared.

"There are quite a number of names that begin with E," she remarked
enigmatically.

Now it was all very well to sit in the sanctuary of their schoolroom
trying such mild magic as divination through chestnuts and apple skins.
Gowan's northern blood yearned after more subtle witchcraft.

"I shan't be content till I've pulled a cabbage stalk!" she declared. "I
don't see why we need wait till midnight! Hallowe'en is Hallowe'en as
soon as it's dark, I should think. Who's game to fly up the
kitchen-garden?"

"What? Now?"

"Why not? We should only be gone a few minutes and Miss Hardy would
never find out."

"It really would be a frolicsome joke!"

"There's a moon, too!"

"I vote we risk it!"

"Come along!"

Nine giggling girls therefore stole cautiously downstairs, a little
delayed by Prissie, who, with a most unusual concern for her health,
insisted on fetching a wrap. They opened the side door, and peeped out
into the night. It was quite fine, with a clear full moon, and clouds
drifting high in the sky. The vegetable garden was so near that the
ceremony could be very quickly performed. It was, of course, breaking
rules to leave the house after dark, but not one of them could resist
the temptation, so out they sped to the cabbage patch.

Now when Prissie ran to her bedroom, ostensibly to get a wrap, she had
really gone with quite other intentions. She had certainly put on a long
dark coat and a soft felt hat, but the whole gist of the matter lay in
something that she slipped into her pocket. It was a black mustache that
she had brought to school for use in theatricals, and lay handy in her
top drawer. She had hastily smeared the under side of it with soap, so
that it would adhere to her lip, and once out in the garden, she fell
behind the others and fixed it in position. Then she made a _detour_
behind some bushes, so as to conceal herself from the party.

Presently, under the bright moon and scudding clouds, eight
