examination being made, it was found that this bear had dined on
raisins, tobacco, pork, and adhesive plaster!  Such an extraordinary
mixture of articles, of course, led the party to conclude that either
she had helped herself to the stores of the _Dolphin_ placed on Store
Island, or that she had fallen in with those of some other vessel.  This
subject afforded food for thought and conversation during the next hour
or two, as they drove towards the ship along the ice-belt of the shore.

The ice-belt referred to is a zone of ice which extends along the shore
from the unknown regions of the north.  To the south it breaks up in
summer and disappears altogether, but, in the latitude which our
travellers had now reached, it was a permanent feature of the scenery
all the year round, following the curvatures and indentations of bays
and rivers, and increasing in winter or diminishing in summer, but never
melting entirely away.  The surface of this ice-belt was covered with
immense masses of rock many tons in weight, which had fallen from the
cliffs above.  Pointing to one of these, as they drove along, West
remarked to Fred:

"There is a mystery explained, sir; I have often wondered how huge
solitary stones, that no machinery of man's making could lift, have come
to be placed on sandy shores where there were no other rocks of any kind
within many miles of them.  The ice must have done it, I see."

"True, West, the ice, if it could speak, would explain many things that
now seem to us mysterious, and yonder goes a big rock on a journey that
may perhaps terminate at a thousand miles to the south of this."

The rock referred to was a large mass that became detached from the
cliffs and fell, as he spoke, with a tremendous crash upon the ice-belt,
along which it rolled for fifty yards.  There it would lie all winter,
and in spring the mass of ice to which it was attached would probably
break off and float away with it to the south, gradually melting until
it allowed the rock to sink to the bottom of the sea, or depositing it,
perchance, on some distant shore, where such rocks are not wont to lie--
there to remain an object of speculation and wonderment to the unlearned
of all future ages.

Some of the bergs close to which they passed on the journey were very
fantastically formed, and many of them were more than a mile long, with
clear, blue, glassy surfaces, indicating that they had been but recently
thrown off from the great glacier of the north.  Between two of these
they drove for some time before they found that they were going into a
sort of blind alley.

"Sure the road's gittin' narrower," observed O'Riley, as he glanced up
at the blue walls, which rose perpendicularly to a height of sixty feet
on either hand.  "Have a care, Meetuck, or ye'll jam us up, ye will."

"'Tis a pity we left the ice-belt," remarked Fred, "for this rough work
among the bergs is bad for man and dog.  How say you, Meetuck, shall we
take to it again when we get through this place?"

"Faix, then, well niver git through," said O'Riley, pointing to the end
of the chasm, where a third iceberg had entirely closed the opening.

The Esquimaux pulled up, and, after advancing on foot a short way to
examine, returned with a rueful expression on his countenance.

"Ha! no passage, I suppose?" said Fred.

"Bad luck to ye," cried O'Riley, "won't ye spaake?"

"No rod--muss go back," replied Meetuck, turning the dogs in the
direction whence they had come, and resuming his place on the sledge.

The party had to retrace their steps half a mile in consequence of this
unfortunate interruption, and return to the level track of the ice-belt,
which they had left for a time and taken to the sea-ice, in order to
avoid the sinuosities of the land.  To add to their misfortunes, the
dogs began to flag, so that they were obliged to walk behind the sledge
at a slow pace, and snow began to fall heavily.  But they pressed
forward manfully, and, having regained the shore-ice, continued to make
their way northward towards the ship, which was now spoken of by the
endearing name of home.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

DEPARTURE OF THE SUN--EFFECTS OF DARKNESS ON DOGS--WINTER ARRANGEMENTS
IN THE INTERIOR OF THE DOLPHIN.

It is sad to part with an old friend, especially if he be one of the
oldest and best friends we ever had.  When the day of departure arrives,
it is of no avail that he tells us kindly he will come back again.  That
assurance is indeed a comfort after he is gone, and a sweet star of hope
that shines brighter and brighter each day until he comes back; but it
is poor consolation to us at the time of parting, when we are squeezing
his hand for the last time, and trying to crush back the drops that
_will_ overflow.

The crew of the _Dolphin_ had, in the course of that winter, to part
with one of their best friends; one whom they regarded with the most
devoted attachment; one who was not expected to return again till the
following spring, and one, therefore, whom some of them might perhaps,
never see again.

Mivins became quite low-spirited about it, and said "as 'ow 'e'd 'ave a
'eavy 'eart for hever and hever, hamen," after he was gone.  O'Riley
remarked, in reference to his departure, that every man in the ship was
about to lose a "_son_!"  Yes, indeed he did; he perpetrated that
atrocious pun, and wasn't a bit ashamed of it.  O'Riley had perpetrated
many a worse pun than that before; it's to be hoped that for the credit
of his country he has perpetrated a few better ones since!

Yes, the period at length arrived when the great source of light and
heat was about to withdraw his face from these Arctic navigators for a
long, long time, and leave them in unvarying night.  It was a good
while, however, before he went away altogether, and for many weeks after
winter set in in all its intensity, he paid them a daily visit which
grew gradually shorter and shorter, until that sad evening in which he
finally bade them farewell.

About the middle of October the dark months overspread the Bay of Mercy,
and the reign of perpetual night began.  There was something terribly
depressing at first in this uninterrupted gloom, and for some time after
the sun ceased to show his disc above the horizon the men of the
_Dolphin_ used to come on deck at noon, and look out for the faint
streak of light that indicated the presence of the life-giving luminary
with all the earnestness and longing of Eastern fire-worshippers.

The dogs, too, became sensibly affected by the continued absence of
light, and seemed to draw more sympathetically than ever to their human
companions in banishment.  A curious and touching instance of this
feeling was exhibited when the pack were sent to sleep on Store Island.
A warm kennel had been erected for them there, partly in order that the
ship might be kept more thoroughly clean, and partly that the dogs might
act as a guard over the stores, in case bears or wolves should take a
fancy to examine them.  But nothing would induce the poor animals to
keep away from the ship, and remain beyond the sound of human voices.
They deserted their comfortable abode, with one consent, the first time
they were sent to it, preferring to spend the night by the side of the
ship upon the bare snow.  Coaxing them was of no use.  O'Riley tried it
in vain.

"At, then," said he to Dumps with a wheedling air and expression of
intense affection that would have taken by storm the heart of any
civilised dog, "_won't_ ye come now an' lay in yar own kennel?  Sure
it's a beautiful wan, an' as warm as the heart of an iceberg.  Doo come
now, avic, an' I'll show ye the way."

But Dumps's heart was marble.  He wouldn't budge.  By means of a piece
of walrus, however, he was at length induced to go with the Irishman to
the kennel, and was followed by the entire pack.  Here O'Riley
endeavoured to make them comfortable, and prevailed on them to lie down
and go to sleep, but whenever he attempted to leave them they were up
and at his heels in a moment.

"Och, but ye're too fond o' me entirely!  Doo lie down agin, and I'll
sing ye a ditty!"

True to his word, O'Riley sat down by the dog-kennel, and gave vent to a
howl which his "owld grandmother," he said, "used to sing to the pig,"
and whether it was the effects of this lullaby, or of the cold, it is
impossible to say, but O'Riley at length succeeded in slipping away and
regaining the ship, unobserved by his canine friends.  Half an hour
later he went on deck to take a mouthful of fresh air before supper, and
on looking over the side he saw the whole pack of dogs lying in a circle
close to the ship, with Dumps comfortably asleep in the middle, and
using Poker's back for a pillow.

"Faix, but ye must be fond of the cowld, to lie there all night when
ye've got a palace on Store Island."

"Fond of society, rather," observed Captain Guy, who came on deck at the
moment, "the poor creatures cannot bear to be left alone.  It is a
strange quality in dogs which I have often observed before."

"Have ye, Capting?  Sure I thought it was all owin' to the bad manners
o' that baste Dumps, which is for iver leadin' the other dogs into
mischief."

"Supper's ready, sir," said Mivins, coming up the hatchway and touching
his cap.

"Look here, Mivins," said O'Riley, as the captain went below, "can ye
point out the mornin' star to me, lad?"

"The morning star?" said Mivins slowly, as he thrust his hands into the
breast of his jumper, and gazed upwards into the dark sky, where the
starry host blazed in Arctic majesty.  "No, of course I can't.  Why,
don't you know that there hain't no _morning_ star when it's _night_ all
round?"

"Faix ye're right.  I niver thought o' that."

Mivins was evidently a little puffed up with a feeling of satisfaction
at the clever way in which he had got out of the difficulty without
displaying his ignorance of astronomy, and was even venturing, in the
pride of his heart, to make some speculative and startling assertions in
regard to the "'eavenly bodies" generally, when Buzzby put his head up
the hatchway.

"Hallo! messmates, wot's ado now?  Here's the supper awaitin', and the
tea bilin' like blazes!"

Mivins instantly dived down below, as the sailors express it; and we may
remark, in passing, that the expression, in this particular case, was
not inappropriate, for Mivins, as we have elsewhere said, was remarkably
agile and supple, and gave beholders a sort of impression that he went
head-foremost at everything.  O'Riley followed at a more reasonable
rate, and in a few minutes the crew of the _Dolphin_ were seated at
supper in the cabin, eating with as much zest, and laughing and chatting
as blithely as if they were floating calmly on their ocean home in
temperate climes.  Sailors are proverbially lighthearted, and in their
moments of comfort and social enjoyment they easily forget their
troubles.  The depression of spirits that followed the first
disappearance of the sun soon wore off, and they went about their
various avocations cheerfully by the light of the Aurora Borealis and
the stars.

The cabin, in which they now all lived together, had undergone
considerable alterations.  After the return of Fred Ellice and the
hunting-party, whom we left on the ice-belt in the last chapter, the
bulk-head, or partition, which separated the cabin from the hold, had
been taken down, and the whole was thrown into one large apartment, in
order to secure a freer circulation of air and warmth.  All round the
walls inside of this apartment moss was piled to the depth of twelve
inches to exclude the cold, and this object was further gained by the
spreading of a layer of moss on the deck above.  The cabin hatchway was
closed, and the only entrance was at the farther end, through the hold,
by means of a small doorway in the bulkhead, to which was attached a
sort of porch, with a curtain of deer-skins hung in front of it.  In the
centre of the floor stood an iron cooking-stove, which served at once
the purpose of preparing food and warming the cabin, which was lighted
by several small oil-lamps.  These were kept burning perpetually, for
there was no distinction between day and night in midwinter, either in
the cabin or out-of-doors.

In this snug-looking place the officers and men of the ship messed, and
dwelt, and slept together; but, notwithstanding the _apparent_ snugness,
it was with the greatest difficulty they could keep themselves in a
sufficient degree of warmth to maintain health and comfort.  Whenever
the fire was allowed to get low, the beams overhead became coated with
hoar-frost; and even when the temperature was raised to the utmost
possible pitch it was cold enough, at the extreme ends of the apartment,
to freeze a jug of water solid.

A large table occupied the upper end of the cabin, between the stove and
the stern, and round this the officers and crew were seated, when
O'Riley entered and took his place among them.  Each individual had his
appointed place at the mess-table, and with unvarying regularity these
places were filled at the appointed hours.

"The dogs seem to be disobedient," remarked Amos Parr, as his comrade
sat down; "they'd be the better of a taste o' Meetuck's cat I think."

"It's truth ye're sayin'," replied O'Riley, commencing a violent assault
on a walrus steak; "they don't obey orders at all, at all.  An' Dumps,
the blaggard, is as cross-grained as me grandmother's owld pig--"

A general laugh here interrupted the speaker, for O'Riley could seldom
institute a disparaging comparison without making emphatic allusion to
the pig that once shared with him the hospitalities of his grandmother's
cabin.

"Why, everything you speak of seems to be like that wonderful pig,
messmate," said Peter Grim.

"Ye're wrong there intirely," retorted O'Riley.  "I niver seed nothing
like it in all me thravels except yerself, and that only in regard to
its muzzle, which was black and all kivered over with bristles, it wos.
I'll throuble for another steak, messmate; that walrus is great livin'.
We owe ye thanks for killin' it, Mister Ellice."

"You're fishing for compliments, but I'm afraid I have none to give you.
Your first harpoon, you know, was a little wide of the mark, if I
recollect right, wasn't it?"

"Yis, it wos--about as wide as the first bullet.  I misremember exactly
who fired it; wos it you, Meetuck?"

Meetuck, being deeply engaged with a junk of fat meat at that moment
expressed all he had to say in a convulsive gasp, without interrupting
his supper.

"Try a bit of the bear," said Fred to Tom Singleton; "it's better than
the walrus to my taste."

"I'd rather not," answered Tom, with a dubious shake of the head.

"It's a most unconscionable thing to eat a beast o' that sort," remarked
Saunders gravely.

"Especially one who has been in the habit of living on raisins and
sticking-plaster," said Bolton with a grin.

"I have been thinking about that," said Captain Guy, who had been for
some time listening in silence to the conversation, "and I cannot help
thinking that Esquimaux must have found a wreck somewhere in this
neighbourhood, and carried away her stores, which Bruin had managed to
steal from them."

"May they not have got some of the stores of the brig we saw nipped some
months ago?" suggested Singleton.

"Possibly they may."

"I dinna think that's likely," said Saunders, shaking his head.  "Yon
brig had been deserted long ago, and her stores must have been consumed,
if they were taken out of her at all, before we thought o' comin' here."

For some time the party in the cabin ate in silence.

"We must wait patiently," resumed the captain, as if he were tired of
following up a fruitless train of thought.  "What of your theatricals,
Fred? we must get them set a-going as soon as possible."

The captain spoke animatedly, for he felt that, with the prospect of a
long dark winter before them, it was of the greatest importance that the
spirits of the men should be kept up.

"I find it difficult to beat up recruits," answered Fred, laughing;
"Peter Grim has flatly refused to act, and O'Riley says he could no more
learn a part off by heart than--"

"His grandmother's pig could," interrupted David Mizzle, who, having
concluded supper, now felt himself free to indulge in conversation.

"Och! ye spalpeen," whispered the Irishman.

"I have written out the half of a play which I hope to produce in a few
days on the boards of our Arctic theatre with a talented company, but I
must have one or two more men--one to act the part of a lady.  Will you
take that part, Buzzby?"

"Wot! _me_?" cried the individual referred to with a stare of amazement.

"Oh yes! _do_, Buzzby," cried several of the men with great delight.
"You're just cut out for it."

"Blue eyes," said one.

"Fair hair," cried another.

"And plump," said a third.

"Wid cheeks like the hide of a walrus," cried O'Riley; "but, sure, it
won't show wid a veil on."

"Come, now, you won't refuse."

But Buzzby did refuse; not, however, so determinedly but that he was
induced at last to allow his name to be entered in Fred's note-book as a
supernumerary.

"Hark!" cried the captain; "surely the dogs must have smelt a bear."

There was instantly a dead silence in the cabin, and a long, loud wail
from the dogs was heard outside.

"It's not like their usual cry when game is near," said the second mate.

"Hand me my rifle, Mivins," said the captain, springing up and pulling
forward the hood of his jumper, as he hurried on deck followed by the
crew.

It was a bright, still, frosty night, and the air felt intensely sharp,
as if needles were pricking the skin, while the men's breath issued from
their lips in white clouds, and settled in hoar-frost on the edges of
their hoods.  The dogs were seen galloping about the ice hummocks as if
in agitation, darting off to a considerable distance at times, and
returning with low whines to the ship.

"It is very strange," remarked the captain.  "Jump down on the ice,
boys, and search for footprints.  Extend as far as Store Island and see
that all is right there."

In a few seconds the men scattered themselves right and left, and were
lost in the gloom, while the vessel was left in charge of Mivins and
four men.  A strict search was made in all directions, but no traces of
animals could be found; the stores on the island were found undisturbed,
and gradually the dogs ceased their agitated gyrations and seemed
inclined to resume their slumbers on the ice.

Seeing this, and supposing that they were merely restless, Captain Guy
recalled his men, and, not long after, every man in the cabin of the
_Dolphin_ was buried in profound slumber.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

STRANGERS APPEAR ON THE SCENE--THE ESQUIMAUX ARE HOSPITABLY ENTERTAINED
BY THE SAILORS--A SPIRITED TRAFFIC--THIEVING PROPENSITIES AND SUMMARY
JUSTICE.

Dumps sat on the top of a hummock, about quarter of a mile from the
ship, with an expression of subdued melancholy on his countenance, and
thinking, evidently, about nothing at all.  Poker sat in front of him,
gazing earnestly and solemnly right into his eyes with a look that said,
as plain as if he had spoken: "What a tremendously stupid old fellow you
are, to be sure!"  Having sat thus for full five minutes Dumps wagged
his tail.  Poker, observing the action, returned the compliment with his
stump.  Then Poker sprang up and barked savagely, as much as to say:
"Play, won't you!" but Dumps wouldn't; so Poker endeavoured to relieve
his mind by gambolling violently round him.

We would not have drawn your attention, reader, to the antics of our
canine friends, were it not for the fact that these antics attracted the
notice of a personage who merits particular description.  This was no
other than one of the Esquimaux inhabitants of the land--a woman, and
_such_ a woman!  Most people would have pronounced her a man, for she
wore precisely the same dress--fur jumper and long boots--that was worn
by the men of the _Dolphin_.  Her lips were thick and her nose was
blunt; she wore her hair turned up, and twisted into a knot on the top
of her head; her hood was thrown back, and inside of this hood there was
a baby--a small and a very fat baby!  It was, so to speak, a
conglomerate of dumplings.  Its cheeks were two dumplings, and its arms
were four dumplings--one above each elbow and one below.  Its hands,
also, were two smaller dumplings, with ten extremely little dumplings at
the end of them.  This baby had a nose, of course, but it was so small
that it might as well have had none; and it had a mouth, too, but that
was so capacious that the half of it would have been more than enough
for a baby double the size.  As for its eyes, they were large and
black--black as two coals--and devoid of all expression save that of
astonishment.

Such were the pair that stood on the edge of the ice-belt gazing down
upon Dumps and Poker.  And no sooner did Dumps and Poker catch sight of
them than they sprang hastily towards them, wagging their tails--or,
more correctly speaking, their tail and a quarter.  But on a nearer
approach those sagacious animals discovered that the woman and her child
were strangers, whereupon they set up a dismal howl, and fled towards
the ship as fast as they could run.

Now it so happened that, at this very time, the howl of the dogs fell
upon the ears of two separate parties of travellers--the one was a band
of Esquimaux who were moving about in search of seals and walrus, to
which band this woman and her baby belonged; the other was a party of
