"Hallo!  Got a spark in yer eye?" enquired Dove, looking up anxiously.

It flashed across Ruby at that instant that the look given him by Minnie
was meant to warn him not to take any notice of her, so he answered the
smith's query with "No, no; I've only let the hammer fall, don't you
see?  Get on, old boy, an don't let the metal cool."

The smith continued his work without further remark, and Ruby assisted,
resolving in his own mind to be a little more guarded as to the
expression of his feelings.

Meanwhile Mr Stevenson received the visitors, and showed them over the
works, pointing out the peculiarities thereof, and the difficulties that
stood in the way.

Presently he came towards the forge, and said, "Brand, the stout
gentleman there wishes to speak to you.  He says he knew you in
Arbroath.  You can spare him for a few minutes, I suppose, Mr Dove?"

"Well, yes, but not for long," replied the smith.  "The tide will soon
be up, and I've enough to do to get through with all these."

Ruby flung down his hammer at the first word, and hastened to the ledge
of rock where the visitors were standing, as far apart from the workmen
as the space of the rock would admit of.

The stout gentleman was no other than his uncle, Captain Ogilvy, who put
his finger to his lips as his nephew approached, and gave him a look of
mystery that was quite sufficient to put the latter on his guard.  He
therefore went forward, pulled off his cap, and bowed respectfully to
Minnie, who replied with a stiff curtsy, a slight smile, and a decided
blush.

Although Ruby now felt convinced that they were all acting a part, he
could scarcely bear this cold reception.  His impulse was to seize
Minnie in his arms; but he did not even get the comfort of a cold shake
of the hand.

"Nephy," said the captain in a hoarse whisper, putting his face close to
that of Ruby, "mum's the word!  Silence, mystery, an' all that sort o'
thing.  Don't appear to be an old friend, lad; and as to Minnie here--

  "`O no, we never mention her,
  Her name it's never heard.'

"Allow me to introduce you to Major Stewart, whose house you broke into,
you know, Ruby, when:--

  "`All in the Downs the fleet was moored,'

"At least when the _Termagant_ was waitin' for you to go aboard."

Here the captain winked and gave Ruby a facetious poke in the ribs,
which was not quite in harmony with the ignorance of each other he was
endeavouring to inculcate.

"Young man," said the major quietly, "we have come off to tell you that
everything is in a prosperous state as regards the investigation into
your innocence--the private investigation I mean, for the authorities
happily know nothing of your being here.  Captain Ogilvy has made me his
confidant in this matter, and from what he tells me I am convinced that
you had nothing to do with this robbery.  Excuse me if I now add that
the sight of your face deepens this conviction."

Ruby bowed to the compliment.

"We were anxious to write at once to the captain of the vessel in which
you sailed," continued the major, "but you omitted to leave his full
name and address when you left.  We were afraid to write to you, lest
your name on the letter might attract attention, and induce a premature
arrest.  Hence our visit to the rock to-day.  Please to write the
address in this pocket-book."

The major handed Ruby a small green pocket-book as he spoke, in which
the latter wrote the full name and address of his late skipper.

"Now, nephy," said the captain, "we must, I'm sorry to say, bid ye good
day, and ask you to return to your work, for it won't do to rouse
suspicion, lad.  Only keep quiet here, and do yer dooty--`England
expects _every_ man to do his dooty'--and as sure as your name's Ruby
all will be shipshape in a few weeks."

"I thank you sincerely," said Ruby, addressing the major, but looking at
Minnie.

Captain Ogilvy, observing this, and fearing some display of feeling that
would be recognised by the workmen, who were becoming surprised at the
length of the interview, placed himself between Minnie and her lover.

"No, no, Ruby," said he, solemnly.  "I'm sorry for ye, lad, but it won't
do.  Patience is a virtue, which, taken at the flood, leads on to
fortune."

"My mother?" said Ruby, wishing to prolong the interview.

"Is well," said the captain.  "Now, goodbye, lad, and be off."

"Goodbye, Minnie," cried Ruby, stepping forward suddenly and seizing the
girl's hand; then, wheeling quickly round, he sprang over the rocks, and
returned to his post.

"Ha! it's time," cried the smith.  "I thought you would never be done
makin' love to that there girl.  Come, blaze away!"

Ruby felt so nettled by the necessity that was laid upon him of taking
no notice of Minnie, that he seized the handle of the bellows
passionately, and at the first puff blew nearly all the fire away.

"Hallo! messmate," cried the smith, clearing the dust from his eyes;
"what on airth ails ye?  You've blowed the whole consarn out!"

Ruby made no reply, but, scraping together the embers, heaped them up
and blew more gently.

In a short time the visitors re-entered their boat, and rowed out of the
creek in which it had been lying.

Ruby became so exasperated at not being able even to watch the boat
going away, that he showered terrific blows on the mass of metal the
smith was turning rapidly on the anvil.

"Not so fast, lad; not so fast," cried Dove hurriedly.

Ruby's chafing spirit blew up just at that point; he hit the iron a
crack that knocked it as flat as a pancake, and then threw down the
hammer and deliberately gazed in the direction of the boat.

The sight that met his eyes appalled him.  The boat had been lying in
the inlet named Port Stevenson.  It had to pass out to the open sea
through _Wilson's Track_, and past a small outlying rock named _Gray's
Rock_--known more familiarly among the men as _Johnny Gray_.  The boat
was nearing this point, when the sea, which had been rising for some
time, burst completely over the seaward ledges, and swept the boat high
against the rocks on the left.  The men had scarcely got her again into
the track when another tremendous billow, such as we have already
described, swept over the rocks again and swamped the boat, which, being
heavily ballasted, sank at once to the bottom of the pool.

It was this sight that met the horrified eyes of Ruby when he looked up.

He vaulted over the bellows like an antelope, and, rushing over _Smith's
Ledge_ and _Trinity Ledge_, sprang across _Port Boyle_, and dived head
foremost into _Neill's Pool_ before any of the other men, who made a
general rush, could reach the spot.

A few powerful strokes brought Ruby to the place where the major and the
captain, neither of whom could swim, were struggling in the water.  He
dived at once below these unfortunates, and almost in a second,
reappeared with Minnie in his arms.

A few seconds sufficed to bring him to _Smith's Ledge_, where several of
his comrades hauled him and his burden beyond the reach of the next
wave, and where, a moment or two later, the major and captain with the
crew of the boat were landed in safety.

To bear the light form of Minnie in his strong arms to the highest and
driest part of the rock were the work of a few moments to Ruby.  Brief
though those moments were, however, they were precious to the youth
beyond all human powers of calculation, for Minnie recovered partial
consciousness, and fancying, doubtless, that she was still in danger,
flung her arms round his neck, and grasped him convulsively.  Reader, we
tell you in confidence that if Ruby had at that moment been laid on the
rack and torn limb from limb, he would have cheered out his life
triumphantly.  It was not only that he knew she loved him--_that_ he
knew before,--but he had saved the life of the girl he loved, and a
higher terrestrial happiness can scarcely be attained by man.

Laying her down as gently as a mother would her first-born, Ruby placed
a coat under her head, and bade his comrades stand back and give her
air.  It was fortunate for him that one of the foremen, who understood
what to do, came up at this moment, and ordered him to leave off chafing
the girl's hand with his wet fists, and go get some water boiled at the
forge if he wanted to do her good.

Second words were not needed.  The bellows were soon blowing, and the
fire glowed in a way that it had not done since the works at the Bell
Rock began.  Before the water quite boiled some tea was put in, and,
with a degree of speed that would have roused the jealousy of any living
waiter, a cup of tea was presented to Minnie, who had recovered almost
at the moment Ruby left her.

She drank a little, and then closing her eyes, moved her lips silently
for a few seconds.

Captain Ogilvy, who had attended her with the utmost assiduity and
tenderness as soon as he had wrung the water out of his own garments,
here took an opportunity of hastily pouring something into the cup out
of a small flask.  When Minnie looked up again and smiled, he presented
her with the cup.  She thanked him, and drank a mouthful or two before
perceiving that it had been tampered with.

"There's something in it," she said hurriedly.

"So there is, my pet," said the captain, with a benignant smile, "a
little nectar, that will do you more good than all the tea.  Come now,
don't shake your head, but down with it all, like a good child."

But Minnie was proof against persuasion, and refused to taste any more.

"Who was it that saved me, uncle?"  (She had got into the way of calling
the captain "uncle.")

"Ruby Brand did it, my darlin'," said the old man with a look of pride.
"Ah! you're better now; stay, don't attempt to rise."

"Yes, yes, uncle," she said, getting up and looking round, "it is time
that we should go now; we have a long way to go, you know.  Where is the
boat?"

"The boat, my precious, is at the bottom of the sea."

As he said this, he pointed to the mast, half of which was seen rising
out of the pool where the boat had gone down.

"But you don't need to mind," continued the captain, "for they're goin'
to send us in one o' their own boats aboord the floatin' lightship,
where we'll get a change o' clothes an' somethin' to eat."

As he spoke, one of the sailors came forward and announced that the boat
was ready, so the captain and the major assisted Minnie into the boat,
which soon pushed off with part of the workmen from the rock.  It was to
be sent back for the remainder of the crew, by which time the tide would
render it necessary that all should leave.

Ruby purposely kept away from the group while they were embarking, and
after they were gone proceeded to resume work.

"You took a smart dive that time, lad," observed Joe Dumsby as they went
along.

"Not more than anyone would do for a girl," said Ruby.

"An' such a purty wan, too," said O'Connor.  "Ah! av she's not Irish,
she should ha' bin."

"Ye're a lucky chap to hae sic a chance," observed John Watt.

"Make up to her, lad," said Forsyth; "I think she couldn't refuse ye
after doin' her such service."

"Time enough to chaff after work is over," cried Ruby with a laugh, as
he turned up his sleeves, and, seizing the hammer, began, as his friend
Dove said, "to work himself dry."

In a few minutes, work was resumed, and for another hour all continued
busy as bees, cutting and pounding at the flinty surface of the Bell
Rock.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A SLEEPLESS BUT A PLEASANT NIGHT.

The evening which followed the day that has just been described was
bright, calm, and beautiful, with the starry host unclouded and
distinctly visible to the profoundest depths of space.

As it was intended to send the _Smeaton_ to Arbroath next morning for a
cargo of stones from the building-yard, the wrecked party were prevailed
on to remain all night on board the _Pharos_, instead of going ashore in
one of the ship's boats, which could not well be spared at the time.

This arrangement, we need hardly say, gave inexpressible pleasure to
Ruby, and was not altogether distasteful to Minnie, although she felt
anxious about Mrs Brand, who would naturally be much alarmed at the
prolonged absence of herself and the captain.  However, "there was no
help for it"; and it was wonderful the resignation which she displayed
in the circumstances.

It was not Ruby's duty to watch on deck that night, yet, strange to say,
Ruby kept watch the whole night long!

There was no occasion whatever for Minnie to go on deck after it was
dark, yet, strange to say, Minnie kept coming on deck at intervals
_nearly_ the whole night long!  Sometimes to "look at the stars",
sometimes to "get a mouthful of fresh air", frequently to find out what
"that strange noise could be that had alarmed her", and at last--
especially towards the early hours of morning--for no reason whatever,
except that "she could not sleep below."

It was very natural that when Minnie paced the quarterdeck between the
stern and the mainmast, and Ruby paced the forepart of the deck between
the bows and the mainmast, the two should occasionally meet at the
mainmast.  It was also very natural that when they did meet, the girl
who had been rescued should stop and address a few words of gratitude to
the man who had saved her.  But it was by no means natural--nay, it was
altogether unnatural and unaccountable, that, when it became dark, the
said man and the said girl should get into a close and confidential
conversation, which lasted for hours, to the amusement of Captain Ogilvy
and the major, who quite understood it, and to the amazement of many of
the ship's crew, who couldn't understand it at all.

At last Minnie bade Ruby a final good night and went below, and Ruby,
who could not persuade himself that it was final, continued to walk the
deck until his eyes began to shut and open involuntarily like those of a
sick owl.  Then he also went below, and, before he fell quite asleep
(according to his own impression), was awakened by the bell that called
the men to land on the rock and commence work.

It was not only Ruby who found it difficult to rouse himself that
morning.  The landing-bell was rung at four o'clock, as the tide suited
at that early hour, but the men were so fatigued that they would gladly
have slept some hours longer.  This, however, the nature of the service
would not admit of.  The building of the Bell Rock Lighthouse was a
peculiar service.  It may be said to have resembled duty in the trenches
in military warfare.  At times the work was light enough, but for the
most part it was severe and irregular, as the men had to work in all
kinds of weather, as long as possible, in the face of unusual
difficulties and dangers, and were liable to be called out at all
unseasonable hours.  But they knew and expected this, and faced the work
like men.

After a growl or two, and a few heavy sighs, they all tumbled out of
their berths, and, in a very short time, were mustered on deck, where a
glass of rum and a biscuit were served to each, being the regular
allowance when they had to begin work before breakfast.  Then they got
into the boats and rowed away.

Ruby's troubles were peculiar on this occasion.  He could not bear the
thought of leaving the _Pharos_ without saying goodbye to Minnie; but as
Minnie knew nothing of such early rising, there was no reasonable hope
that she would be awake.  Then he wished to put a few questions to his
uncle which he had forgotten the day before, but his uncle was at that
moment buried in profound repose, with his mouth wide open, and a
trombone solo proceeding from his nose, which sadly troubled the
unfortunates who lay near him.

As there was no way of escape from these difficulties, Ruby, like a wise
man, made up his mind to cast them aside, so, after swallowing his
allowance, he shouldered his big bellows, heaved a deep sigh, and took
his place in one of the boats alongside.

The lassitude which strong men feel when obliged to rise before they
have had enough of rest soon wears off.  The two boats had not left the
_Pharos_ twenty yards astern, when Joe Dumsby cried, "Ho! boys, let's
have a race."

"Hooray!" shouted O'Connor, whose elastic spirits were always equal to
anything, "an' sure Ruby will sing us `The girl we've left behind us.'
Och! an' there she is, av I'm not draymin'."

At that moment a little hand was waved from one of the ports of the
floating light.  Ruby at once waved his in reply, but as the attention
of the men had been directed to the vessel by Ned's remark, each saw the
salutation, and, claiming it as a compliment to himself, uttered a loud
cheer, which terminated in a burst of laughter, caused by the sight of
Ruby's half-angry, half-ashamed expression of face.

As the other boat had shot ahead, however, at the first mention of the
word "race", the men forgot this incident in their anxiety to overtake
their comrades.  In a few seconds both boats were going at full speed,
and they kept it up all the way to the rock.

