The crew was a mixed one.  There seemed to be representatives of at
least half a dozen nations.  The captain himself was of mixed blood, and
no one could have told from his look or speech to what nation he
belonged.  He was a big powerful man, much feared by the crew, who hated
him cordially.  He was well aware of this, and returned the hatred with
interest.  Besides this, being monarch of the ship, he worried them in
every way that lay in his power.

It is awful to think of the ruinous effects of sin, and how nearly men
can come to resemble devils.  This monster actually laid plots to entrap
his men in order that he might have an excuse to vent his hatred on
them.

Gaff soon found that he had got into a nest, so to speak, of evil
spirits.  Before he had been two days with them, he would have given all
he possessed, or ever hoped to possess, in order to escape from the
"Rattlesnake," which was the vessel's name.

As for Billy, his heart sank to a depth of woe he had never hitherto
conceived of.  Every one kicked and cuffed him and swore at him for
being in the way, and when he was wanted he was kicked, cuffed, and
sworn at for being out of the way.  Poor boy! his dreams had never
presented him with _this_ species of adventure.

So bad did the state of things become that the men began to talk among
themselves of deserting the moment they should reach port, no matter
what should be the consequences.  This threat reached the captain's
ears, and he frustrated it by telling the mate that he thought the
needful repairs could be managed on board by the ship's carpenters; and
so gave orders to alter the course for South America!

Deep and fierce were the counsels that went on in the forecastle that
night among the men.  Some hinted darkly at murder.  Others suggested
that the captain should be put on shore on a desert island and left to
his fate.  All agreed that something must be done, that a decisive blow
must be struck, with the exception of Gaff, who remained silent while
his shipmates were discussing the matter.

Observing this they called upon him for his opinion.

"Lads," said he in decided tones, "I've got no opinion to offer.  I am--
at least I strive to be--a Christian man; an', to be plain with ye, I
won't go for to consult or act with murderers, or mutineers, or pirates,
which it appears you intend to become, if you're not that a'ready.  One
opinion I will give ye, however, an' one piece of advice I'll offer.
The opinion is, that if you go on as you've bin a-goin' on since I came
aboard, you'll all live to be hanged.  The advice is, that you should
face yer troubles like men--take things as ye find 'em, an' if ye can't
mend 'em, why grin and bear 'em."

The crew received this in varied mood.  Some laughed, others swore, and
one suggested that Gaff should be thrown overboard.

This latter, who was a big strong man, and a sort of bully among his
mates, shook his fist at Gaff, and said--

"Now, I'll tell ye wot it is, Mister Toogood, if you go for to tell the
cap'n wot we've bin a-talkin' about, I'll knock yer two daylights into
one, so see that ye keep yer tongue in order."

"What's past is past," said Gaff quietly; "but I tell ye plainly, that
if you let _your_ tongues go the same pace again in my hearin', I'll go
aft and report ye.  I'll be no spy, but I give ye fair warnin'."

At this the bully lost command of himself.  Seizing an iron bar that lay
on a chest close by, he rushed at Gaff with the evident intention of
felling him.  But the latter was on his guard.  He was active and
powerful too, besides being quite cool.  Leaping nimbly aside, he
avoided the bully's onset, and at the same moment laid him flat on the
deck with one blow of his fist.

"Sarves him right!"

"So it does!" exclaimed several of the men, who were not sorry to see
one whom they disliked so roughly handled.

"Well, so it does sarve him right," added one who had been a prominent
speaker in the recent debates; "but hark'ee, friend," he said, turning
to Gaff with a scowl, "you can't knock the whole crew down in that
fashion.  I advise ye, for your own sake, to mind what ye're about."

"I means to do so," said Gaff; "I'll stick to my dooty and to the
cap'n."

"Very good," replied the other with a sneer, "then wotiver is the
cap'n's fate you'll have the pleasure of sharin' it with him."

"Tumble up there! tumble up, an' reef tops'ls!" roared the captain down
the hatch at that moment.

The men obeyed, and for the time their mutinous intentions seemed to
have been dismissed.  For many weeks after this Gaff heard nothing that
could lead him to suppose that the men still harboured their dark
designs.  Yet the state of affairs on board became worse and worse.  The
captain cursed and tyrannised more than ever, and the men grew sulkier
and more wretched, but no word of a murderous nature was ever uttered in
the hearing of Gaff or his little son.

As for Billy his small mind had received such a rude shock by the sudden
and terrible change in his circumstances, that he seemed to have lost
all his wonted vivacity as well as his mischief.  In fact, both
qualities, or tendencies, had been thoroughly kicked out of him before
he had been a week on board.  He was protected to some extent by his
father, who one day quietly knocked another of the men down for giving
Billy an undeserved beating; but some of them kicked and cuffed the poor
boy when his father was not present.

Billy was found to be active and useful in small matters and light
duties suited to his age, and in the course of time was appointed to the
position of steward's assistant, in which capacity he became deeply
learned in the matter of washing cups, dishes, etcetera, besides
acquiring a knowledge of baking, pudding-making, and many other useful
arts more or less allied to cookery; in addition to which he had the
inestimable benefit of being taught thoroughly submission and
obedience--a lesson which the Bu'ster found very hard to learn, and
thought particularly grievous, but which at his age, and considering his
previous training, was an absolute blessing.

The way in which that cherub went about that ship in a little blue
jacket, straw hat, and canvas trousers, rubbing and cleaning, and
according prompt obedience at all times to every one, would have charmed
his mother as much as it gratified his father, who was in consequence
somewhat reconciled to his otherwise hard lot.

Now, philosophical reader--if such you be--do not suppose that I
advocate kicking and cuffing as the best possible cure for general
mischievousness and badness in a boy.  By no means.  My strong-minded
wife says I do; but then she always forms, or rather partially forms,
her opinions on assumptions, retains them in confusion, states them at
haphazard, according to her mood at the time being, and, having stated
them, sticks to them like a limpet to a rock.

You will judge differently when I explain my ideas on this point.  I
maintain that Billy Gaff, _alias_ the Bu'ster, was taught to accord
obedience--simple obedience and nothing else--by means of the kicking
and cuffing he received on board of that whaler; and, further, that the
method is a sure one.  I do not say that it is the _best_ one, but that
does not affect the fact that it is almost infallible.  It was reserved
for Billy's father, however, by means of wise counsels, kindly given
advice, and otherwise affectionate treatment, to save Billy from being
turned into an obedient but misanthropic brute, and to lead him to
accord his obedience, not because he could not help it, but because his
father wished him to do it.

This appeal went right home to Billy's heart, because he loved his
father fervently.  He had always loved him in time past, now more than
ever, for the poor boy regarded him much as a drowning man regards the
solitary plank to which he clings as his last hope.  Thus did Billy
practically learn the great truth, that "Love is the fulfilling of the
law."

Weeks rolled on; gales succeeded calms, and calms succeeded gales.  The
"line" was passed; southern seas were reached; new constellations
glittered overhead; strange fish and luminous creatures gambolled in the
sea, and the whalers' fishing-ground was entered.  Latterly the men had
ceased to grumble at the captain, although he had by no means ceased to
swear at and bully the men, and Gaff began to hope that they had got
over their bad fit, and were going to settle down to work peaceably.

The calm, however, was deceitful; it preceded a storm.

One sultry afternoon when Gaff was standing at the helm and the captain
beside him, the men came aft in a body, and two of their number, with
pistols in their hands, advanced to seize the captain.

He saw at once what they meant to do, and, springing back, seized a
handspike.

"Lay that down and surrender, else I'll blow out yer brains," said one
of the two, levelling his pistol.

Instead of obeying, the captain raised the heavy handspike, and the man
pulled the trigger.  At the same instant Gaff struck up the muzzle with
his hand; the ball passed over the captain's head, and the handspike
descended on the seaman's crown felling him at once.

Upon this the entire crew made a rush and overpowered Gaff and the
captain.  The latter, who struggled with the fury of a tiger, was kicked
while down until he was nearly dead.  Gaff at once gave in, knowing that
any attempt at further resistance, besides being hopeless, would only
render matters worse.  He was therefore allowed to rise, and his hands
were tied behind his back.

The captain, being similarly secured, was raised to his feet.

"Now, you tyrant," said the ringleader of the crew with a terrible oath,
"how would you like to have your throat cut?"

The man slowly opened a long clasp-knife as he spoke, and felt its keen
edge with his thumb.  Blood was flowing down his face and breast from
the wound inflicted by the handspike, and the fiendish expression of his
countenance, added to the terribleness of his aspect, while it showed
that his sarcastic question would certainly be followed by the murderous
deed.  But the other mutineers restrained him.

"It's too good for him, make him walk the plank and drown like a dog--as
he is," cried one.

"Hang him up to the yard-arm," said another.

Several voices here expressed dissent, and an elderly seaman stepped
forward and said that they didn't intend to become pirates, so they had
better not begin with murder.

"Hear, hear!" from several voices emphatically.

"What'll we do with him, then?" inquired one in angry excitement.

Upon this they all began to consult noisily, and they were so much
engrossed that they failed to perceive the movements of Billy, who, when
his first alarm at the uproar was over, began to feel deep anxiety in
regard to his father's bound and helpless condition.  His active mind
did not remain long paralysed; pulling out the clasp-knife which he
always carried in his pocket, he quickly cut the cords that fastened
Gaff's wrists.  Before the latter could avail himself of his freedom the
act was discovered, and he was secured again more firmly than before,
while Billy was favoured with a slap on the ear so tremendous that it
threw all those he had ever received from his mother utterly into the
shade!

Recovering from this, he sat down on the deck at his father's feet, and
wept silently.

In a few minutes the mutineers agreed among themselves.  One of the
smallest boats in the ship was lowered, and the captain and Gaff having
been cast loose were ordered to get into it.  The former obeyed at once,
pronouncing a terrible curse on the crew as he went down the side.

One of the men at the same time threw a bag of biscuit into the boat.

"Come along, Billy," said Gaff, as he followed the captain.

The boy was about to do so, when one of the men seized him and pulled
him back.

"No, no," said he, "the lad's useful, and will only eat up your biscuit
faster than need be.  We'll keep him aboard."

Gaff listened to this with an expression of agony on his rugged
features.

"Oh, have mercy on my son!" he cried, as they cast the boat adrift.
Then feeling that an appeal to such desperadoes was useless, he clasped
his hands, and, looking up to Heaven, prayed God, for Christ's sake, to
deliver him from the company of sinful men.

A light breeze was blowing, and the ship, which had been hove-to while
the boat was being lowered, soon gathered way, and left the boat behind.

All of a sudden Billy broke away, and, rushing towards the stern, sprang
wildly into the sea!

"Down with the helm! heave-to!" shouted some of the men.

"No, no, let the whelp go," cried others; "besides, he'd be able to
peach on us."

This last argument was all-powerful.  The ship held on her course, and
Billy was left to his fate.

The moment that Gaff saw him take the leap he seized the oars, and
applying all his strength to them, succeeded in catching hold of his son
before his struggles had ceased.

Billy was none the worse for his adventure beyond the ducking.  Gaff
soon wrung the water out of his garments, and then placing him on his
knee, sat down to watch the ship as it sailed slowly away.

The captain, who sat in the stern with his chin resting in his hand, and
a dark scowl on his face, also watched the retreating vessel.

Soon it glimmered like the wing of a sea-mew on the horizon, and then,
just as night began to set in, it disappeared, leaving the boat a
solitary speck in the midst of the great wide sea.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE DINNER PARTY--A SUDDEN PIECE OF QUESTIONABLE GOOD FORTUNE BEFALLS
MRS. GAFF.

"It is a most unfortunate piece of good fortune this that has befallen
Mrs Gaff," said Mr George Stuart, "a very unfortunate thing indeed."

"Dear me, do you think so?  Now I don't agree with you at all, brother,"
observed Miss Peppy.  "I think that good fortune is always good fortune,
and never can be bad fortune.  I wish it would only come to me
sometimes, but it never does, and when it does it never remains long.
Only think how she'll flaunt about now, with a coach-and-four perhaps,
and such like.  I really think that fortune made a mistake in this case,
for she has been used to such mean ways, not that I mean anything bad by
mean, you know, but only low and common, including food and domestic
habits, as well as society, that--that--dear me, I don't exactly know
how to express myself, but it's a puzzle to me to know how she'll ever
come to be able to spend it all, indeed it is.  I wonder why we are
subjected to such surprises so constantly, and then it's _so_ perplexing
too, because one will never be able to remember that she's not a
fisherwoman as she used to be, and will call her Jessie in spite of
one's-self; and how it ever came about, that's another puzzle.  But
after all there is no accounting for the surprising way in which things
_do_ come about, dear me, in this altogether unaccountable world.  Take
a little more soup, Captain Bingley?"

The above observations were made by Miss Peppy and my friend Stuart,
from the head and foot respectively of their dinner-table, around which
were assembled my wife, my niece Lizzie Gordon, an elderly spinster
named Miss Eve Flouncer, a Miss Martha Puff, (niece to Miss Flouncer), a
baronet named Sir Richard Doles, my son Gildart, and Kenneth Stuart.

I was seated beside Miss Peppy, opposite to Sir Richard Doles, who was
one of the slowest, dullest, stupidest men I ever met with.  He appeared
to me to have been born without any intellect.  When he told a story
there was no end to it, indeed there seldom was anything worthy the name
of a beginning to it, and it never by the remotest chance had any point.

In virtue of his rank, not his capacity of course, Sir Richard was in
great demand in Wreckumoft.  He was chairman at every public meeting;
honorary member of every society; a director in the bank, the insurance
company, the railway, the poorhouse, and the Sailors' Home; in all of
which positions and institutions he was a positive nuisance, because of
his insane determination to speak as long as possible, when he had not
the remotest notion of what he wished to say, so that business was in
his presence brought almost to a dead lock.  Yet Sir Richard was
tolerated; nay, courted and toadied, because of his title.

My wife was seated opposite to Miss Eve Flouncer, who was one of the
strong-minded women.  Indeed, I think it is but just to say of her that
she was one of the strongest-minded women in the town.  In her presence
the strength of Mrs Bingley's mind dwindled down to comparative
weakness.  In form she was swan-like, undulatory, so to speak.  Her
features were _prononce_; nose, aquiline; eyes, piercing; hair, black as
night, and in long ringlets.

Miss Flouncer was, as I have said, an elderly spinster.  Sir Richard was
an elderly bachelor.  Miss Flouncer thought of this, and often sighed.
Sir Richard didn't think of it, and never sighed, except when, having
finished a good dinner, he felt that he could eat no more.  By the way,
he also sighed at philanthropic meetings when cases of distress were
related, such as sudden bereavement, coupled, perhaps, with sickness and
deep poverty.  But Sir Richard's sighs were all his contributions to the
cause of suffering humanity.  Sometimes, indeed, he gave it his
blessing, though it would have puzzled the deepest philosopher to have
said what that consisted in, but he never gave it his prayers, for this
reason, that he never prayed for himself or anybody else.  He held that
this world was in a sufficiently satisfactory condition, and advised
that men should let well alone, and contended that any attempt to
interfere with its arrangements in the way of prayer was quite
indefensible.  He did indeed read his prayers in church on Sundays, in a
very loud and distinct voice, to the great annoyance and distraction,
not to say irritation, of all who sat within fifty yards of him, but
this he regarded as a commendable institution of the country.  But to
return to Miss Flouncer.

