"It is splendid!" Bob said, as he walked round by the low parapet,
and gazed at the view in all directions; "and we can see what
everyone else is doing on their roofs, and no one can look down on
us--except from the rock over there, behind us, and there are no
houses there."

"No, the batteries commanding the neutral ground lie over that
crest, Bob. We are quite shut in, on two sides; but we make up for
it by the extent of our view, on the others. We are very lucky in
getting the place. A regiment went home in the transport that
brought us out. Gerald knew some of the officers, and one of them
had been staying here, and told Gerald of it; and we took it at
once. The other officers' wives are all quite jealous of me and,
though some of them have very nice quarters, it is admitted that,
as far as the view goes, this is by far the best. Besides, it is a
great thing being out of the town, and it does not take Gerald more
than three or four minutes longer to get down to the barracks.

"But now, let us go downstairs. I am sure you must want something
to eat, and we sha'n't have supper for another three hours."

"I dined at twelve," Bob said, "just before we rounded the point,
and I could certainly hold on until supper time Still, I daresay I
could eat something, now."

"Oh, it is only a snack! It is some stewed chicken and some fruit.
That won't spoil your supper, Bob?"

"You will be glad to hear, Bob," Captain O'Halloran said, as the
lad was eating his meal, "that I have secured the services of a
Spanish professor for you. He is to begin next Monday."

Bob's face fell.

"I don't see that there was need for such a hurry," he said,
ruefully, laying down his knife and fork. "I don't see there was
need for any hurry, at all. Besides, of course, I want to see the
place."

"You will be able to see a good deal of it, in four days, Bob; and
your time won't be entirely occupied, when you do begin. The days
are pretty long here, everyone gets up early.

"He is to come at seven o'clock in the morning. You have a cup of
coffee, and some bread and butter and fruit, before that. He will
go at nine, then we have breakfast. Then you will have your time to
yourself, till dinner at half past two. The assistant surgeon of
our regiment--he is a Dublin man--will come to you for Latin, and
what I may call general knowledge, for two hours. That is all;
except, I suppose, that you will work a bit by yourself, of an
evening.

"That is not so bad, is it?"

"What sort of man is the assistant surgeon?" Bob replied,
cautiously. "It all depends how much he is going to give me to do,
in the evening."

"I don't think he will give you anything to do, in the evening,
Bob. Of course, the Spanish is the principal thing, and I told him
that you will have to work at that."

"I don't think you need be afraid, Bob," his sister laughed. "You
won't find Dr. Burke a very severe kind of instructor. Nobody but
Gerald would ever have thought of choosing him."

"Sure, and didn't you agree with me, Carrie," her husband said, in
an aggrieved voice, "that as we were not going to make the boy a
parson, and as it was too much to expect him to learn Spanish, and
a score of other things, at once; that we ought to get someone who
would make his lessons pleasant for him, and not be worrying his
soul out of his body with all sorts of useless balderdash?"

"Yes, we agreed that, Gerald; but there was a limit, and when you
told me you had spoken to Teddy Burke about it, and arranged the
matter with him, I thought you had gone beyond that limit,
altogether."

"He is just the man for Bob, Carrie. That boy will find it mighty
dull here, after a bit, and will want someone to cheer him up. I
promised the old gentleman I would find him someone who could push
Bob on in his humanities; and Teddy Burke has taken his degree at
Dublin, and I will venture to say will get him on faster than a
stiff starched man will do. Bob would always be playing tricks,
with a fellow like that, and be getting into rows with him. There
will be no playing tricks with Teddy Burke, for he is up to the
whole thing, himself."

"I should think he is, Gerald. Well, we will see how it works,
anyhow.

"Go on with your fowl, Bob. You will see all about it, in good
time."

Bob felt satisfied that the teacher his brother-in-law had chosen
for him was not a very formidable personage; and his curiosity as
to what he would be like was satisfied, that evening. After he had
finished his meal, he went for a stroll with Captain O'Halloran
through the town, and round the batteries at that end of the Rock,
returning to supper. After the meal was over, they went up to the
terrace above. There was not a breath of wind, and a lamp on a
table there burned without a flicker.

They had scarcely taken their seats when Manola announced Dr.
Burke, and a minute later an officer in uniform made his appearance
on the terrace. He wore a pair of blue spectacles, and advanced in
a stiff and formal manner.

"I wish you a good evening, Mrs. O'Halloran. So this is our young
friend!

"You are well, I hope, Master Repton; and are none the worse for
the inconveniences I hear you have suffered on your voyage?"

Carrie, to Bob's surprise, burst into a fit of laughter.

"What is the matter, Mrs. O'Halloran?" Dr. Burke asked, looking at
her with an air of mild amazement.

"I am laughing at you, Teddy Burke. How can you be so ridiculous?"

The doctor removed his spectacles.

"Now, Mrs. O'Halloran," he said, with a strong brogue. "Do you call
that acting fairly by me? Didn't you talk to me yourself, half an
hour yesterday, and impress upon me that I ought to be grave and
steady, now that I was going to enter upon the duties of a
pedagogue; and ain't I trying my best to act up to your
instructions, and there you burst out laughing in my face, and
spoil it all, entirely?

"Gerald said to me, 'Now mind, Teddy, it is a responsible affair.
The boy is up to all sorts of divarsions, and divil a bit will he
attend to ye, if he finds that you are as bad, if not worse, than
he is himself.'

"'But,' said I, 'it's Latin and such like that you are wanting me
to teach him; and not manners at all, at all.'

"And he says, 'It is all one. It is quiet and well behaved that you
have got to be, Teddy. The missis has been houlding out about the
iniquity of taking a spalpeen, like yourself; and it is for you to
show her that she is mistaken, altogether.'

"So I said, 'You trust me, Gerald, I will be as grave as a doctor
of divinity.'

"So I got out these glasses--which I bought because they told me
that they would be wanted here, to keep out the glare of the
sun--and I came here, and spoke as proper as might be; and then,
Mrs. O'Halloran, you burst out laughing in my face, and destroy the
whole effect of these spectacles, and all.

"Well, we must make the best of a bad business; and we will try,
for a bit, anyhow. If he won't mind me, Gerald must go to the
chaplain, as he intended to; and I pity the boy, then. I would
rather be had up before the colonel, any day, than have any matter
in dispute with him."

"You are too bad, Teddy Burke," Mrs. O'Halloran said, still
laughing. "It was all very well for you to try and look sensible,
but to put on that face was too absurd. You know you could not have
kept it up for five minutes.

"No, I don't think it will do," and she looked serious now. "I
always thought that it was out of the question, but this bad
beginning settles it."

But Bob, who had been immensely amused, now broke in.

"Why not, Carrie? I am sure I should work better, for Dr. Burke,
than I should for anyone who was very strict and stiff. One is
always wanting to do something, with a man like that: to play
tricks with his wig or pigtail, or something of that sort. You
might let us try, anyhow; and if Dr. Burke finds that I am not
attentive, and don't mind him, then you can put me with somebody
else."

"Sure, we shall get on first rate, Mrs. O'Halloran. Gerald says the
boy is a sensible boy, and that he has been working very well under
an old uncle of yours. He knows for himself that it's no use his
having a master, if he isn't going to try his best to get on. When
I was at school, I used to get larrupped every day; and used to
think, to myself, what a grand thing it would be to have a master
just like what Dr. Burke, M.D., Dublin, is now; and I expect it is
just about the same, with him. We sha'n't work any the worse
because, maybe, we will joke over it, sometimes."

"Very well, then, we will try, Teddy; though I know the whole
regiment will think Gerald and I have gone mad, when they hear
about it. But I shall keep my eye upon you both."

"The more you keep your eye upon me, the better I shall be plazed,
Mrs. O'Halloran; saving your husband's presence," the doctor said,
insinuatingly.

"Do sit down and be reasonable, Teddy. There are cigars in that box
on the table."

"The tobacco here almost reconciles one to living outside Ireland,"
Dr. Burke said, as he lit a cigar, and seated himself in one of the
comfortable chairs. "Just about a quarter the price they are at
home, and brandy at one shilling per bottle. It is lucky for the
country that we don't get them at that price, in Ireland; for it is
mighty few boys they would get to enlist, if they could get tobacco
and spirits at such prices, at home."

"I have been telling Gerald that it will be much better for him to
drink claret, out here," Mrs. O'Halloran said.

"And you are not far wrong," the doctor agreed; "but the native
wines here are good enough for me, and you can get them at sixpence
a quart. I was telling them, at mess yesterday, that we must not
write home and tell them about it; or faith, there would be such an
emigration that the Rock wouldn't hold the people--not if you were
to build houses all over it. Sixpence a quart, and good sound
tipple!

"Sure, and it was a mighty mistake of Providence that Ireland was
not dropped down into the sea, off the coast of Spain. What a
country it would have been!"

"I don't know, Teddy," Captain O'Halloran said. "As the people
don't kill themselves with overwork, now, I doubt if they would
ever work at all, if they had the excuse of a hot climate for doing
nothing."

"There would not have been so much need, Gerald. They needn't have
bothered about the thatch, when it only rains once in six months,
or so; while as for clothes, it is little enough they would have
needed. And the bogs would all have dried up, and they would have
had crops without more trouble than just scratching the ground, and
sowing in the seed; and they would have grown oranges, instead of
praties. Oh, it would have been a great country, entirely!"

The doctor's three listeners all went off into a burst of laughter,
at the seriousness with which he spoke.

"But you would have had trouble with your pigs," Mrs. O'Halloran
said. "The Spanish pigs are wild, fierce-looking beasts, and would
never be content to share the cottages."

"Ah! But we would have had Irish pigs just the same as now. Well,
what do you think--" and he broke off suddenly, sitting upright,
and dropping the brogue altogether--"they were saying, at mess,
that the natives declare there are lots of Spanish troops moving
down in this direction; and that a number of ships are expected,
with stores, at Algeciras."

"Well, what of that?" Mrs. O'Halloran asked. "We are at peace with
Spain. What does it matter where they move their troops, or land
stores?"

"That is just the thing. We are at peace with them, sure enough;
but that is no reason why we should be always at peace. You know
how they hate seeing our flag flying over the Rock; and they may
think that, now we have got our hands full with France, and the
American colonists, it will be the right time for them to join in
the scrimmage, and see if they can't get the Rock back again."

"But they would never go to war, without any ground of complaint!"

"I don't know, Mrs. O'Halloran. When one wants to pick a quarrel
with a man, it is always a mighty easy thing to do so. You can
tread on his toe, and ask him what he put it there for; or sit down
on his hat, and swear that he put it on the chair on purpose; or
tell him that you do not like the colour of his hair, or that his
nose isn't the shape that pleases you. It is the easiest thing in
the world to find something to quarrel about, when you have a mind
for it."

"Are you quite serious, Teddy?"

"Never more serious in my life.

"Have you heard about it, Gerald?"

"I heard them saying something about it, when we were waiting for
the colonel on parade, this morning; but I did not think much of
it."

"Well, of course, it mayn't be true, Gerald; but the colonel and
major both seemed to think that there was something in it. It
seems, from what they said, that the governor has had letters that
seemed to confirm the news that several regiments are on the march
south; and that stores are being collected at Cadiz, and some of
the other seaports. There is nothing, as far as we know, specially
said about Gibraltar; but what else can they be getting ready for,
unless it is to cross the Straits and attack the Moors--and they
are at peace with them, at present, just as they are with us? I
mean to think that they are coming here, till we are downright sure
they are not. The news is so good, I mean to believe that it is
true, as long as I can."

"For shame, Teddy!" Mrs. O'Halloran said. "You can't be so wicked
as to hope that they are going to attack us?"

"And it is exactly that point of wickedness I have arrived at," the
doctor said, again dropping into the brogue. "In the first place,
sha'n't we need something, to kape us from dying entirely of
nothing to do at all, at all, in this wearisome old place? We are
fresh to it, and we are not tired, yet, of the oranges and the wine
and the cigars, and the quare people you see in the streets; but
the regiments that have been here some time are just sick of their
lives. Then, in the second place, how am I going to learn my
profession, if we are going to stop here, quiet and peaceful, for
years? Didn't I come into the army to study gunshot wounds and,
barring duels, divil a wound have I seen since I joined. It's
getting rusty I am, entirely; and there is the elegant case of
instruments my aunt gave me, that have never been opened. By the
same token, I will have them out and oil them, in the morning."

"Don't talk in that way, Teddy. You ought to be ashamed of
yourself. It seems to me that you are making a great to-do about
nothing. Some soldiers have been marched somewhere in Spain, and
all this talk is made up about it. They must know, very well, they
can't take the Rock. They tried it once, and I should have thought
they would not be in a hurry to try it again. I shall believe in it
when I see it.

"You need not look so delighted, Bob. If there should be any
trouble--and it seems nonsense even to think about such a
thing--but if there should be any, we should put you on board the
very first vessel sailing for England, and get you off our minds."

Bob laughed.

"I should go down and ship as a powder monkey, on one of the ships
of war; or enlist as a drummer, in one of the regiments; and then I
should be beyond your authority, altogether."

"I begin to think you are beyond my authority already, Bob.

"Gerald, I am afraid we did a very foolish thing in agreeing to
have this boy out here."

"Well, we have got him on our hands now, Carrie; and it is early,
yet, for you to find out your mistake.

"Well, if there should be a siege--"

"You know there is no chance of it, Gerald."

"Well, I only say if, and we are cut off from all the world, he
will be a companion to you, and keep you alive, while I am in the
batteries."

"I won't hear such nonsense talked any more, Gerald; and if Teddy
Burke is going to bring us every bit of absurd gossip that may be
picked up from the peasants, he can stay away, altogether."

"Except when he comes to instruct his pupil, Mrs. O'Halloran."

"Oh, that is not likely to last long, Dr. Burke!"

"That is to be seen, Mrs. O'Halloran. It is a nice example you are
setting him of want of respect for his instructor. I warn you that,
before another six months have passed, you will have to confess
that it has been just the very best arrangement that could have
been made; and will thank your stars that Dr. Edward Burke, M.D.,
of Dublin, happened to be here, ready to your hand."



Chapter 7: Troubles Ahead.


When Dr. Burke had left, Bob broke into an Indian war dance,
expressive of the deepest satisfaction; and Captain O'Halloran
burst into a shout of laughter at the contrast between the boy's
vehement delight, and the dissatisfaction expressed in his wife's
face.

"I am not at all pleased, Gerald, not at all; and I don't see that it
is any laughing matter. I never heard a more ridiculous thing.  Uncle
intrusted Bob to our care, believing that we should do what was best for
him; and here you go and engage the most feather-headed Irishman in the
garrison--and that is saying a good deal, Gerald--to look after him."

It was so seldom that Carrie took matters seriously that her
husband ceased laughing, at once.

"Well, Carrie, there is no occasion to put yourself out about it.
The experiment can be tried for a fortnight; and if, at the end of
that time, you are not satisfied, we will get someone else. But I
am sure it will work well."

"So am I, Carrie," Bob put in. "I believe Dr. Burke and I will get
on splendidly. You see, I have been with two people, both of whom
looked as grave as judges, and one of them as cross as a bear; and
yet they were both first-rate fellows. It seems to me that Dr.
Burke is just the other way. He turns everything into fun; but I
expect he will be just as sharp, when he is at lessons, as anyone
else. At any rate, you may be sure that I will do my best with him;
so as not to get put under some stiff old fellow, instead of him."

"Well, we shall see, Bob. I hope that it will turn out well, I am
sure."

"Of course it will turn out well, Carrie. Why, didn't your uncle at
first think I was the most harum-scarum fellow he ever saw; and now
he sees that I am a downright model husband, with only one fault,
and that is that I let you have your own way, altogether."

"It looks like it, on the present occasion, Gerald," his wife
laughed. "I will give it, as you say, a fortnight's trial. I only
hope that you have made a better choice for Bob's Spanish master."

"I hope so, my dear--that is, if it is possible. The professor, as
I call him, has been teaching his language to officers, here, for
the last thirty years. He is a queer, wizened-up little old chap,
and has got out of the way of bowing and scraping that the senors
generally indulge in; but he seems a cheery little old soul, and he
has got to understand English ways and, at any rate, there is no
fear of his leading Bob into mischief. The Spaniards don't
understand that; and if you were to ruffle his dignity, he would
throw up teaching him at once; and I have not heard of another man
on the Rock who would be likely to suit."

On the following Monday, Bob began work with the professor; who
called himself, on his card, Don Diaz Martos. He spoke English very
fairly and, after the first half hour, Bob found that the lessons
would be much more pleasant than he expected. The professor began
by giving him a long sentence to learn by heart, thoroughly; and
when Bob had done this, parsed each word with him, so that he
perfectly understood its meaning. Then he made the lad say it after
him a score of times, correcting his accent and inflection; and
when he was satisfied with this, began to construct fresh sentences
out of the original one, again making Bob repeat them, and form
fresh ones himself.

Thus, by the time the first lesson was finished the lad, to his
surprise, found himself able, without difficulty, to frame
sentences from the words he had learned. Then the professor wrote
down thirty nouns and verbs in common use.

"You will learn them this evening," he said, "and in the morning we
shall be able to make up a number of sentences out of them and, by
the end of a week, you will see we shall begin to talk to each
other. After that, it will be easy. Thirty fresh words, every day,
will be ample. In a month you will know seven or eight hundred; and
seven or eight hundred are enough for a man to talk with, on common
occasions."

"He is first rate," Bob reported to his sister, as they sat down to
dinner, at one o'clock. "You would hardly believe that I can say a
dozen little sentences, already; and can understand him, when he
says them. He says, in a week, we shall be able to get to talk
together.

"I wonder they don't teach Latin like that. Why, I shall know in
two or three months as much Spanish--and more, ever so much
more--than I do Latin, after grinding away at it for the last seven
or eight years."

"Well, that is satisfactory. I only hope the other will turn out as
well."

As Mrs. O'Halloran sat that evening, with her work in her hand, on
the terrace; with her husband, smoking a cigar, beside her. She
paused, several times, as she heard a burst of laughter.

"That doesn't sound like master and pupil," she said, sharply,
after an unusually loud laugh from below.

"More the pity, Carrie. Why on earth shouldn't a master be capable
of a joke? Do you think one does not learn all the faster, when the
lecture is pleasant? I know I would, myself. I never could see why
a man should look as if he was going to an execution, when he wants
to instil knowledge."

"But it is not usual, Gerald," Carrie remonstrated, no other
argument occurring to her.

"But that doesn't prove that it's wrong. Why a boy should be driven
