of people walkin' about London of a mornin' with nothin' whatever on
their shoulders.  Why, there was one man actually posted a cheque for 9
pounds, 15 shillings loose, in a pillar letter-box in Liverpool, without
even an envelope on it.  The owner was easily traced through the bank,
but was unable to explain how the cheque got out of his possession or
into the pillar.--Just listen to this, ma'am," he added, rising and
taking down a pamphlet from a bookshelf, "this is last year's Report.
Hear what it says:--

"`Nearly 28,500 letters were posted this year without addresses. 757 of
these letters were found to contain, in the aggregate, about 214 pounds
in cash and bank-notes, and about 9088 pounds in bills of exchange,
cheques, etcetera.'--Of course," said the letter-carrier, refreshing
himself with a mouthful of tea, "the money and bills were returned to
the senders, but it warn't possible to do the same with 52,856
postage-stamps which were found knocking about loose in the bottom of
the mail-bags."

"How many?" cried Miss Lillycrop, in amazement.

"Fifty-two thousand eight hundred and fifty-six," repeated Solomon with
deliberation.  "No doubt," he continued, "some of these stamps had bin
carelessly stuck on the envelopes, and some of 'em p'r'aps had come out
of busted letters which contained stamps sent in payment of small
accounts.  You've no idea, ma'am, what a lot o' queer things get mixed
up in the mail-bags out of bust letters and packages--all along of
people puttin' things into flimsy covers not fit to hold 'em.  Last year
no fewer than 12,525 miscellaneous articles reached the Returned Letter
Office (we used to call it the Dead Letter Office) without covers or
addresses, and the number of inquiries dealt with in regard to these
things and missing letters by that Office was over 91,000.

"We're very partickler, Miss Lillycrop, in regard to these things,"
continued Solomon, with a touch of pride.  "We keep books in which every
stray article, unaddressed, is entered and described minutely, so that
when people come howlin' at us for our carelessness in non-delivery, we
ask 'em to describe their missing property, and in hundreds of cases
prove to them their own carelessness in makin' up parcels by handin' the
wrecks over to 'em!"

"But what sort of things are they that break loose?" asked Miss
Lillycrop.

"Oh, many sorts.  Anything may break loose if it's ill packed, and, as
almost every sort of thing passes through the post, it would be
difficult to describe 'em all.  Here is a list, however, that may give
you an idea of what kind of things the public sent through our mail-bags
last year.  A packet of pudding, a steam-gauge, a tin of cream, a bird's
wing, a musical box, packet of snowdrops, fruit sweets, shrimps, and
sample potatoes; a dormouse, four white mice, two goldfinches, a lizard
and a blind-worm, all alive; besides cutlery, medicines, varnish,
ointments, perfumery, articles of dress; a stoat, a squirrel, fish,
leeches, frogs, beetles, caterpillars, and vegetables.  Of course, many
of these, such as live animals, being prohibited articles, were stopped
and sent to the Returned Letter Office, but were restored, on
application, to the senders."

Observing Miss Lillycrop's surprised expression of face, the old woman's
curiosity was roused.  "What's he haverin' aboot, my dear?" she asked of
May.

"About the many strange things that are sent through the post, Grannie."

"Ay, ay, likely enough," returned the old creature, shaking her head and
administering an unintentional cuff to the poor cat; "folk write a heap
o' lees noo-a-days, nae doot."

"You'd hardly believe it now," continued Solomon, turning the leaves of
the Report, "but it's a fact that live snakes have frequently been sent
through the post.  No later than last year a snake about a yard long
managed to get out of his box in one of the night mail sorting carriages
on the London and North-Western Railway.  After a good deal of confusion
and interruption to the work, it was killed.  Again, a small box was
sent to the Returned Letter Office in Liverpool, which, when opened, was
found to contain eight living snakes."

"Come now, Mr Flint," said May, "you mustn't bore my cousin with the
Post-Office.  You know that when you once begin on that theme there is
no stopping you."

"Very well, Miss May," returned the letter-carrier, with a modest smile,
"let's draw round the fire and talk of something else.--Hallo, Dollops!
clear away the dishes."

"But he doesn't bore me," protested Miss Lillycrop, who had the happy
knack of being intensely interested in whatever happened to interest her
friends.  "I like, of all things, to hear about the Post-Office.  I had
no idea it was such a wonderful institution.--Do tell me more about it,
Mr Flint, and never mind May's saucy remarks."

Much gratified by this appeal, Solomon wheeled the old woman to her own
corner of the fire, placed a stool under her feet, the cat on her knees,
and patted her shoulder, all of which attentions she received with a
kindly smile, and said that "Sol was a good laddie."

Meanwhile the rotund maid-of-all-work having, as it were, hurled the
crockery into her den, and the circle round the fire having been
completed, as well as augmented, by the sudden entrance of Phil
Maylands, the "good laddie" re-opened fire.

"Yes, ma'am, as you well observe, it _is_ a wonderful institution.  More
than that, it's a gigantic one, and it takes a big staff to do the duty
too.  In London alone the staff is 10,665.  The entire staff of the
kingdom is 13,763 postmasters, 10,000 clerks, and 21,000
letter-carriers, sorters, and messengers,--sum total, a trifle over
45,500.  Then, the total number of Post-offices and receptacles for
receiving letters throughout the kingdom is 25,000 odd.  Before the
introduction of the penny postage--in the year 1840--there were only
4500!  Then, again--"

"O Mr Flint! pray stop!" cried Miss Lillycrop, pressing her hands to
her eyes; "I never _could_ take in figures.  At least I never could keep
them in.  They just go in here, and come out there (pointing to her two
ears), and leave no impression whatever."

"You're not the only one that's troubled with that weakness, ma'am,"
said the gallant Solomon, "but if a few thousands puzzle you so much
what will you make of this?--The total number of letters, post-cards,
newspapers, etcetera, that passed through the Post-Offices of the
kingdom last year was fourteen hundred and seventy-seven million eight
hundred and twenty-eight thousand two hundred!  What d'ye make o' that,
ma'am?"

"Mr Flint, I just make nothing of it at all," returned Miss Lillycrop,
with a placid smile.

"Come, Phil," said May, laughing, "can _you_ make nothing of it?  You
used to be good at arithmetic."

"Well, now," said Phil, "it don't take much knowledge of arithmetic to
make something of that.  George Aspel happened to be talking to me about
that very sum not long ago.  He said he had been told by a man at the
Post-Office that it would take a man about a hundred and seventy years
to count it.  I tried the calculation, and found he was right.  Then I
made another calculation:--

"I put down the average length of an envelope at four inches, and I
found that if you were to lay fourteen hundred and seventy-seven million
letters out in a straight line, end to end, the lot would extend to
above 93,244 miles, which is more than three times the circumference of
the world.  Moreover, this number is considerably more than the
population of the whole world, which, at the present time, is about 1444
millions, so that if the British Post-Office were to distribute the 1477
millions of letters that pass through it in the year impartially, every
man, woman, and child on the globe would receive one letter, post-card,
newspaper, or book-packet, and leave thirty-three millions to spare!"

"Now, really, you _must_ stop this," said May; "I see that my cousin's
colour is going with her efforts to understand you.  Can't you give her
something more amusing to think of?"

"Oh, cer'nly," said Solomon, again turning with alacrity to the Report.
"Would you like to hear what some people think it's our dooty to attend
to?  I'll give you a letter or two received by our various departments."

Here the letter-carrier began to read the following letters, which we
give from the same Report, some being addressed to the "Chief of the
Dead Office," others to the Postmaster-General, etcetera.

"_May_ 18--.

"DEAR SIR,--I write to ask you for some information about finding out
persons who are missing--I want to find out my mother and sisters who
are in Melbourne in Australia i believe--if you would find out for me
please let me know by return of post, and also your charge at the
lowest, yours," etcetera.

"_Nov_. 8, 18--.

"Sir,--Not having received the live bullfinch mentioned by you as having
arrived at the Returned Letter Office two days ago, having been posted
as a letter contrary to the regulations of the Postal system, I now
write to ask you to have the bird fed and forwarded at once to ---, and
to apply for all fines and expenses to ---.  If this is not done, and I
do not receive the bird before the end of the week, I shall write to the
Postmaster-General, who is a very intimate friend of my father's, and
ask him to see that measures are taken against you for neglect.

"This is not an idle threat, so you will oblige by following the above
instructions."

"Wales, _Nov_. 12, 18--.

"DEAR SIR,--I am taking the liberty of writeing you those few lines as I
am given to understand that you do want men in New South Wales, and I am
a Smith by Trade; a single man.  My age is 24 next birthday.  I shood be
verry thankful if you would be so kind and send all the particulars by
return."

"London, _Nov_. 5, 18--.

"Sir,--i right to you and request of you sinsearly for to help me to
find out my husband.  I ham quite a stranger in London, only two months
left Ireland--i can find know trace of my husband--your the only
gentleman that I know that can help me to find him.  Thears is letters
goes to him to --- in his name and thears is letters comes to him to the
--- Post-Office for him.--Sir you may be sure that i ham low in spirit
in a strange contry without a friend.  I hope you will be so kind as not
to forget me.  Sir, I would never find --- for I would go astray,
besides i have no money."

"So you see, ma'am," continued Solomon, closing the Report, "much though
we do, more is expected of us.  But although we can't exactly comply
with such requests as these, we do a pretty stroke of business in other
ways besides letter-distributin'.  For instance, we are bankers on a
considerable scale.  Through our money-order agency the sum we
transmitted last year was a trifle over 27,870,000 pounds, while the
deposits in our Savings-Banks amounted to over 9,166,000 pounds.  Then
as to telegraphs: there were--But I forgot," said Solomon, checking
himself, "Miss May is the proper authority on that subject.--How many
words was it you sent last year?"

"I won't tell you," said May, with a toss of her little head.  "You have
already driven my cousin distracted.  She won't be able to walk home."

"My dear, I don't intend to walk home; I shall take a cab," said the
mild little woman.  "_Do_ tell me something about your department."

"No, cousin, I won't."

"Sure, if ye don't, I will," said Phil.

"Well then, I will tell you a very little just to save you from Phil,
who, if he once begins, will kill you with his calculations.  But you
can't appreciate what I say.  Let me see.  The total number of
telegraphic messages forwarded by our offices in the United Kingdom
during the last twelve months amounted to a little more than twenty-two
millions."

"Dear me!" said Miss Lillycrop, with that look and tone which showed
that if May had said twenty-two quintillions it would have had no
greater effect.

"There, that's enough," said May, laughing.  "I knew it was useless to
tell you."

"Ah, May!" said Phil, "that's because you don't know how to tell her.--
See here now, cousin Sarah.  The average length of a message is thirty
words.  Well, that gives 660 millions of words.  Now, a good average
story-book of 400 pages contains about ninety-six thousand words.
Divide the one by the other, and that gives you a magnificent library of
6875 volumes as the work done by the Postal Telegraphs every year.  All
these telegrams are kept for a certain period in case of inquiry, and
then destroyed."

"Phil, I must put on my things and go," exclaimed Miss Lillycrop,
rising.  "I've had quite as much as I can stand."

"Just cap it all with this, ma'am, to keep you steady," interposed
Solomon Flint;--"the total revenue of the Post-Office for the year was
six millions and forty-seven thousand pounds; and the expenditure three
millions nine hundred and ninety-one thousand.  Now, you may consider
yourself pretty well up in the affairs of the Post-Office."

The old 'ooman, awaking at this point with a start, hurled the cat under
the grate, and May laughingly led Miss Lillycrop into her little
boudoir.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

IN WHICH A BOSOM FRIEND IS INTRODUCED, RURAL FELICITY IS ENLARGED ON,
AND DEEP PLANS ARE LAID.

A bosom friend is a pleasant possession.  Miss Lillycrop had one.  She
was a strong-minded woman.  We do not say this to her disparagement.  A
strong mind is as admirable in woman as in man.  It is only when woman
indicates the strength of her mind by unfeminine self-assertion that we
shrink from her in alarm.  Miss Lillycrop's bosom friend was a
warm-hearted, charitable, generous, hard-featured, square-shouldered,
deep-chested, large-boned lady of middle age and quick temper.  She was
also in what is styled comfortable circumstances, and dwelt in a pretty
suburban cottage.  Her name was Maria Stivergill.

"Come with me, child," said Miss Stivergill to Miss Lillycrop one day,
"and spend a week at The Rosebud."

It must not be supposed that the good lady had given this romantic name
to her cottage.  No, when Miss Stivergill bought it, she found the name
on the two gate-posts; found that all the tradespeople in the vicinity
had imbibed it, and therefore quietly accepted it, as she did all the
ordinary affairs of life.

"Impossible, dear Maria," said her friend, with a perplexed look, "I
have so many engagements, at least so many duties, that--"

"Pooh!" interrupted Miss Stivergill.  "Put 'em off.  Fulfil 'em when you
come back.  At all events," she continued, seeing that Miss Lillycrop
still hesitated, "come for a night or two."

"But--"

"Come now, Lilly"--thus she styled her friend--"but give me no _buts_.
You know that you've no good reason for refusing."

"Indeed I have," pleaded Miss Lillycrop; "my little servant--"

"What, the infant who opened the door to me?"

"Yes, Tottie Bones; she is obliged to stay at nights with me just now,
owing to her mother, poor thing, being under the necessity of shutting
up her house while she goes to look after a drunken husband, who has
forsaken her."

"Hah!" exclaimed Miss Stivergill, giving a nervous pull at her left
glove, which produced a wide rent between the wrist and the thumb.  "I
wonder why women marry!"

"Don't you think it's a sort of--of--unavoidable necessity?" suggested
Miss Lillycrop, with a faint smile.

"Not at all, my dear, not at all.  I have avoided it.  So have you.  If
I had my way, I'd put a stop to marriage altogether, and bring this
miserable world to an abrupt close.--But little Bones is no difficulty:
we'll take her along with us."

"But, dear Maria--"

"Well, what further objections, Lilly?"

"Tottie has charge of a baby, and--"

"What! one baby in charge of another?"

"Indeed it is too true; and, you know, you couldn't stand a baby."

"Couldn't I?" said Miss Stivergill sharply.  "How d'you know that?  Let
me see it."

Tottie being summoned with the baby, entered the room staggering with
the rotund mountain of good-natured self-will entirely concealing her
person, with exception of her feet and the pretty little coal-dusted
arms with which she clasped it to her heaving breast.

"Ha!  I suppose little Bones is behind it," said Miss Stivergill.--"Set
the baby down, child, and let me see you."

Tottie obeyed.  The baby, true to his principles, refused to stand.  He
sat down and stared at those around him in jovial defiance.

"What is your age, little Bones?"

"Just turned six, m'm," replied Tottie, with a courtesy, which Miss
Lillycrop had taught her with great pains.

"You're sixty-six, at the least, compared with male creatures of the
same age," observed her interrogator.

"Thank you, m'm," replied Tottie, with another dip.

"Have you a bonnet and shawl, little Bones?"

Tottie, in a state of considerable surprise, replied that she had.

"Go and put 'em on then, and get that thing also ready to go out."

Miss Stivergill pointed to the baby contemptuously, as it were, with her
