loading-rods for their guns.  The shorter ones afford material for
mallets, drinking-cups, handles for small tools, and the like.  In
Abyssinia, and other parts of Northern Africa, where swords are in use,
sword-hilts are made from the horns of the rhinoceros.

The hide is also used for different purposes, among others for making
the whips known as "jamboks," though hippopotamus-hide is superior.

The skin of the African rhinoceros, as already stated, is without the
plaits, folds, and scutellae, that characterise its Asiatic congener,
yet it is far from being a soft one.  It is so thick and difficult to
pierce, that a bullet of ordinary lead will sometimes flatten upon it.
To ensure its penetrating, the lead must be hardened with solder.

The rhinoceros, though not a water animal, like the hippopotamus, is
nevertheless fond of that element, and is rarely found at a great
distance from it.  All four kinds love to lie and wallow in mud, just as
hogs in a summer's day; and they are usually seen coated all over with
this substance.  During the day they may be observed lying down or
standing under the shade of some thick mimosa-tree, either asleep or in
a state of easy indolence; and it is during the night that they wander
about in search of food and water.  If approached from the lee side they
can easily be got at, as their small sparkling eyes do not serve them
well.  On the contrary, if the hunter go to windward, they will scent
him at a great distance, as their sense of smell is most acute.  If
their eyes were only as keen as their nostrils, it would be a dangerous
game to attack them, for they can run with sufficient rapidity to
overtake a horse in the first charge.

In charging and running, the black variety far excels the white.  They
are easily avoided, however, by the hunter springing quickly to one
side, and letting them rush blindly on.

The black rhinoceros is about six feet high at the shoulder, and full
thirteen in length; while the white kinds are far larger.  The "kobaoba"
is full seven feet high, and fourteen in length!

No wonder that an animal of these extraordinary dimensions was at first
sight taken for the elephant.  In fact, the kobaoba rhinoceros is the
quadruped next to the elephant in size; and with his great muzzle--full
eighteen inches broad--his long clumsy head, his vast ponderous body,
this animal impresses one with an idea of strength and massive grandeur
as great, and some say greater than the elephant himself.  He looks,
indeed, like a caricature of the elephant.  It was not such a bad
mistake, then, when our people by the wagon took the "kobaoba" for the
"mighty elephant."

Swartboy, however, set them all right by declaring that the animal they
saw was the white rhinoceros.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

A HEAVY COMBAT.

When they first saw the kobaoba, he was, as stated, just coming out of
the thicket.  Without halting, he headed in the direction of the vley
already mentioned; and kept on towards it, his object evidently being to
reach the water.

This little lake, of course, owed its existence to the spring--though it
was full two hundred yards from the latter--and about the same from the
great tree.  It was nearly circular in shape, and about one hundred
yards in diameter, so that its superficial area would thus be a little
over two English acres.  It merited, then, the name of "lake;" and by
that name the young people already called it.

On its upper side--that in the direction of the spring--its shore was
high, and in one or two places rocky, and these rocks ran back to the
spring along the channel of a little rivulet.  On the west or outer side
of the lake the land lay lower, and the water at one or two points
lipped up nearly to the level of the plain.  For this reason it was,
that upon that side, the bank was paddled all over with tracks of
animals that had been to drink.  Hendrik the hunter had observed among
them the footprints of many kinds he knew nothing about.

It was for the lower end of the lake the kobaoba was making--no doubt
with him an old and favourite drinking-place.

There was a point where the water was easier of access than elsewhere--a
little to one side of where the wash or waste-stream of the lake ran
out.  It was a sort of cove with bright sandy beach, and approachable
from the plain by a miniature gorge, hollowed out, no doubt, by the long
usage of those animals who came to drink at the vley.  By entering this
cove, the tallest animals might get deep water and good bottom, so that
they could drink without much straining or stooping.  The kobaoba came
on in a direct line for the lake; and as he drew near, they could see
him heading for the gorge that led into the little cove.  It proved he
had been there before.

Next moment he passed through the gap, and stood knee-deep in the water.

After swallowing several copious draughts--now sneezing, and then
wheezing--he plunged his broad snout, horn and all, into the water,
tossed it till it foamed, and then lying down in it, commenced wallowing
like a hog.

The place was shallow, and most of his huge body was above the surface--
though there was deep enough water in the lake to have given him a bath
had he desired it.

The first thought of Von Bloom, as well as of Hendrik, was how to
"circumvent" the rhinoceros, and of course destroy him.  Not that they
simply wished his destruction; but Swartboy had already represented what
fine food the species was, and there was no stock of provision in camp.
Hendrik had another object in wishing the death of the creature.  He
wanted a new loading-rod for his rifle; and he had gazed covetously at
the kobaoba's long horn.

But it was easier to desire the death of the rhinoceros than to
accomplish it.  They had no horses--at least none that could be
mounted--and to attack the animal on foot would be a game as dangerous
as idle.  He would be like enough to impale one of them on his great
spike, or else trample them brutally under his huge feet.  If he did not
do one or the other, he would easily make his escape--as any kind of
rhinoceros can outrun a man.

How were they to manage him then?

Perhaps they might get near--fire at him from an ambush, and with a
lucky shot stretch him out.  A single bullet sometimes kills the
rhinoceros--but only when correctly placed, so as to penetrate the
heart, or some other of the "vitals."

This was, probably, the best plan.  They might easily get near enough.
There was some bush cover close to the spot.  It was probable the old
kobaoba would not perceive them, if they approached from leeward,
particularly as he seemed in the full tide of enjoyment at that moment.

They were about to attempt the approach, and had got to their feet for
that purpose, when a sudden fit seemed to have attacked Swartboy.  The
latter commenced jumping over the ground, at the same time muttering in
a low voice,--

"Da klow! da klow!"

A stranger would have fancied Swartboy in a fit, but Von Bloom knew that
by "Da klow! da klow!" the Bushman meant "The elephant! the elephant!"
and therefore looked in the direction in which Swartboy was pointing.

Sure enough, upon the western plain, looming up against the yellow sky,
was a dark mass, that upon examination presented the outlines of an
elephant.  Its rounded back was easily distinguished over the low
bushes; and its broad hanging ears were moving as it marched.  All saw
at a glance that it was coming towards the lake, and almost in the same
track that the rhinoceros had taken.

Of course this new apparition quite disarranged the plans of the
hunters.  At sight of the mighty elephant, they scarce any longer gave a
thought to the kobaoba.  Not that they had formed any very great hopes
of being able to kill the gigantic animal, yet some such thought was
running through their minds.  They had determined to try, at all events.

Before they could agree upon any plan, however, the elephant had got up
to the edge of the lake.  Though moving only at a slow walk, with his
immense strides he soon measured off a large quantity of ground, and
advanced much more rapidly than one would have supposed.  The hunters
had scarce time to exchange thoughts, before the huge creature was up
within a few yards of the water.

Here he halted, pointed his proboscis in different directions, stood
quite silent, and seemed to listen.

There was no noise to disturb him--even the kobaoba for the moment was
quiet.

After standing a minute or so, the huge creature moved forward again,
and entered the gorge already described.

They at the camp had now a full view of him, at less than three hundred
yards distance.  An immense mass he seemed.  His body quite filled the
gorge from side to side, and his long yellow tusks projecting more than
two yards from his jaws, curved gracefully upward.  He was an "old
bull," as Swartboy whispered.

Up to this time the rhinoceros had not had the slightest intimation of
the elephant's approach; for the tread of the latter--big beast as he
is--is as silent as a cat's.  It is true that a loud rumbling noise like
distant thunder proceeded from his inside as he moved along; but the
kobaoba was in too high a caper just then to have heard or noticed any
sound that was not very near and distinct.

The huge body of the elephant coming suddenly into "his sunshine," and
flinging its dark shadow over the vley, was distinct enough, and caused
the kobaoba to get to his feet with an agility quite surprising for a
creature of his build.

At the same time a noise, something between a grunt and a whistle
escaped him, as the water was ejected from his nostrils.

The elephant also uttered his peculiar salute in a trumpet note, that
echoed from the cliffs and halted in his tracks as soon as he saw the
rhinoceros.

No doubt both were surprised at the rencontre as both stood for some
seconds eyeing each other with apparent astonishment.

This, however, soon gave place to a different feeling.  Symptoms of
anger began to show themselves.  It was evident that bad blood was
brewing between them.

There was, in fact, a little dilemma.  The elephant could not get
comfortably at the water unless the rhinoceros left the cove; and the
rhinoceros could not well get out of the cove, so long as the elephant
blocked up the gorge with his immense thick limbs.

It is true, the kobaoba might have sneaked through among the other's
legs, or he might have swum off and landed at some other point, and in
either way have left the coast clear.

But of all animals in the world a rhinoceros is, perhaps, the most
unaccommodating.  He is, also, one of the most fearless, dreading
neither man nor beast--not even the boasted lion, whom he often chases
like a cat.  Hence the old kobaoba had no intention of yielding ground
to the elephant; and from his attitude, it was plain that he neither
intended to sneak off under the other's belly, nor swim a single stroke
for him.  No--not a stroke.

It remained to be seen how the point of honour was to be decided.  The
attitude of affairs had become so interesting, that every one by the
camp was gazing with fixed eyes upon the two great bulls--for the
rhinoceros was also a "bull" and of the largest size known of his kind.

For several minutes they stood eyeing each other.  The elephant,
although much the larger, knew his antagonist well.  He had met his
"sort" before, and knew better than to despise his powers.  Perhaps, ere
now, he had had a touch of that long spit-like excrescence that stood
out from the kobaoba's snout.

At all events, he did not rush upon his adversary at once--as he would
have done on some poor antelope that might have crossed him in the same
way.

His patience, however, became exhausted.  His ancient dignity was
insulted--his rule disputed--he wished to have his bath and his drink--
he could bear the insolence of the rhinoceros no longer.

With a bellow that made the rocks ring again, he charged forward; placed
his tusks firmly under the shoulder of his adversary,--gave a mighty
"lift," and turned the rhinoceros over in the water!

For a moment the latter plunged, and blowed, and snorted, his head half
under water; but in a second's time he was on his feet again, and
charging in turn.  The spectators could see that he aimed right at the
elephant's ribs with his horn, and that the latter did all he could to
keep head towards him.

Again the elephant flung the kobaoba, and again the latter rose and
charged madly upon his huge antagonist; and so both fought until the
water around them was white with foam.

The contest was carried on _in_ the water, until the elephant, seeming
to think his adversary had an advantage there, backed himself into the
gorge, and stood waiting with his head towards the lake.  In this
position the sides of the gorge did not protect him, as perhaps he
fancied.  They were too low, and his broad flanks rose far above them.
They only kept him from turning round, and this interfered with the
freedom of his movements.

It could scarce have been design in the rhinoceros to act as he now did,
though it appeared so to those who were watching.  As the elephant took
up his position in the gorge, the kobaoba clambered out upon the bank;
and then, wheeling suddenly, with head to the ground and long horn
projected horizontally, the latter rushed upon his antagonist and struck
him right among the ribs.  The spectators saw that the horn penetrated,
and the loud scream that came from the elephant, with the quick motions
of his trunk and tail, told plainly that he had received a severe wound.
Instead of standing any longer in the gorge he rushed forward, and did
not stop until he was knee-deep in the lake.  Drawing the water up into
his trunk, he raised it on high, and pointing it backwards, he
discharged large volumes over his body, and upon the spot where he had
received the thrust of the kobaoba's horn.

He then ran out of the lake, and charged about in search of the
rhinoceros; but long-horn was nowhere to be found!

Having escaped from the cove without compromising his dignity, and
perhaps believing that he had gained the victory, the rhinoceros, as
soon as he delivered the thrust, had galloped off and disappeared among
the bushes.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE DEATH OF THE ELEPHANT.

The battle between these two large quadrupeds did not continue for more
than ten minutes.  During that time the hunters made no advance towards
attacking either of them--so much absorbed were they in watching the
novel contest.  It was only after the rhinoceros had retreated, and the
elephant returned to the water, that they once more began to deliberate
on some plan of assaulting this mightiest of African animals.  Hans now
laid hold of his gun and joined them.

The elephant, after looking about for his enemy had got back, and was
standing knee-deep in the lake.  He appeared restless and highly
excited.  His tail was continually in motion, and at intervals he
uttered a piercing melancholy scream--far different to the usual
trumpet-like bellow of his voice.  He lifted his huge limbs, and then
plunged them back again to the bottom, until the foam gathered upon the
water with his continued churning.

But the oddest of his actions was the manner in which he employed his
long tubular trunk.  With this he sucked up vast volumes of water, and
then pointing it backwards ejected the fluid over his back and
shoulders, as if from an immense syringe.  This shower-bath he kept
repeating time after time, though it was evident he was not at his ease.

They all knew he was angry.  Swartboy said it would be exceedingly
dangerous to be seen by him at that moment, without having a horse to
gallop out of his way.  On this account every one of them had concealed
themselves behind the trunk of the nwana-tree, Von Bloom peeping past
one side, and Hendrik the other, in order to watch his movements.

Notwithstanding the danger, they at length resolved to attack him.  They
believed that if they did not do so soon, he would walk off, and leave
them supperless--for they had hoped to sup upon a slice of his trunk.
Time, therefore, had grown precious, and they resolved to attack him
without further ado.

They intended to creep as near as was safe.  All three would fire
together, and then lie close in the bushes until they saw the effect of
their shots.

Without further parley, Von Bloom, Hans, and Hendrik, leaving the tree,
crept through the bushes towards the western end of the lake.  It was
not a continuous thicket, but only an assemblage of copses and clumps,
so that they required to steal very cautiously from one to the other.
Von Bloom led the way, while the boys kept in his tracks, following him
