that he is the wisest, and if not the most talented, which we don't say
he is, that he makes the best use of the talents he has got.  You must
come and see him one of these days; I would say at once; but I think
that you will like him, and that he will like you better by and by.  I
wrote to him about you, I must confess that, and he put me up to some of
the advice I gave you.  My brothers and I always write to him just as we
write to one another; indeed, we generally pass our letters on to him,
because we know that he likes to hear everything that we are doing.  We
have no secrets from him, as I find some fellows here have.  We always
go to him for advice about everything.  He often tells us to act as we
think best, and to let him know what we have done.  Sometimes he tells
us that he thinks we have acted very judiciously; at other times he
tells us that, from the judgment he has been able to form, we ought to
have done differently.  He has never kept us in what might be called
leading-strings; but has placed the same confidence in us that we do in
him--that is to say, he knows we want to do what is right.  Depend on
it, Ellis, there is nothing like having the most perfect confidence
between your father and yourself.  I assure you that I should be
miserable if I had not, and if I did not believe that he is the best
friend I have on earth, or ever shall have."

Bracebridge said a great deal more to the same effect.  Indeed, whenever
he got on the subject of his father's excellences, he was always
enthusiastic.  Not without ample reason, I believe, for Mr Bracebridge
was a man possessed of very rare qualities; and Oaklands, his place, was
one of the most delightful houses to visit at in the country, or
probably, in all England; that is to say, young men and boys, and indeed
young people, generally, found it so.  Ernest knew that it would do poor
Ellis a great deal of good to go there.  From what he could make out,
Ellis's father and mother were advanced in life and great invalids, and
Edward, their only son, had been considerably over-petted and
over-coddled, though, as they had a good deal of sense with regard to
many important matters, they had not spoilt him.  They had corrected him
as a child when he deserved it, and watching the growth of bad
propensities, had endeavoured to eradicate them before they had attained
any size.  They were themselves very shy, diffident people, and thinking
little of themselves, thought very little of their son, and brought him
up to think very little of himself.  Certainly, if they erred, they
erred on the right side.

Ellis was not weak; he was not a boy at all likely to be imposed upon by
a bad person; his principles were, as far as could be seen, good, and
his sympathies appeared to be always on the right side.  Thus he was
undoubtedly particularly fortunate in falling in with a boy like Ernest
Bracebridge, whom he could admire, and who could, at the same time,
enter into his feelings, and take an interest in him.  Still Ernest did
not think that he was doing anything out of the way in encouraging him.
There was something so natural and unpretending about his character, and
so free was he from anything like conceit or vanity, that he was
scarcely conscious that he was superior to his companions; or, if he was
conscious of the fact, that it was anything on which he should be
justified in priding himself.  Of one thing I am sure, that he had not
found out that, by his own force of character and talents, he had
already become one of the most popular boys in the school, and that, had
he made the experiment, he would have had more followers than any boy
even in the first class.  The way he had tackled Blackall the evening of
the kite-race had become known, though neither he nor Ellis had talked
of it; and this gained him many admirers, especially among those over
whom the bully was accustomed to tyrannise.  At last Blackall began to
be twitted with it, even by the fellows of his own age.  It became at
last a joke among his compeers to ask him how his ears were--how he
liked to have an old man of the woods on his back, and how he could
allow himself to be thrashed by a fellow half a head shorter than
himself, and so much younger.  He dared not attack either Ernest or
Ellis openly, but he resolved to take his revenge on them as soon as
possible.  He had not long to wait for an opportunity.  Before our
drilling lessons were over, Sergeant Dibble used to arm us all with
basket-hilted sticks, which served the purpose of broadswords; and,
forming in two parties on opposite sides of the parade-ground, we were
ordered to advance and attack, and defend ourselves, delivering or
receiving so many cuts each time the two lines passed each other.
Blackall, who prided himself on being a good swordsman, thought this
would be a fine opportunity for inflicting a severe revenge on
Bracebridge, whom he dared not now bully as formerly, and kick and cuff
whenever he met him.

"Now, young gentlemen, prepare for the broadsword exercise," the
Sergeant sung out in his clear, sharp voice.  "Fall in line; fall in!"

Ellis had begun to learn the broadsword exercise, though it was a sore
trial to him, for he found great difficulty in recollecting the proper
guards or strokes, and he was always receiving some severe cuts across
the head or shoulders or legs, and getting into trouble by giving the
wrong strokes, and making his opponents, who were not prepared for them,
suffer accordingly.  Bracebridge had hit upon a plan to save him
somewhat from this, by taking him as his opponent; and when he saw him
making the wrong stroke, he was ready with the proper guard; and when he
saw that Ellis had not his right guard, he either hit him softly, or hit
at the guard presented to him.  This was very good practice to Ernest,
though it made Sergeant Dibble sing out, every now and then--

"Mr Bracebridge!  Mr Bracebridge! can you never remember to listen to
the word of command, sir?  When I say cut two, I often see you cut four;
and when I say third guard, you are apt to use the first or second
guard.  How is this, sir?  Mr Ellis, you are not attentive either, sir,
permit me to observe.  When I say defend, draw up the hand smartly, and
from the first guard.  Be smart!--second guard! third guard!  Remember,
if you have a big, ugly fellow, with a sword sharp enough to divide a
bolster, who happens to wish to cut your head off, he doesn't stop to
consider which is the right guard to make, or thrust to deliver.  He'd
whip off your head before you had time to look round, and then what
would you think of yourself, I should like to know?"

Ernest never replied, while exercising, to these or any similar remarks,
but he and Sergeant Dibble soon understood each other, and the Sergeant
was convinced that Ernest was a better swordsman than he had supposed.

"But, Mr Bracebridge, it will never do to let Mr Ellis go on in that
way.  Now that he has a little more confidence, we must make him run his
chance with the rest," he urged.  "A few cuts with a hazel stick won't
do him any harm, and will make him open his eyes a little."

To this, of course, Ernest agreed, and the present day was one of the
first poor Ellis had to look out for himself.

Blackall had meantime watched Ernest; and hearing him found fault with,
and seeing him and Ellis make a mess of it, as he thought, he held his
swordsmanship in very low estimation.  This made him confident that he
could do what he liked with him.  It required some management to get
placed opposite to him, but he succeeded, and felt highly delighted at
the thoughts of the revenge he was about to enjoy.

"Draw swords, gentlemen;" sung out Sergeant Dibble.  "Both parties
advance.  Mr Jones's party assault with the second cut; Mr Smith's
defend with the second guard.  Now hit hard and sharp, gentlemen.  If
the proper guards are up you can do no harm."  Blackall was in the
Jones's party, and purposed fully to carry out the order.  Bracebridge
saw that he was opposite to him, and assumed a look of perfect
indifference.  The bully expected to see him turning pale and looking
alarmed.  "March!" sung out the Sergeant.  "Double quick!"

On rushed the two squadrons, for so they could not help fancying
themselves, and, as I believe, the Sergeant for the moment fancied them
also.  They met with a hostile clash.  Blackall, not knowing that the
Sergeant's eye was on him, shifted to the third cut, hoping to give
Ernest a severe blow across the legs, but Ernest's eye was as quick as
his, and catching the movement of the arm, he had the third guard ready
to receive the blow.

The Sergeant made no remark, but kept a watch on Blackall's movements,
"Very well, gentlemen; very well!" he exclaimed.  "Now let Mr Smith's
party assault with the fourth cut.  Bravo! performed with perfect
precision."  And so he went on.  Each time, however, that Jones's
division had to assault, he saw that Blackall endeavoured to take some
undue advantage of Ernest, who with equal regularity contrived quietly
to foil him.  Ernest kept his eye on his opponent's, but said nothing,
and in no other way showed that he was aware of his evil intentions.
Blackall at length began to lose his temper at his own failures: he
ground his teeth and turned savage glances towards Bracebridge, who met
them with a quiet look, free, at the same time, from scorn or anger.
Not once did Blackall succeed in inflicting a blow, and though Ernest at
last might have bestowed several very severe ones, he rightly refrained
from so doing.

"I know perfectly well that even had he hit me, I ought not to have hit
him back," he said to himself; "much more then ought I to refrain when
he has not succeeded in his object.  I should like to try the plan of
heaping coals of fire on his head.  I might soften him, but I should
have less hope with him than with any one.  I will try.  It matters not
what may happen to me, but I am resolved, at the same time, I will not
let him go on bullying any fellow whom I can defend."  When the drill
was over, Sergeant Dibble called up Ernest.

"I saw it all, sir," he said.  "You did capitally.  I never saw a young
gentleman keep his temper as you did.  Why he wants to hurt you I don't
know, but I will put you up to a trick or two which will place him in
your power.  You are getting on famously with your fencing.  He piques
himself on being a first-rate fencer.  He is not bad; and he does very
well when he fences with Mr Jay, or any one he knows.  Now, though I do
not teach fencing, I can fence; and, what is more, I have learned
several tricks which people do not generally know.  I once saved a
wounded Frenchman's life and took him prisoner, and nursed him as I
ought to have done, and then I found he was a master of the science of
defence and attack.  I never saw a man who could use a small sword as he
did.  Well, as a mark of his gratitude, he taught me all he knew, and,
especially, how to disarm an opponent.  It is simple, but requires
practice.  There is no one in the fencing-room; come with me there and I
will show it to you.  Practise the trick till I come again, whenever you
have an opportunity, either by yourself or with a friend you can trust,
like Ellis or Buttar.  I'll answer for it that you will be perfect in a
couple of weeks at most.  If you lead Blackall to it, he is certain to
challenge you before long.  Disarm him three times running, and I do not
think that he'll ever wish to attack you again in any way."

Ernest could not resist the offer the Sergeant made him.  He thought
that the knowledge might be of the greatest importance to him during his
life, so he at once went with the Sergeant into the fencing-room.  "You
see, Mr Bracebridge," observed his instructor, "if you had a real sword
in your hand, you would give your opponent such a cut round the wrist
that he would probably be unable to hold a weapon again for many a month
afterwards."

Ernest set to work at once in his usual way, and Sergeant Dibble taking
great pains to instruct him, he quickly acquired the trick.

"You see, sir," observed the Sergeant, "though a foil does not cut, the
button, if the leather is off, as I often see is the case, will give a
very ugly scratch round the wrist, and if this is repeated two or three
times, a fencer will rather stand clear of the man who can do it.  Just
do you try it on Blackall, and you'll see if my word don't come right."

After the Sergeant was gone, Ernest thought over what he had said.  He
did not, however, half like the idea of taking the advantage which had
been given him over Blackall.

"No, no!" he exclaimed to himself.  "I'll tell him beforehand what I am
going to do.  If I was going to engage with him in mortal combat, the
matter would be different; I should feel as if I was going to commit a
murder; but now I feel as if I was going to inflict on him a very
deserved punishment and take down his pride a little."  So Ernest set to
work, and practised the trick Sergeant Dibble had taught him.  After a
day or two he took Buttar and Ellis into his confidence, and they all
practised it together.  Ellis, however, could not manage to accomplish
the turn of the wrist in a way to be effective, but Buttar, who had
resolved to be a soldier, and took a deep interest in all military
exercises, was never weary in practising it.  When Sergeant Dibble came
again, he told Ernest that he would be perfect in another week, and
complimented Buttar also on his proficiency.

Ellis, meantime, was making great advances in the use of the broadsword,
and the Sergeant assured him that if he would go on and persevere, he
would very soon be far superior to many idle fellows who now sneered at
him, and would not practise unless the master was present.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A FISHING EXPEDITION.

"I say, Bracebridge, we must try our new rod before we break up," said
Ellis, one Saturday, just before the boys were going in to dinner.
"It's a capital afternoon for fishing, cloudy and soft.  I'll see about
bait if you will promise to come.  Buttar and Bouldon say they will, and
so will Gregson; so we shall be a jolly party, and shall gain something
even if we don't catch fish."  Ernest, who always appeared to have more
spare time than any one else, consented to go, provided he had
half-an-hour's reading after dinner, to get up some work.  Ellis had
learned to be almost as eager as his friend in anything he was about.
He now hurried off to send Jim, a lame boy, who was allowed to go on
errands for the young gentlemen, to prepare the baits for the
fishing-party.  They all assembled at the appointed hour, with capital
rods in hand, with the exception of Gregson, who declared that he always
made his own rods, and that his, though uncouth in appearance, would
catch as many fish as all the rest put together.  The young fishermen
had very little excuse for not catching fish.  There was a large pond,
about two miles off, with a clear full stream running into it.  In the
stream were trout, grayling, roach, and dace, and the pond was full of
fine carp, and tench, and perch, while occasionally the other fish from
the stream condescended to swim into it.  The fishing belonged to a
gentleman in the neighbourhood, who took a great interest in the Doctor
and his school, and always allowed a dozen boys at a time to fish there.
They had to go to the Doctor or one of the masters for leave, and as
seldom more than a dozen wished to go at a time, it was not often that
any were disappointed.  Off they set, with their fishing-rods over their
shoulders, singing away as merrily as crickets.  There were one or two
ponds and streams in the way, where they proposed to try their fortune
for a few minutes, as it was reported that sometimes very fine fish were
caught in them.  The first they came to was a quiet dark pond, shaded by
trees.  Gregson declared that he thought it must be full of fish, and he
was considered an authority on such matters.  Ellis, who knew also a
good deal about fishing, rather doubted that such was the case.

"Come and try," said Gregson; "there is no great harm in doing that, at
all events."  Gregson prevailed, and no one perceived a quiet chuckle in
the tone of his voice.  He persuaded them all to fish with very small
hooks and red worms, which he gave them.  They had not fished long
before Bouldon exclaimed, "I've a bite, I've a bite!"  His float began
to bob; down it went, and up he whisked his rod.  "A fine fish," he
cried out; "but, hillo, it has legs--four legs, I declare!  Why, it's a
monster; a terrible monster.  Hillo!  Ellis, Gregson, Buttar, come and
help me.  Will it bite, I wonder?"  Gregson ran laughing up to Bouldon
to see what was the matter.

"Why, it is a water-newt!" he exclaimed.  "A harmless, curious little
creature--there, don't hurt it!  It has not swallowed the hook.  I'll
put it into my basket and take it home.  It will live in a tub of water
for a long time.  Look! it is something like a lizard, but it has a flat
tail made for swimming.  What curious little feet and legs!  Now, though
the newt has four legs, it lays eggs; and to guard them from injury,
wraps them up in the leaves of water plants, with its four paws.  When
the young newt is hatched, it is very like a tadpole.  It is like a
fish, for it breathes through gills; but as it increases in size the
gills go away and the front legs appear, and then the hind ones.  In a
frog-tadpole the hind legs appear first, and then the front ones."

"Curious sort of fellows," observed Tom Bouldon, who had been listening
attentively to Gregson's account; "but, I say, I thought fellows, when
they grew bigger, took to gills instead of throwing them aside."

"Oh!  Tommy, Tommy, what a pun!" was the general cry.

"What a good pun, or what a bad one?" asked Bouldon with perfect
simplicity.  "But, I say, Gregson, are there any other fish but your
friends, the newts, in this pond, do you think? because if there are
not, I vote we move on."

"I never heard of any; but I wanted a newt, and so I proposed that we
should fish here."

On hearing this, there was a general proposal that he should be left
behind to catch newts by himself; but he promised faithfully to show
them where the best fish were to be caught, if they would forgive him.
On these conditions he very easily obtained pardon for his trick.

"I say, did you ever catch a fresh-water lobster?" asked Gregson.  No
one had, and no one believed that there was such a thing.  "I'll soon
show you one," said Gregson; and when they came to a shallow stream with
highish banks, pulled off his shoes and stockings, tucked up the sleeves
of his shirt and the legs of his trousers, and was soon busy feeling
under the banks, just below water.

"Why, he has got one; he has indeed!" shouted Bouldon, as Gregson
produced, by the antennae, a crayfish, which, to prevent himself from
being bitten, he caught by the back; its claws, though they stretched
wide open, as if they had the cramp very badly, being utterly harmless.

"This is a Crustacea," cried Gregson, holding him up in pride; "and if
not a lobster, it may well be called one.  I have often caught two or
three dozens of them, and found them capital for tea or breakfast.  In
my opinion, if a person has his senses about him, and will but study
natural history, he would be able to live entirely on the herbs and
