
"You'd better stand a little way back, ma'am."

Mrs Marrot obediently retreated to a safe distance.  Then the stalwart
men threw open the furnace door.  Mrs Marrot exclaimed, almost
shrieked, with surprise at the intense light which gushed forth, casting
even the modified daylight of the place into the shade.  The proceedings
of the stalwart men thereafter were in Mrs Marrot's eyes absolutely
appalling--almost overpowering,--but Mrs M was tough both in mind and
body.  She stood her ground.  Several of the men seized something inside
the furnace with huge pincers, tongs, forceps--whatever you choose to
call them--and drew partly out an immense rudely shaped bar or _log_ of
glowing irons thicker than a man's thigh.  At the same time a great
chain was put underneath it, and a crane of huge proportions thereafter
sustained the weight of the glowing metal.  By means of this crane it
was drawn out of the furnace and swung round until its glowing head or
end came close to the tongue before mentioned.  Then some of the
stalwart men grasped several iron handles, which were affixed to the
cool end of the bar, and prepared themselves to act.  A signal was given
to a man who had not hitherto been noticed, he was so small in
comparison with the machine on which he stood--perhaps it would be
better to say to which he stuck, because he was perched on a little
platform about seven or eight feet from the ground, which was reached by
an iron ladder, and looked down on the men who manipulated the iron bar
below.

On receiving the signal, this man moved a small lever.  It cost him no
effort whatever, nevertheless it raised the iron tongue about six feet
in the air, revealing the fact that it had been resting on another
square block of iron embedded in the earth.  This latter was the anvil.
On the anvil the end of the white-hot bar was immediately laid.  Another
signal was given, and down came the "five-carts-of-coals weight" with a
thud that shook the very earth, caused the bar partially to flatten as
if it had been a bit of putty, and sent a brilliant shower of sparks
over the whole place.  Mrs Marrot clapped both hands on her face, and
capped the event with a scream.  As for Bob, he fairly shouted with
delight.

Blow after blow was given by this engine, and as each blow fell the
stalwart men heaved on the iron handles and turned the bar this way and
that way, until it was pounded nearly square.  By this time Mrs Marrot
had recovered so far as to separate her fingers a little, and venture to
peep from behind that protecting screen.  By degrees the unwieldy mass
of misshapen metal was pounded into a cylindrical form, and Will Garvie
informed his friends that this was the beginning of the driving-axle of
a locomotive.  Pointing to several of those which had been already
forged, each having two enormous iron projections on it which were
afterwards to become the cranks, he said--

"You'll see how these are finished, in another department."

But Mrs Marrot and Bob paid no attention to him.  They were fascinated
by the doings of the big hammer, and especially by the cool quiet way in
which the man with the lever caused it to obey his will.  When he moved
the lever up or down a little, up or down went the hammer a little; when
he moved it a good deal the hammer moved a good deal; when he was
gentle, the hammer was gentle; when he gave a violent push, the hammer
came down with a crash that shook the whole place.  He could cause it to
plunge like lightning to within a hair's-breadth of the anvil and check
it instantaneously so that it should not touch.  He could make it pat
the red metal lovingly, or pound it with the violence of a fiend.
Indeed, so quick and sympathetic were all the movements of that
steam-hammer that it seemed as though it were gifted with intelligence,
and were nervously solicitous to act in prompt obedience to its master's
will.  There were eleven steam-hammers of various sizes in this
building, with a staff of 175 men to attend to them, half of which staff
worked during the day, and half during the night--besides seven smaller
steam-hammers in the smiths' shops and other departments.

With difficulty Will Garvie tore his friends away from the big hammer;
but he could not again chain their attention to anything else, until he
came to the pair of scissors that cut iron.  With this instrument Mrs
Marrot at first expressed herself disappointed.  It was not like a pair
of scissors at all, she said, and in this she was correct, for the
square clumsy-looking blunt-like mass of iron, about five feet high and
broad, which composed a large portion of it, was indeed very unlike a
pair of scissors.

"Why, mother," exclaimed Bob, "you didn't surely expect to see two large
holes in it for a giant's thumb and fingers, did you?"

"Well, but," said Mrs Marrot, "it ain't got no blades that I can see."

"I'll let 'ee see 'em, Missis, in a minute," said a workman who came up
at that moment with a plate of iron more than a quarter of an inch
thick.  "Turn it on, Johnny."

A small boy turned on the steam, the machine moved, and Will Garvie
pointed out to Mrs Marrot the fact that two sharp edges of steel in a
certain part of it crossed each other exactly in the manner of a pair of
scissors.

"Well," remarked Mrs M, after contemplating it for some time, "it don't
look very like scissors, but I'm free to confess that them two bits of
iron _do_ act much in the same way."

"And with the same result, Missus," observed the machine-man, putting
the plate between the clippers, which, closing quietly, snipped off
about a foot of iron as if it had been paper.  There was, however, a
crunching sound which indicated great power, and drew from Mrs Marrot
an exclamation of surprise not altogether unmingled with alarm.

The man then seized a bit of iron about as thick as his own wrist--full
an inch and a half in diameter--which the scissors cut up into lengths
of eighteen inches or so as easily as if it had been a bar of lead or
wood.

"Didn't I say it could cut through the poker, mother?" cried Bob with a
look of triumph.

"The poker, boy! it could cut poker, tongs, shovel, and fender, all at
once!" replied Mrs Marrot--"well, I never! can it do anything else?"

In reply to this the man took up several pieces of hard steel, which it
snipped through as easily as it had cut the iron.

But if Mrs Marrot's surprise at the scissors was great, not less great
was it at the punching machine, which punched little buttons the size of
a sixpence out of cold iron full half-an-inch thick.  This vicious
implement not only punched holes all round boiler-plates so as to permit
of their being riveted together, but it cut patterns out of thick iron
plates by punching rows of such holes so close to each other that they
formed one long cutting, straight or crooked, as might be required.  In
short, the punching machine acted the part of a saw, and cut the iron
plates in any shape that was desired.  Here also they saw the testing of
engine springs--those springs which to most people appear to have no
spring in them whatever--so very powerful are they.  One of these was
laid on an iron table, with its two ends resting against an iron plate.
A man approached and measured it exactly.  Then a hydraulic ram was
applied; and there was something quite impressive in the easy quiet way,
in which the ram shoved a spring, which the weight of a locomotive can
scarcely affect, _quite_ _flat_ against the iron plate, and held it
there a moment or two!  Being released, the spring resumed its proper
form.  It was then re-measured; found not to have expanded a
hair's-breadth, and, therefore,--as Will Garvie took care to explain,--
was passed as a sound well-tempered spring; whereat Bob remarked that it
would need to be a good-tempered spring, to suffer such treatment
without grumbling.

It seemed to Mrs Marrot now as if her capacity for surprise had reached
its limit; but she little knew the wealth of capacity for creating
surprise that lay in these amazing "works" of the Grand National Trunk
Railway.

The next place she was ushered into was a vast apartment where iron in
every shape, size, and form was being planed and turned and cut.  The
ceiling of the building, or rather the place where a ceiling ought in
ordinary circumstances to have been, was alive with moving bands and
whirling wheels.  The first thing she was called on to contemplate was
the turning of the tyre or rim of one of the driving-wheels of a
locomotive.  Often had Mrs Marrot heard her husband talk of tyres and
driving-wheels, and many a time had she seen these wheels whirling,
half-concealed, in their appropriate places, but never till that day had
she seen the iron hoop, eight feet in diameter, elevated in bare
simplicity on a turning-lathe, where its size impressed her so much that
she declared, "she never _could_ 'ave imagined engine-wheels was so
big," and asked, "'ow did they ever manage to get 'em lifted up to w'ere
they was?"

To which an overseer kindly replied by pointing out a neat little crane
fitted on a tail, which, when required, ran along the apartment like a
strong obedient little domestic servant, lifting wheels, etcetera, that
a man could scarcely move, and placing them wherever they were wanted.
Mrs Marrot was then directed to observe the rim of the wheel, where she
saw a small chisel cutting iron curls off it just as easily, to all
appearance, as a turner cuts shavings off wood--and these iron curls
were not delicate; they were thick, solid, unpliant ringlets, that would
have formed a suitable decoration for the fair brow of a locomotive, or,
perhaps, a chignon--supposing that any locomotive could have been
prevailed on to adopt such a wild monstrosity!

This same species of chisel, applied in different ways, reduced masses
of iron in size, planed down flat surfaces, enlarged holes, made
cylinders "true" and smooth inside, besides doing a variety of other
things.

After seeing the large tyre turned, Mrs Marrot could not be induced to
pay much regard to the various carriage and truck wheels which were
being treated in a similar manner in that department, but she was
induced to open her ears, and her eyes too, when the overseer informed
her that the "works" turned out complete no fewer than one hundred and
thirty pairs of locomotive, carriage, and waggon wheels a week.

"How many did you say?" she asked.

"A hundred and thirty pair of wheels in the week," repeated the
overseer.

"Every week?" asked Mrs Marrot.

"Yes; every week.  Sometimes more, sometimes less; but altogether,
pretty well on for 6000 pairs of wheels every year."

"W'y, what _do_ you make of 'em all?"

"Oh, we make good use of 'em," replied the overseer, laughing.  "We wear
them out so fast that it keeps us working at that rate to meet our
necessities.  But that," he continued, "is only a small part of what we
do.  We turn out of the works 156 first-class carriages besides many
seconds and thirds, and about 1560 trucks every year; besides three
engines, new and complete, every fortnight."

"Three noo engines every fortnight!" echoed Mrs Marrot; "how many's
that in the year, Bob?"

"Seventy-eight," replied Bob, promptly.  Bob was a swift mental
calculator, and rather proud of it.

"Where ever do they all go to?" murmured Mrs Marrot.

"Why," replied Will Garvie, "they go to all the stations on the line, of
course; some of 'em go to smash at once in cases of accidents, and all
of 'em goes to destruction, more or less, in about fifteen or twenty
years.  We reckon that to be the life of a locomotive.  See, there's a
drivin' axle, such as you saw forged by the big hammer, being turned
now, and cut to shape and size by the same sort of machine that you saw
cuttin' the tyres."

They passed on, after looking at the axle for a few minutes, until they
came to a part of the building where rails were being forged.  This
also, although not done by hammer, was a striking process.  The place
was so hot owing to the quantity of uncooled metal on the floor, that it
was not possible to remain long; they therefore took a rapid survey.  In
one place several men were in the act of conveying to the steam-hammer a
mass of shapeless white-hot iron, which had just been plucked from a
furnace with a pair of grippers.  They put it below the hammer for a few
minutes, which soon reduced it to a clumsy bar; then they carried it to
a pair of iron rollers driven by steam.  The end of the bar being
presented to these, it was gripped, dragged in between them, and passed
out at the other side, flat and very much lengthened, as well as
thinned.  Having been further reduced by this process, it was finally
passed through a pair of rollers, which gave it shape, and sent it out a
complete rail, ready to be laid down on the line.

Here Garvie took occasion to explain that steel rails, although very
expensive, were now being extensively used in preference to iron rails,
because they lasted much longer.  "For instance," he said, "steel costs
about 12 pounds a ton and iron only costs about 7 pounds; but then, d'ye
see, steel rails will last two years and more, whereas iron rails get
wore out, and have to be renewed every six weeks in places where there's
much traffic."

"Now, I can't stand no more o' this," said Mrs Marrot, down whose face
the perspiration was streaming; "I'm a'most roasted alive, an' don't
understand your explanations one bit, Willum, so come along."

"Oh, mother, _do_ hold on a moment," pleaded Bob, whose mechanical soul
was in a species of paradise.

"You'd better come, Bob," interposed Garvie, "else we won't have time to
see the department where the engines are fitted."

This was sufficient for Bob, who willingly followed.

The fitting shed at that time contained several engines in various
stages of advancement.  In one place men were engaged in fitting
together the iron framework or foundation of a locomotive, with screws,
and bolts, and nuts, and rivets.  Others were employed near them, on an
engine more advanced, in putting on the wheels and placing the boilers
and fire-boxes, while another gang were busy covering the boiler of a
third engine with a coating of wood and felt, literally for the purpose
of keeping it warm, or preventing its heat from escaping.  Farther on,
three beautiful new engines, that had just been made and stood ready for
action, were receiving a few finishing touches from the painters.
Fresh, spotless, and glittering, these were to make their _debut_ on the
morrow, and commence their comparatively brief career of furious
activity--gay things, doomed emphatically to a fast life!  Beyond these
young creatures lay a number of aged and crippled engines, all more or
less disabled and sent there for repair; one to have a burst steam-pipe
removed and replaced, another to have a wheel, or a fire-box or a
cylinder changed; and one, that looked as if it had recently "run
a-muck" against all the other engines on the line, stood sulkily grim in
a corner, evidently awaiting its sentence of condemnation,--the usual
fate of such engines being to be torn, bored, battered, chiselled,
clipt, and otherwise cut to pieces, and cast into the furnaces.

While gazing round this apartment, Mrs Marrot's eyes suddenly became
transfixed.

"Wot's the matter _now_?" demanded Bob, in some alarm.

"I _do_ believe--w'y--there's a locomotive _in the air_!" said Mrs
Marrot in an undertone.

"So it is!" exclaimed Bob.

And, reader, so it was.  In that shed they had a crane which rested on a
framework overhead, and ran on wheels over the entire shop.  It was
capable of lifting above fifty tons' weight and as a large locomotive,
ponderous though it be, is not much over twenty tons, of course this
giant crane made short work of such.  When the men have occasion to
remove a wheel from the iron horse, not being able to make it lift up
its leg, so to speak, to have it taken off, they bring it under the
crane, swing it up as a little boy might swing a toy-cart, and operate
on it at their leisure.

Mrs Marrot felt an unpleasant sensation on beholding this.  As the wife
of an engine-driver, she had long felt the deepest respect, almost
amounting to reverence, for locomotives, in regard to the weight, speed,
and irresistible power of which she had always entertained the most
exalted ideas.  To see one of the race--and that too, of the largest
size--treated in this humiliating fashion was too much for her, she
declared that she had seen enough of the "works," and wouldn't on any
account remain another minute!

"But you won't go without seein' the carriage and truck department,
surely?" said Bob.

"Well, I'll just take a look to please _you_," said the amiable woman.

Accordingly, to the truck and van department they went, and there Bob,
whose mind was sharp as a needle, saw a good many pieces of mechanism,
which formerly he had only seen in a transition state, now applied to
their ultimate uses.  The chiselled, sawn, and drilled planks seen in
the first department, were here being fitted and bolted together in the
form of trucks, while the uses of many strange pieces of iron, which had
puzzled him in the blacksmiths' department, became obvious when fitted
to their appropriate woodwork.  Here, also, he saw the internal
machinery of railway carriages laid bare, especially the position and
shape of the springs that give elasticity to the buffers, which, he
observed, were just the same in shape as ordinary carriage springs,
placed so that the ends of the buffer-rods pressed against them.

But all this afforded no gratification to Mrs Marrot, whose sensitive
mind dwelt uneasily on the humiliated locomotive, until she suddenly
came on a row of new first-class carriages, where a number of people
were employed stuffing cushions.

"Well, I declare," she exclaimed, "if here ain't cushion-stuffing going
on!  I expect we shall come to coat-and-shift-making for porters and
