hand.  His thumb happened to touch the spring on the handle, and
instantly there came a low melodious note from inside the repeater--One,
two, three, and then a double tinkle twice repeated.

"That's striking," observed Jim, who was occasionally guilty of a pun.
"Why, it's a repeater!"

"So it is!  Did you ever know such a brick as that uncle of mine?"

"It's a pity your people can't think of anything else but watches for
presents.  Why, what a donkey you made of yourself about that silver
turnip when you first had it!  Don't you remember?  What's to become of
it, by the by?"

"How do I know?  I say, Jim, this one wasn't got for nothing."  And then
the boys together investigated the wonders of the new watch, peeping at
its works and making it strike, till I was quite sick of hearing it.
But then I was jealous.  There was no more Cicero for Charlie that day.
He was almost as ridiculous, though not so rough, with his new treasure
as he had been with me.  He turned me out of my pocket to make room for
it; and then half a dozen times a minute pulled it out and gloated over
it.  At night he put us both under his pillow, little dreaming of the
sorrow and disappointment that filled my breast.

Where were all the old days now?  Who would admire or value _me_, a
poor, commonplace silver drudge, now that this grand, showy rival had
come and taken my place?  In my anger and excitement my heart beat fast
and loud, so loud that presently I heard a voice beside me saying,--

"Gently, there, if you please; no one can hear himself speak with that
noise."

"I've more right to be here than you," I growled.

"That is as our mutual master decides; but surely I have heard your
voice before!  Let me look at you."

And he edged himself up, so as to get a peep at my shabby face.

"To be sure--my young friend the three-guinea silver watch?  How do you
do, my little man?"

This patronage was intolerable, and I had no words to reply.

"Ah! you find it difficult to converse.  You must indeed be almost worn
out after the work you have had.  I am indeed astonished to see you
alive at all.  I am sure, in my master's name, I may be allowed to thank
you for your praiseworthy exertions in his service.  We are both much
obliged to you, and hope we shall show ourselves not unmindful of
your--"

"Brute!" was all I could shriek, so mad was I, Whether my rival would
have pursued his discourse I cannot say, but at that instant a hand came
fumbling under the pillow.  It passed me by, and sought the repeater,
and next moment the tinkling chimes sounded half-past eleven.

It was as much as I could endure to be thus slighted and triumphed over.

"Contemptible creature!"  I exclaimed; "you may think you've a fine
voice, but, like a simpering schoolgirl, you can't sing till you're
pressed!"  I had him there, surely!

"Better that than having no voice at all, like some people, or using it
when no one wants to hear it, like others."  I suppose he thought he had
me there, the puppy!

He went on chiming at intervals during the night, and of course my
master had very little rest in consequence.

The next day Charlie and Jim had a solemn confabulation as to the
disposal of me.

"It's no use wasting it, you know," said Jim.  "Pity you haven't got a
young brother to pass it on to."

"Suppose you take it," said the generous Charlie.

"No, old man, I don't want it.  I'm not so mad about tickers as you.
But, I tell you what, Charlie, you might like Tom to have it.  He's
leaving, you know, and it would be a nice reminder of Randlebury."

"Just what I thought directly the new one came," exclaimed Charlie,
"only then I remembered we had a row about this very watch three years
ago, and I'm afraid he wouldn't like it."

"Try.  Old Tom would be quite set up with a watch."

Charlie proceeded that same day in quest of Tom, whom he found packing
up his books and chemicals in a large trunk.

To him my master exhibited his new treasure, greatly to Drift's delight.

"Why, Charlie," he said, "I don't know much about watches, but I'm
certain that's worth twenty pounds."

"No!" exclaimed Charlie; "you don't mean that."

"Yes, I do; but, for all that, I'll back your old turnip to keep as good
time as it."

"It's always gone well, the old one.  I'm glad you like it, Tom."

"I always liked it, you know."

"Why?"

"Well, I've known it as long as I've known you, and if it hadn't been
for it things might have been different."

"Yes," said Charlie, "it was the cause of all the row three years ago."

"And if it hadn't been for that row I should have gone to the bad long
ago.  That was a lucky row for me, Charlie, thanks to you."

"Don't say that, old man, because it's a cram."

"I say, Tom," added Charlie nervously, coming to his point, "will you do
me a favour?"

"Anything in the world.  What is it?"

"Take my old watch, Tom.  It's not worth much, you know, but it may be
useful, and it will help to remind you of old days.  Will you, Tom?"

Tom's lips quivered as he took me from Charlie's outstretched hand.

"Old boy," said he, "I'd sooner have this than anything else in the
world.  Somehow I feel I can't go wrong as long as I have it."

Charlie was beyond measure delighted to find his present accepted with
so little difficulty.

"Oh, Tom," he said, "I am glad to think you'll have it, and I know
you'll think of me when you use it."

"Won't I?" said Tom.  "I say, Charlie, I wish you were coming to London
with me."

"So do I.  Never mind, we'll often write, and you'll promise to let me
know how you are getting on, won't you?"

"Yes."

"And you'll call and see my father pretty often, won't you?"

"Yes."

"And you'll keep yourself free for a week's jaunt at Easter?"

"Yes."

They had much more talk that evening, which lasted till late.  What they
talked about it is not for me to repeat, and if it were it would
probably not interest my reader.  He would perhaps be disappointed to
find that a considerable part of it related to a new suit of Tom's, just
arrived from the tailor's, and that another part had reference to Tom's
intention to prevail on his landlady in London to allow him to support a
bull-dog puppy on her premises.  These subjects, deeply interesting to
the two friends, would not improve with repetition; and neither would
the rest of their talk, which was chiefly a going over of old times, and
a laying of many a wondrous scheme for the future.  Suffice it to say,
on this last evening the two boys unbosomed themselves to one another,
and if Tom Drift went off to bed in a sober and serious frame of mind,
it was because he and Charlie both had thought and felt a great deal
more than they had spoken during the interview.  The packing went on at
the same time as the talk, and then the two friends separated, only to
meet once more on the morrow for a hurried farewell.

"Let's have a last look at him," said Charlie, as Tom was getting into
the cab to go.

Tom took me out and handed me to him.  Long and tenderly my dear young
master looked at me, then, patting me gently with his hand as if I were
a child, he said,--

"Good-bye, and be good to Tom Drift; do you hear?"

If a tick could express anything, my reply at that moment must have
satisfied him his parting wish would not be forgotten.  Then returning
me to my new master, he said,--

"Good-bye, old boy; joy go with you.  We'll hear of you at the head of
your profession before Jim and I have left school."

"Not quite so soon," replied Tom, laughing.

Then came a last good-bye, and the cab drove off.  As it turned the
corner of the drive Tom leaned out of the window and held me out in his
hand.

Long shall I remember that parting glimpse.  He was standing on the
steps with Jim waving his hands.  The sun shone full on him, lighting up
his bright face and curly head.  I thought as I looked, "Where could one
find his equal?"--_Sans peur et sans reproche_--"matchless for
gentleness, honesty, and courage," and felt, as the vision faded from
me, that I should never see another like him.  And I never did.

Little, however, did I dream in what strange way I was next to meet
Charlie Newcome.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

HOW TOM DRIFT MADE ONE START IN LONDON, AND PREPARED TO MAKE ANOTHER.

The two months that followed my departure from Randlebury were
melancholy and tedious.

It was hard for me, after the boisterous surroundings of a public
school, to settle down to the heavy monotony of a dull lodging in a back
street of London; and it was harder still, after being the pride and
favourite of a boy like Charlie Newcome, to find myself the property of
Tom Drift.

Not that Tom used me badly at first.  He wound me up regularly, and for
the sake of his absent friend honoured me with a considerable share of
his affection.

Indeed, for the first week or so he was quite gushing, scarcely letting
me out of his sight, and sometimes even dropping a tear over me.  And I,
remembering Charlie's last words, "Be good to Tom Drift," felt glad to
be able to remind my new master of old times, and keep fresh the hopes
and resolutions with which Charlie had done so much to inspire him.  But
Tom Drift, I could not help feeling, was not a safe man.

There was something lacking in him, and that something was ballast.  No
one, perhaps, ever had a greater theoretical desire to be all that was
right and good, but that was not in itself enough.

In quiet, easy times, and with a guiding friend to help him, Tom Drift
did well enough; but left to himself amid currents and storms he could
hardly fail to come to grief, as we shall presently see.

For the first two months he stuck hard to his work he was regular at
lectures, and attentive when there; he spent his spare time well in
study bearing upon the profession for which he was preparing; he wrote
and heard once a week from Charlie; he kept clear of the more rackety of
his fellow-students; he spent his Sundays at Mr Newcome's house, and he
took plenty of healthy exercise both for body and mind.

With many examples about him of industry and success he determined to
make the most of his time as a student, and spoke of the life and sphere
of a country doctor, for which he was training, with the enthusiasm of
one whose heart is in his work.

"The more I think of it," he once wrote to his mother, who was residing
abroad for her health, "the more I take to it.  A good doctor is the
best-liked man in his parish.  Everybody comes to him in their trouble.
He gets into the best society, and yet makes himself loved by the
poorest.  In four or five years at least I ought to get through my
course here, and then there is nothing to prevent my settling down at
once.  By that time I hope you'll be well enough to come and keep house
for me, for all country doctors, you know, are bachelors," and so on.

All this was very well, and, as one of Tom's friends, I rejoiced to see
him thus setting himself in earnest to the duties of his calling.  But I
rejoiced with trembling.  Although he kept clear, for the most part, of
his fellow-students, choosing his friends charily and shyly, I could yet
see that he had no objection to contemplate from a distance the humours
and festivities of his more high-spirited companions.  He was not one of
those impulsive fellows who shut their eyes and take a header into the
midst of a new good-fellowship, only to discover too late their error,
and repent their rashness at leisure.

No, Tom had his eyes open.  He saw the evil as well as the good, and,
alas for him, having seen it, he looked still!

The students of Saint Elizabeth's Hospital were not on the whole a bad
set.  On Tom's arrival in London, however, he had the firm impression in
his mind that all medical students were bad characters, and this foolish
notion did him much harm.  If two or three of them were to go off for a
spree, his imagination would at once picture them in scenes and places
such as no respectable man would like to frequent, whereas, if the truth
were known, these misjudged young men had committed no greater crime
than that of taking a boat up the river, or a drive in a dog-cart.  If a
group of them should be seen by him laughing and talking, he
instinctively concluded their topic must be ribaldry, whereas they would
perhaps be only joking at the expense of some eccentric professor, or
else chaffing one of their own number.  And so it happened that Tom
failed in time to distinguish between the really bad and such as he only
imagined to be bad; and from his habit of looking on at them and their
doings from a studied distance, their presence began gradually and
insensibly to exercise a very considerable influence over his mind.

"After all," he would sometimes say to himself, "these fellows get on.
They pass their exams, they pay their bills, they gain the confidence of
their professors, and at the same time they manage to enjoy themselves.
Perhaps I am a fool to take so much pains about the first three of these
things, and to deny myself the fourth.  Perhaps, after all, these
fellows are not so bad as I have fancied, or perhaps I am prudish."

And then the silly fellow, having once inclined to admit there was
something to be said for medical students, and having before considered
all bad alike, became tolerant all round, more particularly of the
really bad set, who appeared to him to enjoy themselves the most.

As his companions became more attractive to him, his work became less
interesting.

"Why should I grind and plod here," he said, "while every one else is
enjoying himself?  If young Charlie were here, I'm pretty sure _he'd_ be
in for some of their sprees, and laugh at me for wearing my eyes out as
I'm doing."

And then he leaned back in his chair and took to wondering what the six
fellows who started that afternoon for Richmond were doing.  Smashing
the windows of the "Star and Garter," perhaps, or fighting the bargees
on the river, or capturing a four-in-hand drag, or disporting themselves
in some such genial and truly English manner.  And as Tom conjured up
the picture he half envied them their sport.

So he gradually became restless and discontented.  The days were weary
and the evenings intolerably dull.  The visits to Mr Newcome were of
course pleasant enough, but it was slow being cooped up an entire Sunday
with two old people.  On the whole, life in London was becoming stupid.

One of the first symptoms of his altered frame of mind was the
occasional neglect of his regular letter to Charlie.  That ever-faithful
young man wrote as punctually as clockwork.  Every Thursday morning a
letter lay on Tom's plate at breakfast-time, addressed in the well-known
hand, and bearing the Randlebury post-mark.  And jolly lively letters
