At last night descended on the scene, making the situation much more
unpleasant, for the darkness tended to deceive the man as to the motions
of the brute, and once or twice he almost leaped off the branch under
the impression that his foe had somehow grown tall enough to reach him,
and was on the point of seizing him with his formidable claws.  To add
to his troubles, hunger came upon Tim about his usual supper-time, and
what was far worse, because much less endurable, sleep put in a powerful
claim to attention.  Indeed this latter difficulty became so great that
hunger, after a time, ceased to trouble him, and all his faculties--even
the inventive--were engaged in a tremendous battle with this good old
friend, who had so suddenly been converted into an implacable foe.  More
than once that night did Little Tim, despite his utmost efforts, fall
into a momentary sleep, from which each time he awoke with a convulsive
start and sharp cry, to the obvious surprise of Bruin, who, being
awakened out of a comfortable nap, looked up with a growl inquiringly,
and then relapsed.

When morning broke, it found the wretched man still clutching his uneasy
couch, and blinking like an owl at the bear, which still lay comfortably
on the ground below him.  Unable to stand it any longer, Tim resolved to
have a short nap, even if it should cost him his life.  With this end in
view, he twined his arms and legs tightly round his branch.  The very
act reminded him that his worsted waistbelt might be twined round both
body and branch, for it was full two yards long.  Wondering that it had
not occurred to him before, he hastily undid it, lashed himself to the
branch as well as he could, and in a moment was sound asleep.  This
device would have succeeded admirably had not one of his legs slowly
dropped so low down as to attract the notice of the bear when it awoke.
Rising to its full height on its hind legs, and protruding its tongue to
the utmost, it just managed to touch Tim's toe.  The touch acted liked
an electric spark, awoke him at once, and the leg was drawn promptly up.

But Tim had had a nap, and it is wonderful how brief a slumber will
suffice to restore the energies of a man in robust health.  He unlashed
himself.

"Good mornin' to 'ee," he said, looking down.  "You're there yet, I
see."

He finished the salutation with a loud yawn, and stretched himself so
recklessly that he almost fell off the branch into the embrace of his
expectant foe.  Then he looked round, and, reason having been restored,
hit upon a plan of escape which seemed to him hopeful.

We have said that the space he had selected was rather open, but there
were scattered over it several large masses of rock, about the size of
an ordinary cart, which had fallen from the neighbouring cliffs.  Four
of these stood in a group at about fifty yards' distance from his tree.

"Now, old Caleb," he said, "I'll go in for it, neck or nothin'.  You
tasted my toes this mornin'.  Would you like to try 'em again?"

He lowered his foot as he spoke, as far down as he could reach.  The
bear accepted the invitation at once, rose up, protruded his tongue as
before, and just managed to touch the toe.  Now it is scarcely needful
to say that a strong man leading the life of a hunter in the Rocky
Mountains is an athlete.  Tim thought no more of swinging himself up
into a tree by the muscular power of his arms than you would think of
stepping over a narrow ditch.  When the bear was standing in its most
upright attitude, he suddenly swung down, held on to the branch with his
hands, and drove both his feet with such force against the bear's chin
that it lost its balance and fell over backwards with an angry growl.
At the same moment Tim dropped to the ground, and made for the fallen
rocks at a quicker rate than he had ever run before.  Bruin scrambled to
his feet with amazing agility, looked round, saw the fugitive, and gave
chase.  Darting past the first rock, it turned, but Little Tim, of
course, was not there.  He had doubled round the second, and taken
refuge behind the third mass of rock.

Waiting a moment till the baffled bear went to look behind another rock,
he ran straight back again to his tree, hastily gathered up his ropes,
and reascended to his branch, where the bear found him again not many
minutes later.

"Ha!  HA! you old rascal!" he shouted, as he fastened the end of a rope
firmly to the branch, and gathered in the slack so as to have the
running noose handy.  "I've got you now.  Come, come along; have another
taste of my toe!"

This invitation was given when the bear stood in his former position
under the tree and looked up.  Once again it accepted the invitation,
and rose to the hunter's toe as a salmon rises to an irresistible fly.

"That's it!  Now, hold on--just one moment.  _There_!"

As Tim finished the sentence, he dropped the noose so deftly over the
bear's head and paws that it went right down to his waist.  This was an
unlooked-for piece of good fortune.  The utmost the hunter had hoped for
was to noose the creature round the neck.  Moreover, it was done so
quickly that the monster did not seem to fully appreciate what had
occurred, but continued to strain and reach up at the toe in an imbecile
sort of way.  Instead, therefore, of drawing the noose tight, Little Tim
dropped a second noose round the monster's neck, and drew that tight.
Becoming suddenly alive to its condition, the grizzly made a backward
plunge, which drew both ropes tight and nearly strangled it, while the
branch on which Tim was perched shook so violently that it was all he
could do to hold on.

For full half an hour that bear struggled fiercely to free itself, and
often did the shaken hunter fear that he had miscalculated the strength
of his ropes, but they stood the test well, and, being elastic, acted in
some degree like lines of indiarubber.  At the end of that time the bear
fell prone from exhaustion, which, to do him justice, was more the
result of semi-strangulation than exertion.

This was what Little Tim had been waiting for and expecting.  Quietly
but quickly he descended to the ground, but the bear saw him, partially
recovered, no doubt under an impulse of rage, and began to rear and
plunge again, compelling his foe to run to the fallen rocks for shelter.
When Bruin had exhausted himself a second time, Tim ran forward and
seized the old net with which he had failed to catch the previous bear,
and threw it over his captive.  The act of course revived the lively
monster, but his struggles now wound him up into such a ravel with the
two lines and the net that he was soon unable to get up or jump about,
though still able to make the very earth around him tremble with his
convulsive heaves.  It was at once a fine as well as an awful display of
the power of brute force and the strength of raw material!

Little Tim would have admired it with philosophic interest if he had not
been too busy dancing around the writhing creature in a vain effort to
fix his third rope on a hind leg.  At last an opportunity offered.  A
leg burst one of the meshes of the net.  Tim deftly slipped the noose
over it, and made the line fast to the tree.  "Now," said he, wiping the
perspiration from his brow, "you're safe, so I'll have a meal."

And Little Tim, sitting down on a stone at a respectful distance,
applied himself with zest to the cold breakfast of which he stood so
very much in need.

He was thus occupied when his son with the prairie chief and his party
found him.

It would take at least another chapter to describe adequately the joy,
surprise, laughter, gratulation, and comment which burst from the rescue
party on discovering the hunter.  We therefore leave it to the reader's
imagination.  One of the young braves was at once sent off to find the
agent and fetch him to the spot with his cage on wheels.  The feat, with
much difficulty, was accomplished.  Bruin was forcibly and very
unwillingly thrust into the prison.  The balance of the stipulated sum
was honourably paid on the spot, and now that bear is--or, if it is not,
ought to be--in the Zoological Gardens of New York, London, or Paris,
with a printed account of his catching, and a portrait of Little Tim
attached to the front of his cage!



CHAPTER TEN.

SNAKES IN THE GRASS.

It was a sad but interesting council that was held in the little
fortress of "Tim's Folly" the day following that on which the grizzly
bear was captured.

The wounded missionary, lying in Big Tim's bed, presided.  Beside him,
with an expression of profound sorrow on his fine face, sat Whitewing,
the prairie chief.  Little Tim and his big son sat at his feet.  The
other Indians were ranged in a semicircle before him.

In one sense it was a red man's council, but there were none of the
Indian formalities connected with it, for the prairie chief and his
followers had long ago renounced the superstitions and some of the
practices of their kindred.

Softswan was not banished from the council chamber, as if unworthy even
to listen to the discussions of the "lords of creation," and no pipe of
peace was smoked as a preliminary, but a brief, earnest prayer for
guidance was put up by the missionary to the Lord of hosts, and subjects
more weighty than are usually broached in the councils of savages were
discussed.

The preacher's voice was weak, and his countenance pale, but the wonted
look of calm confidence was still there.

"Whitewing," he said, raising himself on one elbow, "I will speak as God
gives me power, but I am very feeble, and feel that the discussion of
our plans must be conducted chiefly by yourself and your friends."

He paused, and the chief, with the usual dignity of the red man,
remained silent, waiting for more.  Not so Little Tim.  That worthy,
although gifted with all the powers of courage and endurance which mark
the best of the American savages, was also endowed with the white man's
tendency to assert his right to wag his tongue.

"Cheer up, sir," he said, in a tone of encouragement, "you mustn't let
your spirits go down.  A good rest here, an' good grub, wi' Softswan's
cookin'--to say nothin' o' her nursin'--will put ye all right before
long."

"Thanks, Little Tim," returned the missionary, with a smile; "I do cheer
up, or rather, God cheers me.  Whether I recover or am called home is in
His hands; therefore all shall be well.  But," he added, turning to the
chief, "God has given us brains, hands, materials, and opportunities to
work with, therefore must we labour while we can, as if all depended on
ourselves.  The plans which I had laid out for myself He has seen fit to
change, and it now remains for me to point out what I aimed at, so that
we may accommodate ourselves to His will.  Sure am I that with or
without my aid, His work shall be done, and, for the rest--'though He
slay me, yet will I trust in Him."

Again he paused, and the Indians uttered that soft "Ho!" of assent with
which they were wont to express approval of what was said.

"When I left the settlements of the white men," continued the preacher,
"my object was twofold: I wished to see Whitewing, and Little Tim, and
Brighteyes, and all the other dear friends whom I had known long ago,
before the snows of life's winter had settled on my head, but my main
object was to visit Rushing River, the Blackfoot chief, and carry the
blessed Gospel to his people, and thus, while seeking the salvation of
their souls, also bring about a reconciliation between them and their
hereditary foe, Bounding Bull."

"It's Rushin' River as is the enemy," cried Little Tim, interrupting,
for when his feelings were excited he was apt to become regardless of
time, place, and persons, and the allusion to his son's wife's father--
of whom he was very fond--had roused him.  "Boundin' Bull would have bin
reconciled long ago if Rushin' River would have listened to reason, for
he is a Christian, though I'm bound to say he's somethin' of a queer
one, havin' notions of his own which it's not easy for other folk to
understand."

"In which respect, daddy," remarked Big Tim, using the English tongue
for the moment, and allowing the smallest possible smile to play on his
lips, "Bounding Bull is not unlike yourself."

"Hold yer tongue, boy, else I'll give you a woppin'," said the father
sternly.

"Dumb, daddy, dumb," replied the son meekly.

It was one of the peculiarities of this father and son that they were
fond of expressing their regard for each other by indulging now and then
in a little very mild "chaff," and the playful threat to give his son a
"woppin'"--which in earlier years he had sometimes done with much
effect--was an invariable proof that Little Tim's spirit had been
calmed, and his amiability restored.

"My white father's intentions are good," said Whitewing, after another
pause, "and his faith is strong.  It needs strong faith to believe that
the man who has shot the preacher shall ever smoke the pipe of peace
with Whitewing."

"With God all things are possible," returned the missionary.  "And you
must not allow enmity to rankle in your own breast, Whitewing, because
of me.  Besides, it was probably one of Rushing River's braves, and not
himself, who shot me.  In any case they could not have known who I was."

"I'm not so sure o' that," said Big Tim.  "The Blackfoot reptile has a
sharp eye, an' father has told me that you knew him once when you was in
these parts twenty years ago."

"Yes, I knew him well," returned the preacher, in a low, meditative
voice.  "He was quite a little boy at the time--not more than ten years
of age, I should think, but unusually strong and brave.  I met him when
travelling alone in the woods, and it so happened that I had the good
fortune to save his life by shooting a brown bear which he had wounded,
and which was on the point of killing him.  I dwelt with him and his
people for a time, and pressed him to accept salvation through Jesus,
but he refused.  The Holy Spirit had not opened his eyes, yet I felt and
still feel assured that that time will come.  But it has not come yet,
if all that I have heard of him be true.  You may depend upon it,
however, that he did not shoot me knowingly."

Both Little and Big Tim by their looks showed that their belief in
Rushing River's future reformation was very weak, though they said
nothing, and the Indians maintained such imperturbable gravity that
their looks gave no indication as to the state of their minds.

"My white father's hopes and desires are good," said Whitewing, after
another long pause, during which the missionary closed his eyes, and
appeared to be resting, and Tim and his son looked gravely at each
other, for that rest seemed to them strongly to resemble death.  "And
now what does my father propose to do?"

"My course is clear," answered the wounded man, opening his eyes with a
bright, cheerful look.  "I cannot move.  Here God has placed me, and
here I must remain till--till I get well.  All the action must be on
your part, Whitewing, and that of your friends.  But I shall not be idle
or useless as long as life and breath are left to enable me to pray."

There was another decided note of approval from the Indians, for they
had already learned the value of prayer.

"The first step I would wish you to take, however," continued the
missionary, "is to go and bring to this hut my sweet friend Brighteyes
and your own mother, Whitewing, who, you tell me, is still alive."

"The loved old one still lives," returned the Indian.

"Lives!" interposed Little Tim, with emphasis, "I should think she does,
an' flourishes too, though she _has_ shrivelled up a bit since you saw
her last.  Why, she's so old now that we've changed her name to
Live-for-ever.  She sleeps like a top, an' feeds like a grampus, an'
does little else but laugh at what's goin' on around her.  I never did
see such a jolly old girl in all my life.  Twenty years ago--that time,
you remember, when Whitewing carried her off on horseback, when the
village was attacked--we all thought she was on her last legs, but,
bless you sir, she can still stump about the camp in a tremblin' sort o'
way, an' her peepers are every bit as black as those of my own
Brighteyes, an' they twinkle a deal more."

"Your account of her," returned the preacher, with a little smile,
"makes me long to see her again.  Indeed, the sight of these two would
comfort me greatly whether I live or die.  They are not far distant from
here, you say?"

"Not far.  My father's wish shall be gratified," said Whitewing.  "After
they come we will consult again, and my father will be able to decide
what course to pursue in winning over the Blackfeet."

Of course the two Tims and all the others were quite willing to follow
the lead of the prairie chief, so it was finally arranged that a party
