"Oh! nothing, Sergeant," stammered I, in some confusion.

Notwithstanding my assurance, I overheard Lincoln whisper to his nearest
comrade:

"What ther old Harry hes got into the cap?"

He referred to the fact that I had unconsciously hooked myself half a
dozen times on the thorny claws of the pita-plant, and my overalls began
to exhibit a most tattered condition.

Our route lay through a dense chaparral--now crossing a sandy spur,
covered with mezquite and acacia; then sinking into the bed of some
silent creek, shaded with old cork-trees, whose gnarled and venerable
trunks were laced together by a thousand parasites.  Two miles from the
rancho we reached the banks of a considerable stream, which we
conjectured was a branch of the Jamapa River.

On both sides a fringe of dark forest-trees flung out long branches
extending half-way across the stream.  The water flowed darkly
underneath.

Huge lilies stood out from the banks--their broad, wax-like leaves
trailing upon the glassy ripple.

Here and there were pools fringed with drooping willows and belts of
green _tule_.  Other aquatic plants rose from the water to the height of
twenty feet; among which we distinguished the beautiful "iris", with its
tall, spear-like stem, ending in a brown cylinder, like the pompon of a
grenadier's cap.

As we approached the banks the pelican, scared from his lonely haunt,
rose upon heavy wing, and with a shrill scream flapped away through the
dark aisles of the forest.  The cayman plunged sullenly into the sedgy
water; and the "Sajou" monkey, suspended by his prehensile tail from
some overhanging bough, oscillated to and fro, and filled the air with
his hideous, half-human cries.

Halting for a moment to refill the canteens, we crossed over and
ascended the opposite bank.  A hundred paces farther on the guide, who
had gone ahead, cried out from an eminence, "_Mira la caballada_!"
(Yonder's the drove!)



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

ONE WAY OF TAMING A BULL.

Pushing through the jungle, we ascended the eminence.  A brilliant
picture opened before us.  The storm had suddenly lulled, and the
tropical sun shone down upon the flowery surface of the earth, bathing
its verdure in a flood of yellow light.  It was several hours before
sunset, but the bright orb had commenced descending towards the snowy
cone of Orizava, and his rays had assumed that golden red which
characterises the ante-twilight of the tropics.  The short-lived storm
had swept the heavens, and the blue roof of the world was without a
cloud.  The dark masses had rolled away over the south-eastern horizon,
and were now spending their fury upon the dyewood forests of Honduras
and Tabasco.

At our feet lay the prairie, spread before us like a green carpet, and
bounded upon the farther side by a dark wall of forest-trees.  Several
clumps of timber grew like islands on the plain, adding to the
picturesque character of the landscape.

Near the centre of the prairie stood a small rancho, surrounded by a
high picket fence.  This we at once recognised as the "corral" mentioned
by Don Cosme.

At some distance from the inclosure thousands of cattle were browsing
upon the grassy level, their spotted flanks and long upright horns
showing their descent from the famous race of Spanish bulls.  Some of
them, straggling from the herd, rambled through the "mottes", or lay
stretched out under the shade of some isolated palm-tree.  Ox-bells were
tinkling their cheerful but monotonous music.  Hundreds of horses and
mules mingled with the herd; and we could distinguish a couple of
leather-clad _vaqueros_ (herdsmen) galloping from point to point on
their swift mustangs.

These, as we appeared upon the ridge, dashed out after a wild bull that
had just escaped from the corral.

All five--the vaqueros, the mustangs, and the bull--swept over the
prairie like wind, the bull bellowing with rage and terror; while the
vaqueros were yelling in his rear, and whirling their long lazos.  Their
straight black hair floating in the wind--their swarthy, Arab-like
faces--their high Spanish hats--their red leather calzoneros, buttoned
up the sides--their huge jingling spurs, and the ornamental trappings of
their deep saddles--all these, combined with the perfect _manege_ of
their dashing steeds, and the wild excitement of the chase in which they
were engaged, rendered them objects of picturesque interest; and we
halted a moment to witness the result.

The bull came rushing past within fifty paces of where we stood,
snorting with rage, and tossing his horns high in the air--his pursuers
close upon him.  At this moment one of the vaqueros launched his lazo,
which, floating gracefully out, settled down over one horn.  Seeing
this, the vaquero did not turn his horse, but sat facing the bull, and
permitted the rope to run out.  It was soon carried taut; and, scarcely
checking the animal, it slipped along the smooth horn and spun out into
the air.  The cast was a failure.

The second vaquero now flung his lazo with more success.  The heavy
loop, skilfully projected, shot out like an arrow, and embraced _both_
horns in its curving noose.  With the quickness of thought the vaquero
wheeled his horse, buried his spurs deep into his flanks, and, pressing
his thighs to the saddle, galloped off in an opposite direction.  The
bull dashed on as before.  In a moment the lariat was stretched.  The
sudden jerk caused the thong to vibrate like a bowstring, and the bull
lay motionless on the grass.  The shock almost dragged the mustang upon
his flanks.

The bull lay for some time where he had fallen; then, making an effort,
he sprang up, and looked around him with a bewildered air.  He was not
yet conquered.  His eye, flashing with rage, rolled around until it fell
upon the rope leading from his horns to the saddle; and, suddenly
lowering his head, with a furious roar he rushed upon the vaquero.

The latter, who had been expecting this attack, drove the spurs into his
mustang, and started in full gallop across the prairie.  On followed the
bull, sometimes shortening the distance between him and his enemy, while
at intervals the lazo, tightening, would almost jerk him upon his head.

After running for a hundred yards or so, the vaquero suddenly wheeled
and galloped out at right angles to his former course.  Before the bull
could turn, himself the rope again tightened with a jerk and flung him
upon his side.  This time he lay but an instant, and, again springing to
his feet, he dashed off in fresh pursuit.

The second vaquero now came up, and, as the bull rushed past, launched
his lazo after, and snared him around one of the legs, drawing the noose
upon his ankle.

This time the bull was flung completely over, and with such a violent
shock that he lay as if dead.  One of the vaqueros then rode cautiously
up, and, bending over in the saddle, unfastened both of the lariats, and
set the animal free.

The bull rose to his feet, and, looking around in the most cowed and
pitiful manner, walked quietly off, driven unresistingly towards the
corral.

We commenced descending into the place, and the vaqueros, catching a
glimpse of our uniforms, simultaneously reined up their mustangs with a
sudden jerk.  We could see from their gestures that they were frightened
at the approach of our party.  This was not strange, as the major,
mounted upon his great gaunt charger, loomed up against the blue sky
like a colossus.  The Mexicans, doubtless, had never seen anything in
the way of horseflesh bigger than the mustangs they were riding; and
this apparition, with the long line of uniformed soldiers descending the
hill, was calculated to alarm them severely.

"Them fellers is gwine to put, Cap'n," said Lincoln, touching his cap
respectfully.

"You're right, Sergeant," I replied; "and without them we might as well
think of catching the wind as one of these mules."

"If yer'll just let me draw a bead on the near mustang, I kin kripple
him 'ithout hurtin' the thing thet's in the saddle."

"It would be a pity.  No, Sergeant," answered I.  "I might stop them by
sending forward the guide," I continued, addressing myself rather than
Lincoln; "but no, it will not do; there must be the appearance of force.
I have promised.  Major, would you have the goodness to ride forward,
and prevent those fellows from galloping off?"

"Lord, Captain!" said the major, with a terrified look, "you don't think
I could overtake such Arabs as them?  Hercules is slow--slow as a crab!"

Now, this was _a lie_, and I knew it! for Hercules, the major's great,
raw-boned steed, was as fleet as the wind.

"Then, Major, perhaps you will allow Mr Clayley to make trial of him,"
I suggested.  "He is light weight.  I assure you that, without the
assistance of these Mexicans, we shall not be able to catch a single
mule."

The major, seeing that all eyes were fixed upon him, suddenly
straightened himself up in his stirrups, and, swelling with courage and
importance, declared, "If that was the case, he would go himself."
Then, calling upon "Doc" to follow him, he struck the spurs into
Hercules, and rode forward at a gallop.

It proved that this was just the very course to start the vaqueros, as
the major had inspired them with more terror than all the rest of our
party.  They showed evident symptoms of taking to their heels, and I
shouted to them at the top of my voice:

"_Alto! somos amigos_!"  (Halt! we are friends).

The words were scarcely out of my mouth when the Mexicans drove the
rowels into their mustangs, and galloped off as if for their lives in
the direction of the corral.

The major followed at a slashing pace, Doc bringing up the rear; while
the basket which the latter carried over his arm began to eject its
contents, scattering the commissariat of the major over the prairie.
Fortunately, the hospitality of Don Cosme had already provided a
substitute for this loss.

After a run of about half a mile Hercules began to gain rapidly upon the
mustangs, whereas Doc was losing distance in an inverse ratio.  The
Mexicans had got within a couple of hundred yards of the rancho, the
major not over a hundred in their rear, when I observed the latter
suddenly pull up, and, jerking the long body of Hercules round, commence
riding briskly back, all the while looking over his shoulder towards the
in closure.

The vaqueros did not halt at the corral, as we expected, but kept across
the prairie, and disappeared among the trees on the opposite side.

"What the deuce has got into Blossom?" inquired Clayley; "he was clearly
gaining upon them.  The old bloat must have burst a blood-vessel."



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

A BRUSH WITH THE GUERILLEROS.

"Why, what was the matter, Major?" inquired I, as the major rode up
blowing like a porpoise.

"Matter!" replied he, with one of his direst imprecations; "matter,
indeed!  You wouldn't have me ride plump into their works, would you?"

"Works!" echoed I, in some surprise; "what do you mean by that, Major?"

"I mean works--that's all.  There's a stockade ten feet high, as full as
it can stick of them."

"Full of what?"

"Full of the enemy--full of rancheros.  I saw their ugly copper faces--a
dozen of them at least--looking at me over the pickets; and, sure as
heaven, if I had gone ten paces farther they would have riddled me like
a target."

"But, Major, they were only peaceable rancheros--cow-herds--nothing
more."

"Cow-herds!  I tell you, Captain, that those two that galloped off had a
sword apiece strapped to their saddles.  I saw them when I got near:
they were decoys to bring us up to that stockade--I'll bet my life upon
it!"

"Well, Major," rejoined I, "they're far enough from the stockade now;
and the best we can do in their absence will be to examine it, and see
what chances it may offer to corral these mules, for, unless they can be
driven into it, we shall have to return to camp empty-handed."

Saying this, I moved forward with the men, the major keeping in the
rear.

We soon reached the formidable stockade, which proved to be nothing more
than a regular corral, such as are found on the great _haciendas de
ganados_ (cattle farms) of Spanish America.  In one corner was a house,
constructed of upright poles, with a thatch of palm-leaves.  This
contained the lazos, _alparejas_, saddles, etcetera, of the vaqueros;
and in the door of this house stood a decrepit old zambo, the only human
thing about the place.  The zambo's woolly head over the pickets had
reflected itself a dozen times on the major's terrified imagination.

After examining the corral, I found it excellent for our purpose,
provided we could only succeed in driving the mules _into_ it; and,
throwing open the bars, we proceeded to make the attempt.  The mules
were browsing quietly at the distance of a quarter of a mile from the
corral.

Marching past the drove, I deployed the company in the form of a
semicircle, forming a complete cordon round the animals; then, closing
in upon them slowly, the soldiers commenced driving them towards the
pen.

We were somewhat awkward at this new duty; but by means of a shower of
small rocks, pieces of _bois de vache_, and an occasional "heigh,
heigh!" the mules were soon in motion and in the required direction.

The major, with Doc and little Jack, being the mounted men of the party,
did great service, especially Jack, who was highly delighted with this
kind of thing, and kept Twidget in a constant gallop from right to left.

As the _mulado_ neared the gates of the inclosure, the two extremes of
the semi-circumference gradually approached each other, closing in
toward the corral.

The mules were already within fifty paces of the entrance, the soldiers
coming up about two hundred yards in the rear, when a noise like the
tramping of many hoofs arrested our attention.  The quick, sharp note of
a cavalry bugle rang out across the plain, followed by a wild yell, as
though a band of Indian warriors were sweeping down upon the foe.

In an instant every eye was turned, and we beheld with consternation a
cloud of horsemen springing out from the woods, and dashing along in the
headlong velocity of a charge.

It required but a single glance to satisfy me that they were
guerilleros.  Their picturesque attire, their peculiar arms, and the
parti-coloured bannerets upon their lances were not to be mistaken.

We stood for a moment as if thunderstruck; a sharp cry rose along the
deployed line.

I signalled to the bugler, who gave the command, "Rally upon the
centre!"

As if by one impulse, the whole line closed in with a run upon the gates
of the inclosure.  The mules, impelled by the sudden rush, dashed
forward pell-mell, blocking up the entrance.

On came the guerilleros, with streaming pennons and lances couched,
shouting their wild cries:

"_Andela! andela!  Mueran los Yankees_!"  (Forward! forward!  Death to
the Yankees!)

The foremost of the soldiers were already upon the heels of the crowded
mules, pricking them with bayonets.  The animals began to kick and
plunge in the most furious manner, causing a new danger in front.

"Face about--fire!"  I commanded at this moment.

An irregular but well-directed volley emptied half a dozen saddles, and
for a moment staggered the charging line; but, before my men could
reload, the guerilleros had leaped clear over their fallen comrades, and
were swooping down with cries of vengeance.  A dozen of their bravest
men were already within shot-range, firing their escopettes and pistols
as they came down.

Our position had now grown fearfully critical.  The mules still blocked
up the entrance, preventing the soldiers from taking shelter behind the
stockade; and before we could reload, the rearmost would be at the mercy
of the enemy's lances.

Seizing the major's servant by the arm, I dragged him from his horse,
and, leaping into the saddle, flung myself upon the rear.  Half a dozen
of my bravest men, among whom were Lincoln, Chane, and the Frenchman
Raoul, rallied around the horse, determined to receive the cavalry
charge on the short bayonets of their rifles.  Their pieces were all
empty!

At this moment my eye rested on one of the soldiers, a brave but
slow-footed German, who was still twenty paces in the rear of his
comrades, making every effort to come up.  Two of the guerilleros were
rushing upon him with couched lances.  I galloped out to his rescue; but
before I could reach him the lance of the foremost Mexican crashed
through the soldier's skull, shivering it like a shell.  The barb and
bloody pennon came out on the opposite side.  The man was lifted from
the ground, and carried several paces upon the shaft of the lance.

The guerillero dropped his entangled weapon; but before he could draw
any other, the sword of Victoria was through his heart.

His comrade turned upon me with a cry of vengeance.  I had not yet
disengaged my weapon to ward off the thrust.  The lance's point was
within three feet of my breast, when a sharp crack was heard from
behind; the lancer threw out his arms with a spasmodic jerk; his long
spear was whirled into the air, and he fell back in his saddle, dead.

"Well done, Jack! fire and scissors! who showed yer that trick? whooray!
whoop!" and I heard the voice of Lincoln, in a sort of Indian yell,
rising high above the din.

At this moment a guerillo, mounted upon a powerful black mustang, came
galloping down.  This man, unlike most of his comrades, was armed with
the sabre, which he evidently wielded with great dexterity.  He came
dashing on, his white teeth set in a fierce smile.

"Ha!  Monsieur le Capitaine," shouted he, as he came near, "still alive?
I thought I had finished you on Lobos; not too late yet!"

I recognised the deserter, Dubrosc!

"Villain!"  I ejaculated, too full of rage to utter another word.

We met at full speedy but with my unmanageable horse I could only ward
off his blow as he swept past me.  We wheeled again, and galloped
towards each other--both of us impelled by hatred; but my horse again
shied, frightened by the gleaming sabre of my antagonist.  Before I
could rein him round, he had brought me close to the pickets of the
corral; and on turning to meet the deserter, I found that we were
separated by a band of dark objects.

It was a detachment of mules that had backed from the gates of the
corral and were escaping to the open plain.  We reined up, eyeing each
other with impatient vengeance; but the bullets of my men began to
whistle from the pickets; and Dubrosc, with a threatening gesture,
wheeled his horse and galloped off to his comrades.  They had retired
beyond range, and were halted in groups upon the prairie, chafing with
disappointment and rage.


