Speed--"So you are to be one of us?"

Lincoln--"I reckon so, if you will let me take pot luck with you."

Speed--"All right, Abe; it's better than Salem."

Lincoln--"I've been to Gorman's and got a single bedstead; now you
figure out what it will cost for a tick, blankets and so forth."

Speed (after figuring)--"Say, seventeen dollars or so."

Lincoln (countenance paling)--"I had no _idea_ it would cost half that,
and I--I can't pay it; but if you can wait on me till Christmas, and I
make anything, I'll pay; if I don't, I can't."

Speed--"I can do better than that; upstairs I sleep in a bed big enough
for two, and you just come and sleep with me till you can do better."

Lincoln (brightening)--"Good, where is it?"

Speed--"Upstairs behind that pile of barrels--turn to the right when you
go up."

Lincoln (returning joyously)--"Well, Speed, I've moved!"


STUART & LINCOLN

Major Stuart had grown so thoroughly interested in Lincoln, approving
the diligence with which the young law student applied himself to the
books which he had lent him, that, after his signal success in bringing
about the removal of the State capital to Springfield, the older man
invited the younger to go into partnership with him.

Abe had been admitted to the bar the year before, and had practiced law
in a small way before Squire Bowling Green in New Salem. Greatly
flattered by the offer of such a man, Abe gladly accepted, and soon
after his arrival in Springfield this sign, which thrilled the junior
partner's whole being, appeared in front of an office near the square:

         ------------------------------
        |    STUART & LINCOLN          |
        | ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW             |
         ------------------------------


"I NEVER USE ANYONE'S MONEY BUT MY OWN"

After a while Lincoln left Speed's friendly loft and slept on a lounge
in the law office, keeping his few effects in the little old-fashioned
trunk pushed out of sight under his couch.

One day an agent of the Post Office Department came in and asked if
Abraham Lincoln could be found there. Abe arose and, reaching out his
hand, said that was his name. The agent then stated his business; he had
come to collect a balance due the Post Office Department since the
closing of the post office at New Salem.

The young ex-postmaster looked puzzled for a moment, and a friend, who
happened to be present, hastened to his rescue with, "Lincoln, if you
are in need of money, let us help you."

Abe made no reply, but, pulling out his little old trunk, he asked the
agent how much he owed. The man stated the amount, and he, opening the
trunk, took out an old cotton cloth containing coins, which he handed to
the official without counting, and it proved to be the exact sum
required, over seventeen dollars, evidently the very pieces of money Abe
had received while acting as postmaster years before!

After the department agent had receipted for the money and had gone out,
Mr. Lincoln quietly remarked:

"I never use anyone's money but my own."


DROPS THROUGH THE CEILING TO DEMAND FREE SPEECH

Stuart & Lincoln's office was, for a time, over a court room, which was
used evenings as a hall. There was a square opening in the ceiling of
the court room, covered by a trap door in the room overhead where
Lincoln slept. One night there was a promiscuous crowd in the hall, and
Lincoln's friend, E. D. Baker, was delivering a political harangue.
Becoming somewhat excited Baker made an accusation against a well-known
newspaper in Springfield, and the remark was resented by several in the
audience.

"Pull him down!" yelled one of them as they came up to the platform
threatening Baker with personal violence. There was considerable
confusion which might become a riot.

Just at this juncture the spectators were astonished to see a pair of
long legs dangling from the ceiling and Abraham Lincoln dropped upon the
platform. Seizing the water pitcher he took his stand beside the
speaker, and brandished it, his face ablaze with indignation.

"Gentlemen," he said, when the confusion had subsided, "let us not
disgrace the age and the country in which we live. This is a land where
freedom of speech is guaranteed. Mr. Baker has a right to speak, and
ought to be permitted to do so. I am here to protect him and no man
shall take him from this stand if I can prevent it." Lincoln had opened
the trap door in his room and silently watched the proceedings until he
saw that his presence was needed below. Then he dropped right into the
midst of the fray, and defended his friend and the right of free speech
at the same time.


DEFENDING THE DEFENSELESS

A widow came to Mr. Lincoln and told him how an attorney had charged her
an exorbitant fee for collecting her pension. Such cases filled him with
righteous wrath. He cared nothing for "professional etiquette," if it
permitted the swindling of a poor woman. Going directly to the greedy
lawyer, he forced him to refund to the widow all that he had charged in
excess of a fair fee for his services, or he would start proceedings at
once to prevent the extortionate attorney from practicing law any longer
at the Springfield bar.

If a negro had been wronged in any way, Lawyer Lincoln was the only
attorney in Springfield who dared to appear in his behalf, for he always
did so at great risk to his political standing. Sometimes he appeared in
defense of fugitive slaves, or negroes who had been freed or had run
away from southern or "slave" States where slavery prevailed to gain
liberty in "free" States in which slavery was not allowed. Lawyer
Lincoln did all this at the risk of making himself very unpopular with
his fellow-attorneys and among the people at large, the greater part of
whom were then in favor of permitting those who wished to own, buy and
sell negroes as slaves.

Lincoln always sympathized with the poor and down-trodden. He could not
bear to charge what his fellow-lawyers considered a fair price for the
amount of work and time spent on a case. He often advised those who came
to him to settle their disputes without going to law. Once he told a man
he would charge him a large fee if he had to try the case, but if the
parties in the dispute settled their difficulty without going into court
he would furnish them all the legal advice they needed free of charge.
Here is some excellent counsel Lawyer Lincoln gave, in later life, in
an address to a class of young attorneys:

"Discourage litigation. Persuade your neighbors to compromise whenever
you can. Point out to them how the nominal winner is often the real
loser--in fees, expenses and waste of time. As a peacemaker a lawyer has
a superior opportunity of becoming a good man. There will always be
enough business. Never stir up litigation. A worse man can scarcely be
found than one who does this. Who can be more nearly a fiend than he who
habitually overhauls the register of deeds in search of defects in
titles whereon to stir up strife and put money in his pocket. A moral
tone ought to be infused into the profession which should drive such men
out of it."


YOUNG LAWYER LINCOLN OFFERS TO PAY HALF THE DAMAGES

A wagonmaker in Mechanicsville, near Springfield, was sued on account of
a disputed bill. The other side had engaged the best lawyer in the
place. The cartwright saw that his own attorney would be unable to
defend the case well. So, when the day of the trial arrived he sent his
son-in-law to Springfield to bring Mr. Lincoln to save the day for him
if possible. He said to the messenger:

"Son, you've just got time. Take this letter to my young friend, Abe
Lincoln, and bring him back in the buggy to appear in the case. Guess
he'll come if he can."

The young man from Mechanicsville found the lawyer in the street playing
"knucks" with a troop of children and laughing heartily at the fun they
were all having. When the note was handed to him, Lincoln said:

"All right, wait a minute," and the game soon ended amid peals of
laughter. Then the young lawyer jumped into the buggy. On the way back
Mr. Lincoln told his companion such funny stories that the young man,
convulsed with laughter, was unable to drive. The horse, badly broken,
upset them into a ditch, smashing the vehicle.

"You stay behind and look after the buggy," said the lawyer. "I'll walk
on."

He came, with long strides, into the court room just in time for the
trial and won the case for the wagonmaker.

"What am I to pay you?" asked the client delighted.

"I hope you won't think ten or fifteen dollars too much," said the young
attorney, "and I'll pay half the hire of the buggy and half the cost of
repairing it."


LAWYER LINCOLN AND MARY OWENS

About the time Mr. Lincoln was admitted to the bar, Miss Mary Owens, a
bright and beautiful young woman from Kentucky, came to visit her
married sister near New Salem. The sister had boasted that she was going
to "make a match" between her sister and Lawyer Lincoln. The newly
admitted attorney smiled indulgently at all this banter until he began
to consider himself under obligations to marry Miss Owens if that young
lady proved willing.

After he went to live in Springfield, with no home but his office, he
wrote the young lady a long, discouraging letter, of which this is a
part:


        "I am thinking of what we said about your
        coming to live in Springfield. I am afraid you
        would not be satisfied. There is a great deal
        of flourishing about in carriages here, which
        it would be your doom to see without sharing
        it. You would have to be poor without the means
        of hiding your poverty. Do you believe that you
        could bear that patiently? Whatever woman may
        cast her lot with mine, should any ever do so,
        it is my intention to do all in my power to
        make her happy and contented, and there is
        nothing I can imagine that could make me more
        unhappy than to fail in that effort. I know I
        should be much happier with you than the way I
        am, provided I saw no sign of discontent in
        you.

        "I much wish you would think seriously before
        you decide. What I have said, I will most
        positively abide by, provided you wish it. You
        have not been accustomed to hardship, and it
        may be more severe than you now imagine. I know
        you are capable of thinking correctly on any
        subject, and if you deliberate maturely upon
        this before you decide, then I am willing to
        abide by your decision.

                                 "Yours, etc.,
                                            "LINCOLN."

For a love letter this was nearly as cold and formal as a legal
document. Miss Owens could see well enough that Lawyer Lincoln was not
much in love with her, and she let him know, as kindly as she could,
that she was not disposed to cast her lot for life with an enforced
lover, as he had proved himself to be. She afterward confided to a
friend that "Mr. Lincoln was deficient in those little links which make
up the chain of a woman's happiness."


THE EARLY RIVALRY BETWEEN LINCOLN AND DOUGLAS

Soon after Mr. Lincoln came to Springfield he met Stephen A. Douglas, a
brilliant little man from Vermont. The two seemed naturally to take
opposing sides of every question. They were opposite in every way.
Lincoln was tall, angular and awkward. Douglas was small, round and
graceful--he came to be known as "the Little Giant." Douglas was a
Democrat and favored slavery. Lincoln was a Whig, and strongly opposed
that dark institution. Even in petty discussions in Speed's store, the
two men seemed to gravitate to opposite sides. A little later they were
rivals for the hand of the same young woman.

One night, in a convivial company, Mr. Douglas's attention was directed
to the fact that Mr. Lincoln neither smoked nor drank. Considering this
a reflection upon his own habits, the little man sneered:

"What, Mr. Lincoln, are you a temperance man?"

"No," replied Lincoln with a smile full of meaning, "I'm not exactly a
temperance man, but I am temperate in this, to wit:--I _don't drink_!"

In spite of this remark, Mr. Lincoln _was_ an ardent temperance man. One
Washington's birthday he delivered a temperance address before the
Washingtonian Society of Springfield, on "Charity in Temperance Reform,"
in which he made a strong comparison between the drink habit and black
slavery.


LOGAN & LINCOLN

In 1841 the partnership between Stuart and Lincoln was dissolved and the
younger man became a member of the firm of Logan & Lincoln. This was
considered a long step in advance for the young lawyer, as Judge Stephen
T. Logan was known as one of the leading lawyers in the State. From
this senior partner he learned to make the thorough study of his cases
that characterized his work throughout his later career.

While in partnership with Logan, Mr. Lincoln was helping a young fellow
named "Billy" Herndon, a clerk in his friend Speed's store, advising him
in his law studies and promising to give the youth a place in his own
office as soon as young Herndon should be fitted to fill it.


WHAT LINCOLN DID WITH HIS FIRST FIVE HUNDRED DOLLAR FEE

During the interim between two partnerships, after he had left Major
Stuart, and before he went into the office with Logan, Mr. Lincoln
conducted a case alone. He worked very hard and made a brilliant success
of it, winning the verdict and a five hundred dollar fee. When an old
lawyer friend called on him, Lincoln had the money spread out on the
table counting it over.

"Look here, judge," said the young lawyer. "See what a heap of money
I've got from that case. Did you ever see anything like it? Why, I never
in my life had so much money all at once!"

Then his manner changed, and crossing his long arms on the table he
said:

"I have got just five hundred dollars; if it were only seven hundred and
fifty I would go and buy a quarter section (160 acres) of land and give
it to my old stepmother."

The friend offered to lend him the two hundred and fifty dollars needed.
While drawing up the necessary papers, the old judge gave the young
lawyer this advice:

"Lincoln, I wouldn't do it quite that way. Your stepmother is getting
old, and, in all probability, will not live many years. I would settle
the property upon her for use during her lifetime, to revert to you upon
her death."

"I shall do no such thing," Lincoln replied with deep feeling. "It is a
poor return, at best, for all the good woman's devotion to me, and there
is not going to be any half-way business about it."

The dutiful stepson did as he planned. Some years later he was obliged
to write to John Johnston, his stepmother's son, appealing to him not to
try to induce his mother to sell the land lest the old woman should lose
the support he had provided for her in her declining years.


IN LOVE WITH A BELLE FROM LEXINGTON

Lincoln's popularity in Sangamon County, always increasing, was greatly
strengthened by the part he had taken in the removal of the capital to
Springfield, which was the county seat as well as the State capital. So
he was returned to the Legislature, now held in Springfield, time after
time, without further effort on his part. He was looked upon as a young
man with a great future. While he was in the office with Major Stuart
that gentleman's cousin, Miss Mary Todd, a witty, accomplished young
lady from Lexington, Kentucky, came to Springfield to visit her sister,
wife of Ninian W. Edwards, one of the "Long Nine" in the State Assembly.

Miss Todd was brilliant and gay, a society girl--in every way the
opposite of Mr. Lincoln--and he was charmed with everything she said and
did. Judge Douglas was one of her numerous admirers, and it is said that
the Louisville belle was so flattered by his attentions that she was in
doubt, for a time, which suitor to accept. She was an ambitious young
woman, having boasted from girlhood that she would one day be mistress
of the White House.

To all appearances Douglas was the more likely to fulfill Miss Todd's
high ambition. He was a society man, witty in conversation, popular with
women as well as with men, and had been to Congress, so he had a
national reputation, while Lincoln's was only local, or at most confined
