Now, while they were yet speaking, the festive party received another
surprise, or alarm, which was even more exciting than the previous one.

A young man suddenly burst into the village with the announcement that a
body of the Queen's soldiers were close at hand.  They had been sent off
in pursuit of Razafil, with directions to scour the country, and bring
in as many Christian fugitives as possible, and he--the young man--being
a fast runner, had been sent in advance by some friends of the bard to
warn him of his danger.

"I would not try to avoid them if I stood alone," said Razafil, softly.
"Should _I_ shrink from dying for Jesus, after seeing my Raniva go to
Him in a chariot of fire?  But I stand not alone.  My wife claims my
support, and my little boy."

While he was speaking, it was seen that a few of the hunters, as well as
one or two inhabitants of the village, rose quietly and left the place.
These were either professing or suspected Christians, who were anxious
to make their escape from the danger that threatened.

After bidding Voalavo farewell, the guide and his friends left the
village and struck into the woods.  They were accompanied by the bard a
short distance, until a point was reached where their routes diverged,
and here, after a few words of brotherly sympathy and counsel from
Ravonino, the bereaved man went on his solitary way, and the others
directed their course towards the capital.

"Poor man," said Ebony, who looked over his shoulder with profound
sorrow in his earnest eyes as long as the tall figure of the bard was in
sight, "I's most awrful sorry for 'im.  Why don't dey hang Randalvalona,
or shot 'er?"

"History teaches that it's not always so easy as one might think to get
rid of objectionable queens in that way," said Mark.

"Hm!  I'd teach history suffin diff'rent if I had my way," returned the
negro.

"But surely the great men around her might have some sort o' power to
clap a stopper on 'er?" said Hockins.

"They have some power, but not much," returned the guide, "for
Ranavalona is a passionate, self-willed, cruel woman; and when such a
woman happens to be a despotic queen, nothing short of a revolution, or
her death, can save the country.  She usurped the throne in 1829, we
have now reached 1857, so she has been reigning more than twenty-seven
years, and a bitter reign it has been.  There have been many
persecutions of the Christians since it began.  Hundreds have been
slain; thousands have been sold into slavery; many more have been
banished to pestilential districts, where disease has laid them low.
God grant that this mad fit may not be the forerunner of another burst
of cruelty."

"But do you really think," said Mark, "that Rafaravavy is in great
danger?  Did not the bard say that she is a favourite with the queen?"

"That is some security, but not much, for Ranavalona is changeable as
well as cruel.  But my dear one is in the hands of God.  No harm can
come to her unless He permits.  Nevertheless, our God works not by
miracles but by means, therefore it is my business, having the
opportunity given me, to hasten to her rescue."

"And it is mine to help you," said Mark, an impulse of youthful
enthusiasm and sympathy swelling his heart as his mind suddenly reverted
to the morning when he left England, and said his last good-bye to the
fair one with the golden hair and the rosebud mouth and "such lovely
blue eyes!"

"But how," he continued, "shall we best aid you in this matter?"

"That question I cannot answer immediately.  When we draw near to the
capital and hear what is going on I shall be able to form a plan.  What
we have to do just now is to travel fast.  You are strong stout men, all
of you.  Do you think you can walk fast and far with little rest or
sleep, and without breaking down?"

"I think so," answered Mark, modestly.

"I's cock-sure ob it," said Ebony, "if we's allowed lots o' grub."

"I'm not quite so sure," said Hockins; "you must remember I've only got
sea-legs on--but I'll try."

And he did try, and so did the others; with such success, too, that
before the sun set that evening they had penetrated into the very heart
of the mountain range which runs through the centre of the island.

There had not been much conversation on the way, for hill-climbing all
day at top-speed is not compatible with small talk.  Besides, the
obvious anxiety of Ravonino rendered his companions less inclined than
usual to engage in desultory remarks.  Nevertheless there were
occasions--during momentary halts to recover breath, or when clear
bubbling springs tempted them to drink--when the prolonged silence was
broken.

"Putty stiff work dis hill-climbin', massa," said Ebony, during one of
these brief halts, as he wiped the perspiration from his sable brow with
the back of his hand.  "Lucky I's used to it."

"Used to it?" repeated Mark.

"Yes.  Di'n't I tell you I was born an' raised among de Andes in Sout'
Ameriky?"

"To be sure, I forgot that, but there must be a considerable difference
between the two mountain ranges."

"Das troo, massa, but de diff'rence don't make much diff'rence to de
legs.  You see, wild rugged ground much de same wheder de mountains rise
a few t'ousand foot, like dese, or poke der snow-topped heads troo de
clouds right away up into de blue sky, like de Andes.  Rugged ground is
rugged ground, an' hard on de legs all de same, an' dis am rugged 'nuff
even for 'Ockins!"

The negro opened his huge mouth in an amiable laugh at his companion,
who had taken advantage of the brief halt to give a hearty rub to his
colossal limbs.

"Rugged enough it is, no doubt," said the sailor, gravely, "an' it makes
my sea-legs raither stiffish.  But never you fear, Ebony; they're tough,
an' will last as long as yours, anyhow."

"You's right, 'Ockins.  Dey'll last _longer_ dan mine by eight or ten
hinches--if not more."

"Your jokes are small, Ebony, which is more than can be said for your
mouth.  Shut it, man, or some of us'll go tumblin' into it by accident."

While these two were indulging their little pleasantries, the guide and
his friend Laihova had gone to the top of a neighbouring bluff to
consult as to the best route to adopt in the present troubled state of
the country.

The view from the commanding height on which they stood was indeed
marked by a rugged grandeur which might have done credit even to the
giant Andes themselves, and offered a variety of routes, or rather
obstructions to routes, which might well perplex men who were eager to
cross country swiftly.

The point which they had reached, and much of the range they had
crossed, was formed of basalt in various stages of decomposition; but in
the country before them, for several miles in advance, huge masses of
granite and fragments of quartz indicated a change in the nature of the
prevailing rock.  The position of these masses, as well as their size,
gave a wild Titanic aspect to much of the scenery.

Many enormous stones projected out of the ground at various angles.  One
of these stood out horizontally to the distance of between twenty and
thirty feet, forming a cave under it, in which it was evident, from
sundry suggestive appearances, that wayfarers were accustomed to lodge.
The neighbourhood of this cave formed one of the most romantic and
picturesque scenes they had yet seen.  It was a dark narrow vale, in
many places not less than five hundred feet deep, with a considerable
stream at the bottom, which brawled among detached and shattered rocks,
or was partly lost to view in its meanderings among the beautiful green
shrubs which clothed its banks.  Various kinds of birds twittered among
the bushes, and wherever water expanded in the form of pond or lakelet
numerous waterfowl sported on the surface.

"A glorious prospect!" exclaimed Mark, as he joined the guide and his
friend, "and a splendid place, I should think, for fugitives from
persecution."

He pointed, as he spoke, to the scene on his right, where masses of rock
varying from thirty to fifty feet in length projected from the side of
the ravine.  On the top of these rested other masses in a position that
seemed to threaten destruction to all who ventured beneath them.

"The caves of this region," said the guide, "have served to shelter the
Christians many a time.  It looks as if God had provided these blocks of
granite for this very purpose, for the caverns which extend beneath them
are dark and intricate, having many entrances, and being lighted in some
places by openings between the blocks, while in other places they are
profoundly dark and of unknown extent.  See also, if you look at the
stream below, they form a splendid bridge.  At this distance they do not
seem large, but some of these blocks are not less than a hundred feet
long.  This whole region is infested by robbers, but the recent act of
the Queen in sending troops out to scour the country for fugitive
Christians seems to have driven them away.  But if they had been here we
should have had little to fear, for robbers are not usually fond of
attacking even small parties of men who are well able to defend
themselves; besides, they do not injure the outlawed Christians much.
Perhaps they have a sort of fellow-feeling for us!"

At this point Laihova spoke a few words to the guide in the native
tongue.  The latter nodded approval, and turning to Mark, said--

"We have been consulting about our route.  There are two roads--one
rugged, round-about, and safe, which would take us a longer time,
however, to reach the capital than the other, which is the regular
beaten path, through the villages.  But this latter way lays us open to
the danger of meeting with soldiers, and of my being captured along with
my friend Laihova.  There would be no danger to you and your friends,
for you are strangers."

"Ravonino," said Mark, quickly, "do what is best for rescuing
Rafaravavy.  We have no will but yours.  We will follow wherever you
choose to lead."

A quiet look of satisfaction played on the guide's features as he turned
to his friend.

"What says Laihova?  The Englishmen are willing to do whatever we wish."

"Let us go by the villages.  Let us push on by night as well as by day,"
said Laihova.  "Time flies!  Ranavalona is mad!  Rafaravavy is in
danger!"

It was finally arranged that, at this place, which was considerably to
the south of Antananarivo, they should diverge to the right, so as to
avoid certain points of danger, and arrive ultimately at the eastern
side of the capital.

Having settled this point, the three men rejoined their comrades, who
were still conversing amicably beside the spring.  Thereafter they all
descended into the valley by a steep and rugged pathway.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A NARROW ESCAPE AND THREATENING CLOUDS.

Their progress after leaving the spot described in the last chapter was
not so rapid as could have been desired by anxious men, for it was
absolutely necessary to proceed with extreme caution.

Not only were the Queen's troops out in various directions, but many of
her spies had been seen prowling about, like the evil one they served,
seeking whom they could devour.  Of this the travellers were made aware
at the first villages they came to; and as Ravonino had formerly been
well-known at the capital, it became necessary for him not only to
disguise himself, but to keep as much as possible out of sight.

Disguising himself was not very difficult, owing to the fact that when
he lived in Antananarivo he had, like his father, worn a bushy beard.
This had made him a marked man, for the Malagasy, as a rule, have little
beard, and what little they possess is usually pulled out by the roots.
Since he became a fugitive the guide had shaved closely.  This of itself
went a long way to change his appearance; but when, in addition, he had
modified the arrangement of his hair, and stained his face of a darker
hue, he had made himself almost unrecognisable, even by his best
friends.  His chief difficulty was with his voice, which had a mellow
sweetness in it that resisted modification.  However, by keeping
silence, or speaking low, he hoped to escape recognition until he should
reach the vicinity of the capital, where he had friends who would gladly
receive and conceal him, even at the risk of their lives.

As to the great object that lay nearest his heart, he hoped to manage
that through his friend Laihova, without himself entering the capital.

Our travellers soon reached the inhabited part of the country, where,
being surrounded by men and women going about, as well as journeying
towards the Antananarivo market with provisions, etcetera, they ceased
to attract much attention.  Of course the Englishmen were subjects of
curiosity--sometimes of inquiry,--but as Laihova reported that they were
men who had been cast on the southern coast of the island, and whom he
was guiding to the capital, suspicion was not aroused.

Laihova at this point became leader of the party, in order to enable the
guide more easily to fall into the background; and he was all the more
fitted for the position in that he had acquired a smattering of English
from his friend Ravonino, and could both understand much of what was
said to him and also make himself pretty well understood by his white
friends.

This part of the journey was by no means without adventure, sometimes of
a kind that filled them with anxiety.

One evening they approached a small hamlet, or group of cottages, where
they learned, among other things, that two of the Queen's spies were at
that moment in the neighbourhood, searching for two ladies of the Court
who had fled because Ranavalona had threatened them with imprisonment.

"Are they young?" asked Ravonino, forgetting his caution in his anxiety.

"I know not," replied the man who had informed them of the fact.  "I
think some one told me they were not young--but I forget."

The guide said no more.  He regretted having said so much, for the man
glanced at him suspiciously.

Affecting an air of unconcern he turned away and bade his comrades
follow.

"Come," he said, when out of ear-shot of the man, "we must pass through
this village quickly, for we know not in what house the spies may have
taken up their quarters."

"But, don' you tink," suggested Ebony, "dat we five could wallop any
oder five men in de univarse, to say not'ing ob two spies?"

A grim smile was all the reply that the guide gave him, as he walked
quickly along the path that led out of the hamlet.

"I have a friend," he said to Mark, "who lives in a solitary cottage
half-a-mile further on.  He is rich, and, I think, a Christian man--but
secretly, for fear of the Queen.  We will call at his house in passing."

As he spoke, they approached a large house by the roadside, the owner of
which, a brown old gentleman, was enjoying himself with his wife and
family in front of it.

"Is that your friend?" asked Mark.

"No; he lives in the house just beyond.  We shall see it on clearing
this group of trees."

The track which they were following led close past the large house above
referred to, necessitating compliance with a custom of the country,
which greatly surprised, and not a little amused, the Englishmen.

We have spoken of the residence as a house, because it belonged to one
owner, but it would be more correct to call it a farm-steading, or a
group of buildings.  Except among the very poorest people, a Malagasy
family has usually two or three houses in its enclosure--frequently
more, for young married people often live beside their parents, and some
houses are appropriated to slaves, while others are used as kitchens,
etcetera, the whole being surrounded by a wall of clay.  Where a house
is near the public road they have usually a little square platform,
called the _fijerena_, in an angle of the wall, or at the gate, with
steps leading up to it.  Here the family sits, when the work of the day
is over, to watch--and, doubtless, to criticise--the passers-by; also to
do the polite according to Malagasy ideas, for it must be told that
these people are very courteous.  Even the poorest have a natural
dignity and ease of manner about them.

As our travellers approached the house they were observed with much
interest by the brown old gentleman and his comfortable-looking
wife, and his pretty little light-brown daughter, and a very
uncomfortable-looking elderly female with her head tied up, who were all
squatted on the _fijerena_.

When within hearing Laihova stopped, and said in the politest tone and
manner possible--

"Will you allow me to pass, sir?"

"Pray proceed, sir," replied the old gentleman, with a gracious smile.

This interchange of civilities was entirely formal, and stood in the
place of the Englishman's opening remarks on the weather, to which a
Malagasy would as soon think of referring, in this connection, as he
would to the hatching of crocodiles' eggs.

Then followed the conventional inquiry, "How are you?  How is it with
you?" which politenesses, in a number of variations unknown to Western
speech, would have been continued, in ordinary circumstances, until the
passers-by were beyond the range of hearing; but the appearance of the
Englishmen induced the brown old gentleman on this occasion to beg the
travellers to stop and accept his hospitality.  This they declined to
do, with many expressions of regret, on the ground that their business
at the capital was urgent.

"It would have gratified me much," said the old gentleman, "to have
entertained you.  But you are all well, I hope?"

"Yes, we are very well," answered Laihova; "and how do _you_ feel?"

"I feel as well as possible.  And is it well with _you_?"

"It is well with us.  But it does not seem to be well with the lady,"
returned Laihova, glancing at the uncomfortable female with her head
tied up.

"No, it is not well with her.  She has toothache on the north side of
her head.  Farewell," said the brown old gentleman, re-squatting on the
_fijerena_, as the travellers moved on; "may you live," he shouted after
them, when nearly out of ear-shot, "and reach old age."

Great was the amusement of our travellers at all this, especially when
Ravonino explained about the toothache.  "You must know," he said, "that
almost all the houses in the central provinces of the island are built
with their length running north and south, or nearly so, and the people
