arrived at the spinning mills. Therefore before cotton is shipped it
has to be reduced in bulk so that it will not take up so much space."

"But how can it be, Uncle Frederick? asked Mary, open-eyed.

"What do you do when you wish to make some soft material into a small
parcel, my dear?"

"Oh, roll it up--squeeze it together," was the instant response.

"Well, there you have your answer!" responded Uncle Frederick. "Balers
treat cotton lint in the same fashion; only, as they are not strong
enough to accomplish this end with their hands, they resort to powerful
machines, or compressors, to carry out the process for them. By means
of enormous pressure they crush down the billowing lint until four feet
of it can be reduced to a thickness of not more than seven inches."

"I wouldn't want to fall into that machine! chuckled Carl.

"There wouldn't be much left of you if you should, I can assure you of
that," Captain Dillingham said. "Cotton, however, does not raise any
such protest. It is pressed and pressed and pressed, and while still in
the presses iron bands are put round it to hold it so it can be
compactly transported. An American bale of some five hundred pounds
will usually have six or seven of these iron bands round it. Certain of
these bales are merely rough ones; others are cylindrical. I believe
the latter sort are more generally preferred. To make them the cotton
is gradually pressed and rolled by powerful presses until a bale four
feet long and about two feet through is obtained. These cylindrical
bales weigh a trifle less than the others--about four hundred and
twenty-six pounds--and because they have been pressed so hard they keep
in place without either iron bands or cloth covers. When they arrive at
the mills the cotton from them can be unrolled and much more easily fed
into the machines. If they are covered it is merely to keep them
clean."

"Do all bales of cotton have to weigh the same?" inquired Carl.

"You mean is there a standardized weight for all bales?"

"Yes."

"No, there is no universal standard for bales of cotton. The bales from
different countries differ quite considerably. For example a Brazilian
bale usually weighs only from a hundred and seventy-five to two hundred
and twenty pounds; the Turkish from two hundred and fifty to three
hundred and twenty-five pounds; those coming from India do better,
averaging about three hundred and ninety pounds. Should you handle this
imported cotton you would notice that the bales from India are very
heavily banded, often as many as thirteen bands encircling them. This
is partly because the long staple of this variety of cotton must not be
injured by heavy pressure, and partly because they have not in India
the excellent facilities for compressing lint that we have here. The
Egyptian bales are the largest transported; they run as high as seven
hundred pounds and have about eleven bands to hold them."

"It must be a stunt to get them aboard ship," grinned Carl.

"I've taken my turn at the job," responded the captain drily. "We swing
them down into the hold by means of cranes and have now learned to land
them quite neatly. Nevertheless, even though they are only bundles of
cotton wool I should not fancy having one of them drop on my head,"
concluded he with a twinkle.




CHAPTER XI

A FAMILY CONGRESS


Meantime while the McGregors discussed cotton and the sunny southern
fields in which it grew, Christmas was approaching and Baileyville,
shrouded in wintry whiteness, began to feel the pulse of the coming
holiday. Shop windows along the main street were gay with holly and
scarlet. Every alluring object was displayed to entice purchasers and
such objects as were not alluring were made to appear so by a garnish
of ribbon or flashing tinsel. There were Christmas carpet sweepers,
Christmas teakettles, Christmas coal hods and how surprised and
embarrassed they must have been to find themselves dragged out of their
modest corners and, arrayed in splendor, set forth before the public
gaze. Nothing was too mundane to be transformed by the holiday's magic
into a thing mystic and unreal. Even such a prosaic article as a
washtub, borrowing luster from the season's witchery and in shining
blue dress became a thing to covet and dream about.

Then there was the army of foolish trifles that owed their existence
merely to the season's glamor and would have had no excuse for being at
a time when the purchaser's head was level and his judgment sane. And
in addition to all these there were the scores upon scores of gifts
useful, fascinating, desirable, but beyond range of possibility at any
ordinary period of the year.

Oh, it was a time to keep one's balance, the Christmas holidays! The
very stones of the streets glistened golden and the crisp air breathed
enchantment. If one's nerves were not frayed and on edge he jostled his
neighbor with a smile and took his share of jostling in good part. Was
not every man a brother; and did not a great throbbing kindliness
emanate from all humanity?

It seemed so to Carl McGregor as the wonderful day of days drew near;
and so also it seemed to all the wee McGregors. They were on tiptoe
with excitement and could hardly be made to stand still long enough to
have their neckties tied or their pinafores buttoned.

"Have you children decided yet what you want to do?" questioned their
mother one morning, as she struggled to hold the wriggling Tim until
his hair could be made presentable for school. "Christmas is but a week
away now and we must come to some decision as to our plans. We can't
have everything, you know. Shall it be a turkey and no tree? Or shall
it be a tree and no turkey? And if it is a tree shall it be a big or a
little one? We must vote on all these questions."

"I want ice-teem," lisped Nell.

"Mercy on us!" ejaculated Mrs. McGregor, in consternation, as this
fresh avenue for outlay presented itself. "Nell is for ice cream and a
tree too."

"And turkey!" went on the little one imperturbably. "Me wants turkey!"

"Ice-treem! Ice-treem!" cooed James Frederick.

The mother's face clouded. A tree, turkey, ice cream and presents were
far beyond the range of the family purse.

"I'd rather have stockings and turkey," Mary declared.

"And cranberry sauce and nuts," put in Tim.

"And celery and sweet potatoes," added Carl. "A real dinner, Mother."

"Would you rather do that than have the tree?"

Silence greeted the question.

Into every mind flashed the picture of a tree towering to the ceiling
and a-glitter with lights and ornaments. Even Carl, despite his
fourteen years, could not entirely banish the vision. But the dinner,
the dinner! After all the tree would only be a thing to look at; food
could be eaten and enjoyed, and Carl was a healthy boy at an age when
he was possessed of a particularly healthy appetite. Tempting as was
the tree the aroma of browned turkey rose in his nostrils.

"I vote for turkey," announced he at last.

"No tree? No Christmas tree?" murmured Martin, his lip quivering.

"You have a tree at kindergarten, silly, and so does Nell," declared
the elder brother quickly.

"'Tain't like having it here--our really own tree," bewailed Martin.

"Couldn't we have a simpler dinner, Mother, and manage to get a tree?"
interrogated Mary. "It is fun to trim it and the little children love
it so."

"Girls always like things that look pretty," piped Tim in disdain.

"And all boys care about is to eat and eat," Mary shot out with equal
scorn.

Hidden away in a corner behind his newspaper Captain Dillingham
chuckled. He was vastly amused by this family congress.

Meantime Mrs. McGregor, in order to avert the battle she saw rising,
said, "Suppose we put it to vote. Are you ready for the question?"

"Yes!" responded her flock in chorus.

"All right. Shall it be presents and turkey, or presents and a tree?"

"I want mince pie," proclaimed Martin flatly.

"But we are not talking of pie, dear," answered his mother patiently.
"It is the turkey we're voting on."

"I want turkey _and_ a tree _and_ presents _and_ ice-teem _and_ pie!"
Nell asserted shamelessly.

"Stockings and turkey, Ma! Stockings and turkey!" shouted Carl.

"Listen, dears!" began their mother. "As I told you before we can't
have everything. I wish we could but we just plain can't, so that ends
it. Therefore we must choose what we think we will get the most
pleasure out of. Now who is for turkey? Raise your hands!"

Every hand came up.

"And who is for a tree?"

Again every hand was raised.

Helplessly Mrs. McGregor sank back into her chair.

"Oh, dear," sighed she. "Don't you see we are getting nowhere? I told
you only a minute ago we couldn't have both."

Uncle Frederick came out from behind his paper.

"See here, you young savages," began he, laughing good-humoredly,
"listen to me! If you do not get down to business and use some sense,
Christmas will be here and you will have nothing at all."

A wail ascended from Nell and Martin.

"Your mother can give you either turkey or a tree; but she can't give
you both. In my opinion she is almighty good to do so much."

He saw the children flush uncomfortably. Carl dropped his eyes and Mary
slipped a hand into her mother's.

"Now instead of clamoring at her like a lot of ungrateful little brutes
and wanting the whole earth, why don't you show her you are grateful
for what she's doing?" went on Captain Dillingham in a sharper tone.

"Oh, it's all right, Frederick," interrupted Mrs. McGregor hurriedly.
"I don't want----"

The captain, however, was not to be stopped.

"Your mother is ready to give you turkey _or_ a tree. How many are for
turkey?"

Carl and Tim raised their hands.

"And who is for the tree?"

Instantly Mary, Martin, and Nell raised their hands.

"It is the tree, as I see it," acclaimed he.

"But it isn't fair," Tim objected. "James Frederick didn't vote."

At this everybody laughed and whatever tension there was vanished.

"Oh, James Frederick would vote for the tree," Mary said. "He is so
little he couldn't eat turkey if we had it, could he, Mother?"

"I'm afraid he couldn't," smiled her mother. "He hasn't teeth enough."

"Then it is a tree! A tree!" cried Martin exultantly.

"Wait!" Captain Dillingham put up his hand. "We haven't finished with
this matter yet. You've got your tree from your mother; now I can give
you a turkey if you decide you want me to. But first you are to listen
to what I have to say. A Christmas tree and a turkey mean a great deal
for one family to have in these days when so many people are having so
little. The O'Dowds, for example, are to have neither a Christmas
dinner nor a tree; I happen to know that. Joey has been sick and there
are doctor's bills to pay. Beside that, Mr. O'Dowd has been out of work
and has no money to spend this year."

The little McGregors regarded their uncle with solemn faces.

"Oh, dear!" breathed Mary sympathetically.

Carl scowled soberly; then his face glowed with a sudden idea.

"Couldn't we----" he hesitated awkwardly.

"Oh, Uncle Frederick, if you _were_ really going to buy a turkey,
couldn't we give it to them?" flashed Mary, smiling toward her brother.
"Would you mind giving it away to somebody else? You see, if you were
going to buy it anyway----" she regarded her uncle timidly, "we could
have something else for dinner, couldn't we, Mother? Perhaps corn
chowder. We all like that. And maybe we could have a pudding and some
nuts."

"Bully, Mary! I'm with you!" Carl rejoined.

"I'd like to do that, too," agreed Martin. "I wouldn't mind so much
about the turkey if we had the tree."

"What do you say, Tim?" inquired Captain Dillingham.

"I don't see why we should give our turkey to somebody else," grumbled
Tim sullenly. "We never have one all the year--never! You know we
don't, Mother."

"No, dear; I'm afraid we don't," Mrs. McGregor said.

"Then why should we give ours away," went on Tim in an argumentative
tone. "Don't we want turkey as much as the O'Dowds, I'd like to know?"

"Oh, Timmie!"

"Don't be such a pig, Tim," cut in Carl with brotherly directness. "If
we were hard up, wouldn't you like somebody to send you something for
Christmas?"

Tim colored, his brother's question bringing home to him uncomfortable
possibilities.

"We could have such fun doing it, Timmie," coaxed Mary. "Think how we
could trim up the basket, and what a surprise it would be! Why, it
would make no end of sport."

Tim's expression softened.

Instantly Mrs. McGregor, who was quick to interpret her children's
moods, saw the battle was won.

"We can plan together what shall go into the basket," said she briskly.
"Each of us might contribute the thing he likes best."

"The turkey shall be mine!" Uncle Frederick declared.

"I choose cranberry sauce!" Carl announced.

"Celery! Oh, could I put in celery, Mother?" Mary inquired. "The tops
are so pretty and I love it so!"

Her mother nodded.

"Somebody must give the plain things so I will donate potatoes, squash,
and onions," she said.

"Don't forget nuts! We must have nuts and raisins," Mary added.

"I'd like to give those," Tim whispered.

"You shall, son."

A friendly little glance passed between the boy and his mother.

"Pie! I want pie!" asserted Nell, who although too young to understand
what was going on, nevertheless grasped the notion that food was the
prevailing topic and plunged into the subject with enthusiasm.

"Bless your heart, dearie, you shall have pie!" laughed her mother.
"I'll make a couple of apple pies and they shall be your present."

"There ought to be candy. Please let me send candy! May I?" begged
Martin for whom the world held only two articles really worth
while--candy and ice cream.

There was general merriment at this suggestion.

"Precious little candy would ever get to anybody else if you had the
giving of it, Martie," teased Mary.

"Yes, Martin shall give the candy," Mrs. McGregor consented.

"We'll paste his mouth up before he goes to buy it," Carl drawled.

"Don't you s'pose I could keep from eating it if once I set out to?"
scowled Martin defiantly.

"No, I don't!"

"Well, I could, so now!" The boy drew himself up proudly.

"James Frederick ought to send something, Mother," reminded the
care-taking Mary. "We don't want him left out."

"Oh, we mustn't leave out the baby!" agreed Captain Dillingham. "He and
I will get together and talk the matter over. There are still several
things needed."

"Oh, it will be splendid!" cried Mary, clapping her hands. "Do get a
real big turkey, won't you, Uncle Frederick? And we'll trim it up with
a necklace of cranberries the way they do in the market."

"Huh! There you go again," sniffed Tim. "All girls seem to think of is
necklaces and bows of ribbon."

Mary smiled brightly.

"What's the harm in making it pretty if you can just as well?" asked
she. "I do love pretty things. Why, I believe I could eat stewed whale
if it was on a pretty dish."

"I couldn't; I'd hate whale," responded the stolid Timothy.

"Oh, I didn't mean I'd really eat whale, silly," explained Mary.

"Then what did you say you would for?"

"Mary was just imagining, dear," put in Mrs. McGregor, coming to the
rescue.

"She is always imagining," glowered Tim. "Only the other day she was
trying to make me imagine my salt fish was chicken."

"I'll bet she didn't succeed," taunted Carl.

"Not on your life she didn't!" was the instant answer. "I know salt
fish when I see it."

"No matter, dear," soothed Mrs. McGregor, affectionately touching her
daughter's arm. "If her imagining Mary can convert salt fish into
chicken it is an asset that will stand her in good stead all through
life. And if you, Tim, prefer to keep your salt fish just salt fish,
why you have a perfect right to do so. I will say, however, that the
person who has the power to make believe has an invaluable gift. Many's
the time I've made believe and it has helped me over more than one hard
spot. We all have to masquerade to a greater or less degree. It is
simply meeting life with imagination and seeing in the humdrum
something that associates it with finer and more beautiful things." For
a moment she was silent; then she added in her quick, businesslike
accents, "And now to this dinner! There must be a basket to hold it, of
course."

