"Because you said so," replied his friend.

"Nay, I said that I _suspected_ him to be Durward--nothing more."

"And what more would you have?" cried Ole, whose calm spirit was ruffled
with unusual violence at the thought of the hated Durward being actually
within his reach.  "For my part I conceive that you are justified in
taking him up on suspicion, trying him in a formal way (just to save
appearances) on suspicion, and hanging him at once on suspicion.  Quite
time enough to inquire into the matter after the villain is comfortably
sewed up in a hammock with a thirty-pound shot at his heels, and sent to
the bottom of the sea for the sharks and crabs to devour.  Suspicion is
nine points of the law in these regions, Captain Montague, and we never
allow the tenth point to interfere with the course of justice one way or
another.  Hang him, or shoot him if you prefer it, at once; _that_ is
what I recommend."

Just as Thorwald concluded this amiable piece of advice, the deep strong
tones of Gascoyne's voice were heard addressing the first lieutenant.

"You had better hoist your royals and skyscrapers, Mr Mulroy; we shall
have a light air off the land presently, and it will require all your
canvas to carry the ship round the north point, so as to bring her guns
to bear on the village of the savages."

"The distance seems to me very short," replied the lieutenant, "and the
_Talisman_ sails faster than you may suppose with a light wind."

"I doubt not the sailing qualities of your good ship, though I could
name a small schooner that would beat them in light wind or storm; but
you forget that we have to land our stout ally Mr Thorwald with his men
at the Goat's Pass, and that will compel us to lose time, too much of
which has been lost already."

Without reply, the lieutenant turned on his heel and gave the necessary
orders to hoist the additional sails, while the captain hastened on
deck, leaving Thorwald to finish his pipe in peace, and ruminate on the
suspicions which had been raised in his mind.

In less than half an hour the light wind which Gascoyne had predicted
came off the land, first in a series of what sailors term "cats' paws,"
and then in a steady breeze which lasted several hours, and caused the
vessel to slip rapidly through the still water.  As he looked anxiously
over the bow, Captain Montague felt that he had placed himself
completely in the power of the suspected skipper of the _Foam_, for
coral reefs surrounded him on all sides, and many of them passed so
close to the ship's side that he expected every moment to feel the shock
that would wreck his vessel and his hopes at the same time.  He blamed
himself for trusting a man whom he supposed he had such good reason to
doubt, but consoled himself by thrusting his hand into his bosom and
grasping the handle of a pistol, with which, in the event of the ship
striking, he had made up his mind to blow out Gascoyne's brains.

About an hour later the _Talisman_ was hove-to off the Goat's Pass, and
Ole Thorwald was landed with his party at the base of a cliff which rose
sheer up from the sea like a wall.

"Are we to go up there?" inquired Ole in a rueful tone of voice, as he
surveyed a narrow chasm to which Gascoyne guided him.

"That is the way.  It's not so bad as it looks.  When you get to the
top, follow the little path that leads along the cliffs northward, and
you will reach the brow of a hill from which the native village will be
visible.  Descend and attack it at once, if you find men to fight with--
if not, take possession quietly.  Mind you don't take the wrong turn; it
leads to places where a wild-cat would not venture even in daylight.  If
you attend to what I have said, you can't go wrong.  Good night.  Shove
off."

The oars splashed in the sea at the word, and Gascoyne retained to the
ship, leaving Ole to lead his men up the Pass as he best might.

It seemed as if the pilot had resolved to make sure of the destruction
of the ship that night; for, not content with running her within a foot
or two of innumerable reefs, he at last steered in so close to the shore
that the beetling cliffs actually seemed to overhang the deck.  When the
sun rose, the breeze died away; but sufficient wind continued to fill
the upper sails and to urge the vessel gently onward for some time after
the surface of the sea was calm.

Montague endeavoured to conceal and repress his anxiety as long as
possible, but when at length a line of breakers without any apparent
opening presented themselves right ahead, he went up to Gascoyne and
said in a stern under tone--

"Are you aware that you forfeit your life if my vessel strikes?"

"I know it," replied Gascoyne, coolly throwing away the stump of his
cigar and lighting a fresh one, "but I have no desire either to destroy
your vessel or to lose my life; although, to say truth, I should have no
objection, in other circumstances, to attempt the one and to risk the
other."

"Say you so?" said Montague, with a sharp glance at the countenance of
the other, where, however, he could perceive nothing but placid good
humour "that speech sounds marvellously warlike, methinks, in the mouth
of a sandal-wood trader."

"Think you, then," said Gascoyne, with a smile of contempt, "that it is
only your fire-eating men of war who experience bold impulses and heroic
desires?"

"Nay, but traders are not wont to aspire to the honour of fighting the
ships that are commissioned to protect them."

"Truly, if I had sought protection from the warships of the king of
England, I must have sailed long and far to find it," returned Gascoyne.
"It is no child's play to navigate these seas, where bloodthirsty
savages swarm in their canoes like locusts.  Moreover I sail, as I have
told you before, in the China Seas where pirates are more common than
honest traders.  What would you say if I were to take it into my head to
protect myself?"

"That you were well able to do so," answered Montague, with a smile;
"but when I examined the _Foam_ I found no arms save a few cutlasses and
rusty muskets that did not seem to have been in recent use."

"A few bold men can defend themselves with any kind of weapons.  My men
are stout fellows not used to flinch at the sound of a round shot
passing over their heads."

The conversation was interrupted here by the ship rounding a point and
suddenly opening up a view of a fine bay, at the head of which,
embosomed in trees and dense underwood, stood the native village of
which they were in search.

Just in front of this village lay a small but high and thickly wooded
island, which, as it were, filled up the head of the bay, sheltering it
completely from the ocean, and making the part of the sea which washed
the shores in front of the houses resemble a deep and broad canal.  This
stripe of water was wide and deep enough to permit of a vessel of the
largest size passing through it; but to any one approaching the place
for the first time there seemed to be no passage for any sort of craft
larger than a native canoe.  The island itself was high enough to
conceal the _Talisman_ completely from the natives until she was within
half gunshot of the shore.

Gascoyne still stood on the fore part of the ship as she neared this
spot, which was so beset with reefs and rocks that her escape seemed
miraculous.

"I think we are near enough for the work that we have to do," suggested
Montague in some anxiety.

"Just about it, Mr Montague," said Gascoyne, as he turned towards the
stern and shouted--

"Port your helm."

"Port it is," answered the man at the wheel.

"Steady."

"Back the topsails, Mr Mulroy."

The sails were backed at once, and the ship became motionless with her
broadside to the village.

"What are we to do now, Mr Gascoyne," inquired Montague, smiling in
spite of himself at the strange position in which he found himself.

"Fire away at the village as hard as you can," replied Gascoyne,
returning the smile.

"What! do you really advise me to bombard a defenceless place in which,
as far as I can see, there are none but women and children?"

"Even so!" returned the other, carelessly, "at the same time I would
advise you to give it them with blank cartridge."

"And to what purpose such waste of powder?" inquired Montague.

"The furthering of the plans which I have been appointed to carry out,"
answered Gascoyne somewhat stiffly, as he turned on his heel and walked
away.

The young captain reddened and bit his lip, as he gave the order to load
the guns with blank cartridge, and made preparation to fire this
harmless broadside on the village.  The word to "fire" had barely
crossed his lips when the rocks around seemed to tremble with the crash
of a shot that came apparently from the other side of the island, for
its smoke was visible, although the vessel that discharged it was
concealed behind the point.  The _Talisman's_ broadside followed so
quickly, that the two discharges were blended in one.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

DOINGS ON BOARD THE "FOAM."

The nature of this part of our story requires that we should turn back,
repeatedly, in order to trace the movements of the different parties
which co-operated with each other.

While the warlike demonstrations we have described were being made by
the British cruiser, the crew of the _Foam_ were not idle.

In consequence of the capture of Bumpus by the savages, Gascoyne's
message was, of course, not delivered to Manton, and the first mate of
the sandalwood trader would have known nothing about the fight that
raged on the other side of the island on the Sunday, but for the three
shots, fired by the first lieutenant of the _Talisman_, which decided
the fate of the day.

Being curious to know the cause of the firing, Manton climbed the
mountains until he gained the dividing ridge--which, however, he did not
succeed in doing till late in the afternoon, the way being rugged as
well as long.  Here he almost walked into the midst of a flying party of
the beaten savages; but dropping suddenly behind a rock, he escaped
their notice.  The haste with which they ran, and the wounds visible on
the persons of many of them, were sufficient to acquaint the mate of the
_Foam_ with the fact that a fight had taken place in which the savages
had been beaten; and his knowledge of the state of affairs on the island
enabled him to jump at once to the correct conclusion that the Christian
village had been attacked.

A satanic smile played on the countenance of the mate as he watched the
savages until they were out of sight; then, quitting his place of
concealment, he hurried back to the schooner, which he reached some time
after nightfall.

Immediately on gaining the deck he gave orders to haul the chain of the
anchor short, to shake out the sails, and to make other preparations to
avail himself without delay of the light breeze off the land which his
knowledge of the weather and the locality taught him to look for before
morning.

While his orders were being executed, a boat came alongside with that
part of the crew which had been sent ashore by Gascoyne to escape the
eye of the British commander.  It was in charge of the second mate--a
short, but thick-set and extremely powerful man, of the name of
Scraggs--who walked up to his superior the moment he came on board, and,
in a tone somewhat disrespectful, asked what was going to be done.

"Don't you see," growled Manton; "we're getting ready to sail."

"Of course I see that," retorted Scraggs, between whom and his superior
officer there existed a feeling of jealousy as well as of mutual
antipathy, for reasons which will be seen hereafter; "but I should like
to know where we are going, and why we are going anywhere without the
captain.  I suppose I am entitled to ask that much."

"It's your business to obey orders," said Manton, angrily.

"Not if they are in opposition to the captain's orders," replied
Scraggs, firmly, but in a more respectful tone; for in proportion as he
became more mutinous, he felt that he could afford to become more
deferential.  "The captain's last orders to you were to remain where you
are; I heard him give them, and I do not feel it my duty to disobey him
at _your_ bidding.  You'll find, too, that the crew are of my way of
thinking."

Manton's face flushed crimson, and, for a moment, he felt inclined to
seize a handspike and fell the refractory second mate therewith; but the
looks of a few of the men who were standing by and had overheard the
conversation, convinced him that a violent course of procedure would do
him injury.  Swallowing his passion, therefore, as he best could, he
said--

"Come, Mr Scraggs, I did not expect that _you_ would set a mutinous
example to the men; and if it were not that you do so out of respect for
the supposed orders of the captain, I would put you in irons at once."

Scraggs smiled sarcastically at this threat, but made no reply, and the
mate continued--

"The captain did indeed order me to remain where we are, but I have
since discovered that the black dogs have attacked the Christian
settlement, as it is called, and you know as well as I do, that Gascoyne
would not let slip the chance to pitch into the undefended village of
the niggers, and pay them off for the mischief they have done to us more
than once.  At any rate, I mean to go round and blow down their log huts
with Long Tom; so you can go ashore if you don't like the work."

Manton knew well, when he made this allusion to mischief formerly done
to the crew of the _Foam_, that he touched a rankling sore in the breast
of Scraggs, who in a skirmish with the natives some time before had lost
an eye; and the idea of revenging himself on the defenceless women and
children of his enemies was so congenial to the mind of the second mate,
that his objections to act willingly under Manton's orders were at once
removed.

"Ha!" said he, commencing to pace to and fro on the quarter-deck with
his superior officer, while the men made the necessary preparations for
the intended assault, "that alters the case, Mr Manton.  I don't think,
however, that Gascoyne would have taken advantage of the chance to give
the brutes what they deserve, for I must say he does seem to be
unaccountably chicken-hearted; perhaps it's as well that he's out of the
way.  Do you happen to know where he is or what he's doing?"

"Not I.  No doubt he is playing some sly game with this British cruiser,
and I dare say he may be lending a hand to the settlers, for he's got
some strange interests to look after there, you know," (here both men
laughed,) "and I shouldn't wonder if he was beforehand with us in
pitching into the niggers.  He is always ready enough to fight in
self-defence, though we can never get him screwed up to the assaulting
point."

"Ay, we saw something of the fighting from the hill tops, but as it is
no business of ours, I brought the men down in case they might be wanted
aboard."

"Quite right, Scraggs.  You're a judicious fellow to send on a dangerous
expedition.  I'm not sure, however, that Gascoyne would thank you for
leaving him to fight the savages alone."  Manton chuckled as he said
this, and Scraggs grinned maliciously as he replied--

"Well, it can't exactly be said that I've _left_ him, seeing that I have
not been with him since we parted aboard of this schooner, and as to his
fightin' the niggers alone,--hasn't he got ever so many hundred
_Christian_ niggers to help him to lick the others?"

"True," said Manton, while a smile of contempt curled his lip.  "But
here comes the breeze, and the sun won't be long behind it.  All the
better for the work we've got to do.  Mind your helm there.  Here, lads,
take a pull at the topsail halyards; and some of you get the nightcap
off Long Tom.  I say, Mr Scraggs, should we shew them the _red_, by way
of comforting their hearts?"

Scraggs shook his head dubiously.  "You forget the cruiser.  She has
eyes aboard, and may chance to set them on that same red, in which case
it's likely she would shew us her teeth."

"And what then?" demanded Manton, "are _you_ also growing
chicken-hearted.  Besides," he added in a milder tone, "the cruiser is
quietly at anchor on the other side of the island, and there's not a
captain in the British navy who could take a pinnace, much less a ship,
through the reefs at the north end of the island without a pilot."

"Well," returned Scraggs, carelessly, "do as you please.  It's all one
to me."

While the two officers were conversing, the active crew of the _Foam_
were busily engaged in carrying out the orders of Manton, and the
graceful schooner glided swiftly along the coast before the same breeze
which urged the _Talisman_ to the north end of the island.  The former,
having few reefs to avoid, approached her destination much more rapidly
than the latter, and there is no doubt that she would have arrived first
on the scene of action had not the height and form of the cliffs
prevented the wind from filling her sails on two or three occasions.

Meanwhile, in obedience to Manton's orders, a great and very peculiar
change was effected in the outward aspect of the _Foam_.  To one
unacquainted with the character of the schooner, the proceedings of her
crew must have seemed unaccountable as well as surprising.  The
carpenter and his assistants were slung over the sides of the vessel,
upon which they plied their screwdrivers for a considerable time with
great energy, but, apparently, with very little result.  In the course
of a quarter of an hour, however, a long narrow plank was loosened,
which, when stripped off, discovered a narrow line of bright scarlet
running quite round the vessel, a little more than a foot above the
water-line.  This having been accomplished, they next proceeded to the
figurehead, and, unscrewing the white lady who smiled there, fixed in
her place a hideous griffin's head, which, like the ribbon, was also
bright scarlet.  While these changes were being effected, others of the
crew removed the boat that lay on the deck, bottom up, between the
masts, and uncovered a long brass pivot-gun of the largest calibre,
which shone in the saffron light of morning like a mass of burnished
gold.  This gun was kept scrupulously clean and neat in all its
arrangements; the rammers, sponges, screws, and other apparatus
belonging to it, were neatly arranged beside it, and four or five of its
enormous iron shot were piled under its muzzle.  The traversing gear
connected with it was well greased, and, in short, everything about the
gun gave proof of the care that was bestowed on it.

But these were not the only alterations made in the mysterious schooner.
Round both masts were piled a number of muskets, boarding-pikes,
cutlasses, and pistols, all of which were perfectly clean and bright,
and the men--fierce enough and warlike in their aspect at all times--had
now rendered themselves doubly so, by putting on broad belts with
pistols therein, and tucking up their sleeves to the shoulders, thereby
displaying their brawny arms as if they had dirty work before them.
This strange metamorphosis was finally completed when Manton, with his
own hands, ran up to the peak of the mainsail a bright scarlet flag with
the single word "AVENGER" on it in large black letters.

During one of those lulls in the breeze to which we have referred, and
while the smooth ocean glowed in the mellow light that ushered in the
day, the attention of those on board the _Avenger_ (as we shall call the
double-faced schooner when under red colours) was attracted to one of
the more distant cliffs, on the summit of which human beings appeared to
