reality all but under the waves and the knowledge that the proverbial
plank between him and death was of the very thinnest description, a
sensation of helplessness and of dependence on the Almighty, such as he
had never before experienced, crept over him.  What the thoughts of the
hermit were he could not tell, for that strange man seldom spoke about
himself; but Moses was not so reticent, for he afterwards remarked that
he had often been caught by gales while in the canoe, and had been
attached for hours to their floating anchor, but that "dat was out ob
sight de wust bust ob wedder dey'd had since dey come to lib at
Krakatoa, an' he had bery nigh giben up in despair!"

The use of the floating breakwater was to meet the full force of the
seas and break them just before they reached the canoe.  In spite of
this some of them were so tremendous that, broken though they were, the
swirling foam completely buried the craft for a second or two, but the
sharp bow cut its way through, and the water poured off the deck and off
the stooping figures like rain from a duck's back.  Of course a good
deal got in at their necks, sleeves, and other small openings, and wet
them considerably, but that, as Moses remarked, "was not'ing to speak
ob."

Thus they lay tossing in the midst of the raging foam for several hours.
Now and then each would raise his head a little to see that the rope
held fast, but was glad to lower it again.  They hardly knew when day
broke.  It was so slow in coming, and so gloomy and dark when it did
come, that the glare of the lightning-flash seemed more cheerful.

It may be easily believed that there was no conversation during those
hours of elemental strife, though the thoughts of each were busy enough.
At last the thunder ceased, or, rather, retired as if in growling
defiance of the world which it had failed to destroy.  Then the sky
began to lighten a little, and although the wind did not materially
abate in force it became more steady and equal.  Before noon, however,
it had subsided so much that Moses suggested the propriety of continuing
the voyage.  To this Van der Kemp agreed, and the floating anchor was
hauled in; the large paddle was resumed by the hermit, and the dangerous
process of turning the canoe was successfully accomplished.

When the mast was again set up and the close-reefed main and foresails
were hoisted, the light craft bounded away once more before the wind
like a fleck of foam.  Then a gleam of sunshine forced its way through
the driving clouds, and painted a spot of emerald green on the heaving
sea.  Soon after that Van der Kemp opened the lid, or hatch, of the
fore-hold, and Spinkie, jumping out with alacrity, took possession of
his usual seat beside the mast, to which he clung with affectionate
tenacity.  Gradually the wind went down.  Reef after reef of the two
sails was shaken out, and for several hours thereafter our travellers
sped merrily on, plunging into the troughs and cutting through the
crests of the stormy sea.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

FRIENDS ARE MET WITH, ALSO PIRATES, AND A LIFE-OR-DEATH PADDLE ENSUES.

In physics, as in morals, a storm is frequently the precursor of a dead
calm.

Much to the monkey's joy, to say nothing of the men, the sun ere long
asserted its equatorial power, and, clearing away the clouds, allowed
the celestial blue to smile on the turmoil below.  The first result of
that smile was that the wind retired to its secret chambers, leaving the
ships of men to flap their idle sails.  Then the ocean ceased to fume,
though its agitated bosom still continued for some time to heave.
Gradually the swell went down and soon the unruffled surface reflected a
dimpling smile to the sky.

When this happy stage had been reached our voyagers lowered and stowed
the canoe-sails, and continued to advance under paddles.

"We get along wonderfully fast, Van der Kemp," said Nigel, while resting
after a pretty long spell; "but it seems to me, nevertheless, that we
shall take a considerable time to reach Borneo at this rate, seeing that
it must be over two hundred miles away, and if we have much bad weather
or contrary wind, we shan't be able to reach it for weeks--if at all."

"I have been thrown somewhat out of my reckoning," returned the hermit,
"by having to fly from the party on the islet, where I meant to remain
till a steamer, owned by a friend of mine, should pass and pick us up,
canoe and all.  The steamer is a short-voyage craft, and usually so
punctual that I can count on it to a day.  But it may have passed us in
the gale.  If so, I shall take advantage of the first vessel that will
agree to lend us a hand."

"How!--Do you get them to tow you?"

"Nay, that were impossible.  A jerk from the tow-rope of a steamer at
full speed would tear us asunder.  Have you observed these two strong
ropes running all round our gunwale, and the bridles across with
ring-bolts in them?"

"I have, and did not ask their use, as I thought they were merely meant
to strengthen the canoe."

"So they are," continued the hermit, "but they have other uses
besides--"

"Massa," cried Moses, at this point.  "You'll 'scuse me for 'truptin'
you, but it's my opinion dat Spinkie's sufferin' jus' now from a empty
stummik!"

The hermit smiled and Nigel laughed.  Laying down his paddle the former
said--

"I understand, Moses.  That speech means that you are suffering from the
same complaint.  Well--get out the biscuit."

"Jus' de way ob de wurld," muttered the negro with a bland smile.  "If a
poor man obsarves an feels for de sorrows ob anoder, he allers gits
credit for t'inkin' ob his-self.  Neber mind, I's used to it!"

Evidently the unjust insinuation did not weigh heavily on the negro's
spirit, for he soon began to eat with the appetite of a healthy
alligator.

While he was thus engaged, he chanced to raise his eyes towards the
south-western horizon, and there saw something which caused him to
splutter, for his mouth was too full to speak, but his speaking eyes and
pointing finger caused his companions to turn their faces quickly to the
quarter indicated.

"A steamer!" exclaimed the hermit and Nigel in the same breath.

The vessel in question was coming straight towards them, and a very
short time enabled Van der Kemp to recognise with satisfaction the
steamer owned by his friend.

"Look here, run that to the mast-head," said Van der Kemp, handing a red
flag to Nigel.  "We lie so low in the water that they might pass quite
close without observing us if we showed no signal."

An immediate, though slight, change in the course of the steamer showed
that the signal had been seen.  Hereupon the hermit and Moses performed
an operation on the canoe which still farther aroused Nigel's surprise
and curiosity.  He resolved to ask no questions, however, but to await
the issue of events.

From the marvellous hold of the canoe, which seemed to be a magazine for
the supply of every human need, Moses drew a short but strong rope or
cable, with a ring in the middle of it, and a hook at each end.  He
passed one end along to his master who hooked it to the bridle-rope at
the bow before referred to.  The other end was hooked to the bridle in
the stern, so that the ring in the centre came close to Nigel's elbow.

This arrangement had barely been completed when the steamer was within
hail, but no hail was given, for the captain knew what was expected of
him.  He reduced speed as the vessel approached the canoe, and finally
came almost to a stop as he ranged alongside.

"What cheer, Van der Kemp?  D'ye want a lift to-day?" shouted the
skipper, looking over the side.

A nod and a wave of the hand was the hermit's reply.

"Heave a rope, boys--bow and stern--and lower away the tackle," was the
skipper's order.

A coil was flung to Van der Kemp, who deftly caught it and held on
tight.  Another was flung to Moses, who also caught it and held on--
slack.  At the same moment, Nigel saw a large block with a hook attached
descending towards his head.

"Catch it, Nigel, and hook it to the ring at your elbow," said the
hermit.

Our hero obeyed, still in surprise, though a glimmer of what was to
follow began to dawn.

"Haul away!" shouted the skipper, and next moment the canoe was swinging
in the air, kept in position by the lines in the hands of Van der Kemp
and Moses.  At the same time another order was given, and the steamer
went ahead full speed.

It was all so suddenly done, and seemed such a reckless proceeding, that
Nigel found himself on the steamer's deck, with the canoe reposing
beside him, before he had recovered from his surprise sufficiently to
acknowledge in suitable terms the welcome greeting of the hospitable
skipper.

"You see, Nigel," said Van der Kemp that night, as the two friends paced
the deck together after supper, "I have other means, besides paddles and
sails, of getting quickly about in the Java seas.  Many of the traders
and skippers here know me, and give me a lift in this way when I require
it."

"Very kind of them, and very convenient," returned Nigel.  He felt
inclined to add: "But why all this moving about?" for it was quite
evident that trade was not the hermit's object, but the question, as
usual, died on his lips, and he somewhat suddenly changed the subject.

"D'ye know, Van der Kemp, that I feel as if I must have seen you
somewhere or other before now, for your features seem strangely familiar
to me.  Have you ever been in England?"

"Never.  As I have told you, I was born in Java, and was educated in
Hong Kong at an English School.  But a fancy of this sort is not very
uncommon.  I myself once met a perfect stranger who bore so strong a
resemblance to an old friend, that I spoke to him as such, and only
found out from his voice that I was mistaken."

The captain of the steamer came on deck at that moment and cut short the
conversation.

"Are you engaged, Van der Kemp?" he asked.

"No--I am at your service."

"Come below then, I want to have a talk with you."

Thus left alone, and overhearing a loud burst of laughter at the fore
part of the steamer, Nigel went forward to see what was going on.  He
found a group of sailors round his comrade Moses, apparently engaged in
good-natured "chaff."

"Come, now, blackey," said one; "be a good fellow for once in your life
an' tell us what makes your master live on a desert island like Robinson
Crusoe, an' go about the ocean in a canoe."

"Look 'ere now, whitey," returned Moses, "what you take me for?"

"A nigger, of course."

"Ob course, an' you're right for once, which is such an unusual t'ing
dat I 'dvise you go an' ax de cappen to make a note ob it in de log.
I's a nigger, an a nigger's so much more 'cute dan a white man dat you
shouldn't ought to expect him to blab his massa's secrets."

"Right you are, Moses.  Come, then, if you won't reveal secrets, give us
a song."

"Couldn't t'ink ob such a t'ing," said the negro, with a solemn,
remonstrant shake of the head.

"Why not?"

"'Cause I neber sing a song widout a moral, an' I don't like to hurt
your feelin's by singin' a moral dat would be sure to waken up _some_ o'
your consciences."

"Never mind that, darkey.  Our consciences are pretty tough.  Heave
ahead."

"But dere's a chorus," said Moses, looking round doubtfully.

"What o' that?  We'll do our best with it--if it ain't too difficult."

"Oh, it's not diffikilt, but if de lazy fellers among you sings de
chorus dey'll be singin' lies, an' I don't 'zackly like to help men to
tell lies.  Howseber, here goes.  It begins wid de chorus so's you may
know it afore you has to sing it."

So saying, Moses struck two fingers on the capstan after the manner of a
tuning-fork, and, holding them gravely to his ear as if to get the right
pitch, began in a really fine manly voice to chant the following
ditty:--

  "Go to Work."

  Oh when de sun am shinin' bright, and eberyt'ing am fair,
  Clap on de steam an' go to work, an' take your proper share.
  De wurld hab got to go ahead, an' dem what's young and strong
  Mus' do deir best, wid all de rest, to roll
  de wurld along.

  De lazy man does all he can to stop its whirlin' round.
  If he was king he'd loaf an' sing--and guzzle, I'll be bound,
  He always shirk de hardest work, an' t'ink he's awful clebbar,
  But boder his head to earn his bread, Oh! no, he'll nebber, nebber.
  _Chorus_--Oh when de sun, etcetera.

  De selfish man would rader dan put out his hand to work,
  Let women toil, an' sweat and moil--as wicked as de Turk.
  De cream ob eberyt'ing he wants, let oders hab de skim;
  In fact de wurld and all it holds was only made for him.
  _Chorus_--Oh when de sun, etcetera.

  So keep de ball a-rollin', boys, an' each one do his best
  To make de wurld a happy one--for dat's how man is blest.
  Do unto oders all around de t'ing what's good and true,
  An' oders, 'turning tit for tat, will do do same to you.
  _Chorus_--Oh when de sun, etcetera.

The sailors, who were evidently much pleased, took up the chorus
moderately at the second verse, came out strong at the third, and sang
with such genuine fervour at the last that it was quite evident, as
Moses remarked, there was not a lazy man amongst them--at least, if they
all sang conscientiously!

The weather improved every hour, and after a fine run of about
twenty-four hours over that part of the Malay Sea, our three voyagers
were lowered over the steamer's side in their canoe when within sight of
the great island of Borneo.

"I'm sorry," said the captain at parting, "that our courses diverge
here, for I would gladly have had your company a little longer.
Good-bye.  I hope we'll come across you some other time when I'm in
these parts."

"Thanks--thanks, my friend," replied Van der Kemp, with a warm grip of
the hand, and a touch of pathos in his tones.  "I trust that we shall
meet again.  You have done me good service by shortening my voyage
considerably.--Farewell."

"I say, Moses," shouted one of the seamen, as he looked down on the tiny
canoe while they were pushing off.

"Hallo?"

"Keep your heart up, for--we'll try to `do to oders all around de t'ing
what's good an' true!'"

"Das de way, boy--`an' oders, 'turning tit for tat, will do de same to
you!'"

He yelled rather than sang this at the top of his tuneful voice, and
waved his hand as the sharp craft shot away over the sea.

Fortunately the sea was calm, for it was growing dark when they reached
the shores of Borneo and entered the mouth of a small stream, up which
they proceeded to paddle.  The banks of the stream were clothed with
mangrove trees.  We have said the banks, but in truth the mouth of that
river had no distinguishable banks at all, for it is the nature of the
mangrove to grow in the water--using its roots as legs with which, as it
were, to wade away from shore.  When darkness fell suddenly on the
landscape, as it is prone to do in tropical regions, the gnarled roots
of those mangroves assumed the appearance of twining snakes in Nigel's
eyes.  Possessing a strongly imaginative mind he could with difficulty
resist the belief that he saw them moving slimily about in the black
water, and, in the dim mysterious light, tree-stems and other objects
assumed the appearance of hideous living forms, so that he was enabled
to indulge the uncomfortable fancy that they were traversing some
terrestrial Styx into one of Dante's regions of horror.

In some respects this was not altogether a fancy, for they were
unwittingly drawing near to a band of human beings whose purposes, if
fully carried out, would render the earth little better than a hell to
many of their countrymen.

It is pretty well-known that there is a class of men in Borneo called
Head Hunters.  These men hold the extraordinary and gruesome opinion
that a youth has not attained to respectable manhood until he has taken
the life of some human being.

There are two distinct classes of Dyaks--those who inhabit the hills and
those who dwell on the sea-coast.  It is the latter who recruit the
ranks of the pirates of those eastern seas, and it was to the camp of a
band of such villains that our adventurers were, as already said,
unwittingly drawing near.

They came upon them at a bend of the dark river beyond which point the
mangroves gave place to other trees--but what sort of trees they were it
was scarcely light enough to make out very distinctly, except in the
case of the particular tree in front of which the Dyaks were encamped,
the roots of which were strongly illuminated by their camp fire.  We say
_roots_ advisedly, for this singular and gigantic tree started its
branches from a complexity of aerial roots which themselves formed a
pyramid some sixty feet high, before the branches proper of the tree
began.

If our voyagers had used oars the sharp ears of the pirates would have
instantly detected them.

As it was, the softly moving paddles and the sharp cutwater of the canoe
made no noise whatever.  The instant that Van der Kemp, from his
position in the bow, observed the camp, he dipped his paddle deep, and
noiselessly backed water.  There was no need to give any signal to his
servant.  Such a thorough understanding existed between them that the
mere action of the hermit was sufficient to induce the negro to support
him by a similar movement on the opposite side, and the canoe glided as
quickly backward as it had previously advanced.  When under the deep
shadow of the bank Moses thrust the canoe close in, and his master,
laying hold of the bushes, held fast and made a sign to him to land and
reconnoitre.

Creeping forward to an opening in the bushes close at hand, Moses peeped
