her own private use.  She now opened it with the determination to enjoy
it to the full, to smack her lips very much and frequently, and offer
none of it to Hobbs.  When the cover was removed she gazed into the pot
with a look of intense horror, uttered a piercing shriek, and fell back
in a dead faint.

This extraordinary result is easily accounted for.  Almost every human
being has one grand special loathing.  There is everywhere some creature
which to some individual is an object of dread--a creature to be shrunk
from and shuddered at.  Mrs Brown's horror was frogs.  Jacky knew this
well.  He also knew of Mrs Brown's love for cranberry-jam, and her
having put up a special pot.  To abstract the pot, replace it by a
similar pot with a live frog imprisoned therein, and then retire to
chuckle in solitude and devour the jam, was simple and natural.  That
the imp had done this; that he had watched with delight the deceived
woman pant up Glen Ogle with the potted frog on her arm and perspiration
on her brow; that he had asked for a little cranberry-jam on the way,
with an expression of countenance that almost betrayed him; and that he
had almost shrieked with glee, when he observed the anxiety with which
Mrs Brown--having tripped and fallen--opened her basket and smiled to
observe that the pot was _not_ broken; that the imp, we say, had been
guilty of all this, was known only to himself; but much of it became
apparent to the mind of Hobbs, when, on Mrs Brown's fainting, he heard
a yell of triumph, and, on looking up, beheld Master Jacky far up the
heights, clearly defined against the bright sky, and celebrating the
success of his plot with a maniacal edition of the Highland fling.

At a quarter-past four all the party assembled at the inn except Mr
Sudberry.

Five arrived--no Mr Sudberry.  The coach could not wait!  The
gentlemen, in despair, rushed up the bed of the stream, and found him
fishing, in a glow of excitement, with his basket and all his pockets
full of splendid trout.

The result was that the party had to return home in a large wagon, and
it was night when at last they embarked in their boat and rowed down
their own lake.  It was a profound calm.  The air was mild and balmy.
There was just enough of light to render the surrounding mountains
charmingly mysterious, and the fatigues of the day made the repose of
the boat agreeable.  Even Mrs Sudberry enjoyed that romantic night-trip
on the water.  It was so dark that there was a tendency to keep silence
on landing to speak in low tones; but a little burst of delight broke
forth when they surmounted the dark shoulder of the hill, and came at
last in sight of the windows of the White House, glowing a ruddy welcome
home.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 18.

THE FAMILY GO TO CHURCH UNDER DIFFICULTIES.

It would seem to be a well-understood and undeniable fact that woman
invariably gains the victory over man in the long-run; and even when she
does not prove to be the winner, she is certain to come off the
conqueror.  It is well that it should be so.  The reins of the world
could not be in better hands!

But, strangely enough, woman triumphs, not only in matters over which
she and man have, more or less, united control, but even in matters with
which the human race cannot interfere.  For instance, in regard to
weather--despite the three weeks of unfailing sunshine, Mrs Sudberry
maintained her original opinion, that, notwithstanding appearances being
against her, the weather in the Highlands of Scotland was, as a rule,
execrable.  As if to justify this opinion, the weather suddenly changed,
and the three weeks of sunshine were followed by _six_ weeks of rain.

Whether there was something unusual in the season or not, we cannot
positively say; but certain it is that, for the period we have named, it
rained incessantly, with the exception of four days.  During a great
part of the time it rained from morning till night.  Sometimes it was
intermittent, and came down in devastating floods.  At other times it
came in the form of Scotch mist, which is simply small rain, so
plentiful that it usually obliterates the whole landscape, and so
penetrating that it percolates through everything except water-proof.
It was a question which was the more wetting species of rain--the
thorough down-pour or the heavy mist.  But whether it poured or
permeated, there was never any change in the leaden sky during these six
weeks, and the mountains were never clearly seen except during the four
accidental days already referred to.

At first Mrs Sudberry triumphed; but long before that season was over
she had reached such a condition of humility that she would have
actually rejoiced in a fine day.

As for the rest of the family, they bore up against it bravely for a
time.  On the first day of this wet season, they were rather pleased
than otherwise to be obliged to stay in the house.  Jacky, in
particular, was delighted, as it afforded him a glorious opportunity of
doing mischief, and making himself so disagreeable, that all, except his
mother, felt as if they hated him.  On the second day, indoor games of
various kinds were proposed and entered into with much spirit.  On the
third day the games were tried again, with less spirit.  On the fourth
day they were played without any spirit at all, and on the fifth they
were given up in disgust.  The sixth day was devoted to reading and
sulking, and thus they ended that week.

The seventh day, which chanced to be Sunday, was one of the four fine
days before mentioned.  The sky was blue, the sun intensely bright, and
the inundated earth was steaming.  The elastic spirits of the family
recovered.

"Come, we'll walk to church!" cried Mr Sudberry, as they rose from
breakfast.

"What, my dear!" exclaimed his wife, "and the roads knee-deep in mud and
water!"

"I care not if they were waist-deep!" cried the reckless man: "I've been
glued to my seat for a week; so I'll walk to church, if I should have to
swim for it."

"So will I! so will I!" from George and Fred; "So will we all!" from
Lucy; "And me, too!" timidly, from Tilly; with "Hurrah!" furiously from
the imp,--this decided the business.

"Very well!" said the resigned mother of the flock; "then I will go
too!"

So away they went to church, through mud and mire and water, with the
nine collie dogs at their heels, and Mr McAllister bearing them
company.

Fred and McAllister walked together in rear of the rest, conversing
earnestly, for the latter was learned in theology, and the former dearly
loved a philosophical discussion.  Mr Sudberry and Lucy walked in
advance.  As he approached the well-known bush, the force of habit
induced him almost unconsciously to pick up a stone and walk on tip-toe.
Lucy, who did not know the cause of this strange action, looked at her
father in surprise.

Whirr! went a black-cock; bang! went the stone, and a yell instantly
followed, accompanied by a hat--it was his best beaver!

"Why, dear papa, it is Sunday!"

"Dear me, so it is!"  The good man was evidently much discomfited.  "Ah!
Lucy dear, that shows the effect and force of bad habit; that is to
say, of habit, (for the simple act cannot be called bad), on the wrong
day."

"You cannot call throwing your best hat in the mud a good habit on _any_
day," said Mrs Sudberry, with the air of a woman who regarded her
husband's chance of mending as being quite hopeless.

"It was only forgetfulness, my dear!" said the worthy man, putting his
hat quite meekly on the back of his head, and pushing forward in order
to avoid further remarks.  Coming to a hollow of the road, they found
that it was submerged a foot deep by the river, which had been swollen
into a small lake at that spot.  There was much trouble here.
McAllister, with native gallantry, offered to carry the ladies over in
his arms; but the ladies would not listen to the proposal, with the
exception of Tilly, who at once accepted it gladly.  The rest succeeded
in scrambling along by the projecting stones at the base of the wall
that ran alongside of the road, and gained the other side, after many
slips, much alarm, and sundry screams.

"Oh, you _darling_!" cried Tilly, suddenly.  She pointed to a hole in
the wall, out of which peeped the most wide-awake weasel that ever
lived.  Its brown little head and sharp nose moved quickly about with
little jerks, and its round lustrous black eyes seemed positively to
glitter with surprise, (perhaps it was delight), at the Sudberry Family.
Of course Jacky rushed at it with a yell--there was a good deal of the
terrier in Jacky--and of course the weasel turned tail, and vanished
like a flash of light.

When they came to the narrowest part of the pass which opened out of
their own particular valley--Rasselas Vale, as Lucy had named it--Tilly
was fortunate enough to set eyes on another "darling," which, in the
shape of a roe deer, stood, startled and trembling, in the centre of the
pass.  They came on it so suddenly that it seemed to have been paralysed
for a moment.  A shout from the imp, however, quickly dissolved the
spell; with one graceful bound it cleared the wall, and was far away
among the brackens on the mountain-side before the party had recovered
from their delight and surprise at having met a real live wild deer,
face to face, and not twenty yards distant, in this unexpected manner.

Nothing further occurred to arrest their progress to church, which was
upwards of four miles from their home among the hills.

The sermon that day was peculiar.  The minister of the parish was a
young man; one of those quiet, modest, humble young men, who are, as
their friends think, born to be neglected in this world.  He was a
shrewd, sensible young fellow, however, who, if put to it, could have
astonished his "friends" not a little.  He was brimful of "Scotch"
theology; but, strange to say, he refrained from bringing that fact
prominently before his flock, insomuch that some of the wiser among them
held the opinion, that, although he was an excellent, worthy young man,
he was, if any thing, a little commonplace--in fact, "he never seemed to
have any diffeeculties in his discoorses: an' if he _had_, he aye got
ower them by sayin' plump oot that they were mysteries he did na pretend
to unravel!"

Any one with half an eye might have seen that the young clergyman was
immeasurably above his flock intellectually.  A few of them, among whom
was our friend McAllister, perceived this, and appreciated their
minister.  The most of them, good souls, thought him worthy, but _weak_.

Feeling that he had been appointed to _preach the gospel_, this youth
resolved to "make himself all things to all men, in order that he might
gain some."  He therefore aimed at preaching Christ crucified, and kept
much of his own light in the background, bringing it out only in
occasional flashes, which were calculated to illuminate, but not dazzle,
the minds of his people.  He remembered the remark of that old woman,
who, when asked what she thought of a new minister, said, "Hoot!  I
think naethin' o' him ava'; _I understand every word he says_," and he
resolved rather to be thought nothing of at all than pander to the
contemptible craving of those who fancy that they are drinking deep
draughts of wisdom when they read or hear words that are
incomprehensible, but which _sound_ profoundly philosophical.

But we might have spared our readers all this, for the young minister
did not preach that day.  He was unwell, and a friend had agreed to
preach for him.  The friend was an old man, with bent form and silvery
hair, who, having spent a long life in preaching the gospel, had been
compelled, by increasing age, to retire from active service.  Yet, like
a true warrior, he could, when occasion required, buckle on his
Christian armour, and fight stoutly, as of old, for his beloved Master
and for the salvation of human souls.

His eye was dim and his voice was weak, and it brought tears to the eyes
of the sympathetic among the people to see the old man lose his place
and unconsciously repeat his sentences.  But not a shadow of disrespect
mingled with their feelings.  There was no mistaking the glow of love
and the kindly fire which flushed the pale face when salvation was the
theme.  When he mentioned the name of Jesus, and urged sinners to flee
from the wrath to come, the people _felt_ the truth of that word, "God's
strength is perfected in man's weakness."

The Sudberrys felt very happy that day on returning home.  They overtook
old Moggy, stumping along through mud and water, with tears bedewing her
cheeks.

"Why, Moggy, you are all wet!" said Fred, hastening towards her.

"Ay, I fell into a dub as I cam out o' the kirk.  But, ech! sirs, I've
heard blessed words this day."

The Sudberrys spent that evening in their usual way.  They went to a
particular spot, which Lucy had named the Sunny Knoll, and there learned
hymns off by heart, which were repeated at night, and commented on by
Mr Sudberry.  After supper they all got into what is called "a talk."
It were presumptuous to attempt to explain what that means.  Everyone
knows what it is.  Many people know, also, that "a talk" can be got up
when people are in the right spirit, on any subject, and that the
subject of all others most difficult to get up this "talk" upon, is
religion.  Mr Sudberry knew this; he felt much inclined at one time
that night to talk about fishing, but he laid strong constraint on
himself; and gave the conversation a turn in the right direction.  The
result was "a talk"--a hearty, free, enthusiastic communing on the
Saviour, the soul, and eternal things, which kept them up late and sent
them happy to bed--happier than they had yet been all that season.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 19.

A STRANGE HOME-COMING.

Master Jacky made two discoveries next day, both of which he announced
with staring eyes and in breathless haste, having previously dashed into
the parlour like a miniature thunderbolt.

The first was that the bathing-pool was clean swept away by the floods,
not a vestige of it being left.  The whole family rushed out to see with
their own eyes.  They saw and were convinced.  Not a trace of it
remained.  Even the banks of the little stream had been so torn and
altered by gushing water and tumbling rocks that it was almost
impossible to say where that celebrated pool had been.  The rains having
commenced again on Monday, (just as if Sunday had been allowed to clear
up in order to let people get to church), the family returned to the
house, some to read and sketch, Mr Sudberry and George to prepare for a
fishing excursion, despite the rain.

The second discovery was more startling in its nature.  Jacky announced
it with round eyes and a blazing face, thus--

"Oh! ma, old Moggy's d-dyin'!"

The attractive power of "sweeties" and a certain fondness for the old
woman in the boy's heart had induced Jacky to visit the hut so
frequently, that it at last came to be understood, that, when the imp
was utterly lost, he was sure to be at old Moggy's!  He had sauntered
down, indifferent to rain, to call on his friend just after discovering
the destruction of the bathing-pool, and found her lying on the bundle
of rags which constituted her bed.  She was groaning woefully.  Jack
went forward with much anxiety.  The old woman was too ill to raise
herself; but she had sufficient strength to grasp the child's hand, and,
drawing him towards her, to stroke his head.

"Hallo!  Moggy, you're ill!"

A groan and a gasp was the reply, and the poor creature made such wry
faces, and looked altogether so cadaverous, that Jacky was quite
alarmed.  He suggested a drink of water, and brought her one.  Then, as
the old woman poured out a copious stream of Gaelic with much emphasis,
he felt that the presence of some more able and intelligent nurse was
necessary; so, like a sensible boy, he ran home and delivered his
report, as has been already described.

Lucy and Fred hastened at once to the hut of the old woman, and found
her in truth in a high fever, the result, no doubt, of the severe
wetting of the day before, and having slept in damp clothes.  Her mind
was wandering a little when Lucy knelt at her side and took her hand,
but she retained sufficient self-control to look up and exclaim
earnestly, "I can say'd noo--I can say'd noo!  I can say, _Thy will be
done_!"

She became aware, as she said so, that the visitor at her side was not
the one she had expected.

"Eh! ye're no' Miss Flora."

"No, dear granny, but I am quite as anxious to help you, and Flora will
come very soon.  We have only just heard of your illness, and have sent
a message to Flora.  Come, tell me what is the matter; let me put your
poor head right."

Old Moggy submitted with a groan, and Lucy, assisted by Fred,
endeavoured to make her bed a little more comfortable, while the anxious
and staring Jacky was sent back to the house for some tea and a dry
flannel gown.  Before his return, however, Flora Macdonald, who chanced
to be in the neighbourhood, came in to see Moggy, and immediately took
the case in hand, in a way that greatly relieved Fred and Lucy, because
they felt that she was accustomed to such incidents, and thoroughly
understood what to do.

Hobbs, who came in a few minutes later with the Sudberry medicine chest,
was instantly despatched by Flora for the doctor, and George, who
entered a few minutes after that, was sent about his business, as were
also a number of gossips, whose presence would ere long have rendered
the small hut unbearably warm, but for Flora's decision.

Meanwhile all this unusual bustle had the effect of diverting the mind
of the patient, who ceased to groan, and took to wandering instead.

Leaving them all thus engaged, we must beg the reader to accompany us to
a very different scene.

It is a dense thicket within the entrance of the pass, to which
reference has been made more than once.  Here a band of wandering
beggars or gypsies had pitched their camp on a spot which commanded an
extensive view of the high-road, yet was itself concealed from view by
the dwarf-trees which in that place covered the rugged hill-side.

There was a rude hut constructed of boughs and ferns, underneath which
several dark-skinned and sturdy children were at play.  A
dissipated-looking young woman sat beside them.  In front of this hut a
small fire was kindled, and over it, from a tripod, hung an iron pot,
the contents of which were watched with much interest, and stirred from
time to time by a middle-aged woman of forbidding aspect.  Beside her
stood our amiable friend with the squint and the broken nose, who has
already been mentioned as having received a merited thrashing from Mr
Sudberry.

"Yes, the little brute has come back," said the gypsy, grinding his
teeth in a way that might have led one to suppose he would have been
glad to have had the "little brute" between them.

"Serves ye right for stealin' him away!" said the woman.

"Serves me right!" echoed the man, bitterly.  "Did I not vow that I
would have my revenge on that old witch?  Did she not stand up in court
and witness again' me, so that I got two year for a job that many a
fellow gits off with six months for?"

"Well, you know you deserved it!" was the woman's comforting rejoinder.
"You committed the robbery."

"So I did; but if that she-wolf had not made it out so bad, I'd have got
off with six months.  Ha! but I knew how to touch her up.  I knew her
weakness! swore, afore I left the dock, that I'd steal away the little
cub she was so fond of--and _I did it_!"

There was a gleam of triumph in the gypsy's face as he said this, but it
was quickly followed by a scowl when the woman said--

"Well, and much you have made of it.  Here is the brat come back at the
end o' five years, to spoil our harvest!"

"How could I know he'd do that?  I paid the captain a goodish lump o'
tin to take him on a long voyage, and I thought he was so young that
he'd forget the old place."

"How d'ye know that he hasn't forgot it?" inquired the woman.

"'Cause, I seed him not twenty miles from this, and heerd him say he'd
stop at the Blue Boar all night, and come on here in the morning--that's
to-morrow--so I come straight out to ask you wot I'm to do."

"Ha! that's like you.  Too chicken-hearted to do any thing till I set
you on, an' mean enough to saddle it on me when ye'r nabbed."

"Come, that's an old story!" growled the man.  "You know wot _I_ am, and
I knows wot _you_ are.  But if something's not done, we'll have to cut
this here part o' the country in the very thick o' the season, when
these southern sightseers are ranging about the hills."

"That's true!" rejoined the woman, seriously.  "Many a penny the bairns
get from them, an there's no part so good as this.  Ye couldn't _put him
out o' the way_, could ye?"

"No," said the man, doggedly.

The woman had accompanied her question with a sidelong glance of
fiendish meaning, but her eyes at once dropped, and she evinced no anger
at the sharp decision of her companion's reply.

"Mother!" cried the young woman, issuing from the hut at the moment,
"don't you dare to go an' tempt him again like that.  Our hands are
black enough already; don't you try to make them _red_, else I'll blab!"

The elder woman assumed an injured look as she said, "Who spoke of
makin' them red?  Evil dreaders are evil doers.  Is there no way o'
puttin' a chick out o' the way besides murderin' him?"

"Hush!" exclaimed the man, starting and glancing round with a guilty
look, as if he fancied the bare mention of the word "murder" would bring
the strong arm of the law down on his head.

"I won't hush!" cried the woman.  "You're cowards, both of you.  Are
there no corries in the hills to hide him in--no ropes to tie him with--
that you should find it so difficult to keep a brat quiet for a week or
two?"
