Brings off a guanaco--Two natives captured--Attempt to take two more
defeated--Natives called Patagons--Possession of the country taken for
the crown of Spain--Mutiny discovered--Ringleaders executed--One of the
squadron wrecked--Squadron sails south--Entrance to the straits
discovered--Ships advance through them--The crews, alarmed, desire to
return--Two ships missing--Smoke seen--Land to south called Tierra del
Fuego--One of the ships deserts--Cape Deseado reached--The Pacific
appears--Squadron steers north-west--Two small islands seen--Fearful
sufferings from hunger--The crews attacked by scurvy--The Ladrones
reached, so-called from thievish natives--Some natives killed--Island of
Good Signs--Arrive at the Philippines--Natives friendly--Anchor off the
Island of Mazaqua--The Rajah Colamba--The Admiral plants a banner with a
cross, and invites the natives to worship it--Two officers dine with the
Rajah, who gets tipsy--The ships sail--The Rajah accompanies them--Reach
Zebut--Tribute demanded by the Rajah--Refused--How Magalhaens converted
the Rajah and all his people to the Romish faith.

Jealous rivalry for some time existed between the crowns of Castile and
Portugal, to obtain possession of the rich countries lately discovered
by their subjects in the Eastern seas and Pacific.  The Pope, who
claimed to be the Lord Paramount of the whole world, had munificently
bestowed all the lands in the east on the crown of Portugal, and those
in the west on that of Spain.  Yet these gifts rather increased than
diminished the contention existing between the two countries.  Each was
ready to undertake any enterprise which might injure the other.

Fernando De Magalhaens.

Of this ill feeling several adventurers took advantage, and if their
offers of service were not accepted at one Court, they went over to the
other to seek employment.  Among them was Fernando Magalhaens, a
Portuguese gentleman of good family, who had considerable experience in
nautical affairs, having performed a voyage to India and as far as the
Straits of Malacca.  He was also formed by nature for command,
possessing a courage in danger which nothing could appal, at the same
time a calm and amiable temper, which won the regard of all those with
whom he was brought in contact.  His personal appearance,
notwithstanding, was rather mean, as he was short in stature, and was
lame from a wound which he had received in battle with the Moors.  He
had, however, a quick and ready mind, and never wanting in
self-possession, was very fertile in expedients.  The pride of the
Spanish officers, and the national jealousy they felt, made them,
however, murmur sometimes against his authority.  He had eloquence to
support his views, and indomitable perseverance to carry them out.

After serving in India under the famous Albuquerque, he offered his
services to Portugal to lead an expedition to the west; but on meeting
with a rebuff, he went to Spain.  Here he formed the acquaintance of a
talented astronomer, Ruy Falero, and soon afterwards they together
proceeded to Cardinal Ximenez, to propose leading an expedition westward
from the Atlantic into the newly-discovered South Sea.  Their proposals
being favourably listened to by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, were
accepted, and they were furnished by his orders with five ships, manned
by two hundred and thirty-four men, having provisions for two years.  To
the adventurers was granted a twentieth part of the clear profit, and
the governorship of any islands they might discover was to be vested in
them and their heirs, who were to bear the title of Adelantado.

The squadron, which was fitted out at Seville, consisted of the
_Trinidad_, the Admiral's ship, of which Estevan Gomez, a Portuguese,
went as pilot; the _Saint Vitoria_, commanded by Don Luis de Mendoza;
the _Saint Antonio_, Don Juan de Carthagena; the _Santiago_, Don Juan
Serrano; and the _Conception_, Don Caspar de Quixada.

The Admiral Magalhaens depended chiefly on the naval skill of thirty of
his Portuguese countrymen whom he took with him, as he did likewise on
that of Serrano, who had served for many years in India, and for some
time at the Moluccas, which islands they hoped to reach from the
eastward, instead of their being approached, as before, from the west.

The ships being ready, the squadron set sail on the 10th of August,
1519, and steering south, they arrived on the 3rd of October off the
Cape de Verde Islands.  Getting into the region of calms, they were
detained for the long space of seventy days without making any progress;
but at last a breeze springing up, they got to the south of the line,
then steered a course which brought them about twenty degrees south in
sight of the coast of Brazil.  Putting into harbour, they obtained an
abundant supply of fruits, sugar-canes, and animals of various kinds,
differing greatly in appearance from those of Europe.  Proceeding about
two and a half leagues farther south, they again came to an anchor, at
the mouth of a large fresh water river, probably that of the Rio de la
Plata, as no other of the size mentioned exists in the south of the
continent.

Here, soon after they arrived, a number of persons of wild and furious
aspect and prodigious stature, making strange noises, rather resembling
the bellowing of bulls than the voices of human beings, came down to the
beach.  Notwithstanding their enormous size, these people when they ran
were so nimble, that none of the Spaniards or Portuguese could overtake
them.

They had not, however, much intercourse with these savages; they here,
however, obtained some pearls from oyster-shells which they fished up.
Proceeding south, they in a short time came off two islands, so thickly
covered with seals and penguins that they might easily, in the course of
a few hours, have laden all their ships with them.  The penguins were
black, heavy-looking, unwieldy fowl, extremely fat, covered with a sort
of down instead of feathers, having bills like those of ravens.  Fish
appeared to be their only food.

Continuing south until they reached latitude 49 degrees 30 minutes, the
weather becoming very tempestuous, with a contrary wind, they put into
harbour, hoping that the wind would soon change, when they might
continue their course.  In this, however, they were disappointed.  Day
after day went by, and the weather only grew worse and worse.  It was
evidently the winter of that region, though on the other side of the
line it was summer.  This caused no small astonishment to the crews.
They went on shore, but finding no inhabitants, believed that they had
arrived at some desert region of the world.  The wind blew fearfully
hard, with sleet and rain, and being ill provided to meet the inclemency
of the season, they preferred living on board.

One day they had landed for the sake of exercise, when, to their
surprise, they saw a human being approaching them.  He was a big fellow,
and strongly built, his body painted all over, with a stag's horn on
each cheek and large circles round his eyes.  The natural colour of his
skin, as far as could be perceived, was yellow, and his hair was of a
light tint.  His only garment was the skin of a beast roughly sewn
together, covering his whole body and limbs from head to foot.  In his
hand he carried a stout bow, and his arrows, instead of having iron
heads, were tipped with sharp stones.  As he advanced he began singing
and dancing, and as he got nearer he stood for some time throwing dust
upon his head.  The Spaniards imitating him, he came close up to them
without any signs of fear.  Being invited to go on board the ships, he
willingly stepped into a boat.  The Spanish chronicler declares that so
big was he, that the tallest of their number only reached up to his
waist; but as no persons of a stature so gigantic have been seen in the
country since, this statement must be doubted.  The Admiral welcomed him
on board, and directed that meat and drink should be given him, of which
he willingly partook, and seemed to enjoy himself.  Various toys were
shown him, and among them was a mirror, in which, happening to see
himself, he was so frightened that, starting back, he capsized two of
the crew, and did not easily recover his composure.

His dress, which was composed of several skins, was wrapped round his
body from his head to his ankles.  On his feet he wore shoes or boots of
the same material as his robe, so roughly made as to be almost round,
from which circumstance the Spaniards called him Patagon, or Big-footed,
a name they applied to all the people of that country.

He was so well treated that on returning on shore he induced several of
his countrymen to visit the ships, and one of them especially behaved
with so much good humour, and was so completely at his ease, that he won
the regard of the voyagers.  To show his gratitude, he brought them off
an animal, from the skin of which, he let them understand, the robe he
wore was composed.  The voyagers had never seen any creature like it
before, and described it as a beast which was neither mule, horse, nor
camel, but partaking of all three, having the ears of a mule, the tail
of a horse, and the body shaped like a camel.  He was probably a guanaco
or llama, commonly known as the Peruvian sheep.  The Admiral, wishing to
make prisoners of some of these big fellows, gave orders to his crew to
secure them.  Accordingly, while the poor savages were being amused with
toys put into their hands, which they grasped eagerly, the Spaniards put
iron shackles on the legs of two of them, persuading the men that they
were fine ornaments, like the rest of the things shown them.  They
appeared highly pleased with the jingling sound they produced when
struck together, until they suddenly found themselves hampered and
betrayed, on which they began bellowing like bulls, and shouting to
their god--_Setebos_--for assistance.  From this Shakespeare has
undoubtedly taken the name of the demon _Setebos_, introduced in the
play of the "Tempest."  This act of treachery was not calculated to
raise the Spaniards in the opinion of the natives.  One of the prisoners
remained on board the Admiral's ship, while his companion was carried to
another for safe keeping.

In spite of this they did not object to the strangers coming among them,
although they kept their women out of the way.  They were all dressed
like those who came on board, in the skins of beasts, and their hair was
short or tied up by a string.  They had apparently no fixed dwellings,
but lived in huts covered with skins and supported by poles, so that
they could easily be moved.  They were not seen to cook their food, but
ate meat raw, with a sweet root called capar, which name they applied to
the ship's biscuit offered them.

The only remedies they were seen to use when sick was bleeding and
vomiting.  The former was performed by giving a chop with an edge tool
to the part afflicted, while the latter was produced by thrusting an
arrow down the throat of the patient.

The voyagers, ignorant and superstitious themselves, declared that they
saw among the savages on shore all sorts of strange creatures of
horrible forms, such as horned demons, with long shaggy hair, throwing
out fire before and behind, which especially made their appearance when
the natives were dying.

The Captain had a great wish to secure some females as companions to the
men, that a race of giants might be introduced into Europe; but though
the ladies were far from attractive, their husbands exhibited great
jealousy, and would not allow them to appear.  It was resolved,
therefore, to capture two of their principal men, that they might be
exchanged for women.

After a time the natives, having overcome their fears, again mixed
freely with their visitors.  On one occasion a number of Spaniards had
gone on shore, when two natives came among them, upon whom they threw
themselves, nine Spaniards seizing one man, while a number of others
brought his companion to the ground.  Some of the Spaniards having ropes
ready, had begun to bind the hands of one of their captives, but he
struggled so violently, at the same time shouting out for assistance,
that he managed to break loose from them, and, striking out right and
left, sent them flying in all directions; then bursting away, he took to
flight, the other soon afterwards following his example.  One of the
Spaniards pursuing was shot by an arrow.  The rest fired at the
fugitives, but could not hit them, for instead of running along in a
straight line, they kept leaping from side to side at a rate equal to
that of a horse at full gallop.

From the name of Patagons or Patagonians, which the natives have ever
since borne, their country was called Patagonia, and that of Saint
Julien was given to the port in which the squadron had sought refuge.
The Admiral now took solemn possession of the country around for the
crown of Spain, erecting on the shore a cross, the sign of sovereignty.
He was sorely troubled, however, by discovering that a mutiny had been
projected by many of the crew, headed by two of the principal officers,
Don Luis Mendoza and Don Juan de Carthagena, with others of inferior
rank.  Should he put to sea, he had reason to believe that they would
run off with some of the ships.  He therefore waited in port, hoping to
reduce them to obedience.  Fortunately, the greater number of officers
and men remained faithful.  The Admiral, concealing the knowledge he had
obtained of their treachery, was able at length to seize the
ringleaders.

This done, having summoned a council of his principal officers, the
mutineers were tried and condemned, Mendoza to death, and Carthagena,
with others less guilty, to be left in the country among the savages.
No time was lost in carrying this stern decree into execution.  A stout
gallows was erected on the shore, on which, notwithstanding his rank,
Don Luis was hung, while Don Juan de Carthagena, a priest, and others,
were landed and driven among the natives, to endure whatever fate was in
store for them.

Having re-established his authority, the Admiral sent the _Saint Iago_
on an exploring cruise, when she discovered a river, to which the name
of Santa Cruz was given, it being the anniversary, in the Romish
calendar, of the finding of the holy cross.  The vessel having advanced
about three leagues farther, a storm coming on, she was wrecked; but her
crew escaped to the shore, and after enduring great hardships they got
back to the harbour of Saint Julien, where they rejoined their
companions, and were distributed among the other ships.

The bad weather and the quelling of the mutiny kept the squadron at the
port of Saint Julien for five months.  At the end of this time the
Admiral set sail, and the unfortunate Patagonians who had been entrapped
were carried off, the equally unfortunate Spaniards being left on shore.
Sailing southward, the explorers at length reached the latitude of 51
degrees 40 minutes, where, finding a convenient port, and plenty of
fuel, water, and fish, they remained two months longer.  Magalhaens
carefully examined every inlet and bay as he proceeded, hoping to find a
passage through the continent into the South Sea, of the existence of
which passage he was fully persuaded.  He was not aware how close he had
been to it in the last harbour where he had taken refuge.

On reaching latitude 52 degrees, an opening appearing in the rocky
mountainous-looking coast, the squadron sailed into it, having on one
side a cape, to which the Admiral gave the name of Cabo de los Virgines,
because it was discovered on the feast of Saint Ursula and the Eleven
Thousand Virgins.  At first many supposed that it was merely a deep bay
or gulf, but as the ships proceeded on, the hopes of the Admiral that he
had at length discovered the long-sought-for channel increased.  The
wind being fair, onwards they sailed, though when night came down upon
them they were compelled to anchor.

At this juncture the pilot Estevan Gomez proposed, as it was doubtful
whether they could get through, and as their provisions were running
short and their ships were unseaworthy, that they should return to
Spain.  The Admiral listened to all that was said in silence, and then
declared that rather than fail in fulfilling his promise to the King of
Spain, he would endure far greater hardships than they had yet suffered,
and would eat the skins on the ship's yards and rigging; and he forbade
any one, on pain of death, to speak of turning back on account of want
of provisions, or their longing for home.

Anxiously they waited for the return of day, when the light would enable
them to see their way.  The channel, as they proceeded from east to
west, varied greatly in its breadth, sometimes being several leagues
wide, and in others no more than half a league across.  The land on both
sides was high, rugged, and uneven, the mountains capped with snow, in
some places barren, and in others covered with woods.  Having sailed on
upwards of fifty leagues, a broad channel was seen opening out before
them.  Two ships were sent to explore it, while the Admiral and others
came to an anchor.  During their absence a violent storm arose, and
great fears were entertained that the ships were lost.  For two days the
Admiral waited for their re-appearance, and, at length, a cloud of smoke
being seen rising to the southward, it was supposed that it was produced
from fires kindled by those of the ship wrecked crews who had escaped.

Now, more than ever, the people believed that the voyage had ended, and
were giving way to despair, when the two ships were seen approaching
under full sail, with flags flying.  As they drew near the crew shouted
with joy and fired salutes from their guns.  The captains of the
exploring vessels reported that a passage had been seen ahead, but that
they deemed it wise to return and announce their discovery.  From the
circumstance of the smoke rising in the south, to the country on which
it was seen was given the name of "Tierra del Fuego," or the Land of
Fire.

On this the squadron again got under weigh and sailed forward; but
another passage appearing, opening out to the south-east, the two ships
which had been before sent away were again dispatched to ascertain in
what direction it led.  One of them returned, but the crew of the other,
instigated by the traitor Estevan Gomez, finding themselves away from
the Admiral, rose on their captain and officers, and, confining them
below, insisted on returning homewards.  In vain the Admiral looked out,
expecting her to rejoin him.  Day after day the rest of the squadron
pressed on, their gallant commander anticipating the realisation of his
long-cherished hopes.  We may picture him, as he stood on the forecastle
of the _Trinidada_, leading the way, eagerly looking out ahead.  How
anxious he must have felt when the channel narrowed, and it became
possible that some rocky barrier might impede his progress!  Then, as he
saw it again stretching out into a broad, lake-like expanse, how he must
have rejoiced, while seamen in the chains on either side kept heaving
the lead and announcing the depth of water.  On and on the explorers
pushed their way under all sail.  If they saw the natives in their tiny
canoes, darting out from behind some rocky point, they were too eager to
stop and communicate with them.

Above their heads rose the lofty snow-capped mountains, their outlines
reflected in the calm waters, often producing scenes of much grandeur,
though the barren and rugged rocks offered no temptation to the voyagers
to land.

A hundred leagues had been passed over, and, unless the land should
extend much farther west, according to the theory held by the Admiral,
the termination of the channel must be reached.  What must have been his
joy, when about ten leagues more had been made good, on the 28th of
November, 1520, as rounding a point to which he gave the name of Cape
Deseado, he saw the vast expanse of the Pacific Ocean spreading out to
the westward.  From the topmast-head not a speck of land could be seen,
to denote that there was the slightest impediment to his further
progress into the great South Sea.

He had now practically demonstrated that it was possible to sail to the
east by way of the west.  To the long-sought-for straits Magalhaens
ultimately gave the appellation of the Straits of the Patagonians; but
it has more properly ever since been called after his name, corrupted by
the English into Magellan.

Having waited at the entrance of the straits for the missing ship till
the time appointed for her rejoining had passed, the three remaining
vessels proceeded on their voyage.  The cold being severe, the Admiral
considered it desirable to steer towards the Line, and accordingly
shaped a north-westerly course.

On the 24th of January, 1521, a small island was discovered, to which
the name of Saint Pablo was given, in memory of the hapless Patagonian,
who, after being baptised, had shortly before died.  A few days
afterwards another small island was sighted, and called Tiburones, or
Shark's Island.  In this manner he proceeded for three months and twenty
days, having sighted only the two small islands already mentioned.  The
crew by this time had exhausted all their provisions, including even
their bread.  The fresh water had become so bad that it could be with
difficulty swallowed, while they at length had nothing left to eat but
pieces of skin and bits of feather.  In order to enable them to chew
these unsavoury morsels, they were first steeped in hot water for some
days, and then cooked with any fat or grease which remained.  Owing to
the impure and scanty means of subsistence many died, and those who
remained became sickly, weak, and low spirited.  The gums of many of
them grew over their teeth on both sides, so that they were unable to
masticate the pieces of skin, and were thus miserably starved to death.
The sea, however, continued smooth and the wind fair, and they were
blown gently along at a good rate.  In consequence of the calmness of
the water, the Admiral gave the sea over which he was sailing the name
of the Pacific Ocean, which it has ever since retained, although
considered by many, from their different experience, very inappropriate,
as at certain periods severe storms prevail there, as in other parts of
the world.

In a short time nineteen men had died, and thirty were so weak that they
were unable to do duty.  After sailing on all this time, they were
anxiously looking out for islands where they could obtain fresh
provisions, but, except the two barren rocks they passed, none were
seen.

The needles of their compasses varied so much, and moved so irregularly,
that they were often compelled to quicken them with a touch of the
loadstone.

After crossing the equator and steering west, they at length arrived, on
the 6th of March, at a cluster of three fertile inhabited islands in
thirteen or fourteen degrees north latitude, just three months and
twenty days from the time of leaving the Straits.

Here they anchored.  No sooner did the natives perceive them, than they
came off in their canoes, bringing cocoa-nuts, yams, and rice.  They
were well-formed men, of an olive-brown colour, their teeth stained
black and red.  Some of them wore long beards, and the hair of their
heads hung down to their waists.  They were perfectly naked, their
bodies anointed with cocoa-nut oil, some of them wearing head-dresses
made from the leaves of the palm-tree.  The women appeared to have some
idea of modesty, and wore coverings of cloth made from the bark of a
tree.  Their hair was black and thick, reaching almost to the ground.
They appeared to be very industrious, and were seen employed in making
nets and mats from fibre.  Their houses were built of timber, thatched
with large leaves, and divided into several apartments, the beds in
which were of palm mats piled one above another.  Their only weapons
were clubs and long poles tipped with horn.  Their canoes were formed of
planks sewn together with fibre, the stem and stern alike, and were
painted either black, white, or red.  The sails, which were balanced by
outriggers, were made of broad leaves sewn together, and the rudder was
formed of a broad board at the end of a pole.

When the Spaniards went on shore, the natives received them in a
friendly way, but soon showed that they were of an especially thievish
disposition, pilfering everything on which they could lay hands, either
from those who landed, or when they themselves went on board the
vessels.

From this circumstance Magalhaens bestowed on the islands the name of
the Ladrones, or thieves.  The voyagers, indeed, found it impossible to
enjoy any quiet, either while they were ashore or on land, as the
natives stood hovering about to pick up whatever they could find.

At length they stole one of the boats from the stern of the Admiral's
ship, on which, to punish them, he landed with a party of ninety men,
and marching up the country, set fire to one of their villages, which
being built of wood thatched with leaves, burnt rapidly.  He also killed
some of the natives, who, when they were wounded, drew out the arrows,
and gazed at them with astonishment, as if they had never before seen
such weapons.  When the Spaniards retired, after their cruel exploit,
the natives followed them in wellnigh a hundred canoes, as if disposed
to renew the traffic; but instead of doing so, as they got near,
uttering shouts and shrieks, they threw showers of stones on board the
ships, and then took rapidly to flight.

Having refreshed themselves, and finding no advantage could be gained by
a longer stay at the Ladrones, the Spaniards set sail.  They touched at
a beautiful uninhabited island, where they found springs of clear water
and abundance of fruit-trees, and to this the Admiral gave the name of
the Island of Good Signs.

While the ships lay at anchor, canoes from other islands, seen in the
distance, came towards them, bringing presents of fish, cocoa-nuts,
cocoa-nut wine, and other provisions.  Though nearly naked, they were
remarkably well behaved, and wore ornaments of gold, and cotton
head-dresses.  Their bodies were tatooed and perfumed with aromatic
oils.  They used harpoons and fishing--nets, and had swords, lances,
clubs, and shields.

When the Spaniards went on shore they found that the island was
cultivated, and that spices were grown, of which they saw considerable
stores.  The whole group was at first called the Archipelago of Saint
Lazarus, but it is now known as a portion of the Philippines.  The
island where the squadron anchored was called Humuna.  The wine, it was
found, was the sap of a tree, which was drawn out by cutting off a
branch, into which a large reed was fixed, and by its means the sap, of
a light amber colour, with a tart taste, dropped out, when it was
considered at once fit for drinking.

The fruit, with which many of the voyagers now first became acquainted,
was described as big as a man's head, with two rinds, the outermost
being green, two fingers thick, and full of strings and shreds.  Within
this was a shell of considerable thickness and very hard, the kernel
being white and of the thickness of a finger, with a pleasant taste like
that of almonds.  In the midst was a hollow full of pure limpid water,
of a very cordial and refreshing nature.  When the natives wish to make
oil of it, they leave the root to steep in water until it putrifies.
They then set it over a fire, and boil it until the oil rises to the
surface.

Their visitors came from the island of Zulvan, where they produced
cinnamon, spices, cloves, nutmegs, ginger, and mace, which they brought
off in their canoes.  They exhibited also numerous articles made of
gold.  They had earrings of gold, and had jewels fastened with pieces of
gold to their arms, besides which they possessed daggers, knives, and
lances ornamented with the same metal.  They were broad-shouldered,
well-made men, of olive colour, their naked bodies being well greased
and anointed with oil.

On the 25th of March the squadron left Humuna, and steering between
numerous islands, again brought up off the island of Mazagua.  The
Admiral having on board a slave, a native of Sumatra, took him to act as
interpreter in his intercourse with the chief or Rajah of the island.

Everything was done to impress the Rajah with the power of the
Europeans, and the dignity of the King their master.  The Rajah was a
fine-looking man, with long hair, of an olive complexion, and his body
perfumed with sweet oil.  He had gold rings in his ears, three on every
finger, and on his head he wore a fine silk turban, while a piece of
cotton, embroidered with silk and gold, covered his body to the knees.
At his side he carried a long dagger, with a gold handle and a scabbard
of fine carved wood.  He and his Court were constantly chewing the
areca-nut.

In order to impress the Rajah Colambu, as the prince was called, with
the power and superiority of Europeans, the Admiral dressed up one of
his sailors in complete armour, and directed three others to cut at him
with swords, and endeavour to pierce him with their poniards.  The
Rajah, on seeing that he was unharmed, was much astonished, and remarked
that one warrior so protected might contend with a hundred foes.

"Yes," replied the Admiral, through his interpreter, "and each of my
three vessels has two hundred armed in the same manner."

The natives appeared to have no religious rites, but only lifted up
their faces, their hands joined together, towards heaven when they
called upon their god Abba.

Under the idea of inducing the natives to become Christians, the Admiral
landed on Easter Day, with a banner, on which was portrayed a cross, a
crown of thorns, and nails.  He told all his men to reverence it, and
informed the Rajah that it should be set up on some high mountain, not
only as a memorial of the good treatment the Christians had received,
but for his own security, since if they devoutly prayed to it, they
would be protected from lightning and thunder.  Some of the Spaniards
then received the communion, and after discharging their muskets, to the
great astonishment of the savages, returned to their ships.

The Rajah promised to do as the Admiral wished, knowing no better.
After this a priest, the chronicler of the voyage, and a companion, went
on shore to partake of a feast which the Rajah had prepared, and which
was served in porcelain vessels.  His manner of eating and drinking was
to take alternately a mouthful of meat and a spoonful of wine, lifting
up his hands to heaven before he helped himself, when he suddenly
extended his left fist in a way which made the priest expect that he was
going to receive a buffet in the face.  Among the luxuries on the table
were candles, composed of gums, rolled up in palm-leaves.  The Rajah,
who had on the previous day attended Mass and nominally professed
himself a Christian, became so tipsy that he was unable to attend to any
of the duties of the state.

On his recovery he requested that the Admiral would allow his crews to
assist in gathering in his harvest, which friendly office they performed
with much satisfaction.  This done, the ships again sailed, accompanied
by the Rajah in his big canoe; but she being unable to keep up with the
squadron, he and his people were taken on board, and after passing by
several other islands, the ships arrived on the 7th of April, about
noon, at Zebut, the principal port of the Philippine Islands.

In order to impress the Rajah of this place and his people--two thousand
of whom, armed with spears and shields, were collected at the water's
edge gazing at a sight so novel to them--with the greatness and power of
the Spaniards, the ships were decked with banners and a salute fired
from all the great guns, which caused no small amount of consternation
among the spectators.

To allay their fears, an envoy, accompanied by the slave from Sumatra,
called Enrique, to act as interpreter, was sent on shore, who informed
the Rajah that it was the custom for Spaniards to discharge their cannon
whenever they came into great ports, and that it was done in respect to
him.  The envoy also expressed the high consideration in which the King
of Spain, the greatest monarch on the earth, and his Captain-General
Magalhaens, held the Rajah of Zebut, adding that the ships had come, on
their way to the Moluccas, to obtain provisions and articles of
merchandise.  The Rajah, in return, bade them welcome, but said that it
was customary for all ships to pay him tribute, and that he expected the
like acknowledgment from them.

This the envoy positively refused, informing him that the
Captain-General was the servant of so great a king that he never had
yet, nor ever would, make an acknowledgment of the sort to any prince in
the world, and that if he would not receive them peaceably, he would
soon have his hands full of war.

The Rajah, advised by a Moor who was at his Court, and by the Rajah
Mazagua, the next day was ready rather to pay tribute himself than
excite the hostility of his visitors.  However, they did not require
tribute, and only wanted liberty to trade, which was cheerfully granted.

The next day the two Rajahs of Mazagua and Zebut came on board, when,
after some conferences had been held, the Admiral persuaded them to
embrace the Christian faith.  This they forthwith did, being baptised,
together with several of the ladies of their families.

The Rajah of Zebut received the name of Carlos, after the Emperor, and
his son that of Fernando.  The Rajah of Mazagua was called Juan, and a
Moorish Christian received the name of Christopher.

Besides the princes and their Court, five hundred persons of inferior
rank were also baptised; so that Magalhaens congratulated himself on the
wonderful success of his first attempt at converting the heathen.  He
then told them that, as they had become Christians, they must do away
with their idols; and all to be found being forthwith broken to pieces,
crosses were erected in their places.  As he had previously done, the
Admiral urged them to pray before the crosses devoutly, morning and
evening.

The Queen, with forty of her ladies, and her daughter, the wife of the
heir apparent, was also baptised.  The latter was young and handsome,
and wore a robe of white cloth, her head being adorned with a tiara of
date-leaves.

After the ceremony Mass was performed, which the Queen attended.  She
was habited in a garment like that of her daughter, and over her head
and shoulders she wore a silken veil striped with gold.  Three young
girls walked before her, each carrying one of the royal hats.

Having bowed to the altar, the Queen seated herself on a cushion of
embroidered silk, when she and her attendants were sprinkled by the
Admiral with rose-water,--a scent in which the women of the country
greatly delighted.

The Admiral obtained still further credit, and gained over more
proselytes, by a cure which he was said to have effected on the brother
