"We are looking for Ozma, the Supreme Ruler of the Land of Oz," replied
the Wizard.

"Do you see her anywhere around here?" asked the Czarover.

"Not yet, Your Majesty; but perhaps you may tell us where she is."

"No; I have my hands full keeping track of my own people. I find them
hard to manage because they are so tremendously strong."

"They don't look very strong," said Dorothy. "It seems as if a good wind
would blow 'em way out of the city, if it wasn't for the wall."

"Just so--just so," admitted the Czarover. "They really look that way,
don't they? But you must never trust to appearances, which have a way of
fooling one. Perhaps you noticed that I prevented you from meeting any
of my people. I protected you with my giants while you were on the way
from the gates to my palace, so that not a Herku got near you."

"Are your people so dangerous, then?" asked the Wizard.

"To strangers, yes; but only because they are so friendly. For, if they
shake hands with you, they are likely to break your arms or crush your
fingers to a jelly."

"Why?" asked Button-Bright.

"Because we are the strongest people in all the world."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed the boy, "that's bragging. You prob'ly don't know
how strong other people are. Why, once I knew a man in Philadelphi' who
could bend iron bars with just his hands!"

"But--mercy me!--it's no trick to bend iron bars," said His Majesty.
"Tell me, could this man crush a block of stone with his bare hands?"

"No one could do that," declared the boy.

"If I had a block of stone I'd show you," said the Czarover, looking
around the room. "Ah, here is my throne. The back is too high, anyhow,
so I'll just break off a piece of that."

He rose to his feet and tottered in an uncertain way around the throne.
Then he took hold of the back and broke off a piece of marble over a
foot thick.

"This," said he, coming back to his seat, "is very solid marble and much
harder than ordinary stone. Yet I can crumble it easily with my
fingers--a proof that I am very strong."

Even as he spoke he began breaking off chunks of marble and crumbling
them as one would a bit of earth. The Wizard was so astonished that he
took a piece in his own hands and tested it, finding it very hard
indeed.

Just then one of the giant servants entered and exclaimed:

[Illustration]

"Oh, Your Majesty, the cook has burned the soup! What shall we do?"

"How dare you interrupt me?" asked the Czarover, and grasping the
immense giant by one of his legs he raised him in the air and threw him
headfirst out of an open window.

"Now, tell me," he said, turning to Button-Bright, "could your man in
Philadelphia crumble marble in his fingers?"

"I guess not," said Button-Bright, much impressed by the skinny
monarch's strength.

"What makes you so strong?" inquired Dorothy.

"It's the zosozo," he explained, "which is an invention of my own. I and
all my people eat zosozo, and it gives us tremendous strength. Would you
like to eat some?"

"No, thank you," replied the girl. "I--I don't want to get so thin."

"Well, of course one can't have strength and flesh at the same time,"
said the Czarover. "Zosozo is pure energy, and it's the only compound of
its sort in existence. I never allow our giants to have it, you know, or
they would soon become our masters, since they are bigger than we; so I
keep all the stuff locked up in my private laboratory. Once a year I
feed a teaspoonful of it to each of my people--men, women and
children--so every one of them is nearly as strong as I am. Wouldn't
_you_ like a dose, sir?" he asked, turning to the Wizard.

"Well," said the Wizard, "if you would give me a little zosozo in a
bottle, I'd like to take it with me on my travels. It might come handy,
on occasion."

"To be sure. I'll give you enough for six doses," promised the Czarover.
"But don't take more than a teaspoonful at a time. Once Ugu the
Shoemaker took two teaspoonsful, and it made him so strong that when he
leaned against the city wall he pushed it over, and we had to build it
up again."

"Who is Ugu the Shoemaker?" asked Button-Bright curiously, for he now
remembered that the bird and the rabbit had claimed Ugu the Shoemaker
had enchanted the peach he had eaten.

"Why, Ugu is a great magician, who used to live here. But he's gone
away, now," replied the Czarover.

"Where has he gone?" asked the Wizard quickly.

"I am told he lives in a wickerwork castle in the mountains to the west
of here. You see, Ugu became such a powerful magician that he didn't
care to live in our city any longer, for fear we would discover some of
his secrets. So he went to the mountains and built him a splendid
wicker castle, which is so strong that even I and my people could not
batter it down, and there he lives all by himself."

"This is good news," declared the Wizard, "for I think this is just the
magician we are searching for. But why is he called Ugu the Shoemaker?"

"Once he was a very common citizen here and made shoes for a living,"
replied the monarch of Herku. "But he was descended from the greatest
wizard and sorcerer who has ever lived--in this or in any other
country--and one day Ugu the Shoemaker discovered all the magical books
and recipes of his famous great-grandfather, which had been hidden away
in the attic of his house. So he began to study the papers and books and
to practice magic, and in time he became so skillful that, as I said, he
scorned our city and built a solitary castle for himself."

"Do you think," asked Dorothy anxiously, "that Ugu the Shoemaker would
be wicked enough to steal our Ozma of Oz?"

"And the Magic Picture?" asked Trot.

"And the Great Book of Records of Glinda the Good?" asked Betsy.

"And my own magic tools?" asked the Wizard.

"Well," replied the Czarover, "I won't say that Ugu is wicked, exactly,
but he is very ambitious to become the most powerful magician in the
world, and so I suppose he would not be too proud to steal any magic
things that belonged to anybody else--if he could manage to do so."

"But how about Ozma? Why would he wish to steal _her_?" questioned
Dorothy.

"Don't ask me, my dear. Ugu doesn't tell me why he does things, I assure
you."

"Then we must go and ask him ourselves," declared the little girl.

"I wouldn't do that, if I were you," advised the Czarover, looking first
at the three girls and then at the boy and the little Wizard and finally
at the stuffed Patchwork Girl. "If Ugu has really stolen your Ozma, he
will probably keep her a prisoner, in spite of all your threats or
entreaties. And, with all his magical knowledge, he would be a dangerous
person to attack. Therefore, if you are wise, you will go home again and
find a new Ruler for the Emerald City and the Land of Oz. But perhaps it
isn't Ugu the Shoemaker who has stolen your Ozma."

"The only way to settle that question," replied the Wizard, "is to go to
Ugu's castle and see if Ozma is there. If she is, we will report the
matter to the great Sorceress, Glinda the Good, and I'm pretty sure she
will find a way to rescue our darling ruler from the Shoemaker."

"Well, do as you please," said the Czarover. "But, if you are all
transformed into hummingbirds or caterpillars, don't blame me for not
warning you."

They stayed the rest of that day in the City of Herku and were fed at
the royal table of the Czarover and given sleeping rooms in his palace.
The strong monarch treated them very nicely and gave the Wizard a little
golden vial of zosozo, to use if ever he or any of his party wished to
acquire great strength.

Even at the last the Czarover tried to persuade them not to go near Ugu
the Shoemaker, but they were resolved on the venture and the next
morning bade the friendly monarch a cordial good-bye and, mounting upon
their animals, left the Herkus and the City of Herku and headed for the
mountains that lay to the west.




The Truth Pond

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 13


It seems a long time since we have heard anything of the Frogman and
Cayke the Cookie Cook, who had left the Yip Country in search of the
diamond-studded gold dishpan which had been mysteriously stolen the same
night that Ozma had disappeared from the Emerald City. But you must
remember that while the Frogman and the Cookie Cook were preparing to
descend from their mountain-top, and even while on their way to the
farmhouse of Wiljon the Winkie, Dorothy and the Wizard and their friends
were encountering the adventures we have just related.

So it was that on the very morning when the travelers from the Emerald
City bade farewell to the Czarover of the City of Herku, Cayke and the
Frogman awoke in a grove in which they had passed the night sleeping on
beds of leaves. There were plenty of farmhouses in the neighborhood, but
no one seemed to welcome the puffy, haughty Frogman or the little
dried-up Cookie Cook, and so they slept comfortably enough underneath
the trees of the grove.

The Frogman wakened first, on this morning, and after going to the tree
where Cayke slept and finding her still wrapt in slumber, he decided to
take a little walk and seek some breakfast. Coming to the edge of the
grove he observed, half a mile away, a pretty yellow house that was
surrounded by a yellow picket fence, so he walked toward this house and
on entering the yard found a Winkie woman picking up sticks with which
to build a fire to cook her morning meal.

"For goodness sakes!" she exclaimed on seeing the Frogman, "what are you
doing out of your frog-pond?"

"I am traveling in search of a jeweled gold dishpan, my good woman," he
replied, with an air of great dignity.

"You won't find it here, then," said she. "Our dishpans are tin, and
they're good enough for anybody. So go back to your pond and leave me
alone."

She spoke rather crossly and with a lack of respect that greatly annoyed
the Frogman.

"Allow me to tell you, madam," he said, "that although I am a frog I am
the Greatest and Wisest Frog in all the world. I may add that I possess
much more wisdom than any Winkie--man or woman--in this land. Wherever I
go, people fall on their knees before me and render homage to the Great
Frogman! No one else knows so much as I; no one else is so grand--so
magnificent!"

"If you know so much," she retorted, "why don't you know where your
dishpan is, instead of chasing around the country after it?"

"Presently," he answered, "I am going where it is; but just now I am
traveling and have had no breakfast. Therefore I honor you by asking you
for something to eat."

"Oho! the Great Frogman is hungry as any tramp, is he? Then pick up
these sticks and help me to build the fire," said the woman
contemptuously.

"Me! The Great Frogman pick up sticks?" he exclaimed in horror. "In the
Yip Country, where I am more honored and powerful than any King could
be, people weep with joy when I ask them to feed me."

"Then that's the place to go for your breakfast," declared the woman.

"I fear you do not realize my importance," urged the Frogman. "Exceeding
wisdom renders me superior to menial duties."

"It's a great wonder to me," remarked the woman, carrying her sticks to
the house, "that your wisdom doesn't inform you that you'll get no
breakfast here," and she went in and slammed the door behind her.

The Frogman felt he had been insulted, so he gave a loud croak of
indignation and turned away. After going a short distance he came upon a
faint path which led across a meadow in the direction of a grove of
pretty trees, and thinking this circle of evergreens must surround a
house--where perhaps he would be kindly received--he decided to follow
the path. And by and by he came to the trees, which were set close
together, and pushing aside some branches he found no house inside the
circle, but instead a very beautiful pond of clear water.

Now the Frogman, although he was so big and so well educated and now
aped the ways and customs of human beings, was still a frog. As he gazed
at this solitary, deserted pond, his love for water returned to him with
irresistible force.

"If I cannot get a breakfast I may at least have a fine swim," said he,
and pushing his way between the trees he reached the bank. There he took
off his fine clothing, laying his shiny purple hat and his gold-headed
cane beside it. A moment later he sprang with one leap into the water
and dived to the very bottom of the pond.

The water was deliciously cool and grateful to his thick, rough skin,
and the Frogman swam around the pond several times before he stopped to
rest. Then he floated upon the surface and examined the pond with some
curiosity. The bottom and sides were all lined with glossy tiles of a
light pink color; just one place in the bottom, where the water bubbled
up from a hidden spring, had been left free. On the banks the green
grass grew to the edge of the pink tiling.

And now, as the Frogman examined the place, he found that on one side
the pool, just above the water line, had been set a golden plate on
which some words were deeply engraved. He swam toward this plate and on
reaching it read the following inscription:

_This is_
THE TRUTH POND
_Whoever bathes in this
water must always
afterward tell_
THE TRUTH

This statement startled the Frogman. It even worried him, so that he
leaped upon the bank and hurriedly began to dress himself.

"A great misfortune has befallen me," he told himself, "for hereafter I
cannot tell people I am wise, since it is not the truth. The truth is
that my boasted wisdom is all a sham, assumed by me to deceive people
and make them defer to me. In truth, no living creature can know much
more than his fellows, for one may know one thing, and another know
another thing, so that wisdom is evenly scattered throughout the world.
But--ah, me!--what a terrible fate will now be mine. Even Cayke the
Cookie Cook will soon discover that my knowledge is no greater than her
own; for having bathed in the enchanted water of the Truth Pond, I can
no longer deceive her or tell a lie."

[Illustration]

More humbled than he had been for many years, the Frogman went back to
the grove where he had left Cayke and found the woman now awake and
washing her face in a tiny brook.

"Where has Your Honor been?" she asked.

"To a farmhouse to ask for something to eat," said he, "but the woman
refused me."

"How dreadful!" she exclaimed. "But never mind; there are other houses,
