the queen asked him to live with them and be their son. In process of
time Fairyfoot and Princess Maybloom were married, and still live
happily. When they go to visit at Stumpinghame, they always wash their
feet in the Growing Well, lest the royal family might think them a
disgrace, but when they come back, they make haste to the Fair Fountain;
and the fairies and the nightingales are great friends to them, as well
as the maids and the chamberlain, because they have told nobody about
it, and there is peace and quiet yet in the grove of rose-trees.



200

        The ill-fated Oscar Wilde (1856-1900) was born
        in Ireland, was educated at Oxford, came into
        great notoriety as the reputed leader of the
        "aesthetic movement," was prominent in the
        London literary world from 1885 to 1895, fell
        under the obloquy of most of his countrymen,
        and died in distressing circumstances in Paris.
        In addition to some remarkable plays, poems,
        and prose books, he wrote a number of unusual
        stories especially fascinating to children,
        which were collected under the title _The Happy
        Prince, and Other Tales_. These stories were at
        once recognized as classic in quality. While
        they contain much implied criticism of certain
        features of modern civilization, the whole tone
        is so idealistic and the workmanship so fine
        that they convey no strong note of bitterness
        to the child. "The Happy Prince" suggests that
        Wilde saw on the one hand "the white faces of
        starving children looking out listlessly at the
        black streets"; while on the other hand he saw
        the Pyramids, marble angels sculptured on the
        cathedral tower, and the gold-covered statue of
        the Prince of the Palace of the Care-Free.
        Wilde also suggests a remedy for the starvation
        and wretchedness that exist, especially among
        children, in most cities where great wealth is
        displayed. The important thing in presenting
        this story to children is to get the full
        sympathetic response due to the sacrifice made
        by the Happy Prince and the little swallow. So
        much of the effect depends upon the wonderful
        beauty of the language that teachers will, as a
        rule, get better results from reading or
        reciting than from any kind of oral paraphrase.
        Another story in this same volume widely and
        successfully used by teachers is the one called
        "The Selfish Giant."


THE HAPPY PRINCE

OSCAR WILDE

High above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy
Prince. He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes
he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his
sword-hilt.

He was very much admired indeed. "He is as beautiful as a weathercock,"
remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for
having artistic tastes; "only not quite so useful," he added, fearing
lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.

"Why can't you be like the Happy Prince?" asked a sensible mother of her
little boy who was crying for the moon. "The Happy Prince never dreams
of crying for anything."

"I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy," muttered
a disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.

"He looks just like an angel," said the Charity Children as they came
out of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean
white pinafores.

"How do you know?" said the Mathematical Master; "you have never seen
one."

"Ah! but we have, in our dreams," answered the children; and the
Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not
approve of children dreaming.

One night there flew over the city a Little Swallow. His friends had
gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he
was in love with the most beautiful Reed. He had met her early in the
spring as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had
been so attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to
her.

"Shall I love you?" said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at
once, and the Reed made him a low bow. So he flew round and round her,
touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples. This was
his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.

"It is a ridiculous attachment," twittered the other Swallows; "she has
no money, and far too many relations"; and indeed the river was quite
full of Reeds. Then when the autumn came they all flew away.

After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his lady-love.
"She has no conversation," he said, "and I am afraid that she is a
coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind." And certainly,
whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys. "I
admit that she is domestic," he continued, "but I love traveling, and my
wife, consequently, should love traveling also."

"Will you come away with me?" he said finally to her; but the Reed shook
her head, she was so attached to her home.

"You have been trifling with me," he cried. "I am off to the Pyramids.
Good-bye!" and he flew away.

All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city. "Where
shall I put up?" he said; "I hope the town has made preparations."

Then he saw the statue on the tall column.

"I will put up there," he cried; "it is a fine position, with plenty of
fresh air." So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.

"I have a golden bedroom," he said softly to himself as he looked round,
and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head
under his wing a large drop of water fell on him. "What a curious
thing!" he cried; "there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are
quite clear and bright, and yet it is raining. The climate in the north
of Europe is really dreadful. The Reed used to like the rain, but that
was merely her selfishness."

Then another drop fell.

"What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off?" he said;
"I must look for a good chimney-pot," and he determined to fly away.

But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up,
and saw--Ah! what did he see?

The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were
running down his golden cheeks. His face was so beautiful in the
moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.

"Who are you?" he said.

"I am the Happy Prince."

"Why are you weeping then?" asked the Swallow; "you have quite drenched
me."

"When I was alive and had a human heart," answered the statue, "I did
not know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of Sans-Souci, where
sorrow is not allowed to enter. In the daytime I played with my
companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the
Great Hall. Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to
ask what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful. My
courtiers called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if
pleasure be happiness. So I lived, and so I died. And now that I am dead
they have set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all
the misery of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot
choose but weep."

"What! is he not solid gold?" said the Swallow to himself. He was too
polite to make any personal remarks out loud.

"Far away," continued the statue in a low musical voice, "far away in a
little street there is a poor house. One of the windows is open, and
through it I can see a woman seated at a table. Her face is thin and
worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she
is a seamstress. She is embroidering passion-flowers on a satin gown for
the loveliest of the Queen's maids-of-honor to wear at the next
Court-ball. In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying
ill. He has a fever, and is asking for oranges. His mother has nothing
to give him but river water, so he is crying. Swallow, Swallow, little
Swallow, will you not take her the ruby out of my sword-hilt? My feet
are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move."

"I am waited for in Egypt," said the Swallow. "My friends are flying up
and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus-flowers. Soon they
will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King. The King is there
himself in his painted coffin. He is wrapped in yellow linen, and
embalmed with spices. Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and
his hands are like withered leaves."

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not stay
with me for one night, and be my messenger? The boy is so thirsty, and
the mother so sad."

"I don't think I like boys," answered the Swallow. "Last summer, when I
was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller's sons,
who were always throwing stones at me. They never hit me, of course; we
swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family
famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect."

But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
"It is very cold here," he said; "but I will stay with you for one
night, and be your messenger."

"Thank you, little Swallow," said the Prince.

So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince's sword, and
flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.

He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were
sculptured. He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing. A
beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover. "How wonderful
the stars are," he said to her, "and how wonderful is the power of
love!"

"I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball," she
answered; "I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but
the seamstresses are so lazy."

He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of
the ships. He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining
with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales. At last he
came to the poor house and looked in. The boy was tossing feverishly on
his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired. In he
hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman's thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy's forehead with his
wings. "How cool I feel," said the boy. "I must be getting better"; and
he sank into a delicious slumber.

Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had
done. "It is curious," he remarked, "but I feel quite warm now, although
it is so cold."

"That is because you have done a good action," said the Prince. And the
little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep. Thinking always
made him sleepy.

When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath. "What a
remarkable phenomenon," said the Professor of Ornithology as he was
passing over the bridge. "A swallow in winter!" And he wrote a long
letter about it to the local newspaper. Every one quoted it, it was full
of so many words that they could not understand.

"To-night I go to Egypt," said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits
at the prospect. He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long
time on top of the church steeple. Wherever he went the Sparrows
chirruped, and said to each other, "What a distinguished stranger!" so
he enjoyed himself very much.

When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince. "Have you any
commissions for Egypt?" he cried; "I am just starting."

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not stay
with me one night longer?"

"I am waited for in Egypt," answered the Swallow. "To-morrow my friends
will fly up to the Second Cataract. The river-horse couches there among
the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon. All
night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he
utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent. At noon the yellow lions
come down to the water's edge to drink. They have eyes like green
beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract."

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "far away across
the city I see a young man in a garret. He is leaning over a desk
covered with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of
withered violets. His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a
pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes. He is trying to finish a
play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any
more. There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint."

"I will wait with you one night longer," said the Swallow, who really
had a good heart. "Shall I take him another ruby?"

"Alas! I have no ruby now," said the Prince; "my eyes are all that I
have left. They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of
India a thousand years ago. Pluck out one of them and take it to him. He
will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish his
play."

"Dear Prince," said the Swallow, "I cannot do that"; and he began to
weep.

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "do as I command
you."

So the Swallow plucked out the Prince's eye, and flew away to the
student's garret. It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in
the roof. Through this he darted, and came into the room. The young man
had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the
bird's wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire
lying on the withered violets.

"I am beginning to be appreciated," he cried; "this is from some great
admirer. Now I can finish my play," and he looked quite happy.

The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbor. He sat on the mast of
a large vessel and watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the
hold with ropes. "Heave a-hoy!" they shouted as each chest came up. "I
am going to Egypt!" cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the
moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.

"I am come to bid you good-bye," he cried.

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not stay
with me one night longer?"

"It is winter," answered the Swallow, "and the chill snow will soon be
here. In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the
crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them. My companions are
building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves
are watching them, and cooing to each other. Dear Prince, I must leave
you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back
two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away. The ruby
shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as
the great sea."

"In the square below," said the Happy Prince, "there stands a little
match-girl. She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all
spoiled. Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money,
and she is crying. She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is
bare. Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will
not beat her."

"I will stay with you one night longer," said the Swallow, "but I cannot
pluck out your eye. You would be quite blind then."

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "do as I command
you."

So he plucked out the Prince's other eye, and darted down with it. He
swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her
hand. "What a lovely bit of glass," cried the little girl; and she ran
home, laughing.

Then the Swallow came back to the Prince. "You are blind now," he said,
"so I will stay with you always."

"No, little Swallow," said the poor Prince, "you must go away to Egypt."

"I will stay with you always," said the Swallow, and he slept at the
Prince's feet.

All the next day he sat on the Prince's shoulder, and told him stories
of what he had seen in strange lands. He told him of the red ibises, who
stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch goldfish in their
beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in
the desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by
the side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the
King of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and
worships a large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a
palm-tree, and has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of
the pygmies who sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are
always at war with the butterflies.

"Dear little Swallow," said the Prince, "you tell me of marvelous
things, but more marvelous than anything is the suffering of men and of
women. There is no Mystery so great as Misery. Fly over my city, little
Swallow, and tell me what you see there."

So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry
in their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.
He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children
looking out listlessly at the black streets. Under the archway of a
bridge two little boys were lying in one another's arms to try to keep
themselves warm. "How hungry we are!" they said. "You must not lie
here," shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.

Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.

"I am covered with fine gold," said the Prince; "you must take it off,
leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold
can make them happy."

Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy
Prince looked quite dull and grey. Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he
brought to the poor, and the children's faces grew rosier, and they
laughed and played games in the street. "We have bread now!" they cried.

Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost. The streets
looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and
glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves
of the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore
scarlet caps and skated on the ice.

The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave
the Prince; he loved him too well. He picked up crumbs outside the
baker's door when the baker was not looking, and tried to keep himself
warm by flapping his wings.

But at last he knew that he was going to die. He had just strength to
fly up to the Prince's shoulder once more. "Good-bye, dear Prince!" he
murmured, "will you let me kiss your hand?"

"I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow," said
the Prince. "You have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the
lips, for I love you."

"It is not to Egypt that I am going," said the Swallow. "I am going to
the House of Death. Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?"

And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his
feet.

At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if
something had suddenly broken. The fact is that the leaden heart had
snapped right in two. It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.

Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in
company with the Town Councillors. As they passed the column he looked
up at the statue: "Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!" he said.

"How shabby indeed!" cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with
the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.

"The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is
golden no longer," said the Mayor; "in fact, he is little better than a
beggar!"

"Little better than a beggar," said the Town Councillors.

"And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!" continued the Mayor.
"We must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed
to die here." And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.

So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince. "As he is no longer
beautiful he is no longer useful," said the Art Professor at the
University.

Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting
of the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal. "We
must have another statue, of course," he said, "and it shall be a statue
of myself."

"Of myself," said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarreling still.

"What a strange thing!" said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
"This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace. We must throw it
away." So they threw it on a dustheap where the dead Swallow was also
lying.

"Bring me the two most precious things in the city," said God to one of
His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead
bird.

"You have rightly chosen," said God, "for in my garden of Paradise this
little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy
Prince shall praise me."



201

        Two stories of unusual interest and charm for
        children are found in the collection of eleven
        by Raymond M. Alden (1873--), _Why the Chimes
        Rang_. One is the title story of the volume;
        the other is "The Knights of the Silver
        Shield." The latter follows by permission of
        the publishers, The Bobbs-Merrill Co.,
        Indianapolis. (Copyright, 1906, 1908.) It is of
        striking dramatic interest and emphasizes a
        much-needed quality of character, the
        importance of a loyal performance of the
        lowlier duties of life. The salvation of a
        nation may depend upon the humble guardian of
        the gate quite as much as upon those who are
        engaged in the more spectacular struggle with
        giants. Mr. Alden is a scholarly professor of
        literature in Leland Stanford Jr. University,
        and it may interest the reader to know that he
        is the son of the author of the _Pansy Books_,
        a type of religious or Sunday-school fiction
        widely read throughout the country by a
        generation or two of young people.


THE KNIGHTS OF THE SILVER SHIELD

RAYMOND MACDONALD ALDEN

There was once a splendid castle in a forest, with great stone walls and
a high gateway, and turrets that rose away above the tallest trees. The
forest was dark and dangerous, and many cruel giants lived in it; but in
the castle was a company of knights, who were kept there by the king of
the country, to help travelers who might be in the forest and to fight
with the giants whenever they could.

Each of these knights wore a beautiful suit of armor and carried a long
spear, while over his helmet there floated a great red plume that could
be seen a long way off by any one in distress. But the most wonderful
thing about the knights' armor was their shields. They were not like
those of other knights, but had been made by a great magician who had
lived in the castle many years before. They were made of silver, and
sometimes shone in the sunlight with dazzling brightness; but at other
times the surface of the shields would be clouded as though by a mist,
and one could not see his face reflected there as he could when they
shone brightly.

Now, when each young knight received his spurs and his armor, a new
shield was also given him from among those that the magician had made;
and when the shield was new its surface was always cloudy and dull. But
as the knight began to do service against the giants, or went on
expeditions to help poor travelers in the forest, his shield grew
brighter and brighter, so that he could see his face clearly reflected
in it. But if he proved to be a lazy or cowardly knight, and let the
giants get the better of him, or did not care what became of the
travelers, then the shield grew more and more cloudy, until the knight
became ashamed to carry it.

But this was not all. When any one of the knights fought a particularly
hard battle, and won the victory, or when he went on some hard errand
for the lord of the castle, and was successful, not only did his silver
shield grow brighter, but when one looked into the center of it he could
see something like a golden star shining in its very heart. This was the
greatest honor that a knight could achieve, and the other knights always
spoke of such a one as having "won his star." It was usually not till he
was pretty old and tried as a soldier that he could win it. At the time
when this story begins, the lord of the castle himself was the only one
of the knights whose shield bore the golden star.

There came a time when the worst of the giants in the forest gathered
themselves together to have a battle against the knights. They made a
camp in a dark hollow not far from the castle, and gathered all their
best warriors together, and all the knights made ready to fight them.
The windows of the castle were closed and barred; the air was full of
the noise of armor being made ready for use; and the knights were so
excited that they could scarcely rest or eat.

Now there was a young knight in the castle, named Sir Roland, who was
among those most eager for the battle. He was a splendid warrior, with
eyes that shone like stars whenever there was anything to do in the way
of knightly deeds. And although he was still quite young, his shield had
begun to shine enough to show plainly that he had done bravely in some
of his errands through the forest. This battle, he thought, would be the
great opportunity of his life. And on the morning of the day when they
were to go forth to it, and all the knights assembled in the great hall
of the castle to receive the commands of their leaders, Sir Roland hoped
that he would be put in the most dangerous place of all, so that he
could show what knightly stuff he was made of.

But when the lord of the castle came to him, as he went about in full
armor giving his commands, he said: "One brave knight must stay behind
and guard the gateway of the castle, and it is you, Sir Roland, being
one of the youngest, whom I have chosen for this."

At these words Sir Roland was so disappointed that he bit his lip and
closed his helmet over his face so that the other knights might not see
it. For a moment he felt as if he must reply angrily to the commander
and tell him that it was not right to leave so sturdy a knight behind
when he was eager to fight. But he struggled against this feeling and
went quietly to look after his duties at the gate. The gateway was high
and narrow, and was reached from outside by a high, narrow bridge that
crossed the moat, which surrounded the castle on every side. When an
enemy approached, the knight on guard rang a great bell just inside the
gate, and the bridge was drawn up against the castle wall, so that no
one could come across the moat. So the giants had long ago given up
trying to attack the castle itself.

To-day the battle was to be in the dark hollow in the forest, and it was
not likely that there would be anything to do at the castle gate, except
to watch it like a common doorkeeper. It was not strange that Sir Roland
thought some one else might have done this.

Presently all the other knights marched out in their flashing armor,
their red plumes waving over their heads, and their spears in their
hands. The lord of the castle stopped only to tell Sir Roland to keep
guard over the gate until they had all returned and to let no one enter.
Then they went into the shadows of the forest and were soon lost to
sight.

Sir Roland stood looking after them long after they had gone, thinking
how happy he would be if he were on the way to battle like them. But
after a little he put this out of his mind and tried to think of
pleasanter things. It was a long time before anything happened, or any
word came from the battle.

At last Sir Roland saw one of the knights come limping down the path to
the castle, and he went out on the bridge to meet him. Now this knight
was not a brave one, and he had been frightened away as soon as he was
wounded.

"I have been hurt," he said, "so that I can not fight any more. But I
could watch the gate for you, if you would like to go back in my place."

At first Sir Roland's heart leaped with joy at this, but then he
remembered what the commander had told him on going away, and he said:

"I should like to go, but a knight belongs where his commander has put
him. My place is here at the gate, and I can not open it even for you.
Your place is at the battle."

The knight was ashamed when he heard this, and he presently turned about
and went into the forest again.

So Sir Roland kept guard silently for another hour. Then there came an
old beggar woman down the path to the castle and asked Sir Roland if she
might come in and have some food. He told her that no one could enter
the castle that day, but that he would send a servant out to her with
food, and that she might sit and rest as long as she would.

"I have been past the hollow in the forest where the battle is going
on," said the old woman, while she was waiting for her food.

"And how do you think it is going?" asked Sir Roland.

"Badly for the knights, I am afraid," said the old woman. "The giants
are fighting as they have never fought before. I should think you had
better go and help your friends."

"I should like to, indeed," said Sir Roland. "But I am set to guard the
gateway of the castle and can not leave."

"One fresh knight would make a great difference when they are all weary
with fighting," said the old woman. "I should think that, while there
are no enemies about, you would be much more useful there."

"You may well think so," said Sir Roland, "and so may I; but it is
neither you nor I that is commander here."

"I suppose," said the old woman then, "that you are one of the kind of
knights who like to keep out of fighting. You are lucky to have so good
an excuse for staying at home." And she laughed a thin and taunting
laugh.

Then Sir Roland was very angry, and thought that if it were only a man
instead of a woman, he would show him whether he liked fighting or no.
But as it was a woman, he shut his lips and set his teeth hard together,
and as the servant came just then with the food he had sent for, he gave
it to the old woman quickly and shut the gate that she might not talk to
him any more.

It was not very long before he heard some one calling outside. Sir
Roland opened the gate and saw standing at the other end of the
drawbridge a little old man in a long black cloak. "Why are you knocking
here?" he said. "The castle is closed to-day."

"Are you Sir Roland?" said the little old man.

"Yes," said Sir Roland.

"Then you ought not to be staying here when your commander and his
knights are having so hard a struggle with the giants, and when you have
the chance to make of yourself the greatest knight in this kingdom.
Listen to me! I have brought you a magic sword."

As he said this, the old man drew from under his coat a wonderful sword
that flashed in the sunlight as if it were covered with diamonds. "This
is the sword of all swords," he said, "and it is for you, if you will
leave your idling here by the castle gate and carry it to the battle.
Nothing can stand before it. When you lift it the giants will fall back,
your master will be saved, and you will be crowned the victorious
knight--the one who will soon take his commander's place as lord of the
castle."

Now Sir Roland believed that it was a magician who was speaking to him,
for it certainly appeared to be a magic sword. It seemed so wonderful
that the sword should be brought to him, that he reached out his hand as
though he would take it, and the little old man came forward, as though
he would cross the drawbridge into the castle. But as he did so, it came
to Sir Roland's mind again that that bridge and the gateway had been
intrusted to him, and he called out "No!" to the old man, so that he
stopped where he was standing. But he waved the shining sword in the air
again, and said: "It is for you! Take it, and win the victory!"

Sir Roland was really afraid that if he looked any longer at the sword
or listened to any more words of the old man, he would not be able to
hold himself within the castle. For this reason he struck the great bell
at the gateway, which was the signal for the servants inside to pull in
the chains of the drawbridge, and instantly they began to pull, and the
drawbridge came up, so that the old man could not cross it to enter the
castle, nor Sir Roland to go out.

Then, as he looked across the moat, Sir Roland saw a wonderful thing.
The little old man threw off his black cloak, and as he did so he began
to grow bigger and bigger, until in a minute more he was a giant as tall
as any in the forest. At first Sir Roland could scarcely believe his
eyes. Then he realized that this must be one of their giant enemies, who
had changed himself to a little old man through some magic power, that
he might make his way into the castle while all the knights were away.
Sir Roland shuddered to think what might have happened if he had taken
the sword and left the gate unguarded. The giant shook his fist across
the moat that lay between them, and then, knowing that he could do
nothing more, he went angrily back into the forest.

Sir Roland now resolved not to open the gate again, and to pay no
attention to any other visitor. But it was not long before he heard a
sound that made him spring forward in joy. It was the bugle of the lord
of the castle, and there came sounding after it the bugles of many of
the knights that were with him, pealing so joyfully that Sir Roland was
sure they were safe and happy. As they came nearer, he could hear their
shouts of victory. So he gave the signal to let down the drawbridge
again, and went out to meet them. They were dusty and bloodstained and
weary, but they had won the battle with the giants; and it had been such
a great victory that there had never been a happier home-coming.

Sir Roland greeted them all as they passed in over the bridge, and then,
when he had closed the gate and fastened it, he followed them into the
great hall of the castle. The lord of the castle took his place on the
highest seat, with the other knights about him, and Sir Roland came
forward with the key of the gate, to give his account of what he had
done in the place to which the commander had appointed him. The lord of
the castle bowed to him as a sign for him to begin, but just as he
opened his mouth to speak, one of the knights cried out:

"The shield! the shield! Sir Roland's shield!"

Every one turned and looked at the shield which Sir Roland carried on
his left arm. He himself could see only the top of it and did not know
what they could mean. But what they saw was the golden star of
knighthood, shining brightly from the center of Sir Roland's shield.
There had never been such amazement in the castle before.

Sir Roland knelt before the lord of the castle to receive his commands.
He still did not know why every one was looking at him so excitedly, and
wondered if he had in some way done wrong.

"Speak, Sir Knight," said the commander, as soon as he could find his
voice after his surprise, "and tell us all that has happened to-day at
the castle. Have you been attacked? Have any giants come hither? Did you
fight them alone?"

"No, my Lord," said Sir Roland. "Only one giant has been here, and he
went away silently when he found he could not enter."

Then he told all that had happened through the day.

When he had finished, the knights all looked at one another, but no one
spoke a word. Then they looked again at Sir Roland's shield, to make
sure that their eyes had not deceived them, and there the golden star
was still shining.

After a little silence the lord of the castle spoke.

"Men make mistakes," he said, "but our silver shields are never
mistaken. Sir Roland has fought and won the hardest battle of all
to-day."

Then the others all rose and saluted Sir Roland, who was the youngest
knight that ever carried the golden star.



202

        Jean Ingelow (1820-1897) was an English poet,
        novelist, and writer of stories for children,
        who lived in the fen district of Lincolnshire.
        Her most noted poem deals with a terrible
        catastrophe that happened there more than three
        centuries ago. It is called "The High Tide on
        the Coast of Lincolnshire." Many reading books
        for the third or fourth grade contain her
        dainty and melodious "Seven Times One," in
        which a little girl expresses the joy and sense
        of power felt on reaching a seventh birthday.
        Of her children's books, the favorite is _Mopsa
        the Fairy_, which some one has called a
        "delightful succession of breezy
        impossibilities." Her shorter stories for
        children are collected under the title _Stories
        Told to a Child_ (two series), from which "The
        Prince's Dream" is taken. It is somewhat old
        fashioned in method and style, reminding one of
        the stories of the days of Addison and Steele.
        Its seriousness is in striking contrast with
        the more flippant note in much modern writing
        for children, and it is sure to suggest some
        questions on the dangers and advantages of
        great possessions in their effects on labor,
        liberty, and human happiness in general.
        However, the moral will take care of itself,
        and the attention should rest on the means used
        by the old man to teach the young prince the
        things he is shut out from learning by
        experience. The children will easily see that
        it is an anticipation of the moving-picture
        method. Some other good stories in the
        collection mentioned are "I Have a Right," "The
        Fairy Who Judged Her Neighbors," and "Anselmo."


THE PRINCE'S DREAM

JEAN INGELOW

If we may credit the fable, there is a tower in the midst of a great
Asiatic plain, wherein is confined a prince who was placed there in his
earliest infancy, with many slaves and attendants, and all the luxuries
that are compatible with imprisonment.

Whether he was brought there from some motive of state, whether to
conceal him from enemies, or to deprive him of rights, has not
transpired; but it is certain that up to the date of this little history
he had never set his foot outside the walls of that high tower, and that
of the vast world without he knew only the green plains which surrounded
it; the flocks and the birds of that region were all his experience of
living creatures, and all the men he saw outside were shepherds.

And yet he was not utterly deprived of change, for sometimes one of his
attendants would be ordered away, and his place would be supplied by a
new one. This fresh companion the prince would never weary of
questioning, and letting him talk of cities, of ships, of forests, of
merchandise, of kings; but though in turns they all tried to satisfy his
curiosity, they could not succeed in conveying very distinct notions to
his mind; partly because there was nothing in the tower to which they
could compare the external world, partly because, having chiefly lived
lives of seclusion and indolence in Eastern palaces, they knew it only
by hearsay themselves.

At length, one day, a venerable man of a noble presence was brought to
the tower, with soldiers to guard him and slaves to attend him. The
prince was glad of his presence, though at first he seldom opened his
lips, and it was manifest that confinement made him miserable. With
restless feet he would wander from window to window of the stone tower,
and mount from story to story; but mount as high as he would there was
still nothing to be seen but the vast unvarying plain, clothed with
scanty grass, and flooded with the glaring sunshine; flocks and herds,
and shepherds, moved across it sometimes, but nothing else, not even a
shadow, for there was no cloud in the sky to cast one.

The old man, however, always treated the prince with respect, and
answered his questions with a great deal of patience, till at length he
found a pleasure in satisfying his curiosity, which so much pleased the
young prisoner, that, as a great condescension, he invited him to come
out on the roof of the tower and drink sherbet with him in the cool of
the evening, and tell him of the country beyond the desert, and what
seas are like, and mountains, and towns.

"I have learnt much from my attendants, and know this world pretty well
by hearsay," said the prince, as they reclined on the rich carpet which
was spread on the roof.

The old man smiled, but did not answer; perhaps because he did not care
to undeceive his young companion, perhaps because so many slaves were
present, some of whom were serving them with fruit, and others burning
rich odors on a little chafing-dish that stood between them.

"But there are some words to which I never could attach any particular
meaning," proceeded the prince, as the slaves began to retire, "and
three in particular that my attendants cannot satisfy me upon, or are
reluctant to do so."

"What words are those, my prince?" asked the old man. The prince turned
on his elbow to be sure that the last slave had descended the tower
stairs, then replied--

"O man of much knowledge, the words are these--Labor, and Liberty, and
Gold."

"Prince," said the old man, "I do not wonder that it has been hard to
make thee understand the first, the nature of it, and the cause why most
men are born to it; as for the second, it would be treason for thee and
me to do more than whisper it here, and sigh for it when none are
listening; but the third need hardly puzzle thee, thy hookah is bright
with it; all thy jewels are set in it; gold is inlaid in the ivory of
thy bath; thy cup and thy dish are of gold, and golden threads are
wrought into thy raiment."

"That is true," replied the prince, "and if I had not seen and handled
this gold, perhaps I might not find its merits so hard to understand;
but I possess it in abundance, and it does not feed me, nor make music
for me, nor fan me when the sun is hot, nor cause me to sleep when I am
weary; therefore when my slaves have told me how merchants go out and
brave the perilous wind and sea, and live in the unstable ships, and run
risks from shipwreck and pirates, and when, having asked them why they
have done this, they have answered, 'For gold,' I have found it hard to
believe them; and when they have told me how men have lied, and robbed,
and deceived; how they have murdered one another, and leagued together
to depose kings, to oppress provinces, and all for gold; then I have
said to myself, either my slaves have combined to make me believe that
which is not, or this gold must be very different from the yellow stuff
that this coin is made of, this coin which is of no use but to have a
hole pierced through it and hang to my girdle, that it may tinkle when I
walk."

"Notwithstanding," said the old man, "nothing can be done without gold;
for look you, prince, it is better than bread, and fruit, and music, for
it can buy them all, since men love it, and have agreed to exchange it
for whatever they may need."

"How so?" asked the prince.

"If a man has many loaves he cannot eat them all," answered the old man;
"therefore he goes to his neighbor and says, 'I have bread and thou
hast a coin of gold--let us change'; so he receives the gold and goes to
another man, saying, 'Thou hast two houses and I have none; lend me one
of thy houses to live in, and I will give thee my gold'; thus again they
change, and he that has the gold says, 'I have food enough and goods
enough, but I want a wife, I will go to the merchant and get a marriage
gift for her father, and for it I will give him this gold.'"

"It is well," said the prince; "but in time of drought, if there is no
bread in a city, can they make it of gold?"

"Not so," answered the old man, "but they must send their gold to a city
where there is food, and bring that back instead of it."

"But if there was a famine all over the world," asked the prince, "what
would they do then?"

"Why then, and only then," said the old man, "they must starve, and the
gold would be nought, for it can only be changed for that which _is_; it
cannot make that which is not."

"And where do they get gold?" asked the prince; "is it the precious
fruit of some rare tree, or have they whereby they can draw it down from
the sky at sunset?"

"Some of it," said the old man, "they dig out of the ground."

Then he told the prince of ancient rivers running through terrible
deserts, whose sands glitter, with golden grains and are yellow in the
fierce heat of the sun, and of dreary mines where the Indian slaves work
in gangs tied together, never seeing the light of day; and lastly (for
he was a man of much knowledge, and had traveled far), he told him of
the valley of the Sacramento in the New World, and of those mountains
where the people of Europe send their criminals, and where now their
free men pour forth to gather gold, and dig for it as hard as if for
life; sitting up by it at night lest any should take it from them,
giving up houses and country, and wife and children, for the sake of a
few feet of mud, whence they dig clay that glitters as they wash it; and
how they sift it and rock it as patiently as if it were their own
children in the cradle, and afterwards carry it in their bosoms, and
forego on account of it safety and rest.

"But, prince," he proceeded, observing that the young man was absorbed
in his narrative, "if you would pass your word to me never to betray me,
I would procure for you a sight of the external world, and in a trance
you should see those places where gold is dug, and traverse those
regions forbidden to your mortal footsteps."

Upon this, the prince threw himself at the old man's feet, and promised
heartily to observe the secrecy required, and entreated that, for
however short time, he might be suffered to see this wonderful world.

Then, if we may credit the story, the old man drew nearer to the
chafing-dish which stood between them, and having fanned the dying
embers in it, cast upon them a certain powder and some herbs, from
whence as they burnt a peculiar smoke arose. As their vapors spread, he
desired the prince to draw near and inhale them, and then (says the
fable) when he should sleep he should find himself, in his dream, at
whatever place he might desire, with this strange advantage, that he
should see things in their truth and reality as well as in their outward
shows.

So the prince, not without some fear, prepared to obey; but first he
drank his sherbet, and handed over the golden cup to the old man by way
of recompense; then he reclined beside the chafing-dish and inhaled the
heavy perfume till he became overpowered with sleep, and sank down upon
the carpet in a dream.

The prince knew not where he was, but a green country was floating
before him, and he found himself standing in a marshy valley, where a
few wretched cottages were scattered here and there with no means of
communication. There was a river, but it had overflowed its banks and
made the central land impassable, the fences had been broken down by it,
and the fields of corn laid low; a few wretched peasants were wandering
about there; they looked half clad and half starved. "A miserable valley
indeed!" exclaimed the prince; but as he said it a man came down from
the hills with a great bag of gold in his hand.

"This valley is mine," said he to the people; "I have bought it for
gold. Now make banks that the river may not overflow, and I will give
you gold; also make fences and plant fields, and cover in the roofs of
your houses, and buy yourselves richer clothing." So the people did so,
and as the gold got lower in the bag the valley grew fairer and greener,
till the prince exclaimed, "O gold, I see your value now! O wonderful,
beneficent gold!"

But presently the valley melted away like a mist, and the prince saw an
army besieging a city; he heard a general haranguing his soldiers to
urge them on, and the soldiers shouting and battering the walls; but
shortly, when the city was well-nigh taken, he saw some men secretly
throwing gold among the soldiers, so much of it that they threw down
their arms to pick it up, and said that the walls were so strong that
they could not throw them down. "O powerful gold!" thought the prince;
"thou art stronger than the city walls!"

After that it seemed to himself that he was walking about in a desert
country, and in his dream he thought, "Now I know what labor is, for I
have seen it, and its benefits; and I know what liberty is, for I have
tasted it; I can wander where I will, and no man questions me; but gold
is more strange to me than ever, for I have seen it buy both liberty and
labor." Shortly after this he saw a great crowd digging upon a barren
hill, and when he drew near he understood that he had reached the summit
of his wishes, and that he was to see the place where the gold came
from.

He came up and stood a long time watching the people as they toiled
ready to faint in the sun, so great was the labor of digging the gold.

He saw who had much and could not trust any one to help them to carry
it, binding it in bundles over their shoulders, and bending and groaning
under its weight; he saw others hide it in the ground, and watch the
place clothed in rags, that none might suspect that they were rich; but
some, on the contrary, who had dug up an unusual quantity, he saw
dancing and singing, and vaunting their success, till robbers waylaid
them when they slept, and rifled their bundles and carried their golden
sand away.

"All these men are mad," thought the prince, "and this pernicious gold
has made them so."

After this, as he wandered here and there, he saw groups of people
smelting the gold under the shadow of the trees, and he observed that a
dancing, quivering vapor rose up from it, which dazzled their eyes, and
distorted everything that they looked at; arraying it also in different
colors from the true one. He observed that this vapor from the gold
caused all things to rock and reel before the eyes of those who looked
through it, and also, by some strange affinity, it drew their hearts
towards those that carried much gold on their persons, so that they
called them good and beautiful; it also caused them to see darkness and
dullness in the faces of those who carried none. "This," thought the
prince, "is very strange"; but not being able to explain it, he went
still further, and there he saw more people. Each of these had adorned
himself with a broad golden girdle, and was sitting in the shade, while
other men waited on them.

"What ails these people?" he inquired of one who was looking on, for he
observed a peculiar air of weariness and dullness in their faces. He was
answered that the girdles were very tight and heavy, and being bound
over the regions of the heart, were supposed to impede its action, and
prevent it from beating high, and also to chill the wearer, as being of
opaque material, the warm sunshine of the earth could not get through to
warm him.

"Why, then, do they not break them asunder," exclaimed the prince, "and
fling them away?"

"Break them asunder!" cried the man; "why what a madman you must be;
they are made of the purest gold!"

"Forgive my ignorance," replied the prince; "I am a stranger."

So he walked on, for feelings of delicacy prevented him from gazing any
longer at the men with the golden girdles; but as he went he pondered on
the misery he had seen, and thought to himself that this golden sand did
more mischief than all the poisons of the apothecary; for it dazzled the
eyes of some, it strained the hearts of others, it bowed down the heads
of many to the earth with its weight; it was a sore labor to gather it,
and when it was gathered, the robber might carry it away; it would be a
good thing, he thought, if there were none of it.

After this he came to a place where were sitting some aged widows and
some orphan children of the gold-diggers, who were helpless and
destitute; they were weeping and bemoaning themselves, but stopped at
the approach of a man, whose appearance attracted the prince, for he had
a very great bundle of gold on his back, and yet it did not bow him down
at all; his apparel was rich but he had no girdle on, and his face was
anything but sad.

"Sir," said the prince to him, "you have a great burden; you are
fortunate to be able to stand under it."

"I could not do so," he replied, "only that as I go on I keep lightening
it"; and as he passed each of the widows, he threw gold to her, and
stooping down, hid pieces of it in the bosoms of the children.

"You have no girdle," said the prince.

"I once had one," answered the gold gatherer; "but it was so tight over
my breast that my very heart grew cold under it, and almost ceased to
beat. Having a great quantity of gold on my back, I felt almost at the
last gasp; so I threw off my girdle and being on the bank of a river,
which I knew not how to cross, I was about to fling it in, I was so
vexed! 'But no,' thought I, 'there are many people waiting here to cross
besides myself. I will make my girdle into a bridge, and we will cross
over on it.'"

"Turn your girdle into a bridge!" exclaimed the prince doubtfully, for
he did not quite understand.

The man explained himself.

"And then, sir, after that," he continued, "I turned one half of my
burden into bread, and gave it to these poor people. Since then I have
not been oppressed by its weight, however heavy it may have been; for
few men have a heavier one. In fact, I gather more from day to day."

As the man kept speaking, he scattered his gold right and left with a
cheerful countenance, and the prince was about to reply, when suddenly a
great trembling under his feet made him fall to the ground. The refining
fires of the gold gatherers sprang up into flames, and then went out;
night fell over everything on the earth, and nothing was visible in the
sky but the stars of the southern cross, which were glittering above
him.

"It is past midnight," thought the prince, "for the stars of the cross
begin to bend."

He raised himself upon his elbow, and tried to pierce the darkness, but
could not. At length a slender blue flame darted out, as from ashes in a
chafing-dish, and by the light of it he saw the strange pattern of his
carpet and the cushions lying about. He did not recognise them at first,
but presently he knew that he was lying in his usual place, at the top
of his tower.

"Wake up, prince," said the old man.

The prince sat up and sighed, and the old man inquired what he had seen.

"O man of much learning!" answered the prince, "I have seen that this is
a wonderful world; I have seen the value of labor, and I know the uses
of it; I have tasted the sweetness of liberty, and am grateful, though
it was but in a dream; but as for that other word that was so great a
mystery to me, I only know this, that it must remain a mystery forever,
since I am fain to believe that all men are bent on getting it; though,
once gotten, it causeth them endless disquietude, only second to their
discomfort that are without it. I am fain to believe that they can
procure with it whatever they most desire, and yet that it cankers their
hearts and dazzles their eyes; that it is their nature and their duty to
gather it; and yet that, when once gathered, the best thing they can do
is to scatter it!"

Alas! the prince visited this wonderful world no more; for the next
morning, when he awoke, the old man was gone. He had taken with him the
golden cup which the prince had given him. And the sentinel was also
gone, none knew whither. Perhaps the old man had turned his golden cup
into a golden key.



203

        Few modern writers have given their readers
        more genuine delight than Frank R. Stockton
        (1834-1902). The most absurd and illogical
        situations and characters are presented with an
        air of such quiet sincerity that one refuses to
        question the reality of it all. _Rudder Grange_
        established his reputation in 1879, and was
        followed by a long list of stories of
        delightfully impossible events. For several
        years Stockton was one of the editors of _St.
        Nicholas_, and some of his stories for
        children, of first quality in both form and
        content, deserve to be better known than they
        are. Five of the best of them for school use
        have been brought together in a little volume
        called _Fanciful Tales_. One of these, "Old
        Pipes and the Dryad," is given here by
        permission of the publishers, Charles
        Scribner's Sons, New York. (Copyright, 1894.)
        This story is based upon the old mythical
        belief that the trees are inhabited by guardian
        deities known as dryads, or hamadryads. To
        injure a tree meant to injure its guardian
        spirit and was almost certain to insure
        disaster for the guilty person. On the other
        hand, to protect a tree would bring some token
        of appreciation from the dryad. A good
        introduction to the story would be the telling
        of one or two of these tree myths as found in
        Gayley's _Classic Myths_ or Bulfinch's _Age of
        Fable_. A fine literary version of one of them
        is in Lowell's "Rhoecus." But the beautiful and
        kindly helpfulness of Old Pipes will carry its
        own message whether one knows any mythology or
        not.


OLD PIPES AND THE DRYAD

FRANK R. STOCKTON

A Mountain brook ran through a little village. Over the brook there was
a narrow bridge, and from the bridge a foot-path led out from the
village and up the hill-side, to the cottage of Old Pipes and his
mother.

For many, many years Old Pipes had been employed by the villagers to
pipe the cattle down from the hills. Every afternoon, an hour before
sunset, he would sit on a rock in front of his cottage and play on his
pipes. Then all the flocks and herds that were grazing on the mountains
would hear him, wherever they might happen to be, and would come down to
the village--the cows by the easiest paths, the sheep by those not quite
so easy, and the goats by the steep and rocky ways that were hardest of
all.

But now, for a year or more, Old Pipes had not piped the cattle home. It
is true that every afternoon he sat upon the rock and played upon his
pipes; but the cattle did not hear him. He had grown old, and his breath
was feeble. The echoes of his cheerful notes, which used to come from
the rocky hill on the other side of the valley, were heard no more; and
twenty yards from Old Pipes one could scarcely tell what tune he was
playing. He had become somewhat deaf, and did not know that the sound of
his pipes was so thin and weak, and that the cattle did not hear him.
The cows, the sheep, and the goats came down every afternoon as before;
but this was because two boys and a girl were sent up after them. The
villagers did not wish the good old man to know that his piping was no
longer of any use; so they paid him his little salary every month, and
said nothing about the two boys and the girl.

Old Pipes's mother was, of course, a great deal older than he was, and
was as deaf as a gate--post, latch, hinges, and all--and she never knew
that the sound of her son's pipe did not spread over all the
mountain-side and echo back strong and clear from the opposite hills.
She was very fond of Old Pipes, and proud of his piping; and as he was
so much younger than she was, she never thought of him as being very
old. She cooked for him, and made his bed, and mended his clothes; and
they lived very comfortably on his little salary.

One afternoon, at the end of the month, when Old Pipes had finished his
piping, he took his stout staff and went down the hill to the village to
receive the money for his month's work. The path seemed a great deal
steeper and more difficult than it used to be; and Old Pipes thought
that it must have been washed by the rains and greatly damaged. He
remembered it as a path that was quite easy to traverse either up or
down. But Old Pipes had been a very active man, and as his mother was so
much older than he was, he never thought of himself as aged and infirm.

When the Chief Villager had paid him, and he had talked a little with
some of his friends, Old Pipes started to go home. But when he had
crossed the bridge over the brook, and gone a short distance up the
hill-side, he became very tired, and sat down upon a stone. He had not
been sitting there half a minute, when along came two boys and a girl.

"Children," said Old Pipes, "I'm very tired to-night, and I don't
believe I can climb up this steep path to my home. I think I shall have
to ask you to help me."

"We will do that," said the boys and the girl, quite cheerfully; and one
boy took him by the right hand and the other by the left, while the girl
pushed him in the back. In this way he went up the hill quite easily,
and soon reached his cottage door. Old Pipes gave each of the three
children a copper coin, and then they sat down for a few minutes' rest
before starting back to the village.

"I'm sorry that I tired you so much," said Old Pipes.

"Oh, that would not have tired us," said one of the boys, "if we had not
been so far to-day after the cows, the sheep, and the goats. They
rambled high up on the mountain, and we never before had such a time in
finding them."

"Had to go after the cows, the sheep, and the goats!" exclaimed Old
Pipes. "What do you mean by that?"

The girl, who stood behind the old man, shook her head, put her hand on
her mouth, and made all sorts of signs to the boy to stop talking on
this subject; but he did not notice her, and promptly answered Old
Pipes.

"Why, you see, good sir," said he, "that as the cattle can't hear your
pipes now, somebody has to go after them every evening to drive them
down from the mountain, and the Chief Villager has hired us three to do
it. Generally it is not very hard work, but to-night the cattle had
wandered far."

"How long have you been doing this?" asked the old man.

The girl shook her head and clapped her hand on her mouth as before, but
the boy went on.

"I think it is about a year now," he said, "since the people first felt
sure that the cattle could not hear your pipes; and from that time we've
been driving them down. But we are rested now, and will go home.
Good-night, sir."

The three children then went down the hill, the girl scolding the boy
all the way home. Old Pipes stood silent a few moments, and then he went
into his cottage.

"Mother," he shouted, "did you hear what those children said?"

"Children!" exclaimed the old woman; "I did not hear them. I did not
know there were any children here."

Then Old Pipes told his mother--shouting very loudly to make her
hear--how the two boys and the girl had helped him up the hill, and what
he had heard about his piping and the cattle.

"They can't hear you?" cried his mother. "Why, what's the matter with
the cattle?"

"Ah, me!" said Old Pipes; "I don't believe there's anything the matter
with the cattle. It must be with me and my pipes that there is something
the matter. But one thing is certain: if I do not earn the wages the
Chief Villager pays me, I shall not take them. I shall go straight down
to the village and give back the money I received to-day."

"Nonsense!" cried his mother. "I'm sure you've piped as well as you
could, and no more can be expected. And what are we to do without the
money?"

"I don't know," said Old Pipes; "but I'm going down to the village to
pay it back."

The sun had now set; but the moon was shining very brightly on the
hill-side, and Old Pipes could see his way very well. He did not take
the same path by which he had gone before, but followed another, which
led among the trees upon the hill-side, and, though longer, was not so
steep.

When he had gone about half-way, the old man sat down to rest, leaning
his back against a great oak tree. As he did so, he heard a sound like
knocking inside the tree, and then a voice said:

"Let me out! let me out!"

Old Pipes instantly forgot that he was tired, and sprang to his feet.
"This must be a Dryad tree!" he exclaimed. "If it is, I'll let her out."

Old Pipes had never, to his knowledge, seen a Dryad tree, but he knew
there were such trees on the hill-sides and the mountains, and that
Dryads lived in them. He knew, too, that in the summer time, on those
days when the moon rose before the sun went down, a Dryad could come out
of her tree if any one could find the key which locked her in, and turn
it. Old Pipes closely examined the trunk of the tree, which stood in the
full moonlight. "If I see that key," he said, "I shall surely turn it."
Before long he found a piece of bark standing out from the tree, which
looked to him very much like the handle of a key. He took hold of it,
and found he could turn it quite around. As he did so, a large part of
the side of the tree was pushed open, and a beautiful Dryad stepped
quickly out.

For a moment she stood motionless, gazing on the scene before her--the
tranquil valley, the hills, the forest, and the mountain-side, all lying
in the soft clear light of the moon. "Oh, lovely! lovely!" she
exclaimed. "How long it is since I have seen anything like this!" And
then, turning to Old Pipes, she said: "How good of you to let me out! I
am so happy, and so thankful, that I must kiss you, you dear old man!"
And she threw her arms around the neck of Old Pipes, and kissed him on
both cheeks.

"You don't know," she then went on to say, "how doleful it is to be shut
up so long in a tree. I don't mind it in the winter, for then I am glad
to be sheltered, but in summer it is a rueful thing not to be able to
see all the beauties of the world. And it's ever so long since I've been
let out. People so seldom come this way; and when they do come at the
right time, they either don't hear me or they are frightened and run
away. But you, you dear old man, you were not frightened, and you looked
and looked for the key, and you let me out; and now I shall not have to
go back till winter has come, and the air grows cold. Oh, it is
glorious! What can I do for you, to show you how grateful I am?"

"I am very glad," said Old Pipes, "that I let you out, since I see that
it makes you so happy; but I must admit that I tried to find the key
because I had a great desire to see a Dryad. But, if you wish to do
something for me, you can, if you happen to be going down toward the
village."

"To the village!" exclaimed the Dryad. "I will go anywhere for you, my
kind old benefactor."

"Well, then," said Old Pipes, "I wish you would take this little bag of
money to the Chief Villager and tell him that Old Pipes cannot receive
pay for the services which he does not perform. It is now more than a
year that I have not been able to make the cattle hear me, when I piped
to call them home. I did not know this until to-night; but now that I
know it, I cannot keep the money, and so I send it back." And, handing
the little bag to the Dryad, he bade her good-night, and turned toward
his cottage.

"Good-night," said the Dryad. "And I thank you over, and over, and over
again, you good old man!"

Old Pipes walked toward his home, very glad to be saved the fatigue of
going all the way down to the village and back again. "To be sure," he
said to himself, "this path does not seem at all steep, and I can walk
along it very easily; but it would have tired me dreadfully to come up
all the way from the village, especially as I could not have expected
those children to help me again." When he reached home his mother was
surprised to see him returning so soon.

"What!" she exclaimed; "have you already come back? What did the Chief
Villager say? Did he take the money?"

Old Pipes was just about to tell her that he had sent the money to the
village by a Dryad, when he suddenly reflected that his mother would be
sure to disapprove such a proceeding, and so he merely said he had sent
it by a person whom he had met.

"And how do you know that the person will ever take it to the Chief
Villager?" cried his mother. "You will lose it, and the villagers will
never get it. Oh, Pipes! Pipes! when will you be old enough to have
ordinary common-sense?"

Old Pipes considered that, as he was already seventy years of age, he
could scarcely expect to grow any wiser; but he made no remark on this
subject, and, saying that he doubted not that the money would go safely
to its destination, he sat down to his supper. His mother scolded him
roundly, but he did not mind it; and after supper he went out and sat on
a rustic chair in front of the cottage to look at the moonlit village,
and to wonder whether or not the Chief Villager really received the
money. While he was doing these two things, he went fast asleep.

When Old Pipes left the Dryad, she did not go down to the village with
the little bag of money. She held it in her hand, and thought about what
she had heard. "This is a good and honest old man," she said; "and it is
a shame that he should lose this money. He looked as if he needed it,
and I don't believe the people in the village will take it from one who
has served them so long. Often, when in my tree, have I heard the sweet
notes of his pipes. I am going to take the money back to him." She did
not start immediately, because there were so many beautiful things to
look at; but after awhile she went up to the cottage, and, finding Old
Pipes asleep in his chair, she slipped the little bag into his
coat-pocket, and silently sped away.

The next day Old Pipes told his mother that he would go up the mountain
and cut some wood. He had a right to get wood from the mountain, but for
a long time he had been content to pick up the dead branches which lay
about his cottage. To-day, however, he felt so strong and vigorous that
he thought he would go and cut some fuel that would be better than
this. He worked all the morning, and when he came back he did not feel
at all tired, and he had a very good appetite for his dinner.

Now, Old Pipes knew a good deal about Dryads; but there was one thing
which, although he had heard, he had forgotten. This was, that a kiss
from a Dryad made a person ten years younger.

The people of the village knew this, and they were very careful not to
let any child of ten years or younger go into the woods where the Dryads
were supposed to be; for, if they should chance to be kissed by one of
these tree-nymphs, they would be set back so far that they would cease
to exist.

A story was told in the village that a very bad boy of eleven once ran
away into the woods, and had an adventure of this kind; and when his
mother found him he was a little baby of one year old. Taking advantage
of her opportunity, she brought him up more carefully than she had done
before, and he grew to be a very good boy indeed.

Now Old Pipes had been kissed twice by the Dryad, once on each cheek,
and he therefore felt as vigorous and active as when he was a hale man
of fifty. His mother noticed how much work he was doing, and told him
that he need not try in that way to make up for the loss of his piping
wages; for he would only tire himself out, and get sick. But her son
answered that he had not felt so well for years, and that he was quite
able to work.

In the course of the afternoon, Old Pipes, for the first time that day,
put his hand in his coat-pocket, and there, to his amazement, he found
the little bag of money. "Well, well!" he exclaimed, "I am stupid,
indeed! I really thought that I had seen a Dryad; but when I sat down by
that big oak tree I must have gone to sleep and dreamed it all; and then
I came home, thinking I had given the money to a Dryad, when it was in
my pocket all the time. But the Chief Villager shall have the money. I
shall not take it to him to-day, but to-morrow I wish to go to the
village to see some of my old friends; and then I shall give up the
money."

Toward the close of the afternoon, Old Pipes, as had been his custom for
so many years, took his pipes from the shelf on which they lay, and went
out to the rock in front of the cottage.

"What are you going to do?" cried his mother. "If you will not consent
to be paid, why do you pipe?"

"I am going to pipe for my own pleasure," said her son. "I am used to
it, and I do not wish to give it up. It does not matter now whether the
cattle hear me or not, and I am sure that my piping will injure no one."

When the good man began to play upon his favorite instrument he was
astonished at the sound that came from it. The beautiful notes of the
pipes sounded clear and strong down into the valley, and spread over the
hills, and up the sides of the mountain beyond, while, after a little
interval, an echo came back from the rocky hill on the other side of the
valley.

"Ha! ha!" he cried, "what has happened to my pipes? They must have been
stopped up of late, but now they are as clear and good as ever."

Again the merry notes went sounding far and wide. The cattle on the
mountain heard them, and those that were old enough remembered how these
notes had called them from their pastures every evening, and so they
started down the mountain-side, the others following.

The merry notes were heard in the village below, and the people were
much astonished thereby. "Why, who can be blowing the pipes of Old
Pipes?" they said. But, as they were all very busy, no one went up to
see. One thing, however, was plain enough: the cattle were coming down
the mountain. And so the two boys and the girl did not have to go after
them, and had an hour for play, for which they were very glad.

The next morning Old Pipes started down to the village with his money,
and on the way he met the Dryad. "Oh, ho!" he cried, "is that you? Why,
I thought my letting you out of the tree was nothing but a dream."

"A dream!" cried the Dryad; "if you only knew how happy you have made
me, you would not think it merely a dream. And has it not benefited you?
Do you not feel happier? Yesterday I heard you playing beautifully on
your pipes."

"Yes, yes," cried he. "I did not understand it before, but I see it all
now. I have really grown younger. I thank you, I thank you, good Dryad,
from the bottom of my heart. It was the finding of the money in my
pocket that made me think it was a dream."

"Oh, I put it in when you were asleep," she said, laughing, "because I
thought you ought to keep it. Good-by, kind, honest man. May you live
long, and be as happy as I am now."

Old Pipes was greatly delighted when he understood that he was really a
younger man; but that made no difference about the money, and he kept on
his way to the village. As soon as he reached it, he was eagerly
questioned as to who had been playing his pipes the evening before, and
when the people heard that it was himself they were very much surprised.
Thereupon Old Pipes told what had happened to him, and then there was
greater wonder, with hearty congratulations and hand-shakes; for Old
Pipes was liked by everyone. The Chief Villager refused to take his
money; and although Old Pipes said that he had not earned it, everyone
present insisted that, as he would now play on his pipes as before, he
should lose nothing because, for a time, he was unable to perform his
duty.

So Old Pipes was obliged to keep his money, and after an hour or two
spent in conversation with his friends he returned to his cottage.

There was one person, however, who was not pleased with what had
happened to Old Pipes. This was an Echo-dwarf who lived on the hills
across the valley. It was his work to echo back the notes of the pipes
whenever they could be heard.

A great many other Echo-dwarfs lived on these hills. They all worked,
but in different ways. Some echoed back the songs of maidens, some the
shouts of children, and others the music that was often heard in the
village. But there was only one who could send back the strong notes of
the pipes of Old Pipes, and this had been his sole duty for many years.
But when the old man grew feeble, and the notes of his pipes could not
be heard on the opposite hills, this Echo-dwarf had nothing to do, and
he spent his time in delightful idleness; and he slept so much and grew
so fat that it made his companions laugh to see him walk.

On the afternoon on which, after so long an interval, the sound of the
pipes was heard on the echo hills, this dwarf was fast asleep behind a
rock. As soon as the first notes reached them, some of his companions
ran to wake him up. Rolling to his feet, he echoed back the merry tune
of Old Pipes.

Naturally, he was very angry at being thus obliged to give up his life
of comfort, and he hoped very much that this pipe-playing would not
occur again. The next afternoon he was awake and listening, and, sure
enough, at the usual hour, along came the notes of the pipes as clear
and strong as they ever had been; and he was obliged to work as long as
Old Pipes played. The Echo-dwarf was very angry. He had supposed, of
course, that the pipe-playing had ceased forever, and he felt that he
had a right to be indignant at being thus deceived. He was so much
disturbed that he made up his mind to go and try to find out how long
this was to last. He had plenty of time, as the pipes were played but
once a day, and he set off early in the morning for the hill on which
Old Pipes lived. It was hard work for the fat little fellow, and when he
had crossed the valley and had gone some distance into the woods on the
hill-side, he stopped to rest, and in a few minutes the Dryad came
tripping along.

"Ho, ho!" exclaimed the dwarf; "what are you doing here? and how did you
get out of your tree?"

"Doing!" cried the Dryad; "I am being happy; that's what I am doing. And
I was let out of my tree by the good old man who plays the pipes to call
the cattle down from the mountain. And it makes me happier to think that
I have been of service to him. I gave him two kisses of gratitude, and
now he is young enough to play his pipes as well as ever."

The Echo-dwarf stepped forward, his face pale with passion. "Am I to
believe," he said, "that you are the cause of this great evil that has
come upon me? and that you are the wicked creature who has again started
this old man upon his career of pipe-playing? What have I ever done to
you that you should have condemned me for years and years to echo back
the notes of those wretched pipes?"

At this the Dryad laughed loudly.

"What a funny little fellow you are!" she said. "Anyone would think you
had been condemned to toil from morning till night; while what you
really have to do is merely to imitate for half an hour every day the
merry notes of Old Pipes's piping. Fie upon you, Echo-dwarf! You are
lazy and selfish; and that is what is the matter with you. Instead of
grumbling at being obliged to do a little wholesome work, which is less,
I am sure, than that of any other echo-dwarf upon the rocky hill-side,
you should rejoice at the good fortune of the old man who has regained
so much of his strength and vigor. Go home and learn to be just and
generous; and then, perhaps, you may be happy. Good-by."

"Insolent creature!" shouted the dwarf, as he shook his fat little fist
at her. "I'll make you suffer for this. You shall find out what it is to
heap injury and insult upon one like me, and to snatch from him the
repose that he has earned by long years of toil." And, shaking his head
savagely, he hurried back to the rocky hill-side.

Every afternoon the merry notes of the pipes of Old Pipes sounded down
into the valley and over the hills and up the mountain-side; and every
afternoon when he had echoed them back, the little dwarf grew more and
more angry with the Dryad. Each day, from early morning till it was time
for him to go back to his duties upon the rocky hill-side, he searched
the woods for her. He intended, if he met her, to pretend to be very
sorry for what he had said, and he thought he might be able to play a
trick upon her which would avenge him well.

One day, while thus wandering among the trees, he met Old Pipes. The
Echo-dwarf did not generally care to see or speak to ordinary people;
but now he was so anxious to find the object of his search, that he
stopped and asked Old Pipes if he had seen the Dryad. The piper had not
noticed the little fellow, and he looked down on him with some surprise.

"No," he said; "I have not seen her, and I have been looking everywhere
for her."

"You!" cried the dwarf, "what do you wish with her?"

Old Pipes then sat down on a stone, so that he should be nearer the ear
of his small companion, and he told what the Dryad had done for him.

When the Echo-dwarf heard that this was the man whose pipes he was
obliged to echo back every day, he would have slain him on the spot, had
he been able; but, as he was not able, he merely ground his teeth and
listened to the rest of the story.

"I am looking for the Dryad now," Old Pipes continued, "on account of my
aged mother. When I was old myself, I did not notice how very old my
mother was; but now it shocks me to see how feeble her years have caused
her to become; and I am looking for the Dryad to ask her to make my
mother younger, as she made me."

The eyes of the Echo-dwarf glistened. Here was a man who might help him
in his plans.

"Your idea is a good one," he said to Old Pipes, "and it does you honor.
But you should know that a Dryad can make no person younger but one who
lets her out of her tree. However, you can manage the affair very
easily. All you need do is to find the Dryad, tell her what you want,
and request her to step into her tree and be shut up for a short time.
Then you will go and bring your mother to the tree; she will open it,
and everything will be as you wish. Is not this a good plan?"

"Excellent!" cried Old Pipes; "and I will go instantly and search more
diligently for the Dryad."

"Take me with you," said the Echo-dwarf. "You can easily carry me on
your strong shoulders; and I shall be glad to help you in any way that I
can."

"Now then," said the little fellow to himself, as Old Pipes carried him
rapidly along, "if he persuades the Dryad to get into a tree,--and she
is quite foolish enough to do it,--and then goes away to bring his
mother, I shall take a stone or a club and I will break off the key of
that tree, so that nobody can ever turn it again. Then Mistress Dryad
will see what she has brought upon herself by her behavior to me."

Before long they came to the great oak tree in which the Dryad had
lived, and at a distance they saw that beautiful creature herself coming
toward them.

"How excellently well everything happens!" said the dwarf. "Put me
down, and I will go. Your business with the Dryad is more important
than mine; and you need not say anything about my having suggested your
plan to you. I am willing that you should have all the credit of it
yourself."

Old Pipes put the Echo-dwarf upon the ground, but the little rogue did
not go away. He hid himself between some low, mossy rocks, and he was so
much like them in color that you would not have noticed him if you had
been looking straight at him.

When the Dryad came up, Old Pipes lost no time in telling her about his
mother, and what he wished her to do. At first, the Dryad answered
nothing, but stood looking very sadly at Old Pipes.

"Do you really wish me to go into my tree again?" she said. "I should
dreadfully dislike to do it, for I don't know what might happen. It is
not at all necessary, for I could make your mother younger at any time
if she would give me the opportunity. I had already thought of making
you still happier in this way, and several times I have waited about
your cottage, hoping to meet your aged mother, but she never comes
outside, and you know a Dryad cannot enter a house. I cannot imagine
what put this idea into your head. Did you think of it yourself?"

"No, I cannot say that I did," answered Old Pipes. "A little dwarf whom
I met in the woods proposed it to me."

"Oh!" cried the Dryad; "now I see through it all. It is the scheme of
that vile Echo-dwarf--your enemy and mine. Where is he? I should like to
see him."

"I think he has gone away," said Old Pipes.

"No, he has not," said the Dryad, whose quick eyes perceived the
Echo-dwarf among the rocks, "there he is. Seize him and drag him out, I
beg of you."

Old Pipes saw the dwarf as soon as he was pointed out to him; and
running to the rocks, he caught the little fellow by the arm and pulled
him out.

"Now, then," cried the Dryad, who had opened the door of the great oak,
"just stick him in there, and we will shut him up. Then I shall be safe
from his mischief for the rest of the time I am free."

