anxious to escape the tickling. But even as he professed to "feel merry"
his round, red face wore an expression of horror and anxiety that was
really comical.

"Sing, then!" commanded Queen Cor, who was greatly amused.

Rinkitink gave a sigh of relief and after clearing his throat and trying
to repress his sobs he began to sing this song--gently, at first, but
finally roaring it out at the top of his voice:

  "Oh!
    There was a Baby Tiger lived in a men-ag-er-ie--
      Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--they wouldn't set him free;
    And ev'rybody thought that he was gentle as could be--
      Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--Ba-by Ti-ger!

  "Oh!
    They patted him upon his head and shook him by the paw--
      Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--he had a bone to gnaw;
    But soon he grew the biggest Tiger that you ever saw--
      Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--what a Ti-ger!

  "Oh!
    One day they came to pet the brute and he began to fight--
      Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy--how he did scratch and bite!
    He broke the cage and in a rage he darted out of sight--
      Fizzy-fezzy-fuzzy was a Ti-ger!"

"And is there a moral to the song?" asked Queen Cor, when King
Rinkitink had finished his song with great spirit.

[Illustration]

"If there is," replied Rinkitink, "it is a warning not to fool with
tigers."

The little Prince could not help smiling at this shrewd answer, but
Queen Cor frowned and gave the King a sharp look.

"Oh," said she; "I think I know the difference between a tiger and a
lapdog. But I'll bear the warning in mind, just the same."

For, after all her success in capturing them, she was a little afraid of
these people who had once displayed such extraordinary powers.

[Illustration]




Zella Goes to Coregos

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 11

The forest in which Nikobob lived with his wife and daughter stood
between the mountains and the City of Regos, and a well-beaten path
wound among the trees, leading from the city to the mines. This path was
used by the King's messengers, and captured prisoners were also sent by
this way from Regos to work in the underground caverns.

Nikobob had built his cabin more than a mile away from this path, that
he might not be molested by the wild and lawless soldiers of King Gos,
but the family of the charcoal-burner was surrounded by many creatures
scarcely less dangerous to encounter, and often in the night they could
hear savage animals growling and prowling about the cabin. Because
Nikobob minded his own business and never hunted the wild creatures to
injure them, the beasts had come to regard him as one of the natural
dwellers in the forest and did not molest him or his family. Still,
Zella and her mother seldom wandered far from home, except on such
errands as carrying honey to Coregos, and at these times Nikobob
cautioned them to be very careful.

So when Zella set out on her journey to Queen Cor, with the two pails of
honey in her hands, she was undertaking a dangerous adventure and there
was no certainty that she would return safely to her loving parents. But
they were poor, and Queen Cor's money, which they expected to receive
for the honey, would enable them to purchase many things that were
needed; so it was deemed best that Zella should go. She was a brave
little girl and poor people are often obliged to take chances that rich
ones are spared.

[Illustration]

A passing woodchopper had brought news to Nikobob's cabin that Queen Cor
had made a prisoner of the conquering Prince of Pingaree and that Gos
and his warriors were again back in their city of Regos; but these
struggles and conquests were matters which, however interesting, did not
concern the poor charcoal-burner or his family. They were more anxious
over the report that the warriors had become more reckless than ever
before, and delighted in annoying all the common people; so Zella was
told to keep away from the beaten path as much as possible, that she
might not encounter any of the King's soldiers.

"When it is necessary to choose between the warriors and the wild
beasts," said Nikobob, "the beasts will be found the more merciful."

The little girl had put on her best attire for the journey and her
mother threw a blue silk shawl over her head and shoulders. Upon her
feet were the pretty red shoes her father had brought her from Regos.
Thus prepared, she kissed her parents good-bye and started out with a
light heart, carrying the pails of honey in either hand.

It was necessary for Zella to cross the path that led from the mines to
the city, but once on the other side she was not likely to meet with
anyone, for she had resolved to cut through the forest and so reach the
bridge of boats without entering the City of Regos, where she might be
interrupted. For an hour or two she found the walking easy enough, but
then the forest, which in this part was unknown to her, became badly
tangled. The trees were thicker and creeping vines intertwined between
them. She had to turn this way and that to get through at all, and
finally she came to a place where a network of vines and branches
effectually barred her farther progress.

Zella was dismayed, at first, when she encountered this obstacle, but
setting down her pails she made an endeavor to push the branches aside.
At her touch they parted as if by magic, breaking asunder like dried
twigs, and she found she could pass freely. At another place a great log
had fallen across her way, but the little girl lifted it easily and cast
it aside, although six ordinary men could scarcely have moved it.

The child was somewhat worried at this evidence of a strength she had
heretofore been ignorant that she possessed. In order to satisfy herself
that it was no delusion, she tested her new-found power in many ways,
finding that nothing was too big nor too heavy for her to lift. And,
naturally enough, the girl gained courage from these experiments and
became confident that she could protect herself in any emergency. When,
presently, a wild boar ran toward her, grunting horribly and
threatening her with its great tusks, she did not climb a tree to
escape, as she had always done before on meeting such creatures, but
stood still and faced the boar. When it had come quite close and Zella
saw that it could not injure her--a fact that astonished both the beast
and the girl--she suddenly reached down and seizing it by one ear threw
the great beast far off amongst the trees, where it fell headlong to the
earth, grunting louder than ever with surprise and fear.

The girl laughed merrily at this incident and, picking up her pails,
resumed her journey through the forest. It is not recorded whether the
wild boar told his adventure to the other beasts or they had happened to
witness his defeat, but certain it is that Zella was not again molested.
A brown bear watched her pass without making any movement in her
direction and a great puma--a beast much dreaded by all men--crept out
of her path as she approached, and disappeared among the trees.

[Illustration]

Thus everything favored the girl's journey and she made such good speed
that by noon she emerged from the forest's edge and found she was quite
near to the bridge of boats that led to Coregos. This she crossed safely
and without meeting any of the rude warriors she so greatly feared,
and five minutes later the daughter of the charcoal-burner was seeking
admittance at the back door of Queen Cor's palace.

[Illustration]




The Excitement of Bilbil the Goat

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 12


Our story must now return to one of our characters whom we have been
forced to neglect. The temper of Bilbil the goat was not sweet under any
circumstances, and whenever he had a grievance he was inclined to be
quite grumpy. So, when his master settled down in the palace of King Gos
for a quiet life with the boy Prince, and passed his time in playing
checkers and eating and otherwise enjoying himself, he had no use
whatever for Bilbil, and shut the goat in an upstairs room to prevent
his wandering through the city and quarreling with the citizens. But
this Bilbil did not like at all. He became very cross and disagreeable
at being left alone and he did not speak nicely to the servants who came
to bring him food; therefore those people decided not to wait upon him
any more, resenting his conversation and not liking to be scolded by a
lean, scraggly goat, even though it belonged to a conqueror. The
servants kept away from the room and Bilbil grew more hungry and more
angry every hour. He tried to eat the rugs and ornaments, but found them
not at all nourishing. There was no grass to be had unless he escaped
from the palace.

When Queen Cor came to capture Inga and Rinkitink, both the prisoners
were so filled with despair at their own misfortune that they gave no
thought whatever to the goat, who was left in his room. Nor did Bilbil
know anything of the changed fortunes of his comrades until he heard
shouts and boisterous laughter in the courtyard below. Looking out of a
window, with the intention of rebuking those who dared thus to disturb
him, Bilbil saw the courtyard quite filled with warriors and knew from
this that the palace had in some way again fallen into the hands of the
enemy.

[Illustration]

Now, although Bilbil was often exceedingly disagreeable to King
Rinkitink, as well as to the Prince, and sometimes used harsh words in
addressing them, he was intelligent enough to know them to be his
friends, and to know that King Gos and his people were his foes. In
sudden anger, provoked by the sight of the warriors and the knowledge
that he was in the power of the dangerous men of Regos, Bilbil butted
his head against the door of his room and burst it open. Then he ran to
the head of the staircase and saw King Gos coming up the stairs followed
by a long line of his chief captains and warriors.

The goat lowered his head, trembling with rage and excitement, and just
as the King reached the top stair the animal dashed forward and butted
His Majesty so fiercely that the big and powerful King, who did not
expect an attack, doubled up and tumbled backward. His great weight
knocked over the man just behind him and he in turn struck the next
warrior and upset him, so that in an instant the whole line of Bilbil's
foes was tumbling heels over head to the bottom of the stairs, where
they piled up in a heap, struggling and shouting and in the mix-up
hitting one another with their fists, until every man of them was
bruised and sore.

Finally King Gos scrambled out of the heap and rushed up the stairs
again, very angry indeed. Bilbil was ready for him and a second time
butted the King down the stairs; but now the goat also lost his balance
and followed the King, landing full upon the confused heap of soldiers.
Then he kicked out so viciously with his heels that he soon freed
himself and dashed out of the doorway of the palace.

"Stop him!" cried King Gos, running after.

But the goat was now so wild and excited that it was not safe for anyone
to stand in his way. None of the men were armed and when one or two
tried to head off the goat, Bilbil sent them sprawling upon the ground.
Most of the warriors, however, were wise enough not to attempt to
interfere with his flight.

Coursing down the street, Bilbil found himself approaching the bridge of
boats and without pausing to think where it might lead him he crossed
over and proceeded on his way. A few moments later a great stone
building blocked his path. It was the palace of Queen Cor, and seeing
the gates of the courtyard standing wide open, Bilbil rushed through
them without slackening his speed.

[Illustration]




Zella Saves the Prince

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 13


The wicked Queen of Coregos was in a very bad humor this morning, for
one of her slave drivers had come from the fields to say that a number
of slaves had rebelled and would not work.

"Bring them here to me!" she cried savagely. "A good whipping may make
them change their minds."

So the slave driver went to fetch the rebellious ones and Queen Cor sat
down to eat her breakfast, an ugly look on her face.

Prince Inga had been ordered to stand behind his new mistress with a big
fan of peacock's feathers, but he was so unused to such service that he
awkwardly brushed her ear with the fan. At once she flew into a terrible
rage and slapped the Prince twice with her hand--blows that tingled,
too, for her hand was big and hard and she was not inclined to be
gentle. Inga took the blows without shrinking or uttering a cry,
although they stung his pride far more than his body. But King
Rinkitink, who was acting as the queen's butler and had just brought in
her coffee, was so startled at seeing the young Prince punished that he
tipped over the urn and the hot coffee streamed across the lap of the
Queen's best morning gown.

Cor sprang from her seat with a scream of anger and poor Rinkitink would
doubtless have been given a terrible beating had not the slave driver
returned at this moment and attracted the woman's attention. The
overseer had brought with him all of the women slaves from Pingaree, who
had been loaded down with chains and were so weak and ill they could
scarcely walk, much less work in the fields.

Prince Inga's eyes were dimmed with sorrowful tears when he discovered
how his poor people had been abused, but his own plight was so helpless
that he was unable to aid them. Fortunately the boy's mother, Queen
Garee, was not among these slaves, for Queen Cor had placed her in the
royal dairy to make butter.

"Why do you refuse to work?" demanded Cor in a harsh voice, as the
slaves from Pingaree stood before her, trembling and with downcast eyes.

"Because we lack strength to perform the tasks your overseers demand,"
answered one of the women.

"Then you shall be whipped until your strength returns!" exclaimed the
Queen, and turning to Inga, she commanded: "Get me the whip with the
seven lashes."

As the boy left the room, wondering how he might manage to save the
unhappy women from their undeserved punishment, he met a girl entering
by the back way, who asked:

"Can you tell me where to find Her Majesty, Queen Cor?"

"She is in the chamber with the red dome, where green dragons are
painted upon the walls," replied Inga; "but she is in an angry and
ungracious mood to-day. Why do you wish to see her?"

"I have honey to sell," answered the girl, who was Zella, just come from
the forest. "The Queen is very fond of my honey."

"You may go to her, if you so desire," said the boy, "but take care not
to anger the cruel Queen, or she may do you a mischief."

"Why should she harm me, who brings her the honey she so dearly loves?"
inquired the child innocently. "But I thank you for your warning; and I
will try not to anger the Queen."
