but at last one ambitious little cottage blazed up, fired a tree of the
palm species, which fell on to the roof of a large family mansion,
and in a few minutes the whole town was burning merrily. The wooden
population stood and stared at the destruction like blockheads, as they
were, till they also caught and blazed away without a cry. It took
some time to reduce the town to ashes, and the lookers-on enjoyed the
spectacle immensely, cheering as each house fell, dancing like wild
Indians when the steeple flamed aloft, and actually casting one wretched
little churn-shaped lady, who had escaped to the suburbs, into the very
heart of the fire.

The superb success of this last offering excited Teddy to such a degree,
that he first threw his lamb into the conflagration, and before it had
time even to roast, he planted poor Annabella on the funeral pyre. Of
course she did not like it, and expressed her anguish and resentment in
a way that terrified her infant destroyer. Being covered with kid,
she did not blaze, but did what was worse, she squirmed. First one leg
curled up, then the other, in a very awful and lifelike manner; next
she flung her arms over her head as if in great agony; her head itself
turned on her shoulders, her glass eyes fell out, and with one final
writhe of her whole body, she sank down a blackened mass on the ruins
of the town. This unexpected demonstration startled every one and
frightened Teddy half out of his little wits. He looked, then screamed
and fled toward the house, roaring "Marmar" at the top of his voice.

Mrs. Bhaer heard the outcry and ran to the rescue, but Teddy could only
cling to her and pour out in his broken way something about "poor Bella
hurted," "a dreat fire," and "all the dollies dorn." Fearing some dire
mishap, his mother caught him up and hurried to the scene of action,
where she found the blind worshippers of Kitty-mouse mourning over the
charred remains of the lost darling.

"What have you been at? Tell me all about it," said Mrs. Jo, composing
herself to listen patiently, for the culprits looked so penitent, she
forgave them beforehand.

With some reluctance Demi explained their play, and Aunt Jo laughed till
the tears ran down her cheeks, the children were so solemn, and the play
was so absurd.

"I thought you were too sensible to play such a silly game as this. If
I had any Kitty-mouse I'd have a good one who liked you to play in safe
pleasant ways, and not destroy and frighten. Just see what a ruin you
have made; all Daisy's pretty dolls, Demi's soldiers, and Rob's new
village beside poor Teddy's pet lamb, and dear old Annabella. I shall
have to write up in the nursery the verse that used to come in the boxes
of toys,

     "The children of Holland take pleasure in making,
     What the children of Boston take pleasure in breaking."

"Only I shall put Plumfield instead of Boston."

"We never will again, truly, truly!" cried the repentant little sinners,
much abashed at this reproof.

"Demi told us to," said Rob.

"Well, I heard Uncle tell about the Greece people, who had altars
and things, and so I wanted to be like them, only I hadn't any live
creatures to sackerryfice, so we burnt up our toys."

"Dear me, that is something like the bean story," said Aunt Jo, laughing
again.

"Tell about it," suggested Daisy, to change the subject.

"Once there was a poor woman who had three or four little children, and
she used to lock them up in her room when she went out to work, to keep
them safe. On day when she was going away she said, 'Now, my dears,
don't let baby fall out of window, don't play with the matches, and
don't put beans up your noses.' Now the children had never dreamed of
doing that last thing, but she put it into their heads, and the minute
she was gone, they ran and stuffed their naughty little noses full of
beans, just to see how it felt, and she found them all crying when she
came home."

"Did it hurt?" asked Rob, with such intense interest that his mother
hastily added a warning sequel, lest a new edition of the bean story
should appear in her own family.

"Very much, as I know, for when my mother told me this story, I was so
silly that I went and tried it myself. I had no beans, so I took some
little pebbles, and poked several into my nose. I did not like it at
all, and wanted to take them out again very soon, but one would not
come, and I was so ashamed to tell what a goose I been that I went for
hours with the stone hurting me very much. At last the pain got so bad
I had to tell, and when my mother could not get it out the doctor came.
Then I was put in a chair and held tight, Rob, while he used his ugly
little pincers till the stone hopped out. Dear me! how my wretched
little nose did ache, and how people laughed at me!" and Mrs. Jo shook
her head in a dismal way, as if the memory of her sufferings was too
much for her.

Rob looked deeply impressed and I am glad to say took the warning to
heart. Demi proposed that they should bury poor Annabella, and in the
interest of the funeral Teddy forgot his fright. Daisy was soon consoled
by another batch of dolls from Aunt Amy, and the Naughty Kitty-mouse
seemed to be appeased by the last offerings, for she tormented them no
more.

"Brops" was the name of a new and absorbing play, invented by Bangs.
As this interesting animal is not to be found in any Zoological Garden,
unless Du Chaillu has recently brought one from the wilds of Africa, I
will mention a few of its peculiar habits and traits, for the benefit of
inquiring minds. The Brop is a winged quadruped, with a human face of
a youthful and merry aspect. When it walks the earth it grunts, when it
soars it gives a shrill hoot, occasionally it goes erect, and talks good
English. Its body is usually covered with a substance much resembling a
shawl, sometimes red, sometimes blue, often plaid, and, strange to say,
they frequently change skins with one another. On their heads they have
a horn very like a stiff brown paper lamp-lighter. Wings of the same
substance flap upon their shoulders when they fly; this is never very
far from the ground, as they usually fall with violence if they attempt
any lofty flights. They browse over the earth, but can sit up and eat
like the squirrel. Their favorite nourishment is the seed-cake; apples
also are freely taken, and sometimes raw carrots are nibbled when food
is scarce. They live in dens, where they have a sort of nest, much like
a clothes-basket, in which the little Brops play till their wings are
grown. These singular animals quarrel at times, and it is on these
occasions that they burst into human speech, call each other names, cry,
scold, and sometimes tear off horns and skin, declaring fiercely that
they "won't play." The few privileged persons who have studied them are
inclined to think them a remarkable mixture of the monkey, the sphinx,
the roc, and the queer creatures seen by the famous Peter Wilkins.

This game was a great favorite, and the younger children beguiled many
a rainy afternoon flapping or creeping about the nursery, acting like
little bedlamites and being as merry as little grigs. To be sure, it was
rather hard upon clothes, particularly trouser-knees, and jacket-elbows;
but Mrs. Bhaer only said, as she patched and darned,

"We do things just as foolish, and not half so harmless. If I could
get as much happiness out of it as the little dears do, I'd be a Brop
myself."

Nat's favorite amusements were working in his garden, and sitting in the
willow-tree with his violin, for that green nest was a fairy world to
him, and there he loved to perch, making music like a happy bird. The
lads called him "Old Chirper," because he was always humming, whistling,
or fiddling, and they often stopped a minute in their work or play to
listen to the soft tones of the violin, which seemed to lead a little
orchestra of summer sounds. The birds appeared to regard him as one of
themselves, and fearlessly sat on the fence or lit among the boughs to
watch him with their quick bright eyes. The robins in the apple-tree
near by evidently considered him a friend, for the father bird hunted
insects close beside him, and the little mother brooded as confidingly
over her blue eggs as if the boy was only a new sort of blackbird who
cheered her patient watch with his song. The brown brook babbled and
sparkled below him, the bees haunted the clover fields on either side,
friendly faces peeped at him as they passed, the old house stretched its
wide wings hospitably toward him, and with a blessed sense of rest and
love and happiness, Nat dreamed for hours in this nook, unconscious what
healthful miracles were being wrought upon him.

One listener he had who never tired, and to whom he was more than a
mere schoolmate. Poor Billy's chief delight was to lie beside the brook,
watching leaves and bits of foam dance by, listening dreamily to the
music in the willow-tree. He seemed to think Nat a sort of angel who sat
aloft and sang, for a few baby memories still lingered in his mind and
seemed to grow brighter at these times. Seeing the interest he took in
Nat, Mr. Bhaer begged him to help them lift the cloud from the feeble
brain by this gentle spell. Glad to do any thing to show his gratitude,
Nat always smiled on Billy when he followed him about, and let him
listen undisturbed to the music which seemed to speak a language he
could understand. "Help one another," was a favorite Plumfield motto,
and Nat learned how much sweetness is added to life by trying to live up
to it.

Jack Ford's peculiar pastime was buying and selling; and he bid fair
to follow in the footsteps of his uncle, a country merchant, who sold
a little of every thing and made money fast. Jack had seen the sugar
sanded, the molasses watered, the butter mixed with lard, and things of
that kind, and labored under the delusion that it was all a proper part
of the business. His stock in trade was of a different sort, but he made
as much as he could out of every worm he sold, and always got the
best of the bargain when he traded with the boys for string, knives,
fish-hooks, or whatever the article might be. The boys who all had
nicknames, called him "Skinflint," but Jack did not care as long as the
old tobacco-pouch in which he kept his money grew heavier and heavier.

He established a sort of auction-room, and now and then sold off all the
odds and ends he had collected, or helped the lads exchange things with
one another. He got bats, balls, hockey-sticks, etc., cheap, from one
set of mates, furbished them up, and let them for a few cents a time to
another set, often extending his business beyond the gates of Plumfield
in spite of the rules. Mr. Bhaer put a stop to some of his speculations,
and tried to give him a better idea of business talent than mere
sharpness in overreaching his neighbors. Now and then Jack made a bad
bargain, and felt worse about it than about any failure in lessons or
conduct, and took his revenge on the next innocent customer who came
along. His account-book was a curiosity; and his quickness at figures
quite remarkable. Mr. Bhaer praised him for this, and tried to make his
sense of honesty and honor as quick; and, by and by, when Jack found
that he could not get on without these virtues, he owned that his
teacher was right.

Cricket and football the boys had of course; but, after the stirring
accounts of these games in the immortal "Tom Brown at Rugby," no feeble
female pen may venture to do more than respectfully allude to them.

Emil spent his holidays on the river or the pond, and drilled the elder
lads for a race with certain town boys, who now and then invaded
their territory. The race duly came off, but as it ended in a general
shipwreck, it was not mentioned in public; and the Commodore had serious
thoughts of retiring to a desert island, so disgusted was he with his
kind for a time. No desert island being convenient, he was forced
to remain among his friends, and found consolation in building a
boat-house.

The little girls indulged in the usual plays of their age, improving
upon them somewhat as their lively fancies suggested. The chief and
most absorbing play was called "Mrs. Shakespeare Smith;" the name
was provided by Aunt Jo, but the trials of the poor lady were quite
original. Daisy was Mrs. S. S., and Nan by turns her daughter or a
neighbor, Mrs. Giddygaddy.

No pen can describe the adventures of these ladies, for in one short
afternoon their family was the scene of births, marriages, deaths,
floods, earthquakes, tea-parties, and balloon ascensions. Millions of
miles did these energetic women travel, dressed in hats and habits never
seen before by mortal eye, perched on the bed, driving the posts like
mettlesome steeds, and bouncing up and down till their heads spun. Fits
and fires were the pet afflictions, with a general massacre now and then
by way of change. Nan was never tired of inventing fresh combinations,
and Daisy followed her leader with blind admiration. Poor Teddy was a
frequent victim, and was often rescued from real danger, for the excited
ladies were apt to forget that he was not of the same stuff their
longsuffering dolls. Once he was shut into the closet for a dungeon, and
forgotten by the girls, who ran off to some out-of-door game. Another
time he was half drowned in the bath-tub, playing be a "cunning little
whale." And, worst of all, he was cut down just in time after being hung
up for a robber.

But the institution most patronized by all was the Club. It had no other
name, and it needed none, being the only one in the neighborhood. The
elder lads got it up, and the younger were occasionally admitted if
they behaved well. Tommy and Demi were honorary members, but were always
obliged to retire unpleasantly early, owing to circumstances over
which they had no control. The proceedings of this club were somewhat
peculiar, for it met at all sorts of places and hours, had all manner
of queer ceremonies and amusements, and now and then was broken up
tempestuously, only to be re-established, however, on a firmer basis.

Rainy evenings the members met in the schoolroom, and passed the time in
games: chess, morris, backgammon, fencing matches, recitations, debates,
or dramatic performances of a darkly tragical nature. In summer the barn
was the rendezvous, and what went on there no uninitiated mortal
knows. On sultry evenings the Club adjourned to the brook for aquatic
exercises, and the members sat about in airy attire, frog-like and cool.
On such occasions the speeches were unusually eloquent, quite flowing,
as one might say; and if any orator's remarks displeased the audience,
cold water was thrown upon him till his ardor was effectually quenched.
Franz was president, and maintained order admirably, considering the
unruly nature of the members. Mr. Bhaer never interfered with their
affairs, and was rewarded for this wise forbearance by being invited now
and then to behold the mysteries unveiled, which he appeared to enjoy
much.

When Nan came she wished to join the Club, and caused great excitement
and division among the gentlemen by presenting endless petitions, both
written and spoken, disturbing their solemnities by insulting them
through the key-hole, performing vigorous solos on the door, and
writing up derisive remarks on walls and fences, for she belonged to
the "Irrepressibles." Finding these appeals in vain, the girls, by the
advice of Mrs. Jo, got up an institution of their own, which they called
the Cosy Club. To this they magnanimously invited the gentlemen whose
youth excluded them from the other one, and entertained these favored
beings so well with little suppers, new games devised by Nan, and other
pleasing festivities, that, one by one, the elder boys confessed a
desire to partake of these more elegant enjoyments, and, after much
consultation, finally decided to propose an interchange of civilities.

The members of the Cosy Club were invited to adorn the rival
establishment on certain evenings, and to the surprise of the gentlemen
their presence was not found to be a restraint upon the conversation
or amusement of the regular frequenters; which could not be said of all
Clubs, I fancy. The ladies responded handsomely and hospitably to these
overtures of peace, and both institutions flourished long and happily.



CHAPTER IX. DAISY'S BALL

"Mrs. Shakespeare Smith would like to have Mr. John Brooke, Mr. Thomas
Bangs, and Mr. Nathaniel Blake to come to her ball at three o'clock
today.

"P.S. Nat must bring his fiddle, so we can dance, and all the boys must
be good, or they cannot have any of the nice things we have cooked."

This elegant invitation would, I fear, have been declined, but for the
hint given in the last line of the postscript.

"They have been cooking lots of goodies, I smelt 'em. Let's go," said
Tommy.

"We needn't stay after the feast, you know," added Demi.

"I never went to a ball. What do you have to do?" asked Nat.

"Oh, we just play be men, and sit round stiff and stupid like grown-up
folks, and dance to please the girls. Then we eat up everything, and
come away as soon as we can."

"I think I could do that," said Nat, after considering Tommy's
description for a minute.

"I'll write and say we'll come;" and Demi despatched the following
gentlemanly reply,

"We will all come. Please have lots to eat. J. B. Esquire."

Great was the anxiety of the ladies about their first ball, because if
every thing went well they intended to give a dinner-party to the chosen
few.

"Aunt Jo likes to have the boys play with us, if they are not rough;
so we must make them like our balls, then they will do them good," said
Daisy, with her maternal air, as she set the table and surveyed the
store of refreshments with an anxious eye.

"Demi and Nat will be good, but Tommy will do something bad, I know he
will," replied Nan, shaking her head over the little cake-basket which
she was arranging.

"Then I shall send him right home," said Daisy, with decision.

"People don't do so at parties, it isn't proper."

"I shall never ask him any more."

"That would do. He'd be sorry not to come to the dinner-ball, wouldn't
he?"

"I guess he would! we'll have the splendidest things ever seen, won't
we? Real soup with a ladle and a tureem [she meant tureen] and a little
bird for turkey, and gravy, and all kinds of nice vegytubbles." Daisy
never could say vegetables properly, and had given up trying.

"It is 'most three, and we ought to dress," said Nan, who had arranged a
fine costume for the occasion, and was anxious to wear it.

"I am the mother, so I shan't dress up much," said Daisy, putting on a
night-cap ornamented with a red bow, one of her aunt's long skirts, and
a shawl; a pair of spectacles and large pocket handkerchief completed
her toilette, making a plump, rosy little matron of her.

Nan had a wreath of artificial flowers, a pair of old pink slippers, a
yellow scarf, a green muslin skirt, and a fan made of feathers from the
duster; also, as a last touch of elegance, a smelling-bottle without any
smell in it.

"I am the daughter, so I rig up a good deal, and I must sing and dance,
and talk more than you do. The mothers only get the tea and be proper,
you know."

A sudden very loud knock caused Miss Smith to fly into a chair, and fan
herself violently, while her mamma sat bolt upright on the sofa, and
tried to look quite calm and "proper." Little Bess, who was on a visit,
acted the part of maid, and opened the door, saying with a smile, "Wart
in, gemplemun; it's all weady."

In honor of the occasion, the boys wore high paper collars, tall
black hats, and gloves of every color and material, for they were an
afterthought, and not a boy among them had a perfect pair.

"Good day, mum," said Demi, in a deep voice, which was so hard to keep
up that his remarks had to be extremely brief.

Every one shook hands and then sat down, looking so funny, yet so sober,
that the gentlemen forgot their manners, and rolled in their chairs with
laughter.

"Oh, don't!" cried Mrs. Smith, much distressed.

"You can't ever come again if you act so," added Miss Smith, rapping Mr.
Bangs with her bottle because he laughed loudest.

"I can't help it, you look so like fury," gasped Mr. Bangs, with most
uncourteous candor.

"So do you, but I shouldn't be so rude as to say so. He shan't come to
the dinner-ball, shall he, Daisy?" cried Nan, indignantly.

"I think we had better dance now. Did you bring your fiddle, sir?" asked
Mrs. Smith, trying to preserve her polite composure.

"It is outside the door," and Nat went to get it.

"Better have tea first," proposed the unabashed Tommy, winking openly
at Demi to remind him that the sooner the refreshments were secured, the
sooner they could escape.

"No, we never have supper first; and if you don't dance well you won't
have any supper at all, not one bit, sir," said Mrs. Smith, so sternly
that her wild guests saw she was not to be trifled with, and grew
overwhelmingly civil all at once.

