entry with his head bent and his heart in a whirl until he should hear
Nancy rise to her feet. He must take this Heaven-sent chance of telling
her all, but how do it without alarming her?

A moment, and her step sounded in the stillness of the empty church.

Obeying the first impulse, he passed through the outer door, and
standing on the step, knocked once, twice, three times; then, opening
it a little and speaking through the chink, he called, "Is Miss Nancy
Wentworth here?"

"I'm here!" in a moment came Nancy's answer; and then, with a little
wondering tremor in her voice, as if a hint of the truth had already
dawned: "What's wanted?"

"You're wanted, Nancy, wanted badly, by Justin Peabody, come back from
the West."

The door opened wide, and Justin faced Nancy standing halfway down
the aisle, her eyes brilliant, her lips parted. A week ago Justin's
apparition confronting her in the empty meeting-house after nightfall,
even had she been prepared for it as now, by his voice, would have
terrified her beyond measure. Now it seemed almost natural and
inevitable. She had spent these last days in the church where both of
them had been young and happy together; the two letters had brought him
vividly to mind, and her labor in the old Peabody pew had been one
long excursion into the past in which he was the most prominent and the
best-loved figure.

"I said I'd come back to you when my luck turned, Nancy."

These were so precisely the words she expected him to say, should she
ever see him again face to face, that for an additional moment they but
heightened her sense of unreality.

"Well, the luck hasn't turned, after all, but I could n't wait any
longer. Have you given a thought to me all these years, Nancy?"

"More than one, Justin." For the very look upon his face, the tenderness
of his voice, the attitude of his body, outran his words and told her
what he had come home to say, told her that her years of waiting were
over at last.

"You ought to despise me for coming back again with only myself and my
empty hands to offer you."

How easy it was to speak his heart out in this dim and quiet place! How
tongue-tied he would have been, sitting on the black hair-cloth sofa in
the Wentworth parlor and gazing at the open soapstone stove!

"Oh, men are such fools!" cried Nancy, smiles and tears struggling
together in her speech, as she sat down suddenly in her own pew and put
her hands over her face.

"They are," agreed Justin humbly; "but I've never stopped loving you,
whenever I've had time for thinking or loving. And I was n't sure that
you really cared anything about me; and how could I have asked you when
I had n't a dollar in the world?"

"There are other things to give a woman besides dollars, Justin."

"Are there? Well, you shall have them all, every one of them, Nancy, if
you can make up your mind to do without the dollars; for dollars seem to
be just what I can't manage."

Her hand was in his by this time, and they were sitting side by side,
in the cushionless, carpetless Wentworth pew. The door stood open; the
winter moon shone in upon them. That it was beginning to grow cold in
the church passed unnoticed. The grasp of the woman's hand seemed
to give the man new hope and courage, and Justin's warm, confiding,
pleading pressure brought balm to Nancy, balm and healing for the wounds
her pride had suffered; joy, too, half-conscious still, that her life
need not be lived to the end in unfruitful solitude. She had waited,
"as some gray lake lies, full and smooth, awaiting the star below the
twilight."

Justin Peabody might have been no other woman's star, but he was
Nancy's! "Just you sitting beside me here makes me feel as if I'd been
asleep or dead all these years, and just born over again," said
Justin. "I've led a respectable, hard-working, honest life, Nancy," he
continued, "and I don't owe any man a cent; the trouble is that no man
owes me one. I've got enough money to pay two fares back to Detroit on
Monday, although I was terribly afraid you would n't let me do it. It'll
need a good deal of thinking and planning, Nancy, for we shall be very
poor."

Nancy had been storing up fidelity and affection deep, deep in the hive
of her heart all these years, and now the honey of her helpfulness stood
ready to be gathered.

"Could I keep hens in Detroit?" she asked. "I can always make them pay."

"Hens--in three rooms, Nancy?"

Her face fell. "And no yard?"

"No yard."

A moment's pause, and then the smile came. "Oh, well, I've had yards and
hens for thirty-five years. Doing without them will be a change. I can
take in sewing."

"No, you can't, Nancy. I need your backbone and wits and pluck and
ingenuity, but if I can't ask you to sit with your hands folded for the
rest of your life, as I'd like to, you shan't use them for other people.
You're marrying me to make a man of me, but I'm not marrying you to make
you a drudge."

His voice rang clear and true in the silence, and Nancy's heart vibrated
at the sound.

"O Justin, Justin! there's something wrong somewhere," she whispered,
"but we'll find it out together, you and I, and make it right. You're
not like a failure. You don't even look poor, Justin; there is n't a man
in Edgewood to compare with you, or I should be washing his dishes and
darning his stockings this minute. And I am not a pauper! There'll be
the rent of my little house and a carload of my furniture, so you can
put the three-room idea out of your mind, and your firm will offer you a
larger salary when you tell them you have a wife to take care of. Oh, I
see it all, and it is as easy and bright and happy as can be!"

Justin put his arm around her and drew her close, with such a throb of
gratitude for her belief and trust that it moved him almost to tears.
There was a long pause; then he said:--

"Now I shall call for you tomorrow morning after the last bell has
stopped ringing, and we will walk up the aisle together and sit in the
old Peabody pew. We shall be a nine days' wonder anyway, but this will
be equal to an announcement, especially if you take my arm. We don't
either of us like to be stared at, but this will show without a word
what we think of each other and what we've promised to be to each other,
and it's the only thing that will make me feel sure of you and settled
in my mind after all these mistaken years. Have you got the courage,
Nancy?"

"I should n't wonder! I guess if I've had courage enough to wait for
you, I've got courage enough to walk up the aisle with you and marry
you besides!" said Nancy.--"Now it is too late for us to stay here any
longer, and you must see me only as far as my gate, for perhaps you have
n't forgotten yet how interested the Brewsters are in their neighbors."

They stood at the little Wentworth gate for a moment, hand close clasped
in hand. The night was clear, the air was cold and sparkling, but with
nothing of bitterness in it, the sky was steely blue, and the evening
star glowed and burned like a tiny sun. Nancy remembered the shepherd's
song she had taught the Sunday-School children, and repeated softly:--

 For I my sheep was watching
  Beneath the silent skies,
 When sudden, far to eastward,
  I saw a star arise;
 Then all the peaceful heavens
  With sweetest music rang,
 And glory, glory, glory!
  The happy angels sang.

 So I this night am joyful,
  Though I can scarce tell why,
 It seemeth me that glory
  Hath met us very nigh;
 And we, though poor and humble,
  Have part in heavenly plan,
 For, born tonight, the Prince of Peace
  Shall rule the heart of man.

Justin's heart melted within him like wax to the woman's vision and the
woman's touch.

"Oh, Nancy, Nancy!" he whispered. "If I had brought my bad luck to you
long, long ago, would you have taken me then, and have I lost years of
such happiness as this?"

"There are some things it is not best for a man to be certain about,"
said Nancy, with a wise smile and a last goodnight.



VIII. Ring out, sweet bells


 Ring out, sweet bells,
 O'er woods and dells
  Your lovely strains repeat,
 While happy throngs
 With joyous songs
  Each accent gladly greet.

Christmas morning in the old Tory Hill Meeting-House was felt by all
of the persons who were present in that particular year to be a most
exciting and memorable occasion.

The old sexton quite outdid himself, for although he had rung the bell
for more than thirty years, he had never felt greater pride or joy in
his task. Was not his son John home for Christmas, and John's wife,
and a grand-child newly named Nathaniel for himself? Were there not
spareribs and turkeys and cranberries and mince pies on the pantry
shelves, and barrels of rosy Baldwins in the cellar and bottles of
mother's root beer just waiting to give a holiday pop? The bell itself
forgot its age and the suspicion of a crack that dulled its voice on
a damp day, and, inspired by the bright, frosty air, the sexton's
inspiring pull, and the Christmas spirit, gave out nothing but joyous
tones.

_Ding-dong_! _Ding-dong_! It fired the ambitions of star scholars about
to recite hymns and sing solos. It thrilled little girls expecting dolls
before night. It excited beyond bearing dozens of little boys being
buttoned into refractory overcoats. _Ding-dong_! _Ding-dong_! Mothers'
fingers trembled when they heard it, and mothers' voices cried: "If that
is the second bell, the children will never be ready in time! Where
are the overshoes? Where are the mittens? Hurry, Jack! Hurry, Jennie!"
_Ding-dong_! _Ding-dong_! "Where's Sally's muff? Where's father's fur
cap? Is the sleigh at the door? Are the hot soapstones in? Have all of
you your money for the contribution box?" _Ding-dong_! _Ding-dong_! It
was a blithe bell, a sweet, true bell, a holy bell, and to Justin pacing
his tavern room, as to Nancy trembling in her maiden chamber, it rang a
Christmas message:--

 Awake, glad heart! Arise and sing;
 It is the birthday of thy King!

The congregation filled every seat in the old meeting-house. As Maria
Sharp had prophesied, there was one ill-natured spinster from a rival
village who declared that the church floor looked like Joseph's coat
laid out smooth; but in the general chorus of admiration, approval, and
goodwill, this envious speech, though repeated from mouth to mouth, left
no sting.

Another item of interest long recalled was the fact that on that august
and unapproachable day the pulpit vases stood erect and empty, though
Nancy Wentworth had filled them every Sunday since any one could
remember. This instance, though felt at the time to be of mysterious
significance if the cause were ever revealed, paled into nothingness
when, after the ringing of the last bell, Nancy Wentworth walked up the
aisle on Justin Peabody's arm, and they took their seats side by side in
the old family pew.

("And consid'able close, too, though there was plenty o' room!")

("And no one that I ever heard of so much as suspicioned that they had
ever kept company!")

("And do you s'pose she knew Justin was expected back when she scrubbed
his pew a-Friday? ")

("And this explains the empty pulpit vases! ")

("And I always said that Nancy would make a real handsome couple if she
ever got anybody to couple with!")

During the unexpected and solemn procession of the two up the aisle
the soprano of the village choir stopped short in the middle of the
Doxology, and the three other voices carried it to the end without any
treble. Also, among those present there were some who could not remember
afterward the precise petitions wafted upward in the opening prayer.

And could it be explained otherwise than by cheerfully acknowledging the
bounty of an overruling Providence that Nancy Wentworth should have had
a new winter dress for the first time in five years--a winter dress of
dark brown cloth to match her beaver muff and victorine? The existence
of this toilette had been known and discussed in Edgewood for a month
past, and it was thought to be nothing more than a proper token
of respect from a member of the carpet committee to the general
magnificence of the church on the occasion of its reopening after
repairs. Indeed, you could have identified every member of the Dorcas
Society that Sunday morning by the freshness of her apparel. The brown
dress, then, was generally expected; but why the white cashmere waist
with collar and cuffs of point lace, devised only and suitable only for
the minister's wedding, where it first saw the light?

"The white waist can only be explained as showing distinct hope!"
whispered the minister's wife during the reading of the church notices.

"To me it shows more than hope; I am very sure that Nancy would never
take any wear out of that lace for hope; it means certainty!" answered
Maria, who was always strong in the prophetic line.

Justin's identity had dawned upon most of the congregation by sermon
time. A stranger to all but one or two at first, his presence in the
Peabody pew brought his face and figure back, little by little, to the
minds of the old parishioners.

When the contribution plate was passed, the sexton always began at the
right-wing pews, as all the sextons before him had done for a hundred
years. Every eye in the church was already turned upon Justin and
Nancy, and it was with almost a gasp that those in the vicinity saw a
ten-dollar bill fall in the plate. The sexton reeled, or, if that is too
intemperate a word for a pillar of the church, the good man tottered,
but caught hold of the pew rail with one hand, and, putting the thumb
of his other over the bill, proceeded quickly to the next pew, lest
the stranger should think better of his gift, or demand change, as had
occasionally been done in the olden time.

Nancy never fluttered an eyelash, but sat quietly by Justin's side with
her bosom rising and falling under the beaver fur and her cold
hands clasped tight in the little brown muff. Far from grudging this
appreciable part of their slender resources, she thrilled with pride to
see Justin's offering fall in the plate.

Justin was too absorbed in his own thoughts to notice anything, but
his munificent contribution had a most unexpected effect upon his
reputation, after all; for on that day, and on many another later one,
when his sudden marriage and departure with Nancy Wentworth were under
discussion, the neighbors said to one another:--"Justin must be making
money fast out West! He put ten dollars in the contribution plate
a-Sunday, and paid the minister ten more next day for marryin' him to
Nancy; so the Peabody luck has turned at last!"--which as a matter of
fact, it had.

"And all the time," said the chairman of the carpet committee to the
treasurer of the Dorcas Society--"all the time, little as she realized
it, Nancy was laying the carpet in her own pew. Now she's married to
Justin, she'll be the makin' of him, or I miss my guess. You can't do a
thing with men-folks without they're right alongside where you can keep
your eye and hand on 'em. Justin's handsome and good and stiddy; all he
needs is some nice woman to put starch into him. The Edgewood Peabodys
never had a mite o' stiffenin' in 'em,--limp as dishrags, every blessed
one! Nancy Wentworth fairly rustles with starch. Justin had n't been
engaged to her but a few hours when they walked up the aisle together,
but did you notice the way he carried his head? I declare I thought 't
would fall off behind! I should n't wonder a mite but they prospered and
come back every summer to set in the Old Peabody Pew."





SUSANNA AND SUE




I. Mother Ann's Children


It was the end of May, when "spring goeth all in white." The apple trees
were scattering their delicate petals on the ground, dropping them
over the stone walls to the roadsides, where in the moist places of the
shadows they fell on beds of snowy innocence. Here and there a single
tree was tinged with pink, but so faintly, it was as if the white were
blushing. Now and then a tiny white butterfly danced in the sun and
pearly clouds strayed across the sky in fleecy flocks.

Everywhere the grass was of ethereal greenness, a greenness drenched
with the pale yellow of spring sunshine. Looking from earth to sky
and from blossom to blossom, the little world of the apple orchards,
shedding its falling petals like fair-weather snow, seemed made of
alabaster and porcelain, ivory and mother-of-pearl, all shimmering on a
background of tender green.

After you pass Albion village, with its streets shaded by elms and
maples and its outskirts embowered in blossoming orchards, you wind
along a hilly country road that runs between grassy fields. Here the
whiteweed is already budding, and there are pleasant pastures dotted
with rocks and fringed with spruce and fir; stretches of woodland,
too, where the road is lined with giant pines and you lift your face
gratefully to catch the cool balsam breath of the forest. Coming from
out this splendid shade, this silence too deep to be disturbed by light
breezes or vagrant winds, you find yourself on the brow of a descending
hill. The first thing that strikes the eye is a lake that might be a
great blue sapphire dropped into the verdant hollow where it lies. When
the eye reluctantly leaves the lake on the left, it turns to rest
upon the little Shaker Settlement on the right--a dozen or so large
comfortable white barns, sheds, and houses, standing in the wide orderly
spaces of their own spreading acres of farm and timber land. There
again the spring goeth all in white, for there is no spot to fleck the
dazzling quality of Shaker paint, and their apple, plum, and pear trees
are so well cared for that the snowy blossoms are fairly hiding the
branches.

The place is very still, although there are signs of labor in all
directions. From a window of the girls' building a quaint little
gray-clad figure is beating a braided rug; a boy in homespun, with his
hair slightly long in the back and cut in a straight line across the
forehead, is carrying milk-cans from the dairy to one of the Sisters'
Houses. Men in broad-brimmed hats, with clean-shaven, ascetic faces, are
ploughing or harrowing here and there in the fields, while a group of
Sisters is busy setting out plants and vines in some beds near a cluster
of noble trees. That cluster of trees, did the eye of the stranger
realize it, was the very starting-point of this Shaker Community, for
in the year 1785, the valiant Father James Whittaker, one of Mother Ann
Lee's earliest English converts, stopped near the village of Albion
on his first visit to Maine. As he and his Elders alighted from their
horses, they stuck into the ground the willow withes they had used as
whips, and now, a hundred years later, the trees that had grown from
these slender branches were nearly three feet in diameter.

From whatever angle you look upon the Settlement, the first and
strongest impression is of quiet order, harmony, and a kind of austere
plenty. Nowhere is the purity of the spring so apparent. Nothing is
out of place; nowhere is any confusion, or appearance of loose ends, or
neglected tasks. As you come nearer, you feel the more surely that here
there has never been undue haste nor waste; no shirking, no putting off
till the morrow what should have been done today. Whenever a shingle or
a clapboard was needed it was put on, where paint was required it was
used,--that is evident; and a look at the great barns stored with hay
shows how the fields have been conscientiously educated into giving a
full crop.

To such a spot as this might any tired or sinful heart come for
rest; hoping somehow, in the midst of such frugality and thrift, such
self-denying labor, such temperate use of God's good gifts, such shining
cleanliness of outward things, to regain and wear "the white flower of
a blameless life." The very air of the place breathed peace, so thought
Susanna Hathaway; and little Sue, who skipped by her side, thought
