Kaiser is well licked.' Now, that, Miss Oliver, dear," concluded Susan,
"is the kind of spirit I admire."

"I admire it but I can't emulate it," sighed Gertrude. "Before this, I
have always been able to escape from the hard things of life for a
little while by going into dreamland, and coming back like a giant
refreshed. But I can't escape from this."

"Nor I," said Mrs. Blythe. "I hate going to bed now. All my life I've
liked going to bed, to have a gay, mad, splendid half-hour of imagining
things before sleeping. Now I imagine them still. But such different
things."

"I am rather glad when the time comes to go to bed," said Miss Oliver.
"I like the darkness because I can be myself in it--I needn't smile or
talk bravely. But sometimes my imagination gets out of hand, too, and I
see what you do--terrible things--terrible years to come."

"I am very thankful that I never had any imagination to speak of," said
Susan. "I have been spared that. I see by this paper that the Crown
Prince is killed again. Do you suppose there is any hope of his staying
dead this time? And I also see that Woodrow Wilson is going to write
another note. I wonder," concluded Susan, with the bitter irony she had
of late begun to use when referring to the poor President, "if that
man's schoolmaster is alive."

In January Jims was five months old and Rilla celebrated the
anniversary by shortening him.

"He weighs fourteen pounds," she announced jubilantly. "Just exactly
what he should weigh at five months, according to Morgan."

There was no longer any doubt in anybody's mind that Jims was getting
positively pretty. His little cheeks were round and firm and faintly
pink, his eyes were big and bright, his tiny paws had dimples at the
root of every finger. He had even begun to grow hair, much to Rilla's
unspoken relief. There was a pale golden fuzz all over his head that
was distinctly visible in some lights. He was a good infant, generally
sleeping and digesting as Morgan decreed. Occasionally he smiled but he
had never laughed, in spite of all efforts to make him. This worried
Rilla also, because Morgan said that babies usually laughed aloud from
the third to the fifth month. Jims was five months and had no notion of
laughing. Why hadn't he? Wasn't he normal?

One night Rilla came home late from a recruiting meeting at the Glen
where she had been giving patriotic recitations. Rilla had never been
willing to recite in public before. She was afraid of her tendency to
lisp, which had a habit of reviving if she were doing anything that
made her nervous. When she had first been asked to recite at the Upper
Glen meeting she had refused. Then she began to worry over her refusal.
Was it cowardly? What would Jem think if he knew? After two days of
worry Rilla phoned to the president of the Patriotic Society that she
would recite. She did, and lisped several times, and lay awake most of
the night in an agony of wounded vanity. Then two nights after she
recited again at Harbour Head. She had been at Lowbridge and
over-harbour since then and had become resigned to an occasional lisp.
Nobody except herself seemed to mind it. And she was so earnest and
appealing and shining-eyed! More than one recruit joined up because
Rilla's eyes seemed to look right at him when she passionately demanded
how could men die better than fighting for the ashes of their fathers
and the temples of their gods, or assured her audience with thrilling
intensity that one crowded hour of glorious life was worth an age
without a name. Even stolid Miller Douglas was so fired one night that
it took Mary Vance a good hour to talk him back to sense. Mary Vance
said bitterly that if Rilla Blythe felt as bad as she had pretended to
feel over Jem's going to the front she wouldn't be urging other girls'
brothers and friends to go.

On this particular night Rilla was tired and cold and very thankful to
creep into her warm nest and cuddle down between her blankets, though
as usual with a sorrowful wonder how Jem and Jerry were faring. She was
just getting warm and drowsy when Jims suddenly began to cry--and kept
on crying.

Rilla curled herself up in her bed and determined she would let him
cry. She had Morgan behind her for justification. Jims was warm,
physically comfortable--his cry wasn't the cry of pain--and had his
little tummy as full as was good for him. Under such circumstances it
would be simply spoiling him to fuss over him, and she wasn't going to
do it. He could cry until he got good and tired and ready to go to
sleep again.

Then Rilla's imagination began to torment her. Suppose, she thought, I
was a tiny, helpless creature only five months old, with my father
somewhere in France and my poor little mother, who had been so worried
about me, in the graveyard. Suppose I was lying in a basket in a big,
black room, without one speck of light, and nobody within miles of me,
for all I could see or know. Suppose there wasn't a human being
anywhere who loved me--for a father who had never seen me couldn't love
me very much, especially when he had never written a word to or about
me. Wouldn't I cry, too? Wouldn't I feel just so lonely and forsaken
and frightened that I'd have to cry?

Rilla hopped out. She picked Jims out of his basket and took him into
her own bed. His hands were cold, poor mite. But he had promptly ceased
to cry. And then, as she held him close to her in the darkness,
suddenly Jims laughed--a real, gurgly, chuckly, delighted, delightful
laugh.

"Oh, you dear little thing!" exclaimed Rilla. "Are you so pleased at
finding you're not all alone, lost in a huge, big, black room?" Then
she knew she wanted to kiss him and she did. She kissed his silky,
scented little head, she kissed his chubby little cheek, she kissed his
little cold hands. She wanted to squeeze him--to cuddle him, just as
she used to squeeze and cuddle her kittens. Something delightful and
yearning and brooding seemed to have taken possession of her. She had
never felt like this before.

In a few minutes Jims was sound asleep; and, as Rilla listened to his
soft, regular breathing and felt the little body warm and contented
against her, she realized that--at last--she loved her war-baby.

"He has got to be--such--a--darling," she thought drowsily, as she
drifted off to slumberland herself.

In February Jem and Jerry and Robert Grant were in the trenches and a
little more tension and dread was added to the Ingleside life. In March
"Yiprez," as Susan called it, had come to have a bitter significance.
The daily list of casualties had begun to appear in the papers and no
one at Ingleside ever answered the telephone without a horrible cold
shrinking--for it might be the station-master phoning up to say a
telegram had come from overseas. No one at Ingleside ever got up in the
morning without a sudden piercing wonder over what the day might bring.

"And I used to welcome the mornings so," thought Rilla.

Yet the round of life and duty went steadily on and every week or so
one of the Glen lads who had just the other day been a rollicking
schoolboy went into khaki.

"It is bitter cold out tonight, Mrs. Dr. dear," said Susan, coming in
out of the clear starlit crispness of the Canadian winter twilight. "I
wonder if the boys in the trenches are warm."

"How everything comes back to this war," cried Gertrude Oliver. "We
can't get away from it--not even when we talk of the weather. I never
go out these dark cold nights myself without thinking of the men in the
trenches--not only our men but everybody's men. I would feel the same
if there were nobody I knew at the front. When I snuggle down in my
comfortable bed I am ashamed of being comfortable. It seems as if it
were wicked of me to be so when many are not."

"I saw Mrs. Meredith down at the store," said Susan, "and she tells me
that they are really troubled over Bruce, he takes things so much to
heart. He has cried himself to sleep for a week, over the starving
Belgians. 'Oh, mother,' he will say to her, so beseeching-like, 'surely
the babies are never hungry--oh, not the babies, mother! Just say the
babies are not hungry, mother.' And she cannot say it because it would
not be true, and she is at her wits' end. They try to keep such things
from him but he finds them out and then they cannot comfort him. It
breaks my heart to read about them myself, Mrs. Dr. dear, and I cannot
console myself with the thought that the tales are not true. When I
read a novel that makes me want to weep I just say severely to myself,
'Now, Susan Baker, you know that is all a pack of lies.' But we must
carry on. Jack Crawford says he is going to the war because he is tired
of farming. I hope he will find it a pleasant change. And Mrs. Richard
Elliott over-harbour is worrying herself sick because she used to be
always scolding her husband about smoking up the parlour curtains. Now
that he has enlisted she wishes she had never said a word to him. You
know Josiah Cooper and William Daley, Mrs. Dr. dear. They used to be
fast friends but they quarrelled twenty years ago and have never spoken
since. Well, the other day Josiah went to William and said right out,
'Let us be friends. 'Tain't any time to be holding grudges.' William
was real glad and held out his hand, and they sat down for a good talk.
And in less than half an hour they had quarrelled again, over how the
war ought to be fought, Josiah holding that the Dardanelles expedition
was rank folly and William maintaining that it was the one sensible
thing the Allies had done. And now they are madder at each other than
ever and William says Josiah is as bad a pro-German as
Whiskers-on-the-Moon. Whiskers-on-the-moon vows he is no pro-German but
calls himself a pacifist, whatever that may be. It is nothing proper or
Whiskers would not be it and that you may tie to. He says that the big
British victory at New Chapelle cost more than it was worth and he has
forbid Joe Milgrave to come near the house because Joe ran up his
father's flag when the news came. Have you noticed, Mrs. Dr. dear, that
the Czar has changed that Prish name to Premysl, which proves that the
man had good sense, Russian though he is? Joe Vickers told me in the
store that he saw a very queer looking thing in the sky tonight over
Lowbridge way. Do you suppose it could have been a Zeppelin, Mrs. Dr.
dear?"

"I do not think it very likely, Susan."

"Well, I would feel easier about it if Whiskers-on-the-moon were not
living in the Glen. They say he was seen going through strange
manoeuvres with a lantern in his back yard one night lately. Some
people think he was signalling."

"To whom--or what?"

"Ah, that is the mystery, Mrs. Dr. dear. In my opinion the Government
would do well to keep an eye on that man if it does not want us to be
all murdered in our beds some night. Now I shall just look over the
papers a minute before going to write a letter to little Jem. Two
things I never did, Mrs. Dr. dear, were write letters and read
politics. Yet here I am doing both regular and I find there is
something in politics after all. Whatever Woodrow Wilson means I cannot
fathom but I am hoping I will puzzle it out yet."

Susan, in her pursuit of Wilson and politics, presently came upon
something that disturbed her and exclaimed in a tone of bitter
disappointment,

"That devilish Kaiser has only a boil after all."

"Don't swear, Susan," said Dr. Blythe, pulling a long face.

"'Devilish' is not swearing, doctor, dear. I have always understood
that swearing was taking the name of the Almighty in vain?"

"Well, it isn't--ahem--refined," said the doctor, winking at Miss
Oliver.

"No, doctor, dear, the devil and the Kaiser--if so be that they are
really two different people--are not refined. And you cannot refer to
them in a refined way. So I abide by what I said, although you may
notice that I am careful not to use such expressions when young Rilla
is about. And I maintain that the papers have no right to say that the
Kaiser has pneumonia and raise people's hopes, and then come out and
say he has nothing but a boil. A boil, indeed! I wish he was covered
with them."

Susan stalked out to the kitchen and settled down to write to Jem;
deeming him in need of some home comfort from certain passages in his
letter that day.

"We're in an old wine cellar tonight, dad," he wrote, "in water to our
knees. Rats everywhere--no fire--a drizzling rain coming down--rather
dismal. But it might be worse. I got Susan's box today and everything
was in tip-top order and we had a feast. Jerry is up the line somewhere
and he says the rations are rather worse than Aunt Martha's ditto used
to be. But here they're not bad--only monotonous. Tell Susan I'd give a
year's pay for a good batch of her monkey-faces; but don't let that
inspire her to send any for they wouldn't keep.

"We have been under fire since the last week in February. One boy--he
was a Nova Scotian--was killed right beside me yesterday. A shell burst
near us and when the mess cleared away he was lying dead--not mangled
at all--he just looked a little startled. It was the first time I'd
been close to anything like that and it was a nasty sensation, but one
soon gets used to horrors here. We're in an absolutely different world.
The only things that are the same are the stars--and they are never in
their right places, somehow.

"Tell mother not to worry--I'm all right--fit as a fiddle--and glad I
came. There's something across from us here that has got to be wiped
out of the world, that's all--an emanation of evil that would otherwise
poison life for ever. It's got to be done, dad, however long it takes,
and whatever it costs, and you tell the Glen people this for me. They
don't realize yet what it is has broken loose--I didn't when I first
joined up. I thought it was fun. Well, it isn't! But I'm in the right
place all right--make no mistake about that. When I saw what had been
done here to homes and gardens and people--well, dad, I seemed to see a
gang of Huns marching through Rainbow Valley and the Glen, and the
garden at Ingleside. There were gardens over here--beautiful gardens
with the beauty of centuries--and what are they now? Mangled,
desecrated things! We are fighting to make those dear old places where
we had played as children, safe for other boys and girls--fighting for
the preservation and safety of all sweet, wholesome things.

"Whenever any of you go to the station be sure to give Dog Monday a
double pat for me. Fancy the faithful little beggar waiting there for
me like that! Honestly, dad, on some of these dark cold nights in the
trenches, it heartens and braces me up no end to think that thousands
of miles away at the old Glen station there is a small spotted dog
sharing my vigil.

"Tell Rilla I'm glad her war-baby is turning out so well, and tell
Susan that I'm fighting a good fight against both Huns and cooties."

"Mrs. Dr. dear," whispered Susan solemnly, "what are cooties?"

Mrs. Blythe whispered back and then said in reply to Susan's horrified
ejaculations, "It's always like that in the trenches, Susan."

Susan shook her head and went away in grim silence to re-open a parcel
she had sewed up for Jem and slip in a fine tooth comb.



CHAPTER XII

IN THE DAYS OF LANGEMARCK

"How can spring come and be beautiful in such a horror," wrote Rilla in
her diary. "When the sun shines and the fluffy yellow catkins are
coming out on the willow-trees down by the brook, and the garden is
beginning to be beautiful I can't realize that such dreadful things are
happening in Flanders. But they are!

"This past week has been terrible for us all, since the news came of
the fighting around Ypres and the battles of Langemarck and St. Julien.
Our Canadian boys have done splendidly--General French says they 'saved
the situation,' when the Germans had all but broken through. But I
can't feel pride or exultation or anything but a gnawing anxiety over
Jem and Jerry and Mr. Grant. The casualty lists are coming out in the
papers every day--oh, there are so many of them. I can't bear to read
them for fear I'd find Jem's name--for there have been cases where
people have seen their boys' names in the casualty lists before the
official telegram came. As for the telephone, for a day or two I just
refused to answer it, because I thought I could not endure the horrible
moment that came between saying 'Hello' and hearing the response. That
moment seemed a hundred years long, for I was always dreading to hear
'There is a telegram for Dr. Blythe.' Then, when I had shirked for a
while, I was ashamed of leaving it all for mother or Susan, and now I
make myself go. But it never gets any easier. Gertrude teaches school
and reads compositions and sets examination papers just as she always
has done, but I know her thoughts are over in Flanders all the time.
Her eyes haunt me.

"And Kenneth is in khaki now, too. He has got a lieutenant's commission
and expects to go overseas in midsummer, so he wrote me. There wasn't
much else in the letter--he seemed to be thinking of nothing but going
overseas. I shall not see him again before he goes--perhaps I will
never see him again. Sometimes I ask myself if that evening at Four
Winds was all a dream. It might as well be--it seems as if it happened
in another life lived years ago--and everybody has forgotten it but me.

"Walter and Nan and Di came home last night from Redmond. When Walter
stepped off the train Dog Monday rushed to meet him, frantic with joy.
I suppose he thought Jem would be there, too. After the first moment,
he paid no attention to Walter and his pats, but just stood there,
wagging his tail nervously and looking past Walter at the other people
coming out, with eyes that made me choke up, for I couldn't help
thinking that, for all we knew, Monday might never see Jem come off
that train again. Then, when all the people were out, Monday looked up
at Walter, gave his hand a little lick as if to say, 'I know it isn't
your fault he didn't come--excuse me for feeling disappointed,' and
then he trotted back to his shed, with that funny little sidelong
waggle of his that always makes it seem that his hind legs are
travelling directly away from the point at which his forelegs are
aiming.

"We tried to coax him home with us--Di even got down and kissed him
between the eyes and said, 'Monday, old duck, won't you come up with us
just for the evening?' And Monday said--he did!--'I am very sorry but I
can't. I've got a date to meet Jem here, you know, and there's a train
goes through at eight.'

"It's lovely to have Walter back again though he seems quiet and sad,
just as he was at Christmas. But I'm going to love him hard and cheer
him up and make him laugh as he used to. It seems to me that every day
of my life Walter means more to me.

"The other evening Susan happened to say that the mayflowers were out
in Rainbow Valley. I chanced to be looking at mother when Susan spoke.
Her face changed and she gave a queer little choked cry. Most of the
time mother is so spunky and gay you would never guess what she feels
inside; but now and then some little thing is too much for her and we
see under the surface. 'Mayflowers!' she said. 'Jem brought me
mayflowers last year!' and she got up and went out of the room. I would
have rushed off to Rainbow Valley and brought her an armful of
mayflowers, but I knew that wasn't what she wanted. And after Walter
got home last night he slipped away to the valley and brought mother
home all the mayflowers he could find. Nobody had said a word to him
about it--he just remembered himself that Jem used to bring mother the
first mayflowers and so he brought them in Jem's place. It shows how
tender and thoughtful he is. And yet there are people who send him
cruel letters!

"It seems strange that we can go in with ordinary life just as if
nothing were happening overseas that concerned us, just as if any day
might not bring us awful news. But we can and do. Susan is putting in
the garden, and mother and she are housecleaning, and we Junior Reds
are getting up a concert in aid of the Belgians. We have been
practising for a month and having no end of trouble and bother with
cranky people. Miranda Pryor promised to help with a dialogue and when
she had her part all learnt her father put his foot down and refused to
allow her to help at all. I am not blaming Miranda exactly, but I do
think she might have a little more spunk sometimes. If she put her foot
down once in a while she might bring her father to terms, for she is
all the housekeeper he has and what would he do if she 'struck'? If I
were in Miranda's shoes I'd find some way of managing
Whiskers-on-the-moon. I would horse-whip him, or bite him, if nothing
else would serve. But Miranda is a meek and obedient daughter whose
days should be long in the land.
