work--and can do things for him you can't?  I mean, are you jealous
of--your father?"

Marco loosed his arms from his knees and lay down flat on his pillow.

"No, I'm not.  The more people love and serve him, the better," he
said.  "The only thing I care for is--is him.  I just care for HIM.
Lazarus does too.  Don't you?"

The Rat was greatly excited internally.  He had been thinking of this
thing a great deal.  The thought had sometimes terrified him.  He might
as well have it out now if he could.  If he could get at the truth,
everything would be easier.  But would Marco really tell him?

"Don't you mind?" he said, still hoarse and eager--"don't you mind how
much I care for him?  Could it ever make you feel savage?  Could it
ever set you thinking I was nothing but--what I am--and  that it was
cheek of me to push myself in and fasten on to a gentleman who only
took me up for charity?  Here's the living truth," he ended in an
outburst; "if I were you and you were me, that's what I should be
thinking.  I know it is.  I couldn't help it.  I should see every low
thing there was in you, in your manners and your voice and your looks.
I should see nothing but the contrast between you and me and between
you and him.  I should be so jealous that I should just rage.  I should
HATE you--and I should DESPISE you!"

He had wrought himself up to such a passion of feeling that he set
Marco thinking that what he was hearing meant strange and strong
emotions such as he himself had never experienced.  The Rat had been
thinking over all this in secret for some time, it was evident.  Marco
lay still a few minutes and thought it over. Then he found something to
say, just as he had found something before.

"You might, if you were with other people who thought in the same way,"
he said, "and if you hadn't found out that it is such a mistake to
think in that way, that it's even stupid.  But, you see, if you were I,
you would have lived with my father, and he'd have told you what he
knows--what he's been finding out all his life."

"What's he found out?"

"Oh!" Marco answered, quite casually, "just that you can't set savage
thoughts loose in the world, any more than you can let loose savage
beasts with hydrophobia.  They spread a sort of rabies, and they always
tear and worry you first of all."

"What do you mean?"  The Rat gasped out.

"It's like this," said Marco, lying flat and cool on his hard pillow
and looking at the reflection of the street lamp on the ceiling.  "That
day I turned into your Barracks, without knowing that you'd think I was
spying, it made you feel savage, and you threw the stone at me.  If it
had made me feel savage and I'd rushed in and fought, what would have
happened to all of us?"

The Rat's spirit of generalship gave the answer.

"I should have called on the Squad to charge with fixed bayonets.
They'd have half killed you.  You're a strong chap, and you'd have hurt
a lot of them."

A note of terror broke into his voice.  "What a fool I should have
been!" he cried out.  "I should never have come here!  I should never
have known HIM!"  Even by the light of the street lamp Marco could see
him begin to look almost ghastly.

"The Squad could easily have half killed me," Marco added. "They could
have quite killed me, if they had wanted to do it. And who would have
got any good out of it?  It would only have been a street-lads'
row--with the police and prison at the end of it."

"But because you'd lived with him," The Rat pondered, "you walked in as
if you didn't mind, and just asked why we did it, and looked like a
stronger chap than any of us--and different--different.  I wondered
what was the matter with you, you were so cool and steady.  I know now.
It was because you were like him.  He'd taught you.  He's like a
wizard."

"He knows things that wizards think they know, but he knows them
better," Marco said.  "He says they're not queer and unnatural. They're
just simple laws of nature.  You have to be either on one side or the
other, like an army.  You choose your side.  You either build up or
tear down.  You either keep in the light where you can see, or you
stand in the dark and fight everything that comes near you, because you
can't see and you think it's an enemy.  No, you wouldn't have been
jealous if you'd been I and I'd been you."

"And you're NOT?"  The Rat's sharp voice was almost hollow. "You'll
swear you're not?"

"I'm not," said Marco.

The Rat's excitement even increased a shade as he poured forth his
confession.

"I was afraid," he said.  "I've been afraid every day since I came
here.  I'll tell you straight out.  It seemed just natural that you and
Lazarus wouldn't stand me, just as I wouldn't have stood you.  It
seemed just natural that you'd work together to throw me out.  I knew
how I should have worked myself.  Marco--I said I'd tell you straight
out--I'm jealous of you.  I'm jealous of Lazarus.  It makes me wild
when I see you both knowing all about him, and fit and ready to do
anything he wants done.  I'm not ready and I'm not fit."

"You'd do anything he wanted done, whether you were fit and ready or
not," said Marco.  "He knows that."

"Does he?  Do you think he does?" cried The Rat.  "I wish he'd try me.
I wish he would."

Marco turned over on his bed and rose up on his elbow so that he faced
The Rat on his sofa.

"Let us WAIT," he said in a whisper.  "Let us WAIT."

There was a pause, and then The Rat whispered also.

"For what?"

"For him to find out that we're fit to be tried.  Don't you see what
fools we should be if we spent our time in being jealous, either of us.
We're only two boys.  Suppose he saw we were only two silly fools.
When you are jealous of me or of Lazarus, just go and sit down in a
still place and think of HIM.  Don't think about yourself or about us.
He's so quiet that to think about him makes you quiet yourself.  When
things go wrong or when I'm lonely, he's taught me to sit down and make
myself think of things I like--pictures, books, monuments, splendid
places.  It pushes the other things out and sets your mind going
properly. He doesn't know I nearly always think of him.  He's the best
thought himself.  You try it.  You're not really jealous.  You only
THINK you are.  You'll find that out if you always stop yourself in
time.  Any one can be such a fool if he lets himself. And he can always
stop it if he makes up his mind.  I'm not jealous.  You must let that
thought alone.  You're not jealous yourself.  Kick that thought into
the street."

The Rat caught his breath and threw his arms up over his eyes. "Oh,
Lord!  Oh, Lord!" he said; "if I'd lived near him always as you have.
If I just had."

"We're both living near him now," said Marco.  "And here's something to
think of," leaning more forward on his elbow. "The kings who were being
made ready for Samavia have waited all these years; WE can make
ourselves ready and wait so that, if just two boys are wanted to do
something--just two boys--we can step out of the ranks when the call
comes and say 'Here!'  Now let's lie down and think of it until we go
to sleep."



XIII

LORISTAN ATTENDS A DRILL OF THE SQUAD, AND MARCO MEETS A SAMAVIAN

The Squad was not forgotten.  It found that Loristan himself would have
regarded neglect as a breach of military duty.

"You must remember your men," he said, two or three days after The Rat
became a member of his household.  "You must keep up their drill.
Marco tells me it was very smart.  Don't let them get slack."

"His men!"  The Rat felt what he could not have put into words.

He knew he had worked, and that the Squad had worked, in their hidden
holes and corners.  Only hidden holes and corners had been possible for
them because they had existed in spite of the protest of their world
and the vigilance of its policemen.  They had tried  many refuges
before they found the Barracks.  No one but resented the existence of a
troop of noisy vagabonds.  But somehow this man knew that there had
evolved from it something more than mere noisy play, that he, The Rat,
had MEANT order and discipline.

"His men!"  It made him feel as if he had had the Victoria Cross
fastened on his coat.  He had brain enough to see many things, and he
knew that it was in this way that Loristan was finding him his "place."
He knew how.

When they went to the Barracks, the Squad greeted them with a
tumultuous welcome which expressed a great sense of relief. Privately
the members had been filled with fears which they had talked over
together in deep gloom.  Marco's father, they decided, was too big a
swell to let the two come back after he had seen the sort the Squad was
made up of.  He might be poor just now, toffs sometimes lost their
money for a bit, but you could see what he was, and fathers like him
weren't going to let their sons make friends with "such as us."  He'd
stop the drill and the "Secret Society" game.  That's what he'd do!

But The Rat came swinging in on his secondhand crutches looking as if
he had been made a general, and Marco came with him; and the drill the
Squad was put through was stricter and finer than any drill they had
ever known.

"I wish my father could have seen that," Marco said to The Rat.

The Rat turned red and white and then red again, but he said not a
single word.  The mere thought was like a flash of fire passing through
him.  But no fellow could hope for a thing as big as that.  The Secret
Party, in its subterranean cavern, surrounded by its piled arms, sat
down to read the morning paper.

The war news was bad to read.  The Maranovitch held the day for the
moment, and while they suffered and wrought cruelties in the capital
city, the Iarovitch suffered and wrought cruelties in the country
outside.  So fierce and dark was the record that Europe stood aghast.

The Rat folded his paper when he had finished, and sat biting his
nails.  Having done this for a few minutes, he began to speak in his
dramatic and hollow Secret Party whisper.

"The hour has come," he said to his followers.  "The messengers must go
forth.  They know nothing of what they go for; they only know that they
must obey.  If they were caught and tortured, they could betray nothing
because they know nothing but that, at certain places, they must utter
a certain word.  They carry no papers.  All commands they must learn by
heart.  When the sign is given, the Secret Party will know what to
do--where to meet and where to attack."

He drew plans of the battle on the flagstones, and he sketched an
imaginary route which the two messengers were to follow.  But his
knowledge of the map of Europe was not worth much, and he turned to
Marco.

"You know more about geography that I do.  You know more about
everything," he said.  "I only know Italy is at the bottom and Russia
is at one side and England's at the other.  How would the Secret
Messengers go to Samavia?  Can you draw the countries they'd have to
pass through?"

Because any school-boy who knew the map could have done the same thing,
Marco drew them.  He also knew the stations the Secret Two would arrive
at and leave by when they entered a city, the streets they would walk
through and the very uniforms they would see; but of these things he
said nothing.  The reality his knowledge gave to the game was, however,
a thrilling thing.  He wished he could have been free to explain to The
Rat the things he knew.  Together they could have worked out so many
details of travel and possible adventure that it would have been almost
as if they had set out on their journey in fact.

As it was, the mere sketching of the route fired The Rat's imagination.
He forged ahead with the story of adventure, and filled it with such
mysterious purport and design that the Squad at times gasped for
breath.  In his glowing version the Secret Two entered cities by
midnight and sang and begged at palace gates where kings driving
outward paused to listen and were given the Sign.

"Though it would not always be kings," he said.  "Sometimes it would be
the poorest people.  Sometimes they might seem to be beggars like
ourselves, when they were only Secret Ones disguised.  A  great lord
might wear poor clothes and pretend to be a workman, and we should only
know him by the signs we had learned by heart.  When we were sent to
Samavia, we should be obliged to creep in through some back part of the
country where no fighting was being done and where no one would attack.
Their generals are not clever enough to protect the parts which are
joined to friendly countries, and they have not forces enough. Two boys
could find a way in if they thought it out."

He became possessed by the idea of thinking it out on the spot. He drew
his rough map of Samavia on the flagstones with his chalk.

"Look here," he said to Marco, who, with the elated and thrilled Squad,
bent over it in a close circle of heads. "Beltrazo is here and
Carnolitz is here--and here is Jiardasia. Beltrazo and Jiardasia are
friendly, though they don't take sides.  All the fighting is going on
in the country about Melzarr.  There is no reason why they should
prevent single travelers from coming in across the frontiers of
friendly neighbors.  They're not fighting with the countries outside,
they are fighting with themselves."  He paused a moment and thought.

"The article in that magazine said something about a huge forest on the
eastern frontier.  That's here.  We could wander into a forest and stay
there until we'd planned all we wanted to do. Even the people who had
seen us would forget about us.  What we have to do is to make people
feel as if we were nothing--nothing."

They were in the very midst of it, crowded together, leaning over,
stretching necks and breathing quickly with excitement, when Marco
lifted his head.  Some mysterious impulse made him do it in spite of
himself.

"There's my father!" he said.

The chalk dropped, everything dropped, even Samavia.  The Rat was up
and on his crutches as if some magic force had swung him there.  How he
gave the command, or if he gave it at all, not even he himself knew.
But the Squad stood at salute.

Loristan was standing at the opening of the archway as Marco had stood
that first day.  He raised his right hand in return salute and came
forward.

"I was passing the end of the street and remembered the Barracks was
here," he explained.  "I thought I should like to look at your men,
Captain."

He smiled, but it was not a smile which made his words really a joke.
He looked down at the chalk map drawn on the flagstones.

"You know that map well," he said.  "Even I can see that it is Samavia.
What is the Secret Party doing?"

"The messengers are trying to find a way in," answered Marco.

"We can get in there," said The Rat, pointing with a crutch. "There's a
forest where we could hide and find out things."

"Reconnoiter," said Loristan, looking down.  "Yes.  Two stray boys
could be very safe in a forest.  It's a good game."

That he should be there!  That he should, in his own wonderful way,
have given them such a thing as this.  That he should have cared enough
even to look up the Barracks, was what The Rat was thinking.  A batch
of ragamuffins they were and nothing else, and he standing looking at
them with his fine smile.  There was something about him which made him
seem even splendid.  The Rat's heart thumped with startled joy.

"Father," said Marco, "will you watch The Rat drill us?  I want you to
see how well it is done."

"Captain, will you do me that honor?" Loristan said to The Rat, and to
even these words he gave the right tone, neither jesting nor too
serious.  Because it was so right a tone, The Rat's pulses beat only
with exultation.  This god of his had looked at his maps, he had talked
of his plans, he had come to see the soldiers who were his work!  The
Rat began his drill as if he had been reviewing an army.

What Loristan saw done was wonderful in its mechanical exactness.

The Squad moved like the perfect parts of a perfect machine. That they
could so do it in such space, and that they should have accomplished
such precision, was an extraordinary testimonial to the military
efficiency and curious qualities of this one hunchbacked, vagabond
officer.

"That is magnificent!" the spectator said, when it was over. "It could
not be better done.  Allow me to congratulate you."

He shook The Rat's hand as if it had been a man's, and, after he had
shaken it, he put his own hand lightly on the boy's shoulder and let it
rest there as he talked a few minutes to them all.

He kept his talk within the game, and his clear comprehension of it
added a flavor which even the dullest member of the Squad was elated
by.  Sometimes you couldn't understand toffs when they made a shy at
being friendly, but you could understand him, and he stirred up your
spirits.  He didn't make jokes with you, either, as if a chap had to be
kept grinning.  After the few minutes were over, he went away.  Then
they sat down again in their circle and talked about him, because they
could talk and think about nothing else.  They stared at Marco
furtively, feeling as if he were a creature of another world because he
had lived with this man.  They stared at The Rat in a new way also. The
wonderful-looking hand had rested on his shoulder, and he had been told
that what he had done was magnificent.

"When you said you wished your father could have seen the drill," said
The Rat, "you took my breath away.  I'd never have had the cheek to
think of it myself--and I'd never have dared to let you ask him, even
if you wanted to do it.  And he came himself!  It struck me dumb."

"If he came," said Marco, "it was because he wanted to see it."

When they had finished talking, it was time for Marco and The Rat to go
on their way.  Loristan had given The Rat an errand.  At a certain hour
he was to present himself at a certain shop and receive a package.

"Let him do it alone," Loristan said to Marco.  "He will be better
pleased.  His desire is to feel that he is trusted to do things alone."

So they parted at a street corner, Marco to walk back to No. 7
Philibert Place, The Rat to execute his commission.  Marco turned into
one of the better streets, through which he often passed on his way
home.  It was not a fashionable quarter, but it contained some
respectable houses in whose windows here and there were to be seen neat
cards bearing the word "Apartments," which meant that the owner of the
house would let to lodgers his drawing-room or sitting-room suite.

As Marco walked up the street, he saw some one come out of the door of
one of the houses and walk quickly and lightly down the pavement.  It
