"On these conditions you may go. Redwood, send some one with Ropes."

Rodney followed the chief of his department back to the cloak room, and
the latter, after a moments thought, summoned Jasper.

"Jasper," he said, "Ropes is going to his room to get a parcel which
belongs to the store. You may go with him."

There was a flash of satisfaction in Jasper's eyes as he answered with
seeming indifference, "All right! I will go. I shall be glad to have a
walk."

As the two boys passed out of the store, Jasper asked, "What does it
mean, Ropes?"

"I don't know myself. I only know that there is said to be a parcel
containing a cloak in my room. This cloak came from the store, and I am
suspected of having stolen it."

"Whew! that's a serious matter. Of course it is all a mistake?"

"Yes, it is all a mistake."

"But how could it get to your room unless you carried it there?"

Rodney gave Jasper a sharp look.

"Some one must have taken it there," he said.

"How on earth did Uncle James find out?"

"An anonymous letter was sent to Mr. Goodnow charging me with theft. Did
you hear that articles have been missed for some time from the stock?"

"Never heard a word of it," said Jasper with ready falsehood.

"It seems the articles are missing from our room, and some one in the
room is suspected of being the thief."

"Good gracious! I hope no one will suspect me," said Jasper in pretended
alarm.

"It seems I am suspected. I hope no other innocent person will have a
like misfortune."

Presently they reached Rodney's lodgings. Mrs. McCarty was coming up the
basement stairs as they entered.

"La, Mr. Ropes!" she said, "what brings you here in the middle of the
day?"

"I hear there is a parcel in my room."

"Yes; it contains such a lovely cloak. The gentleman from your store who
called a little while ago thought you might have meant it as a present
for me."

"I am afraid it will be some time before I can afford to make such
present. Do you know if any one called and left the cloak here?"

"No; I didn't let in no one at the door."

"Was the parcel there when you made the bed?"

"Well, no, it wasn't. That is curious."

"It shows that the parcel has been left here since. Now I certainly
couldn't have left it, for I have been at work all the morning. Come up
stairs, Jasper."

The two boys went up the stairs, and, entering Rodney's room, found the
parcel, still on the bed.

Rodney opened it and identified the cloak as exactly like those which
they carried in stock.

He examined the paper in which it was inclosed, but it seemed to differ
from the wrapping paper used at the store. He called Jasper's attention
to this.

"I have nothing to say," remarked Jasper, shrugging his shoulders. "I
don't understand the matter at all. I suppose you are expected to carry
the cloak back to the store."

"Yes, that is the only thing to do."

"I say, Ropes, it looks pretty bad for you."

Jasper said this, but Rodney observed that his words were not
accompanied by any expressions of sympathy, or any words that indicated
his disbelief of Rodney's guilt.

"Do you think I took this cloak from the store?" he demanded, facing
round upon Jasper.

"Really, I don't know. It looks bad, finding it in your room."

"I needn't ask any further. I can see what you think."

"You wouldn't have me tell a lie, would you, Ropes? Of course such
things have been done before, and your salary is small."

"You insult me by your words," said Rodney, flaming up.

"Then I had better not speak, but you asked me, you know."

"Yes, I did. Things may look against me, but I am absolutely innocent."

"If you can make Mr. Goodnow think so," said Jasper with provoking
coolness, "it will be all right. Perhaps he will forgive you."

"I don't want his forgiveness. I want him to think me honest."

"Well, I hope you are, I am sure, but it won't do any good our
discussing it, and it doesn't make any difference what I think any way."

By this time they had reached the store.




CHAPTER XIV.


RODNEY IS DISCHARGED.


Rodney reported his return to Mr. Redwood, and in his company went down
stairs to the office, with the package under his arm.

"Well?" said Mr. Goodnow inquiringly.

"This is the package, sir."

"And it was found in your room?"

"Yes, sir, I found it on my bed."

"Can't you account for it being there?" asked the merchant searchingly.

"No, sir."

"You must admit that its presence in your room looks bad for you."

"I admit it sir; but I had nothing to do with it being there."

"Have you any theory to account for it?"

"Only this, that some one must have carried it to my room and placed it
where it was found."

"Did you question your landlady as to whether she had admitted any one
during the morning?"

"Yes, sir. She had not."

"This is very unfavorable to you."

"In what way, sir?"

"It makes it probable that you carried in the parcel yourself."

"That I deny," said Rodney boldly.

"I expected you to deny it," said the merchant coldly. "If this cloak
were the only one that had been taken I would drop the matter. But
this is by no means the case. Mr. Redwood, can you give any idea of the
extent to which we have been robbed?"

"So far as I can estimate we have lost a dozen cloaks and about half a
dozen dress patterns."

"This is a serious loss, Ropes," said Mr. Goodnow. "I should think it
would foot up several hundred dollars. If you can throw any light upon
the thefts, or give me information by which I can get back the goods
even at considerable expense, I will be as considerate with you as I
can."

"Mr. Goodnow," returned Rodney hotly, "I know no more about the matter
than you do. I hope you will investigate, and if you can prove that I
took any of the missing articles I want no consideration. I shall expect
you to have me arrested, and, if convicted, punished."

"These are brave words, Ropes," said Mr. Goodnow coldly, "but they are
only words. The parcel found in your room affords strong ground for
suspicion that you are responsible for at least a part of the thefts.
Under the circumstances there is only one thing for me to do, and that
is to discharge you."

"Very well, sir."

"You may go to the cashier and he will pay you to the end of the week,
but your connection with the store will end at once."

"I don't care to be paid to the end of the week, sir. If you will give
me an order for payment up to tonight, that will be sufficient."

"It shall be as you say."

Mr. Goodnow wrote a few words on a slip of paper and handed it to
Rodney.

"I will leave my address, sir, and if I change it I will notify you. If
you should hear anything as to the real robber I will ask you as a favor
to communicate with me."

"Mr. Redwood, you have heard the request of Ropes, I will look to you to
comply with it."

"Very well, sir."

The merchant turned back to his letters, and Rodney left the office,
with what feelings of sorrow and humiliation may be imagined.

"I am sorry for this occurrence, Ropes," said Mr. Redwood, with a touch
of sympathy in his voice.

"Do you believe me guilty, Mr. Redwood?"

"I cannot do otherwise. I hope you are innocent, and, if so, that the
really guilty party will be discovered sooner or later."

"Thank you, sir."

When they entered the room in which Rodney had been employed Jasper came
up, his face alive with curiosity.

"Well," he said, "how did you come out?"

"I am discharged," said Rodney bitterly.

"Well, you couldn't complain of that. Things looked pretty dark for
you."

"If I had committed the theft, I would not complain. Indeed, I would
submit to punishment without a murmur. But it is hard to suffer while
innocent."

"Uncle James," said Jasper, "if Ropes is going will you ask Mr. Goodnow
to put me in his place?"

Even Mr. Redwood was disgusted by this untimely request.

"It would be more becoming," he said sharply, "if you would wait till
Ropes was fairly out of the store before applying for his position."

"I want to be in time. I don't want any one to get ahead of me."

James Redwood did not deign a reply.

"I am sorry you leave us under such circumstances, Ropes," he said. "The
time may come when you will be able to establish your innocence, and in
that case Mr. Goodnow will probably take you back again."

Rodney did not answer, but with his order went to the cashier's desk and
received the four dollars due him. Then, with a heavy heart, he left the
store where it had been such a satisfaction to him to work.

On Broadway he met his room mate, Mike Flynn, in the uniform of a
telegraph boy.

"Where are you goin', Rodney?" asked Mike. "You ain't let off so early,
are you?"

"I am let off for good and all, Mike."

"What's that?"

"I am discharged."

"What for?" asked Mike in amazement.

"I will tell you when you get home tonight."

Rodney went back to his room, and lay down sad and despondent. Some
hours later Mike came in, and was told the story. The warm hearted
telegraph boy was very angry.

"That boss of yours must be a stupid donkey," he said.

"I don't know. The parcel was found in my room."

"Anybody'd know to look at you that you wouldn't steal."

"Some thieves look very innocent. The only way to clear me is to find
out who left the bundle at the house."

"Doesn't Mrs. McCarty know anything about it?"

"No; I asked her."

"Some one might have got into the house without her knowing anything
about it. The lock is a very common one. There are plenty of keys that
will open it."

"If we could find some one that saw a person with a bundle go up the
steps, that would give us a clew."

"That's so. We'll ask."

But for several days no one could be found who had seen any such person.

Meanwhile Rodney was at a loss what to do. He was cut off from applying
for another place, for no one would engage him if he were refused
a recommendation from his late employer. Yet he must obtain some
employment for he could not live on nothing.

"Do you think, Mike," he asked doubtfully, "that I could make anything
selling papers?"

"Such business isn't for you," answered the telegraph boy.

"But it is one of the few things open to me. I can become a newsboy
without recommendations. Even your business would be closed to me if it
were known that I was suspected of theft."

"Thats so," said Mike, scratching his head in perplexity.

"Then would you recommend my becoming a newsboy?"

"I don't know. You couldn't make more'n fifty or sixty cent a day."

"That will be better than nothing."

"And I can pay the rent, or most of it, as I'll be doin' better than
