to her own home, where she lived in great luxury, being one of the
prominent women of the Pinkies. In this country the women seemed fully
as important as the men, and instead of being coddled and petted, they
performed their share of the work, both in public and private affairs,
and were expected to fight in the wars exactly as the men did.

Our friends learned considerable about the Pinkies during that
afternoon and evening, for their hostess proved kind and agreeable and
frankly answered all their questions. Although this half of Sky Island
was no larger than the Blue Country, being no more than two miles
square, it had several hundred inhabitants. These were divided into two
tribes, which were called the Sunrise Tribe and the Sunset Tribe. The
Sunrise Tribe lived in the eastern half of the Pink Country and the
Sunset Tribe in the west half, and there was great rivalry between
them, and sometimes war.

It was all a question of social importance. The Sunrise Tribe claimed
that every day the sun greeted them first of all, which proved they
were the most important; but on the other hand, the Sunset Tribe
claimed that the sun always deserted the other tribe and came to them,
which was evidence that they were the most attractive people. On Sky
Island--at least on the Pink side--the sun arose in wonderful splendor,
but also it set in a blaze of glory, and so there were arguments on
both sides, and for want of something better to argue about, the
Pinkies took this queer subject as a cause of dispute.

Both Tribes acknowledged Tourmaline their Queen and obeyed the laws of
the country, and just at this time there was peace in the land, and all
the inhabitants of the east and west were friendly. But they had been
known, Coralie said, to fight one another fiercely with their sharp
sticks, at which times a good many were sure to get hurt.

"Why do they call this an Island?" asked Button-Bright. "There isn't
any water around it, is there?"

"No, but there is sky all around it," answered Coralie. "And if one
should step off the edge, he would go tumbling into the great sky and
never be heard of again."

"Is there a fence around the edge?" asked Trot.

"Only a few places are fenced," was the reply. "Usually there are rows
of thick bushes set close to the edge to prevent people from falling
off. Once there was a King of the Pinkies who was cruel and overbearing
and imagined he was superior to the people he ruled, so one day his
subjects carried him to the edge of the island and threw him over the
bushes."

"Goodness me!" said Trot. "He might have hit someone on the Earth."

"Guess he skipped it, though," added Cap'n Bill, "for I never heard of
a Pinky till I came here."

"And I have never heard of the Earth," retorted Coralie. "Of course,
there must be such a place, because you came from there, but the Earth
is never visible in our sky."

"No," said Button-Bright, "'cause it's UNDER your island. But it's
there, all right, and it's a pretty good place to live. I wish I could
get back to it."

"So do I, Button-Bright!" exclaimed Trot.

"Let's fly!" cried the parrot, turning his head so that one bright
little eye looked directly into the girl's eye. "Say goodbye and let's
fly through the sky, far and high!"

"If we only had my umbrella, we'd fly in a minute," sighed
Button-Bright. "But the Boolooroo stole it."

  "Naughty, naughty Boolooroo,
  What a wicked thing to do!"

wailed the parrot, and they all agreed with him.

Coralie belonged to the Sunset Tribe, as she lived west of the queen's
palace, which was the center of the Pink Country. A servant came to the
room where they were conversing to state that the sun was about to set,
and at once Coralie arose and took the strangers to an upper balcony,
where all the household had assembled.

The neighboring houses also had their balconies and roofs filled with
people, for it seemed all the Sunset Tribe came out every night to
witness the setting of the sun. It was really a magnificent sight, and
Trot scarcely breathed as the great, golden ball sank low in the sky
and colored all the clouds with gorgeous tints of orange, red and
yellow. Never on the Earth was there visible such splendor, and as the
little girl watched the ever-changing scene, she decided the Sunset
Tribe was amply justified in claiming that the West was the favored
country of the sun.

"You see," said Cap'n Bill, "the sky is all around us, an' we're high
up, so the sun really loses itself in the clouds an' leaves a trail of
beauty behind him."

"He does that!" agreed Trot. "This is almost worth comin' for, Cap'n."

"But not quite," said Button-bright sadly. "I'd get along without the
sunset if only we could go home."

They went in to dinner after this, and sat at Coralie's own table with
her husband and children and found the meal very good. After a pleasant
evening, during which no reference was made to their being prisoners,
they were shown to prettily furnished rooms--all in pink--and slept
soundly in the soft beds provided for them. Trot wakened early the next
morning and went out on the balcony to see the sunrise. The little girl
was well repaid, for the splendor of the rising sun was almost equal to
that of the setting sun. Surely this was a wonderful country and much
more delightful than the Blue side of the island, where the sun was
hidden by the great Fog and only the moon was visible.

When she went in, she found that both Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were
up and dressed, so they decided to take a walk before breakfast. No one
restrained them or interfered with them in any way. "They know we can't
get away," observed the sailor, "so they don't need to watch us."

"We could go into the Fog Bank again," suggested Trot.

"We could, mate, but we won't," answered Cap'n Bill. "If there's no way
for us to get clean off'n Sky Island, I'd rather stay with the Pinkies
than with the Blues."

"I wonder what they'll do with us," said Button-Bright. "The Queen
seems like a nice girl, and I don't think she'll hurt us, whatever
happens."

They walked freely along the circular street, seeing such sights as the
Pink City afforded, and then returned to Coralie's house for breakfast.
Coralie herself was not there, as she had been summoned to the Queen's
palace, but her husband looked after the guests, and when breakfast was
finished he said to them, "I am to take you to Tourmaline, who has
promised to decide your fate this morning. I am curious to know what
she will do with you, for in all our history we have never before had
strangers intrude upon us."

"We're curious, too," said Trot, "but we'll soon find out." As they
walked down the street, they observed that the sky was now covered with
dark clouds which entirely hid the sun.

"Does it ever rain here?" inquired Button-Bright.

"Certainly," answered Coralie's husband, "that is the one drawback of
our country: it rains quite often. And although it makes the flowers
and the grass grow, I think rain is very disagreeable. I am always glad
to see the rainbow, which is a sign that the sun will shine again."

"Looks like rain now," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"It does," said the man, glancing at the sky. "We must hurry, or we may
get wet."

"Haven't you any umbrellas?" asked Button-Bright.

"No, we don't know what umbrellas are," replied the Pinky man.

It did not rain at once, and they reached Tourmaline's wretched hut in
safety. There they found quite a number of Pinkies assembled, and a
spirited discussion was taking place when they arrived.

"Come in, please," said Tourmaline, opening the door for them, and when
they had entered, she placed a pinkwood bench for them to sit upon and
went back to her throne, which was a common rocking chair. At her right
were seated six men and women of the Sunrise Tribe, and on her left six
men and women of the Sunset Tribe, among the latter being Coralie. The
contrast between the plain, simple dress of the Queen and the gorgeous
apparel of her Counselors was quite remarkable, yet her beauty far
surpassed that of any of her people, and her demeanor was so modest and
unassuming that it was difficult for the prisoners to believe that her
word would decree life or death and that all the others were
subservient to her. Tourmaline's eyes were so deep a shade of pink that
they were almost hazel, and her hair was darker than that of the
others, being a golden-red in color. These points, taken with her
light-pink skin and slender form, rendered her distinctive among the
Pinkies, whatever gown she might wear.

When the strangers were seated, she turned to them and said, "I have
searched through the Great Book of Laws and found nothing about foreign
people entering our land. There is a law that if any of the Blueskins
break through the Fog Bank, they shall be driven back with sharp
sticks; but you are not Blueskins, so this Law does not apply to you.
Therefore, in order to decide your fate, I have summoned a Council of
twelve of my people, who will vote as to whether you shall be permitted
to remain here or not. They wanted to see you before they cast their
final vote, that they may examine you carefully and discover if you are
worthy to become inhabitants of the Pink Country."

  "The rose is red, the violet's blue,
  But Trot is sweeter than the two!"

declared the parrot in a loud voice. It was a little verse Cap'n Bill
had taught the bird that very morning while Trot was seeing the sun
rise.

The Pinkies were startled and seemed a little frightened at hearing a
bird speak so clearly. Trot laughed and patted the bird's head in
return for the compliment. "Is the Monster Man whose legs are part wood
a dangerous creature?" asked one of the Sunrise Tribe.

"Not to my friends," replied Cap'n Bill, much amused. "I s'pose I could
fight your whole crowd of Pinkies if I had to, an' make you run for
your lives, but bein' as you're friendly to us, you ain't in any
danger." The sailor thought this speech was diplomatic and might "head
off any trouble," but the Pinkies seemed uneasy, and several of them
picked up their slender, pointed sticks and held them in their hands.
They were not cowardly, but it was evident they mistrusted the big man,
who on Earth was not considered big at all, but rather undersized.

"What we'd like," said Trot, "is to stay here, cozy an' peaceable, till
we can find a way to get home to the Earth again. Your country is much
nicer than the Blue Country, and we like you pretty well from what
we've seen of you, so if you'll let us stay, we won't be any more
trouble to you than we can help."

They all gazed upon the little girl curiously, and one of them said,
"How strangely light her color is! And it is pink, too, which is in her
favor. But her eyes are of that dreadful blue tint which prevails in
the other half of Sky Island, while her hair is a queer color unknown
to us. She is not like our people and would not harmonize with the
universal color here."

"That's true," said another. "The three strangers are all inharmonious.
If allowed to remain here, they would ruin the color scheme of the
country, where all is now pink."

"In spite of that," said Coralie, "they are harmless creatures and have
done us no wrong."

"Yes they have," replied a nervous little Sunrise man, "they wronged us
by coming here."

"They could not help doing that," argued Coralie, "and it is their
misfortune that they are here on Sky Island at all. Perhaps if we keep
them with us for a while, they may find a way to return safely to their
own country."

"We'll fly through the sky by-and-by--ki-yi!" yelled the parrot with
startling suddenness.

"Is that true?" asked a Pinky seriously.

"Why, we would if we could," answered Trot. "We flew to this island,
anyhow."

"Perhaps," said another, "if we pushed them off the edge, they could
fly down again. Who knows?"

"We know," answered Cap'n Bill hastily. "We'd tumble, but we wouldn't
fly."

  "They'd take a fall--
  And that is all!"

observed the parrot, fluttering its wings. There was silence for a
moment while all the Pinkies seemed to think deeply. Then the Queen
asked the strangers to step outside while they counseled together. Our
friends obeyed, and leaving the room they all entered the courtyard and
examined the rows of pink marble statues for nearly an hour before they
were summoned to return to the little room in Tourmaline's palace.

"We are now ready to vote as to your fate," said the pretty Queen to
them. "We have decided there are but two things for us do to: either
permit you to remain here as honored guests or take you to an edge of
the island and throw you over the bushes into the sky."

They were silent at hearing this dreadful alternative, but the parrot
screamed shrilly,

  "Oh, what a dump! Oh, what a jump!
  Won't we all thump when we land with a bump?"

"If we do," said Cap'n Bill thoughtfully, "we'll none of us know it."




ROSALIE THE WITCH

CHAPTER 16


Trot and Button-Bright had now become worried and anxious, for they
knew if they were tossed over the edge of the island they would be
killed. Cap'n Bill frowned and set his jaws tight together. The old
sailor had made up his mind to make a good fight for his boy and girl,
as well as for his own life, if he was obliged to do so.

The twelve Counselors then voted, and when the vote was counted,
Tourmaline announced that six had voted to allow the strangers to
remain and six to toss them over the bushes. "We seem evenly divided on
this matter," remarked the Queen with a puzzled look at her Council.

Trot thought the pretty Queen was their friend, so she said, "Of course
you'll have the deciding vote, then, you being the Ruler."

"Oh no," replied Tourmaline. "Since I have asked these good people to
advise me, it would be impolite to side against some of them and with
the others. That would imply that the judgment of some of my Counselors
is wrong, and the judgment of others right. I must ask someone else to
cast the deciding vote."

"Who will it be, then?" inquired Trot. "Can't I do it? Or Cap'n Bill or
Button-Bright?"

Tourmaline smiled and shook her head, while all the Counselors murmured
their protests.

  "Let Trot do it
  Or you'll rue it!"

advised the parrot, and then he barked like a dog and made them all
jump.

"Let me think a moment," said the Queen, resting her chin on her hand.

  "A Pink can think
  As quick's a wink!"

the parrot declared. But Tourmaline's thoughts required time, and all
her Counselors remained silent and watched her anxiously.

At last she raised her head and said, "I shall call upon Rosalie the
Witch. She is wise and honest and will decide the matter justly."

The Pinkies seemed to approve this choice, so Tourmaline rose and took
a small, pink paper parcel from a drawer. In it was a pink powder,
which she scattered upon the seat of a big armchair. Then she lighted
this powder, which at first flashed vivid pink and then filled all the
space around the chair with a thick, pink cloud of smoke. Presently the
smoke cleared away, when they all saw seated within the chair Rosalie
the Witch.

This famous woman was much like the other Pinkies in appearance except
that she was somewhat taller and not quite so fat as most of the
people. Her skin and hair and eyes were all of a rosy, pink color, and
her gown was of spiderweb gauze that nicely matched her complexion. She
did not seem very old, for her features were smiling and attractive and
pleasant to view. She held in her hand a slender staff tipped with a
lustrous pink jewel.

All the Pinkies present bowed very respectfully to Rosalie, who
returned the salutation with a dignified nod. Then Tourmaline began to
explain the presence of the three strangers and the difficulty of
deciding what to do with them.

"I have summoned you here that you may cast the deciding vote," added
the Queen. "What shall we do, Rosalie, allow them to remain here as
honored guests, or toss them over the bushes into the sky?"

Rosalie, during Tourmaline's speech, had been attentively examining the
faces of the three Earth people. Now she said,

"Before I decide, I must see who these strangers are. I will follow
their adventures in a vision to discover if they have told you the
truth. And in order that you may all share my knowledge, you shall see
the vision as I see it." She then bowed her head and closed her eyes.
