place was a very serious matter.

"What does this mean, Mr. Dickson?" he asked quickly.

"I can't inform you," answered the cashier, smiling unpleasantly, for he
was a selfish man who sympathized with no one, and cared for no one as
long as he himself remained prosperous.

"Who handed you this paper?" asked Phil.

"The boss."

"Mr. Pitkin?"

"Of course."

Mr. Pitkin was still in his little office, and Phil made his way
directly to him.

"May I speak to you, sir?" asked our hero.

"Be quick about it then, for I am in a hurry," answered Pitkin, in a
very forbidding tone.

"Why am I discharged, sir?"

"I can't go into details. We don't need you any longer."

"Are you not satisfied with me?"

"No!" said Pitkin brusquely.

"In what respect have I failed to satisfy you, sir?"

"Don't put on any airs, boy!" returned Pitkin. "We don't want you,
that's all."

"You might have given me a little notice," said Phil indignantly.

"We made no stipulation of that kind, I believe."

"It would only be fair, sir."

"No impertinence, young man! I won't stand it! I don't need any
instructions as to the manner of conducting my business."

Phil by this time perceived that his discharge was decided upon without
any reference to the way in which he had performed his duties, and that
any discussion or remonstrance would be unavailing.

"I see, sir, that you have no regard for justice, and will leave you,"
he said.

"You'd better, and without delay!" said Pitkin irascibly.

Phil emerged upon the street with a sinking heart. His available funds
consisted only of the money he had just received and seventy-five cents
in change, and what he was to do he did not know. He walked home with
slow steps, looking sad in spite of his usually hopeful temperament.

When he entered the house he met Mrs. Forbush in the hall. She at once
noticed his gravity.

"Have you had any bad luck, Philip?" she asked.

"Yes," answered Phil. "I have lost my situation."

"Indeed!" returned the landlady, with quick sympathy. "Have you had any
difficulty with your employer?"

"Not that I am aware of."

"Did he assign any reason for your discharge?"

"No; I asked him for an explanation, but he merely said I was not wanted
any longer."

"Isn't there any chance of his taking you back?"

"I am sure there is not."

"Don't be discouraged, Philip. A smart boy like you won't be long out of
a place. Meanwhile you are welcome to stay here as long as I have a roof
to cover me."

"Thank you, Mrs. Forbush," said Phil warmly, "you are a true friend. You
are in trouble yourself, yet you stand by me!"

"I have had a stroke of good luck to-day," said Mrs. Forbush cheerfully.
"A former boarder, whom I allowed to remain here for five or six weeks
when he was out of employment, has sent me thirty dollars in payment of
his bill, from Boston, where he found a position. So I shall be able to
pay my rent and have something over. I have been lucky, and so may you."

Phil was cheered by the ready sympathy of his landlady, and began to
take a more cheerful view of matters.

"I will go out bright and early on Monday and see if I can't find
another place," he said. "Perhaps it may be all for the best."

Yet on the day succeeding he had some sober hours. How differently
he had been situated only three months before. Then he had a home and
relatives. Now he was practically alone in the world, with no home
in which he could claim a share, and he did not even know where his
step-mother and Jonas were. Sunday forenoon he attended church, and
while he sat within its sacred precincts his mind was tranquilized, and
his faith and cheerfulness increased.

On Monday he bought the Herald, and made a tour of inquiry wherever he
saw that a boy was wanted. But in each place he was asked if he could
produce a recommendation from his last employer. He decided to go back
to his old place and ask for one, though he was very reluctant to ask
a favor of any kind from a man who had treated him so shabbily as Mr.
Pitkin. It seemed necessary, however, and he crushed down his pride and
made his way to Mr. Pitkin's private office.

"Mr. Pitkin!" he said.

"You here!" exclaimed Pitkin, scowling. "You needn't ask to be taken
back. It's no use."

"I don't ask it," answered Phil.

"Then what are you here for?"

"I would like a letter of recommendation, that I may obtain another
place."

"Well, well!" said Pitkin, wagging his head. "If that isn't impudence."

"What is impudence?" asked Phil. "I did as well as I could, and that I
am ready to do for another employer. But all ask me for a letter from
you."

"You won't get any!" said Pitkin abruptly.

"Where is your home?"

"I have none except in this city."

"Where did you come from?"

"From the country."

"Then I advise you to go back there. You may do for the country. You are
out of place in the city."

Poor Phil! Things did indeed look dark for him. Without a letter of
recommendation from Mr. Pitkin it would be almost impossible for him to
secure another place, and how could he maintain himself in the city? He
didn't wish to sell papers or black boots, and those were about the only
paths now open to him.

"I am having a rough time!" he thought, "but I will try not to get
discouraged."

He turned upon his heel and walked out of the store.

As he passed the counter where Wilbur was standing, the young man said:

"I am awfully sorry, Philip. It's a shame! If I wasn't broke I'd offer
to lend you a fiver."

"Thank you all the same for your kind offer, Wilbur," said Phil.

"Come round and see me."

"So I will--soon."

He left the store and wandered aimlessly about the streets.

Four days later, sick with hope deferred, he made his way down to the
wharf of the Charleston and Savannah boats, with a vague idea that he
might get a job of carrying baggage, for he felt that he must not let
his pride interfere with doing anything by which he could earn an honest
penny.

It so happened that the Charleston boat was just in, and the passengers
were just landing.

Phil stood on the pier and gazed listlessly at them as they disembarked.

All at once he started in surprise, and his heart beat joyfully.

There, just descending the gang-plank, was his tried friend, Mr. Oliver
Carter, whom he supposed over a thousand miles away in Florida.

"Mr. Carter!" exclaimed Phil, dashing forward.

"Philip!" exclaimed the old gentleman, much surprised. "How came you
here? Did Mr. Pitkin send you?"




CHAPTER XXIII.

AN EXPLANATION.

It would be hard to tell which of the two was the more surprised at the
meeting, Philip or Mr. Carter.

"I don't understand how Mr. Pitkin came to hear of my return. I didn't
telegraph," said the old gentleman.

"I don't think he knows anything about it," said Phil.

"Didn't he send you to the pier?"

"No, sir."

"Then how is it that you are not in the store at this time?" asked Mr.
Carter, puzzled.

"Because I am no longer in Mr. Pitkin's employ. I was discharged last
Saturday."

"Discharged! What for?"

"Mr. Pitkin gave no reason. He said my services were no longer
required. He spoke roughly to me, and has since declined to give me a
recommendation, though I told him that without it I should be unable to
secure employment elsewhere."

Mr. Carter frowned. He was evidently annoyed and indignant.

"This must be inquired into," he said. "Philip, call a carriage, and I
will at once go to the Astor House and take a room. I had intended to
go at once to Mr. Pitkin's, but I shall not do so until I have had an
explanation of this outrageous piece of business."

Phil was rejoiced to hear this, for he was at the end of his resources,
and the outlook for him was decidedly gloomy. He had about made up his
mind to sink his pride and go into business as a newsboy the next day,
but the very unexpected arrival of Mr. Carter put quite a new face on
matters.

He called a carriage, and both he and Mr. Carter entered it.

"How do you happen to be back so soon, sir?" asked Phil, when they were
seated. "I thought you were going to Florida for a couple of months."

"I started with that intention, but on reaching Charleston I changed my
mind. I expected to find some friends at St. Augustine, but I learned
that they were already returning to the North, and I felt that I should
be lonely and decided to return. I am very glad I did, now. Did you
receive my letter?"

"Your letter?" queried Philip, looking at Mr. Carter in surprise.

"Certainly. I gave Alonzo a letter for you, which I had directed to your
boarding-house, and requested him to mail it. It contained a ten-dollar
bill."

"I never received any such letter, sir. It would have been of great
service to me--the money, I mean; for I have found it hard to live on
five dollars a week. Now I have not even that."

"Is it possible that Alonzo could have suppressed the letter?" said Mr.
Carter to himself.

"At any rate I never received it."

"Here is something else to inquire into," said Mr. Carter. "If Alonzo
has tampered with my letter, perhaps appropriated the money, it will be
the worse for him."

"I hardly think he would do that, sir; though I don't like him."

"You are generous; but I know the boy better than you do. He is fond of
money, not for the sake of spending it, but for the sake of hoarding it.
Tell me, then, how did you learn that I had gone to Florida?"

"I learned it at the house in Twelfth Street."

"Then you called there?"

"Yes, sir; I called to see you. I found it hard to get along on my
salary, and I did not want Mrs. Forbush to lose by me, so I----"

"Mrs. Forbush?" repeated the old gentleman quickly. "That name sounds
familiar to me."

"Mrs. Forbush is your niece," said Phil, a hope rising in his heart that
he might be able to do his kind landlady a good turn.

"Did she tell you that?"

"No, sir; that is, I was ignorant of it until I met her just as I was
going away from Mrs. Pitkin's."

"Did she call there, too--to see me?" asked the old gentleman.

"Yes, sir; but she got a very cold reception. Mrs. Pitkin was very rude
to her, and said that you were so much prejudiced against her that she
had better not call again."

"That's like her cold selfishness. I understand her motives very well. I
had no idea that Mrs. Forbush was in the city. Is she--poor?"

"Yes, sir; she is having a hard struggle to maintain herself and her
daughter."

"And you board at her house?"

"Yes, sir."

"How strangely things come about! She is as nearly related to me as
Lavinia--Mrs. Pitkin."

"She told me so."

"She married against the wishes of her family, but I can see now that we
were all unreasonably prejudiced against her. Lavinia, however, trumped
up stories against her husband, which I am now led to believe were quite
destitute of foundation, and did all she could to keep alive the feud. I
feel now that I was very foolish to lend myself to her selfish ends. Of
course her object was to get my whole fortune for herself and her boy."

Phil had no doubt of this, but he did not like to say so, for it would
seem that he, too, was influenced by selfish motives.

"Then you are not so much prejudiced against Mrs. Forbush as she was
told?" he allowed himself to say.

"No, no!" said Mr. Carter earnestly. "Poor Rebecca! She has a much
better nature and disposition than Mrs. Pitkin. And you say she is
poor?"

"She had great difficulty in paying her last month's rent," said Philip.

"Where does she live?"

Phil told him.

"What sort of a house is it?"

"It isn't a brown-stone front," answered Phil, smiling. "It is a poor,
cheap house; but it is as good as she can afford to hire."

"And you like her?"

"Very much, Mr. Carter. She has been very kind to me, and though she
finds it so hard to get along, she has told me she will keep me as long
as she has a roof over her head, though just now I cannot pay my board,
because my income is gone."

"It will come back again, Philip," said the old gentleman.

Phil understood by this that he would be restored to his place in Mr.
Pitkin's establishment. This did not yield him unalloyed satisfaction,
for he was sure that it would be made unpleasant for him by Mr. Pitkin.
Still he would accept it, and meet disagreeable things as well as he
could.

By this time they had reached the Astor House.

Phil jumped out first, and assisted Mr. Carter to descend.

He took Mr. Carter's hand-bag, and followed him into the hotel.

Mr. Carter entered his name in the register.

"What is your name?" he asked--"Philip Brent?"

"Yes, sir."

"I will enter your name, too."

"Am I to stay here?" asked Phil, in surprise.

"Yes; I shall need a confidential clerk, and for the present you will
fill that position. I will take two adjoining rooms--one for you."

Phil listened in surprise.

"Thank you, sir," he said.

Mr. Carter gave orders to have his trunk sent for from the steamer, and
took possession of the room. Philip's room was smaller, but considerably
more luxurious than the one he occupied at the house of Mrs. Forbush.

"Have you any money, Philip?" asked the old gentleman.

"I have twenty-five cents," answered Philip.

"That isn't a very large sum," said Mr. Carter, smiling. "Here, let me
replenish your pocketbook."

He drew four five-dollar bills from his wallet and handed them to Phil.

"How can I thank you, sir?" asked Phil gratefully.

"Wait till you have more to thank me for. Let me tell you this, that in
trying to harm you, Mr. and Mrs. Pitkin have done you a great service."

"I should like to see Mrs. Forbush this evening, if you can spare me, to
let her know that she needn't be anxious about me."

"By all means. You can go."

"Am I at liberty to mention that I have seen you, sir?"

"Yes. Tell her that I will call to-morrow. And you may take her this."

Mr. Carter drew a hundred-dollar bill from his wallet and passed it to
Phil.

"Get it changed at the office as you go out," he said. "Come back as
soon as you can."

With a joyful heart Phil jumped on a Fourth Avenue car in front of the
hotel, and started on his way up town.



CHAPTER XXIV.

RAISING THE RENT.

Leaving Phil, we will precede him to the house of Mrs. Forbush.

She had managed to pay the rent due, but she was not out of trouble. The
time had come when it was necessary to decide whether she would retain
the house for the following year. In New York, as many of my young
readers may know, the first of May is moving-day, and leases generally
begin at that date. Engagements are made generally by or before March
1st.

Mr. Stone, the landlord, called upon the widow to ascertain whether she
proposed to remain in the house.

"I suppose I may as well do so," said Mrs. Forbush.

She had had difficulty in making her monthly payments, but to move
would involve expense, and it might be some time before she could secure
boarders in a new location.

