dismay and all the girls climbed shrieking upon their desks. Joe Sloane
stood as one transfixed in the midst of the commotion and St. Clair,
helpless with laughter, rocked to and fro in the aisle. Prillie Rogerson
fainted and Annetta Bell went into hysterics.

It seemed a long time, although it was really only a few minutes, before
the last pinwheel subsided. Anne, recovering herself, sprang to open
doors and windows and let out the gas and smoke which filled the room.
Then she helped the girls carry the unconscious Prillie into the porch,
where Barbara Shaw, in an agony of desire to be useful, poured a pailful
of half frozen water over Prillie's face and shoulders before anyone
could stop her.

It was a full hour before quiet was restored  . . . but it was a quiet
that might be felt. Everybody realized that even the explosion had not
cleared the teacher's mental atmosphere. Nobody, except Anthony Pye,
dared whisper a word. Ned Clay accidentally squeaked his pencil while
working a sum, caught Anne's eye and wished the floor would open and
swallow him up. The geography class were whisked through a continent
with a speed that made them dizzy. The grammar class were parsed
and analyzed within an inch of their lives. Chester Sloane, spelling
"odoriferous" with two f's, was made to feel that he could never live
down the disgrace of it, either in this world or that which is to come.

Anne knew that she had made herself ridiculous and that the incident
would be laughed over that night at a score of tea-tables, but the
knowledge only angered her further. In a calmer mood she could have
carried off the situation with a laugh but now that was impossible; so
she ignored it in icy disdain.

When Anne returned to the school after dinner all the children were
as usual in their seats and every face was bent studiously over a desk
except Anthony Pye's. He peered across his book at Anne, his black eyes
sparkling with curiosity and mockery. Anne twitched open the drawer
of her desk in search of chalk and under her very hand a lively mouse
sprang out of the drawer, scampered over the desk, and leaped to the
floor.

Anne screamed and sprang back, as if it had been a snake, and Anthony
Pye laughed aloud.

Then a silence fell . . . a very creepy, uncomfortable silence. Annetta
Bell was of two minds whether to go into hysterics again or not,
especially as she didn't know just where the mouse had gone. But she
decided not to. Who could take any comfort out of hysterics with a
teacher so white-faced and so blazing-eyed standing before one?

"Who put that mouse in my desk?" said Anne. Her voice was quite low but
it made a shiver go up and down Paul Irving's spine. Joe Sloane caught
her eye, felt responsible from the crown of his head to the sole of his
feet, but stuttered out wildly,

"N . . . n . . . not m . . . m . . . me t . . . t . . . teacher, n . . .
n . . . not m . . . m . . . me."

Anne paid no attention to the wretched Joseph. She looked at Anthony
Pye, and Anthony Pye looked back unabashed and unashamed.

"Anthony, was it you?"

"Yes, it was," said Anthony insolently.

Anne took her pointer from her desk. It was a long, heavy hardwood
pointer.

"Come here, Anthony."

It was far from being the most severe punishment Anthony Pye had ever
undergone. Anne, even the stormy-souled Anne she was at that moment,
could not have punished any child cruelly. But the pointer nipped keenly
and finally Anthony's bravado failed him; he winced and the tears came
to his eyes.

Anne, conscience-stricken, dropped the pointer and told Anthony to go
to his seat. She sat down at her desk feeling ashamed, repentant, and
bitterly mortified. Her quick anger was gone and she would have given
much to have been able to seek relief in tears. So all her boasts had
come to this . . . she had actually whipped one of her pupils. How Jane
would triumph! And how Mr. Harrison would chuckle! But worse than
this, bitterest thought of all, she had lost her last chance of winning
Anthony Pye. Never would he like her now.

Anne, by what somebody has called "a Herculaneum effort," kept back her
tears until she got home that night. Then she shut herself in the east
gable room and wept all her shame and remorse and disappointment into
her pillows . . . wept so long that Marilla grew alarmed, invaded the
room, and insisted on knowing what the trouble was.

"The trouble is, I've got things the matter with my conscience," sobbed
Anne. "Oh, this has been such a Jonah day, Marilla. I'm so ashamed of
myself. I lost my temper and whipped Anthony Pye."

"I'm glad to hear it," said Marilla with decision. "It's what you should
have done long ago."

"Oh, no, no, Marilla. And I don't see how I can ever look those children
in the face again. I feel that I have humiliated myself to the very
dust. You don't know how cross and hateful and horrid I was. I can't
forget the expression in Paul Irving's eyes . . . he looked so surprised
and disappointed. Oh, Marilla, I HAVE tried so hard to be patient and to
win Anthony's liking . . . and now it has all gone for nothing."

Marilla passed her hard work-worn hand over the girl's glossy, tumbled
hair with a wonderful tenderness. When Anne's sobs grew quieter she
said, very gently for her,

"You take things too much to heart, Anne. We all make mistakes . . . but
people forget them. And Jonah days come to everybody. As for Anthony
Pye, why need you care if he does dislike you? He is the only one."

"I can't help it. I want everybody to love me and it hurts me so when
anybody doesn't. And Anthony never will now. Oh, I just made an idiot of
myself today, Marilla. I'll tell you the whole story."

Marilla listened to the whole story, and if she smiled at certain parts
of it Anne never knew. When the tale was ended she said briskly,

"Well, never mind. This day's done and there's a new one coming
tomorrow, with no mistakes in it yet, as you used to say yourself. Just
come downstairs and have your supper. You'll see if a good cup of tea
and those plum puffs I made today won't hearten you up."

"Plum puffs won't minister to a mind diseased," said Anne
disconsolately; but Marilla thought it a good sign that she had
recovered sufficiently to adapt a quotation.

The cheerful supper table, with the twins' bright faces, and Marilla's
matchless plum puffs . . . of which Davy ate four . . .  did "hearten her
up" considerably after all. She had a good sleep that night and
awakened in the morning to find herself and the world transformed. It
had snowed softly and thickly all through the hours of darkness and the
beautiful whiteness, glittering in the frosty sunshine, looked like a
mantle of charity cast over all the mistakes and humiliations of the
past.

     "Every morn is a fresh beginning,
     Every morn is the world made new,"

sang Anne, as she dressed.

Owing to the snow she had to go around by the road to school and she
thought it was certainly an impish coincidence that Anthony Pye should
come ploughing along just as she left the Green Gables lane. She felt
as guilty as if their positions were reversed; but to her unspeakable
astonishment Anthony not only lifted his cap . . . which he had never done
before . . . but said easily,

"Kind of bad walking, ain't it? Can I take those books for you,
teacher?"

Anne surrendered her books and wondered if she could possibly be awake.
Anthony walked on in silence to the school, but when Anne took her books
she smiled down at him . . . not the stereotyped "kind" smile she had so
persistently assumed for his benefit but a sudden outflashing of good
comradeship. Anthony smiled . . . no, if the truth must be told, Anthony
GRINNED back. A grin is not generally supposed to be a respectful thing;
yet Anne suddenly felt that if she had not yet won Anthony's liking she
had, somehow or other, won his respect.

Mrs. Rachel Lynde came up the next Saturday and confirmed this.

"Well, Anne, I guess you've won over Anthony Pye, that's what. He says
he believes you are some good after all, even if you are a girl. Says
that whipping you gave him was 'just as good as a man's.'"

"I never expected to win him by whipping him, though," said Anne,
a little mournfully, feeling that her ideals had played her false
somewhere. "It doesn't seem right. I'm sure my theory of kindness can't
be wrong."

"No, but the Pyes are an exception to every known rule, that's what,"
declared Mrs. Rachel with conviction.

Mr. Harrison said, "Thought you'd come to it," when he heard it, and
Jane rubbed it in rather unmercifully.




XIII

A Golden Picnic


Anne, on her way to Orchard Slope, met Diana, bound for Green Gables,
just where the mossy old log bridge spanned the brook below the Haunted
Wood, and they sat down by the margin of the Dryad's Bubble, where tiny
ferns were unrolling like curly-headed green pixy folk wakening up from
a nap.

"I was just on my way over to invite you to help me celebrate my
birthday on Saturday," said Anne.

"Your birthday? But your birthday was in March!"

"That wasn't my fault," laughed Anne. "If my parents had consulted me
it would never have happened then. I should have chosen to be born in
spring, of course. It must be delightful to come into the world with the
mayflowers and violets. You would always feel that you were their foster
sister. But since I didn't, the next best thing is to celebrate my
birthday in the spring. Priscilla is coming over Saturday and Jane will
be home. We'll all four start off to the woods and spend a golden day
making the acquaintance of the spring. We none of us really know her
yet, but we'll meet her back there as we never can anywhere else. I
want to explore all those fields and lonely places anyhow. I have a
conviction that there are scores of beautiful nooks there that have
never really been SEEN although they may have been LOOKED at. We'll
make friends with wind and sky and sun, and bring home the spring in our
hearts."

"It SOUNDS awfully nice," said Diana, with some inward distrust of
Anne's magic of words. "But won't it be very damp in some places yet?"

"Oh, we'll wear rubbers," was Anne's concession to practicalities.
"And I want you to come over early Saturday morning and help me prepare
lunch. I'm going to have the daintiest things possible . . .  things that
will match the spring, you understand . . . little jelly tarts and lady
fingers, and drop cookies frosted with pink and yellow icing, and
buttercup cake. And we must have sandwiches too, though they're NOT very
poetical."

Saturday proved an ideal day for a picnic . . . a day of breeze and blue,
warm, sunny, with a little rollicking wind blowing across meadow
and orchard. Over every sunlit upland and field was a delicate,
flower-starred green.

Mr. Harrison, harrowing at the back of his farm and feeling some of the
spring witch-work even in his sober, middle-aged blood, saw four girls,
basket laden, tripping across the end of his field where it joined a
fringing woodland of birch and fir. Their blithe voices and laughter
echoed down to him.

"It's so easy to be happy on a day like this, isn't it?" Anne was
saying, with true Anneish philosophy. "Let's try to make this a really
golden day, girls, a day to which we can always look back with delight.
We're to seek for beauty and refuse to see anything else. 'Begone, dull
care!' Jane, you are thinking of something that went wrong in school
yesterday."

"How do you know?" gasped Jane, amazed.

"Oh, I know the expression . . . I've felt it often enough on my own face.
But put it out of your mind, there's a dear. It will keep till Monday
. . . or if it doesn't so much the better. Oh, girls, girls, see that patch
of violets! There's something for memory's picture gallery. When I'm
eighty years old . . . if I ever am . . . I shall shut my eyes and see
those violets just as I see them now. That's the first good gift our day
has given us."

"If a kiss could be seen I think it would look like a violet," said
Priscilla.

Anne glowed.

"I'm so glad you SPOKE that thought, Priscilla, instead of just
thinking it and keeping it to yourself. This world would be a much more
interesting place . . . although it IS very interesting anyhow . . .  if
people spoke out their real thoughts."

"It would be too hot to hold some folks," quoted Jane sagely.

"I suppose it might be, but that would be their own faults for thinking
nasty things. Anyhow, we can tell all our thoughts today because we are
going to have nothing but beautiful thoughts. Everybody can say just
what comes into her head. THAT is conversation. Here's a little path I
never saw before. Let's explore it."

The path was a winding one, so narrow that the girls walked in single
file and even then the fir boughs brushed their faces. Under the firs
were velvety cushions of moss, and further on, where the trees were
smaller and fewer, the ground was rich in a variety of green growing
things.

"What a lot of elephant's ears," exclaimed Diana. "I'm going to pick a
big bunch, they're so pretty."

"How did such graceful feathery things ever come to have such a dreadful
name?" asked Priscilla.

"Because the person who first named them either had no imagination at
all or else far too much," said Anne, "Oh, girls, look at that!"

"That" was a shallow woodland pool in the center of a little open glade
where the path ended. Later on in the season it would be dried up
and its place filled with a rank growth of ferns; but now it was a
glimmering placid sheet, round as a saucer and clear as crystal. A
ring of slender young birches encircled it and little ferns fringed its
margin.

"HOW sweet!" said Jane.

"Let us dance around it like wood-nymphs," cried Anne, dropping her
basket and extending her hands.

But the dance was not a success for the ground was boggy and Jane's
rubbers came off.

"You can't be a wood-nymph if you have to wear rubbers," was her
decision.

"Well, we must name this place before we leave it," said Anne, yielding
to the indisputable logic of facts. "Everybody suggest a name and we'll
draw lots. Diana?"

"Birch Pool," suggested Diana promptly.

"Crystal Lake," said Jane.

Anne, standing behind them, implored Priscilla with her eyes not to
perpetrate another such name and Priscilla rose to the occasion with
"Glimmer-glass." Anne's selection was "The Fairies' Mirror."

The names were written on strips of birch bark with a pencil Schoolma'am
Jane produced from her pocket, and placed in Anne's hat. Then Priscilla
shut her eyes and drew one. "Crystal Lake," read Jane triumphantly.
Crystal Lake it was, and if Anne thought that chance had played the pool
a shabby trick she did not say so.

Pushing through the undergrowth beyond, the girls came out to the young
green seclusion of Mr. Silas Sloane's back pasture. Across it they
found the entrance to a lane striking up through the woods and voted
to explore it also. It rewarded their quest with a succession of pretty
surprises. First, skirting Mr. Sloane's pasture, came an archway of wild
cherry trees all in bloom. The girls swung their hats on their arms
and wreathed their hair with the creamy, fluffy blossoms. Then the lane
turned at right angles and plunged into a spruce wood so thick and dark
that they walked in a gloom as of twilight, with not a glimpse of sky or
sunlight to be seen.

"This is where the bad wood elves dwell," whispered Anne. "They are
impish and malicious but they can't harm us, because they are not
allowed to do evil in the spring. There was one peeping at us around
that old twisted fir; and didn't you see a group of them on that big
freckly toadstool we just passed? The good fairies always dwell in the
sunshiny places."
