
Miss Heath came to the threshold of her pretty room and smiled at the
young girl.

"You look well and happy," she said. "You are getting at home here.
You will love us all yet."

"I love you now!" said Prissie with fervor.

Miss Heath, prompted by the look of intense and sincere gladness on
the young face, bent and kissed Priscilla. A rather disagreeable voice
said suddenly at her back:

"I beg your pardon," and Lucy Marsh ran down the stairs.

She had knocked against Prissie in passing; she had witnessed Miss
Heath's kiss. The expression on Lucy's face was unpleasant. Prissie
did not notice it, however. She went slowly up to her room. The
electric light was on, the fire was blazing merrily. Priscilla removed
her hat and jacket, threw herself into the one easy-chair the room
contained, and gave herself up to pleasant dreams. Many new aspects of
life were opening before her. She felt that it was a good thing to be
young, and she was distinctly conscious of a great, soft glow of
happiness.

  CHAPTER XIII

 CAUGHT IN A TRAP

COLLEGE life is school life over again, but with wide differences. The
restraints which characterize the existence of a schoolgirl are
scarcely felt at all by the girl graduates. There are no punishments.
Up to a certain point she is free to be industrious or not as she
pleases. Some rules there are for her conduct and guidance, but they
are neither many nor arbitrary. In short, the young girl graduate is
no longer thought of as a child. She is a woman, with a woman's
responsibilities; she is treated accordingly.

Miss Day, Miss Marsh, Miss Merton and one or two other congenial
spirits entered heartily into the little plot which should deprive
Priscilla of Maggie Oliphant's friendship. They were anxious to
succeed in this, because their characters were low, their natures
jealous and mean. Prissie had set up a higher standard than theirs,
and they were determined to crush the little aspirant for moral
courage. If in crushing Prissie they could also bring discredit upon
Miss Oliphant, their sense of victory would have been intensified; but
it was one thing for these conspirators to plot and plan and another
thing for them to perform. It is possible that in school life they
might have found this easier; opportunities might have arisen for
them, with mistresses to be obeyed, punishments to be dreaded, rewards
to be won. At St. Benet's there was no one especially to be obeyed,
and neither rewards nor punishments entered into the lives of the
girls.

Maggie Oliphant did not care in the least what girls like Miss Day or
Miss Marsh said or thought about her, and Priscilla, who was very
happy and industrious just now, heard many innuendoes and sly little
speeches without taking in their meaning.

Still, the conspirators did not despair. The term before Christmas was
in some ways rather a dull one, and they were glad of any excitement
to break the monotony. As difficulties increased their ardor also
deepened, and they were resolved not to leave a stone unturned to
effect their object. Where there is a will there is a way. This is
true as regards evil and good things alike.

One foggy morning, toward the end of November, Priscilla was standing
by the door of one of the lecture-rooms, a book of French history, a
French grammar and exercise-book and thick note-book in her hand. She
was going to her French lecture and was standing patiently by the
lecture-room door, which had not yet been opened.

Priscilla's strongest bias was for Greek and Latin, but Mr. Hayes had
recommended her to take up modern languages as well, and she was
steadily plodding through the French and German, for which she had not
so strong a liking as for her beloved classics. Prissie was a very
eager learner, and she was busy now looking over her notes of the last
lecture and standing close to the door, so as to be one of the first
to take her place in the lecture-room.

The rustling of a dress caused her to look round, and Rosalind Merton
stood by her side. Rosalind was by no means one of the "students" of
the college. She attended as few lectures as were compatible with her
remaining there, but French happened to be one of the subjects which
she thought it well to take up, and she appeared now by Prissie's side
with the invariable notebook, without which no girl went to lecture,
in her hand.

"Isn't it cold?" she said, shivering and raising her pretty face to
Priscilla's.

Prissie glanced at her for a moment, said Yes, she supposed it was
cold, in an abstracted voice, and bent her head once more over her
note-book.

Rosalind was looking very pretty in a dress of dark blue velveteen.
Her golden curly hair lay in little tendrils all over her head and
curled lovingly against her soft white throat.

"I hate Kingsdene in a fog," she continued, "and I think it's very
wrong to keep us in this draughty passage until the lecture-room is
opened. Don't you, Miss Peel?"

"Well, we are before our time, so no one is to blame for that,"
answered Priscilla.

"Of course, so we are." Rosalind pulled out a small gold watch, which
she wore at her girdle.

"How stupid of me to have mistaken the hour!" she exclaimed. Then
looking hard at Prissie, she continued in an anxious tone:

"You are not going to attend any lectures this afternoon, are you,
Miss Peel?"

"No," answered Priscilla. "Why?"

Rosalind's blue eyes looked almost pathetic in their pleading.

"I wonder"-- she began; "I am so worried, I wonder if you'd do me a
kindness."

"I can't say until you ask me," said Priscilla; "what do you want me
to do?"

"There's a girl at Kingsdene, a Miss Forbes. She makes my dresses now
and then; I had a letter from her last night, and she is going to
London in a hurry because her mother is ill. She made this dress for
me. Isn't it pretty?"

"Yes," answered Priscilla, just glancing at it. "But what connection
has that with my doing anything for you?"

"Oh, a great deal; I'm coming to that part. Miss Forbes wants me to
pay her for making this dress before she goes to London. I can only do
this by going to Kingsdene this afternoon."

"Well?" said Priscilla.

"I want to know if you will come with me. Miss Heath does not like our
going to the town alone, particularly at this time of year, when the
evenings are so short. Will you come with me, Miss Peel? It will be
awfully good-natured of you, and I really do want poor Miss Forbes to
have her money before she goes to London."

"But cannot some of your own friends go with you?" returned Priscilla.
"I don't wish to refuse, of course, if it is necessary; but I want to
work up my Greek notes this afternoon. The next lecture is a very
stiff one, and I sha'n't he ready for it without some hard work."

"Oh, but you can study when you come back. Do come with me. I would
not ask you, only I know you are so good-natured, and Annie Day and
Lucy Marsh have both to attend lectures this afternoon. I have no one
to ask-- no one, really if you refuse. I have not half so many friends
as you think, and it would be quite too dreadful for poor Miss Forbes
not to have her money when she wants to spend it on her sick mother."

Priscilla hesitated for a moment. Two or three other girls were
walking down the corridor to the lecture-room; the door was flung
open.

"Very well," she said as she entered the room, followed by Rosalind,
"I will go with you. At what hour do you want to start?"

"At three o'clock. I'm awfully grateful. A thousand thanks, Miss
Peel."

Prissie nodded, seated herself at the lecture-table and in the
interest of the work which lay before her soon forgot all about
Rosalind and her troubles.

The afternoon of that day turned out not only foggy but wet. A
drizzling rain shrouded the landscape, and very few girls from St.
Benet's were venturing abroad.

At half-past two Nancy Banister came hastily into Priscilla's room.

"Maggie and I are going down to the library," she said, "to have a
cozy read by the fire; we want you to come with us. Why, surely you
are never going out, Miss Peel?"

"Yes, I am," answered Prissie in a resigned voice. "I don't like it a
bit, but Miss Merton has asked me to go with her to Kingsdene, and I
promised."

"Well, you sha'n't keep your promise. This is not a fit day for you to
go out, and you have a cough, too. I heard you coughing last night."

"Yes, but that is nothing. I must go, Miss Banister,", I must keep my
word. I dare say it won't take Miss Merton and me very long to walk
into Kingsdene and back again."

"And I never knew that Rosalind Merton was one of your friends,
Prissie," continued Nancy in a puzzled voice.

"Nor is she-- I scarcely know her; but when she asked me to go out
with her, I could not very well say no."

"I suppose not; but I am sorry, all the same, for it is not a fit day
for any one to be abroad, and Rosalind is such a giddy pate. Well,
come back as soon as you can. Maggie and I are going to have a jolly
time, and we only wish you were with us."

Nancy nodded brightly and took her leave, and Priscilla, putting on
her waterproof and her shabbiest hat, went down into the hall to meet
Rosalind.

Rosalind was also in waterproof, but her hat was extremely pretty and
becoming, and Priscilla fancied she got a glimpse of a gay silk dress
under the waterproof cloak.

"Oh, how quite too sweet of you to be ready!" said Rosalind with
effusion. She took Prissie's hand and squeezed it affectionately, and
the two girls set off.

The walk was a dreary one, for Kingsdene, one of the most beautiful
places in England in fine weather, lies so low that in the winter
months fogs are frequent, and the rain is almost incessant, so that
then the atmosphere is always damp and chilly. By the time the two
girls had got into the High Street Prissie's thick, sensible boots
were covered with mud and Rosalind's thin ones felt very damp to her
feet.

They soon reached the quarter where the dressmaker, Miss Forbes,
lived. Prissie was asked to wait downstairs, and Rosalind ran up
several flights of stairs to fulfil her mission. She came back at the
end of a few minutes, looking bright and radiant.

"I am sorry to have kept you waiting, Miss Peel," she said, "but my
boots were so muddy that Miss Forbes insisted on polishing them up for
me."

"Well, we can go home now, I suppose?" said Prissie.

"Ye-- es; only as we are here, would you greatly mind our going round
by Bouverie Street? I want to inquire for a friend of mine, Mrs.
Elliot-Smith. She has not been well."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Priscilla. "Will it take us much out of our
way?"

"No, only a step or two. Come, we have just to turn this corner, and
here we are. What a dear-- quite too good-natured girl you are, Miss
Peel!"

Prissie said nothing. The two started forth again in the drizzling
mist and fog, and presently found themselves in one of the most
fashionable streets of Kingsdene and standing before a ponderous
hall-door, which stood back in a portico.

Rosalind rang the bell, which made a loud peal. The door was opened
almost immediately; but, instead of a servant appearing in answer to
the summons, a showily dressed girl, with a tousled head of flaxen
hair, light blue eyes and a pale face, stood before Rosalind and
Prissie.

"Oh, you dear Rose!" she said, clasping her arms round Miss Merton and
dragging her into the house; "I had almost given you up. Do come in--
do come in, both of you. You are more than welcome. What a miserable,
horrid, too utterly depressing afternoon it is!"

"How do you do, Meta?" said Rosalind, when she could interrupt this
eager flow of words. "May I introduce my friend, Miss Peel? Miss Peel,
this is my very great and special friend and chum, Meta Elliot-Smith."

"Oh, you charming darling!" said Meta, giving Rose a fresh hug and
glancing in a supercilious but friendly way at Prissie.

"We came to inquire for your mother, dear Meta," said Rose in a demure
tone. "Is she any better?"

"Yes, my dear darling, she's much better." Meta's eyes flashed
interrogation into Rose's: Rose's returned back glances which spoke
whole volumes of meaning.

"Look here," said Meta Elliot-Smith, "now that you two dear, precious
girls have come, you mustn't go away. Oh, no, I couldn't hear of it. I
have perfect oceans to say to you, Rose-- and it is absolutely
centuries since we have met. Off with your waterproof and up you come
to the drawing-room for a cup of tea. One or two friends are dropping
in presently, and the Beechers and one or two more are upstairs now.
You know the Beechers, don't you, Rosalind? Here, Miss Peel, let me
help you to unburden yourself. Little Rose is so nimble in her ways
that she doesn't need any assistance."

"Oh, but indeed I can't stay," said Prissie. "It is quite impossible!
You know, Miss Merton, it is impossible. We are due at St. Benet's
now. We ought to be going back at once."

Rosalind Merton's only answer was to slip off her waterproof cloak and
stand arrayed in a fascinating toilet of silk and lace-- a little too
dressy, perhaps, even for an afternoon party at Kingsdene, but vastly
becoming to its small wearer.

Priscilla opened her eyes wide as she gazed at her companion. She saw
at once that she had been entrapped into her present false position,
and that Rosalind's real object in coming to Kingsdene was not to pay
her dressmaker but to visit the Elliot-Smiths.

"I can't possible stay," she said in a cold, angry voice. "I must go
back to St. Benet's at once."

She began to button up her waterproof as fast as Miss Elliot-Smith was
unbuttoning it.

"Nonsense, you silly old dear!" said Rosalind, who, having gained her
way, was now in the best of spirits. "You mustn't listen to her, Meta;
she studies a great deal too hard, and a little relaxation will do her
all the good in the world. My dear Miss Peel, you can't be so rude as
to refuse a cup of tea, and I know I shall catch an awful cold if I
don't have one. Do come upstairs for half an hour; do, there's a dear
Prissie!"

