
"Clovy," she said, "I've been thinking; and I'm not going to write
to papa about this affair at all!"

"Aren't you?  Why not?" asked Clover, puzzled.

"Because it would worry him, and be of no use.  He would come on and
take us right away, I'm sure; but Mrs. Florence and all the teachers,
and a great many of the girls, would always believe that this horrid,
ridiculous story is true.  I can't bear to have them.  Let's stay,
instead, and convince them that it isn't.  I think we can."

"I would a great deal rather go home," said Clover.  "It won't ever
be nice here again.  We shall have this dark room, and Miss Jane will
be  more unkind than ever, and the girls will think you wrote that
note, and Lilly Page will say hateful things!"  She buttoned her
boots with a vindictive air.

"Never mind," said Katy, trying to feel brave.  "I don't suppose it
will be pleasant, but I'm pretty sure it's right.  And Rosy and all
the girls we really care for know how it is."

"I can't bear it," sighed Clover, with tears in her eyes.  "It is so
cruel that they should say such things about you."

"I mean that they shall say something quite different before we go
away," replied Katy, stroking her hair.  "Cousin Helen would tell
us to stay, I'm pretty sure.  I was thinking about her just now,
and I seemed to hear her voice in the air, saying over and over,
'Live it down!  Live it down!  Live it down!'"  She half sang this,
and took two or three dancing steps across the room.

"What a girl you are!" said Clover, consoled by seeing Katy look
so bright.

Mrs. Florence was surprised that morning, as she sat in her room, by
the appearance of Katy.  She looked pale, but perfectly quiet and
gentle.

"Mrs. Florence," she said, "I've come to say that I shall not write
to my father to take us away, as I told you I should."

Mrs. Florence bowed stiffly, by way of answer.

"Not," went on Katy, with a little flash in her eyes, "that he would
hesitate, or doubt my word one moment, if I did.  But he wished us
to stay here a year, and I don't want to disappoint him.  I'd rather
stay.  And, Mrs. Florence, I'm sorry I was angry, and felt that you
were unjust."

"And to-day you own that I was not?"

"Oh, no!" replied Katy, "I can't do that.  You _were_ unjust, because
neither Clover nor I wrote that note.  We wouldn't do such a horrid
thing for the world, and I hope some day you will believe us.  But I
oughtn't to have spoken so."

Katy's face and voice were so truthful as she said this, that Mrs.
Florence was almost shaken in her opinion.

"We will say no more about the matter," she remarked, in a kinder
tone.  "If your conduct is perfectly correct in future, it will go
far to make this forgotten."

Few things are more aggravating than to be forgiven when one has done
no wrong.  Katy felt this as she walked away from Mrs. Florence's
room.  But she would not let herself grow angry again.  "Live it
down!" she whispered, as she went into the school-room.

She and Clover had a good deal to endure for the next two or three
weeks.  They missed their old room with its sunny window and pleasant
outlook.  They missed Rose, who, down at the far end of Quaker Row,
could not drop in half so often as had been her custom.  Miss Jane
was specially grim and sharp; and some of the upstairs girls, who
resented Katy's plain speaking, and the formation of a society against
flirting, improved the chance to be provoking.  Lilly Page was one of
these.  She didn't really believe Katy guilty, but she liked to tease
her by pretending to believe it.

"Only to think of the President of the Saintly Stuck-Up Society being
caught like this!"  she remarked, maliciously.  "What are our great
reformers coming to?  Now if it had been a sinner like me, no one
would be surprised!"

All this naturally was vexatious.  Even sunny Clover shed many tears
in private over her mortifications.  But the girls bore their trouble
bravely, and never said one syllable about the matter in the letters
home.  There were consolations, too, mixed with the annoyances.  Rose
Red clung to her two friends closely, and loyally fought their battles.
The S. S. U. C. to a girl rallied round its chief.  After that sad
Saturday the meetings were resumed with as much spirit as ever.
Katy's  steadiness and uniform politeness and sweet temper impressed
even those who would have been glad to believe a tale against her,
and in short time the affair ceased to be a subject for discussion,--
was almost forgotten, in fact, except for a sore spot in Katy's heart,
and one page in Rose Red's album, upon which, under the date of that
fatal day, were written these words, headed by an appalling skull
and cross-bones in pen-and-ink:--

                                    "N. B.--Pay Miss Jane off."




CHAPTER VIII.  CHANGES.


"Clover, where's Clover?" cried Rose Red, popping her head into the
schoolroom, where Katy sat writing her composition.  "Oh, Katy! there
you are.  I want you too.  Come down to my room right away.  I've such
a thing to tell you!"

"What is it?"  Tell me too!" said Bella Arkwright.  Bella was a
veritable "little pitcher," of the kind mentioned in the Proverb,
and had an insatiable curiosity to know every thing that other
people knew.

"Tell you, Miss?  I should really like to know why!" replied Rose,
who was not at all fond of Bella.

"You're real mean, and real unkind," whined Bella.  "You think you're
a great grown-up lady, and can have secrets.  But you ain't!  You're
a little girl too,--most as little as me.  So there!"

Rose made a face at her, and a sort of growling rush, which had the
effect of sending Bella screaming down the hall.  Then, returning to
the school-room,--

"Do come, Katy," she said: "find Clover, and hurry!  Really and truly
I want you.  I feel as if I should burst if I don't tell somebody
right away what I've found out."

Katy began to be curious.  She went in pursuit of Clover, who was
practising in one of the recitation-rooms, and the three girls ran
together down Quaker Row.

"Now," said Rose, locking the door, and pushing forward a chair for
Katy and another for Clover, "swear that you won't tell, for this is
a real secret,--the greatest secret that ever was, and Mrs. Florence
would flay me alive if she knew that I knew!"  She paused to enjoy
the effect of her words, and suddenly began to snuff the air in a
peculiar manner.

"Girls," she said, solemnly, "that little wretch of a Bella is in this
room.  I am sure of it."

"What makes you think so?" cried the others supervised.

"I smell that dreadful pomatum that she puts on her hair!  Don't you
notice it?  She's hidden somewhere."  Rose looked sharply about for
a minute, then made a pounce, and from under the bed dragged a small
kicking heap.  It was the guilty Bella.

"What were you doing there, you bad child?" demanded Rose, seizing the
kicking feet and holding them fast.

"I don't care," blubbered Bella, "you wouldn't tell me your secret.
You're a real horrid girl, Rose Red.  I don't love you a bit."

"Your affection is not a thing which I particularly pine for," retorted
Rose, seating herself, and holding the culprit before her by the ends
of her short pig-tails.  "I don't want little girls who peep and hide
to love me.  I'd rather they wouldn't.  Now listen.  Do you know what
I shall do if you ever come again into my room without leave.  First,
I shall cut off your hair, pomatum and all, with my penknife,"--Bella
screamed,--"and then I'll turn myself into a bear--a great brown bear
--and eat you up."  Rose pronounced this threat with tremendous energy,
and accompanied it with a snarl which showed all her teeth.  Bella
roared with fright, twitched away her pig-tails, unlocked the door and
fled, Rose not pursuing, but sitting comfortably in her chair and
growling at intervals, till her victim was out of hearing.  Then she
rose and bolted the door again.

"How lucky that the imp is so fond of that smelly pomatum!" she
remarked: "one always knows where to look for her.  It's as good as
a bell round her neck!  Now, for the secret.  You promise not to tell?
Well, then, Mrs. Florence is going away week after next, and, what's
more,--she's going to be married!"

"Not really!" cried the others.

"Really and truly.  She's going to be married to a clergyman."

"How did you find out?"

"Why, it's the most curious thing.  You know my blue lawn, which Miss
James is making.  This morning I went to try it on, Miss Barnes with
me of course, and while Miss James was fitting the waist Mrs. Seccomb
came in and sat down on the sofa by Miss Barnes.  They began to talk,
and pretty soon Mrs. Seccomb said, 'What day does Mrs. Florence go?"

"'Thursday week,' said Miss Barnes.  She sort of mumbled it, and
looked to see if I were listening.  I wasn't; but of course after
that I did,--as hard as I could.

"'And where does the important event take place?' asked Mrs. Seccomb.
She's so funny with her little bit of a mouth and her long words.
She always looks as if each of them was a big pill, and she wanted
to swallow it and couldn't.

"'In Lewisberg, at her sister's house,' said Miss Barnes.  She mumbled
more than ever, but I heard.

"'What a deplorable loss she will be to our limited circle!' said Mrs.
Seccomb.  I couldn't imagine what they meant.  But don't you think,
when I got home there was this letter from Sylvia, and she says, 'Your
adored Mrs. Florence is going to be married.  I'm afraid you'll all
break your hearts about it.  Mother met the gentleman at a party the
other night.  She says he looks clever, but isn't at all handsome,
which is a pity, for Mrs. Florence is a raving beauty in my opinion.
He's an excellent preacher, we hear; and won't she manage the parish
to perfection?  How shall you like being left to the tender mercies
of Mrs. Nipson?'  Now did you ever hear any thing so droll in your
life?" went on Rose, folding up her letter.  "Just think of those two
things coming together the same day!  It's like a sum in arithmetic,
with an answer which 'proves' the sum, isn't it?"

Rose had counted on producing an effect, and she certainly was not
disappointed.  The girls could think and talk of nothing else for
the remainder of that afternoon.

It was a singular fact that before two days were over every scholar
in the school knew that Mrs. Florence was going to be married!  How
the secret got out, nobody could guess.  Rose protested that it
wasn't her fault,--she had been a miracle of discretion, a perfect
sphinx; but there was a guilty laugh in her eyes, and Katy suspected
that the sphinx had unbent a little.  Nothing so exciting had ever
happened at the Nunnery before.  Some of the older scholars were
quite inconsolable.  They bemoaned themselves, and got together in
corners to enjoy the luxury of woe.  Nothing comforted them but the
project of getting up a "testimonial" for Mrs. Florence.

What this testimonial should be caused great discussion in the school.
Everybody had a different idea, and everybody was sure that her idea
was better than anybody's else.  All the school contributed.  The
money collected amounted to nearly forty dollars, and the question
was, What should be bought?

Every sort of thing was proposed.  Lilly Page insisted that nothing
could possibly be so appropriate as a bouquet of wax flowers and a
glass shade to put over it.  There was a strong party in favor of
spoons.  Annie Silsbie suggested "a statue;" somebody else a clock.
Rose Red was for a cabinet piano, and Katy had some trouble in
convincing her that forty dollars would not buy one.  Bella demanded
that they should get "an organ."

"You can go along with it as monkey," said Rose, which remark made
Bella caper with indignation.

At last, after long discussion and some quarelling, a cake-basket was
fixed upon.  Sylvia Redding happened to be making a visit in Boston,
and Rose was commissioned to write and ask her to select the gift
and send it up by express.  The girls could hardly wait till it came.

"I do hope it will be pretty, don't you?" they said over and over
again.  When the box arrived, they all gathered to see it opened.
Esther Dearborn took out the nails, half a dozen hands lifted the
lid, and Rose unwrapped the tissue paper and displayed the basket
up to general view.

"Oh, what a beauty!" cried everybody.  It was woven of twisted silver
wire.  Two figures of children with wings and garlands supported the
handle on either side.  In the middle of the handle were a pair of
silver doves, billing and cooing in the most affectionate way, over
a tiny shield, on which were engraved Mrs. Florence's initials.

"I never saw one like it!"  "Doesn't it look heavy?" cried a chorus
of voices, as Rose, highly gratified, held up the basket.

"Who shall present it?" asked Louisa Agnew.

"Rose Red," said some of the girls.

"No, indeed, I'm not tall enough," protested Rose, "it must be somebody
who'd kind of sweep into the room and be impressive.  I vote for Katy."

"Oh, no!" said Katy, shrinking back, "I shouldn't do it well at all.
Suppose we put it to a vote."

Ellen Gray cut some slips of paper, and each girl wrote a name and
dropped it into the box.  When the votes were counted, Katy's name
appeared on all but three.

"I propose that we make this vote unanimous," said Rose, highly
delighted.  The girls agreed; and Rose, jumping on a chair, exclaimed,
"Three cheers for Katy Carr! keep time, girls,--one, two, hip, hip,
hurrah!"

The hurrahs were given with enthusiasm, for Katy, almost without
knowing it, had become popular.  She was too much touched and
pleased to speak at first.  When she did, it was to protest against
her election.

"Esther would do it beautifully," she said, "and I think Mrs. Florence
would like the basket better if she gave it.  You know ever since"--
she stopped.  Even now she could not refer with composure to the
affair of the note.

"Oh!" cried Louisa, "she's thinking of that ridiculous note Mrs.
Florence made such a fuss about.  As if anybody supposed you wrote
it, Katy!  I don't believe even Miss Jane is such a goose as that.
Any way, if she is, that's one reason more why you should present
the basket, to show that we don't think so."  She gave Katy a kiss
by way of period.

"Yes, indeed, you're chosen, and you must give it," cried the others.

"Very well," said Katy, extremely gratified, "what am I to say?"

"We'll compose a speech for you," replied Rose, "sugar your voice,
Katy, and, whatever you do, stand up straight.  Don't crook over,
as if you thought you were tall.  It's a bad trick you have, child,
and I'm always sorry to see it," concluded Rose, with the air of a
wise mamma giving a lecture.

It is droll how much can go on in a school unseen and unsuspected by
its teachers.  Mrs. Florence never dreamed that the girls had guessed
her secret.  Her plan was to go away as if for a visit, and leave Mrs.
Nipson to explain at her leisure.  She was therefore quite unprepared
for the appearance of Katy, holding the beautiful basket, which was
