"I'm going to put two cents more a week in my missionary box than I've
been doing," said Cecily determinedly.

Two cents more a week out of Cecily's egg money, meant something of a
sacrifice. It inspired the rest of us. We all decided to increase
our weekly contribution by a cent or so. And Peter, who had had no
missionary box at all, up to this time, determined to start one.

"I don't seem to be able to feel as int'rested in missionaries as you
folks do," he said, "but maybe if I begin to give something I'll get
int'rested. I'll want to know how my money's being spent. I won't be
able to give much. When your father's run away, and your mother goes out
washing, and you're only old enough to get fifty cents a week, you can't
give much to the heathen. But I'll do the best I can. My Aunt Jane was
fond of missions. Are there any Methodist heathen? I s'pose I ought to
give my box to them, rather than to Presbyterian heathen."

"No, it's only after they're converted that they're anything in
particular," said Felicity. "Before that, they're just plain heathen.
But if you want your money to go to a Methodist missionary you can give
it to the Methodist minister at Markdale. I guess the Presbyterians can
get along without it, and look after their own heathen."

"Just smell Mrs. Sampson's flowers," said Cecily, as we passed a trim
white paling close to the road, over which blew odours sweeter than the
perfume of Araby's shore. "Her roses are all out and that bed of Sweet
William is a sight by daylight."

"Sweet William is a dreadful name for a flower," said the Story Girl.
"William is a man's name, and men are NEVER sweet. They are a great many
nice things, but they are NOT sweet and shouldn't be. That is for women.
Oh, look at the moonshine on the road in that gap between the spruces!
I'd like a dress of moonshine, with stars for buttons."

"It wouldn't do," said Felicity decidedly. "You could see through it."

Which seemed to settle the question of moonshine dresses effectually.



CHAPTER XII. THE BLUE CHEST OF RACHEL WARD

"It's utterly out of the question," said Aunt Janet seriously. When Aunt
Janet said seriously that anything was out of the question it meant that
she was thinking about it, and would probably end up by doing it. If a
thing really was out of the question she merely laughed and refused to
discuss it at all.

The particular matter in or out of the question that opening day of
August was a project which Uncle Edward had recently mooted. Uncle
Edward's youngest daughter was to be married; and Uncle Edward had
written over, urging Uncle Alec, Aunt Janet and Aunt Olivia to go down
to Halifax for the wedding and spend a week there.

Uncle Alec and Aunt Olivia were eager to go; but Aunt Janet at first
declared it was impossible.

"How could we go away and leave the place to the mercy of all those
young ones?" she demanded. "We'd come home and find them all sick, and
the house burned down."

"Not a bit of fear of it," scoffed Uncle Roger. "Felicity is as good a
housekeeper as you are; and I shall be here to look after them all, and
keep them from burning the house down. You've been promising Edward for
years to visit him, and you'll never have a better chance. The haying
is over and harvest isn't on, and Alec needs a change. He isn't looking
well at all."

I think it was Uncle Roger's last argument which convinced Aunt Janet.
In the end she decided to go. Uncle Roger's house was to be closed, and
he and Peter and the Story Girl were to take up their abode with us.

We were all delighted. Felicity, in especial, seemed to be in seventh
heaven. To be left in sole charge of a big house, with three meals a
day to plan and prepare, with poultry and cows and dairy and garden
to superintend, apparently furnished forth Felicity's conception of
Paradise. Of course, we were all to help; but Felicity was to "run
things," and she gloried in it.

The Story Girl was pleased, too.

"Felicity is going to give me cooking lessons," she confided to me, as
we walked in the orchard. "Isn't that fine? It will be easier when
there are no grown-ups around to make me nervous, and laugh if I make
mistakes."

Uncle Alec and aunts left on Monday morning. Poor Aunt Janet was full of
dismal forebodings, and gave us so many charges and warnings that we did
not try to remember any of them; Uncle Alec merely told us to be good
and mind what Uncle Roger said. Aunt Olivia laughed at us out of her
pansy-blue eyes, and told us she knew exactly what we felt like and
hoped we'd have a gorgeous time.

"Mind they go to bed at a decent hour," Aunt Janet called back to Uncle
Roger as she drove out of the gate. "And if anything dreadful happens
telegraph us."

Then they were really gone and we were all left "to keep house."

Uncle Roger and Peter went away to their work. Felicity at once set the
preparations for dinner a-going, and allotted to each of us his portion
of service. The Story Girl was to prepare the potatoes; Felix and Dan
were to pick and shell the peas; Cecily was to attend the fire; I was to
peel the turnips. Felicity made our mouths water by announcing that she
was going to make a roly-poly jam pudding for dinner.

I peeled my turnips on the back porch, put them in their pot, and set
them on the stove. Then I was at liberty to watch the others, who had
longer jobs. The kitchen was a scene of happy activity. The Story Girl
peeled her potatoes, somewhat slowly and awkwardly--for she was not
deft at household tasks; Dan and Felix shelled peas and tormented Pat
by attaching pods to his ears and tail; Felicity, flushed and serious,
measured and stirred skilfully.

"I am sitting on a tragedy," said the Story Girl suddenly.

Felix and I stared. We were not quite sure what a "tragedy" was, but we
did not think it was an old blue wooden chest, such as the Story Girl
was undoubtedly sitting on, if eyesight counted for anything.

The old chest filled up the corner between the table and the wall.
Neither Felix nor I had ever thought about it particularly. It was very
large and heavy, and Felicity generally said hard things of it when she
swept the kitchen.

"This old blue chest holds a tragedy," explained the Story Girl. "I know
a story about it."

"Cousin Rachel Ward's wedding things are all in that old chest," said
Felicity.

Who was Cousin Rachel Ward? And why were her wedding things shut up
in an old blue chest in Uncle Alec's kitchen? We demanded the tale
instantly. The Story Girl told it to us as she peeled her potatoes.
Perhaps the potatoes suffered--Felicity declared the eyes were not
properly done at all--but the story did not.

"It is a sad story," said the Story Girl, "and it happened fifty
years ago, when Grandfather and Grandmother King were quite young.
Grandmother's cousin Rachel Ward came to spend a winter with them. She
belonged to Montreal and she was an orphan too, just like the Family
Ghost. I have never heard what she looked like, but she MUST have been
beautiful, of course."

"Mother says she was awful sentimental and romantic," interjected
Felicity.

"Well, anyway, she met Will Montague that winter. He was
handsome--everybody says so"--

"And an awful flirt," said Felicity.

"Felicity, I WISH you wouldn't interrupt. It spoils the effect. What
would you feel like if I went and kept stirring things that didn't
belong to it into that pudding? I feel just the same way. Well, Will
Montague fell in love with Rachel Ward, and she with him, and it was
all arranged that they were to be married from here in the spring. Poor
Rachel was so happy that winter; she made all her wedding things with
her own hands. Girls did, then, you know, for there was no such thing as
a sewing-machine. Well, at last in April the wedding day came, and
all the guests were here, and Rachel was dressed in her wedding robes,
waiting for her bridegroom. And"--the Story Girl laid down her knife and
potato and clasped her wet hands--"WILL MONTAGUE NEVER CAME!"

We felt as much of a shock as if we had been one of the expectant guests
ourselves.

"What happened to him? Was HE killed too?" asked Felix.

The Story Girl sighed and resumed her work.

"No, indeed. I wish he had been. THAT would have been suitable and
romantic. No, it was just something horrid. He had to run away for debt!
Fancy! He acted mean right through, Aunt Janet says. He never sent even
a word to Rachel, and she never heard from him again."

"Pig!" said Felix forcibly.

"She was broken-hearted of course. When she found out what had happened,
she took all her wedding things, and her supply of linen, and some
presents that had been given her, and packed them all away in this old
blue chest. Then she went away back to Montreal, and took the key with
her. She never came back to the Island again--I suppose she couldn't
bear to. And she has lived in Montreal ever since and never married. She
is an old woman now--nearly seventy-five. And this chest has never been
opened since."

"Mother wrote to Cousin Rachel ten years ago," said Cecily, "and asked
her if she might open the chest to see if the moths had got into it.
There's a crack in the back as big as your finger. Cousin Rachel wrote
back that if it wasn't for one thing that was in the trunk she would ask
mother to open the chest and dispose of the things as she liked. But
she could not bear that any one but herself should see or touch that one
thing. So she wanted it left as it was. Ma said she washed her hands of
it, moths or no moths. She said if Cousin Rachel had to move that
chest every time the floor had to be scrubbed it would cure her of her
sentimental nonsense. But I think," concluded Cecily, "that I would feel
just like Cousin Rachel in her place."

"What was the thing she couldn't bear any one to see?" I asked.

"Ma thinks it was her wedding dress. But father says he believes it was
Will Montague's picture," said Felicity. "He saw her put it in. Father
knows some of the things that are in the chest. He was ten years old,
and he saw her pack it. There's a white muslin wedding dress and a
veil--and--and--a--a"--Felicity dropped her eyes and blushed painfully.

"A petticoat, embroidered by hand from hem to belt," said the Story Girl
calmly.

"And a china fruit basket with an apple on the handle," went on
Felicity, much relieved. "And a tea set, and a blue candle-stick."

"I'd dearly love to see all the things that are in it," said the Story
Girl.

"Pa says it must never be opened without Cousin Rachel's permission,"
said Cecily.

Felix and I looked at the chest reverently. It had taken on a new
significance in our eyes, and seemed like a tomb wherein lay buried some
dead romance of the vanished years.

"What happened to Will Montague?" I asked.

"Nothing!" said the Story Girl viciously. "He just went on living and
flourishing. He patched up matters with his creditors after awhile, and
came back to the Island; and in the end he married a real nice girl,
with money, and was very happy. Did you ever HEAR of anything so
unjust?"

"Beverley King," suddenly cried Felicity, who had been peering into
a pot, "YOU'VE GONE AND PUT THE TURNIPS ON TO BOIL WHOLE JUST LIKE
POTATOES!"

"Wasn't that right?" I cried, in an agony of shame.

"Right!" but Felicity had already whisked the turnips out, and was
slicing them, while all the others were laughing at me. I had added a
tradition on my own account to the family archives.

Uncle Roger roared when he heard it; and he roared again at night over
Peter's account of Felix attempting to milk a cow. Felix had previously
acquired the knack of extracting milk from the udder. But he had never
before tried to "milk a whole cow." He did not get on well; the cow
tramped on his foot, and finally upset the bucket.

"What are you to do when a cow won't stand straight?" spluttered Felix
angrily.

"That's the question," said Uncle Roger, shaking his head gravely.

Uncle Roger's laughter was hard to bear, but his gravity was harder.

Meanwhile, in the pantry the Story Girl, apron-enshrouded, was being
initiated into the mysteries of bread-making. Under Felicity's eyes she
set the bread, and on the morrow she was to bake it.

"The first thing you must do in the morning is knead it well," said
Felicity, "and the earlier it's done the better--because it's such a
warm night."

With that we went to bed, and slept as soundly as if tragedies of blue
chests and turnips and crooked cows had no place in the scheme of things
at all.



CHAPTER XIII. AN OLD PROVERB WITH A NEW MEANING

It was half-past five when we boys got up the next morning. We were
joined on the stairs by Felicity, yawning and rosy.

"Oh, dear me, I overslept myself. Uncle Roger wanted breakfast at six.
Well, I suppose the fire is on anyhow, for the Story Girl is up. I guess
she got up early to knead the bread. She couldn't sleep all night for
worrying over it."

The fire was on, and a flushed and triumphant Story Girl was taking a
loaf of bread from the oven.

"Just look," she said proudly. "I have every bit of the bread baked. I
got up at three, and it was lovely and light, so I just gave it a right
good kneading and popped it into the oven. And it's all done and out of
the way. But the loaves don't seem quite as big as they should be," she
added doubtfully.

"Sara Stanley!" Felicity flew across the kitchen. "Do you mean that you
put the bread right into the oven after you kneaded it without leaving
it to rise a second time?"

The Story Girl turned quite pale.

"Yes, I did," she faltered. "Oh, Felicity, wasn't it right?"

"You've ruined the bread," said Felicity flatly. "It's as heavy as a
stone. I declare, Sara Stanley, I'd rather have a little common sense
than be a great story teller."

Bitter indeed was the poor Story Girl's mortification.

"Don't tell Uncle Roger," she implored humbly.

"Oh, I won't tell him," promised Felicity amiably. "It's lucky there's
enough old bread to do to-day. This will go to the hens. But it's an
awful waste of good flour."

The Story Girl crept out with Felix and me to the morning orchard, while
Dan and Peter went to do the barn work.

"It isn't ANY use for me to try to learn to cook," she said.

"Never mind," I said consolingly. "You can tell splendid stories."

"But what good would that do a hungry boy?" wailed the Story Girl.

"Boys ain't ALWAYS hungry," said Felix gravely. "There's times when they
ain't."

"I don't believe it," said the Story Girl drearily.

"Besides," added Felix in the tone of one who says while there is life
there is yet hope, "you may learn to cook yet if you keep on trying."

"But Aunt Olivia won't let me waste the stuff. My only hope was to learn
this week. But I suppose Felicity is so disgusted with me now that she
won't give me any more lessons."

"I don't care," said Felix. "I like you better than Felicity, even if
you can't cook. There's lots of folks can make bread. But there isn't
many who can tell a story like you."

"But it's better to be useful than just interesting," sighed the Story
Girl bitterly.

And Felicity, who was useful, would, in her secret soul, have given
anything to be interesting. Which is the way of human nature.

Company descended on us that afternoon. First came Aunt Janet's sister,
Mrs. Patterson, with a daughter of sixteen years and a son of two. They
were followed by a buggy-load of Markdale people; and finally, Mrs.
Elder Frewen and her sister from Vancouver, with two small daughters of
the latter, arrived.

"It never rains but it pours," said Uncle Roger, as he went out to take
their horse. But Felicity's foot was on her native heath. She had been
