tell you, Dick's our hero, after this."

"Now I should like to know how all this happened," demanded Mr. King.
The old gentleman had remained at the parsonage to get a good morning
nap while the snow frolic was in progress. And he had been awakened by
the unusual bustle below stairs in time to hear the welcome news that
Dicky was all right since Dr. Fisher was taking care of him. He now
presented himself in his dressing-gown, with his sleeping cap awry,
over a face in which anger, distress and impatience strove for the
mastery. "Speak up, my boy," to Jasper, "and tell us what you know
about it."

"Well, the first thing I knew of any danger ahead," said Jasper, "was
hearing Dick sing out 'Hold up!' I supposed the double ripper all
right; didn't you, Ben?"

"Yes," said Ben sturdily, "and it was all right; just exactly as we
used to make them, we boys; there wasn't a weak spot anywhere in her,
sir."

"Who was steering?" demanded old Mr. King almost fiercely.

"I was," said Van, beginning boldly enough, to let his voice die out in
a tremulous effort.

"Humph--humph," responded Mr. King grimly. "A bad business," shaking
his head.

"Van would"--began Percy, but his eye meeting Polly's he added, "We'd
none of us done any better, I don't believe, sir, than Van."

Van was now choking so badly that the greatest kindness seemed to be
not to look at him. Accordingly the little company turned their eyes
away, and regarded each other instead.

"Well, so Dick rolled off?" proceeded the old gentleman.

"Oh! no, he didn't," said all three boys together; "he stuck fast to
the double ripper; we ran into a tree, and Dick was pitched off
head-first."

"But honestly and truly, father," said Jasper, "I do not think that it
was the fault of the steerer."

"Indeed it was not," declared Ben stoutly; "there was an ugly little
gully that we hadn't seen under the snow. We'd been down four or five
times all right, but only missed it by a hair-breadth; this time the
ripper struck into it; I suppose Dick felt it bump, as it was on his
side, and sang out, and as quick as lightning we were against that
tree. It was as much my fault as any one's, and more, because I ought
to have known that old hill thoroughly."

"I share the blame, Ben," broke in Jasper, "old fellow, if you pitch
into yourself, you'll have to knock me over too."

"Come here, Vanny," said old Mr. King, holding out his hand. "Why, you
needn't be afraid, my boy," aghast at the tears that no power on earth
could keep back. "Now all leave the room, please."

"Where's Polly?" asked Ben, on the other side of the door.

"She's run home," said David, "I guess. She isn't here."

"And that's where I must be too," cried Ben, bounding off.

When Van was next seen he was with old Mr. King, and wearing all signs
of having received his full share of comfort. Phronsie, just tying on
her little hood, to go down to the parsonage to ask after Dicky, looked
out of the window to exclaim in pleased surprise, "Why, here comes dear
Grandpapa," and then she rushed out to meet him.

"Here's my little girl," cried the old gentleman, opening his arms,
when she immediately ran into them. "Now we're all right."

"Is Dicky all right?" asked Phronsie anxiously, as she fell into step
by his side.

"Yes, indeed; as well as a youngster can be, who's broken his leg."

Phronsie shivered. "But then, that's nothing," Mr. King hastened to
add; "I broke my own when I was a small shaver no bigger than Dick, and
I was none the worse for it. Boys always have some such trifling
mishaps, Phronsie."

"Ben never broke his leg, nor Joel, nor Davie," said Phronsie. "Must
they yet, Grandpapa?"

"O dear, no," declared Mr. King hastily; "that isn't necessary. I only
meant they must have something. Now you see, Ben had the measles, you
know."

"Yes, he did," said Phronsie, quite relieved to think that this trial
could take the place of the usual leg-breaking episode in a boy's
career. "And so did Joel, and Davie--all of them, Grandpapa dear."

"Exactly; well, and then Ben had to work hard, and Joel and Davie too,
for that matter. So, you see, it wasn't as essential that they should
break their legs, child."

"But Jasper and Percy and Van don't have to work hard; oh! I don't want
them to break their legs," said Phronsie, in a worried tone. "You don't
think they will, Grandpapa dear, do you? Please say they won't."

"I don't think there is the least danger of it," said Mr. King,
"especially as I shall put an end to this double-ripper business,
though not because this upset was anybody's fault; remember that,
Phronsie." Van's head which had dropped a bit at the last words, came
up proudly. "Van, here, has acted nobly"--he put his hand on the boy's
shoulder--"and would have saved Dicky if he could. It was a pure
accident that nobody could help except by keeping off from the
abominable thing. Well, here we are at the little brown house; and
there's your mother, Phronsie, waiting for us in the doorway."

"Halloo!" cried Van, rushing over the flat stone, and past Mrs. Pepper,
"where's Joel? Oh--here, you old chap!"

"Well, Mrs. Pepper," said the old gentleman, coming up to the step,
Phronsie hanging to his hand, "this looks like starting for town
to-morrow, doesn't it?"

"Oh! what shall we do, sir?" cried Mrs. Pepper, in distress. "To think
you have come down here in the goodness of your heart, to be met with
such an accident as this. What shall we do?" she repeated.

"Goodness of my heart," repeated Mr. King, nevertheless well pleased at
the tribute. "I've had as much pleasure out of it all as you or the
young people. I want you to realize that."

"So does any one who does a kind act," replied Mrs. Pepper, wiping her
eyes; "well, sir, now how shall we manage about going back?"

"That remains to be seen," said Mr. King slowly, and he took a long
look at the winter sky, and the distant landscape before he ventured
more. "It very much looks as if we all should remain for a few days, to
see how Dick is to get on, all but the four boys; they must pack off to
school to-morrow, and then probably Mrs. Whitney will stay over with
the boy till he can be moved. Dr. Fisher will do the right thing by
him. Oh! everything is all right, Mrs. Pepper."

Mrs. Pepper sighed and led the way into the house. She knew in spite of
the reassuring words that the extreme limit of the "outing" ought to be
passed on the morrow.




X

THE PARTY SEPARATES


"Good-by to the little brown house!" Joel and David, Percy and Van sang
out in doleful chorus, from the old stage coach; two of the boys on the
seat shared by John Tisbett, the other two within as companions to Mrs.
Pepper and Jasper, who were going home to start the quartette off to
school.

"Ben and I will take good care of everything, Mamsie," said Polly for
the fiftieth time, and climbing up on the steps to tuck the traveling
shawl closer. Thereupon Phronsie climbed up too, to do the same thing.
"Don't you worry; we'll take care of things," she echoed.

"I shan't worry," said Mrs. Pepper in a bright assured way. "Mother
knows you'll both do just right. And Phronsie'll be a good girl too,"
with a long look into the bright eyes peering over the window casing of
the old coach.

"I'll try," said Phronsie. "Good-by, Mamsie," and she tried to stand on
tiptoe to reach her mouth up.

"Goodness me!" cried Polly, "you nearly tumbled off the steps. Throw
her a kiss, Phronsie; Mamsie'll catch it."

"If that child wants to kiss her ma agen, she shall do it," declared
Mr. Tisbett; and throwing down the reins, he sprang to the ground,
seized Phronsie, and swung her lightly over the window edge. "There you
be--went through just like a bird." And there she was, sure enough, in
Mrs. Pepper's lap.

"I should like to go with you," Phronsie was whispering under Mrs.
Pepper's bonnet strings, "Mamsie, I should."

"Oh, no, Phronsie!" Mrs. Pepper made haste to whisper back. "You must
stay with Polly. Why, what would she ever do without you? Be mother's
good girl, Phronsie; you're all coming home, except Auntie and Dick, in
a few days."

Phronsie cast one look at Polly. "Good-by," she said slowly. "Take me
out now," holding her arms towards Mr. Tisbett.

"Here you be!" exclaimed Mr. Tisbett merrily, reversing the process,
and setting her carefully on the ground. "Now, says I; up I goes," his
foot on the wheel to spring to the box.

"Stay!" a peremptory hand was laid on his shaggy coat sleeve, and he
turned to face old Mr. King.

"When I meet a man who can do such a kind thing, it is worth my while
to say that I trust no words of mine gave offense. Bless you, man!"
added the old gentleman, abruptly changing the tone of his address as
well as its form, "it's my way; that's all."

John Tisbett had no words to offer, but remained, his foot on the
wheel, stupidly staring up at the handsome old face.

"We shall be late for the train," called Jasper within the coach, "if
you don't start."

"Get up, do!" cried Joel, who had seized the reins, "or I'll drive off
without you, Mr. Tisbett," which had the effect to carry honest John
briskly up to his place. When there, he took off his fur cap without a
word, and bowed to Mr. King, cracked his whip and they were off,
leaving the four on the little foot-path gazing after them, till the
coach was only a speck in the distance.

"Mamma dear," said Dick, one afternoon three weeks later (the little
brown house had been closed a fortnight, and all the rest of the party
back in town), "when are we going home?"

"Next week," said Mrs. Whitney brightly; "the doctor thinks if all goes
well, you can be moved from here."

Dick leaned back in the big chintz-covered chair. "Mamma," he said,
"your cheeks aren't so pink, and not quite so round, but I think you
are a great deal nicer mamma than you were."

"Do you, Dick?" she said, laughing. "Well, we have had a happy time
together, haven't we? The fortnight hasn't been so long for you as I
feared when the others all went away."

"It hasn't been long at all," said Dick promptly, and burrowing deeper
into the chair-back; "it's just flown, mamma. I like Polly and
Phronsie; but I'd rather have you than any girl I know; I had really,
mamma."

"I'm very glad to hear it, Dick," said Mrs. Whitney, with another laugh.

"And when I grow up, I'm just going to live with you forever and ever.
Do you suppose papa will be always going to Europe then?"

"I trust not," said Mrs. Whitney fervently. "Dicky, would you like to
have a secret?" she asked suddenly.

The boy's eyes sparkled. "Wouldn't I mamma?" he cried, springing
forward in the chair; "ugh!"

"Take care, darling," warned his mother. "You must remember the poor
leg."

Dick made a grimace, but otherwise took the pain pluckily. "Tell me,
do, mamma," he begged, "the secret."

"Yes, I thought it would be a pleasant thing for you to have it to
think of, darling, while you are getting well. Dicky, papa is coming
home soon."

"Right away?" shouted Dick so lustily that Mrs. Henderson popped her
head in the door. "Oh! beg your pardon," she said; "I thought you
wanted something."

"Isn't it lovely," cried Mrs. Whitney, "to have a boy who is beginning
to find his lungs?"

"Indeed it is," cried the parson's wife, laughing; "I always picked up
heart when my children were able to scream. It's good to hear you,
Dicky," as she closed the door.

"Is he--is he--is he?" cried Dick in a spasm of excitement, "coming
right straight away, mamma?"

"Next week," said mamma, with happy eyes, "he sails in the Servia. Next
week, Dicky, my boy, we will see papa. And here is the best part of the
secret. Listen; it has all been arranged that Mr. Duyckink shall live
in Liverpool, so that papa will not have to go across any more, but he
can stay at home with us. Oh, Dicky!"

That "Oh, Dicky!" told volumes to the boy's heart.

"Mamma," he said at last, "isn't it good that God didn't give boys and
girls to Mr. Duyckink? Because you see if he had, why, then Mr.
Duyckink wouldn't like to live over there."

"Mr. Duyckink might not have felt as your father does, Dicky dear,
about having his children educated at home; and Mrs. Duyckink wants to
go to England; she hasn't any father, as I have, Dicky dear, who clings
to the old home."

"Only I wish God had made Mr. Duyckink and Mrs. Duyckink a little
sooner," said Dick reflectively. "I mean, made them want to go to
England sooner, don't you, mamma?"

"I suppose we ought not to wish that," said his mother with a smile,
"for perhaps we needed to be taught to be patient. Only now, Dicky,
just think, we can actually have papa live at home with us!"

"Your cheeks are pink now," observed Dick; "just the very pink they
used to be, mamma."

Mrs. Whitney ran to the old-fashioned looking-glass hanging in its
pine-stained frame, between the low windows, and peered in. "Do I look
just as I did when papa went away six months ago, Dicky?" she asked,
anxiously.

"Yes," said Dick, "just like that, only a great deal nicer," he added
enthusiastically.

His mother laughed and pulled at a bright wave on her forehead, dodging
a bit to avoid a long crack running across the looking-glass front.

"Here's Dr. Fisher!" shouted Dick suddenly. "Now, you old fellow, you,"
and shaking his small fist at his lame leg, "you've got to get well, I
tell you. I won't wait much longer, sir!" And as the doctor came in,
"I've a secret."

"Well, then, you would better keep it," said Dr. Fisher. "Good
morning," to Mrs. Whitney. "Our young man here is getting ahead pretty
fast, I should think. How's the leg, Dicky?" sitting down by him.

