The committee was much pleased at the satisfactory conclusion of what
had threatened to be a very troublesome dispute, and it was arranged,
Philip consenting, that Mr. Beck should play first.

The old musician played, in a confident manner, a familiar dancing-tune,
accompanying his playing with various contortions of the face and
twistings of his figure, supposed to express feeling. It was a fair
performance, but mechanical, and did not indicate anything but very
ordinary talent. His time was good, and dancers always found his playing
satisfactory.

When Paul Beck had completed his task, he looked about him complacently,
as if to say, "Let the boy beat that if he can," and sat down.

Philip had listened to Mr. Beck with attention. He was anxious to learn
how powerful a rival he had to compete with. What he heard did not alarm
him, but rather gave him confidence.



CHAPTER XXIII. AN HOUR OF TRIUMPH.



When Paul rose and stood before this audience, violin in hand, he
certainly presented quite a strong contrast to his rival.

Paul Beck, as we have already said, was a tall, thin, lantern-jawed man,
clad in solemn black, his face of a sickly, sallow hue.

Philip was of fair height, for his age, with a bright, expressive face,
his hair of a chestnut shade, and looking the very picture of boyish
health. His very appearance made a pleasant impression upon those
present.

"He's a nice-looking boy," thought more than one, "but he looks too
young to know much about the violin."

But when Philip began to play, there was general surprise. In a
dancing-tune there was not much chance for the exhibition of talent, but
his delicate touch and evident perfect mastery of his instrument were
immediately apparent. In comparison, the playing of Paul Beck seemed
wooden and mechanical.

There was a murmur of approbation, and when Philip had finished his
first part of the program, he was saluted by hearty applause, which he
acknowledged by a modest and graceful bow.

Paul Beck's face, as his young rival proceeded in his playing, was an
interesting study. He was very disagreeably surprised. He had made up
his mind that Philip could not play at all, or, at any rate, would prove
to be a mere tyro and bungler, and he could hardly believe his ears when
he heard the sounds which Philip evoked from his violin.

In spite of his self-conceit, he secretly acknowledged that Philip even
now was his superior, and in time would leave him so far behind that
there could be no comparison between them.

It was not a pleasant discovery for a man who had prided himself for
many years on his superiority as a musician. If it had been a man of
established fame it would have been different, but to be compelled to
yield the palm to an unknown boy, was certainly mortifying.

When he heard the applause that followed Philip's performance, and
remembered that none had been called forth by his own, he determined
that he would not play again that evening. He did not like to risk the
comparison which he was sure would be made between himself and Philip.
So, when Andrew Blake came up to him and asked him to play for the next
dance, he shook his head. "I don't feel well enough," he said "I thought
I was stronger than I am."

"Do you want the boy to play all the rest of the evening?"

"Yes; he plays very fairly," said Beck, in a patronizing manner, which
implied his own superiority.

"There can be no doubt about that," said Andrew Blake, with emphasis,
for he understood Mr. Beck's meaning, and resented it as one of the
warmest admirers of the boy-musician whom he had engaged.

But Paul Beck would not for the world have revealed his real opinion of
Philip's merits.

"Yes," he continued, "he plays better than I expected. I guess you can
get along with him."

"How shall we arrange about the compensation, Mr. Beck?" asked Blake.
"We ought in that case to give him more than half."

"Oh, you can give him the whole," answered Beck carelessly. "If I felt
well enough to play, I would do my part, but I think it will be better
for me to go home and go to bed."

His decision was communicated to Philip, who felt impelled by politeness
to express his regrets to Mr. Beck.

"I am sorry you don't feel able to play, Mr. Beck," he said politely.

"Oh, it's of no consequence, as they've got some one to take my place,"
returned Beck coldly.

"I should be glad to hear you play again," continued Philip.

Paul Beck nodded slightly, but he felt too much mortified to reciprocate
Philip's friendly advances. Half an hour later he left the hall.

The dancers by no means regretted the change of arrangement. They
evidently preferred the young musician to his elderly rival. The only
one to express regret was Miss Maria Snodgrass.

"I declare it's a shame Mr. Beck has given up," she said. "I wanted you
to dance with me, Mr. Gray. I am sure if you can dance as well as you
can play, you would get along perfectly lovely. Now you've got to play,
and can't dance at all."

"It isn't leap-year, Maria," said Jedidiah Burbank, in a jealous tone.

Miss Snodgrass turned upon him angrily:

"You needn't put in your oar, Jedidiah Burbank!" she said. "I guess I
know what I'm about. If it was leap-year fifty times over, I wouldn't
offer myself to you!"

And the young lady tossed her head in a very decided manner.

"Now don't get mad, Maria!" implored Jedidiah, feeling that at the
prompting of jealousy; he had put his foot in it. "I didn't mean
nothing."

"Then you'd better say nothing next time," retorted the young lady.

Meanwhile, Philip acknowledged the young lady's politeness by a smile
and a bow, assuring her that if it had been possible, it would have
given him great pleasure to dance with her.

"If Mr. Burbank will play for me," he said with a glance at the young
man, "I shall be glad to dance."

Miss Snodgrass burst out laughing.

"Jedidiah couldn't play well enough for an old cow to dance by," she
said.

"There ain't any old cows here," said Jedidiah, vexed at being
ridiculed.

"Well, there are some calves, anyway," retorted Maria, laughing
heartily.

Poor Jedidiah! It is to be feared that he will have a hard time when he
becomes the husband of the fair Maria. She will undoubtedly be the head
of the new matrimonial firm.

There was nothing further to mar the harmony of the evening. It had
begun with indications of a storm, but the clouds had vanished, and when
Mr. Beck left the hall, there was nothing left to disturb the enjoyment
of those present.

The favorable opinions expressed when Philip commenced playing were
repeated again and again, as the evening slipped away.

"I tell you, he's a regular genius!" one enthusiastic admirer said to
his companion. "Paul Beck can't hold a candle to him."

"That's so. He's smart, and no mistake."

Poor Mr. Beck! It was fortunate he was unable to hear these comparisons
made. He could not brook a rival near the throne, and had gone home in
low spirits, feeling that he could never again hold his head as high as
he had done.

When the dancing was over, there was a brief conference of the committee
of management, the subject of which was soon made known.

Andrew Blake approached Philip and said:

"Mr. Gray, some of us would like to hear you play something else, if you
are not tired--not a dancing-tune."

"I shall be very happy to comply with your request," answered Philip.

He spoke sincerely, for he saw that all were pleased with him, and it is
gratifying to be appreciated.

He paused a moment in thought, and then began to play the "Carnival of
Venice," with variations. It had been taught him by his father, and he
had played it so often that his execution was all that could be desired.
The variations were of a showy and popular character, and very well
adapted to impress an audience like that to which he was playing.

"Beautiful! Beautiful!" exclaimed the young ladies, while their partners
pronounced it "tip-top" and "first-rate," by which they probably meant
very much the same thing.

"Oh, Mr. Gray!" exclaimed Miss Snodgrass fervently. "You play like a
seraphim!"

"Thank you!" said Philip, smiling. "I never heard a seraphim play on the
violin, but I am sure your remark is very complimentary."

"I wish you could play like that, Jedidiah," said Maria.

"I'll learn to play, if you want me to," said Mr. Burbank.

"Thank you! You're very obliging," said Maria; "but I won't trouble you.
You haven't got a genius for it, like Mr. Gray."

The evening was over at length, and again Philip was made the
happy recipient of three dollars. His first week had certainly been
unexpectedly prosperous.

"This is better than staying in the Norton Poorhouse!" he said to
himself.



CHAPTER XXIV. LORENZO RICCABOCCA.



Philip's reputation as a musician was materially increased by his second
night's performance. To adopt a military term, he had crossed swords
with the veteran fiddler, Paul Beck, and, in the opinion of all who
heard both, had far surpassed him.

This was said openly to Philip by more than one; but he was modest, and
had too much tact and good taste to openly agree with them. This modesty
raised him higher in the opinion of his admirers.

He was invited by the Blakes to prolong his visit, but preferred to
continue on his journey--though his plans were, necessarily, not clearly
defined.

Andrew Blake carried him five miles on his way, and from that point our
hero used the means of locomotion with which nature had supplied him.

Some six miles farther on there was a manufacturing town of considerable
size, named Wilkesville, and it occurred to him that this would be a
good place at which to pass the night.

Something might turn up for him there. He hardly knew what, but the two
unexpected strokes of luck which he had had thus far encouraged him to
think that a third might come to him.

Philip continued on his way--his small pack of clothing in one hand and
his violin under his arm. Being in no especial hurry--for it was only
the middle of the forenoon--he bethought himself to sit down and rest at
the first convenient and inviting place.

He soon came to a large elm tree, which, with its spreading branches,
offered a pleasant and grateful shade.

He threw himself down and lay back on the greensward, in pleasant
contemplation, when he heard a gentle cough--as of one who wished to
attract attention. Looking up he observed close at hand, a tall man,
dressed in black, with long hair, which fell over his shirt collar and
shoulders.

He wore a broad collar and black satin necktie, and his hair was parted
in the middle. His appearance was certainly peculiar, and excited our
hero's curiosity.

"My young friend," he said, "you have chosen a pleasant resting-place
beneath this umbrageous monarch of the grove." "Yes, sir," answered
Philip, wondering whether the stranger was a poet.

"May I also recline beneath it?" asked the newcomer.

"Certainly, sir. It is large enough to shelter us both."

"Quite true; but I did not wish to intrude upon your meditations."

"My meditations are not of much account," answered Philip, laughing.

"I see you are modest. Am I right in supposing that yonder case contains
a violin?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then you are a musician?"

"A little of one," replied Philip.

"May I ask--excuse my curiosity--if you play professionally?"

"Perhaps he may help me to an engagement," thought our hero, and he said
readily, "I do."

"Indeed!" said the stranger, appearing pleased. "What style of music do
you play?"

"For each of the last two evenings I have played for dancing-parties."

"Alone?"

"Yes."

"You do not confine yourself to dancing-music?"

"Oh, no! I prefer other kinds; but dancing-tunes seem most in demand,
and I have my living to make." The stranger seemed still more gratified.

"I am delighted to have met you, Mr.---- Ahem!" he paused, and looked
inquiringly at Philip.

"Gray."

"Mr. Gray, I believe Providence has brought us together. I see you are
surprised."

Philip certainly did look puzzled, as he well might.

"I must explain myself more clearly. I am Professor Lorenzo Riccabocca,
the famous elocutionist and dramatic reader."

Philip bowed.

"Doubtless you have heard of me?" said the professor inquiringly.

"I have never lived in large places," answered Philip, in some
embarrassment, "or no doubt your name would be familiar to me."

"To be sure, that must make a difference. For years," said the
professor, "I have given dramatic readings to crowded houses, and
everywhere my merits have been conceded by the educated and refined."

Philip could not help wondering how it happened in that case that the
professor should look so seedy. A genius appreciated so highly ought to
have brought in more gold and silver.

Perhaps Professor Riccabocca understood Philip's expressive look, for he
went to to say:

"The public has repaid me richly for the exercise of my talent; but,
alas, my young friend, I must confess that I have no head for business.
I invested my savings unwisely, and ascertained a month since that I had
lost all."

"That was a great pity!" said Philip sympathizingly.

"It was, indeed! It quite unmanned me!" said the professor, wiping away
a tear. "I felt that all ambition was quite gone, and I was mad and
sick. Indeed, only a week since I rose from a sick-bed. But Lorenzo is
himself again!" he exclaimed, striking his breast energetically. "I will
not succumb to Fate. I will again court the favor of the public, and
this time I will take care of the ducats my admirers bestow upon me."

"I should think that was a good plan," said Philip.

"I will begin at once. Nearby is a town devoted to the mammon of trade,
yet among its busy thousands there must be many that will appreciate the
genius of Lorenzo Riccabocca."

"I hope so," answered Philip politely.

He could not help thinking that the professor was rather self-conceited,
and he hardly thought it in good taste for him to refer so boastfully to
his genius.

"I wish you, Mr. Gray, to assist me in my project," continued the
professor.

"How can I do so, sir?" inquired Philip.

"Let me tell you. I propose that we enter into a professional
partnership, that we give an entertainment partly musical, partly
dramatic. I will draw up a program, including some of my most humorous
recitations and impersonations, while interspersed among them will be
musical selections contributed by yourself. Do you comprehend?"

"Yes," answered Philip, nodding.

"And what do you think of it?"

"I think well of it," replied the boy-musician.

He did think well of it. It might not draw a large audience, this mixed
entertainment, but it would surely pay something; and it would interfere
with no plans of his own, for, in truth, he had none.

"Then you will cooperate with me?" said the professor.

"Yes, professor."

"Give me your hand!" exclaimed Riccabocca dramatically. "Mr. Gray, it
is a perfect bonanza of an idea. I may tell you, in confidence, I was
always a genius for ideas. Might I ask a favor of you?"

"Certainly, sir."

"Give me a touch of your quality. Let me hear you play."

Philip drew his violin from its case and played for his new professional
partner "The Carnival of Venice," with variations--the same which had
been received with so much favor the evening previous.

Professor Riccabocca listened attentively, and was evidently agreeably
surprised. He was not a musician, but he saw that Philip was a much
better player than he had anticipated, and this, of course, was likely
to improve their chances of pecuniary success.

"You are a splendid performer," he said enthusiastically. "You
shall come out under my auspices and win fame. I predict for you a
professional triumph."

"Thank you," said Philip, gratified by this tribute from a man of
worldly experience. "I hope you will prove a true prophet."

"And now, Mr. Gray, let us proceed on our way. We must get lodgings in
Wilkesville, and make arrangements for our entertainment. I feel new
courage, now that I have obtained so able a partner. Wilkesville little
knows what is in store for her. We shall go, see, and conquer!"

An hour later Philip and his new partner entered Wilkesville.



CHAPTER XXV. A CHANGE OF NAME.


