"You haven't run away from home, have you?"

"I haven't got any home."

"Where's your father and mother?"

"They are both dead."

"What are you going to do?"

"I hope to get into a store or counting-room and learn to be a
merchant."

"I shan't have to work for a living," said Oscar, in a tone of
importance.

"Because your family is rich, I suppose," said Herbert.

"Yes, we've got a large estate, ever so many acres. That's what mother's
got. Then grandpa is rich besides, and I expect he will leave me a good
deal of his money. He's pretty old, and I don't believe he'll live very
long."

Oscar said this with such evident satisfaction that Herbert was
disgusted, thinking it not very creditable to him to speculate so
complacently upon his grandfather's speedy death.

"You seem to be well off, then," said he, at last, to the boy.

"Yes," said Oscar, "our family is one of the first in the State. My
father is a Peyton."

"Is he?" asked Herbert, not appearing as much awestruck as Oscar
expected.

"We've got a plantation in Virginia. We live there part of the year. My
father's there now. I hope we shall go there soon."

"Do you like it better than here?"

"Yes, a good deal."

"This is a handsome place."

"Yes, this is mother's estate. The other belongs to father."

"Have you any brothers and sisters, Oscar?"

"I've got one sister. She's about twelve. But, I say, I thought you were
a gentleman's son when I first saw you."

"So I am," said Herbert, emphatically.

"Was your father rich?"

"No."

"Did he have to work for a living?"

"Yes."

"Then he wasn't a gentleman," said Oscar, decidedly.

"Isn't anybody a gentleman that has to work for a living?" asked
Herbert, his indignation excited by his companion's assumption of
superiority.

"Of course not," said Oscar, coolly. "It isn't respectable to work.
Niggers and servants work."

"That is where I don't agree with you," said Herbert, his face flushing.

"You don't pretend to be a gentleman, do you?" demanded Oscar,
insolently.

"Yes, I do," said Herbert, firmly.

"But you're not one, you know."

"I don't know anything of the kind," said Herbert, angrily. "I suppose
you call yourself one."

"Of course, I am a gentleman," said Oscar, complacently.

"You don't talk like one, at any rate," retorted Herbert.

This was new language for Oscar to hear. He had been accustomed to have
his own way pretty much, and had been used to order round his father's
servants and slaves like a little despot. The idea of being told by a
boy who had to work for a living that he did not talk like a gentleman,
did not suit him at all. His black eyes flashed and he clenched his
fists.

"Do you mean to insult me?" he demanded.

"I never insult anybody," said Herbert, not feeling particularly alarmed
by this hostile demonstration. "It is you that have insulted me."

"Didn't you tell me I was not a gentleman?" said Oscar, hotly.

"I said you did not talk like one."

"That's about the same thing," said Oscar.

"Just as you like. Even if I did say so, you said the same of me."

"Well, suppose I did."

"I am as much a gentleman as you, to say the least," asserted Herbert.

"If you say that again, I'll knock you down," said Oscar, furiously.

"I'll say it all day, if I like," said Herbert, defiantly.

Perhaps it would have been better for Herbert to stop disputing, and to
have taken no notice of Oscar's words. But Herbert was not perfect. He
had plenty of spirit, and he was provoked by the airs Oscar chose to
assume, and by no means inclined to allow him to arrogate a superiority
over himself, merely on account of his wealth. Though manly and
generous, he was quick to resent an insult, and accordingly, when Oscar
dared to repeat what he had said, he instantly accepted the challenge as
recorded above.

Had Oscar been prudent, he would have hesitated before endeavoring to
carry his threat into execution. A moment's glance at the two boys would
have satisfied anyone that the chances, in a personal contest, were
decidedly in our hero's favor. Herbert was not only a little taller than
Oscar, perhaps an inch and a half, but his shoulders were broader and
his frame more muscular. Oscar had never done any work to strengthen his
arms, while Herbert had been forced by circumstances to do so.

Oscar flung himself upon Herbert, and endeavored to bear him to the
ground. But the latter, without an effort, repelled the charge, and
flung himself free from his antagonist's grasp.

This naturally made Oscar more determined to overcome his foe. His
face red with passion, he showered blows upon Herbert, which the latter
parried with ease. At first he acted wholly upon the defensive, but,
finding that Oscar's impetuosity did not abate, suddenly closed with him
and threw him down.

Oscar rose but little hurt, for Herbert used no unnecessary force, and
recommenced the assault. But the result was the same as before. Oscar
was almost beside himself with mingled rage and mortification, and it is
hard to tell how long the contest would have lasted, had not a servant
come up and informed the boys that Mrs. Peyton wished to see them
immediately. She had witnessed the whole scene from a window and felt
called upon to interfere.

"How is this, young gentleman?" she asked, gravely. "You have scarcely
been together twenty minutes, and I find you fighting."

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Peyton," said Herbert, in a manly tone. "I feel
ashamed of myself, but Oscar attacked me for claiming to be a gentleman,
and I am afraid that my blood was up, and so we got into a fight."

"How is this, Oscar?" said his mother. "Did you so wholly lose your
politeness as to attack your guest for asserting his claims to be a
gentleman? I am annoyed with you."

"He says he has to work for a living," said Oscar, sullenly.

"So may you, some time."

"I am rich."

"You may not always be. At any rate, being rich doesn't insure
gentlemanly behavior, as your conduct to-day clearly shows. Herbert, I
hope you will excuse my son's rudeness."

"Here is my hand, Oscar," said Herbert, cordially. "Let us be friends."

Oscar hardly knew how to receive this overture, but he was finally
thawed by Herbert's manner, and they were soon sauntering about on the
lawn on the best of terms.

At half-past eleven, after an inviting lunch, the carriage was ordered,
and Herbert and Mr. Carroll were driven to the depot, accompanied by
Oscar, who went in his mother's place.

Herbert purchased tickets for both, being intrusted with Mr. Carrol's
pocketbook for that purpose. He found a comfortable seat for the old
gentleman, and sat down beside him.




CHAPTER XIX

A SUSPICIOUS CHARACTER


I pass over the route pursued by the travelers from Columbus to
Wheeling, in West Virginia, as it possesses no special interest.

But after leaving Wheeling there is quite a change. Those of my readers
who are familiar with the Baltimore & Ohio Railway will be able to
understand the enjoyment which Herbert derived from the bold and
romantic scenery visible from the car windows. Mr. Carroll made him take
the seat nearest the window, that he might have a better view, and
from time to time Herbert described what he saw to his sightless
fellow-traveler.

Northwestern Virginia is very mountainous and the construction of a
railway through such a region was a triumph of engineering skill. At
times the road makes bold curves, so that the traveler, looking from the
car window, can see opposite him, across an intervening gulf, the track
over which the train was passing five minutes before. At some places
the track is laid on a narrow shelf, midway of the mountain, a steep and
rugged ascent on one side, a deep ravine on the other, somewhat like
the old diligence road over the Alpine Mt. Cenis. Here and there appear
small hamlets, consisting of one-story cabins, with the chimney built
alongside, instead of rising from the roof in the usual manner.

How long shall we be in reaching Baltimore, Mr. Carroll? "asked Herbert.

"I believe it takes about twenty-six hours," said the old gentleman.
"But I do not mean to go through without stopping."

"I didn't know what your plan was," said Herbert.

"I have been meaning to tell you. Our tickets will allow us to stop
anywhere, and resume our journey the next morning, or even stop two or
three days, if we like."

"That is convenient."

"Yes. If it had been otherwise, I should have purchased the ticket
piecemeal. I cannot endure to travel all night. It fatigues me too
much."

"Where shall we stop, then?"

"I have not yet quite made up my mind. We will ride till about eight
o'clock, and then stop over at whatever place we chance to have
reached."

This arrangement struck Herbert favorably. He was in no particular
hurry, and the scenery was so fine, that he feared that he should lose
a great deal by traveling at night, when, of course, he could not see
anything.

They sat for a while in silence. Then Mr. Carroll inquired, suddenly,
"Did you ever fire a pistol, Herbert?"

"Yes, sir," was the surprised reply.

"Then you understand how to use one?"

"Oh, yes, sir. There was a young man in Waverley, the town where I used
to live, who owned one, and I sometimes borrowed it to fire at a mark."

"Then I think I will intrust this weapon to your charge," said the old
gentleman, drawing from his pocket a handsome pistol, and placing it in
Herbert's hand.

"Is it loaded, sir?"

"No, not at present. We will have it loaded before going to bed. I will
tell you," he added, in a lower tone, "my reason for going armed. It so
happens that I have a large amount of money with me, and, of course, I
feel a little concerned about its safety."

"Perhaps it will be well not to say anything more about it at present,
sir," suggested Herbert, in a low voice. "You may be heard by someone
who would like to take advantage of his discovery."

"No doubt you are right. I will follow your advice."

Herbert would not have thought to give this caution, but, just as Mr.
Carroll uttered the words, "I have a large sum of money with me," a
man dressed in a rough frieze coat, with black whiskers, and a general
appearance, which, to say the least, did not prepossess Herbert in his
favor, chanced to walk through the car. Whether he caught the words
Herbert could not tell, but he paused a moment, and fixed an unpleasant
eye upon the two, as if determined to know them when he should meet them
again. There was another suspicious circumstance. It had evidently been
his intention to pass through the car, but he paused abruptly, and,
turning back, sank into an unoccupied seat a few feet back of that
occupied by Mr. Carroll and his young companion.

His attention naturally drawn by this suspicious conduct, Herbert was
impelled to glance back once or twice. Each time he met the watchful
look of the man fixed upon them, instead of being directed at the
scenery outside, as was the case with the other passengers. When he
saw that the boy was watching him, he turned his head carelessly, and
commenced whistling. But this apparent indifference did not deceive
Herbert for a moment.

"I will watch him," thought our hero. "I do not like his looks. If he
means mischief, as I think very probable, it is necessary that I should
be on my guard against him."

At half-past seven o'clock Mr. Carroll signified his intention of
getting out at the next station. "I am beginning to feel tired," he
said, "and shall feel the better for a good supper and a night's rest."

"Very well, sir," said Herbert.

It occurred to him that now they would get rid of the man who was
watching them so closely.

"If he gets out of the train with us," he thought, "I shall know what it
means."

The train slackened its speed, the sound of the whistle was heard, the
brakes were applied, and soon the conductor, putting his head in at the
door, called out "Oakland!"

"Here we are," said Herbert. "Give me your hand, Mr. Carroll, and I will
lead you out."

The old gentleman rose from his seat, and, guided by Herbert, walked to
the car door. At the door Herbert turned and looked back.

The man with the black whiskers, who a moment before seemed absorbed in
a newspaper, had left his seat, and was but a few feet behind him.

Herbert did not believe that this was an accident. He felt sure that it
meant mischief. But he did not on that account feel nervous, or regret
that he had assumed a charge which seemed likely to expose him to peril.
He had the pistol in his pocket, and that he knew would make him even
with the rascal who was following them.

There was a covered carriage waiting outside to convey passengers to the
only hotel which the village afforded.

"Shall we take the carriage, Mr. Carroll?" asked Herbert.

"Yes," was the reply.

Herbert assisted him in, and placed himself in a seat opposite.

There were two or three other passengers, but the man with the black
whiskers was not to be seen among them.

"I may be mistaken," thought Herbert, who had rather expected to see
him. "Perhaps he lives here, and I have been alarming myself without
reason. Still, it is always best to be on one's guard."

A ride of half a mile brought them to a small but comfortable-looking
inn. Herbert assisted Mr. Carroll to descend, and together they entered
the house of entertainment.

"We shall want some supper. Herbert," said Mr. Carroll. "You may order
some."

"What shall I order, sir?"

"I should like some tea and toast and some beef-steak. If there is
anything that you would prefer, you may order that also."

"No, sir, I should not wish anything better than you have ordered."

"Tell them to get it ready as soon as possible. I feel weary with my
day's ride, and shall retire early."

"I feel tired, too." thought Herbert, "but it won't do for me to sleep.
I must keep my eyes open, if possible."

Supper was soon served. The toast was well browned, and spread with
excellent butter. The steak was juicy and tender, contrary to the usual
custom of country inns, and the tea was fragrant and strong. Both the
travelers partook heartily, having eaten nothing since noon, with the
exception of a little fruit purchased from the car window at one of the
stations. Herbert was not usually in the habit of drinking tea at night,
but on this particular occasion he wanted to keep awake, and therefore
drank two cups, of undiminished strength.

"Now, Herbert," said Mr. Carroll, when they had finished supper, "you
may ask the clerk to assign me to a large room with a couple of beds in
it. I should prefer to have you in the same room with me."

"Very well, sir."

He rose from the table, and went to the public room, one portion of
which was occupied by the office. As he made his way to the desk, he
observed the man with black whiskers on a settee at one end of the room.
He was smoking a clay pipe. Herbert caught a stealthy glance directed
towards himself, but that was all. The man continued smoking, fixing
his eyes with apparent interest on a large yellow handbill pasted on the
opposite wall, announcing a performance by "The Great American Circus
Company" the succeeding evening.

Herbert succeeded in obtaining such a room as he sought, and accompanied
by a servant bearing a lamp, went back to the dining-room to accompany
Mr. Carroll to it.




CHAPTER XX

FACING A BURGLAR


Herbert deliberated as to whether it would be best to inform his aged
traveling companion of the suspicious-looking man, who appeared to have
followed them for no good purpose. He finally decided not to do so,
since it would only alarm Mr. Carroll, and prevent his sleeping off his
fatigue, while there would be no advantage gained, since a blind and
feeble man could be of little use in repelling the burglar, should the
stranger prove to be such.

The bedroom was large and square, and contained two beds. The larger
of these was placed in the corner, and this was assigned to the old
gentleman. The smaller was situated between the two side windows, and
was, of course, the more exposed of the two. This Herbert was to occupy.

"Do you know how to load the pistol, Herbert?" asked Mr. Carroll.

"Yes, sir," said Herbert, confidently.

"I don't anticipate any occasion for using it," continued the old
gentleman. "Still, it will be best to be prepared."

"So I think, sir."

"You won't be afraid to use it, if it should be necessary?"

"No, sir."

Mr. Carroll took a package from his carpet-bag and showed it to Herbert.

"This package," he said, "contains five thousand dollars in bank bills.
If it were known that I had it, I should be in danger. I suppose it will
be best to put it back in the carpet-bag."

"If it were mine," said Herbert, "I would not do that."

"Where, then, would you put it?"

"I would put it between the mattresses. If anyone should get into the
room, they would seize the carpet-bag first, and, perhaps, make off
before they could be stopped."

"I don't know but you are right," said Mr. Carroll. "Perhaps it will be
well to put my watch in the same place."
