strategy. When he came to reflect upon it, it seemed impossible.

"Well, that beats everything," he said, with a perplexed sigh. "That
sounded so close that I expected to be run over before I could get out
of the way, and now he's gone."

He waited some minutes, and, hearing and seeing nothing, once more
resumed his stealthy way along the gorge, a new, shivering fear
gradually creeping over him, as it does over anyone who suspects himself
in the presence of the unexplainable and unnatural.

"I wonder whether they have ghosts in this part of the world?" he said
to himself. "I used to hear the men talk of such things, but father said
there was nothing in them, and so I didn't believe them--but I don't
know what father would say or think if he was in my place."

There was the strong counter-belief, also--the conviction that most
likely there was a reality about the thing--which kept Fred on the _qui
vive_. He was determined, if possible, to prevent a repetition of the
startling surprise of a few minutes before. He scrutinized the side of
the ravine as he walked along, on the lookout for any opening or crevice
which would permit a man and a horse to find shelter. It did not seem
possible that any retreat that would shelter them could escape the eyes
of the lad.

"I haven't seen any such place yet, so, if the Indian is trying any such
trick, he can't do it here without my seeing him, and if I do--Heaven
save me!"

He sprang to one side, again pressing himself back against the rock, as
though trying to flatten his body there in order to escape the trampling
hoofs. At the same time he cocked his rifle, with the purpose of giving
the finishing touch to the Apache who had alarmed him once too often in
this fashion.



CHAPTER XX. AN UNCOMFORTABLE LODGING

A more astounding surprise than before awaited the lad. His hair almost
lifted itself as he found himself staring at vacancy, with no sign of a
living person in sight. Whatever had been the cause of this mysterious
performance, it was very apparent that the solution rested not with the
young fugitive.

"I'm tired of this," he exclaimed, impatiently, after he had waited
several minutes, "and it is n't going to be played on me again."

With this, he began clambering up out of the ravine, with the resolve to
reach some place where no shadowy horseman could ride over him.

The climbing was difficult at first, but he soon reached a point where
the inclination was not so steep, and where he could progress with much
more ease and facility. In this way he in time reached the upper level,
and, believing himself out of range of his phantom pursuer, had time to
look about for some sleeping-place for the night.

He frequently paused and listened, but could not see or hear anything of
man or beast, and, confident that no danger was to be apprehended from
either, he devoted himself to hunting for some refuge, that he could
consider secure against molestation. His first inclination was to seek
out a place among the rocks, as he was likely to gain room where he
could stretch out at his ease and enjoy a few hours' slumber, but, on
reflection, there were several objections to this.

In that part of the world were an abundance of poisonous serpents, and
he had a natural dread of disturbing some of them.

"If I can find the right kind of tree, I think that will be the best
sort of a place, for nothing could get at me there, and there may be all
the limbs I want to make a bed. I guess there's the location now."

He was walking along all the time that he had been thinking and talking,
and, at this juncture, he approached a straggling group of trees, which
seemed likely to offer the very refuge he was seeking. He made his way
toward them with quickened steps.

Fred found himself upon a sort of plateau, broken here and there by
rocks, boulders, and irregularities of surface, but in the main easy to
be traversed, and he lost no time in making a survey of the grove which
had caught his eye. There were some twenty in all, and several of them
offered the very shelter. The limbs were no more than six or eight feet
above the ground, and the largest trees were fifty feet in height, the
branches appearing dense, and capable, apparently, of affording as firm
a support as anyone could need while asleep.

"I guess that will do," he concluded, after surveying the largest, which
happened to stand on the outer edge of the grove. "If I can get the bed,
there ain't any danger of being bothered by snakes and wild animals."

Fred naturally pondered a moment as to the best means of climbing into
the tree with his gun. It was full size, and of such weight that he
had been considerably wearied in carrying it such a distance, but it
contained a precious charge, to be used in some emergency that was
likely to arise, and no man was wealthy enough to buy it from him. The
way that he decided upon was to leave the gun against the trunk of the
tree, and then climb in the way that comes natural to a boy. The barrel
of course, would bother him a little, but he could pull through very
well, and he immediately set about doing so.

As he expected, the gun got in his way, but he managed it very well,
without knocking it down, and in a few minutes had climbed high enough
to grasp the first limb with one hand, which was all that he desired, as
he could easily draw himself up in that fashion.

Fred had just made his grasp certain, when he heard a peculiar yelp, and
a rush of something by him.

Not knowing what it meant, but apprehending some new danger, he drew
himself upon the limb with a spasmodic effort, and then turned to see
what it meant. To his amazement and terror, he discovered that it was an
immense wolf, which had made a snap at and narrowly missed his heels.
It had come like a shadow, making no announcement of its presence, and a
second or two sooner would have brought the two into collision.

As Fred looked downward the wolf looked upward, and the two glared at
each other for a minute or so, as if they meant to stare each other out
of countenance. The wolf was unusually large, belonging to what is known
as the mountain species, and he seemed capable of leaping up among the
limbs without any extra effort; but wolves are not addicted to climbing
trees, and the one in question seemed to content himself with looking
up and meditating upon the situation. It seemed to the lad that he was
saying:

"Well, young man, you're up there out of my reach, but I can afford to
wait; you'll have to come down pretty soon."

"If I only had some powder and ball," reflected Fred, "I'd soon wipe you
out."

The temptation was very strong to spend the last bullet upon him, but he
could not fail to see the absurdity of the thing; besides which, his gun
was seated upon the ground, with the muzzle pointed upward at him. He
could reach it from his perch on the lowermost limb, but it was hardly
safe to attempt it while his enemy was seated there upon his haunches,
as if debating whether he should go up or not.

The boy was in terror lest the brute should strike the piece and knock
it down, in which case it was likely to be discharged and to be placed
altogether beyond his reach. But the dreaded creature sat as motionless
as if he were a carved statue in front of some gentleman's residence,
his eyes fixed upon his supper, which had escaped him by such a narrow
chance. The situation was about as interesting as it could well be, and,
in fact, it was rather too interesting for Fred, who was alarmed at the
prospect of being besieged by a mountain wolf.

After the lapse of a minute or two, the brute quietly rose from his
haunches, trotted a few paces, and then gave utterance to the dismal
wail peculiar to his species. It had a baying, howling tone, which
made the chills creep over the boy from head to foot. He had heard the
barking and howling of wolves when crossing the prairies, but there was
deep, thunderous bass to the one which now struck upon his ear such as
he had never before heard, and which gave it a significance that was
like a voice from the tomb.

The instant the brute left his station, Fred reached down, seized the
muzzle of his gun, and drew it up. Then he made his way some twenty feet
above, where he could feel secure against any daring leap from his foe.
He had scarcely perched himself in this position, when the bay of the
wolf was answered from fully a dozen different directions.

He had called to his comrades, and their replies came from every point
of the compass--the same rumbling, hoarse, wailing howls that had
notified them where a prize awaited them. A minute later, the brute
trotted back to his place, where he sat down until the arrival of
reinforcements.

"It isn't one wolf, but a hundred, that going to besiege me!" gasped the
terrified boy.

He spoke the truth.



CHAPTER XXI. A TERRIBLE NIGHT

The prospect of being besieged all night in a tree by a pack of mountain
wolves was not a pleasant one by any means, and Fred, who had climbed
up among the branches with the object of securing a few hours' slumber,
found little chance of closing his eyes for even a minute.

"It might have been worse," he reflected, as he listened to the dismal
howling, "for if they had happened to come down upon me when I was
walking along the ravine, I could n't have gotten into any place like
this in time to save me. Wolves don't know how to climb trees, and so
long as I stay here I'm all right; but I can't stay here forever."

By-and-by there was a sharp pattering upon the ground, and then the
hoarse howling changed to quick, dog-like yelps, such as these animals
emit when leaping down upon their prey, and which may be supposed to
mean exultation.

Fred came down sufficiently far from his perch to get a glimpse of the
ground beneath. He saw nearly a score of huge mountain wolves, bounding
hither and thither, and over each other, and back and forth, as though
going through some preliminary exercise, so as to prepare themselves for
the feast that was soon to be theirs.

"If I was down there," thought the boy, with a shudder, "I suppose I'd
last them about two minutes, and then they'd be hungrier than ever.
They'll stay there all night, but I wonder if they'll go away in the
morning. If they don't, I can't tell what's to become of me."

He watched them awhile with a lingering fear that some of them might
manage to get among the branches, but they did not make the attempt.
They had sufficient dexterity to leap from the ground up among the
lowermost limbs, but had no power of retaining their position, or doing
anything after they got there.

Nature had unfitted them for such work, and they did not try it. They
seemed to possess tireless activity, and they kept up their leaping and
frolicing as though they had nothing else in the world to do.

After watching them until he was tired, Fred carefully climbed up among
the branches again, where he secured himself as firmly as was possible.
He had lain his rifle across a couple of limbs above his head, and fixed
upon a place within a dozen feet or so of the top, as the one offering
the best support.

Here two or three limbs were gnarled and twisted in such a way that he
could seat himself and arrange his body in such a way that he could have
enjoyed a night's slumber with as much refreshment as if stretched out
upon a blanket on the ground. But the serenade below was not calculated
to soothe his nerves into soft, downy sleep, and he shuddered at
the thought of sitting where he was for four or five hours, with the
pattering feet below him, varied by a yelp or howl, when he should feel
disposed to close his eyes.

"But, then, it can't be helped," he added to himself, endeavoring to
look philosophically at the matter. "I ought to be thankful that they
didn't catch me before I reached the tree, and so I am; and I would be
very thankful, too, if they would go away and leave me alone. I've got a
bed here twice as good as I expected to find, and could sleep as well as
anywhere else."

Almost any sound long continued becomes monotonous, and thus it was that
scarcely a half-hour had passed when, in spite of the dreadful beasts
below, his eyes began to grow heavy and his head to droop.

But at this juncture he received a terrible shock. Just as everything
was becoming dreamy and unreal, he was startled by a jarring of the
tree, as though struck with some heavy object. When it was repeated
several times, his senses returned to him, and he raised his head and
listened.

"I wonder what that can be?" he said to himself. "Is some one hitting
the tree? No, it isn't that."

It seemed not so much a jarring of the trunk as a swaying of the whole
tree.

Puzzled and alarmed, Fred drew his legs from their rather cramped
position, and picked his way downward among the limbs until he had
descended far enough to inform himself.

"Heaven save me! they're in the tree!" he gasped, paralyzed for the
moment with terror.

In one sense, such was the case. The frolicsome wolves had varied their
amusement by springing upward among the lowermost branches. A brute
would make a jump, and, landing upon the limb, sustain himself until
one or two of his comrades imitated his performance, when they would all
come tumbling to the ground.

Thus, it may be said, they were climbing the tree, but they were
scarcely in it when they were out of it again, and Fred had nothing to
fear from that source.

In his fright, he hastily clambered back again after his rifle, with the
intention of shooting the one that was nearest, but by the time he
laid his hand upon the weapon his terror had lessened so much that
he concluded to wait until assured that it was necessary. And a few
minutes' waiting convinced him that he had nothing to fear from that
source. It was only another phase of the hilarious fun they were keeping
up for their own amusement.

"I guess I'll try it again," concluded Fred, as he proceeded to stow his
arms and legs into position for the nap which he came so near commencing
a few minutes before.

He did not consider it within the range of possibility that he could
unconsciously displace his limbs during sleep sufficiently to permit him
to fall.

He heard the yelping and occasional baying below, the rustling among the
limbs, and the undulation caused by the animals leaping upward among the
branches; but they ceased to disturb him after a time, and became like
the sound of falling water in the ears of the hunter by his camp-fire.
It was not long before slumber stole away his senses, and he slept.

A healthful boy generally sleeps well, and is untroubled by dreams,
unless he has been indulging in some indiscretion in the way of diet,
but the stirring scenes of the last few days were so impressed upon the
mind of Fred that they reappeared in his visions of night, as he lived
them all over again. He was again standing in the silent wood along the
Rio Pecos, with Mickey O'Rooney, watching for the stealthy approach of
the Apaches. As time passed, he saw the excited figure of Sut Simpson
the scout, as he came thundering over the prairie, with his warning cry
of the approach of the red-skins. The rattling fight in front of the
young settlement, the repulse of the Apaches, the swoop of Lone Wolf and
the lad's capture, the night ride, the encampment among the mountains,
his own singular escape, and, finally, his siege by the mountain
wolves--all these passed through the mind of the sleeping lad, and
finally settled down to a hand-to-hand fight with the leader of the
brutes.

Fred fancied that the two had met in the ravine, and, clubbing his
gun, he whacked the beast over his head every time he leaped at him.
He struck him royal, resounding blows, too, but, somehow or other, they
failed to produce any effect. The wolf kept coming and coming again,
until, at last, the boy concluded he would wind up the bout by jumping
upon, and throwing him down, and then deliberately choking him to death.

He made the jump, and awakening instantly, found he had leaped "out of
bed," and was falling downward through the limbs. It all flashed upon
the lad with the suddenness of lightning.

He remembered the ravenous wolves, and, with a shuddering horror which
cannot be pictured or imagined, felt that he was dropping directly into
their fangs. It was the instinct of nature which caused him to throw out
his feet and hands in the hope of checking his fall.

