"Yes."

"I thought so," returned the young man, laughing wildly. "So was I."

"You were his clerk?"

"Yes, for two weeks. I paid him fifty dollars good money as security."

"You did?" repeated Walter, with some anxiety.

"Yes; at the end of two weeks he told me I would not suit."

"But he paid you your wages and returned you your money?"

"No, he didn't!" exploded the young man. "He told me to come round on
Monday morning and he would pay me."

"Well?"

"I called Monday, and he was gone! He had moved, the scoundrel! I should
like to choke him!"

"Was it this office?"

"No. Let me see that book! Ah, it is the same that I kept. Have you,
too, given him money?"

"I deposited thirty dollars."

"Ah, it is the same old game! You will never see a cent of it again."

"But," said Walter, "I don't understand. He is doing a good business.
I have had calls from two of his agents. One of them handed me this
check," and he drew out the check Mr. Damon had given him.

The young man took it and laughed bitterly.

"I don't believe there is any such bank," he said. "I never heard of
it."

"Then why should the agent hand me the check?"

"To pull wool over your eyes. These agents are in league with this man
Locke. That wasn't his name when he engaged me."

"What was it then?"

"He called himself Libby. Libby & Richmond, that was the name of the
firm."

"What made you think he might have changed his name?"

"Because the advertisement reads the same."

"And you really think it is the same man?"

"Yes, I feel sure of it."

"He will be back at one o'clock. If you will wait till then you can see
for yourself."

"I'll wait!" said the young man, grinding his teeth. "I will confront
the swindler face to face. I will demand my money."

The door opened and some one put in his head, but before Walter or his
visitor could see who it was it closed again.

Fifteen minutes later a telegraph boy entered the office.




CHAPTER XVIII

WALTER IS TURNED ADRIFT


"Mr. Sherwood?" said the telegraph messenger inquiringly.

"That is my name," answered Walter.

"A message for you."

Walter opened the note, and read as follows:

"I am called out of the city. You may close up at four, and leave the
key with the janitor. Report for duty to-morrow morning. LOCKE."

"What is it?" asked the young man eagerly.

Walter showed him the note.

"It looks to me like some trick," said the stranger.

"But I don't see any object in it."

"He has your thirty dollars."

"And I have a check for over two hundred."

"I would rather have the thirty dollars. What shall you do?"

"There is nothing to do but follow directions."

The young man shrugged his shoulders.

"Then you will come round to-morrow morning?" he said.

"Certainly."

"I'll look in upon you. I want to see this Mr. Locke, though I doubt if
that is his name."

Walter was disposed to think the young man too suspicious. He was of a
sanguine temperament, and he tried to persuade himself that there was
really no good reason to suspect Mr. Locke of unfair dealing. He laid
considerable stress upon the favorable reports of the agents who had
called upon him during the day.

At length four o'clock came, and he closed up the office, leaving the
key with the janitor. He went home, not quite knowing whether he was to
be congratulated or not. He decided not to say anything just yet about
his engagement, lest it might turn out to be deceptive. Had he been
quite sure that it was substantial and to be relied upon, he would have
written to his guardian to announce the good news, but he thought it
best to wait.

The next morning he went to the office, arriving at the hour agreed
upon.

"Please give me the key to Locke & Green's office," he said to the
janitor.

"Mr. Locke's given up the room," was the startling reply.

Walter was dismayed.

"Given up the room! Have you seen him?" he inquired.

"Yes."

"When?"

"He called yesterday afternoon, an hour after you went away, and got the
key from me. In about ten minutes he came down again, carrying a ledger
in his hand.

"'I have taken another office,' he said. 'This is not large enough for
me.'

"'Have you told your clerk?' I asked him.

"'Yes, I have sent a message to him,' he replied carelessly."

Walter sank against the door. He felt limp and helpless. Mr. Locke had
gone off, and carried his thirty dollars with him. There was hardly room
to doubt that it was a case of deliberate swindling.

True, he had the check in his possession--a check for two hundred and
twenty-seven dollars--but, even if it were genuine, it was made out in
favor of Locke & Green, and would be of no service to him, though in
that case it would insure Mr. Locke's calling upon him. Should such be
the Case, he determined that he would not give up the Check till his
thirty dollars were returned.

Walter walked slowly out of the building. When he reached Dearborn
Street he went into the office of a private banker, and, showing the
check, asked, "Is there any such bank as this?"

"I never heard of any," said the banker.

Walter turned pale.

"Then you think it is bogus?"

"Very likely. Under what circumstances did you receive it?"

Walter explained.

"I am sorry to say that you are probably the victim of a confidence
man, or firm. I think I saw an expose of some similar swindlers in the
_Inter-Ocean_ a few weeks since. Did you give the fellow any money?"

"Yes, sir; thirty dollars."

"You will have to whistle for it, in all probability."

Walter's heart felt as heavy as lead. He had less than twenty dollars
now, and his small balance would last him less than three weeks. What
should he do then? Should he write to his guardian for more money? He
hated to do this, and, above all, he hated to confess that he had been
victimized.

In the next three days he answered several advertisements, and made
personal applications for employment. But no one seemed to want him. In
one case he was offered three dollars a week as an office boy, but he
had not got quite so low down as to accept this place and salary. It
struck Walter as very singular that one who had spent two years
at college, and possessed a fair knowledge of Latin, Greek, and
mathematics, should be in so little request. He envied the small office
boys whom he saw on the street, and even the busy newsboys, who appeared
to be making an income. They had work to do, and he had none. He
decided that he must reduce his expenses, and accordingly hired a poor
hall-bedroom for a dollar and a quarter a week, and took his meals at
restaurants.

One day he went into Kinsley's restaurant, on Adams Street, feeling the
need of a good meal, and sat down at a table. He gave his order, and
ate his dinner with appetite. He was about to rise from the table
when, casting his eye about the room, he started in surprise, as at a
neighboring table he saw the familiar face of Mr. Jonas Damon, whose
check he held in his pocket.

Instantly his resolve was taken. He would speak to Mr. Damon, and try to
ascertain something about the check.

He walked over to the table, and touching Damon on the shoulder, said:
"Mr. Damon, I believe?"

The man looked up quickly, and a little change in his countenance showed
that he recognised Walter; but he assumed a stolid look, and said: "Were
you speaking to me, young man?"

"Yes, sir."

"What did you call me?"

"Mr. Damon."

"You're off the track. That isn't my name."

"Perhaps not," said Walter resolutely; "but when you called at Locke
& Green's office and handed me a check you said your name was Jonas
Damon."

"Ho, ho!" laughed Damon. "So I gave you a check, did I?"

"Yes, for two hundred and twenty-seven dollars."

"That's news to me. I'm not in a position to give such checks as that."

"I have got the check with me now."

"Why didn't you cash it?"

"It was not made payable to me."

"Then why didn't you give it to the party it was made out to?"

"Because he disappeared."

"That's a strange story. Do you know what I think?"

"No; but I should like to."

"I think you are a confidence man, and are trying to take in a poor
countryman. But I've read about you fellows in the papers, and I am on
my guard. You'd better go away, or I may call a policeman."

This certainly was turning the tables on Walter with a vengeance. For a
fellow like Damon to accuse him of being a confidence man was something
like the wolf's charge against the lamb in AEsop's fable.

Damon saw that Walter looked perplexed, and followed up the attack.

"If anybody has given you a check," he said, "I don't see what you've
got to complain about. You'd better make use of it if you can."

"Do you deny that your name is Damon?"

"Of course I do. My name is Kellogg--Nelson Kellogg, of Springfield,
Illinois. I am in the city to buy goods."

"And you don't know Mr. Locke, of Locke & Green?"

"Never heard of the gentleman. If you've got a check of his, you'd
better advertise for him. I wish my name was Locke. I shouldn't mind
receiving it myself."

Here the waiter came up with Mr. Damon's order, and that gentleman
addressed himself to disposing of it.

Walter left the restaurant slowly, and walked in a dejected manner
in the direction of the Palmer House. He began to think that he was
a failure. When he was a student of Euclid College he was in his own
estimation, a person of importance. Now he felt his insignificance. If
the world owed him a living, it seemed doubtful if it was inclined to
pay the debt.




CHAPTER XIX

WALTER MEETS PROFESSOR ROBINSON


Two weeks passed. Walter applied for all sorts of situations, but
obtained no engagement. Meanwhile his money steadily diminished, till he
awoke one morning to find only seventy-five cents in his purse. Things
were getting decidedly serious.

"I wonder if there is any poorhouse in Chicago," thought Walter, not
wholly in jest. "It is not the sort of home I should prefer, but it is
better than genteel starvation."

He went out, breakfasted, and at the restaurant picked up a copy of the
Chicago _Times_. This was a piece of luck, for it saved him from the
small expenditure necessary to secure it. He turned to the department of
Help Wanted, and looking down the column came to this notice:

"WANTED--By a traveling lecturer, a young man who can make himself
generally useful; one who plays the violin preferred. Apply to PROFESSOR
ROBINSON, Hotel Brevoort."

Walter knew this hotel. It was located on Madison Street, and was on the
European plan.

"That will suit me," he said to himself. "I must lose no time in making
application. I can play the violin fairly well. If it will help me to a
position, I will bless the violin."

In ten minutes he was at the hotel, inquiring for Professor Robinson.

"He is in his room," said the clerk, "You can go up at once."

Guided by a bell-boy, Walter reached the door of No. 65 and knocked.

"Come in!" said a deep bass voice.

Opening the door he found himself in the presence of a stout man,
inclined to be tall, with a long, full beard, who glanced at him
inquiringly.

"Professor Robinson, I believe?" said Walter.

"I am the man," answered the professor.

"I have come to apply for a position. I have read your advertisement in
the _Times_."

"Just so! Let me look at you."

Walter blushed a little while the professor transfixed him with his
glittering eye. He anxiously hoped that he would bear inspection.

"Humph! I think you'll do. How old are you?"

"Eighteen."

In fact, Walter's birthday had been passed in Chicago.

"You are rather young. Can you play on the violin?"

"Yes, sir."

"Let me hear you."

The professor pointed to a violin on the bed.

"I am glad he doesn't expect me to furnish the violin," Walter said to
himself.

He took the instrument from its case, and trying the strings began to
play a series of familiar airs. The violin was not a Stradivarius, but
it was of good quality, and responded satisfactorily to the efforts of
the young musician. Professor Robinson listened attentively, and nodded
his approval.

"You play better than the last young man I had."

Walter was glad to hear it.

"I may as well tell you the nature of your duties, in case I engage you.
I call myself a traveling lecturer, but this may convey an erroneous
idea. I am the discoverer of Professor Robinson's Liquid Balm, which
is warranted to cure more diseases than any other patent preparation
in existence. I won't go into particulars, for these can be read in my
circular. Now, it is my custom to go from one town to another, engage
a hall if the weather requires, otherwise gather a crowd around me in a
public place, and lecture about the merits of my remarkable preparation.
You, besides assisting me in a general way, are expected to draw and
entertain the crowd by your performance on the violin. Can you sing?"

Walter shook his head.

"I am afraid," he said, "that if I should undertake to sing it would
drive away the crowd."

"Very well! It isn't necessary, though it would have helped. Now, what
are your ideas as to compensation?"

