more questions about yourself, not out of curiosity, but because I may,
if I understand your circumstances, some time have it in my power to
serve you."

"Thank you, sir. I shall be very glad to tell you anything. I was afraid
you would not feel interested."

"You are my private secretary now and that insures my interest. How long
since did your father die?"

"A little over a year."

"What was his business?"

"When he was a young man he was employed in a manufactory near
Providence, but the confinement injured his health and he learned the
carpenter's trade."

"I shouldn't think there would be much for a carpenter to do in a small
village like this."

"My father managed to make a comfortable living but that was all. At the
time he died, he considered that our house was mortgaged for only half
its value, but Squire Leech thinks otherwise."

"Squire Leech wants to get possession of your place. So that was all
your father was able to leave you?"

"No, not quite all; there was something else which father seemed to
think was worth something, but I am afraid it will never do us any
good."

"What is that?" asked Mr. Cameron.

"He was at work in his leisure for the last two years of his life on an
invention."

"An invention! Of what nature?"

"You know I told you he was employed in a cotton manufactory when a
young man. This made him familiar with spinning and weaving. He thought
he could make an improvement in some of the machinery used and he worked
out his idea in a wooden model."

"Have you the model?" asked Cameron, with interest.

"Yes, sir, and also a written paper describing the invention. A few
days before he died father called me to his bedside and told me that he
wanted me some day to show his invention to a manufacturer and get his
opinion of it. He said that he hoped some time it would be a source of
profit to mother and myself."

"Have you ever done as he advised?" asked Cameron.

"I have never had opportunity. There is no manufacturing town near here
and I cannot afford to travel."

"I am myself the son of a cotton manufacturer," said Cameron, "and,
though I have never been employed in the business, I have from my
boyhood been accustomed to visit my father's factory. My opinion may be
worth something, therefore. If you are willing to show me your father's
model--"

"I shall be very much obliged to you if you will look at it," said
Herbert. "I have been afraid that father exaggerated its value and that
it might have defects which would prevent its being adopted anywhere."

"I will give you my opinion when I have seen it. And now suppose we set
to work. Here is a treatise on logic. You may begin and read it very
slowly, pausing at the end of every paragraph till I tell you to go on."

Herbert began to read as he had been requested. For the first two or
three times he took very little interest in his subject and thought
it very dry. In fact, it was not all he began to re-read the earlier
portions that he could comprehend much of it.

"Now," said Cameron, after he had read half an hour, "I have something
else for you to do. You are not only my reader, but I must make you my
teacher, too."

Herbert laughed, saying: "I think you'll have to get somebody that knows
more than I, then; I wouldn't venture to teach a college student."

"I mean that you shall hear my lessons. I want you to imagine yourself a
college professor and ask me questions on what you have just read."

"Do you think I can?"

"You may bungle a little at first, but you'll improve. If you do well,
when I get through with you I will try to get you a professor's chair at
some college."

"I should like that, if professors get well paid."

"They generally get more than five dollars a week; but that is all that
I can afford to pay at present."

"I'm only an apprentice," said Herbert smiling, "and am quite
satisfied."

Herbert began to question Cameron on what he had been reading. He
did not find it altogether easy, partly from want of practice, partly
because the subject was one he knew nothing about. But whenever blunders
were made Cameron laughed good-naturedly and the young professor joined
in the merriment.

"We'll take political economy next," said the student. "You won't find
that so dry as logic."

Though political economy is generally studied in the junior or senior
year at college, its principles, if familiarly illustrated, are not
beyond the comprehension of a boy of fifteen. He found himself reading
with interest, and when he came to act the role of professor he
acquitted himself more creditably than with logic.

"I think," said Cameron, "I shall recommend you for the chair of
political economy."

"I like it much better," said Herbert.

"So do I. Still, logic is important in its way. Tomorrow I must try you
on Latin."

"I am afraid it won't be much use," said our hero. "I have studied it a
little two winters when we had a college student keeping our winter
school."

"If you know as much as that you will answer my purpose better than
I anticipated. Now we'll take a walk. You shall show me the houses of
Wrayburn."

"The houses of Wrayburn are four in number," said Herbert; "the two
churches, the town hall, and Squire Leech's house."

"There's another walk which I prefer; I mean to Prospect Pond. Suppose
we walk over to it."

"I shall be glad to," said Herbert.

"You are a very accommodating professor. You let me off from study when
I feel lazy."




CHAPTER XX

PROSPECT POND


It was a beautiful afternoon and Herbert was satisfied to lay books
aside and walk over to Prospect Pond.

This pond was about a mile from the village and probably about a mile
and a half in circuit. At the farther end was a small hill crowned with
forest trees.

"That would be a fine situation for a house."

"Yes," said Herbert, "but it would be hard to get at."

"Oh, of course a road would have to be built connecting with the
highway. Perhaps you will build a house there when you are a rich man."

"Then I shall have to wait a few years," said Herbert.

"You wouldn't be the first poor boy that has grown rich. My own father
is rich now, but when he was of your age he was only a poor 'bobbin boy'
working at scanty pay in the factory of which he is now owner."

"I should like to be rich for my mother's sake," said Herbert.

"With money one can do a great deal of good, though not all rich men
choose to apply their riches worthily. How smooth the water is to-day!
Isn't there a boat somewhere that we can use?"

"There's one a few rods from here, but it belongs to James Leech."

"Would it do to take it, do you think?"

"It might do for you but not for me."

"Why not for you?"

"James and I are not very good friends."

"Why not?"

"He looks down upon me because I am poor."

"So he is inclined to put on airs on account of his father's money?"

"I should say he is."

"Let us go and see the boat at any rate."

Herbert led the way through a meadow to a clump of trees, where a small
rowboat floated upon the water.

"Does Leech often go out in it?"

"Two or three times a week."

"It is just about large enough for two, though it would easily
accommodate one more."

"Yes."

"If I thought your friend would not be round I should be tempted to try
it for half an hour."

"I think you might venture."

"Jump in, then, and we'll push out."

Herbert shook his head.

"If the boat belonged to anyone but James Leech I would go; but I don't
like him well enough to take any liberty with anything of his."

"Perhaps you are right. Would you mind sitting down and waiting for me
twenty minutes or half an hour?"

"Oh, no; it will be pleasant."

"Then here goes."

Cameron jumped into the boat, pushed off and began to row in a style
that showed he was accustomed to the exercise. The pond was so small
that it was not easy for him to get out of sight.

Herbert sat down, not without a secret longing to be in the boat also;
but he did not care to place himself under any obligations to James.

Suddenly he heard a hasty step behind him. Looking up, he saw the owner
of the boat close at hand.

James Leech looked for his boat and saw that it was gone. Then his gaze
fell upon our hero.

"What have you done with my boat, Carter?" he demanded, peremptorily.

"What makes you ask such a question, Leech?" answered Herbert.

"Why do you call me Leech?" said James, angrily.

"For the same reason you call me Carter, I suppose."

"There's a great difference between us," said James.

"That's true," assented Herbert.

"And you ought to treat me with proper respect."

"I treat you with all the respect you deserve."

"You haven't answered my question," said James.

"What question?"

"Where is my boat?"

"Out on the pond. Look and you will see it."

James looked where Herbert pointed.

"Who is that in that boat?" he demanded, angrily.

"Mr. Cameron."

"Who's he?"

"A boarder at the hotel."

"Is it the young man from Yale College? My father was speaking of him
this morning," said James, moderating his tone very considerably.

"Yes."

"Then I don't mind. My father says he is very rich. I suppose I shall be
introduced to him soon," said James, complacently.

"If you will wait a few minutes till he comes ashore I will introduce
you," said Herbert.

"You! What do you know of him?" sneered James.

"I passed the afternoon with him," said Herbert.

"He must be hard up for company," said James.

"Look here, James Leech," said Herbert his eyes flashing; "I've had
enough of that kind of talk. I don't intend to submit to your impudence.
When you speak to me keep a civil tongue in your head."

"I never heard such impudence. What do you mean by addressing me in that
style?"

"What do I mean? I mean to warn you to be civil."

"Look here, Carter! I'll tell my father and he'll turn you out of house
and home," exclaimed James, furiously.

"He hasn't the power, fortunately."

"Hasn't he got a mortgage on your place?"

"Yes; but the interest was paid to-day and no more will be due for six
months."

"Where did you get the money to pay the interest?"

"That is no business of yours. It is enough for you to know that it is
paid and that your father has no more control over us than we have over
him."

James was disappointed. He had expected that the interest would not be
paid and that Mrs. Carter and Herbert would be at his father's mercy. It
was certainly surprising that they had raised the money.

"Are you waiting here for Mr. Cameron?" asked James.

"Yes."

"I don't think you need to."

"As you don't even know him, I don't think your opinions as to his
wishes of much importance."

"I wouldn't thrust myself on him, if I were you."

"Thank you, I don't intend to."

"I suppose you fell in with him by accident. He probably don't know who
you are."

"Oh, yes, he does. He knows all about me. I am going to spend to-morrow
afternoon with him also," said Herbert, delighting to mystify his
companion.

"He won't care to have you call much longer. My aunt has written to my
father about him and he will invite Mr. Cameron to call."

"I have no objection but I don't think it will make any difference as
I am Mr. Cameron's private secretary."

"Private secretary! What do you do?"

"I read to him, as his eyes are poor, and I suppose I shall write for
him when he needs it."

"What does he pay you?"

"I don't know as that concerns you particularly. Still, I don't mind
telling you. He pays me five dollars a week."

"That's a good deal more than you're worth."

"I think so myself, especially as I only spend the afternoon with him."

James was quite annoyed to find that the boy he disliked was prospering
so well. He was about to make another unpleasant remark when Herbert
suddenly exclaimed:

"He's turned the boat. Doesn't he row beautifully?"

The same thought sprang up in the minds of both boys: "I wish I could
row like that."




CHAPTER XXI

ROWING


The little boat touched its moorings.

"Mr. Cameron," said Herbert, "allow me to introduce to you the owner of
the boat, Mr. James Leech."

"Mr. Leech," said Cameron, "I have to apologize for taking your boat
without leave. I hope I haven't kept you waiting for it."

If the young collegian had not been the son of a wealthy man, whose
social position was higher than his own, James would not so readily
have accepted the apology. As it was, he said, graciously: "Oh it's no
matter. I'm glad you took the boat. How beautifully you row!"

"Thank you for the compliment. Last year I belonged to the Sophomore
crew at Yale."

"I wish I could row as well as you."

"It is a matter of practice. If I can give you any hints I shall be glad
to do so."

"Thank you," said James, eagerly. "Would you have time this afternoon?"

"Yes, I have an hour to spare. If you and my friend Herbert will get
