old iron, bones and dirt lay in the back yard.

"The ice box felt that all her limbs were giving way and that everything
was going to end badly. She lamented: 'Oh, if only I had not joined
the revolution! If I had only stayed at home by the cosy fire! Oh, if
only---' And with that she cracked completely.

"On the same day the young lady on whose table the kettle was standing
said: 'Now I have had enough of this horrid tar-soap boiler. I want
a genuine tea kettle and not an imitation. Away with this thing!' So
the butler took the kettle and dashed him down to the heap of rubbish
in the yard. It was the same rubbish heap where his step-sister had
been thrown, and in his fall he broke his own and his step-sister's
last bones. Then he exclaimed in bitter pain: 'Oh, if only I had not
joined the revolution! Oh, if I were only home in the peaceful, steaming
laundry.' Then he was completely smashed by the old muskets that were
used in the revolution and that had been thrown down on top of him.
And this is the end of the story."

"Yes, they were right. If only they had not joined the revolution!"
Cornelli said sympathetically.

"Yes, and I am right, too," Dino cried triumphantly. "Just see how
much it helped you to forget your curious bump affair. You have no
more wrinkles on your forehead and you have pushed all your hair away.
You look entirely different; I hardly know you now."

Cornelli in very truth had been so eager in listening to the story
that with one quick motion she had pushed the hanging curtains out of
her eyes. She had been anxious not to miss a word, and the hair had
bothered her very much. Her whole face had become bright and changed
during the thrilling tale.

"Just look at yourself!" Dino encouraged her, taking a little mirror
from the wall and holding it in front of the little girl.

"No, no, I do not want to see it!" she cried out. In the same moment
she had pulled her hair back again over her eyes, and on her forehead
appeared a lot of wrinkles.

"Don't get so excited!" said Dino, putting back the mirror. "But I am
awfully glad to know a way to help you. I shall do it every day, but
you must promise to come regularly. I am sure you'll forget everything
else that worries you, and in the end you'll forget about it and so
be gay again."

Cornelli shook her head. "No, you can't prevent it from getting worse,"
she said, covering her forehead with more hair. However, she took
Dino's hand as a promise to come again, for she had enjoyed her visit
very much and was looking forward to repeating it.

From that day on, Cornelli wandered over to Martha's little house as
she had always done. The old woman cried with joy when she heard the
child's merry laughter after all that time, for it had been a great
grief to her to see the bright child so terribly changed. She loved
to leave the children by themselves, for then they always seemed to
enjoy themselves best. From time to time she heard their happy laughter;
it thrilled her with joy, and she never wanted to interrupt it. She
had seen how Cornelli behaved when listening to one of Dino's stories;
the little girl was as eager as if she were experiencing it all herself.
In her burning zeal she would fling back her hair, her eyes would
sparkle as in days gone by, and a brightly laughing face would regard
the story teller. Everything else was forgotten for the time; but if
something reminded Cornelli of her own life and troubles, all sunshine
was suddenly gone from her face, her forehead clouded up, and the
horrible sticky hair was again hanging over her eyes.

So Martha always tried to leave the children undisturbed. She had many
hopes for Cornelli on account of this daily intercourse with the
charming boy, whose clear brow was never troubled and who could so
quickly drive away the clouds from his friend's face.

As soon as Cornelli left the little house and was approaching her own
garden, everything changed back to the old condition. Martha, looking
after the child, could always see the fearful looking hair that so
strangely disfigured the little girl's pretty face. Then she would
sigh deeply and would say to herself: It seems like a disease, but who
can help her? Oh, if our blessed lady had seen her child so terribly
disfigured!

Cornelli was very much surprised when she found that Saturday evening
had come again, for the last two weeks had flown by very fast.

She ran through the garden. Under the plum tree lay the last fully
ripened dark gold plums. Cornelli picked them up; they were really
splendid, but they had given her no pleasure that year. She took them
with her and put them on Martha's table.

"Oh, what fine yellow plums! I am sure they taste as sweet as honey,"
exclaimed Dino. "Are they from your garden? When the sun shines on
them in the morning, all the branches seem to sparkle with reddish
gold like a Christmas tree."

"Yes, they are from the tree. Do you want to eat them?" asked Cornelli.

"With pleasure. But you must eat some, too," said Dino.

"No, I don't want to," Cornelli replied. "Just try whether they are
good. If you do not like them, you can leave them or give them to the
birds."

"Oh, but there is nothing that tastes as sweet and splendid as these
golden plums!" cried Dino, while he was slowly eating one after another.

"What a shame! I wish I had known how much you like them; you really
ought to have told me," Cornelli said. "There are none left on the
tree and they are the last that were lying on the grass. But very soon
we'll have the best juicy pears--they are perfectly delicious, I think,
even better--and then I'll bring you some every day."

"Yes, it certainly would be great to have a pear feast with you every
day," said Dino, looking admiringly at the last reddish plum before
he ate it. "It is easy enough for you, Cornelli. You can stay right
here under the pear tree, but I have to go away. I'll have to spend
my time behind the school house walls, regretting all that I have
lost."

"But you are not going away," said Cornelli with dismay.

It had never occurred to her that this happy companionship could ever
end.

"Yes, I have to. If I could, I would stay here much longer with our
good friend Martha. She is better than anybody I know except my mother,
and she takes care of me as if I were a silkworm."

"Yes, and when you go, everything is over," said Cornelli, speaking
as if Dino were her enemy. Her eyes glowed at him from under her hair
and she seemed to be accusing him of some bitter wrong. She now turned
away, as if to say: Now I do not want to hear of anything more. But
Dino understood her sudden anger.

"No, Cornelli," he said soothingly, "just the opposite will happen.
It is not over at all, because it has only just begun. I have planned
with Martha to-day that I shall come again next summer and the summer
after and every year after that, till we are both old and gray."

But Cornelli only saw the immediate future before her and what was going
to happen now; she could not look so far ahead.

"Yes, but it is so long till next year, that you are sure to forget
all about me a hundred times," she said crossly, as if she were chiding
her companion.

"No, I won't do that," said Dino quietly. "I won't forget you once,
least of all a hundred times. I'll prove it to you, Cornelli. Let us
still have a good time together and enjoy the four remaining days that
I can stay here. Let us look forward, also, to the time when I shall
come again. Just think how much the kid will have grown by then! We
shall be able to drive together. I'll be the coachman and you'll be
the lady in the carriage. That will be splendid!"

But Cornelli could no longer be really gay. She always saw the moment
before her when Dino had to say good-bye, and when all their fun would
be over. The morning really came fast enough when she had to take leave
of him in Martha's cottage. After Dino had driven away, Cornelli buried
her head in her arms and cried piteously. Martha, too, was heavy of
heart, and sat beside her, crying quietly.

That same evening when dinner was done and Cornelli got up from table
to leave the room, the cousin said: "You have not said a single word
to-day, Cornelli. You seem to get worse instead of better! Ought your
father find you worse on coming home than when he left?"

"Good-night," said Cornelli hoarsely, and left the room without once
looking up.

"There is nothing to be done with her; you can see it for yourself,
Betty. You have thought that we could still produce a change for the
better," said Miss Dorner, after Cornelli had shut the door behind
her. "What have we accomplished with our best efforts? We have tried
hard enough for her father's sake. How terrible it will be for him to
live alone with her again! Instead of cheering his lonely life, she
will only cause him worry and trouble. And what a sight she is! Have
you ever seen an obstinacy equal to hers in all your life?"

"No, never," replied the friend. "It actually seems as if all the
helpful words we have spoken had the opposite effect with her. Whenever
we told her how terrible she looked, the disfiguring hair fringes
always seemed to get worse. I should like to know what one could do
to break her stubborn will. Maybe great severity would do it or bringing
together Cornelli and other children; they might cure her by laughing
at her."

"I do not believe so, for nothing seems to help," Miss Dorner concluded.
"My cousin himself, when he comes back, shall decide what to do with
her. But I know that one thing is certain: whatever will be done, she
will never be a joy to her father."




CHAPTER VII

A NEW SORROW



Autumn had come, and all the fruit trees in Mr. Hellmut's garden were
laden with gorgeous fruit. Bright red apples and golden pears were
shining through the green branches; dark blue plums, honey sweet, fell
here and there from the deeply weighted trees. Whoever passed the
garden had to stand still and look, full of wonder, at this great
abundance, and many a person was tempted to leap over the hedge and
get one of the golden pears as a prize.

Cornelli, staring in front of her, was sitting on the bench under the
hazel nut tree. Matthew was just approaching from the stable; he wore
his best coat, and one could see that something special was going on.

"Do you want to come with me, Cornelli?" he asked, walking over to the
bench where she was sitting. "I am just going to harness the horses.
Your father is coming at eleven o'clock and I am going to drive down
to the lake to meet him. Come with me! Our brown fellows will be sure
to trot well, for they have had a long rest. Come along! It will be
fun, I know."

Cornelli shook her head.

"No?" said Matthew with disappointment. "I was sure you would not let
slip a chance of driving gaily out into the bright morning to meet
your father. Shall I get you down some pears? No pears, either?" Matthew
went away, shaking his head. "If our master only had half a dozen boys
and as many girls, how nice it would be here on the place. Then such
splendid pears would not be hanging sad and forgotten on the trees."
Then he added, in a murmur: "Not even to care about driving with such
horses!"

Soon afterwards, Mr. Maelinger arrived, for it was time for Cornelli's
lessons. Most of the time the teacher sat beside his pupil shaking his
head. He really needed all his patience to endure the total indifference
she showed in all her tasks. To-day it was again the same.

The two hours passed, and the carriage which was bringing home her
father had just driven up in front of the house. Mr. Maelinger was
filled with astonishment, for his pupil, instead of jumping up happily
and running away to greet her father, looked shyly through the window
and did not budge.

"You can go, Cornelli; your father is here! We have finished our work,"
he said, and with these words departed.

Cornelli had heard her father coming into the house and had heard the
ladies' joyful words of welcome. She crushed a tear that had begun to
trickle down her cheek and went over to the room where her father had
just entered.

"How are you, child? Have you come at last?" the father called gaily
to her. "But how strange you look, Cornelli!" he went on with a changed
voice. "What is it?" Cornelli had silently given him her hand and was
shyly looking down.

"What has happened to you? How odd you look! I hardly know you any
more! Push away all that gypsy-like hair from your face! Why don't you
look at me pleasantly? Why do you keep looking away? For months I have
been looking forward to this home-coming to my little daughter, who,
I had hoped, would have gained much. So this is the way I am to find
you, Cornelli."

Full of sorrow and anger, the father was gazing at the little girl.
She had turned away and had not said a word. Her face, half hidden by
the horrible hair strands, seemed to be covered by a gray cloud which
threatened to break out in a violent rain.

"We shall talk it all over later, Frederick," said the cousin. "Let
us first enjoy and celebrate the happy hour of your return and let us
keep all troublesome thoughts away." With these words, Miss Dorner led
her cousin to the dining room, where the table was festively set with
all the good dishes Esther knew were her master's favorites.

The Director's thoughts, however, were so troubled that even the festive
meal could not dispel them. He barely touched the food that was offered,
for he could not take his eyes off his only child. She sat in front
of him with bowed head, and only now and then looked up at him, quite
shyly. The meal did not go through in a very festive spirit. It was
noticeable that Mr. Hellmut had to force himself to the few words he
spoke. His thoughts were elsewhere and were of a very disturbing nature.
He got up from the table, as soon as possible, and hurried away.

"He is going over to the works," said Miss Dorner to her friend,
following him with her eyes. Cornelli, too, had left the room as soon
as her father had gone. "I think it has upset him more than I thought
it would. He has to give vent to his excitement a little, and I hope
that seeing the workmen over there will help him to get over his
impression. I hope he will hear there many new and pleasant things--of
much work and good business. It is hard for him to carry on his endless
work for the sake of such a child, don't you think so? But it can't
be changed."

After a while the Director came back again. He did not look much soothed
or pleasantly surprised by what he had just heard. The ladies now sat
down again to drink a cup of coffee with him.

"They have spoiled many things for me over there," said the Director,
sitting down beside them. "Even if it should mean considerable loss,
I can bear it, but I cannot stand the way Cornelli has changed. What
a frightful sight she is, and how dumb and stupid she has grown. She
did not show the slightest sign of pleasure at my coming and has not
said a single word since then. She has hardly even looked at me and
only sits there as if her existence were a real misfortune--I cannot
stand it. What has happened to the child?" In his excitement Mr. Hellmut
