had gained from Benjamin, and at a late hour they arrived safely at the
cottage.

They staid up but a short time, as they were tired; and Oswald had
resolved upon setting off before daylight on the following morning,
which he did without disturbing any one; for Humphrey was up and
dressed as soon as Oswald was and gave him something to eat as he went
along. All the others remained fast asleep. Humphrey walked about a
mile with Oswald, and was returning to the farm when he thought, as he
had not examined his pitfall for many days, that he might as well look
at it before he went back. He therefore struck out in the direction in
which it lay, and arrived there just as the day began to dawn.

It was the end of March, and the weather was mild for the season.
Humphrey arrived at the pit, and it was sufficiently light for him to
perceive that the covering had been broken in, and therefore, in all
probability, something must have been trapped. He sat down and waited
for daylight, but at times he thought he heard a heavy breathing, and
once a low groan. This made him more anxious, and he again and again
peered into the pit, but could not for a long while discover any thing,
until at last he thought that he could make out a human figure lying at
the bottom. Humphrey called out, asking if there was any one there. A
groan was the reply, and now Humphrey was horrified with the idea that
somebody had fallen into the pit, and had perished, or was perishing
for want of succor. Recollecting that the rough ladder which he had
made to take the soil up out of the pit was against an oak-tree, close
at hand, he ran for it, and put it down the pit, and then cautiously
descended. On his arrival at the bottom, his fears were found to be
verified, for he saw the body of a lad, half clothed, lying there. He
turned it up as it was lying with its face to the ground, and attempted
to remove it, and to ascertain if there was life in it, which he was
delighted to find was the case. The lad groaned several times, and
opened his eyes. Humphrey was afraid that he was not strong enough to
lift him on his shoulders and carry him up the ladder; but, on making
the attempt he found out, from exhaustion, the poor lad was light
enough for him to carry him, which he did, and safely landed him by the
side of the pit.

Recollecting that the watering-place of the herd of cattle was not far
off, Humphrey then hastened to it, and filled his hat half full of
water. The lad, although he could not speak, drank eagerly, and in a
few minutes appeared much recovered. Humphrey gave him some more, and
bathed his face and temples. The sun had now risen, and it was broad
daylight. The lad attempted to speak, but what he did say was in so low
a tone, and evidently in a foreign language, that Humphrey could not
make him out. He, therefore, made signs to the lad that he was going
away, and would be back soon; and having, as he thought, made the lad
comprehend this, Humphrey ran away to the cottage as fast as he could;
and as soon as he arrived he called for Edward, who came out, and when
Humphrey told him in few words what had happened, Edward went into the
cottage again for some milk and some cake, while Humphrey put the pony
into the cart.

In a few moments they were off again, and soon arrived at the pitfall,
where they found the lad, still lying where Humphrey had left him. They
soaked the cake in the milk, and as soon as it was soft gave him some;
after a time, he swallowed pretty freely, and was so much recovered as
to be able to sit up. They then lifted him into the cart, and drove
gently home to their cottage.

"What do you think he is, Edward?" said Humphrey.

"Some poor beggar lad, who has been crossing the forest."

"No, not exactly: he appears to me to be one of the Zingaros or
Gipsies, as they call them: he is very dark, and has black eyes and
white teeth, just like those I saw once near Arnwood, when I was out
with Jacob. Jacob said that no one knew where they came from, but that
they were all over the country, and that they were great thieves, and
told fortunes, and played all manner of tricks."

"Perhaps it may be so; I do not think that he can speak English."

"I am most thankful to Heaven that I chanced this morning to visit the
pitfall. Only suppose that I had found the poor boy starved and dead! I
should have been very unhappy, and never should have had any pleasure
in looking at the cows, as they would always have reminded me of such a
melancholy accident."

"Very true, Humphrey; but you have been saved that misfortune, and
ought to be grateful to Heaven that such is the case. What shall we do
with him now we have him?"

"Why if he chooses to remain with us, he will be very useful in the
cow-yard," said Humphrey.

"Of course," replied Edward, laughing, "as he was taken in the
pit-fall, he must go into the yard with all the others who were
captured in the same way."

"Well, Edward, let us get him all right again first, and then we will
see what is to be done with him; perhaps he will refuse to remain with
us."

As soon as they arrived at the cottage, they lifted the lad out of the
cart, and carried him into Jacob's room, and laid him on the bed, for
he was too weak to stand.

Alice and Edith, who were much surprised at the new visitor and the way
in which he had been caught, hastened to get some gruel ready for him.
As soon as it was ready, they gave it to the boy, who then fell back on
the bed with exhaustion, and was soon in a sound sleep. He slept
soundly all that night; and the next morning, when he awoke, he
appeared much better, although very hungry. This last complaint was
easy to remedy, and then the lad got up, and walked into the
sitting-room.

"What's your name?" said Humphrey to the lad.

"Pablo," replied the lad.

"Can you speak English?"

"Yes, little," replied he.

"How did you happen to fall into the pit?"

"Not see hole."

"Are you a gipsy?"

"Yes, gitano--same thing."

Humphrey put a great many more questions to the lad, and elicited from
him, in his imperfect English, the following particulars:

That he was in company with several others of his race, going down to
the sea-coast on one of their usual migrations, and that they had
pitched their tents not far from the pitfall. That during the night he
had gone out to set some snares for rabbits, and going back to the
tents, it being quite dark, he had fallen into the hole; that he had
remained there three days and nights, having in vain attempted to get
out. His mother was with the party of gipsies to which he belonged, but
he had no father. He did not know where to follow the gang, as they had
not said where they were going, farther than to the sea-coast. That it
was no use looking for them; and that he did not care much about
leaving them, as he was very unkindly treated. In reply to the question
as to whether he would like to remain with them, and work with them on
the farm, he replied that he should like it very much if they would be
kind to him, and not make him work too hard; that he would cook the
dinner, and catch them rabbits and birds, and make a great many things.

"Will you be honest, if we keep you, and not tell lies?" said Edward.

The lad thought a little while, and then nodded his head in the
affirmative.

"Well, Pablo, we will try you, and if you are a good lad we will do all
we can to make you happy," said Edward; "but if you behave ill we shall
be obliged to turn you out of doors: do you understand?"

"Be as good as I can," replied Pablo; and here the conversation ended
for the present.

Pablo was a very short-built lad, of apparently fifteen or sixteen
years of age, very dark in complexion, but very handsome in features,
with beautiful white teeth and large dark eyes; and there was certainly
something in his intelligent countenance which recommended him,
independent of his claim to their kindness from his having been left
thus friendless in consequence of his misadventure. Humphrey was
particularly pleased with and interested about him, as the lad had so
nearly lost his life through his means.

"I really think, Edward," said Humphrey, as they were standing outside
of the door of the cottage, "that the lad may be very useful to us, and
I sincerely hope that he may prove honest and true. We must first get
him into health and spirits, and then I will see what he can do."

"The fact is, my dear Humphrey, we can do no otherwise; he is separated
from his friends, and does not know where to go. It would be inhuman,
as we have been the cause of his misfortune, to turn him away; but
although I feel this, I do not feel much security as to his good
behavior and being very useful. I have always been told that these
gipsies were vagrants, who lived by stealing all they could lay their
hands upon; and, if he has been brought up in that way, I fear that he
will not easily be reformed. However, we can but try, and hope for the
best."

"What you say is very just, Edward; at the same time there is an honest
look about this lad, although he is a gipsy, that makes me put a sort
of confidence in him. Admitting that he has been taught to do wrong, do
you not think that when told the contrary he may be persuaded to do
right?"

"It is not impossible, certainly," replied Edward; "but, Humphrey, be
on the safe side, and do not trust him too far until you know more of
him."

"That I most certainly will not," replied Humphrey. "When do you
purpose going over to the keepers cottage, Edward?"

"In a day or two; but I am not exactly in a humor now to be very civil
to the Roundheads, although the one I have promised to visit is a lady,
and a very amiable, pretty little girl in the bargain."

"Why, Edward, what has made you feel more opposed to them than usual?"

"In the first place, Humphrey, the murder of the king--for it was
murder and nothing better--I can not get that out of my head; and
yesterday I obtained what I consider as almost a gift from Heaven, and
if it is so it was not given but with the intention that I should make
use of it."

"And what was that, Edward?"

"Our gallant father's sword, which he drew so nobly and so well in
defense of his sovereign, Humphrey, and which I trust his son may one
day wield with equal distinction, and, it may be, better fortune. Come
in with me, and I will show it to you."

Edward and Humphrey went into the bedroom, and Edward brought out the
sword, which he had placed by his side on the bed.

"See, Humphrey, this was our father's sword; and," continued Edward,
kissing the weapon, "I trust I may be permitted to draw it to revenge
his death, and the death of one whose life ever should have been
sacred."

"I trust that you will, my dear brother," replied Humphrey; "you will
have a strong arm and a good cause. Heaven grant that both may prosper!
But tell me how you came by it."

Edward then related all that had passed during his visit with Oswald to
Lymington, not forgetting to tell him of Benjamin's appearance, and the
arrangements he had made relative to the sale of the venison.

As soon as dinner was over, Edward and Humphrey took down their guns,
having agreed that they would go and hunt the wild cattle.

"Humphrey, have you any idea where the herd of cattle are feeding at
this time?"

"I know where they were feeding yesterday and the day before, and I do
not think that they will have changed their ground, for the grass is
yet very young and only grown on the southern aspects. Depend upon it
we shall fall in with them not four miles from where we now are, if not
nearer."

"We must stalk them as we do the deer, must we not? They won't allow us
to approach within shot, Humphrey, will they?" said Edward.

"We have to take our chance, Edward; they will allow us to advance
within shot, but the bulls will then advance upon us, while the herd
increase their distance. On the other hand, if we stalk them, we may
kill one, and then the report of the gun will frighten the others away.
In the first instance there is a risk; in the second there is none, but
there is more fatigue and trouble. Choose as you please; I will act as
you decide."

"Well, Humphrey, since you give me the choice, I think that this time I
shall take the bull by the horns, as the saying is; that is, if there
are any trees near us, for if the herd are in an open place I would not
run such a risk; but if we can fire upon them and fall back upon a tree
in case of a bull charging, I will take them openly."

"With all my heart, Edward; I think it will be very hard if, with our
two guns and Smoker to back us, we do not manage to be masters of the
field. However, we must survey well before we make our approach; and if
we can get within shot without alarming or irritating them, we, of
course, will do so."

"The bulls are very savage at this spring time," observed Edward.

"They are so at all times, as far as I can see of them," replied
Humphrey; "but we are near to them now, I should think--yes, there is
the herd."

"There they are, sure enough," replied Edward; "now we have not to do
with deer, and need not to be so very cautious; but still the animals
are wary, and keep a sharp look-out. We must approach them quietly, by
slipping from tree to tree. Smoker, to heel!--down---quiet,
Smoker!--good dog!"

Edward and Humphrey stopped to load their guns, and then approached the
herd in manner which had been proposed, and were very soon within two
hundred yards of the cattle, behind a large oak, when they stopped to
reconnoiter. The herd contained about seventy head of cattle, of
various sizes and ages. They were feeding in all directions, scattered,
as the young grass was very short; but although the herd was spread
over many acres of land, Edward pointed out to Humphrey that all the
full-grown large bulls were on the outside, as if ready to defend the
others in case of attack.

"Humphrey," said Edward, "one thing is clear--as the herd is placed at
present, we must have a bull or nothing. It is impossible to get within
shot of the others without passing a bull, and depend upon it, our
passage will be disputed; and moreover the herd will take to flight,
and we shall get nothing at all."

"Well," replied Humphrey, "beef is beef; and, as they say, beggars must
not be choosers, so let it be a bull if it must be so."

"Let us get nearer to them, and then we will decide what we shall do.
Steady, Smoker!"

They advanced gradually, hiding from tree to tree, until they were
within eighty yards of one of the bulls. The animal did not perceive
them, and as they were now within range, they again stepped behind the
tree to consult.

"Now, Edward, I think that it would be best to separate. You can fire
from where we are, and I will crawl through the fern, and get behind
another tree."

"Very well, do so," replied Edward: "if you can manage, get to that
tree with the low branches, and then perhaps you will be within shot of
the white bull, which is coming down in this direction. Smoker, lie
down! He can not go with you, Humphrey; it will not be safe."

The distance of the tree which Humphrey ventured to get to was one
about one hundred and fifty yards from where Edward was standing.
Humphrey crawled along for some time in the fern, but at last he came
to a bare spot of about ten yards wide, which they were not aware of,
and where he could not be concealed. Humphrey hesitated, and at last
decided upon attempting to cross it. Edward, who was one moment
watching the motions of Humphrey, and at another that of the two
animals nearest to them, perceived that the white bull farthest from
him, but nearest to Humphrey, threw its head in the air, pawed with his
foot, and then advanced with a roar to where Humphrey was on the
ground, still crawling toward the tree, having passed the open spot,
and being now not many yards from the tree. Perceiving the danger that
his brother was in, and that, moreover, Humphrey himself was not aware
of it, he hardly knew how to act. The bull was too far from him to fire
at it with any chance of success; and how to let Humphrey know that the
animal had discovered him and was making toward him, without calling
out, he did not know. All this was the thought of a moment, and then
Edward determined to fire at the bull nearest to him, which he had
promised not to do till Humphrey was also ready to fire, and after
firing to call to Humphrey. He therefore, for one moment, turned away
from his brother, and, taking aim at the bull, fired his gun; but
probably from his nerves being a little shaken at the idea of Humphrey
being in danger, the wound was not mortal, and the bull galloped back
to the herd, which formed a closed phalanx about a quarter of a mile
distant. Edward then turned to where his brother was, and perceived
that the bull had not made off with the rest of the cattle, but was
within thirty yards of Humphrey, and advancing upon him, and that
Humphrey was standing up beside the tree with his gun ready to file.
Humphrey fired, and, as it appeared, he also missed his aim; the animal
made at him; but Humphrey, with great quickness, dropped his gun, and,
swinging by the lower boughs, was into the tree, and out of the bull's
reach in a moment. Edward smiled when he perceived that Humphrey was
safe; but still he was a prisoner, for the bull went round and round
the tree roaring and looking up at Humphrey. Edward thought a minute,
then loaded his gun, and ordered Smoker to run in to the bull. The dog,
who had only been restrained by Edward's keeping him down at his feet,
sprung forward to the attack. Edward had intended, by calling to the
dog, to induce the bull to follow it till within gun-shot; but before
the bull had been attacked, Edward observed that one or two more of the
bulls had left the herd, and were coming at a rapid pace toward him.
Under these circumstances, Edward perceived that his only chance was to
climb into a tree himself, which he did, taking good care to take his
gun and ammunition with him. Having safely fixed himself in a forked
bough, Edward then surveyed the position of the parties. There was
Humphrey in the tree, without his gun. The bull who had pursued
Humphrey was now running at Smoker, who appeared to be aware that he
was to decoy the bull toward Edward, for he kept retreating toward him.
In the mean time, the two other bulls were quite close at hand,
mingling their bellowing and roaring with the first; and one of them as
near to Edward as the first bull, which was engaged with Smoker. At
last, one of the advancing bulls stood still, pawing the ground as if
disappointed at not finding an enemy, not forty yards from where Edward
was perched. Edward took good aim, and when he fired the bull fell
dead. Edward was reloading his piece when he heard a howl, and looking
round, saw Smoker flying up in the air, having been tossed by the first
bull; and at the same time he observed that Humphrey had descended from
the tree, recovered his gun, and was now safe again upon the lower
bough.

The first bull was advancing again to attack Smoker, who appeared
incapable of getting away, so much was he injured by the fall, when the
other bull, who apparently must have been an old antagonist of the
first, roared and attacked him; and now the two boys were up in the
tree, the two bulls fighting between them, and Smoker lying on the
ground, panting and exhausted. As the bulls, with locked horns, were
furiously pressing each other, both guns were discharged, and both
animals fell. After waiting a little while to see if they rose again,
or if any more of the herd came up, Edward and Humphrey descended from
the trees and heartily shook hands.




CHAPTER XII.


"A narrow escape, Humphrey!" said Edward as he held his brother's hand.

"Yes, indeed, we may thank Heaven for our preservation," replied
Humphrey; "and poor Smoker! let us see if he is much hurt."

"I trust not," said Edward, going up to the dog, who remained quite
still on the ground, with his tongue out, and panting violently.

They examined poor Smoker all over very carefully, and found that there
was no external wound; but on Edward pressing his side, the animal gave
a low howl.

"It is there where the horn of the bull took him," observed Humphrey.

"Yes," said Edward, pressing and feeling softly: "and he has two of his
ribs broken. Humphrey, see if you can get him a little water, that will
recover him more than any thing else; the bull has knocked the breath
out of his body. I think he will soon be well again, poor fellow."

Humphrey soon returned with some water from a neighboring pool. He
brought it in his hat and gave it to the dog, who lapped it slowly at
first, but afterward much faster, and wagging his tail.

"He will do now," said Edward; "we must give him time to recover
himself. Now then, let us examine our quarry. Why, Humphrey, what a
quantity of meat we have here! It will take three journeys to Lymington
at least."

"Yes, and no time to lose, for the weather is getting warm already,
Edward. Now what to do? Will you remain while I go home for the cart?"

"Yes, it's no use both going; I will stay here and watch poor Smoker,
and take off the skins ready by the time you are back again. Leave me
your knife as well as my own, for one will soon be blunt."

Humphrey gave his knife to Edward, and taking up his gun, set off for
the cottage. Edward had skinned two of the bulls before Humphrey's
return; and Smoker, although he evidently was in great pain, was on his
legs again. As soon as they had finished and quartered the beasts, the
cart was loaded and they returned home; they had to return a second
time, and both the pony and they were very tired before they sat down
to supper They found the gipsy boy very much recovered and in good
spirits. Alice said that he had been amusing Edith and her by tossing
up three potatoes at a time, and playing them like balls; and that he
