Paul Hoffman.

"Just in time," said Paul. "Are you hungry?"

"A little."

"That's right. You're going to dine with me; and I want you to bring a
good appetite with you."

"What will your mother say?" asked Phil, doubtfully.

"Wait and see. If you don't like what she says you can go off without
eating. Where have you been?"

"I went down to Wall Street."

"On business?" inquired Paul, with a smile.

"No," said Phil, seriously. "I saw Lucia."

"Who is she?"

"I forgot. You don't know Lucia. She lived in my home in Italy, and I
used to play with her. She told me of my mother."

"That's lucky, Phil. I hope your mother is well."

"She is not sick, but she is thin. She thinks of me," said Phil.

"Of course she does. You will go home and see her some day."

"I hope so."

"Of course you will," said Paul, confidently.

"I saw the boy who stole my fiddle," continued Phil.

"Tim Rafferty?"

"Yes."

"What did he say?"

"I was with a bootblack--the one they call 'Ragged Dick.' Do you know
him?"

"Yes; I know Dick. He is a bully fellow, always joking."

"Dick wanted to lick him, but a policeman came, and he went away."

"Does Dick know that he stole your fiddle?"

"Yes."

"Then he will be sure to punish him. It will save me the trouble."

The walk was not long. Soon they were at Paul's door.

"I have brought company to dinner, mother," said Paul, entering first.

"I am glad to see you, Phil," said Mrs. Hoffman. "Why have you not come
before?"

"How is that, Phil? Will you stay now?" said Paul.

Mrs. Hoffman looked at Paul inquiringly.

"Phil was afraid he would not be welcome," he exclaimed.

"He is always welcome," said Mrs. Hoffman.

"Where is your fiddle?" asked Jimmy.

"A boy took it," said Phil, "and threw it into the street, and a wagon
went over it and broke it."

Jimmy was quite indignant for his friend, when the story had been told.

"It's lucky for Tim Rafferty that he is not here," said Paul, "or he
might suffer."

"If I was a big boy I'd lick him," said Jimmy, belligerently.

"I never saw you so warlike before, Jimmy," said Paul.

To Phil this sympathy seemed pleasant. He felt that he was in the midst
of friends, and friends were not so plentiful as not to be valued.

"What are you going to have for dinner, mother?" asked Paul.

"I am sorry, Paul, that I have no warm meat. I have some cold roast
beef, some hot potatoes, and an apple pudding."

"You needn't apologize, mother. That's good enough for anybody. It's as
good as Phil gets at his boarding house, I am sure. He has got rather
tired of it, and isn't going to stay."

"Are you going to leave the padrone?" asked Mrs. Hoffman, with interest.

"Si, signora," said Phil.

"Will he let you go?"

"I shall run away," said Phil.

"You see, mother, Phil would be sure of a beating if he went home
without his fiddle. Now he doesn't like to be beaten, and the padrone
gives harder beatings than you do, mother."

"I presume so," said Mrs. Hoffman, smiling. "I do not think I am very
severe."

"No, you spoil the rod and spare the child."

"Is Phil going to stay in the city?"

"No; the padrone would get hold of him if he did. He is going to New
Jersey to make his fortune."

"But he will need a fiddle."

"I am going to lend him money enough to buy one. I know a pawnbroker who
has one for sale. I think I can get it for three or four dollars. When
Phil gets it he is going around giving concerts. How much can you make
in a day, Phil?"

"Sometimes I make two dollars," answered Phil.

"That is excellent, especially when you are your own padrone. You will
be able to save up money. You will have to buy a pocketbook, Phil."

"Where will you sleep, Phil?" asked Jimmy, interested.

Phil shrugged his shoulders. He had not thought of that question
particularly.

"I don't know," he said. "I can sleep anywhere."

"Of course he will stop at the first-class hotels, Jimmy," said Paul,
"like all men of distinction. I shouldn't wonder if he married an
heiress in six months, and went back to Italy on a bridal tour."

"He is too young to be married," said Jimmy, who, it will be perceived,
understood everything literally.

"I don't know but he is," said Paul, "but he isn't too old to be hungry.
So, mother, whenever dinner is ready we shall be."

"It is all ready except peeling the potatoes, Paul."

"We can do that ourselves. It is good exercise, and will sharpen our
appetites. You will have to eat fast or there won't be much left. Jimmy
is the most tremendous eater I ever saw, and won't leave much for the
rest of us, if we give him the chance."

"Now, Paul," expostulated Jimmy, feeling aggrieved at this charge, "you
know I don't eat as much as you do."

"Hear him talk, Phil. I don't eat more than enough to keep a fly alive."

"It must be a pretty large fly, Paul," said Jimmy, slyly.

"Good joke, Jimmy. Mother, you must give Jimmy twelve potatoes to-day
instead of the ten he usually eats."

"Oh, Paul, how can you tell such stories?" exclaimed Jimmy, shocked at
such an extravagant assertion. Phil laughed, for there was something
ludicrous in the idea of Jimmy, who was a slight boy of seven, making
away with such a large quantity, and the little boy began to see that it
was a joke at his expense.

The dinner went off well. All had a good appetite, and did full justice
to Mrs. Hoffman's cookery. The pudding in particular was pronounced a
success. It was so flaky and well-seasoned, and the sauce, flavored
with lemon, was so good, that everyone except Mrs. Hoffman took a
second piece. For the first time since he had left Italy, Phil felt
the uncomfortable sensation of having eaten too much. However, with the
discomfort was the pleasant recollection of a good dinner, and to the
mind of the little fiddler the future brightened, as it is very apt to
do under such circumstances, and he felt ready to go out and achieve his
fortune.

"Why won't you stop with us to-night, Phil, and start on your journey
to-morrow?" asked Mrs. Hoffman. "I am sure Jimmy would be glad of your
company."

"Yes, Phil, stay," said Paul.

Phil hesitated. It was a tempting invitation, but, on the other hand, if
he remained in the city till the next day he might be in danger from the
padrone.

He expressed this fear.

"I am afraid the padrone would catch me," he said.

"No, he won't. You can go out with me and buy the fiddle now, and then
come back and play to mother and Jimmy. To-morrow morning I will go with
you to the Jersey City Ferry myself, and if we meet the padrone, I'll
give him a hint to be off."

Phil still hesitated, but finally yielded to the united request. But it
was now one o'clock, and Paul must be back to his business. Phil took
his cap and went with him to purchase the fiddle, promising to come back
directly.

They went into Chatham Street, and soon halted before a small shop,
in front of which were three gilt balls, indicating that it was a
pawnbroker's shop.

Entering, they found themselves in a small apartment, about twelve feet
front by twenty in depth, completely filled with pawnable articles in
great variety a large part, however, consisting of clothing; for when
the poor have occasion to raise money at a pawnbroker's, they generally
find little in their possession to pawn except their clothing. Here was
a shawls pawned for a few shillings by a poor woman whose intemperate
husband threw the burden of supporting two young children upon her.
Next to it was a black coat belonging to a clerk, who had been out of
employment for three months, and now was out of money also. Here was a
child's dress, pawned by the mother in dire necessity to save the
child from starving. There was a plain gold ring, snatched by a drunken
husband from the finger of his poor wife, not to buy food, but to
gratify his insatiable craving for drink.

Over this scene of confusion presided a little old man with blear eyes
and wrinkled face, but with a sharp glance, fully alive to his own
interests. He was an Englishman born, but he had been forty years
in America. He will be remembered by those who have read "Paul the
Peddler." Though nearly as poverty-stricken in appearance as his poorest
customers, the old man was rich, if reports were true. His business was
a very profitable one, allowing the most exorbitant rates of interest,
and, being a miser, he spent almost nothing on himself, so that his
hoards had increased to a considerable amount.

He looked up sharply, as Paul and Phil entered, and scanned them closely
with his ferret-like eyes.



CHAPTER XVI

THE FASHIONABLE PARTY

Eliakim Henderson, for this was the pawnbroker's name, did not remember
Paul, though on one occasion our hero had called upon him. Nearly
all his customers came to pawn articles, not to purchase, and Eliakim
naturally supposed that the two boys had come on this errand. Before
entering, Paul said to Phil, "Don't say anything; leave me to manage."

As they entered, Phil espied a fiddle hanging up behind the counter,
and he saw at a glance that it was better than the one he had been
accustomed to play upon. But to his surprise, Paul did not refer to it
at first.

"What will you give me on this coat?" asked Paul, indicating the one he
had on.

He had no intention of selling it, but preferred to come to the fiddle
gradually, that the pawnbroker might not think that was his main object,
and so charge an extra price.

Eliakim scanned the garment critically. It was nearly new and in
excellent condition, and he coveted it.

"I will give you a dollar," said he, naming a price low enough to
advance upon.

"That is too little," said Paul, shaking his head.

"I might give you fifty cents more, but I should lose if you didn't
redeem it."

"I don't think you would. I paid ten dollars for it."

"But it is old."

"No, it isn't; I have only had it a few weeks."

"How much do you want on it?" asked Eliakim, scanning Paul sharply, to
see how much he seemed in want of money.

"I don't want any to-day. If I should want some next week, I will come
in."

"It will be older next week," said Eliakim, not wanting to lose the
bargain, for he hoped it would not be redeemed.

"Never mind; I can get along till then."

"Can I do no business with you this morning?" asked Eliakim,
disappointed.

"I don't know," said Paul, looking carelessly around. "My friend here
would like a fiddle, if he can get one cheap. What do you ask for that
one up there?"

Eliakim took down the fiddle with alacrity. He had had it on hand for
a year without securing a customer. It had originally been pawned by a
poor musician, for a dollar and a quarter, but the unfortunate owner had
never been able to redeem it. Among his customers, the pawnbroker had
not found one sufficiently musical to take it off his hands. Here was a
slight chance, and he determined to effect a sale if he could.

"It is a splendid instrument," he said, enthusiastically, brushing off
the dust with a dirty cotton handkerchief. "I have had many chances to
sell it."

"Why didn't you sell it, then?" demanded Paul, who did not believe a
word of this.

"Because it was only pawned. I kept it for the owner."

"Oh, well; if you can't sell it, it doesn't matter."

"It is for sale now," said Eliakim, quickly. "He has not come for
it, and I shall keep it no longer. Just try it. See what a sp-l-endid
instrument it is!" said the pawnbroker, dwelling on the adjective to
give emphasis to it.

Paul tried it, but not knowing how to play, of course created only
discord. He did not offer it to Phil, because the young Italian boy
would have made it sound too well and so enhanced the price.

"It don't sound very well," said he, indifferently; "but I suppose it
will do to learn on. What do you want for it?"

"Five dollars," said Eliakim, studying the face of Paul, to observe the
effect of his announcement.

