heavy sleep. His pretty baby face looked very white as he slept, and
when Cecile laid her hand on his cheek it was cold.

She felt a fresh dread coming over her. Was Maurice too completely a
baby boy to go on such a long and weary pilgrimage? And oh! if this was
the case, what should she do? For they had nothing to live on. There
seemed no future at all before the little girl but the future of
finding Lovedy.

Cecile buried her head in her hands, and again the longing rose up
strong, passionate, fervent, that Jesus, the good Guide, would come to
her. He had come once. He was in the dark room last night. He answered
her though He made no sound, though, listen as she would, she could not
hear the faintest whisper from His lips. Still He was surely there.
Jane had said so, and Jane knew Him well; she said it was He who had
sent back her purse. Suppose she met Him in the street to-day, and He
knew her? Suppose He came out of the church behind them? Or suppose,
suppose He came to her again in the dark in that "lodging for the
night," where they must go? Cecile wished much that Jesus would come in
the daylight; she wanted to see His face, to look into His kind eyes.
But even to feel that He would be with her in the dark was a great
comfort in her present desolation.

Cecile was aroused from her meditations by something very soft and warm
rubbing against her hand. She raised her eyes to encounter the honest
and affectionate gaze of Toby.

Toby's eyes were bright, and he was wagging his tail, and altogether
seeming as if he found life agreeable. He gamboled a little when Cecile
looked at him, and put his forepaws on her lap. Toby meant nothing by
this but to please and cheer his little mistress. He saw she was down
and tired, and he was determined to put a bold face on things, and to
get a bit of sunshine, even on this December afternoon, into his own
honest eyes, if it would come nowhere else. Generally Cecile was the
brightest of the party; now Toby was determined to show her that he was
a dog worth having in adversity.

She did think so. Tears sprang to her own blue eyes. She threw her arms
round Toby's neck and gave him a great hug. In the midst of this caress
the dog's whole demeanor changed; he gave a quick spring out of
Cecile's embrace, and uttered an angry growl. A girl was approaching by
stealthy steps at the back of the little party.

The moment she heard Toby's bark she changed her walk to a quick run
and threw herself down beside Cecile with an easy hail-fellow-well-met
manner.

"Well, you're a queer un, you ere," she said, looking up pertly in
Cecile's face, "a-hugging of that big dawg, and a-sitting on the church
steps of St. Stephen's on the werry bitterest evening that has come
this year yet. Ha'n't you no home, now, as you sits yere?"

"No; but I am going to look out for a night's lodging at once,"
answered Cecile.

"For you and that ere little un, and the dawg?"

"Yes, we must all three be together whatever happens. Do you know of a
lodging, little girl?"

"My name's Jessie--Jessie White. Yes, I knows where I goes myself. 'Tis
werry warm there. 'Tis a'most _too_ warm sometimes."

"And is it cheap?" asked Cecile. "For me, and Maurice, and Toby, we
have got to do things _very_ cheap. We shall only be a day or two in
London, and we must do things _very_, very cheap while we stay."

"Oh! my eyes! hasn't we all to do things cheap? What does you say to a
penny? A penny is wot I pays for a share of a bed, and I s'pose as you
and that ere little chap could have one all to yerselves for tuppence,
and the dawg, he ud lie in for nothink. I calls tuppence uncommon cheap
to be warm for so many hours."

"Tuppence?" said Cecile. "Two pennies for Maurice and me and Toby. Yes,
I suppose that is cheap, Jessie White. I don't know anything about
prices, but it does not sound dear. We will go to your lodgings if you
will tell us the right street, and I hope it is not far away, for
Maurice is very tired."

"No, it ain't far, but you can't go without me; you would not get in
nohow. Now, I works in the factory close by, and I'm just out for an
hour for my dinner. I'll call for you yere, ef you like, at five
o'clock, and take you straight off, and you can get into bed at once.
And now s'pose as we goes and has a bit of dinner? I has tuppence for
my dinner. I did mean to buy a beautiful hartificial flower for my hat
instead, but somehow the sight of you three makes me so starved as I
can't stand it. Will you come to my shop and have dinner too?"

To this proposition Cecile, Maurice (who had awakened), and Toby all
eagerly agreed; and in a moment or two the little party found
themselves being regaled at the ragged girl's directions with great
basins of hot soup and hunches of bread. She took two basins of soup,
and two hunches of bread herself. But though Maurice and Cecile wished
very much for more, Cecile--even though it was to be paid for with
their own money--felt too timid to ask again, and the strange girl
appeared to think it impossible they could want more than one supply.

"I'm off now," she said to Cecile, coming up to her and wiping her
mouth.

"Yes; but where are we to meet you for the lodging?" asked the little
girl anxiously--"Maurice is _so_ tired--and you promised to show us.
Where shall we get the lodging for the night?"

The girl gave a loud rude laugh.

"'Tis in Dean Street," she said. "Dean Street's just round the
corner--'tis number twenty. I'll turn up if I ha' money."

"But you said we could not get in without you," said Cecile.

"Well, what a bother you ere! I'll turn up if I can. You be there at
the door, and if I can I'll be there too." Then she nodded violently,
and darted out of the shop.

Cecile wondered why she was in such a hurry to go, and at the change in
her manner, but she understood it a little better when she saw that the
ragged girl had so arranged matters that Cecile had to pay for all the
dinners!

"I won't never trust ragged girls like that again," was her wise mental
comment; and then she, Maurice, and Toby recommenced their weary
walking up and down. Their dinner had once more rested and refreshed
them, and Cecile hoped they might yet find the old court in Bloomsbury.
But the great fatigue of the morning came back a little sooner in the
short and dull winter's afternoon, and the child discovered now to her
great distress that she was lagging first. The shock and trouble she
had gone through the day before began to tell on her, and by the time
Maurice suddenly burst into tears her own footsteps were reeling.

"I think you're unkind, Cecile," said the little boy, "and I don't
believe we are ever, ever going to find our old court, or the lodgings
for the night."

"There's a card up at this house that we're passing," said Cecile.
"I'll ask for a lodging at this very house, Maurice."

She rang the bell timidly, and in a moment or so a pert girl with a
dirty cap on her head came and answered it.

"Please," said Cecile, raising her pretty anxious little face, "have
you got a lodging for the night for two little children and a dog? I
see a card up. We don't mind its being a very small lodging, only it
must be cheap."

The girl burst out laughing, and rude as the ragged girl's laugh had
been, this struck more painfully, with a keener sense of ridicule, on
Cecile's ear.

"Well, I never," said the servant-maid at last; "_you_ three want a
lodging in this yere house? A night's lodging she says, for her and the
little un and the dog she says, and she wants it cheap, she says. Go
further afield, missy, this house ain't for the likes of you," and then
the door was slammed in Cecile's face.

"Look, look," said Maurice excitedly, "there's a crowd going in there;
a great lot of people, and they're all just as ragged as me and you and
Toby. Let's go in and get a bed with the ragged people, Cecile."

Cecile raised her eyes, then she exclaimed joyfully:

"Why, this is Dean Street, Maurice. Yes, and that's, that's number
twenty. We can get our night's lodging without that unkind ragged girl
after all."

Then the children, holding each other's hands, and Toby keeping close
behind, found themselves in the file of people, and making their way
into the house, over the door of which was written:

"CHEAP LODGINGS FOR THE NIGHT FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN."

Early as the hour was, the house seemed already full from attic to
cellar. Cecile and Maurice were pushed into a good-sized room about
halfway up the first flight of stairs.

At the door of this room a woman stood, who demanded pennies of
everyone before they were allowed to enter the room.

Cecile had some slight difficulty in getting hers out of the bosom of
her frock; she did so with anxiety, and some effort at concealment,
which was observed by two people:

One was a red-faced, wicked-looking girl of about sixteen; the other
was a pale woman, who turned her worn faded brown eyes, with a certain
look of pathos in them, on the little pair.

The moment the people got into the room, there was a scramble for the
beds, which were nothing better than wooden boards, with canvas bags
laid on them, and a second piece of canvas placed for covering. But bad
and comfortless as these beds looked, without either pillow or bolster,
they were all eagerly coveted, and all soon full. Two and even three
got into each, and those who could not get accommodation in that way
were glad to throw themselves on the floor, as near to a great stove,
which burned hot and red, as possible.

It would have fared very badly with Cecile and Maurice were it not for
the woman who noticed them at the door. But as they were looking round
bewildered, and Toby was softly licking Cecile's hand, the little girl
felt a touch from this woman.

"I ha' my own bed laid ready in this corner, and you are both welcome
to share it, my little dears."

"Oh! they may come with me. I has my corner put by too," said the
red-faced girl, who also came up.

"Please, ma'am, we'll choose your bed, if Toby may sleep with us," said
Cecile, raising her eyes, and instinctively selecting the right company.

The woman gave a faint, sad smile, the girl turned scowling away, and
the next moment Maurice found himself curled up in the most comfortable
corner of the room. He was no longer cold, and hard as his bed was, he
was too tired to be particular, and in a moment he and Toby were both
sound asleep.

But Cecile did not sleep. Weary as she was, the foul air, the fouler
language, smote painfully on her ears. The heat, too, soon became
almost unbearable, and very soon the poor child found herself wishing
for the cold streets in preference to such a night's lodging.

There was no chance whatever of Jesus coming to a place like this, and
Cecile's last hope of His helping her vanished.

The strong desire that He would come again and do something wonderful,
as He had done the day before, had been with her for many dreary hours;
and when this hope disappeared, the last drop in her cup of trouble was
full, and poor, brave, tired little pilgrim that she was, she cried
long and bitterly. The pale woman by her side was long ago fast asleep.
Indeed silence, broken only by loud snores, was already brooding over
the noisy room. Cecile was just beginning to feel her own eyes
drooping, when she was conscious of a little movement. There was a gas
jet turned down low in the room, and by its light she could see that
unpleasant red-faced girl sitting up in bed. She was not only sitting
up, but presently she was standing up, and then the little girl felt a
cold chill of fear coming over her. She came up to the bedside.

Cecile almost thought she must scream, when suddenly the pale woman,
who had appeared so sound asleep, said quietly:

"Go back to yer bed at once, Peggie Jones. I know what you're up to."

The girl, discomfited, slunk away; and for ten minutes there was
absolute silence. Then the woman, laying her hand on Cecile's shoulder,
said very softly:

"My dear, you have a little money about you?"

"Yes," answered the child.

"I feared so. You must come away from here at once. I can protect you
from Peggie. But she has accomplices who'll come presently. You'd not
have a penny in the morning. Get up, child, you and the little boy.
Why, 'twas the blessed Jesus guided you to me to save. Come, poor
innocent lambs!"

There was one thing the woman had said which caused Cecile to think it
no hardship to turn out once more into the cold street. She rose quite
quietly, her heart still and calm, and took Maurice's hand, and
followed the woman down the stairs, and out once again.

"Now, as you ha' a bit of money, I'll get you a better lodging than
that," said the kind woman; and she was as good as her word, and took
the children to a cousin of her own, who gave them not only a tiny
little room, and a bed which seemed most luxurious by contrast, but
also a good supper, and all for the sum of sevenpence.

So Cecile slept very sweetly, for she was feeling quite sure again that
Jesus, who had even come into that dreadful lodging to prevent her
being robbed, and to take care of her, was going to be her Guide after
all.




CHAPTER III.

IN THE CORNER BEHIND THE ORGAN.


The next morning the children got up early. The woman of the house, who
had taken a fancy to them, gave them a good breakfast for fourpence
apiece, and Toby, who had always hitherto had share and share alike,
was now treated to such a pan of bones, and all for nothing, that he
could not touch the coffee the children offered him.

"Now," said Mrs. Hodge, "that ere dawg has got food enough and plenty
for the whole day. When a dawg as isn't accustomed to it gets his fill
o' bones 'tis wonderful how sustaining they is."

"And may we come back again here to-night, ma'am?" asked Cecile eagerly.

But here a disappointment awaited them. Mrs. Hodge, against her will,
was obliged to shake her head. Her house was a popular one. The little
room the children had occupied was engaged for a month from to-night.
No--she was sorry--but she had not a corner of her house to put them
in. It was the merest chance her being able to take them in for that
one night.

"It is a pity you can't have us, for I don't think you're a wicked
woman," said Maurice, raising his brown eyes to scan her face solemnly.

Mrs. Hodge laughed.

"Oh! what a queer, queer little baby boy!" she said, stooping down to
kiss him. "No, my pet; it 'ud be a hard heart as 'ud be wicked to you."

But though Mrs. Hodge was sorry, she could not help the children, and
soon after ten o'clock they once more stepped out into the streets. The
sun was shining, and Maurice's spirits were high. But Cecile, who had
the responsibility, felt sad and anxious. She was footsore and very
tired, and she knew no more than yesterday where or how to get a
night's lodging. She saw plainly that it would not do, with all that
money about her, to venture into a penny lodging; and she feared that,
even careful as they were, the ten shillings would soon be spent; and
as to her other gold, she assured herself that she would rather starve
than touch it until they got to France. The aim and object then of her
present quest must be to get to France.

Where was France? Her father said it lay south. Where was south? The
cabby, when she asked him, said he could not tell her, for he did not
know jography. What was jography? Was it a thing, or a person? Whoever
or whatever it was, it knew the way to France, to that haven of her
desire. Cecile must then endeavor to find jography. But where, and how?
A church door stood open. Some straggling worshipers came out. The
