Dick," he went on to young Warrener, "you are going to see a little
native artillery practice. These fellows are not like the Delhi
pandies, who are artillerymen trained by ourselves; here you will see
the real genuine native product; and as the manufacture of shell is in
its infancy, and as the shot seldom fits the gun within half an inch,
or even an inch, you will see something erratic. They may knock holes
in the wall, but it will take them a long time to cut enough holes near
each other to make a breach. There, do you see? there are another lot
of elephants and troops coming from the left. We shall have the whole
countryside here before long. Ah! that's just as we expected; they are
going to take up their position on that rising ground, which you
measured this morning, and found to be just five hundred yards off. Our
carbines make very decent practice at that distance, and you will see
we shall astonish them presently."

The two forces with elephants reached the rising ground at the same
time, and there was great waving of flags, letting off of muskets, and
beating of drums, while the multitude of footmen cheered and danced.

By this time the greater portion of the little garrison were gathered
behind the wall. This was some two feet thick, of rough sun-dried
bricks and mud. It was about fourteen feet high. Against it behind was
thrown up a bank of earth five feet high, and in the wall were
loopholes, four feet above the bank. At the corners of the walls, and
at intervals along them, were little towers, each capable of holding
about four men, who could fire over the top of the walls. In these
towers, and at the loopholes, Major Warrener placed twenty of his best
shots. There was a great deal of moving about on the rising ground;
then the footmen cleared away in front, and most of the elephants
withdrew, and then were seen ten guns ranged side by side. Close behind
them were two elephants, with gaudy trappings, while others, less
brilliantly arrayed, stood further back.

Major Warrener was in one of the little towers, with his second in
command, and his two sons to act as his orderlies.

"Run, boys, and tell the men in the other towers to fire at the howdahs
of the chief elephants; let the rest of them fire at the artillery.
Tell them to take good aim, and fire a volley; I will give the word.
Make haste, I want first shot; that will hurry them, and they will fire
wild."

The boys started at a run, one each way, and in a minute the
instructions were given. The major glanced down, saw that every carbine
was leveled, and gave the word:

"Fire!"

The sound of the volley was answered in a few seconds by a yell of
dismay from the enemy. One of the state elephants threw up its trunk,
and started at a wild gallop across the plain, and a man was seen to
fall from the howdah as it started. There was also confusion visible in
the howdahs of the other elephants. Several men dropped at the guns;
some, surprised and startled, fired wildly, most of the balls going
high over the village; while others, whose loading was not yet
complete, ran back from the guns. Only one ball hit the wall, and made
a ragged hole of a foot in diameter.

"That's sickened them for the present," Captain Dunlop said, "I expect
they'll do nothing now till it gets a bit cooler, for even a nigger
could hardly stand this. Ah, we are going to give them another volley,
this time a stronger one."

Fifty carbines spoke out this time, and the wildest confusion was
caused among the elephants and footmen, who were now trying to drag the
guns back. Again, a third volley, and then the garrison were dismissed
from their posts, and told to lie down and keep cool till wanted again.

Half an hour later another large train of elephants, ten of them with
guns, came from the direction of Bithri, and proceeded to a tope at
about a mile from the village. There the elephants of the first comers
had gathered after the stampede, and presently a great tent was raised
in front of the tope.

"Bithri is going to do it in style," Dick laughed to his brother. "I
shouldn't mind some iced sherbet at present, if he has got any to
spare."

"Look, Dick, there is a movement; they are getting the guns in position
on that knoll a little to the right, and a hundred yards or so in front
of their tent."

Dick took the field-glass which his brother handed him.

"Yes, we shall have a salute presently; but they won't breach the wall
this afternoon at that distance."

Twenty guns opened fire upon the village, and the shot flew overhead,
or buried themselves in the ground in front, or came with heavy thuds
against the wall, or, in some instances, crashed into the upper parts
of the houses. After an hour's firing it slackened a little, and
finally died out, for the heat was tremendous.

At three o'clock there was a move again; ten of the guns were brought
forward to a point about a thousand yards from the wall, while ten
others were taken round and placed on the road, at about the same
distance, so as to command the gate. Again the fire opened, and this
time more effectually. Again the men were called to the loopholes. The
greater portion of them were armed, not with the government carbines,
but with sporting rifles, shortened so as to be carried as carbines;
and although none of the weapons were sighted for more than six hundred
yards, all with sufficient elevation could send balls far beyond that
distance. Ten of the best-armed men were told off against each battery
of artillery, and a slow, steady fire was opened. It was effective,
for, with the field-glasses, men could be seen to fall frequently at
the guns, and the fire became more hurried, but much wilder and even
less accurate, than it had hitherto been. The rest of the men, with the
exception of ten told off for special duty, were dispersed round the
walls, to check the advance of the footmen, who crept daringly to
within a short distance, and kept up a rolling fire around the village.

At five o'clock half of the men were taken off the walls, and several
were set to build a wall four feet high, in a semicircle just inside
the gate, which had been struck by several shots, and showed signs of
yielding. Two or three of the nearest huts were demolished rapidly,
there being plenty of native tools in the village, and a rough wall was
constructed of the materials; a trench five feet deep and eight feet
wide was simultaneously dug across the entrance. At six o'clock, just
as the wall was finished, an unlucky shot struck one of the doorposts,
and the gate fell, dragging the other post with it. A distant yell of
triumph came through the air.

The gates fell partly across the trench. "Now, lads, push them back a
bit if you can; if not, knock the part over the ditch to pieces; it's
half-smashed already."

It was easier to knock the gate, already splintered with shot, to
pieces, than to remove it.

"Now, Dunlop, fetch one of those powder-bags we brought for blowing up
the gates; put it in the trench, with a long train. You attend to the
train, and when I give the word, fire it. Bring up those two big pots
of boiling water to the gate-towers. Captain Kent, thirty men of your
troop will hold the other three walls; but if you hear my dog-whistle,
every man is to leave his post and come on here at a run. Thirty men
more will man this front wall and towers. They are to direct their fire
to check the crowd pushing forward behind those immediately assaulting.
The remaining forty will fire through the loopholes as long as
possible, and will then form round the breastwork and hold it to the
last. One man in each gate-tower, when the enemy reach the gate, will
lay down his carbine, and attend to the boiling water. Let them each
have a small pot as a ladle. But let them throw the water on those
pressing toward the gate, not on those who have reached it. Those are
our affair."

In five minutes every man was at his post, and a sharp fire from the
seventy men along the front wall opened upon the masses of the enemy,
who came swarming toward the gate. The effect on the crowd, many
thousand strong, was very severe, for each shot told; but the Mussulmen
of Oude are courageous, and the rush toward the gate continued. Fast as
those in front fell, the gaps were imperceptible in the swarming crowd.
Major Warreners band of forty men were called away from the loopholes,
and were drawn up behind the ditch; and as the head of the assaulting
crowd neared the gate volley after volley rang out, and swept away the
leaders, foremost among whom were a number of Sepoys, who, when their
regiments mutinied, had returned to their homes, and now headed the
peasantry in their attack upon the British force. When the dense mass
arrived within thirty yards of the gate Major Warrener gave the word,
and a retreat was made behind the breastwork. On, with wild shouts,
came the assailants; the first few saw the trench, and leaped it; those
who followed fell in, until the trench was full; then the crowd swept
in unchecked. The defenders had laid by their carbines now, and had
drawn their revolvers. They were divided into two lines, who were
alternately to take places in front and fire, while those behind loaded
their revolvers. The din, as the circle inclosed by the low wall filled
with the assailants, was prodigious; the sharp incessant crack of the
revolver; the roll of musketry from the walls; the yells of the enemy;
the shrieks, which occasionally rose outside the gate as the men in the
towers scattered the boiling water broadcast over them, formed a chaos.
With the fury and despair of cornered wild beasts, the enemy fought,
striving to get over the wall which so unexpectedly barred their way;
but their very numbers and the pressure from behind hampered their
efforts.

If a man in the front line of defenders had emptied his revolver before
the one behind him had reloaded, he held his place with the sword.

"The wall's giving from the pressure!" Dick exclaimed to his father;
and the latter put his whistle to his lips, and the sound rang out
shrill and high above the uproar.

A minute later the front of the wall tottered and fell. Then Major
Warrener held up his hand, and Captain Dunlop, who had stood all the
time quietly watching him, fired the train. A thundering explosion, a
flight of bodies and fragments of bodies through the air, a yell of
terror from the enemy, and then, as those already rushing triumphantly
through the breach stood paralyzed, the British fell upon them sword in
hand; the men from the other walls came rushing up, eager to take their
part in the fray, and the enemy inside the gate were either cut down or
driven headlong through it!

The crowd beyond, already shaken by the murderous fire that the party
on the walls kept up unceasingly upon them, while they stood unable to
move from the jam in front, had recoiled through their whole mass at
the explosion, and the sight of the handful of their comrades flying
through the gate completed the effect. With yells of rage and
discomfiture, each man turned and fled, while the defenders of the
gateway passed out, and joined their fire to that of their comrades
above on the flying foe.

"Thank God, it is all over!" Major Warrener said; "but it has been hot
while it lasted. Have we had many casualties?"

The roll was soon called, and it was found that the besieged had
escaped marvelously. One young fellow, a civil servant, had been shot
through the head, by a stray ball entering the loophole through which
he was firing. Thirteen of the defenders of the gateway were wounded
with pistol shots, or with sword cuts; but none of the injuries were of
a serious character.

It was now rapidly becoming dark, and Major Warrener mounted one of the
towers to have a last look.

The enemy had rallied at a distance from the walls, and two fresh
bodies of troops, with elephants, were to be seen approaching from the
distance.

"That is all right," he said. "They will wait, and renew the attack
to-morrow."

An hour afterward it was night. The moon had not risen yet, and Major
Warrener had a huge bonfire lighted outside the gate, with posts and
solid beams from the fallen gates and from the houses.

"That will burn for hours," he said, "quite long enough for our
purpose."

Lights could be seen scattered all over the side of the plain on which
the tents were erected, some of them coming up comparatively close to
the walls. On the road in front, but far enough to be well beyond the
light of the fire, voices could be heard, and occasionally a shout that
they would finish with the infidel dogs to-morrow rose on the air.
Evidently by the low buzz of talk there were a large number here, and
probably the guns had been brought closer, to check any attempt on the
part of the little garrison to dash through their enemies. The blazing
fire, however, throwing as it did a bright light upon the empty gateway
through which they must pass, showed that at present, at least, the
besieged had no idea of making their escape.

At nine o'clock the whole of the garrison stood to their horses. Not
only had their feet been muffled with the leather shoes, but cloths, of
which there were plenty in the village, had been wound round them,
until their footfalls would, even on the hardest road, have been
noiseless. Then Major Warrener led the way to the spot where ten men
had been at work during the afternoon.

At this point, which was on the side furthest from that upon which was
the main camp of the enemy, a clump of trees and bushes grew close to
the wall outside; behind them a hole in the wall, wide enough and high
enough for a horse to pass through easily, had been made, and the ditch
behind had been filled up with rubbish. There was no word spoken; every
one had received his orders, and knew what to do; and as silently as
phantoms the troop passed through, each man leading his horse. Once
outside the bushes, they formed fours and went forward, still leading
their horses-as these were less likely to snort with their masters at
their heads.

Ten minutes' walking convinced them that they had little to fear, and
that no guards had been set on that side. It was regarded by the enemy
as so certain that the English would not abandon their horses and fly
on foot, only to be overtaken and destroyed the next day, that they had
only thought it necessary to watch the gateway through which, as they
supposed, the British must, if at all, escape on horseback.

The troop now mounted, and trotted quietly away, making a wide detour,
and then going straight toward Bithri. The moon had risen; and when,
about a mile and a half in front, they could see the castle, Major
Warrener, who with Captain Kent and the native guides was riding ahead,
held up his hand. The troop came to a halt.

"There are some bullock-carts just ahead. Take the mufflings off your
horse's feet and ride on by yourself," he said to one of the native
guides, "and see what is in the wagons, and where they are going."

The man did as ordered, but he needed no questions. The wagons were
full of wounded men going to Bithri. He passed on with a word of
greeting, turned his horse when he reached a wood a little in front,
and allowed them to pass, and then rode back to the troop.

"Four bullock-carts full of wounded, sahib."

"The very thing," Major Warrener exclaimed; "nothing could be more
lucky."

Orders were passed down the line that they were to ride along until the
leaders were abreast of the first cart, then to halt and dismount
suddenly. The drivers were to be seized, gagged, and bound. The wounded
were not to be injured.

"These men are not mutinous Sepoys, with their hands red with the blood
of women," Major Warrener said; "they are peasants who have fought
bravely for their country, and have done their duty, according to their
light."




CHAPTER IX.

SAVE BY A TIGER.


The drivers of the bullock-carts were startled at the noiseless
appearance by their side of a body of horsemen; still more startled,
when suddenly that phantom-like troop halted and dismounted. The rest
was like a dream; in an instant they were seized, bound, and gagged,
and laid down in the field at some distance from the road; one of them,
however, being ungagged, and asked a few questions before being finally
left. The wounded, all past offering the slightest resistance, were
still more astonished when their captors, whom the moonlight now showed
to be white, instead of cutting their throats as they expected, lifted
them tenderly and carefully from the wagons, and laid them down on a
bank a short distance off.

"Swear by the Prophet not to call for aid, or to speak, should any one
pass the road, for one hour!" was the oath administered to each, and
all who were still conscious swore to observe it. Then with the empty
wagons the troops proceeded on their way. At the last clump of trees, a
quarter of a mile from the castle, there was another halt. The troop
dismounted, led their horses some little distance from the road, and
tied them to the trees. Twenty men remained as a guard. Four of the
others wrapped themselves up so as to appear at a short distance like
natives, and took their places at the bullocks' heads, and the rest
crowded into the wagons, covering themselves with their cloaks to hide
their light uniforms. Then the bullocks were again set in motion across
the plain. So careless were the garrison that they were not even
challenged as they approached the gate of the outworks, and without a
question the gate swung back.

"More wounded!" the officer on guard said. "This is the third lot.
Those children of Sheitan must have been aided by their father. Ah,
treachery!" he cried, as, the first cart moving into the moonlight
beyond the shadow of the gateway, he saw the white faces of the
supposed wounded.

There was a leap from the nearest driver upon him, and he was felled to
the ground. But the man at the open gate had heard the cry, and drew a
pistol and fired it before he could be reached. Then the British leaped
from the carts, and twenty of them scattered through the works, cutting
down those who offered resistance and disarming the rest. These were
huddled into the guardroom, and five men with cocked revolvers placed
at the door, with orders to shoot them down at the first sign of
movement.

The garrison in the castle itself had been alarmed by the shots; and
shouts were heard, and loud orders, and the sentries over the gate
discharged their muskets. There was little time given them to rally,
however; for Captain Kent, with four of his men, had, on leaping from
the cart, made straight across the drawbridge over the moat, for the
gateway, to which they attached the petards which they had brought with
them. Then they ran back to the main body, who stood awaiting the
explosion. In a few seconds it came, and then with a cheer the troops
dashed across the drawbridge, and in through the splintered gate. There
was scarcely any resistance. Taken utterly by surprise, and being
numerically inferior to their assailants--for nearly all the fighting
men had gone out with their lord--the frightened retainers tried to
hide themselves rather than to resist, and were speedily disarmed and
gathered in the courtyard.

Major Warrener, informed by the bullock drivers of the quarter in which
the Europeans were confined, followed by a dozen men, made his way
straight to it, and had the delight of being greeted by the voices of
his countrymen and women. These were, as reported, three officers and
five ladies, all of whom were absolutely bewildered by the surprise and
suddenness of their rescue.

There was no time for explanation. The stables were ransacked and eight
of the rajah's best horses taken. Then, when all was ready for
starting, Major Warrener proceeded to the door of the women's
apartments. Here, in obedience to the order he had sent her, the wife
of the talookdar, veiled from head to foot, and surrounded by her
attendants, stood to await the orders of her captor.

"Madam," said Captain Wilkins, who spoke the dialect in use in Oude,
"Major Warrener, the British officer in command, bids me tell you that
this castle, with you and all that it contains, are in his power, and
that he might give it to the flames and carry you off as hostage. But
he will not do this. The Rajah of Bithri is a brave man, but he is
wrong to fight against fate. The English Raj will prevail again, and
all who have rebelled will be punished. We treat him as a brave but
mistaken enemy; and as we have spared his castle and his family, so we
hope that he in turn will behave kindly to any Englishman or woman who
may fall into his hands or may ask his aid. Lastly, let no one leave
this castle till daybreak, for whoever does so we will slay without
