
"Two have run away; the one against the rocks on the other side was
wounded, for I saw him throw up his arms, and it was he who screamed.
The man by him dropped where he stood; the one behind the rock is
killed, I saw his body carried away in the white water."

Half a minute later Dias and Bertie came up.

"So they have come, senor?"

"Yes, there were four of them. Your wife saw them, though I could only
make out one. They shot two arrows at us, and I answered them. The man
I saw was killed, and Donna Maria said that one on the other side also
fell, and another was wounded."

"That was a good beginning," Dias said. "After such a lesson they will
attempt nothing more to-night, and I doubt whether they will come down
in the morning. They can get sight of the barricades from that bend a
hundred yards down, and I don't think they will dare come up when they
see how ready we are for them."

"Well, we will work out our watch anyhow, Dias. Now that I see how
sharp Donna Maria's eyes are I have not the least fear of being
surprised."

"I will stop with you," Bertie said; "I shall have no chance of going
off to sleep again after being wakened up like that."

"If you are going to stop, Bertie, you had better go back and fetch a
blanket, it is chilly here; then if you like you can doze off again
till your watch comes."

"There is no fear of that, Harry. I have been eight-and-forty hours on
deck more than once. I will warrant myself not to go to sleep."

In spite of this, however, in less than ten minutes after his return
Bertie's regular breathing showed that he was sound asleep. Harry and
Maria continued their watch, but no longer with the same intentness as
before. They were sure that Dias would not have lain down unless he
felt perfectly certain that the Chincas would make no fresh move until
the morning, and they chatted gaily until, at two o'clock, Dias came up.

"Everything is quiet here, Dias. My brother is fast asleep, but I will
wake him now that you have come up."

"Do not do so, senor; he worked very hard building the walls today. If
I see anything suspicious I will rouse him. We may have work tomorrow,
and it is much better that he should sleep on."

"Thank you, Dias! the fatigue has told on him more than on us; his
figure is not set yet, and he feels it more."

He walked back to the tents with Maria.

"If you wake just as daylight breaks please rouse me," he said.

"I shall wake, senor; I generally get up at daybreak. That is the best
time for work down in the plain, and I generally contrive to get
everything done before breakfast at seven."

Harry slept soundly until he was called.

"The sky is just beginning to get light, senor."

He turned out at once. Jose was already feeding the mules.

"You had better come along with me, Jose, and bring that gun of yours
with you. If the savages do attack, it will be well to make a forcible
impression on them."

Greatly pleased with the permission, Jose took up the old musket he
carried and accompanied Harry.

"What have you got in that gun, Jose?"

"The charge of buck-shot that you gave me the other day, senor."

"All right! but don't fire unless they get close. The shot will not
carry far like a bullet; but if fired when they are close it is better
than any bullet, for you might hit half a dozen of them at once."

Jose had been allowed to practise at their halting-places, and though
he could not be called a good shot, he could shoot well enough to do
good execution at thirty or forty yards.

Bertie was still asleep.

"Everything quiet, Dias?"

"I have seen nothing moving since I came out."

"Now, Bertie," Harry said, stirring his brother up with his foot. "All
hands on deck!"

Bertie sat up and opened his eyes. "What is up now?" he said. "Ay,
what, is it you, Harry, and Jose too? I must have been asleep!"

"Been asleep! Why, you went off in the middle of my watch, and Dias has
been on the look-out for over three hours."

"Oh, confound it! You don't mean to say that I have slept for over five
hours? Why didn't you wake me, Dias?" he asked angrily.

"Two eyes were quite enough to keep watch," Dias said. "I should have
waked you if I had seen anything of the savages. Besides, Don Harry
said you might as well go on sleeping if nothing happened, and I
thought so too."

"I feel beastly ashamed of myself," Bertie said. "I don't want to be
treated like a child, Harry."

"No, Bertie, and I should not think of treating you so; but you had had
very hard work, and were completely knocked up, which was not
wonderful; and you may want all your strength to-day. Besides, you
know, you would have been of no use had you been awake, for you could
have seen nothing. Donna Maria's eyes were a good deal sharper than
mine, and I am quite sure that, tired as you were, Dias would have seen
them coming long before you would. We had better lie down again, for it
will be light enough soon for them to make us out. How far do their
arrows fly, Dias?"

"They can shoot very straight up to forty or fifty yards, but beyond
that their arrows are of very little use."

"Well, then, we shall be able to stop them before they get to that
ravine."

Presently, as it became light, a figure showed itself at the turn of
the ravine.

"Don't fire at him," Harry said; "it is better that they should think
that our guns won't reach them. Besides, if the beggars will leave us
alone, I have no wish to harm them."

In a minute or two the figure disappeared behind the bend and two or
three others came out. "They think that our guns won't carry so far, or
we should have shot the first man."

For a quarter of an hour there were frequent changes, until at least
fifty men had taken a look at them.

"Now there will be a council," Harry said as the last disappeared.
"They see what they have got before them, and I have no doubt they
don't like it."

"I don't think they will try it, senor," Dias said. "At any rate they
will not do so until they have tried every other means of getting at
us."

Half an hour passed, and then Harry said. "I will stop here with my
brother, Dias, and you and Jose had better examine the hillsides and
ascertain whether there is any place where they can come down. You know
a great deal better than I where active naked-footed men could clamber
down. They might be able to descend with ease at a place that would
look quite impossible to me."

Without a word Dias shouldered his rifle and walked away, followed by
Jose. He returned in two hours.

"There are several places where I am sure the savages could come down.
Now, senors, breakfast is ready; I will leave Jose here, and we will go
and talk matters over while we eat. The tents are only a hundred yards
away, so that if Jose shouts, we can be back here long before the
savages get up, for they could not come fast through that torrent."

"It seems to me," Harry said after they had finished the meal, "that if
there are only one or two points by which they could climb down we
could prevent their doing so by picking them off; but if there are
more, and they really come on in earnest, we could not stop them."

"There are many more than that," Dias replied. "I made out certainly
four points on the right-hand side and three on the left where I could
make my way down; there are probably twice as many where they could
descend."

"Then I should say that the first thing to do is to go up through the
gorge above and see whether there is any place that could be better
defended than this. If we find such a spot, of course we could move to
it; if not, we shall have to settle whether to go up the gorge till we
get to some place where the mules can climb out of it, or stay here and
fight it out. By camping on the stream at a point where it could not be
forded, and making a breast-work with the bales, stones, and so on, I
think we could certainly beat off any attack by daylight, but I admit
that we should have no chance if they should make a rush during the
night."

"I will go at once," said Dias, "and examine the river higher up. If I
can find no place where the mules can climb, I am sure to be able to
find some spot where we could do so. But that would mean the failure of
our expedition, for we certainly could not go up the mountains,
purchase fresh animals, food, and tools, and get down to the place we
are looking for until too late."

"That would be serious, Dias, but cannot be counted against our lives.
If there is no other way of escape from these savages, we must
certainly abandon the animals and make our way back as best we can. In
that case we must give up all idea of finding this gold stream. The
star would not be in the same place again for another year, and even
then we might not find it; so we must make up our minds to do our best
in some other direction. That point we must consider as settled. I
should not feel justified in risking my brother's life, yours, your
wife's, and your nephew's, by remaining here to fight we know not how
many savages--for there may be many more than the fifty we saw this
morning, and they may in a day or two be joined by many others of their
tribe."

"I should not like to lose all the animals and go back empty-handed,"
Dias said after a silence of two or three minutes, "unless it were a
last resource."

"Nor should I, Dias; but you see, if we linger too long we may find it
impossible to retire, we may be so hemmed in that there would be no
chance of our getting through. For the day of course we are safe. The
savages will have to decide among themselves whether to give the matter
up, seeing that they are sure to lose many lives before they overpower
us. Then, if they determine to attack us, they will have to settle how
it is to be done. Numbers of them will go up to the top of the hills on
both sides and try to find a point at which they can make their way
down; others, perhaps--which would be still more serious--may go
farther up into the hills to find a spot where they could come down and
issue out by the upper gorge, and then our retreat would be altogether
cut off. All this will take time, so we may feel sure that no attack
will be made to-day."

"I will start up the river at once, senor. Certainly the first point to
be settled is whether we can find a more defensible spot than this, the
second whether there is any way by which the animals can be taken up."

"There must surely be many points higher up where this can be done."

"Yes, senor, if we could get to them. But you saw we had difficulty in
making our way through this gorge; there may be others higher up where
it would be impossible either for us or the animals to pass."

"I did not think of that. Yes, that must be so. Well, you had certainly
better go at once. My brother will relieve Jose, and after the boy has
breakfasted he can return to his post, and Bertie can join me. I think
if I see the savages trying to find a path I will open fire upon them.
I don't say I should be able to hit them, for the top of those hills
must be eight or nine hundred yards' range, and it is not easy to hit
an object very much above or very much below you; but it is important
that they should know that our weapons carry as far as that; when they
hear bullets strike close to them they will hesitate about coming lower
down, and unless they do come within two or three hundred feet from the
bottom they cannot be sure of getting down."

Dias nodded. "That is a very good idea. Another cause of delay will be
that those at the top cannot see far down the rock on their own side,
so they will have to start by guess-work. Each party must fix upon the
easiest places on the opposite side, and then go back again and change
sides. I don't suppose they know any more of this place than we do.
They always keep down in the plains, and it is only because they met us
down there that they have followed us so far. I believe they will
follow on as long as they think there is a chance of destroying us, for
they are so jealous of any white man coming into what they regard as
their country that they would spare no pains to kill anyone who
ventured there. Now I will go, senor. You will keep near this end of
the valley, in case there should be an alarm that they are coming up
the stream."

"Certainly; and my brother shall remain with Jose. With his rifle and
the two double-barrelled guns and Jose's musket they could hold the
ravine against anything but a rush of the whole tribe."

An hour later Harry saw a number of figures appear against the sky-line
on both sides. As they were clustered together, and would afford a far
better mark than a single Indian, he took a steady aim at the party on
the southern hill and fired. He had aimed above rather than below them,
as, had the ball struck much below, they might not hear it, whereas, if
it went over their heads, they would certainly do so. A couple of
seconds after firing he saw a sudden movement among the savages, and a
moment later not one was to be seen. Donna Maria, who was standing
close by him watching them, clapped her hands. "Your ball must have
gone close to them," she said, "but I don't think you hit anyone."

"I did not try to do so," he said. "I wanted the ball to go just over
their heads, so that they should know that even at that distance they
were not safe. I have no doubt that astonishment as much as fear made
them bolt. They'll be very careful how far they come down the side of
the hill after that. Now for the fellows on the other side."

But these too had disappeared, having evidently noticed the effect
produced upon the others. After a pause heads appeared here and there
at the edge of the crests. Evidently the lesson had impressed them with
the necessity for precaution, as they no longer kept together, and they
had apparently crawled up to continue their investigations. Beyond
keeping a watch to see that none had attempted to descend the slope
Harry did not interfere with them. At times he strolled to the
breast-work, but no movement had been seen in that direction. In two
hours Dias returned.

"The gorge above is a quarter of a mile through, and very difficult to
pass. It is half-blocked with great rocks in two or three places, and
there would be immense difficulty in getting the mules over. Beyond
that it widens again, but the extent is not more than half what it is
here. The walls are almost perpendicular, and I do not think that it
would be possible to climb them at any point. Farther up there is
another ravine. It is very narrow--not half so wide as this--and the
stream rushes with great velocity along it. Two hundred yards from the
entrance the rocks close in completely, and there is a fall of water
sixty or seventy feet high."

"Well, that settles the point, Dias. We cannot get the animals out
except by the way they came in. As for ourselves, we might climb up at
some point in this ravine, but not in the others."

"That is so, senor," Dias said. "The outlook is a bad one--that is to
say, we may now be unable to reach the gold river in time--but so long
as we stay here we may be safe. We have plenty of provisions, we can
catch fish in the stream, and no doubt shall find birds in the bushes
at the lower part of the slopes. I doubt whether the natives will dare
come down those precipices at night. If they try to descend by day, we
can very well defend ourselves."

"The only question is, How long will it take to tire them out?"

"That I cannot tell. We know so little of the Chincas that we have
nothing to go upon. Some savages have patience enough to wait for any
time to carry out their revenge or slay an enemy; others are fickle,
and though they may be fierce in attack, soon tire of waiting, and are
eager to return to their homes again. I cannot think that they will
speedily leave. They have assembled, many of them perhaps from
considerable distances; they have had two days' march up here, and have
lost at least two of their comrades. I think they will certainly not
leave until absolutely convinced that they cannot get at us, but
whether they may come to that decision in two days or a month I cannot
say."




CHAPTER VIII

DEFEAT OF THE NATIVES


Bertie, who had joined Harry when he saw Dias approaching, had listened
silently to their talk, then said:

"Don't you think that, by loading the mules and moving towards the
mouth of the next gorge just as it is getting dark, we might induce the
Chincas to think that we are going that way, and so to follow along the
top of the hills. We might, as soon as night has fallen, come back
again and go down the stream. Of course there may be some of them left
to watch the mouth of the ravine, but we could drive them off easily
enough, and get a long start before the fellows on the hills know what
has happened."

None of the others spoke immediately; then Harry said:

"The idea is a good one as far as it goes. But you see at present we
are in a very strong position. If we leave this and they overtake us in
the woods, we shall not have the advantages that we have here."

"Yes, I see that, Harry; but almost anything is better than having to
wait here and lose our chance of finding that gold."

"We can't help that, Bertie. You know how much that gold would be to
me, but, as I said this morning, I will run no desperate risks to
obtain it. When I started upon this expedition I knew that the chances
of success were extremely slight, and that there might be a certain
amount of danger to encounter from wild beasts and perhaps brigands;
but I had never calculated upon such a risk as this, and certainly I am
not prepared to accept the responsibility of leading others into it."

There was again silence, which was broken at last by Dias.

"The proposal of the young senor is a very bold one; but, as you say,
Don Harry, after leaving our position we should be followed and
surrounded. In the forest that would be very bad. I should say let us
wait for at least a week; that will still give us time to reach the
gold valley. By then the savages may have left, and some other plan may
have occurred to us; at any rate, at the end of a week we shall see how
things go. The Indians may have made an attack, and may lose heart
after they are repulsed. They may find difficulty in procuring food,
though I hardly think that is probable. Still, many things may occur in
a week. If at the end of that time they are still here, we can decide
whether to try some such plan as the young senor has thought of, or
whether to wait until the Indians leave, and then return to Cuzco; for
I feel certain that the place cannot be found except by the help of the
star."

"Well, then," Bertie said, "could we not hit upon some plan to frighten
them?"

"What sort of plan, Bertie?"

"Well, of course we could not make a balloon--I mean a
fire-balloon--because we have no paper to make it with. If we could,
and could let it up at night, with some red and blue fires to go off
when it got up high, I should think it would scare them horribly."

"Yes; but it would be still better, Bertie, if we could make a balloon
big enough to carry us and the mules and everything else out of this
place, and drop us somewhere about the spot we want to get to."

"Oh, it is all very well to laugh, Harry! I said, I knew we could not
make a fire-balloon; I only gave that as an example. If we had powder
enough we might make some rockets, and I should think that would scare
them pretty badly."

"Yes, but we haven't got powder, Bertie. We have plenty of cartridges
for sporting purposes, or for fighting; but a rocket is a thing that
wants a lot of powder, besides saltpetre and charcoal, and so on."

"Yes, yes, I know that," Bertie said testily. "My suggestion was that
we might frighten them somehow, and I still don't see why we shouldn't
be able to do it. Let us try to hit upon something else."

"There is a good deal in what the young senor says," Dias said gravely.
"All the Indians are very superstitious, and think anything they don't
understand is magic. It is worth thinking over: but before we do
anything else we might find out how many of them there are at the other
end of the ravine. Only a few may be left, or possibly the whole tribe
may be gathered there at nightfall. To-night nothing will be settled,
but to-morrow night I will go down the torrent with Jose. I will carry
your double-barrelled guns with me, senor, if you will let me have
them. When we get to the other end I will take up my station there.
Jose is small and active. He could crawl forward and ascertain how many
of them there are. If he should be discovered, which is not likely, he
would run back to me. I should have four barrels ready to pour into
them. That would stop them, for they would think we were all there and
were going to attack them, and before they could recover from their
alarm we should be back here again."

"That seems a good plan, Dias; but I do not see why Bertie and I should
not go down with you."

"It would be better not, senor. In the first place, they may have men
posted at their end of the ravine, and though two of us might crawl
down without being seen, just as they crawled up here, they would be
more likely to see four; in the next place, they might chance to crawl
down the hillside above just as we were going down the ravine, and
Maria and the animals would be at their mercy."

"They are hardly likely to choose the exact moment when we are to be
away, but I quite agree with you that the risk must not be run."

"Well," Bertie said, returning to his former idea, "if Dias can go down
there, I still think that somehow we might get up a scare."
