violent and altogether idiotical contortions of the face, that were
very far from expressing what he intended. However, I knew what the
poor fellow meant by it, so I smiled to him in return, and endeavoured
to make believe that he was winking.

"Now, lads," said Jack, when we were composed enough to listen to him,
"yon green object is not a shark; it is a stream of light issuing from
a cave in the rocks. Just after I made my dive, I observed that this
light came from the side of the rock above which we are now sitting; so
I struck out for it, and saw an opening into some place or other that
appeared to be luminous within. For one instant I paused to think
whether I ought to venture. Then I made up my mind, and dashed into it.
For you see, Peterkin, although I take some time to tell this, it
happened in the space of a few seconds, so that I knew I had wind
enough in me to serve to bring me out o' the hole and up to the surface
again. Well, I was just on the point of turning--for I began to feel a
little uncomfortable in such a place--when it seemed to me as if there
was a faint light right above me. I darted upwards, and found my head
out of water. This relieved me greatly, for I now felt that I could
take in air enough to enable me to return the way I came. Then it all
at once occurred to me that I might not be able to find the way out
again; but, on glancing downwards, my mind was put quite at rest by
seeing the green light below me streaming into the cave, just like the
light that we had seen streaming out of it, only what I now saw was
much brighter.

"At first I could scarcely see anything as I gazed around me, it was so
dark; but gradually my eyes became accustomed to it, and I found that I
was in a huge cave, part of the walls of which I observed on each side
of me. The ceiling just above me was also visible, and I fancied that I
could perceive beautiful glittering objects there; but the farther end
of the cave was shrouded in darkness. While I was looking around me in
great wonder, it came into my head that you two would think I was
drowned; so I plunged down through the passage again in a great hurry,
rose to the surface, and--here I am!"

When Jack concluded his recital of what he had seen in this remarkable
cave, I could not rest satisfied till I had dived down to see it: which
I did, but found it so dark, as Jack had said, that I could scarcely
see anything. When I returned, we had a long conversation about it,
during which I observed that Peterkin had a most lugubrious expression
on his countenance.

"What's the matter, Peterkin?" said I.

"The matter?" he replied. "It's all very well for you two to be talking
away like mermaids about the wonders of this cave, but you know I must
be content to hear about it, while you are enjoying yourselves down
there like mad dolphins. It's really too bad."

"I'm very sorry for you, Peterkin, indeed I am," said Jack, "but we
cannot help you. If you would only learn to dive--"

"Learn to fly, you might as well say!" retorted Peterkin in a very
sulky tone.


"If you would only consent to keep still," said I, "we would take you
down with us in ten seconds."

"Hum!" returned Peterkin; "suppose a salamander was to propose to you
'only to keep still,' and he would carry you through a blazing fire in
a few seconds, what would you say?"

We both laughed and shook our heads, for it was evident that nothing
was to be made of Peterkin in the water. But we could not rest
satisfied till we had seen more of this cave; so, after further
consultation, Jack and I determined to try if we could take down a
torch with us, and set fire to it in the cavern. This we found to be an
undertaking of no small difficulty, but we accomplished it at last by
the following means: First, we made a torch of a very inflammable
nature out of the bark of a certain tree, which we cut into strips,
and, after twisting, cemented together with a kind of resin or gum,
which we also obtained from another tree; neither of which trees,
however, was known by name to Jack. This, when prepared, we wrapped up
in a great number of plies of cocoa-nut cloth, so that we were
confident it could not get wet during the short time it should be under
water. Then we took a small piece of the tinder, which we had carefully
treasured up lest we should require it, as before said, when the sun
should fail us; also, we rolled up some dry grass and a few chips,
which, with a little bow and drill, like those described before, we
made into another bundle, and wrapped it up in cocoa-nut cloth. When
all was ready, we laid aside our garments, with the exception of our
trousers, which, as we did not know what rough scraping against the
rocks we might be subjected to, we kept on.

Then we advanced to the edge of the rocks, Jack carrying one bundle,
with the torch, I the other, with the things for producing fire.

"Now don't weary for us, Peterkin, should we be gone some time," said
Jack; "we'll be sure to return in half-an-hour at the very latest,
however interesting the cave should be, that we may relieve your mind."

"Farewell!" said Peterkin, coming up to us with a look of deep but
pretended solemnity, while he shook hands and kissed each of us on the
cheek. "Farewell! and while you are gone I shall repose my weary limbs
under the shelter of this bush, and meditate on the changefulness of
all things earthly, with special reference to the forsaken condition of
a poor shipwrecked sailor boy!" So saying, Peterkin waved his hand,
turned from us, and cast himself upon the ground with a look of
melancholy resignation, which was so well feigned that I would have
thought it genuine had he not accompanied it with a gentle wink. We
both laughed, and springing from the rocks together, plunged head first
into the sea.

We gained the interior of the submarine cave without difficulty, and,
on emerging from the waves, supported ourselves for some time by
treading water, while we held the two bundles above our heads. This we
did in order to let our eyes become accustomed to the obscurity. Then,
when we could see sufficiently, we swam to a shelving rock, and landed
in safety. Having wrung the water from our trousers, and dried
ourselves as well as we could under the circumstances, we proceeded to
ignite the torch. This we accomplished without difficulty in a few
minutes; and no sooner did it flare up than we were struck dumb with
the wonderful objects that were revealed to our gaze. The roof of the
cabin just above us seemed to be about ten feet high, but grew higher
as it receded into the distance, until it was lost in darkness. It
seemed to be made of coral, and was supported by massive columns of the
same material. Immense icicles (as they appeared to us) hung from it in
various places. These, however, were formed not of ice, but of a
species of limestone, which seemed to flow in a liquid form towards the
point of each, where it became solid. A good many drops fell, however,
to the rock below, and these formed little cones, which rose to meet
the points above. Some of them had already met, and thus we saw how the
pillars were formed, which at first seemed to us as if they had been
placed there by some human architect to support the roof. As we
advanced farther in, we saw that the floor was composed of the same
material as the pillars; and it presented the curious appearance of
ripples such as are formed on water when gently ruffled by the wind.
There were several openings on either hand in the walls that seemed to
lead into other caverns; but, these we did not explore at this time. We
also observed that the ceiling was curiously marked in many places, as
if it were the fretwork of a noble cathedral; and the walls, as well as
the roof, sparkled in the light of our torch, and threw back gleams and
flashes as if they were covered with precious stones. Although we
proceeded far into this cavern, we did not come to the end of it; and
we were obliged to return more speedily than we would otherwise have
done, as our torch was nearly expended. We did not observe any openings
in the roof, or any indications of places whereby light might enter;
but near the entrance to the cavern stood an immense mass of pure white
coral rock, which caught and threw back the little light that found an
entrance through the cave's mouth, and thus produced, we conjectured,
the pale-green object which had first attracted our attention. We
concluded, also, that the reflecting power of this rock was that which
gave forth the dim light that faintly illumined the first part of the
cave.

Before diving through the passage again we extinguished the small piece
of our torch that remained, and left it in a dry spot; conceiving that
we might possibly stand in need of it, if at any future time we should
chance to wet our torch while diving into the cavern. As we stood for a
few minutes after it was out, waiting till our eyes became accustomed
to the gloom, we could not help remarking the deep, intense stillness
and the unutterable gloom of all around us; and, as I thought of the
stupendous dome above, and the countless gems that had sparkled in the
torchlight a few minutes before, it came into my mind to consider how
strange it is that God should make such wonderful and exquisitely
beautiful works never to be seen at all, except, indeed, by chance
visitors such as ourselves.

I afterwards found that there were many such caverns among the islands
of the South Seas, some of them larger and more beautiful than the one
I have just described.

"Now, Ralph, are you ready?" said Jack, in a low voice, that seemed to
echo up into the dome above.

"Quite ready."

"Come along, then," said he; and plunging off the ledge of the rock
into the water, we dived through the narrow entrance. In a few seconds
we were panting on the rocks above, and receiving the congratulations
of our friend Peterkin.




Chapter XIV

Strange peculiarity of the tides--Also of the twilight--Peterkin's
remarkable conduct in embracing a little pig and killing a big
sow--Sage remarks on jesting--Also on love.


It was quite a relief to us to breathe the pure air and to enjoy the
glad sunshine after our long ramble in the Diamond Cave, as we named
it; for although we did not stay more than half-an-hour away, it seemed
to us much longer. While we were dressing, and during our walk home, we
did our best to satisfy the curiosity of poor Peterkin, who seemed to
regret, with lively sincerity, his inability to dive.

There was no help for it, however, so we condoled with him as we best
could. Had there been any great rise or fall in the tide of these seas,
we might perhaps have found it possible to take him down with us at low
water; but as the tide never rose as fell more than eighteen inches or
two feet, this was impossible.

This peculiarity of the tide--its slight rise and fall--had not
attracted our observation till some time after our residence on the
island. Neither had we observed another curious circumstance until we
had been some time there. This was the fact that the tide rose and fell
with constant regularity, instead of being affected by the changes of
the moon as in our own country, and as it is in most other parts of the
world--at least in all those parts with which I am acquainted. Every
day and every night, at twelve o'clock precisely, the tide is at the
full; and at six o'clock every morning and evening it is ebb. I can
speak with much confidence on this singular circumstance, as we took
particular note of it, and never found it to alter. Of course, I must
admit, we had to guess the hour of twelve midnight, and I think we
could do this pretty correctly; but in regard to twelve noon we are
quite positive, because we easily found the highest point that the sun
reached in the sky by placing ourselves at a certain spot whence we
observed the sharp summit of a cliff resting against the sky, just
where the sun passed.

Jack and I were surprised that we had not noticed this the first few
days of our residence here, and could only account for it by our being
so much taken up with the more obvious wonders of our novel situation.
I have since learned, however, that this want of observation is a sad
and very common infirmity of human nature, there being hundreds of
persons before whose eyes the most wonderful things are passing every
day, who nevertheless are totally ignorant of them. I therefore have to
record my sympathy with such persons, and to recommend to them a course
of conduct which I have now for a long time myself adopted--namely, the
habit of forcing my attention upon _all_ things that go on around me,
and of taking some degree of interest in them, whether I feel it
naturally or not. I suggest this the more earnestly, though humbly,
because I have very frequently come to know that my indifference to a
thing has generally been caused by my ignorance in regard to it.

We had much serious conversation on this subject of the tides; and Jack
told us, in his own quiet, philosophical way, that these tides did
great good to the world in many ways, particularly in the way of
cleansing the shores of the land, and carrying off the filth that was
constantly poured into the sea therefrom; which, Peterkin suggested,
was remarkably _tidy_ of it to do. Poor Peterkin could never let slip
an opportunity to joke, however inopportune it might be: which at first
we found rather a disagreeable propensity, as it often interrupted the
flow of very agreeable conversation--and, indeed, I cannot too strongly
record my disapprobation of this tendency in general--but we became so
used to it at last that we found it no interruption whatever; indeed,
strange to say, we came to feel that it was a necessary part of our
enjoyment (such is the force of habit), and found the sudden outbursts
of mirth, resulting from his humorous disposition, quite natural and
refreshing to us in the midst of our more serious conversations. But I
must not misrepresent Peterkin. We often found, to our surprise, that
he knew many things which we did not; and I also observed that those
things which he learned from experience were never forgotten. From all
these things I came at length to understand that things very opposite
and dissimilar in themselves, when united, do make an agreeable whole;
as, for example, we three on this our island, although most unlike in
many things, when united, made a trio so harmonious that I question if
there ever met before such an agreeable triumvirate. There was, indeed,
no note of discord whatever in the symphony we played together on that
sweet Coral Island; and I am now persuaded that this was owing to our
having been all tuned to the same key, namely, that of _love!_ Yes, we
loved one another with much fervency while we lived on that island;
and, for the matter of that, we love each other still.

And while I am on this subject, or rather the subject that just
preceded it--namely, the tides--I may here remark on another curious
natural phenomenon. We found that there was little or no twilight in
this island. We had a distinct remembrance of the charming long
twilight at home, which some people think the most delightful part of
the day, though for my part I have always preferred sunrise; and when
we first landed, we used to sit down on some rocky point or eminence,
at the close of our day's work, to enjoy the evening breeze; but no
sooner had the sun sunk below the horizon than all became suddenly
dark. This rendered it necessary that we should watch the sun when we
happened to be out hunting; for to be suddenly left in the dark while
in the woods was very perplexing, as, although the stars shone with
great beauty and brilliancy, they could not pierce through the thick
umbrageous boughs that interlaced above our heads.

But to return: after having told all we could to Peterkin about the
Diamond Cave under Spouting Cliff, as we named the locality, we were
wending our way rapidly homewards, when a grunt and a squeal were borne
down by the land breeze to our ears.

"That's the ticket!" was Peterkin's remarkable exclamation, as he
started convulsively and levelled his spear.

"Hist!" cried Jack; "these are your friends, Peterkin. They must have
come over expressly to pay you a friendly visit, for it is the first
time we have seen them on this side the island."

"Come along!" cried Peterkin, hurrying towards the wood, while Jack and
I followed, smiling at his impatience.

Another grunt and half-a-dozen squeals, much louder than before, came
down the valley. At this time we were just opposite the small vale
which lay between the Valley of the Wreck and Spouting Cliff.

"I say, Peterkin," cried Jack in a hoarse whisper.

"Well, what is't?"

"Stay a bit, man. These grunters are just up there on the hillside. If
you go and stand with Ralph in the lee of yon cliff, I'll cut round
behind and drive them through the gorge, so that you'll have a better
chance of picking out a good one. Now, mind you pitch into a fat young
pig, Peterkin," added Jack, as he sprang into the bushes.

"Won't I, just!" said Peterkin, licking his lips, as we took our
station beside the cliff. "I feel quite a tender affection for young
pigs in my heart. Perhaps it would be more correct to say in my s--"

"There they come!" cried I, as a terrific yell from Jack sent the whole
herd screaming down the hill. Now Peterkin, being unable to hold back,
crept a short way up a very steep, grassy mound, in order to get a
better view of the hogs before they came up; and just as he raised his
head above its summit, two little pigs, which had outrun their
companions, rushed over the top with the utmost precipitation. One of
these brushed close past Peterkin's ear; the other, unable to arrest
its headlong flight, went, as Peterkin himself afterwards expressed it,
"bash" into his arms with a sudden squeal, which was caused more by the
force of the blow than the will of the animal, and both of them rolled
violently down to the foot of the mound. No sooner was this reached
than the little pig recovered its feet, tossed up its tail, and fled
shrieking from the spot. But I slung a large stone after it, which,
being fortunately well aimed, hit it behind the ear, and felled it to
the earth.

"Capital, Ralph! that's your sort!" cried Peterkin, who, to my
surprise, and great relief, had risen to his feet apparently unhurt,
though much dishevelled. He rushed franticly towards the gorge, which
the yells of the hogs told us they were now approaching. I had made up
my mind that I would abstain from killing another, as, if Peterkin
should be successful, two were more than sufficient for our wants at
the present time. Suddenly they all burst forth--two or three little
round ones in advance, and an enormous old sow with a drove of hogs at
her heels.

"Now, Peterkin," said I, "there's a nice little fat one; just spear it."

But Peterkin did not move; he allowed it to pass unharmed. I looked at
him in surprise, and saw that his lips were compressed and his eyebrows
knitted, as if he were about to fight with some awful enemy.

"What is it?" I inquired, with some trepidation.

Suddenly he levelled his spear, darted forward, and, with a yell that
nearly froze the blood in my veins, stabbed the old sow to the heart.
Nay, so vigorously was it done that the spear went in at one side and
