churchyard."

There was a general murmur of agreement and the materials were quickly
brought.

"Well, Wilson, what do you and Richards think of it?" the Major went on,
after he had braced himself up with a strong glass of brandy and water.
"I should imagine you both feel a little less skeptical than you did two
hours ago."

"I don't know what Richards feels, Major, but I know I feel like a fool.
I am sorry, Bathurst, for what I said at dinner; but it really didn't
seem to me to be possible what you told us about the girl going up into
the air and not coming down again. Well, after I have seen what I have
seen this evening, I won't disbelieve anything I hear in future about
these natives."

"It was natural enough that you should be incredulous," Bathurst said.
"I should have been just as skeptical as you were when I first came out,
and I have been astonished now, though I have seen some good jugglers
before."

At this moment the Doctor came out again.

"Miss Hannay is all right again now, Major. I am not surprised at her
fainting; old hand as I am at these matters, and I think that I have
seen as much or more juggling than any man in India. I felt very queer
myself, specially at the snake business. As I said, I have seen that
ascension trick before, but how it is done I have no more idea than a
child. Those smoke scenes, too, are astonishing. Of course they could be
accounted for as thrown upon a column of white smoke by a magic lantern,
but there was certainly no magic lantern here. The juggler was standing
close to me, and the girl was sitting at his feet. I watched them both
closely, and certainly they had no apparatus about them by which such
views could be thrown on the smoke."

"You recognized the first scene, I suppose, Doctor?" Bathurst asked.

"Perfectly. It took me back twenty-five years. It was a cottage near
Sidmouth, and was correct in every minute detail. The figure was that of
the young lady I married four years afterwards. Many a time have I seen
her standing just like that, as I went along the road to meet her from
the little inn at which I was stopping; the very pattern of her dress,
which I need hardly say has never been in my mind all these years, was
recalled to me.

"Had I been thinking of the scene at the time I could have accounted for
it somehow, upon the theory that in some way or other the juggler was
conscious of my thought and reflected it upon the smoke--how, I don't at
all mean to say; but undoubtedly there exists, to some extent, the power
of thought reading. It is a mysterious subject, and one of which we know
absolutely nothing at present, but maybe in upwards of a hundred years
mankind will have discovered many secrets of nature in that direction.
But I certainly was not thinking of that scene when I spoke and said the
'past.' I had no doubt that he would show me something of the past,
but certainly no particular incident passed through my mind before that
picture appeared on the smoke."

"The other was almost as curious, Doctor," Captain Doolan said, "for
it was certainly you masquerading as a native. I believe the other was
Bathurst; it struck me so; and he seemed to be running off with some
native girl. What on earth could that all mean?"

"It is no use puzzling ourselves about it," the Doctor said. "It may or
may not come true. I have no inclination to go about dressed out as a
native at present, but there is no saying what I may come to. There
is quite enough for us to wonder at in the other things. The mango and
basket tricks I have seen a dozen times, and am no nearer now than I
was at first to understanding them. That ascension trick beats me
altogether, and there was something horribly uncanny about the snake."

"Do you think it was a real snake, Doctor?"

"That I cannot tell you, Richards. Every movement was perfectly natural.
I could see the working of the ribs as it wound itself round the girl,
and the quivering of its tongue as it raised its head above her. At any
other time I should be ready to take my affidavit that it was a python
of unusual size, but at the present moment I should not like to give a
decided opinion about anything connected with the performance."

"I suppose it is no use asking the juggler any questions, Hunter?" one
of the other men said.

"Not in the least; they never do answer questions. The higher class of
jugglers treat their art as a sort of religious mystery, and there is
no instance known of their opening their lips, although large sums have
frequently been offered them. In the present case you will certainly ask
no questions, for the man and girl have both disappeared with the box
and apparatus and everything connected with them. They must have
slipped off directly the last trick was over, and before we had the lamp
lighted. I sent after him at once, but the servant could find no signs
of him. I am annoyed because I have not paid them."

"I am not surprised at that," Dr. Wade said. "It is quite in accordance
with what I have heard of them. They live by exhibiting what you may
call their ordinary tricks; but I have heard from natives that when they
show any what I may call supernatural feats, they do not take money. It
is done to oblige some powerful Rajah, and as I have said, it is only on
a very few occasions that Europeans have ever seen them. Well, we may as
well go in to the ladies. I don't fancy any of them would be inclined to
come out onto the veranda again this evening."

No one was indeed inclined even for talk, and in a very short time the
party broke up and returned home.

"Come and smoke a pipe with me, Bathurst, before you turn in," the
Doctor said, as they went out. "I don't think either of us will be
likely to go to sleep for some time. What is your impression of all
this?"

"My impression, certainly, is that it is entirely unaccountable by any
laws with which we are acquainted, Doctor."

"That is just my idea, and always has been since I first saw any
really good juggling out here. I don't believe in the least in anything
supernatural, but I can quite believe that there are many natural laws
of which at present we are entirely ignorant. I believe the knowledge of
them at one time existed, but has been entirely lost, at any rate among
Western peoples. The belief in magic is as old as anything we have
knowledge of. The magicians at the court of Pharaoh threw down their
rods and turned them into serpents. The Witch of Endor called up the
spirit of Samuel. The Greeks, by no means a nation of fools, believed
implicitly in the Oracles. Coming down to comparatively later times, the
workers of magic burnt their books before St. Paul. It doesn't say, mind
you, that those who pretended to work magic did so; but those who worked
magic.

"Early travelers in Persia and India have reported things they saw far
surpassing any we have witnessed this evening, and there is certainly a
sect in India at present, or rather a body of men, and those, as far as
I have been able to learn, of an exceptionally intelligent class, who
believe that they possess an almost absolute mastery over the powers of
nature. You see, fifty years back, if anyone had talked about traveling
at fifty miles an hour, or sending a message five thousand miles in a
minute, he would have been regarded as a madman. There may yet be other
discoveries as startling to be made.

"When I was in England I heard something of a set of people in America
who called themselves Spiritualists, some of whom--notably a young man
named Home--claimed to have the power of raising themselves through
the air. I am far from saying that such a power exists; it is of course
contrary to what we know of the laws of nature, but should such a power
exist it would account for the disappearance of the girl from the top
of the pole. Highland second sight, carried somewhat farther, and united
with the power of conveying the impressions to others, would account
for the pictures on the smoke, that is, supposing them to be true, and
personally I own that I expect they will prove to be true--unlikely as
it may seem that you, I, and Miss Hannay will ever be going about in
native attire."

By this time they had reached the Doctor's bungalow, and had comfortably
seated themselves.

"There is one thing that flashed across me this evening," Bathurst said.
"I told you, that first evening I met Miss Hannay, that I had a distinct
knowledge of her face. You laughed at me at the time, and it certainly
seemed absurd, but I was convinced I was not wrong. Now I know how it
was; I told you at dinner today about the feat of the girl going up and
not coming down again; but I did not tell you--for you can understand it
is a thing that I should not care to talk much about--that he showed me
a picture like those we saw tonight.

"It was a house standing in a courtyard, with a high wall round it. I
did not particularly observe the house. It was of the ordinary native
type, and might, for anything I know, be the house in the middle of this
station used as a courthouse by Hunter, and for keeping stores, and
so on. I don't say it was that; I did not notice it much. There was a
breach in the outside wall, and round it there was a fierce fight going
on. A party of officers and civilians were repelling the assault of a
body of Sepoys. On the terraced roof of the house others were standing
firing and looking on, and I think engaged in loading rifles were two or
three women. One of them I particularly noticed; and, now I recall it,
her face was that of Miss Hannay; of that I am absolutely certain."

"It is curious, lad," the Doctor said, after a pause; "and the picture,
you see, has so far come true that you have made the acquaintance with
one of the actors whom you did not previously know."

"I did not believe in the truth of it, Doctor, and I do not believe in
it now. There was one feature in the fight which was, as I regret to
know, impossible."

"And what was that, Bathurst?"

Bathurst was silent for a time.

"You are an old friend, Doctor, and you will understand my case, and
make more allowances for it than most people would. When I first came
out here I dare say you heard some sort of reports as to why I had left
the army and had afterwards entered the Civil Service."

"There were some stupid rumors," the Doctor said, "that you had gone
home on sick leave just after the battle of Chillianwalla, and had then
sold out, because you had shown the white feather. I need not say that I
did not give any credit to it; there is always gossip flying about as to
the reasons a man leaves the army."

"It was quite true, Doctor. It is a hideous thing to say, but
constitutionally I am a coward."

"I cannot believe it," the Doctor said warmly. "Now that I know you, you
are the last man of whom I would credit such a thing."

"It is the bane of my life," Bathurst went on. "It is my misfortune,
for I will not allow it is my fault. In many things I am not a coward.
I think I could face any danger if the danger were a silent one, but I
cannot stand noise. The report of a gun makes me tremble all over, even
when it is a blank cartridge that is fired. When I was born my father
was in India. A short time before I came into the world my mother had a
great fright. Her house in the country was broken into by burglars, who
entered the room and threatened to blow out her brains if she moved;
but the alarm was given, the men servants came down armed, there was
a struggle in her room, pistol shots were fired, and the burglars
were overpowered and captured. My mother fainted and was ill for weeks
afterwards--in fact, until the time I was born; and she died a few days
later, never having, the doctor said, recovered from the shock she had
suffered that night.

"I grew up a weakly, timid boy--the sort of boy that is always bullied
at school. My father, as you know, was a general officer, and did
not return home until I was ten years old. He was naturally much
disappointed in me, and I think that added to my timidity, for it grew
upon me rather than otherwise. Morally, I was not a coward. At school I
can say that I never told a lie to avoid punishment, and my readiness to
speak the truth did not add to my popularity among the other boys, and I
used to be called a sneak, which was even more hateful than being called
a coward.

"As I grew up I shook off my delicacy, and grew, as you see, into a
strong man. I then fought several battles at school; I learnt to ride,
and came to have confidence in myself, and though I had no particular
fancy for the army my father's heart was so set on it that I offered no
objection. That the sound of a gun was abhorrent to me I knew, for the
first time my father put a gun in my hand and I fired it, I fainted, and
nothing would persuade me to try again. Still I thought that this was
the result of nervousness as to firing it myself, and that I should get
over it in time.

"A month or two after I was gazetted I went out to India with the
regiment, and arrived just in time to get up by forced marches to take
part in the battle of Chillianwalla. The consequence was that up to that
time I literally had heard no musketry practice.

"Of the events of that battle I have no remembrance whatever; from
the moment the first gun was fired to the end of the day I was as one
paralyzed. I saw nothing, I heard nothing, I moved mechanically; but
happily my will or my instinct kept me in my place in the regiment.
When all was over, and silence followed the din, I fell to the ground
insensible. Happily for me the doctors declared I was in a state of high
fever, and I so remained for a fortnight. As soon as I got better I was
sent down the country, and I at once sent in my papers and went home. No
doubt the affair was talked of, and there were whispers as to the real
cause of my illness. My father was terribly angry when I returned home
and told him the truth of the matter. That his son should be a coward
was naturally an awful blow to him. Home was too unhappy to be endured,
and when an uncle of mine, who was a director on the Company's Board,
offered me a berth in the Civil Service, I thankfully accepted it,
believing that in that capacity I need never hear a gun fired again.

"You will understand, then, the anxiety I am feeling owing to these
rumors of disaffection among the Sepoys, and the possibility of anything
like a general mutiny.

"It is not of being killed that I have any fear; upon the contrary, I
have suffered so much in the last eight years from the consciousness
that the reason why I left the army was widely known, that I should
welcome death, if it came to me noiselessly; but the thought that if
there is trouble I shall assuredly not be able to play my part like a
man fills me with absolute horror, and now more than ever.

"So you will understand now why the picture I saw, in which I was
fighting in the middle of the Sepoys, is to me not only improbable, but
simply impossible. It is a horrible story to have to tell. This is the
first time I have opened my lips on the subject since I spoke to my
father, but I know that you, both as a friend and a doctor, will pity
rather than blame me."



CHAPTER X.


As Bathurst brought his story to its conclusion the Doctor rose and
placed his hand kindly on his shoulder.

"I certainly should not think of blaming you, Bathurst. What you tell
me is indeed a terrible misfortune, situated as we may be soon, though
I trust and believe that all this talk about the Sepoys is moonshine.
I own that I am surprised at your story, for I should have said from
my knowledge of you that though, as I could perceive, of a nervous
temperament, you were likely to be cool and collected in danger. But
certainly your failing is no fault of your own."

"That is but a small consolation to me, Doctor. Men do not ask why
and wherefore--they simply point the finger of scorn at a coward. The
misfortune is that I am here. I might have lived a hundred lives in
England and never once had occasion to face danger, and I thought that I
should have been equally secure as an Indian civilian. Now this trouble
is coming upon us."

"Why don't you take your leave, lad? You have been out seven years now
without a day's relaxation, except indeed, the three days you were over
with me at Cawnpore. Why not apply for a year's leave? You have a good
excuse, too; you did not go home at the death of your father, two years
ago, and could very well plead urgent family affairs requiring your
presence in England."

"No, I will not do that, Doctor; I will not run away from danger again.
You understand me, I have not the least fear of the danger; I in no way
hold to my life; I do not think I am afraid of physical pain. It seems
to me that I could undertake any desperate service; I dread it
simply because I know that when the din of battle begins my body will
overmaster my mind, and that I shall be as I was at Chillianwalla,
completely paralyzed. You wondered tonight why that juggler should have
exhibited feats seldom, almost never, shown to Europeans? He did it
to please me. I saved his daughter's life--this is between ourselves,
Doctor, and is not to go farther. But, riding in from Narkeet, I heard a
cry, and, hurrying on, came upon that man eater you shot the other
day, standing over the girl, with her father half beside himself,
gesticulating in front of him. I jumped off and attacked the brute
with my heavy hunting whip, and he was so completely astonished that he
turned tail and bolted."

"The deuce he did," the Doctor exclaimed; "and yet you talk of being a
coward!"

"No, I do not say that I am a coward generally; as long as I have to
confront danger without noise I believe I could do as well as most men."

"But why didn't you mention this business with the tiger, Bathurst?"

"Because, in the first place, it was the work of a mere passing impulse;
and in the second, because I should have gained credit for being what I
am not--a brave man. It will be bad enough when the truth becomes
known, but it would be all the worse if I had been trading on a false
reputation; therefore I particularly charged Rujub to say nothing about
the affair to anyone."

"Well, putting this for a time aside, Bathurst, what do you think of
that curious scene, you and I and Miss Hannay disguised as natives?"

"Taking it with the one I saw of the attack of Sepoys upon a house, it
looks to me, Doctor, as if there would be a mutiny, and that that mutiny
would be attended with partial success, that a portion of the garrison,
at any rate, will escape, and that Miss Hannay will be traveling down
the country, perhaps to Cawnpore, in your charge, while I in some way
shall be with you, perhaps acting as guide."

"It may possibly be so," the Doctor agreed. "It is at any rate very
curious. I wonder whether Miss Hannay recognized herself in the
disguise."

"I should hope not, Doctor; if it all comes true there will be enough
for her to bear without looking forward to that. I should be glad if the
detachment were ordered back to Cawnpore."

"Well, I should not have thought that, Bathurst."

"I know what you mean, Doctor, but it is for that reason I wish they
were gone. I believe now that you insisted on my coming down to spend
those three days with you at Cawnpore specially that I might meet her."

"That is so, Bathurst. I like her so much that I should be very sorry
to see her throw herself away upon some empty headed fool. I like her
greatly, and I was convinced that you were just the man to make her
happy, and as I knew that you had good prospects in England, I thought
it would be a capital match for her, although you are but a young
civilian; and I own that of late I have thought things were going on
very well."

"Perhaps it might have been so, Doctor, had it not been for this coming
trouble, which, if our fears are realized, will entirely put an end even
to the possibility of what you are talking about. I shall be shown to
be a coward, and I shall do my best to put myself in the way of being
killed. I should not like to blow my brains out, but if the worst comes
to the worst I will do that rather than go on living after I have again
disgraced myself."

"You look at it too seriously, Bathurst."

"Not a bit of it, Doctor, and you know it."

"But if the Sepoys rise, Bathurst, why should they harm their officers?
They may be discontented, they may have a grievance against the
Government, they may refuse to obey orders and may disband; but why on
earth should they attack men who have always been kind to them, whom
they have followed in battle, and against whom they have not as much as
a shadow of complaint?"

"I hope it may be so most sincerely," Bathurst said; "but one never
can say. I can hardly bring myself to believe that they will attack
the officers, much less injure women and children. Still, I have a most
uneasy foreboding of evil."

"You have heard nothing from the natives as to any coming trouble?"

"Nothing at all, Doctor, and I am convinced that nothing is known among
them, or at any rate by the great bulk of them. Only one person has ever
said a word to me that could indicate a knowledge of coming trouble, and
that was this juggler we saw tonight. I thought nothing of his words at
the time. That picture he showed me of the attack by Sepoys first gave
me an idea that his words might mean something. Since then we have heard
much more of this discontent, and I am convinced now that the words had
a meaning. They were simple enough. It was merely his assurance, two or
three times repeated, that he would be ready to repay the service I had
rendered him with his life. It might have been a mere phrase, and so I
thought at the time. But I think now he had before him the possibility
of some event occurring in which he might be able to repay the service I
had rendered him."

"There may have been something in it and there may not," the Doctor
said; "but, at any rate, Bathurst, he ought to be a potent ally. There
doesn't seem any limit to his powers, and he might, for aught one knows,
be able to convey you away as he did his daughter."

The Doctor spoke lightly, and then added, "But seriously, the man might
be of service. These jugglers go among people of all classes. They are
like the troubadours of the Middle Ages, welcomed everywhere; and they
no doubt have every opportunity of learning what is going on, and it may
be that he will be able to give you timely warning should there be any
trouble at hand."

"That is possible enough," Bathurst agreed. "Well, Doctor, I shall be on
horseback at six, so it is time for me to turn in," and taking his hat,
walked across to his own bungalow.

The Doctor sat for some time smoking before he turned into bed. He had
as he had said, heard rumors, when Bathurst first came out, that he had
shown the white feather, but he had paid little attention to it at the
time. They had been together at the first station to which Bathurst was
appointed when he came out, and he had come to like him greatly; but
his evident disinclination to join in any society, his absorption in his
work, and a certain air of gravity unnatural in a young man of twenty,
had puzzled him. He had at the time come to the conclusion that he
must have had some unfortunate love affair, or have got into some very
serious trouble at home. In time that impression had worn off. A young
man speedily recovers from such a blow, however heavy, but no change had
taken place in Bathurst, and the Doctor had in time become so accustomed
to his manner that he had ceased to wonder over it. Now it was all
explained. He sat thinking over it deeply for an hour, and then laid
down his pipe.

"It is a terrible pity he came out here," he said. "Of course it is not
his fault in the slightest degree. One might as well blame a man for
being born a hunchback; but if there should be a row out here it will be
terrible for him. I can quite understand his feeling about it. If I were
placed as he is, and were called upon to fight, I should take a dose
of prussic acid at once. Men talk: about their civilization, but we
are little better than savages in our instincts. Courage is an almost
useless virtue in a civilized community, but if it is called for, we
despise a man in whom it is wanting, just as heartily as our tattooed
ancestors did. Of course, in him it is a purely constitutional failing,
and I have no doubt he would be as brave as a lion in any other
circumstances--in fact, the incident of his attacking the tiger with
that dog whip of his shows that he is so; and yet, if he should fail
when the lives of women are at stake it would be a kindness to give him
that dose of prussic acid, especially as Isobel Hannay will be here.
That is the hardest part of it to him, I can see."

Three days later the force at Deennugghur was increased by the arrival
of a troop of native cavalry, under a Captain Forster, who had just
returned from leave in England.

"Do you know Captain Forster, Doctor?" Isobel Hannay asked, on the
afternoon of his arrival. "Uncle tells me he is coming to dinner."

"Then you must look after your heart, my dear. He is one of the best
looking fellows out here, a dashing soldier, and a devoted servant of
the fair sex."

"You don't like him, Doctor," Isobel said quietly.

"I have not said so, my dear--far from it. I think I said a good deal
for him."

"Yes, but you don't like him, Doctor. Why is that?"

"I suppose because he is not my sort of man," the Doctor said. "I have
not seen him since his regiment and ours were at Delhi together, and we
did not see much of each other then. Our tastes did not lie in the same
direction."

"Well, I know what your tastes are, Doctor; what are his?"

"I will leave you to find out, my dear. He is all I told you--a very
handsome man, with, as is perhaps natural, a very good opinion of
himself, and he distinguished himself more than once in the Punjaub
by acts of personal gallantry. I have no doubt he thinks it an awful
nuisance coming to a quiet little station like this, and he will
probably try to while away his time by making himself very agreeable to
you. But I don't think you need quite believe all that he says."

"I have long ago got over the weakness of believing people's flattery,
Doctor. However, now you have forewarned me I am forearmed."

The Doctor hesitated, and then said gravely, "It is not my habit to
speak ill of people, my dear. You do me the justice to believe that?"

"I am sure it is not, Doctor."

"Well, child, in a station like this you must see a good deal of this
man. He is a man who has won many hearts, and thrown them away. Don't
let him win yours. He is not a good man; he has been mixed up in several
grave scandals; he has been the ruin of more than one young man at cards
and billiards; he is in all respects a dangerous man. Anatomically I
suppose he has a heart, morally he has not a vestige of one. Whatever
you do, child, don't let him make you like him."

"I don't think there is much fear of that, Doctor, after what you have
said," she replied, with a quiet smile; "and I am obliged to you indeed
for warning me."

"I know I am an old fool for meddling, but you know, my dear, I feel
a sort of personal relationship to you, after your having been in my
charge for six months. I don't know a single man in all India whom I
would not rather see you fall in love with than with Captain Forster."

"I thought uncle did not seem particularly pleased: when he came in to
tiffin, and said there was a new arrival."

"I should think not," the Doctor said; "the man in notoriously a
dangerous fellow; and yet, as he has never actually outstepped what are
considered the bounds which constitute an officer and a gentleman, he
has retained his commission, but it has been a pretty close shave once
or twice. Your uncle must know all about him, everyone does; but I don't
suppose the Major will open his mouth to you on the subject--he is one
of those chivalrous sort of men who never thinks evil of anyone unless
he is absolutely obliged to; but in a case like this I think he is
wrong. At any rate, I have done what I consider to be my duty in the
