how to tell you, but in some way your work is imperfect.'

They all assured him that, so far as they knew, everything had been done
for the Princess, and they had forgotten nothing that they could bestow
on so good a neighbour as the King had been to them. After this they
went to see Sabella; but they had no sooner entered her presence than
they cried out with one accord:

'Oh! horror!--she has no heart!'

On hearing this frightful announcement, the King and Queen gave a cry
of despair, and entreated the Fairies to find some remedy for such an
unheard-of misfortune. Thereupon the eldest Fairy consulted her Book of
Magic, which she always carried about with her, hung to her girdle by
a thick silver chain, and there she found out at once that it was
Gorgonzola who had stolen the Princess's heart, and also discovered what
the wicked old Fairy had done with it.

'What shall we do? What shall we do?' cried the King and Queen in one
breath.

'You must certainly suffer much annoyance from seeing and loving
Sabella, who is nothing but a beautiful image,' replied the Fairy, 'and
this must go on for a long time; but I think I see that, in the end,
she will once more regain her heart. My advice is that you shall at once
cause her portrait to be sent all over the world, and promise her hand
and all her possessions to the Prince who is successful in reaching her
heart. Her beauty alone is sufficient to engage all the Princes of the
world in the quest.'

This was accordingly done, and Prince Mannikin heard that already five
hundred Princes had perished in the snow and ice, not to mention their
squires and pages, and that more continued to arrive daily, eager to try
their fortune. After some consideration he determined to present
himself at Court; but his arrival made no stir, as his retinue was as
inconsiderable as his stature, and the splendour of his rivals was great
enough to throw even Farda-Kinbras himself into the shade. However, he
paid his respects to the King very gracefully, and asked permission to
kiss the hand of the Princess in the usual manner; but when he said he
was called 'Mannikin,' the King could hardly repress a smile, and the
Princes who stood by openly shouted with laughter.

Turning to the King, Prince Mannikin said with great dignity:

'Pray laugh if it pleases your Majesty, I am glad that it is in my
power to afford you any amusement; but I am not a plaything for these
gentlemen, and I must beg them to dismiss any ideas of that kind from
their minds at once,' and with that he turned upon the one who had
laughed the loudest and proudly challenged him to a single combat. This
Prince, who was called Fadasse, accepted the challenge very scornfully,
mocking at Mannikin, whom he felt sure had no chance against himself;
but the meeting was arranged for the next day. When Prince Mannikin
quitted the King's presence he was conducted to the audience hall of the
Princess Sabella. The sight of so much beauty and magnificence almost
took his breath away for an instant, but, recovering himself with an
effort, he said:

'Lovely Princess, irresistibly drawn by the beauty of your portrait,
I come from the other end of the world to offer my services to you. My
devotion knows no bounds, but my absurd name has already involved me in
a quarrel with one of your courtiers. Tomorrow I am to fight this ugly,
overgrown Prince, and I beg you to honour the combat with your presence,
and prove to the world that there is nothing in a name, and that you
deign to accept Mannikin as your knight.'

When it came to this the Princess could not help being amused, for,
though she had no heart, she was not without humour. However, she
answered graciously that she accepted with pleasure, which encouraged
the Prince to entreat further that she would not show any favour to his
adversary.

'Alas!' said she, 'I favour none of these foolish people, who weary me
with their sentiment and their folly. I do very well as I am, and yet
from one year's end to another they talk of nothing but delivering me
from some imaginary affliction. Not a word do I understand of all their
pratings about love, and who knows what dull things besides, which, I
declare to you, I cannot even remember.'

Mannikin was quick enough to gather from this speech that to amuse and
interest the Princess would be a far surer way of gaining her favour
than to add himself to the list of those who continually teased her
about that mysterious thing called 'love' which she was so incapable of
comprehending. So he began to talk of his rivals, and found in each
of them something to make merry over, in which diversion the Princess
joined him heartily, and so well did he succeed in his attempt to amuse
her that before very long she declared that of all the people at Court
he was the one to whom she preferred to talk.

The following day, at the time appointed for the combat, when the King,
the Queen, and the Princess had taken their places, and the whole Court
and the whole town were assembled to see the show, Prince Fadasse
rode into the lists magnificently armed and accoutred, followed by
twenty-four squires and a hundred men-at-arms, each one leading, a
splendid horse, while Prince Mannikin entered from the other side armed
only with his spear and followed by the faithful Mousta. The contrast
between the two champions was so great that there was a shout of
laughter from the whole assembly; but when at the sounding of a trumpet
the combatants rushed upon each other, and Mannikin, eluding the blow
aimed at him, succeeded in thrusting Prince Fadasse from his horse
and pinning him to the sand with his spear, it changed to a murmur of
admiration.

So soon as he had him at his mercy, however, Mannikin, turning to the
Princess, assured her that he had no desire to kill anyone who called
himself her courtier, and then he bade the furious and humiliated
Fadasse rise and thank the Princess to whom he owed his life. Then, amid
the sounding of the trumpets and the shoutings of the people, he and
Mousta retired gravely from the lists.

The King soon sent for him to congratulate him upon his success, and to
offer him a lodging in the Palace, which he joyfully accepted. While the
Princess expressed a wish to have Mousta brought to her, and, when the
Prince sent for him, she was so delighted with his courtly manners and
his marvellous intelligence that she entreated Mannikin to give him to
her for her own. The Prince consented with alacrity, not only out of
politeness, but because he foresaw that to have a faithful friend always
near the Princess might some day be of great service to him. All these
events made Prince Mannikin a person of much more consequence at the
Court. Very soon after, there arrived upon the frontier the Ambassador
of a very powerful King, who sent to Farda-Kinbras the following letter,
at the same time demanding permission to enter the capital in state to
receive the answer:

'I, Brandatimor, to Farda-Kinbras send greeting. If I had before this
time seen the portrait of your beautiful daughter Sabella I should not
have permitted all these adventurers and petty Princes to be dancing
attendance and getting themselves frozen with the absurd idea of
meriting her hand. For myself I am not afraid of any rivals, and, now I
have declared my intention of marrying your daughter, no doubt they will
at once withdraw their pretensions. My Ambassador has orders, therefore,
to make arrangements for the Princess to come and be married to me
without delay--for I attach no importance at all to the farrago of
nonsense which you have caused to be published all over the world about
this Ice Mountain. If the Princess really has no heart, be assured that
I shall not concern myself about it, since, if anybody can help her to
discover one, it is myself. My worthy father-in-law, farewell!'

The reading of this letter embarrassed and displeased Farda-Kinbras and
Birbantine immensely, while the Princess was furious at the insolence
of the demand. They all three resolved that its contents must be kept a
profound secret until they could decide what reply should be sent, but
Mousta contrived to send word of all that had passed to Prince Mannikin.
He was naturally alarmed and indignant, and, after thinking it over a
little, he begged an audience of the Princess, and led the conversation
so cunningly up to the subject that was uppermost in her thoughts, as
well as his own, that she presently told him all about the matter and
asked his advice as to what it would be best to do. This was exactly
what he had not been able to decide for himself; however, he replied
that he should advise her to gain a little time by promising her answer
after the grand entry of the Ambassador, and this was accordingly done.

The Ambassador did not at all like being put off after that fashion, but
he was obliged to be content, and only said very arrogantly that so soon
as his equipages arrived, as he expected they would do very shortly,
he would give all the people of the city, and the stranger Princes with
whom it was inundated, an idea of the power and the magnificence of his
master. Mannikin, in despair, resolved that he would for once beg the
assistance of the kind Fairy Genesta. He often thought of her and always
with gratitude, but from the moment of his setting out he had determined
to seek her aid only on the greatest occasions. That very night, when he
had fallen asleep quite worn out with thinking over all the difficulties
of the situation, he dreamed that the Fairy stood beside him, and said:

'Mannikin, you have done very well so far; continue to please me and
you shall always find good friends when you need them most. As for this
affair with the Ambassador, you can assure Sabella that she may look
forward tranquilly to his triumphal entry, since it will all turn out
well for her in the end.'

The Prince tried to throw himself at her feet to thank her, but woke to
find it was all a dream; nevertheless he took fresh courage, and went
next day to see the Princess, to whom he gave many mysterious assurances
that all would yet be well. He even went so far as to ask her if she
would not be very grateful to anyone who would rid her of the insolent
Brandatimor. To which she replied that her gratitude would know no
bounds. Then he wanted to know what would be her best wish for the
person who was lucky enough to accomplish it. To which she said that she
would wish them to be as insensible to the folly called 'love' as she
was herself!

This was indeed a crushing speech to make to such a devoted lover as
Prince Mannikin, but he concealed the pain it caused him with great
courage.

And now the Ambassador sent to say that on the very next day he would
come in state to receive his answer, and from the earliest dawn the
inhabitants were astir, to secure the best places for the grand sight;
but the good Fairy Genesta was providing them an amount of amusement
they were far from expecting, for she so enchanted the eyes of all the
spectators that when the Ambassador's gorgeous procession appeared, the
splendid uniforms seemed to them miserable rags that a beggar would have
been ashamed to wear, the prancing horses appeared as wretched skeletons
hardly able to drag one leg after the other, while their trappings,
which really sparkled with gold and jewels, looked like old sheepskins
that would not have been good enough for a plough horse. The pages
resembled the ugliest sweeps. The trumpets gave no more sound than
whistles made of onion-stalks, or combs wrapped in paper; while the
train of fifty carriages looked no better than fifty donkey carts. In
the last of these sat the Ambassador with the haughty and scornful air
which he considered becoming in the representative of so powerful a
monarch: for this was the crowning point of the absurdity of the whole
procession, that all who took part in it wore the expression of vanity
and self-satisfaction and pride in their own appearance and all their
surroundings which they believed their splendour amply justified.

The laughter and howls of derision from the whole crowd rose ever louder
and louder as the extraordinary cortege advanced, and at last reached
the ears of the King as he waited in the audience hall, and before the
procession reached the palace he had been informed of its nature, and,
supposing that it must be intended as an insult, he ordered the gates
to be closed. You may imagine the fury of the Ambassador when, after
all his pomp and pride, the King absolutely and unaccountably refused
to receive him. He raved wildly both against King and people, and the
cortege retired in great confusion, jeered at and pelted with stones and
mud by the enraged crowd. It is needless to say that he left the country
as fast as horses could carry him, but not before he had declared war,
with the most terrible menaces, threatening to devastate the country
with fire and sword.

Some days after this disastrous embassy King Bayard sent couriers to
Prince Mannikin with a most friendly letter, offering his services in
any difficulty, and enquiring with the deepest interest how he fared.

Mannikin at once replied, relating all that had happened since they
parted, not forgetting to mention the event which had just involved
Farda-Kinbras and Brandatimor in this deadly quarrel, and he ended
by entreating his faithful friend to despatch a few thousands of his
veteran spaniels to his assistance.

Neither the King, the Queen, nor the Princess could in the least
understand the amazing conduct of Brandatimor's Ambassador; nevertheless
the preparations for the war went forward briskly and all the Princes
who had not gone on towards the Ice Mountain offered their services, at
the same time demanding all the best appointments in the King's army.
Mannikin was one of the first to volunteer, but he only asked to go as
aide-de-camp to the Commander-in chief, who was a gallant soldier and
celebrated for his victories. As soon as the army could be got together
it was marched to the frontier, where it met the opposing force headed
by Brandatimor himself, who was full of fury, determined to avenge the
insult to his Ambassador and to possess himself of the Princess Sabella.
All the army of Farda-Kinbras could do, being so heavily outnumbered,
was to act upon the defensive, and before long Mannikin won the esteem
of the officers for his ability, and of the soldiers for his courage,
and care for their welfare, and in all the skirmishes which he conducted
he had the good fortune to vanquish the enemy.

At last Brandatimor engaged the whole army in a terrific conflict, and
though the troops of Farda-Kinbras fought with desperate courage, their
general was killed, and they were defeated and forced to retreat with
immense loss. Mannikin did wonders, and half-a-dozen times turned the
retreating forces and beat back the enemy; and he afterwards collected
troops enough to keep them in check until, the severe winter setting in,
put an end to hostilities for a while.

He then returned to the Court, where consternation reigned. The King was
in despair at the death of his trusty general, and ended by imploring
Mannikin to take the command of the army, and his counsel was followed
in all the affairs of the Court. He followed up his former plan of
amusing the Princess, and on no account reminding her of that tedious
thing called 'love,' so that she was always glad to see him, and the
winter slipped by gaily for both of them.

The Prince was all the while secretly making plans for the next
campaign; he received private intelligence of the arrival of a strong
reinforcement of Spaniels, to whom he sent orders to post themselves
along the frontier without attracting attention, and as soon as he
possibly could he held a consultation with their Commander, who was an
old and experienced warrior. Following his advice, he decided to have a
pitched battle as soon as the enemy advanced, and this Brandatimor lost
not a moment in doing, as he was perfectly persuaded that he was now
going to make an end of the war and utterly vanquish Farda-Kinbras. But
no sooner had he given the order to charge than the Spaniels, who had
mingled with his troops unperceived, leaped each upon the horse nearest
to him, and not only threw the whole squadron into confusion by the
terror they caused, but, springing at the throats of the riders,
unhorsed many of them by the suddenness of their attack; then turning
the horses to the rear, they spread consternation everywhere, and
made it easy for Prince Mannikin to gain a complete victory. He met
Brandatimor in single combat, and succeeded in taking him prisoner; but
he did not live to reach the Court, to which Mannikin had sent him: his
pride killed him at the thought of appearing before Sabella under these
altered circumstances. In the meantime Prince Fadasse and all the others
who had remained behind were setting out with all speed for the conquest
of the Ice Mountain, being afraid that Prince Mannikin might prove
as successful in that as he seemed to be in everything else, and when
Mannikin returned he heard of it with great annoyance. True he had
been serving the Princess, but she only admired and praised him for his
gallant deeds, and seemed no whit nearer bestowing on him the love he
so ardently desired, and all the comfort Mousta could give him on the
subject was that at least she loved no one else, and with that he had to
content himself. But he determined that, come what might, he would delay
no longer, but attempt the great undertaking for which he had come so
far. When he went to take leave of the King and Queen they entreated
him not to go, as they had just heard that Prince Fadasse, and all
who accompanied him, had perished in the snow; but he persisted in his
resolve. As for Sabella, she gave him her hand to kiss with precisely
the same gracious indifference as she had given it to him the first time
they met. It happened that this farewell took place before the whole
Court, and so great a favourite had Prince Mannikin become that they
were all indignant at the coldness with which the Princess treated him.

Finally the King said to him:

'Prince, you have constantly refilled all the gifts which, in my
gratitude for your invaluable services, I have offered to you, but I
wish the Princess to present you with her cloak of marten's fur, and
that I hope you will not reject!' Now this was a splendid fur mantle
which the Princess was very fond of wearing, not so much because she
felt cold, as that its richness set off to perfection the delicate tints
of her complexion and the brilliant gold of her hair. However, she took
it off, and with graceful politeness begged Prince Mannikin to accept
it, which you may be sure he was charmed to do, and, taking only this
and a little bundle of all kinds of wood, and accompanied only by two
spaniels out of the fifty who had stayed with him when the war was
ended, he set forth, receiving many tokens of love and favour from the
people in every town he passed through. At the last little village he
left his horse behind him, to begin his toilful march through the snow,
which extended, blank and terrible, in every direction as far as the eye
could see. Here he had appointed to meet the other forty-eight spaniels,
who received him joyfully, and assured him that, happen what might,
they would follow and serve him faithfully. And so they started, full
of heart and hope. At first there was a slight track, difficult, but
not impossible to follow; but this was soon lost, and the Pole Star was
their only guide. When the time came to call a halt, the Prince, who
had after much consideration decided on his plan of action, caused a few
twigs from the faggot he had brought with him to be planted in the
snow, and then he sprinkled over them a pinch of the magic powder he had
collected from the enchanted boat. To his great joy they instantly
began to sprout and grow, and in a marvellously short time the camp was
surrounded by a perfect grove of trees of all sorts, which blossomed and
bore ripe fruit, so that all their wants were easily supplied, and they
were able to make huge fires to warm themselves. The Prince then sent
out several spaniels to reconnoitre, and they had the good luck to
discover a horse laden with provisions stuck fast in the snow. They at
once fetched their comrades, and brought the spoil triumphantly into the
camp, and, as it consisted principally of biscuits, not a spaniel among
them went supperless to sleep. In this way they journeyed by day and
encamped safely at night, always remembering to take on a few branches
to provide them with food and shelter. They passed by the way armies
of those who had set out upon the perilous enterprise, who stood frozen
stiffly, without sense or motion; but Prince Mannikin strictly forbade
that any attempt should be made to thaw them. So they went on and on for
more than three months, and day by day the Ice Mountain, which they had
seen for a long time, grew clearer, until at last they stood close
to it, and shuddered at its height and steepness. But by patience and
perseverance they crept up foot by foot, aided by their fires of magic
wood, without which they must have perished in the intense cold, until
presently they stood at the gates of the magnificent Ice Palace which
crowned the mountain, where, in deadly silence and icy sleep, lay
the heart of Sabella. Now the difficulty became immense, for if they
maintained enough heat to keep themselves alive they were in danger
every moment of melting the blocks of solid ice of which the palace was
entirely built, and bringing the whole structure down upon their heads;
but cautiously and quickly they traversed courtyards and halls, until
they found themselves at the foot of a vast throne, where, upon a
cushion of snow, lay an enormous and brilliantly sparkling diamond,
which contained the heart of the lovely Princess Sabella. Upon the
lowest step of the throne was inscribed in icy letters, 'Whosoever
thou art who by courage and virtue canst win the heart of Sabella enjoy
peacefully the good fortune which thou hast richly deserved.'

Prince Mannikin bounded forward, and had just strength left to grasp the
precious diamond which contained all he coveted in the world before he
fell insensible upon the snowy cushion. But his good spaniels lost no
time in rushing to the rescue, and between them they bore him hastily
from the hall, and not a moment too soon, for all around them they
heard the clang of the falling blocks of ice as the Fairy Palace slowly
collapsed under the unwonted heat. Not until they reached the foot of
the mountain did they pause to restore the Prince to consciousness, and
then his joy to find himself the possessor of Sabella's heart knew no
bounds.

With all speed they began to retrace their steps, but this time the
happy Prince could not bear the sight of his defeated and disappointed
rivals, whose frozen forms lined his triumphant way. He gave orders
to his spaniels to spare no pains to restore them to life, and so
successful were they that day by day his train increased, so that by the
time he got back to the little village where he had left his horse he
was escorted by five hundred sovereign Princes, and knights and squires
without number, and he was so courteous and unassuming that they all
followed him willingly, anxious to do him honour. But then he was so
happy and blissful himself that he found it easy to be at peace with all
the world. It was not long before he met the faithful Mousta, who was
coming at the top of his speed hoping to meet the Prince, that he might
tell him of the sudden and wonderful change that had come over the
Princess, who had become gentle and thoughtful and had talked to him
of nothing but Prince Mannikin, of the hardships she feared he might
be suffering, and of her anxiety for him, and all this with a hundred
fonder expressions which put the finishing stroke to the Prince's
delight. Then came a courier bearing the congratulations of the King and
Queen, who had just heard of his successful return, and there was even a
graceful compliment from Sabella herself. The Prince sent Mousta back to
her, and he was welcomed with joy, for was he not her lover's present?

At last the travellers reached the capital, and were received with regal
magnificence. Farda-Kinbras and Birbantine embraced Prince Mannikin,
declaring that they regarded him as their heir and the future husband of
the Princess, to which he replied that they did him too much honour.
And then he was admitted into the presence of the Princess, who for the
first time in her life blushed as he kissed her hand, and could not find
a word to say. But the Prince, throwing himself on his knees beside her,
held out the splendid diamond, saying:

'Madam, this treasure is yours, since none of the dangers and
difficulties I have gone through have been sufficient to make me deserve
it.'

'Ah! Prince,' said she, 'if I take it, it is only that I may give it
back to you, since truly it belongs to you already.'

At this moment in came the King and Queen, and interrupted them by
asking all the questions imaginable, and not infrequently the same over
and over again. It seems that there is always one thing that is sure to
be said about an event by everybody, and Prince Mannikin found that
the question which he was asked by more than a thousand people on this
particular occasion was:

