against Cadiz, and by a copy of my Lord Galway's letter you will find he
is in an utter despair of their attempting anything this year, and that
by our instructions it will appear that there is no other enterprise
left for our choice."

Peterborough's military force was, however, wholly insufficient for such
an enterprise. He prevailed upon Lord Galway to give him a part of Lord
Raby's and General Cunningham's regiments of English dragoons, although
the Portuguese strenuously opposed this being done. Their conduct,
indeed, at this time was very similar to that which they adopted a
hundred years later toward the Duke of Wellington, throwing every
conceivable obstacle in the English commander's way, and opposing every
plan of action which he suggested. Many of the dragoons were without
horses, but Lord Peterborough mounted them on animals which he bought
with some of the money he had procured from Curtisos.

The Prince of Hesse Darmstadt went on ahead to Gibraltar to arrange for
a portion of the garrison to accompany the expedition. On the 28th of
July the Archduke Charles embarked with Lord Peterborough on board the
Ranelagh, and an hour later the fleet put to sea. Off Tangiers they were
joined by the squadron under Sir Cloudesley Shovel, and a few days later
they reached the Bay of Gibraltar.

Here they found that the Prince of Hesse Darmstadt had arranged that
the battalion of the guards, with three other veteran regiments that had
borne part in the gallant defense of the fortress, were to be embarked,
and two of the newly raised corps Lord Peterborough had brought out from
England were to take their place in the garrison. The regiment to which
Jack had belonged was one of these. As soon as he heard the news he took
the first opportunity of speaking to the earl.

"I have a favor to ask, sir."

"What is that, lad?"

"It is, sir, that Sergeant Edwards, who, if you remember, advised me
about warning the officers of the mutiny, should be transferred to one
of the regiments coming on board."

"Certainly, my lad; I had not forgotten him. I truly wish that he had
sufficient education to give him a commission. I sent to inquire of his
colonel, but finding that he could not read or write, and that he would
be out of place among the officers, I could not do it; but I will gladly
take him with us on active service. It would be hard on a good soldier
to be left behind with that mutinous set of rascals."

Jack had already heard from Sergeant Edwards, whom he had met several
times on shore at Lisbon, and who had rejoiced most heartily at his
promotion, that Lord Peterborough had sent him, through the colonel, a
purse of fifty guineas as a reward for his conduct.

Jack immediately proceeded in a boat to his old vessel, with an order
from the earl that the sergeant should be at once transferred into one
of the regiments coming on board. The sergeant was delighted, for orders
had already been received for the regiment to disembark and form part of
the garrison.

An hour later the Archduke Charles landed, amid the thunder of the
guns of the fleet and fortress, for here for the first time he was
acknowledged as and received the honor due to the King of Spain. There
was but little delay--Lord Peterborough's energy hurried every one else
forward, and on the 5th of August the fleet again put to sea, the king
and the Prince of Hesse Darmstadt accompanying it.

The winds were contrary, and it was not till the 11th that they anchored
in Altea Bay, at the mouth of the Guadalaviar, on the Valencian coast.
On the other side of the roadstead stood the castle and village of
Denia. The expedition was received with good will by the people, who
hated the ascendency of France at Madrid and were bitterly jealous of
Castile.

As soon as the fleet anchored Peterborough caused a manifesto to be
distributed among the people disclaiming any idea of aggrandizement on
the part of Great Britain or her allies, or any intention of injuring
the persons or property of Spaniards who were the lawful subjects of
King Charles III.

"We come," said he, "to free you from the insupportable yoke of the
government of foreigners, and from the slavery to which you have been
reduced and sold to France by ill designing persons."

Several of the Spanish followers of the king landed to encourage the
people, among them General Basset y Ramos, an active officer who was a
Valencian by birth. The people rapidly assembled from the surrounding
country and lined the shore shouting "Long live King Charles III!"

Abundant supplies of provisions were sent off to the fleet, for which,
however, Peterborough insisted upon liberal payment being made.

A detachment of British infantry was landed to cover the operation of
watering the fleet. The insurrection spread rapidly, and a thousand of
the peasants seized the town of Denia for the king. A frigate and two
bomb vessels crossed the bay and threatened the castle. This, although a
magnificent pile of building, was but weakly fortified, and after a few
shots had been fired it surrendered, and General Ramos with four hundred
regular troops from the fleet landed and took possession, and amid
the enthusiasm of the population Charles III was for the first time on
Spanish ground proclaimed King of Spain and of the Indies.

The Earl of Peterborough now proposed a plan of the most brilliant and
daring kind, and had his advice been taken the war would probably have
terminated in a very short time, by securely seating Charles III upon
the Spanish throne. Madrid was distant but fifty leagues from Altea
Bay. Requena was the only town of strength that lay in the way; the rich
country would have afforded ample provision and means of transport,
and these the friendly portion of the people would have placed at the
disposal of the army.

In the whole of Central Spain there was no force which could oppose
him. All the troops of Philip were either on the frontier of Portugal or
occupying the disaffected cities of the north. At Madrid there were but
a few troops of horse; in a week then, and possibly without shedding a
drop of blood, Charles might have been proclaimed king in the capital of
Spain. The plan was, of course, not without danger. Marshal Tesse, with
an overwhelming force, would threaten the left of the advancing army,
and the garrisons of the northern cities, if united, could march with
equal superiority of force upon its right; but Tesse would be followed
by Lord Galway and the allied and Portuguese army, while Barcelona and
the other strongholds of Catalonia would rise if their garrisons were
withdrawn.

Even in the case of failure Peterborough could have retired safely
through Valencia and have re-embarked on board the fleet, or could have
marched to Gibraltar. The scheme was at once daring and judicious,
but the Archduke Charles was slow and timid, and was controlled by the
advice of his even slower and more cautious German advisers, and neither
argument nor entreaty on the part of Peterborough could suffice to move
him. The earl was in despair at so brilliant an opportunity being thrown
away, and expressed himself with the greatest of bitterness in his
letters home as to the impossibility of carrying out movements when
embarrassed by the presence of the king and by the incapacity of the
king's advisers.

However, finding that nothing could be done he re-embarked his troops,
and the fleet sailed for Barcelona. It was not however, thought probable
that a successful attempt could be made upon so strongly fortified
a city, and it was determined that if upon inspection the chances of
success should appear slight, the fleet and army should at once proceed,
as originally intended, to the assistance of the Duke of Savoy.



CHAPTER VII: BARCELONA


The city of Barcelona, one of the most populous and important in Spain,
is not naturally a place of great strength. It is situated on a plain
close to the sea, and its defenses, although extensive, were not very
formidable against a strong army provided with a siege train. To hold
them fully required a much larger force than was disposable for the
defense. The garrison was, however, fully equal in strength to the force
of Peterborough, and should have been able to defend the city against
an army vastly exceeding their own numbers. Ten bastions and some old
towers protected the town toward the north and east; between the city
and the sea was a long rampart with an unfinished ditch and covered
way; while to the west, standing on a lofty elevation, the castle of
Montjuich overlooked and guarded the walls of the city.

From the center of the sea face a mole projected into the water,
guarding a small harbor. The country round the town was fertile and
beautiful, carefully cultivated and watered by streams flowing from the
neighboring mountains. At the distance of about a league from the shore
the land rises into an amphitheater of hills thickly dotted with small
towns, villages, and country seats.

As soon as the allied fleet had anchored the garrison commenced a
cannonade from the mole and from a battery close to the sea upon some
of the transports nearest to the shore; but their shot did not reach the
vessels, and the fire soon ceased. The east wind, however, proved more
troublesome than the enemy's fire, and the ships rolled heavily from the
sea which came in from the east.

The Prince of Hesse Darmstadt with two frigates put into the harbor of
Mataro for the purpose of obtaining intelligence. He found that in the
neighboring town of Vich the people had risen for King Charles, and
putting himself in communication with their leaders he advised them to
march upon the coast and cooperate with the forces about to land. On his
way to rejoin the fleet the prince chased two Neapolitan galleys, which
managed to get safely into Barcelona.

They had on board the Duke and Duchess of Popoli, M. d'Abary, a French
officer of distinction, and forty other young gentlemen, partisans of
the Duke d'Anjou, and destined for employment in different parts of
Spain. They were now, however, detained in the city by the governor to
assist in its defense.

The first glance into the state of affairs gave the Earl of Peterborough
such an unfavorable impression that he at once objected to the proposed
attack.

The governor, Don Francisco Velasco, was a brave and distinguished
officer, the garrison equaled his own force in numbers, the town was
well supplied with provisions and stores, and, in order to add to the
difficulties of the besiegers, orders had been given to destroy all the
forage in the surrounding country which could not be conveyed within
the walls. Any Austrian sympathies the inhabitants might possess were
effectually suppressed by the power and vigilance of the governor.
The besieging army was far too small to attempt a blockade, while the
chances of an assault upon an equal force behind well armed defenses
seemed almost desperate.

The engineers declared that the difficulties of a regular siege were
enormous, if not insurmountable, and that the only vulnerable point
was covered by a bog, where the transport of cannon or the formation
of works would be impossible. Above all, the principal hope of the
expedition had failed. The adherents of Charles had assured him that the
whole country would rise in his favor on the arrival of the fleet, and
that the town itself would probably open its gates to receive him. These
promises had, like all others he had received from his Spanish friends,
proved delusive. Few of the peasantry appeared to receive them on the
coast, and these were unarmed and without officers.

The earl's instructions, although generally quite indefinite, were
stringent upon one point. He was on no account to make the slightest
alteration in the plans of the expedition, or to take any decisive step
for their accomplishment, without the advice of the council of war. This
would have been in any case embarrassing for a general; in the present
instance it was calculated altogether to cripple him. There was but
little harmony among the chief officers. The English military officers
were by no means on good terms with each other, while the naval officers
regarded almost as an insult Lord Peterborough's being placed in command
of them. The English hated the German officers and despised the Dutch.
Lord Peterborough himself disliked almost all his associates, and
entertained a profound contempt for any one whose opinion might differ
from that which he at the moment might happen to hold.

It was impossible that good could come from a council of war composed
of such jarring elements as these. However, Lord Peterborough's
instructions were positive, and on the 16th of August, 1705, he convened
a council of war on board the Britannia, consisting of nine generals and
a brigadier, with two colonels on the staff. The king and the Prince
of Hesse Darmstadt were present, but took no part in the deliberations.
Singularly enough the council proved unanimous in their opinion that
Barcelona should not be attacked. The reasons for the decision were
drawn up and put on record. The council pointed out all the difficulties
which existed, and declared the strength of the allied army to be only
nineteen battalions of foot and two cavalry regiments, of whom no more
than seven thousand men were fit for action, and only one hundred and
twenty dragoon horses had survived the voyage in serviceable condition.

The decision of the council was most opposed to the hopes and wishes of
Charles and the Prince of Hesse Darmstadt, and they addressed letters
of strong remonstrance to Lord Peterborough, urging that to abandon the
expedition at this juncture would be alike fatal to the common cause and
discreditable to the British arms.

Meanwhile, however, the greater part of the troops had landed without
opposition; but the sea broke with such force on the beach that much
difficulty had been experienced in getting ashore. The landing place had
been well chosen by Lord Peterborough and Sir Cloudesley Shovel. It
was about two miles east of the city, near a place called Badalona, and
close to the mouth of the little river Basoz. The transports were
moored in as close as possible, and the boats of the fleet carried three
thousand men ashore each trip.

In five hours fifteen battalions were landed without the loss of a man.
A strong natural position about a mile from the city was chosen for the
encampment; its left rested on the sea, its right was covered by several
abrupt hills and defiles through which the river Basoz flowed. The front
was, however, much extended, but this mattered the less, as the people
from the neighboring villages began to assemble when the landing took
place, and welcomed the allies of King Charles with joy. A number of
these were employed by Lord Peterborough in guarding the advanced posts
and covering the numerous roads leading from the city toward the camp.

On the 22d another council of war was held at the Dutch General
Schratenbach's quarters in the camp to consider two letters of the
king, in which he again urged the allied generals to attack the city.
He proposed that a battery of fifty guns should be erected to breach
the wall between two of the bastions, and that the whole strength of the
army should be thrown upon an assault. He acknowledged the force of the
several objections to the attack, but urged that in such a case vigorous
action was the safest. He dwelt upon the ruin that must fall upon such
of his subjects as had declared for him if abandoned to their fate, and
concluded by declaring that he at least would not desert them.

The appeal failed to move any of the council with the exception of
Peterborough himself, and he alone voted, although in opposition to his
own judgment, in compliance with the king's plan. Notwithstanding the
adverse decision of the council the horses and dragoons were landed on
the 24th.

On the 25th, the 26th, and the 28th the council again assembled to
deliberate upon an earnest request of the king that they should attempt
the siege for a period of eighteen days. The first decision was adverse,
two only voting with Lord Peterborough for the siege. At the second
council, his influence succeeded in obtaining a majority; but at the
third, they agreed to abandon the attempt, even the commander in chief
concurring.

The cause of this sudden reversal of their opinion was that none of the
workmen whom they had demanded from the leaders of the Catalan peasantry
had appeared, and they felt it impossible to carry on the works and
erect the siege batteries without such assistance. Nevertheless
the peasantry gave effectual aid in landing the artillery, tents,
ammunition, and stores. On the 28th the king landed amid a great
concourse of people, who received him with every demonstration of
enthusiasm, and he could with difficulty make his way through them to
the camp prepared for him near San Martino.

The presence of the king on shore added to the difficulties of the
situation. He and his following of German courtiers complained bitterly
of the disinclination of the allies to undertake the siege, while
the allies were incensed against those who reproached them for not
undertaking impossibilities. Dissension spread between the allies
themselves, and the Dutch general declared that he would disobey the
orders of the commander in chief rather than vainly sacrifice his men.

Peterborough was driven nearly out of his mind by the reproaches and
