are?"

"I couldn't name the place, but we're not so far from Warrenton that we
can't get back there in a short time and tackle Jackson again. Dick, see
all those moving lights to right and left of us. They're the brigades
coming up in the night. Isn't it a weird and tremendous scene? You and I
and Pennington will see this night over and over again, many and many a
time."

"It's so, George," said Dick, "I feel the truth of what you say all
through me. Listen to the rumble of the cannon wheels! I hear 'em on
both sides of us, and behind us, and I've no doubt, too, that it's going
on before us, where the Southerners are massing their batteries. How the
lights move! It's the field of Manassas again, and we're going to win
this time!"

All of Dick's senses were excited once more, and everything he saw was
vivid and highly colored. Warner, cool of blood as he habitually was,
had no words of rebuke for him now, because he, too, was affected in the
same way. The fields and plains of Manassas were alive not alone with
marching armies, but the ghosts of those who had fallen there the year
before rose and walked again.

Despite the darkness everything swelled into life again for Dick. Off
there was the little river of Manassas, Young's Branch, the railway
station, and the Henry House, around which the battle had raged so
fiercely. They would have won the victory then if it had not been for
Stonewall Jackson. If he had not been there the war would have been
ended on that sanguinary summer day.

But Jackson was in front of them now, and they had him fast. Lee and
Jackson had thought to trap Pope, but Jackson himself was in the
trap, and they would destroy him utterly. His admiration for the great
Southern general had changed for the time into consuming rage. They must
overwhelm him, annihilate him, sweep him from the face of the earth.

They mounted again and moved back, but did not go far.

"Get down, Dick," said Colonel Winchester. "Here's food for us, and hot
coffee. I don't remember myself how long we've been in the saddle and
how long we've been without food, but we mustn't go into battle until
we've eaten."

Dick was the last of the officers to dismount. He, too, did not remember
how long they had been in the saddle. He could not say at that moment,
whether it had been one night or two. He ate and drank mechanically, but
hungrily--the Union army nearly always had plenty of stores--and then he
felt better and stronger.

A faint bluish tint was appearing under the gray horizon in the east.
Dick felt the touch of a light wind on his forehead. The dawn was
coming.

Yes, the dawn was coming, but it was coming heavy with sinister omens
and the frown of battle. Before the bluish tint in the east had turned
to silver Dick heard the faint and far thudding of great guns, and
closer a heavy regular beat which he knew was the gallop of cavalry.
Surely the North could not fail now. Fierce anger against those who
would break up the Union surged up in him again.

The gray came at last, driving the bluish tint away, and the sun rose
hot and bright over the field of Manassas which already had been
stained with the blood of one fierce battle. But now the armies were far
greater. Nearly a hundred and fifty thousand men were gathering for the
combat, and Dick was still hoping that McClellan would come with seventy
or eighty thousand more. But within the Confederate lines, where they
must always win and never lose, because losing meant to lose all there
was a stern determination to shatter Pope and his superior numbers
before McClellan could come. Never had the genius and resolution of the
two great Southern leaders burned more brightly.

As the brazen sun swung slowly up Dick felt that the intense nervous
excitement he had felt the night before was seizing him again. The
officers of the regiment remained on foot. Colonel Winchester had sent
their horses away to some cavalrymen who had lost their own. He and his
staff and other officers, dismounted, could lead the men better into
battle.

And that it was battle, great and bloody, the youngest of them all could
see. Never had an August day been brighter and hotter. Every object
seemed to swell into new size in the vivid and burning sunlight. Plain
before them lay Jackson's army. Two of his regiments were between them
and a turnpike that Dick remembered well. Off to the left ran the dark
masses in gray, until they ended against a thick wood. In the center was
a huge battery, and Dick from his position could see the mouths of the
cannon waiting for them.

But he also saw the great line of the Northern Army. It was both deeper
and longer than that of the South, and he knew that the men were full of
resolve and courage.

"How many have we got here?" Dick heard himself asking Warner.

"Forty or fifty thousand, I suppose," he heard Warner replying, "and
before night there will be eighty thousand. Our line is two miles long
now. We ought to wrap around Jackson and crush him to death. Listen to
the bugles! What a mellow note! And how they draw men on to death! And
listen to the throbbing of the big cannon, too!"

Warner's face was flushed. He had become excited, as the two armies
stood there, and looked at each other a moment or two like prize
fighters in the ring before closing in battle. Then they heard the order
to charge and far up and down the line their own cannon opened with a
crash so great that Dick and his comrades could not hear one another
talking.

Then they charged. The whole army lifted itself up and rushed at the
enemy, animated by patriotism, the fire of battle and the desire for
revenge. Among the officers were Milroy and Schenck and others who had
been beaten by Jackson in the valley. There, too, was the brigade
of Germans whom Jackson had beaten at Cross Keyes. Many of them were
veterans of the sternest discipline known in Europe and they longed
fiercely for revenge. And there were more Germans, too, under
Schurz--hired Germans, fighting nearly a hundred years before to prevent
the Union--and free Germans now fighting to save it.

Driven forward thus by all the motives that sway men in battle, the
Union army rushed upon Jackson. Confident from many victories and
trusting absolutely in their leader the Southern defense received the
mighty charge without flinching. The wood now swarmed with riflemen
and they filled the air with their bullets, so many of them that their
passage was like the continual rush of a hurricane. Along the whole line
came the same metallic scream, and the great battery in the center was a
volcano, pouring forth a fiery hurricane of shot and shell.

Dick felt their front lines being shorn. Although he was untouched it
was an actual physical sensation. He could see but little save that
fearful blaze in their faces, and the cries of the wounded and dying
were drowned by the awful roar of so many cannon and rifles.

The cloud of dust and smoke had become immense and overwhelming in an
instant, but it was pierced always in front by the blaze of fire, and
by its flaming light Dick saw the long lines of the Southern men, their
faces gray and fixed, as he knew those of his own comrades were.

But the charge, brave, even reckless, failed. The brigades broke in vain
on Jackson's iron front. Riddled by the fire of the great battery and of
the riflemen they could not go on and live. The Germans had longed for
revenge, but they did not get it. The South Carolinians fell upon them
at the edge of the wood and hurled them back. They rallied, and charged
again, but again they were handled terribly, and were forced back by the
charging masses of the Southerners.

Dick had been at Shiloh. He had seen the men of the west in a great
battle, and now he saw the men of the east in a battle yet greater.
There it had been largely in the forest, here it was mostly in the open,
yet he saw but little more. One of the extraordinary features of this
battle was dust. Trampled up from the dry fields by fighting men in
scores of thousands it rose in vast floating clouds that permeated
everything. It was even more persistent than the smoke. It clogged
Dick's throat. It stung and burnt him like powder. Often it filled his
eyes so completely that for a moment or two he could not see the blaze
of the cannon and rifle fire, almost in his face.

But as they fell back he felt again that sensation of actual physical
pain, although he was still untouched. Added to it was an intense mental
anguish. They were failing! They had been driven back! They had not
crushed Jackson! He forgot all about Colonel Winchester, and his
comrades Warner and Pennington. He forgot all about his own danger in
this terrible reversal of his hopes, and he began to shout angrily at
the men to stand. He did not know by and by that no sound came from his
mouth, that words could not come from a throat so choked with dust and
burned gunpowder.

But the charge was made again. The thudding great guns now told all the
Northern divisions where Jackson was. The eighty thousand men of Pope
were crowding forward to attack him, and the batteries were galloping
over the plateau to add to the volume of shot and shell that was poured
upon the Southern ranks.

Dick was quite unconscious of the passage of time. Hope had sprung anew
in his breast. He heard a report that ten thousand fresh troops under
Kearney had arrived and were attacking the Southerners in the wood.
He knew by the immense volume of fire coming from that point that the
report was true, and he heard that McDowell, too, would soon be at hand
with nearly thirty thousand men.

Then he saw Colonel Winchester, his face a mass of grime and his
clothing flecked with blood. But he did not seem to have suffered any
wound and he was calmly rallying his men.

"It's hot!" Dick shouted, why he knew not.

"Yes, my boy, and it will soon be hotter! Look at the new brigades
coming into battle! See them on both right and left! We'll crush Jackson
yet!"

It was now mid-morning, and neither Colonel Winchester nor any other of
the Northern officers facing the Southern force knew that Lee and the
other Southern army was at hand. The front ranks of Longstreet were
already in battle, and the most difficult and dangerous of all tasks was
accomplished. Two armies coming from points widely divergent, but acting
in concert had joined upon the field of battle at the very moment when
the junction meant the most. Lee had come, but McClellan and the Army of
the Potomac were far away.

Dick heard the trumpets calling again, and once more they charged,
hurling heavy masses now upon the wood, which was held by the Southern
general, A. P. Hill. Rifle fire gave way to bayonet charges by either
side, and after swaying back and forth the Union men held the wood for
a while, but at last they were driven out to stay, and as they retreated
cannon and rifles decimated their ranks.

The regiment had suffered so terribly that after its retreat it was
compelled to lie down a while and rest. Dick gasped for breath, but he
was not as much excited as he had been earlier in the day. Perhaps one
can become hardened to anything. Although he and his immediate comrades
were resting he could see no diminution of the battle.

As far to left and right as the eye reached, cannon and rifles blazed
and thundered. In front of their own exhausted regiment hundreds of
sharpshooters, creeping forward, were now pouring a deadly fire among
the Southern troops who held the wood. They were men of the west and
northwest, accustomed all their lives to the use of firearms, and if a
Confederate officer in the forest showed himself for a moment it was at
the risk of his life. Captains and lieutenants fell fast beneath the aim
of the sharpshooters.

The burning sun was at the zenith, pouring fiery rays upon the vast
conflict which raged along a front of two miles. Pope himself was now
upon the field and his troops were pouring from every point to his aid.
So deadly was the fire of the sharpshooters that they regained the wood,
driving out the Southerners who had exhausted their cartridges. Hill's
division of the Confederates was almost cut to pieces by the cannon
and rifles, and the Southern leaders from their posts on the hills saw
brigades and regiments continually coming to the help of the North.

Dick saw or rather felt the fortunes of the North rising again, and as
his regiment stood up for action once more he began to shout with the
others in triumph. The roar of the battle grew so steady that the voices
of men became audible and articulate beneath it.

"They shut their trap down upon us, but we're breaking that trap all to
pieces," he heard Pennington say.

"Looks as if we might win a victory," said the cooler Warner.

Then he heard no more, as they were once again upon the enemy who
received them almost hand to hand, and the battle swelled anew. It was
now long past noon, and in that prodigious canopy of dust and fire and
smoke it seemed for a while that the Union army in truth had shattered
the trap. The men in gray were borne back by the courage and weight of
their opponents. Hooker, Kearney, Reynolds and all the gallant generals
of the North continually urged on their troops. Confidence in victory at
last passed through all the army, and incited it to greater efforts.

But Jackson was undaunted. Never was he cooler. Never did his genius
shine more brilliantly. Never did any man in all the fury and turmoil
of battle, amid a thousand conflicting reports and appalling confusion,
have a keener perception, a greater power to sum up what was actually
passing, and a better knowledge of what to do.

Lee was a mile away, standing on a wooded hill, the bearded Longstreet
by his side, watching the battle in his immediate front, where
accumulating masses under Pope's own eye were gathering. On the other
flank where Jackson stood and the conflict was heaviest he trusted all
to his great lieutenant and not in vain.

Jackson had formed his plan. There came for a few moments a lull in the
battle which had now lasted nine hours, and then gathering a powerful
reserve he sent them charging through the wood with the bayonet. Dick
saw the massive line of glittering steel coming on at the double
quick and he felt his regiment giving back. The men could not help it.
Physically exhausted and with ammunition running low they slowly yielded
the wood. Many of the youths wept with rage, but although they had lost
thousands in five desperate charges they were compelled to see all five
fail.

Dick, aghast, gazed at Warner through the smoke.

"It's true!" gasped Warner, "we didn't break the trap, Dick. But maybe
they'll succeed off there to the left! Our own commander is there, and
they say that Lee himself has come to the help of Jackson!"

They had been driven back at all points and their own battle was dying,
but off to the left it thundered a while longer, and then as night
suddenly rushed over the field it, too, sank, leaving the hostile forces
on that wing also still face to face, but with the North pushed back.

The coming of night was as sudden to Dick as if it had been the abrupt
dropping of a great dark blanket. In the fury of conflict he had not
noticed the gathering shadows in the west. The dimness around him, if
he had taken time to think about it, he would have ascribed to the vast
columns of dust that eddied and surged about.

Again it was the dust that he felt and remembered. The surging back and
forth of seven score thousand men, the tread of horses and the wheels
of hundreds of cannon raised it in such quantities that it covered the
forest and the armies with a vast whitish curtain. Even in the darkness
it showed dim and ghastly like a funeral veil.

Out of that fatal forest came a dreadful moaning. Dick did not know
whether it was the wind among the leaves or the dying. Once more the
ghosts of the year before walked the fatal field, but the ghosts of this
year would be a far greater company. They had not broken the trap and
Dick knew that the battle was far from over.

It would be renewed in the morning with greater fierceness than ever,
but he was grateful for the present darkness and rest. He and his
comrades had thrown themselves upon the ground, and they felt as if they
could never move again. Their bones did not ache. They merely felt dead
within them.

Dick was roused after a long time. The camp cooks were bringing food
and coffee. He saw a figure lying at his feet as still as death, and he
shoved it with his foot.

"Get up, Frank," he said. "You're not dead."

"No, I'm not, but I'm as good as dead. You just let me finish dying in
peace."

Dick shoved him again and Pennington sat up. When he saw the food and
coffee he suddenly remembered to be hungry. Warner was already eating
and drinking. Off to the left they still heard cannon and rifles,
although the sound was sinking. Occasionally flashes from the mouths of
the great guns illumined the darkness.

Dick did not know what time it was. He had no idea how long he had
been lying upon the ground panting, the air surcharged with menace and
suspense. The vast clouds of dust, impregnated with burned gunpowder
still floated about, and it scorched his mouth and throat as he breathed
it.

The boys, after eating and drinking lay down again. They still heard the
firing of pickets, but it was no more than the buzzing of bees to them,
and after a while they fell into the sleep of nervous and physical
exhaustion. But while many of the soldiers slept all of the generals
were awake.

It was a singular fact but in the night that divided the great battle
of the Second Manassas into two days both sides were full of confidence.
Jackson's men, who had borne the brunt of the first day, rested upon
their arms and awaited the dawn with implicit confidence in their
leader. On the other flank Lee and Longstreet were massing their men for
a fresh attack.

The losses within the Union lines were replaced by reinforcements. Pope
rode among them, sanguine, full of hope, telegraphing to Washington that
the enemy had lost two to his one, and that Lee was retreating toward
the mountains.

