was shivered by a blow from the latter's cudgel, which a moment later
fell again on his head, sending him reeling back several paces.

"Stay, sir, or I will run you through," Cyril said, pricking Harvey
sharply in the arm as he was urging Nellie to enter the chair.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" the other exclaimed, in a tone of fury. "My
boy of Cheapside! Well, I can spare a moment to punish you."

"Oh, do not fight with him, my lord!" Nellie exclaimed.

"My lord!" Cyril laughed. "So he has become a lord, eh?"

Then he changed his tone.

"Mistress Nellie, you have been deceived. This fellow is no lord. He
is a hanger-on of the Court, one John Harvey, a disreputable
blackguard whom I heard boasting to his boon-companions of his
conquest. I implore you to return home as quietly as you went. None
will know of this."

He broke off suddenly, for, with an oath, Harvey rushed at him. Their
swords clashed, there was a quick thrust and parry, and then Harvey
staggered back with a sword-wound through the shoulder, dropping his
sword to the ground.

"Your game is up, John Harvey," Cyril said. "Did you have your
deserts I would pass my sword through your body. Now call your
fellows off, or it will be worse for them."

"Oh, it is not true? Surely it cannot be true?" Nellie cried,
addressing Harvey. "You cannot have deceived me?"

The fellow, smarting with pain, and seeing that the game was up,
replied with a savage curse.

"You may think yourself lucky that you are only disabled, you
villain!" Cyril said, taking a step towards him with his sword
menacingly raised. "Begone, sir, before my patience is exhausted, or,
by heaven! it will be your dead body that the chairmen will have to
carry away."

"Disabled or not," John Wilkes exclaimed, "I will have a say in the
matter;" and, with a blow with his cudgel, he stretched Harvey on the
ground, and belaboured him furiously until Cyril dragged him away by
force. Harvey rose slowly to his feet.

"Take yourself off, sir," Cyril said. "One of your brave companions
has long ago bolted; the other is disarmed, and has his head broken.
You may thank your stars that you have escaped with nothing worse
than a sword-thrust through your shoulder, and a sound drubbing.
Hanging would be a fit punishment for knaves like you. I warn you, if
you ever address or in any way molest this lady again, you won't get
off so easily."

Then he turned and offered his arm to Nellie, who was leaning against
the wall in a half-fainting state. Not a word was spoken until they
emerged from the lane.

"No one knows of this but ourselves, Mistress Nellie, and you will
never hear of it from us. Glad indeed I am that I have saved you from
the misery and ruin that must have resulted from your listening to
that plausible scoundrel. Go quietly upstairs. We will wait here till
we are sure that you have gone safely into your room; then we will
follow. I doubt not that you are angry with me now, but in time you
will feel that you have been saved from a great danger."

The door was not locked. He lifted the latch silently, and held the
door open for her to pass in. Then he closed it again, and turned to
the two men who followed them.

"This has been a good night's work, John."

"That has it. I don't think that young spark will be coming after
City maidens again. Well, it has been a narrow escape for her. It
would have broken the Captain's heart if she had gone in that way.
What strange things women are! I have always thought Mistress Nellie
as sensible a girl as one would want to see. Given a little
over-much, perhaps, to thinking of the fashion of her dress, but that
was natural enough, seeing how pretty she is and how much she is made
of; and yet she is led, by a few soft speeches from a man she knows
nothing of, to run away from home, and leave father, and mother, and
all. Well, Matthew, lad, we sha'n't want any more watching. You have
done a big service to the master, though he will never know it. I
know I can trust you to keep a stopper on your jaws. Don't you let a
soul know of this--not even your wife."

"You trust me, mate," the man replied. "My wife is a good soul, but
her tongue runs nineteen to the dozen, and you might as well shout a
thing out at Paul's Cross as drop it into her ear. I think my back
will be well enough for me to come to work again to-morrow," he
added, with a laugh.

"All right, mate. I shall be glad to have you again, for the chap who
has been in your place is a landsman, and he don't know a
marling-spike from an anchor. Good-night, mate."

"Well, Master Cyril," he went on, as the sailor walked away, "I don't
think there ever was such a good wind as that which blew you here.
First of all you saved Captain Dave's fortune, and now you save his
daughter. I look on Captain Dave as being pretty nigh the same as
myself, seeing as I have been with him man and boy for over thirty
years, and I feel what you have done for him just as if you had done
it for me. I am only a rough sailor-man, and I don't know how to put
it in words, but I feel just full up with a cargo of thankfulness."

"That is all right," Cyril said, holding out his hand, which John
Wilkes shook with a heartiness that was almost painful. "Captain Dave
offered me a home when I was alone without a friend in London, and I
am glad indeed that I have been able to render him service in return.
I myself have done little enough, though I do not say that the
consequences have not been important. It has been just taking a
little trouble and keeping a few watches--a thing not worth talking
about one way or the other. I hope this will do Mistress Nellie good.
She is a nice girl, but too fond of admiration, and inclined to think
that she is meant for higher things than to marry a London citizen. I
think to-night's work will cure her of that. This fellow evidently
made himself out to her to be a nobleman of the Court. Now she sees
that he is neither a nobleman nor a gentleman, but a ruffian who took
advantage of her vanity and inexperience, and that she would have
done better to have jumped down the well in the yard than to have put
herself in his power. Now we can go up to bed. There is no more
probability of our waking the Captain than there has been on other
nights; but mind, if we should do so, you stick to the story we
agreed on, that you thought there was someone by the gate in the lane
again, and so called me to go down with you to investigate, not
thinking it worth while to rouse up the Captain on what might be a
false alarm."

Everything remained perfectly quiet as they made their way upstairs
to their rooms as silently as possible.

"Where is Nellie?" Captain Dave asked, when they assembled at
breakfast.

"She is not well," his wife replied, "I went to her room just now and
found that she was still a-bed. She said that she had a bad headache,
and I fear that she is going to have a fever, for her face is pale
and her eyes red and swollen, just as if she had been well-nigh
crying them out of her head; her hands are hot and her pulse fast.
Directly I have had breakfast I shall make her some camomile tea, and
if that does not do her good I shall send for the doctor."

"Do so, wife, without delay. Why, the girl has never ailed a day for
years! What can have come to her?"

"She says it is only a bad headache--that all she wants is to be left
alone."

"Yes, yes; that is all very well, but if she does not get better soon
she must be seen to. They say that there were several cases last week
of that plague that has been doing so much harm in foreign parts, and
if that is so it behoves us to be very careful, and see that any
illness is attended to without delay."

"I don't think that there is any cause for alarm," his wife said
quietly. "The child has got a headache and is a little feverish, but
there is no occasion whatever for thinking that it is anything more.
There is nothing unusual in a girl having a headache, but Nellie has
had such good health that if she had a prick in the finger you would
think it was serious."

"By the way, John," Captain Dave said suddenly, "did you hear any
noise in the lane last night? Your room is at the back of the house,
and you were more likely to have heard it than I was. I have just
seen one of the watch, and he tells me that there was a fray there
last night, for there is a patch of blood and marks of a scuffle. It
was up at the other end. There is some mystery about it, he thinks,
for he says that one of his mates last night saw a sedan chair
escorted by three men turn into the lane from Fenchurch Street just
before ten o'clock, and one of the neighbours says that just after
that hour he heard a disturbance and a clashing of swords there. On
looking out, he saw something dark that might have been a chair
standing there, and several men engaged in a scuffle. It seemed soon
over, and directly afterwards three people came down the lane this
way. Then he fancied that someone got into the chair, which was
afterwards carried out into Fenchurch Street."

"I did hear something that sounded like a quarrel or a fray," John
Wilkes said, "but there is nothing unusual about that. As everything
was soon quiet again, I gave no further thought to it."

"Well, it seems a curious affair, John. However, it is the business
of the City watch and not mine, so we need not bother ourselves about
it. I am glad to see you have got Matthew at work again this morning.
He tells me that he thinks he has fairly got over that sprain in his
back."




CHAPTER VIII

THE CAPTAIN'S YARN


Mindful of the fact that this affair had added a new enemy to those
he had acquired by the break-up of the Black Gang, Cyril thought it
as well to go round and give notice to the two traders whose books he
attended to in the evening, that unless they could arrange for him to
do them in the daytime he must give up the work altogether. Both
preferred the former alternative, for they recognised the advantage
they had derived from his work, and that at a rate of pay for which
they could not have obtained the services of any scrivener in the
City.

It was three or four days before Nellie Dowsett made her appearance
at the general table.

"I can't make out what ails the girl," her mother said, on the
previous evening. "The fever speedily left her, as I told you, but
she is weak and languid, and seems indisposed to talk."

"She will soon get over that, my dear," Captain Dave said. "Girls are
not like men. I have seen them on board ship. One day they are
laughing and fidgeting about like wild things, the next day they are
poor, woebegone creatures. If she gets no better in a few days, I
will see when my old friend, Jim Carroll, is starting in his brig for
Yarmouth, and will run down with her myself--and of course with you,
wife, if you will go--and stay there a few days while he is unloading
and filling up again. The sea-air will set her up again, I warrant."

"Not at this time of year," Dame Dowsett said firmly. "With these
bitter winds it is no time for a lass to go a-sailing; and they say
that Yarmouth is a great deal colder than we are here, being exposed
to the east winds."

"Well, well, Dame, then we will content ourselves with a run in the
hoy down to Margate. If we choose well the wind and tide we can start
from here in the morning and maybe reach there late in the evening,
or, if not, the next morning to breakfast. Or if you think that too
far we will stop at Sheerness, where we can get in two tides easily
enough if the wind be fair."

"That would be better, David; but it were best to see how she goes
on. It may be, as you say, that she will shortly gain her strength
and spirits again."

It was evident, when Nellie entered the room at breakfast-time the
next morning, that her mother's reports had not been exaggerated. She
looked, indeed, as if recovering from a severe illness, and when she
said good-morning to her father her voice trembled and her eyes
filled with tears.

"Tut, tut, lass! This will never do. I shall soon hardly own you for
my Nellie. We shall have to feed you up on capons and wine, child, or
send you down to one of the baths for a course of strengthening
waters."

She smiled faintly, and then turning, gave her hand to Cyril. As she
did so, a slight flush of colour came into her cheeks.

"I am heartily glad to see you down again, Mistress Nellie," he said,
"and wish you a fair and speedy recovery."

"I shall be better presently," she replied, with an effort.
"Good-morning, John."

"Good-morning, Mistress Nellie. Right glad are we to see you down
again, for it makes but a dull table without your merry laugh to give
an edge to our appetites."

She sat down now, and the others, seeing that it was best to let her
alone for a while, chatted gaily together.

"There is no talk in the City but of the war, Cyril," the Captain
said presently. "They say that the Dutch make sure of eating us up,
but they won't find it as easy a job as they fancy. The Duke of York
is to command the Fleet. They say that Prince Rupert will be second.
To my mind they ought to have entrusted the whole matter to him. He
proved himself as brave a captain at sea as he was on land, and I
will warrant he would lead his ships into action as gallantly as he
rode at the head of his Cavaliers on many a stricken field. The ships
are fitting out in all haste, and they are gathering men at every
sea-port. I should say they will have no lack of hands, for there are
many ships laid up, that at other times trade with Holland, and
Dantzic, and Dunkirk, and many a bold young sailor who will be glad
to try whether he can fight as stoutly against the Dutch under York
and Rupert as his father did under Blake."

"For my part," Cyril said, "I cannot understand it; for it seems to
me that the English and Dutch have been fighting for the last year. I
have been too busy to read the Journal, and have not been in the way
of hearing the talk of the coffeehouses and taverns; but, beyond that
it is some dispute about the colonies, I know little of the matter."

"I am not greatly versed in it myself, lad. Nellie here reads the
Journal, and goes abroad more than any of us, and should be able to
tell us something about it. Now, girl, can't you do something to set
us right in this matter, for I like not to be behind my neighbours,
though I am such a stay-at-home, having, as I thank the Lord, much
happiness here, and no occasion to go out to seek it."

"There was much discourse about it, father, the evening I went to
Dame King's. There were several gentlemen there who had trade with
the East, and one of them held shares in the English Company trading
thither. After supper was over, they discoursed more fully on the
matter than was altogether pleasing to some of us, who would much
rather that, as we had hoped, we might have dancing or singing. I
could see that Dame King herself was somewhat put out that her
husband should have, without her knowing of his intention, brought in
these gentlemen. Still, the matter of their conversation was new to
us, and we became at last so mightily interested in it that we
listened to the discourse without bemoaning ourselves that we had
lost the amusement we looked for. I know I wished at the time that
you had been there. I say not that I can repeat all that I heard, but
as I had before read some of the matters spoken of in the Journal, I
could follow what the gentlemen said more closely. Soon after the
coming of the King to the throne the friendship between us and the
Spaniards, that had been weakened during the mastership of Cromwell,
was renewed, and they gave our ships many advantages at their ports,
while, on the other hand, they took away the privileges the Dutch had
enjoyed there, and thus our commerce with Spain increased, while that
of the Dutch diminished."

"That is certainly true, Nellie," her father said. "We have three
ships sailing through the Mediterranean now to one that sailed there
ten years ago, and doubtless the Dutch must have suffered by the
increase in our trade."

"Then he said that, as we had obtained the Island of Bombay in the
East Indies and the City of Tangier in Africa as the dowry of the
Queen, and had received the Island of Poleron for our East India
Company by the treaty with Holland, our commerce everywhere
increased, and raised their jealousy higher and higher. There was
nothing in this of which complaint could be made by the Dutch
Government, but nevertheless they gave encouragement to their East
and West India Companies to raise trouble. Their East India Company
refused to hand over the Island, and laid great limitations as to the
places at which our merchants might trade in India. The other Company
acted in the same manner, and lawlessly took possession of Cape Coast
Castle, belonging to our English Company.

"The Duke of York, who was patron and governor of our African
Company, sent Sir Robert Holmes with four frigates to Guinea to make
reprisals. He captured a place from the Dutch and named it James's
Fort, and then, proceeding to the river Gambia, he turned out the
Dutch traders there and built a fort. A year ago, as the Dutch still
held Cape Coast Castle, Sir Robert was sent out again with orders to
take it by force, and on the way he overhauled a Dutch ship and found
she carried a letter of secret instructions from the Dutch Government
to the West India Company to take the English Fort at Cormantin.
Seeing that the Hollanders, although professing friendship, were thus
treacherously inclined, he judged himself justified in exceeding the
commission he had received, and on his way south he touched at Cape
Verde. There he first captured two Dutch ships and then attacked
their forts on the Island of Gorse and captured them, together with a
ship lying under their guns.

"In the fort he found a great quantity of goods ready to be shipped.
He loaded his own vessels, and those that he had captured, with the
merchandise, and carried it to Sierra Leone. Then he attacked the
Dutch fort of St. George del Mena, the strongest on the coast, but
failed there; but he soon afterwards captured Cape Coast Castle,
though, as the gentlemen said, a mightily strong place. Then he
sailed across to America, and, as you know, captured the Dutch
Settlements of New Netherlands, and changed the name into that of New
York. He did this not so much out of reprisal for the misconduct of
the Dutch in Africa, but because the land was ours by right, having
been discovered by the Cabots and taken possession of in the name of
King Henry VII., and our title always maintained until the Dutch
seized it thirty years ago.

"Then the Dutch sent orders to De Ruyter, who commanded the fleet
which was in the Mediterranean, to sail away privately and to make
reprisals on the Coast of Guinea and elsewhere. He first captured
several of our trading forts, among them that of Cormantin, taking
great quantities of goods belonging to our Company; he then sailed to
Barbadoes, where he was beaten off by the forts. Then he captured
twenty of our ships off Newfoundland, and so returned to Holland,
altogether doing damage, as the House of Commons told His Majesty, to
the extent of eight hundred thousand pounds. All this time the Dutch
had been secretly preparing for war, which they declared in January,
which has forced us to do the same, although we delayed a month in
hopes that some accommodation might be arrived at. I think, father,
that is all that he told us, though there were many details that I do
not remember."

"And very well told, lass, truly. I wonder that your giddy head
should have taken in so much matter. Of course, now you tell them
over, I have heard these things before--the wrong that the Dutch did
our Company by seizing their post at Cape Coast, and the reprisals
that Sir Robert Holmes took upon them with our Company's ships--but
they made no great mark on my memory, for I was just taking over my
father's work when the first expedition took place. At any rate, none
can say that we have gone into this war unjustly, seeing that the
Dutch began it, altogether without cause, by first attacking our
trading posts."

"It seems to me, Captain Dave," John Wilkes said, "that it has been
mighty like the war that our English buccaneers waged against the
Spaniards in the West Indies, while the two nations were at peace at
home."

"It is curious," Cyril said, "that the trouble begun in Africa should
have shifted to the other side of the Atlantic."

"Ay, lad; just as that first trouble was at last fought out in the
English Channel, off the coast of France, so this is likely to be
decided in well-nigh the same waters."

"The gentlemen, the other night, were all of opinion," Nellie said,
"that the matter would never have come to such a head had it not been
that De Witt, who is now the chief man in Holland, belongs to the
French party there, and has been urged on by King Louis, for his own
interest, to make war with us."

"That may well be, Nellie. In all our English wars France has ever
had a part either openly or by intrigues. France never seems to be
content with attending to her own business, but is ever meddling with
her neighbours', and, if not fighting herself, trying to set them by
the ears against each other. If I were a bit younger, and had not
lost my left flipper, I would myself volunteer for the service. As
for Master Cyril here, I know he is burning to lay aside the pen and
take to the sword."

"That is so, Captain Dave. As you know, I only took up the pen to
keep me until I was old enough to use a sword. I have been two years
at it now, and I suppose it will be as much longer before I can think
of entering the service of one of the Protestant princes; but as soon
as I am fit to do so, I shall get an introduction and be off; but I
would tenfold rather fight for my own country, and would gladly sail
in the Fleet, though I went but as a ship's boy."

"That is the right spirit, Master Cyril," John Wilkes exclaimed. "I
would go myself if the Captain could spare me and they would take
such a battered old hulk."

"I couldn't spare you, John," Captain Dave said. "I have been mighty
near making a mess of it, even with you as chief mate, and I might as
well shut up shop altogether if you were to leave me. I should miss
you, too, Cyril," he went on, stretching his arm across the table to
shake hands with the lad. "You have proved a real friend and a true;
but were there a chance of your going as an officer, I would not balk
you, even if I could do so. It is but natural that a lad of spirit
should speak and think as you do; besides, the war may not last for
long, and when you come back, and the ships are paid off, you would
soon wipe off the arrears of work, and get the books into ship-shape
order. But, work or no work, that room of yours will always stand
ready for you while I live, and there will always be a plate for you
on this table."

"Thank you, Captain Dave. You always overrate my services, and forget
that they are but the consequence of the kindness that you have shown
to me. But I have no intention of going. It was but a passing
thought. I have but one friend who could procure me a berth as a
volunteer, and as it is to him I must look for an introduction to
some foreign prince, I would not go to him twice for a favour,
especially as I have no sort of claim on his kindness. To go as a
cabin boy would be to go with men under my own condition, and
although I do not shirk hard work and rough usage, I should not care
for them in such fashion. Moreover, I am doing work which, even
without your hospitality, would suffice to keep me comfortably, and
if I went away, though but for a month, I might find that those for
whom I work had engaged other assistance. Spending naught, I am
laying by money for the time when I shall have to travel at my own
expense and to provide myself necessaries, and, maybe, to keep myself
for a while until I can procure employment. I have the prospect that,
by the end of another two years, I shall have gathered a sufficient
store for all my needs, and I should be wrong to throw myself out of
employment merely to embark on an adventure, and so to make a break,
perhaps a long one, in my plans."

"Don't you worry yourself on that score," Captain Dave said warmly,
and then checked himself. "It will be time to talk about that when
the time comes. But you are right, lad. I like a man who steadfastly
holds on the way he has chosen, and will not turn to the right or
left. There is not much that a man cannot achieve if he keeps his aim
steadily in view. Why, Cyril, if you said you had made up your mind
to be Lord Mayor of London, I would wager that you would some day be
elected."

Cyril laughed.

"I shall never set my eyes in that direction, nor do I think the
thing I have set myself to do will ever be in my power--that is, to
buy back my father's estate; but so long as I live I shall keep that
in view."

"More unlikely things have happened, lad. You have got first to rise
to be a General; then, what with your pay and your share in the sack
of a city or two, and in other ways, you may come home with a purse
full enough even for that. But it is time for us to be going down
below. Matthew will think that we have forgotten him altogether."

Another fortnight passed. Nellie had, to a considerable extent,
recovered from the shock that she had suffered, but her manner was
still quiet and subdued, her sallies were less lively, and her father
noticed, with some surprise, that she no longer took any great
interest in the gossip he retailed of the gay doings of the Court.

"I can't think what has come over the girl," he said to his wife.
"She seems well in health again, but she is changed a good deal,
somehow. She is gentler and softer. I think she is all the better for
it, but I miss her merry laugh and her way of ordering things about,
