"I have some samples of tea with me," he began, "of excellent quality
and at reasonable prices."

"It's no use," said the girl, abruptly. "We never buy of peddlers," and
she closed the door in his face.

"Not a very good beginning," thought Frank, rather mortified. "So I am a
peddler," he said to himself, and he called to mind the agents and
peddlers who in past years had called at the Cedars.

With some compunction, he remembered that he had regarded them with some
contempt as traveling nuisances. Now he had entered the ranks of this
despised class, and he began to see that they might be perfectly
respectable, and were estimable persons, animated by a praiseworthy
desire to make an honest living.

Thus thinking, he called at another door.

It was opened, not by a servant, but by an elderly maiden lady, who had
rather a weakness for bargains.

"I've got some nice tea," said Frank, "which I should like to sell you.
It is put up by the Great Pekin Company."

"Are you sure it's nice?" asked the elderly lady. "We've been getting
ours at the grocery store on the avenue, and the last wasn't very good."

"You'd better try a pound of ours," said Frank.

"I don't know but I will," said the lady. "How much do you charge?"

"I have some at fifty cents, some at sixty and some at seventy."

"I guess I'll take the sixty."

Frank had a pound parcel ready, which he delivered to her, and received
his money.

"Seems to me you are pretty young for a peddler," said the lady,
regarding Frank with curiosity.

"Yes, ma'am."

"How old be you?"

"Sixteen."

"Been long in the business?"

"No, ma'am; I've only just commenced."

"You don't say so! Do you make much money at it?"

"I haven't made much yet. I should be glad to supply you with some more
tea when this is gone."

"Well, you can call if you are round this way. If I like it, I will try
you again."

Frank's spirits rose.

His profits on the pound of tea were twelve cents. This was not much,
certainly, but it was a beginning.

At the next three houses he sold nothing, being rather rudely rebuffed
at one. At the fourth house, the servant called her mistress, a kind,
motherly-looking woman, who seemed to regard Frank with more interest
than his merchandise.

"I hope you are succeeding well," she said, kindly.

"This is my first day," said Frank, "and I have made one sale."

"I have a son who is an agent like you, but he didn't begin so young.
He is now traveling in the West."

"What is he selling?" asked Frank, with interest.

"Dry goods. He travels for a wholesale house in New York."

"I suppose he is a young man."

"Yes; he is twenty-five, but he began at nineteen in a small way. He
sometimes got quite discouraged at first. That is why I feel interested
in any who are passing through the same experience."

These pleasant words cheered Frank. Only at the nearest house he had
been called a tramp, but here he found that he was regarded with
consideration.

"It is rather uphill work," said Frank.

"And you seem very young."

"I am sixteen."

"Are you entirely dependent on what you earn?" asked the lady,
sympathizingly.

"Not entirely," answered the young merchant, "but I hope to make a
living in this or some other way. Can I sell you any?" he asked,
hopefully.

"I believe we have some on hand. Still tea will always keep, and I would
like to help you along."

The kind-hearted lady took three pounds--two at sixty cents and one at
seventy. This gave Frank a profit thirty-eight cents and put him in good
spirits.

He worked his way back to the avenue on the other side of the street,
and coming to a grocery store, entered.

It occurred to him that he would try to sell some at wholesale.

Frank was so young that the dealer did not suppose him to be an agent,
and asked what he would like to buy.

"I came to sell, not to buy," said Frank.

"What are you dealing in?" asked the grocer.

"I have several samples of tea," said our hero. "If you will give me an
order, I will have it sent to you to-morrow."

The grocer found, upon examination, that his stock was getting low, and
gave Frank an order, but he was obliged to sell below the regular price,
and only cleared three cents a pound. Still, on a sale of twenty-five
pounds, this gave him seventy-five cents, which was very encouraging.

Adding up his profits, thus far, Frank found that his commission
amounted to a dollar and a quarter, which exceeded his anticipations.

He continued his calls, but sold only one pound besides, at fifty cents,
netting him ten cents more.




CHAPTER XXIII

FRANK MEETS MR. MANNING AND MARK


The next morning Frank resumed his tea agency. As on the day previous,
he went to Brooklyn; but, though I should be glad to say that he was
more successful than on the first day, truth compels me to state that
the day was a comparative failure.

It might be that he was unfortunate in the persons whom he visited, but
at all events, at the close of his labors he found that his commissions
amounted to less than fifty cents. He contented himself, therefore, with
a ten-cent lunch, and crossed Fulton Ferry between three and four
o'clock.

"This will never do," thought Frank, seriously. "I shall have to be
economical to make my earnings cover my incidental expenses, while my
board and lodging must be defrayed out of the money I have with me."

Frank was disappointed. It is easy to think of earning one's living, but
not quite so easy to accomplish it. A boy, besides being ignorant of the
world, is inexperienced, and so disqualified for many avenues of
employment which are open to men. It is generally foolish for a boy to
leave a good home and start out for himself, unless the chances are
unusually favorable for him. If he does it, however, he should not allow
himself to be easily discouraged.

If Frank had given up the business in which he was engaged simply
because he had met with one unsuccessful day, I should not have been
willing to make him the hero of my story.

"This will never do," thought Frank. "I must make a greater effort
to-morrow."

The next day his commission amounted to a dollar, and the fourth day to
a dollar and twelve cents.

"You are doing well," said his employer. "You are doing better than the
majority of our agents."

In one way this compliment was satisfactory. In another way it was not
encouraging, for it limited his prospects. Frank began to think that he
would never be able to make his entire expenses as a tea agent.

I don't propose to speak in detail of Frank's daily experiences, but
only to make mention of any incidents that play an important part in
his history.

He was returning from Jersey City on the tenth day of his agency, when
in the gentleman's cabin he saw, directly opposite, two persons whom he
had reason to remember.

They were Mark Manning and his father.

Little reason as he had to like either, they reminded him of home, and
he felt pleased to meet them.

He instantly crossed the cabin, and offered his hand to his stepfather,
who had not yet seen him.

"When did you arrive, Mr. Manning?" he asked.

"Why, it is Frank!" exclaimed Mr. Manning, with an appearance of
cordiality. "Mark, do you see Frank?"

"Yes, I see him," replied Mark, coldly.

"Haven't you anything to say to him?" asked his father, who was much
more of a gentleman than his son.

"How are you?" said Mark, indifferently.

"Thank you for your kind inquiry," said Frank, more amused than vexed,
for he cared very little for his stepbrother's friendship. "I am in very
good health."

"And how are you getting along?" asked his stepfather, with an
appearance of interest. "Are you in any business?"

"Yes," answered Frank.

"What are you doing?' asked Mark, inspired a little by curiosity.

"I am agent for a wholesale tea house in New York," Frank answered,
briefly.

"You don't say so!" exclaimed Mark, rather impressed. "What is the name
of the firm?"

"The Great Pekin Tea Company."

"Does it pay well?" asked his stepbrother.

"I have met with very fair success," replied Frank.

"I congratulate you, Frank," said Mr. Manning. "Your energy and
enterprise are creditable--extremely creditable. I always predicted that
you would succeed--didn't I, Mark?'

"I don't remember hearing you say so," said Mark.

Mr. Manning shrugged his shoulders.

"Nevertheless," he said, "I have often made the remark."

"Where do you live?" asked Mark.

"I board in Clinton Place."

"A very respectable street," said Mr. Manning.

Frank now thought it was his turn to become questioner.

"How long do you remain in the city, Mr. Manning?" he asked.

"Not long--only a day or two," said his stepfather.

"We sail for Europe on Saturday," interposed Mark, "on the Cunard
steamer."

"Indeed! I wish you a pleasant voyage."

"I am sorry you won't go with us, Frank," said his stepfather,
cautiously. "You remember I gave you the chance to do so, and you
desired to devote yourself immediately to business."

"Yes, sir. I would rather remain in New York."

"It might possibly be arranged now, if you desire to go," said Mr.
Manning, hesitatingly.

"No, thank you, sir."

"Well, perhaps you are right," said his stepfather, considerably
relieved.

"What parts of Europe do you expect to visit?" asked Frank.

"We shall visit England, France, the Rhine, Switzerland, and perhaps
Italy."

"I hope you will enjoy it."

"Thank you; I think we shall."

Frank checked a sigh. It was certainly tantalizing. If he could travel
with congenial friends, he felt that he would very much enjoy such a
trip; but with Mark in the party there would be little pleasure for him.

"We are staying at the St. Nicholas Hotel," said Mr. Manning. "I would
invite you to come and dine with us, but I have an engagement first, and
don't know when we shall dine."

"Thank you, all the same," said Frank.

They had reached the New York side, and were walking toward Broadway. It
was necessary for Frank to go to the tea store, and he took leave of his
stepfather and Mark, again wishing them a pleasant voyage.

"I hate that boy!" said Mark, as they walked away.

"You should not indulge in any such disagreeable feelings, Mark," said
his father.

"Don't you hate him?"

"Certainly not."

"One would think by your soft manner that you loved him," said Mark, who
was not noted for the respect with which he treated his father.

"Really, Mark, I am shocked by your strange words."

"What made you invite him to go to Europe with us?"

"I knew he would not go."

"He might have accepted, and then we should have been in a pretty
pickle."

"Mark," said his father, rather irritated, "will you be kind enough to
leave me to manage my own affairs? I believe I have succeeded pretty
well so far."

"Yes, you have," Mark admitted. "All the same, we'd better keep clear of
Frank till we get safely off on the steamer."




CHAPTER XXIV

A DISCOURAGING DAY


The next day was indeed a trying one and one of many experiences for
Frank.

The first lady did not buy any tea, to be sure, but seemed sorry that
she was already supplied, and questioned Frank as to what success he was
meeting with.

When twelve o'clock came, Frank had not sold a single pound. Even if he
earned nothing however, he had an appetite and must buy lunch.

He entered a small oyster saloon, and went up to the proprietor.

"Can I sell you some tea?" he asked.

"No, I guess not. I get my tea in Harlem."

"Take a couple of pounds," said Frank, "and I will take part of the pay
in lunch."

"That is business," said the other. "Let me look at your tea."

Frank showed him his samples.

"Who employs you?'

"The Great Pekin Tea Company."

"They have a good name. Yes, I will try a couple of pounds at fifty
cents."

This, of course, came to a dollar, and Frank's profit on the sale
amounted to twenty cents. This was precisely the cost of the lunch which
he ordered, so that he felt well satisfied with the arrangement.

