The Onondaga turned without a word, and started into the maze of lofty
hills and narrow valleys, where the shadows of the night that was
coming so swiftly already lay thick and heavy.

The three had gone north after the great victory at Lake George, a
triumph that was not followed up as they had hoped. They had waited
to see Johnson's host pursue the enemy and strike him hard again, but
there were bickerings among the provinces which were jealous of one
another, and the army remained in camp until the lateness of the
season indicated a delay of all operations, save those of the scouts
and roving bands that never rested. But Robert, Willet and Tayoga
hoped, nevertheless, that they could achieve some deed of importance
during the coming cold weather, and they were willing to undergo great
risks in the effort.

They were soon in the heavy forest that clothed all the hills, and
passed up a narrow ravine leading into the depths of the maze. The
wind followed them into the cleft and steadily grew colder. The
glowing terraces in the west broke up, faded quite away, and night, as
yet without stars, spread over the earth.

Tayoga was in front, the other two following him in single file,
stepping where he stepped, and leaving to him without question the
selection of a place where they could stay. The Onondaga, guided by
long practice and the inheritance from countless ancestors who had
lived all their lives in the forest, moved forward with confidence.
His instinct told him they would soon come to such a refuge as they
desired, the rocky uplift about him indicating the proximity of many
hollows.

The darkness increased, and the wind swept through the chasms with
alternate moan and whistle, but the red youth held on his course for
a full two miles, and his comrades followed without a word. When the
cliffs about them rose to a height of two or three hundred feet, he
stopped, and, pointing with a long forefinger, said he had found what
they wished.

Robert at first could see nothing but a pit of blackness, but
gradually as he gazed the shadows passed away, and he traced a deep
recess in the stone of the cliff, not much of a shelter to those
unused to the woods, but sufficient for hardy forest runners.

"I think we may build a little fire in there," said Tayoga, "and no
one can see it unless he is here in the ravine within ten feet of us."

Willet nodded and Robert joyfully began to prepare for the blaze. The
night was turning even colder than he had expected, and the chill
was creeping into his frame. The fire would be most welcome for its
warmth, and also because of the good cheer it would bring. He swept
dry leaves into a heap within the recess, put upon them dead wood,
which was abundant everywhere, and then Tayoga with artful use of
flint and steel lighted the spark.

"It is good," admitted the hunter as he sat Turkish fashion on the
leaves, and spread out his hands before the growing flames. "The
nights grow cold mighty soon here in the high hills of the north, and
the heat not only loosens up your muscles, but gives you new courage."

"I intend to make myself as comfortable as possible," said Robert.
"You and Tayoga are always telling me to do so and I know the advice
is good."

He gathered great quantities of the dry leaves, making of them what
was in reality a couch, upon which he could recline in halfway fashion
like a Roman at a feast, and warm at the fire before him the food he
carried in a deerskin knapsack. An appetizing odor soon arose, and, as
he ate, a pleasant warmth pervaded all his body, giving him a feeling
of great content. They had venison, the tender meat of the young bear
which, like the Indians, they loved, and they also allowed themselves
a slice apiece of precious bread. Water was never distant in the
northern wilderness, and Tayoga found a brook not a hundred yards
away, flowing down a ravine that cut across their own. They drank at
it in turn, and, then, the three lay down on the leaves in the recess,
grateful to the Supreme Power which provided so well for them, even in
the wild forest.

They let the flames die, but a comfortable little bed of coals
remained, glowing within the shelter of the rocks. Young Lennox heaped
up the leaves until they formed a pillow under his head, and then
half dreaming, gazed into the heart of the fire, while his comrades
reclined near him, each silent but with his mind turned to that which
concerned him most.

Robert's thoughts were of St. Luc, of the romantic figure he had
seen in the wilderness after the battle of Lake George, the knightly
chevalier, singing his gay little song of mingled sentiment and
defiance. An unconscious smile passed over his face. He and St. Luc
could never be enemies. In very truth, the French leader, though an
official enemy, had proved more than once the best of friends, ready
even to risk his life in the service of the American lad. What was
the reason? What could be the tie between them? There must be some
connection. What was the mystery of his origin? The events of the last
year indicated to him very clearly that there was such a mystery.
Adrian Van Zoon and Master Benjamin Hardy surely knew something about
it, and Willet too. Was it possible that a thread lay in the hand of
St. Luc also?

He turned his eyes from the coals and gazed at the impassive face of
the hunter. Once the question trembled on his lips, but he was sure
the Great Bear would evade the answer, and the lad thought too much of
the man who had long stood to him in the place of father to cause him
annoyance. Beyond a doubt Willet had his interests at heart, and, when
the time came for him to speak, speak he would, but not before.

His mind passed from the subject to dwell upon the task they had set
for themselves, a thought which did not exclude St. Luc, though the
chevalier now appeared in the guise of a bold and skillful foe, with
whom they must match their wisdom and courage. Doubtless he had formed
a new band, and, at the head of it, was already roaming the country
south of the St. Lawrence. Well, if that were the case perhaps they
would meet once more, and he would have given much to penetrate the
future.

"Why don't you go to sleep, Robert?" asked the hunter.

"For the best of reasons. Because I can't," replied the lad.

"Perhaps it's well to stay awake," said the Onondaga gravely.

"Why, Tayoga?"

"Someone comes."

"Here in the ravine?"

"No, not in the ravine but on the cliff opposite us."

Robert strained both eye and ear, but he could neither see nor hear
any human being. The wall on the far side of the ravine rose to a
considerable height, its edge making a black line against the sky, but
nothing there moved.

"Your fancy is too much for you, Tayoga," he said. "Thinking that
someone might come, it creates a man out of air and mist."

"No, Dagaeoga, my fancy sleeps. Instead, my ear, which speaks only the
truth, tells me a man is walking along the crest of the cliff, and
coming on a course parallel with our ravine. My eye does not yet see
him, but soon it will confirm what my ear has already told me. This
deep cleft acts as a trumpet and brings the sound to me."

"How far away, then, would you say is this being, who, I fear, is
mythical?"

"He is not mythical. He is reality. He is yet about three hundred
yards distant. I might not have heard him, even with the aid of the
cleft, but tonight Areskoui has given uncommon power to my ear,
perhaps to aid us, and I know he is walking among thick bushes. I can
hear the branches swish as they fly back into place, after his body
has passed. Ah, a small stick popped as it broke under his foot!"

"I heard nothing."

"That is not my fault, O Dagaeoga. It is a heavy man, because I now
hear his footsteps, even when they do not break anything. He walks
with some uncertainty. Perhaps he fears lest he should make a false
step, and tumble into the ravine."

"Since you can tell so much through hearing, at such a great distance,
perhaps you know what kind of a man the stranger is. A warrior, I
suppose?"

"No, he is not of our race. He would not walk so heavily. It is a
white man."

"One of Rogers' rangers, then? Or maybe it is Rogers himself, or
perhaps Black Rifle."

"It is none of those. They would advance with less noise. It is one
not so much used to the forest, but who knows the way, nevertheless,
and who doubtless has gone by this trail before."

"Then it must be a Frenchman!"

"I think so too."

"It won't be St. Luc?"

"No, Dagaeoga, though your tone showed that for a moment you hoped it
was. Sharp Sword is too skillful in the forest to walk with so heavy
a step. Nor can it be either of the leaders, De Courcelles or
Jumonville. They also are too much at home in the woods. The right
name of the man forms itself on my lips, but I will wait to be sure.
In another minute he will enter the bare space almost opposite us and
then we can see."

The three waited in silence. Although Robert had expressed doubt he
felt none. He had a supreme belief in the Onondaga's uncanny powers,
and he was quite sure that a man was moving upon the bluff. A stranger
at such a time was to be watched, because white men came but little
into this dangerous wilderness.

A dark figure appeared within the prescribed minute upon the crest and
stopped there, as if the man, whoever he might be, wished to rest and
draw fresh breath. The sky had lightened and he was outlined clearly
against it. Robert gazed intently and then he uttered a little cry.

"I know him!" he said. "I can't be mistaken. It's Achille Garay, the
one whose name we found written on a fragment of a letter in Albany."

"It's the man who tried to kill you, none other," said Tayoga gravely,
"and Areskoui whispered in my ear that it would be he."

"What on earth can he be doing here in this lone wilderness at such a
time?" asked Robert.

"Likely he's on his way to a French camp with information about our
forces," said Willet. "We frightened Mynheer Hendrik Martinus, when we
were in Albany, but I suppose that once a spy and traitor always a
spy and traitor. Since the immediate danger has moved from Albany,
Martinus and Garay may have begun work again."

"Then we'd better stop him," said Robert.

"No, let him go on," said Willet. "He can't carry any information
about us that the French leaders won't find out for themselves.
The fact that he's traveling in the night indicates a French camp
somewhere near. We'll put him to use. Suppose we follow him and
discover what we can about our enemies."

Robert looked at the cheerful bed of coals and sighed. They were
seeking the French and Indians, and Garay was almost sure to lead
straight to them. It was their duty to stalk him.

"I wish he had passed in the daytime," he said ruefully.

Tayoga laughed softly.

"You have lived long enough in the wilderness, O Dagaeoga," he said,
"to know that you cannot choose when and where you will do your work."

"That's true, Tayoga, but while my feet are unwilling to go my will
moves me on. So I'm entitled to more credit than you who take an
actual physical de light in trailing anybody at any time."

The Onondaga smiled, but did not reply. Then the three took up their
arms, returned their packs to their backs and without noise left the
alcove. Robert cast one more reluctant glance at the bed of coals, but
it was a farewell, not any weakening of the will to go.

Garay, after his brief rest on the summit, had passed the open space
and was out of sight in the bushes, but Robert knew that both Tayoga
and Willet could easily pick up his trail, and now he was all
eagerness to pursue him and see what the chase might disclose. A
little farther down, the cliff sloped back to such an extent that they
could climb it without trouble, and, when they surmounted the crest,
they entered the bushes at the point where Garay had disappeared.

"Can you hear him now, Tayoga?" asked Robert.

"My ears are as good as they were when I was in the ravine," replied
the Onondaga, "but they do not catch any sounds from the Frenchman.
It is, as we wish, because we do not care to come so near him that he
will hear."

"Give him a half mile start," said Willet. "The ground is soft here,
and it won't be any sort of work to follow him. See, here are the
traces of his footsteps now, and there is where he has pushed his way
among the little boughs. Notice the two broken twigs, Robert."

They followed at ease, the trail being a clear one, and the light of
moon and stars now ample. Robert began to feel the ardor of the chase.
He did not see Garay, but he believed that Tayoga at times heard him
with those wonderful ears of his. He rejoiced too that chance had
caused them to find the French spy in the wilderness. He remembered
that foul attempt upon his life in Albany, and, burning with
resentment, he was eager to thwart Garay in whatever he was now
attempting to do. Tayoga saw his face and said softly:

"You hate this man Garay?"

"I don't like him."

"Do you wish me to go forward and kill him?"

"No! No, Tayoga! Why do you ask me such a cold-blooded question?"

The Onondaga laughed gently.

"I was merely testing you, Dagaeoga," he said. "We of the Hodenosaunee
perhaps do not regard the taking of life as you do, but I would not
shoot Garay from ambush, although I might slay him in open battle. Ah,
there he is again on the crest of the ridge ahead!"

Robert once more saw the thick, strong figure of the spy outlined
against the sky which was now luminous with a brilliant moon and
countless clear stars, and the feeling of resentment was very powerful
within him. Garay, without provocation, had attempted his life, and
he could not forget it, and, for a moment or two, he felt that if
the necessity should come in battle he was willing for a bullet from
Tayoga to settle him. Then he rebuked himself for harboring rancor.

Garay paused, as if he needed another rest, and looked back, though it
was only a casual glance, perhaps to measure the distance he had come,
and the three, standing among the dense bushes, had no fear that he
saw them or even suspected that anyone was on his traces. After a
delay of a minute or so he passed over the crest and Robert, Willet
and Tayoga moved on in pursuit. The Frenchman evidently knew his path,
as the chase led for a long time over hills, down valleys and across
small streams. Toward morning he put his fingers to his lips and blew
a shrill whistle between them. Then the three drew swiftly near
until they could see him, standing under the boughs of a great oak,
obviously in an attitude of waiting.

"It is a signal to someone," said Robert.

"So it is," said Willet, "and it means that he and we have come to
the end of our journey. I take it that we have arrived almost at the
French and Indian camp, and that he whistles because he fears lest he
should be shot by a sentinel through mistake. The reply should come
soon."

As the hunter spoke they heard a whistle, a faint, clear note far
ahead, and then Garay without hesitation resumed his journey. The
three followed, but when they reached the crest of the next ridge they
saw a light shining through the forest, a light that grew and finally
