gloves that called attention to the tanned wrist and arms were stripped
off and put in her own pocket. Then the wreath of pine-cones was
adjusted at a heretofore unimagined angle, the hair was pulled softly
into a fluffy frame, and finally, as she met Rebecca's grateful eyes
she gave her two approving, triumphant kisses. In a second the sensitive
face lighted into happiness; pleased dimples appeared in the cheeks, the
kissed mouth was as red as a rose, and the little fright that had walked
behind the pine-tree stepped out on the other side Rebecca the lovely.

As to the relative value of Miss Dearborn's accomplishments, the
decision must be left to the gentle reader; but though it is certain
that children should be properly grounded in mathematics, no heart of
flesh could bear to hear Miss Dearborn's methods vilified who had seen
her patting, pulling, squeezing Rebecca from ugliness into beauty.

The young superintendent of district schools was a witness of the scene,
and when later he noted the children surrounding Columbia as bees
a honeysuckle, he observed to Dr. Moses: "She may not be much of a
teacher, but I think she'd be considerable of a wife!" and subsequent
events proved that he meant what he said!

II

Now all was ready; the moment of fate was absolutely at hand; the
fife-and-drum corps led the way and the States followed; but what
actually happened Rebecca never knew; she lived through the hours in a
waking dream. Every little detail was a facet of light that reflected
sparkles, and among them all she was fairly dazzled. The brass band
played inspiring strains; the mayor spoke eloquently on great themes;
the people cheered; then the rope on which so much depended was put into
the children's hands, they applied superhuman strength to their task,
and the flag mounted, mounted, smoothly and slowly, and slowly unwound
and stretched itself until its splendid size and beauty were revealed
against the maples and pines and blue New England sky.

Then after cheers upon cheers and after a patriotic chorus by the church
choirs, the State of Maine mounted the platform, vaguely conscious
that she was to recite a poem, though for the life of her she could not
remember a single word.

"Speak up loud and clear, Rebecky," whispered Uncle Sam in the front
row, but she could scarcely hear her own voice when, tremblingly, she
began her first line. After that she gathered strength and the poem
"said itself," while the dream went on.

She saw Adam Ladd leaning against a tree; Aunt Jane and Aunt Miranda
palpitating with nervousness; Clara Belle Simpson gazing cross-eyed but
adoring from a seat on the side; and in the far, far distance, on the
very outskirts of the crowd, a tall man standing in a wagon--a tall,
loose-jointed man with red upturned mustaches, and a gaunt white horse
headed toward the Acreville road.

Loud applause greeted the state of Maine, the slender little white-clad
figure standing on the mossy boulder that had been used as the centre of
the platform. The sun came up from behind a great maple and shone full
on the star-spangled banner, making it more dazzling than ever, so that
its beauty drew all eyes upward.

Abner Simpson lifted his vagrant shifting gaze to its softy fluttering
folds and its splendid massing of colors, thinking:

"I don't know's anybody'd ought to steal a flag--the thunderin' idjuts
seem to set such store by it, and what is it, anyway? Nothin; but a
sheet o' buntin!"

Nothing but a sheet of bunting? He looked curiously at the rapt faces
of the mothers, their babies asleep in their arms; the parted lips and
shining eyes of the white-clad girls; at Cap'n Lord, who had been in
Libby prison, and Nat Strout, who had left an arm at Bull Run; at the
friendly, jostling crowd of farmers, happy, eager, absorbed, their
throats ready to burst with cheers. Then the breeze served, and he heard
Rebecca's clear voice saying:

"For it's your star, my star, all the stars together, That make our
country's flag so proud To float in the bright fall weather!"

"Talk about stars! She's got a couple of em right in her head," thought
Simpson.... "If I ever seen a young one like that lyin; on anybody's
doorstep I'd hook her quicker'n a wink, though I've got plenty to home,
the Lord knows! And I wouldn't swap her off neither.... Spunky little
creeter, too; settin; up in the wagon lookin' bout's big as a pint o'
cider, but keepin' right after the goods!... I vow I'm bout sick o' my
job! Never WITH the crowd, allers JEST on the outside, s if I wa'n't as
good's they be! If it paid well, mebbe I wouldn't mind, but they're so
thunderin' stingy round here, they don't leave anything decent out for
you to take from em, yet you're reskin' your liberty n' reputation jest
the same!... Countin' the poor pickin's n' the time I lose in jail I
might most's well be done with it n' work out by the day, as the folks
want me to; I'd make bout's much n' I don't know's it would be any
harder!"

He could see Rebecca stepping down from the platform, while his own
red-headed little girl stood up on her bench, waving her hat with one
hand, her handkerchief with the other, and stamping with both feet.

Now a man sitting beside the mayor rose from his chair and Abner heard
him call:

"Three cheers for the women who made the flag!"

"HIP, HIP, HURRAH!"

"Three cheers for the State of Maine!"

"HIP, HIP, HURRAH!"

"Three cheers for the girl that saved the flag from the hands of the
enemy!"

"HIP, HIP, HURRAH! HIP, HIP, HURRAH!"

It was the Edgewood minister, whose full, vibrant voice was of the sort
to move a crowd. His words rang out into the clear air and were carried
from lip to lip. Hands clapped, feet stamped, hats swung, while the loud
huzzahs might almost have wakened the echoes on old Mount Ossipee.

The tall, loose-jointed man sat down in the wagon suddenly and took up
the reins.

"They're gettin' a little mite personal, and I guess it's bout time for
you to be goin', Simpson!"

The tone was jocular, but the red mustaches drooped, and the
half-hearted cut he gave to start the white mare on her homeward journey
showed that he was not in his usual devil-may-care mood.

"Durn his skin!" he burst out in a vindictive undertone, as the mare
swung into her long gait. "It's a lie! I thought twas somebody's wash! I
hain't an enemy!"

While the crowd at the raising dispersed in happy family groups to their
picnics in the woods; while the Goddess of Liberty, Uncle Sam,
Columbia, and the proud States lunched grandly in the Grange hall with
distinguished guests and scarred veterans of two wars, the lonely
man drove, and drove, and drove through silent woods and dull, sleepy
villages, never alighting to replenish his wardrobe or his stock of
swapping material.

At dusk he reached a miserable tumble-down house on the edge of a pond.

The faithful wife with the sad mouth and the habitual look of anxiety in
her faded eyes came to the door at the sound of wheels and went doggedly
to the horse-shed to help him unharness.

"You didn't expect to see me back tonight, did ye?" he asked
satirically; "leastwise not with this same horse? Well, I'm here! You
needn't be scairt to look under the wagon seat, there hain't nothin'
there, not even my supper, so I hope you're suited for once! No, I guess
I hain't goin' to be an angel right away, neither. There wa'n't nothin'
but flags layin' roun' loose down Riverboro way, n' whatever they say, I
hain't sech a hound as to steal a flag!"

It was natural that young Riverboro should have red, white, and blue
dreams on the night after the new flag was raised. A stranger thing,
perhaps, is the fact that Abner Simpson should lie down on his hard bed
with the flutter of bunting before his eyes, and a whirl of unaccustomed
words in his mind.

"For it's your star, my star, all our stars together."

"I'm sick of goin' it alone," he thought; "I guess I'll try the other
road for a spell;" and with that he fell asleep.




Seventh Chronicle. THE LITTLE PROPHET


I

"I guess York County will never get red of that Simpson crew!" exclaimed
Miranda Sawyer to Jane. "I thought when the family moved to Acreville
we'd seen the last of em, but we ain't! The big, cross-eyed, stutterin'
boy has got a place at the mills in Maplewood; that's near enough to
come over to Riverboro once in a while of a Sunday mornin' and set in
the meetin' house starin' at Rebecca same as he used to do, only it's
reskier now both of em are older. Then Mrs. Fogg must go and bring back
the biggest girl to help her take care of her baby,--as if there wa'n't
plenty of help nearer home! Now I hear say that the youngest twin has
come to stop the summer with the Cames up to Edgewood Lower Corner."

"I thought two twins were always the same age," said Rebecca,
reflectively, as she came into the kitchen with the milk pail.

"So they be," snapped Miranda, flushing and correcting herself. "But
that pasty-faced Simpson twin looks younger and is smaller than the
other one. He's meek as Moses and the other one is as bold as a brass
kettle; I don't see how they come to be twins; they ain't a mite alike."

"Elijah was always called the fighting twin' at school," said Rebecca,
"and Elisha's other name was Nimbi-Pamby; but I think he's a nice little
boy, and I'm glad he has come back. He won't like living with Mr. Came,
but he'll be almost next door to the minister's, and Mrs. Baxter is sure
to let him play in her garden."

"I wonder why the boy's stayin' with Cassius Came," said Jane. "To be
sure they haven't got any of their own, but the child's too young to be
much use."

"I know why," remarked Rebecca promptly, "for I heard all about it over
to Watson's when I was getting the milk. Mr. Came traded something with
Mr. Simpson two years ago and got the best of the bargain, and Uncle
Jerry says he's the only man that ever did, and he ought to have a
monument put up to him. So Mr. Came owes Mr. Simpson money and won't
pay it, and Mr. Simpson said he'd send over a child and board part of it
out, and take the rest in stock--a pig or a calf or something."

"That's all stuff and nonsense," exclaimed Miranda; "nothin' in the
world but store-talk. You git a clump o' men-folks settin' round
Watson's stove, or out on the bench at the door, an' they'll make up
stories as fast as their tongues can wag. The man don't live that's
smart enough to cheat Abner Simpson in a trade, and who ever heard of
anybody's owin' him money? Tain't supposable that a woman like Mrs. Came
would allow her husband to be in debt to a man like Abner Simpson. It's
a sight likelier that she heard that Mrs. Simpson was ailin' and sent
for the boy so as to help the family along. She always had Mrs. Simpson
to wash for her once a month, if you remember Jane?"

There are some facts so shrouded in obscurity that the most skillful and
patient investigator cannot drag them into the light of day. There are
also (but only occasionally) certain motives, acts, speeches, lines of
conduct, that can never be wholly and satisfactorily explained, even in
a village post-office or on the loafers' bench outside the tavern door.

Cassius Came was a close man, close of mouth and close of purse; and all
that Riverboro ever knew as to the three months' visit of the Simpson
twin was that it actually occurred. Elisha, otherwise Nimbi-Pamby, came;
Nimbi-Pamby stayed; and Nimbi-Pamby, when he finally rejoined his own
domestic circle, did not go empty-handed (so to speak), for he was
accompanied on his homeward travels by a large, red, bony, somewhat
truculent cow, who was tied on behind the wagon, and who made the
journey a lively and eventful one by her total lack of desire to proceed
over the road from Edgewood to Acreville. But that, the cow's tale,
belongs to another time and place, and the coward's tale must come
first; for Elisha Simpson was held to be sadly lacking in the manly
quality of courage.

It was the new minister's wife who called Nimbi-Pamby the Little
Prophet. His full name was Elisha Jeremiah Simpson, but one seldom heard
it at full length, since, if he escaped the ignominy of Nimbi-Pamby,
Lishe was quite enough for an urchin just in his first trousers and
those assumed somewhat prematurely. He was "Lishe," therefore, to the
village, but the Little Prophet to the young minister's wife.

Rebecca could see the Cames' brown farmhouse from Mrs. Baxter's
sitting-room window. The little-traveled road with strips of tufted
green between the wheel tracks curled dustily up to the very doorstep,
and inside the screen door of pink mosquito netting was a wonderful
drawn-in rug, shaped like a half pie, with "Welcome" in saffron letters
on a green ground.

Rebecca liked Mrs. Cassius Came, who was a friend of her Aunt Miranda's
and one of the few persons who exchanged calls with that somewhat
unsociable lady. The Came farm was not a long walk from the brick house,
for Rebecca could go across the fields when haying-time was over, and
her delight at being sent on an errand in that direction could not be
measured, now that the new minister and his wife had grown to be such a
resource in her life. She liked to see Mrs. Came shake the Welcome rug,
flinging the cheery word out into the summer sunshine like a bright
greeting to the day. She liked to see her go to the screen door a dozen
times in a morning, open it a crack and chase an imaginary fly from the
sacred precincts within. She liked to see her come up the cellar steps
into the side garden, appearing mysteriously as from the bowels of the
earth, carrying a shining pan of milk in both hands, and disappearing
through the beds of hollyhocks and sunflowers to the pig-pen or the
hen-house.

Rebecca was not fond of Mr. Came, and neither was Mrs. Baxter, nor
Elisha, for that matter; in fact Mr. Came was rather a difficult person
to grow fond of, with his fiery red beard, his freckled skin, and his
gruff way of speaking; for there were no children in the brown house to
smooth the creases from his forehead or the roughness from his voice.

II

The new minister's wife was sitting under the shade of her great maple
early one morning, when she first saw the Little Prophet. A tiny figure
came down the grass-grown road leading a cow by a rope. If it had been a
small boy and a small cow, a middle-sized boy and an ordinary cow, or a
grown man and a big cow, she might not have noticed them; but it was the
combination of an infinitesimal boy and a huge cow that attracted her
attention. She could not guess the child's years, she only knew that he
was small for his age, whatever it was.

The cow was a dark red beast with a crumpled horn, a white star on her
forehead, and a large surprised sort of eye. She had, of course, two
eyes, and both were surprised, but the left one had an added hint of
amazement in it by virtue of a few white hairs lurking accidentally in
the centre of the eyebrow.

The boy had a thin sensitive face and curtly brown hair, short trousers
patched on both knees, and a ragged straw hat on the back of his head.
He pattered along behind the cow, sometimes holding the rope with both
hands, and getting over the ground in a jerky way, as the animal left
him no time to think of a smooth path for bare feet.

The Came pasture was a good half-mile distant, and the cow seemed in no
hurry to reach it; accordingly she forsook the road now and then,
and rambled in the hollows, where the grass was sweeter to her way of
thinking. She started on one of these exploring expeditions just as she
passed the minister's great maple, and gave Mrs. Baxter time to call out
to the little fellow, "Is that your cow?"

Elisha blushed and smiled, and tried to speak modestly, but there was a
quiver of pride in his voice as he answered suggestively:

"It's--nearly my cow."

"How is that?" asked Mrs. Baxter.

"Why, Mr. Came says when I drive her twenty-nine more times to pasture
thout her gettin' her foot over the rope or thout my bein' afraid, she's
goin' to be my truly cow. Are you fraid of cows?"

"Ye-e-es," Mrs. Baxter confessed, "I am, just a little. You see, I am
nothing but a woman, and boys can't understand how we feel about cows."

"I can! They're awful big things, aren't they?"

"Perfectly enormous! I've always thought a cow coming towards you one of
the biggest things in the world."

"Yes; me, too. Don't let's think about it. Do they hook people so very
often?"

"No indeed, in fact one scarcely ever hears of such a case."

"If they stepped on your bare foot they'd scrunch it, wouldn't they?"

"Yes, but you are the driver; you mustn't let them do that; you are a
free-will boy, and they are nothing but cows."

"I know; but p'raps there is free-will cows, and if they just WOULD do
it you couldn't help being scrunched, for you mustn't let go of the rope
nor run, Mr. Came says.

"No, of course that would never do."

"Where you used to live did all the cows go down into the boggy places
when you drove em to pasture, or did some walk in the road?"

"There weren't any cows or any pastures where I used to live; that's
what makes me so foolish; why does your cow need a rope?"

"She don't like to go to pasture, Mr. Came says. Sometimes she'd druther
stay to home, and so when she gets part way she turns round and comes
backwards."

"Dear me!" thought Mrs. Baxter, "what becomes of this boy-mite if the
cow has a spell of going backwards?--Do you like to drive her?" she
asked.

"N-no, not erzackly; but you see, it'll be my cow if I drive her
twenty-nine more times thout her gettin' her foot over the rope and
thout my bein' afraid," and a beaming smile gave a transient brightness
to his harassed little face. "Will she feed in the ditch much longer?"
he asked. "Shall I say Hurrap'? That's what Mr. Came says--HURRAP!' like
