Wyatt refused to take offense. He said, and Paul could not but hear, that
Paul some day would be grateful for what he was doing, and that it was
necessary in the forest to meet craft with craft, guile with guile.

The days passed in hunting, eating, resting, and marching, and Paul lost
count of time, distance, and direction. He had not Henry's wonderful
instinct in the wilderness, and he could not now tell at what point of the
compass Wareville lay. But he kept a brave heart and a brave face, and if
at times he felt despair, he did not let anyone see it.

They came at last to a place where the forest thinned out, and then broke
away, leaving a little prairie. The warriors, who had previously been
painting themselves in more hideous colors than ever, broke into a long,
loud, wailing chant. It was answered in similar fashion from a point
beyond a swell in the prairie, and Paul knew that they had come to the
Indian village. The wailing chant was a sign that they had returned after
disaster, and now all the old squaws were taking it up in reply. Paul was
filled with curiosity, and he watched everything.

The warriors emerged from the last fringe of the forest, their faces
blackened, the hideous chant for their lost rising and falling, but never
ceasing. Forward to meet them poured a mongrel throng--old men, old
squaws, children, mangy curs, and a few warriors. Paul was with Red Eagle,
and when the old squaws saw him, they stopped their plaintive howl and
sent up a sudden shrill note of triumph. In a moment Paul was in a ring of
ghastly old faces, in every one of which snapped a pair of cruel black
eyes. Then the old women began to push him about, to pinch him, and to
strike him, and they showed incredible activity.

Thoroughly angry and in much pain, Paul struck at the hideous hags; but
they leaped away, jabbered and laughed, and returned to the attack. While
he was occupied with those in front of him, others slipped up behind him,
jabbed him in the back, or violently twitched the hair on his neck. Tears
of pain and rage stood in Paul's eyes, and he wheeled about, only to have
the jeering throng wheel with him and continue their torture. At last he
caught one of them a half blow, and she reeled and fell. The others
shouted uproariously, and the warriors standing by joined in their mirth.

One of the hags finally struck Paul a resounding smack in the face, and as
he turned to pursue her another from behind seized a wisp of hair and
tried to tear it out by the roots. Paul whirled in a frenzy, and so
quickly that she could not escape him. He seized her withered old throat
in both his hands, and then and there he would have choked her to death,
but the warriors interfered, and pulled his hands loose. But they also
drove the old women away, and Paul was let alone for the time. As he stood
on one side, gasping as much with anger as with pain, Braxton Wyatt, who
had not been persecuted at all, came to him again with ironic words and
derisive gesture.

"It was just as I told you, Paul," he said. "I gave you good advice. If
you had taken it, they would have spared you. What you have just got is
only a taste to what you may suffer."

Paul felt a dreadful inclination to shudder, but he managed to control
himself.

"I'd rather die under the torture than do what you have done, you
renegade!" he said.

This was the first time since they crossed the Ohio that he had replied to
Braxton, but even now he would say no more, and Wyatt, following his
custom, shrugged his shoulders and walked away. Then all, mingled in one
great throng, went forward to the village. Paul saw an irregular
collection of buffalo-skin and deer-skin tepees, and a few pole wigwams,
with some rudely cultivated fields of maize about them. A fine brook
flowed through the village, and the site, on the whole, was well chosen,
well watered, and sheltered by the little hills from cold winds. It was
too far away from those hills to be reached by a marksman in ambush, and
all about hung signs of plenty--drying venison and buffalo meat, and skins
of many kinds.

When they came within the circle of huts and tents, Paul was again
regarded by many curious eyes, and there might have been more attempts to
persecute him, but the chief, Red Eagle, kept them off. Red Eagle was able
to speak a little English, but Paul was too proud to ask him about his own
fate. Not a stoic by nature, the boy nevertheless had a will that could
control his impulses.

He was thrust into a small pole hut, and when the door was tightly
fastened he was left alone there. The place was not more than six feet
square, and only a little higher than Paul's head when he stood erect. In
one corner was a couch of skins, but that was its whole equipment. Some of
the poles did not fit closely together, leaving cracks of a quarter of an
inch or so, through which came welcome fresh air, and also the subdued hum
of the village noises. He heard indistinctly the barking of dogs, and the
chatter of old squaws scolding, but he paid little heed to them because he
felt now the sudden rush of a terrible despair.

The Ohio had been the great wall between Paul and his kind, and with the
steady march northward, through the forests and over the little prairies,
still another wall, equally great, had been reared. It seemed to Paul that
Henry and Shif'less Sol and his other friends could never reach him here,
and whatever fate the Shawnees had in store for him, it would be a hard
one. Wild life he liked in its due proportion, but he had no wish to
become a wild man all his days. He wanted to see the settlements grow and
prosper, and become the basis of a mighty civilization. This was what
appealed to him most. His great task of helping to save Kentucky
continually appealed to him, and now his chance of sharing in it seemed
slender and remote--too slender and remote to be considered.

The boy lay long on his couch of skins. The hum of the village life still
came to his ears, but he paid little heed to it. Gradually his courage
came back, or rather his will brought it back, and he became conscious
that the day was waning, also that he was growing hungry. Then the door
was opened, and Red Eagle entered. Behind him came a weazened old warrior
and a weazened old squaw, hideous to behold. Red Eagle stepped to one
side, and the old squaw fell on Paul's neck, murmuring words of
endearment. Paul, startled and horrified, pushed her off, but she returned
to the charge. Then Paul pushed her back again with more force. Red Eagle
stepped forward, and lifted a restraining hand.

"They would adopt you in place of the son they have lost," he said in his
scant and broken English.

Paul looked at Red Eagle. It seemed to him that he saw on the face of the
chief the trace of a sardonic grin. Then he looked at the weazened and
repulsive old pair.

"Put me to the torture," he said.

Now the sardonic grin was unmistakable on die face of the chief.

"Not yet," he said, "but maybe later."

Then he and the old pair left the hut, and presently food was brought to
Paul, who, worn out by his trials, ceased to think about his future. When
he had finished eating he threw himself on the couch again, and slept
heavily until the next day.




CHAPTER IX

A CHANGE OF PLACES


Now came a time which Paul did not wholly understand, but which seemed to
him a period of test. The repulse of the old couple was not permanent.
They came back again and again, inviting him to be their son, and
patiently endured all his rebuffs until he began to feel a kind of pity
for them. After that he was always gentle to them, but he remained firm in
his resolve that he would not become a savage, either in reality or
pretense.

After a week he was allowed to walk in the village and to look upon
barbaric life, but he saw not the remotest chance of escape. The place
contained perhaps five hundred souls--men, women, children, and
papooses--and at least fifty mangy curs, every one of whom, including the
papooses and curs, seemed to Paul to be watching him. Black eyes followed
him everywhere. Nothing that he did escaped their attention. Every step
was noted, and he knew that if he went a yard beyond the village he would
bring a throng of warriors, squaws, and dogs upon him. But he was grateful
for this bit of freedom, the escape from the confinement of close walls,
and the forest about them, glowing with autumnal foliage, looked cool and
inviting. He saw nothing of Braxton Wyatt, but Red Eagle told him one day
that he had gone northward with a band, hunting. "He good boy," said Red
Eagle. Paul shuddered with disgust.

More than two weeks passed thus, and it seemed to Paul that he was not
only lost to his own world, but forgotten by it. Kentucky and all his
friends had dipped down under the horizon, and would never reappear. Henry
and Ross and Shif'less Sol would certainly have come for him if they
could, but perhaps they had fallen, slain in the night battle. His heart
stood still at the thought, but he resolutely put it away. It did not seem
to him that one of such strength and skill as Henry Ware could be killed.

Paul sat on a rock about the twilight hour one day, and watched the sun
sinking into the dark forest. He was inexpressibly lonely, as if forsaken
of men. Savage life still left him untouched. It made no appeal to him
anywhere, and he longed for Wareville, and his kind, which he was now sure
he would never see again. Behind him rose the usual hum of the
village--the barking of dogs, the chatter of squaws, and the occasional
grunt of a warrior. In their way, these people were cheerful. Unlike Paul,
they were living the only life they knew and liked, and had no thoughts of
a better.

The lonely boy rose from the rock and walked back toward the pole hut, in
which they fastened him every night. It had become a habit with him now,
and he knew that it saved useless resistance and a lot of trouble. Had he
taken a single step toward the forest instead of his own prison hut, a
score of watchful eyes would have been upon him.

The twilight melted into the dark, and fires gleamed here and there in the
village. Dusky figures passed before and behind the fires--those of squaws
cooking the suppers. Paul's eyes wandered, idle and unobserving, over the
savage scene, and then he uttered a little cry of impatience as a hulking
warrior lurched against him. The man seemed to have tripped upon a root,
an unusual thing for these sure-footed sons of the forest, and Paul drew
back from him. But the savage recovered himself, and in a low voice said:

"Paul!"

Paul Cotter started violently. It was the first word in good English that
he had heard in a time that seemed to be eternity--save those of Braxton
Wyatt, whom he hated--and the effect upon him was overpowering. It was
like a voice of hope coming suddenly from another world.

"Paul," continued the voice, now warningly, "don't speak. Go on to your
hut. Friends are by."

Then the hulking and savage figure walked away, and Paul knew enough to
take no apparent notice, but to continue on as if that welcome voice Had
not come out of the darkness. Yet a thousand little pulses within him were
throbbing, throbbing with joy and hope.

But whose was the voice? In his excitement he had not noticed the tone
except to note that it was a white man's. He glanced back and saw the
hulking form near the outskirts of the village, but the light was too dim
to disclose anything. Henry? No, it was not Henry's figure. Then who was
it? A friend, that was certain, and he had said that other friends were
by.

Paul walked with a light step to his prison hut, sedulously seeking to
hide the exultation in his face. He was not forgotten in his world! His
friends were ready to risk their lives for him! His heart was leaping as
he looked through the dusk at the smoking camp fires, the dim huts and
tepees, and the shadowy figures that passed and repassed. He would soon be
leaving all that savage life. He never doubted it.

He came to his prison hut, went calmly inside, and a few minutes later,
the regular time being at hand, the door was fastened on the outside by
Red Eagle or some of his people. He might perhaps have forced the door in
the night, but he had not considered himself a skillful enough woodsman to
slip from the village unobserved, and accordingly he had waited. Now he
was very glad of his restraint.

Paul lay down on the couch of skins, but he was not seeking sleep. Instead
he was waiting patiently, with something of Indian stoicism. He saw
through the cracks in his hut the Indian fires, yet burning and smoking,
and the dim figures still passing and repassing. There was also the faint
hum to tell him that savage life did not yet sleep, and now and then a
mongrel cur barked. But all things end in time, and after a while these
noises ceased; even the cure barked no more, and the smoking fires sank
low.

The Indian village lay at peace, but Paul's heart throbbed with
expectation. Nor did it throb in vain. A muffled sound appeared in time at
his door. It was some one at work on the fastenings, and Paul listened
with every nerve a-quiver. Presently the noise ceased, a shaft of pale
night light showed, and then was gone. But the door had been opened, and
then closed, and some one was inside.

Paul waited without fear. He could barely see a dark, shapeless outline
within the dimness of his hut, but he was sure it was the figure of the
slouching warrior who had bumped against him. The man stood a moment or
two, seeking to pierce the dusk with his own eyes, and then he said in a
low voice:

"Paul! Paul! Is it you?"

"Yes," replied Paul, in the same guarded tone, "but I don't know who you
are."

The figure swayed a little and laughed low, but with much amusement.

"It 'pears to me that we are forgot purty soon," it said. "An' I've worked
hard fur a tired man."

Then Paul knew the familiar, whimsical tone. The light had burst upon him
all at once.

"Shif'less Sol!" he exclaimed.

"Jest me," said Sol; "an' ain't I about the purtiest Shawnee warrior you
ever saw? Why, Paul, I'm so good at playin' a loafin' savage from some
other village that nary a Shawnee o' them all has dreamed that I am what I
ain't. If ever I go back thar in the East, I'm goin' to be a play-actor,
Paul."

"You can be anything on earth you want to be, Sol!" said Paul jubilantly.
"It was mighty good of you to come."

"You'd a-thought Henry would a-come," whispered Sol; "but we decided that
he was too tall an' somehow too strikin'-lookin' to come in here ez a
common, everyday Injun, so it fell to me to loaf in, me bein' a
tired-lookin' sort o' feller, anyway. But they're out thar in the woods
a-waitin', Henry an' Tom Ross an' that ornery cuss, Jim Hart."

"I knew that you fellows would never desert me!" exclaimed Paul.

"Why, o' course not!" said Sol. "We never dreamed o' leavin' you. Now,
Paul, we've got to git through this village somehow or other. Lucky it's
purty dark, an' you'll have to do your best to walk an' look like a Red.
Maybe we kin git fur enough to make a good run fur it, and then, with the
woods an' the night helpin' us, we may give them the slip. Here, take
this."

He pressed something cold and hard into Paul's hand, and Paul slipped the
pistol into his belt, standing erect and feeling himself much of a man.

"It's time to be goin'," said Shif'less Sol.

"I'm ready," said Paul.

But neither took more than a single step forward, stopping together as
they heard a light noise at the door.

"Thunder an' lightnin'!" said Shif'less Sol, under his breath. "Somebody's
suspectin'."

"It looks like it," breathed Paul.

"Lay down on the skins and pretend to be asleep," said Shif'less Sol.

Paul lay down on the couch at once, in the attitude of one who slumbers,
