fearful that he had committed a fatal oversight. But he saw or heard
nothing to excite alarm.

"Where are they?" he asked, in a whisper.

"They're up there. I've seen them peep down more than once."

"What were they paaping for?"

"I suppose to find out where we were."

"Be the powers, but I showed them where I was when I fired me gun!"

"That maybe; but you didn't stay there, and perhaps they were looking for
me."

"Did they find ye?"

"I don't think they did. You know I was in behind the boulder, with my
head thrown back, so that it was easy for me to look up, and there wasn't
enough branches and leaves over my head to shut out my view; so I lay
there looking up, watching and listening, when I saw an Indian peep over
the top there, as though he was looking for us."

"Did ye see more than one?"

"I am sure there were two, and I think three."

"They didn't ax ye any question?"

"I didn't hear any."

"What d'ye s'pose they mean to try?"

"I thought they meant to find out where we are hiding, and then roll
stones down on us. They can do that, you know, without our getting a
chance to stop them."

"If we squaze in under that same place," said Mickey, indicating the
inward slope of the rock, they can't hit us; but I don't believe that such
is their intention."

"What do you suppose it to be?"

"That's hard to say; but these varmints ain't ready to shoot us jist yet.
Leastaways, they don't want to do so, until they're sure there ain't
anything else lift for 'em to'do."

"They wish to make us prisoners?"

"That's it, exactly."

"Well, if they are willing to wait, they'll be sure to have us, for there
isn't any water here for us to drink, and we can't get along without
that."

The Irishman suddenly slapped his chest and side, as though he missed
something from the pocket.

"And be the powers!" he exclaimed, "I've lost that mate, and there must
have been enough to last us a wake or two."

"How could you have lost that?" asked Fred, who was much disappointed.

"It must have slid out when we were riding so hard, or else when we lift
our horses."

"Are you sure it wasn't lost somewhere among these trees, where we can get
it again?"

But he was confident that such was not the case, and he was not disposed
to mourn the loss a great deal. They could do longer without food than
they could without drink, and he was of the opinion that this problem
would be solved before they were likely to perish from the want of either.

"Did ye get a fair look at any of the spalpeens that was so ill-mannered
as to paap down on ye?"

"Yes; and there was one--'Sh! there he is now!"

The two peered upward through the leaves, and saw the head and shoulders
of an Apache, who was looking down into the ravine. He was not directly
above them, but a dozen feet off to the left. He seemed to be trying to
locate the party that had fired two such fatal shots, and therefore could
not have known where he was.

The face of the Indian could be seen very distinctly, and it was one with
more individual character than any Mickey had as yet noticed. It was not
handsome nor very homely, but that of a man in the prime of life, with a
prominent nose--a regular contour of countenance for an Indian. The face
was painted, as was the long black hair which dangled about his shoulders.
His eye was a powerful black one, which flitted restlessly, as he keenly
searched the ravine below.

Not seeing that which he wished, he arose to his feet, and walked slowly
along and away from where the fugitives were crouching. That is, his face
was turned toward the main ravine or pass, while he stepped upon the very
edge of the fissure, moving with a certain deliberation and dignity, as he
searched the space below for the man and boy whom he was so anxious to
secure.

"I wonder if he ain't the leader?" said Mickey, in a whisper. "I never saw
better shtyle than that."

"I should think he was the leader. Don't you know him?"

"How should I know him? I never traveled much in Injun society. Are ye and
him acquainted?"

"He's Lone Wolf--their great war-chief."

"Ye don't say so?" exclaimed the astonished Irishman, staring at him.
"He's just the spalpeen I loaded me gun for, and here goes!"

Softly raising the hammer of his rifle, he lifted the weapon to his
shoulder; but before he could make his aim certain, the red scamp stepped
aside and vanished from view.

"Now, that's enough to break a man's heart!" wailed the chagrined Mickey.
"Why wasn't the spalpeen thoughtful and kind enough to wait until I could
have made sartin of him? But sorra and disappointment await us all, as
Barney Mulligan said when his friend wouldn't fight him. Maybe he'll show
himsilf agin."

Whether or not Lone Wolf learned of the precise location of the parties
for whom he was searching can only be conjectured; but during the ten
minutes that Mickey held his weapon ready to shoot him at sight, he took
good care to keep altogether invisible.

The Irishman was still looking for his reappearance, when another singular
occurrence took place. There was a whoop, or rather howl, followed by a
fall of a warrior, who was so near the edge of the narrow ravine that when
he came down, a portion of his body was seen by those below. The dull and
rather distant report of a gun told the curious story.

The same rifle that had picked off one of the Apaches at the mouth of the
fissure had done the same thing in the case of one at the top. The aim in
both instances was unerring.

"Freddy, me lad," said Mickey, a moment later, "whin we rushed in here wid
the spalpeens snapping at our heels, I hadn't any more hope that we'd ever
get clear of 'em than the man who was transported to Botany Bay had of
cutting out Prince Albert in Queen Victoria's graces."

"Have you any more hope _now_?"

"I have; we've got a friend on the outside, and he's doing us good
sarvice, as he has already proved. If Lone Wolf wasn't among that crowd, I
don't belave they would stay after what has took place; there's nothing to
scare an Injun like them things which he don't understand."

"I should think that that rifle-shot is proof enough that somebody is
firing into them."

"Be the powers, but ye know little of Injin devilments, as I've larned 'em
from Soot Simpson. How do ye know but that's a thrick to make these
Apaches belave that there's but a single Kiowa over there popping at them,
when there may be half a hundred waiting for the chance to clean them
out?"

"Maybe that is Sut himself; you know you have been expecting him."

"It can't be him," replied Mickey, with a shake of his head. "He would
have showed himself long ago, when he could be sure of helping us. There
must be some redskins over there that have put up a job on Lone Wolf and
his scamps."

"Whoever it is, whether one or a dozen, they are helping us mightily."

"So it looks, though they don't mean it for that, and after driving these
spalpeens away, they may come over to clean us out themselves."

Nothing was heard of the redskins above for a considerable time after the
shot mentioned. Then the body was suddenly whisked out of sight. It is a
principle with Indians to bring away their dead from any fight in which
they may have fallen. At the imminent risk of losing his own life a
warrior had stolen up and drawn away the remains of his former comrade.

The mysterious shots seemed to come from the other side of the ravine, and
they naturally had a very demoralizing effect upon the party. Lone Wolf
was not only brave, but sagacious and prudent. He was not the chief to
allow his warriors to stand idly and permit themselves to be picked off
one by one by an unseen enemy. But for the latter, he would have descended
into the fissure, and, with several of his most reliable braves, captured
and secured Mickey and his companion at all hazards. But what assurance
could he have that after he and his men had entered the little ravine, a
whole party of Kiowas would not swarm in, overwhelm them, and make off
with their horses? So the leader concluded for the time being to remain
outside, where his line of retreat would be open, while he could arrange
his plans for disposing of the whites at his leisure.

Lone Wolf dispatched two of his most skillful scouts, one to the right,
the other to the left, with orders to get to the rear of the enemy, no
matter how long a detour was necessary. In case they were unable to
extinguish them, they were to signal or return for assistance. After
sending off his trusty messengers, Lone Wolf concluded to hold back until
their return, keeping himself and his braves pretty well concealed, but
guarding against the capture of their horses in the ravine below, or the
escape of the two fugitives, who might attempt to take advantage of the
diversion.

At the end of an hour, nothing had been seen or heard of the Apache scouts
sent out, and the chief dispatched another to learn what was going on, and
what was the cause of the trouble. During this hour not a rifle-shot was
detected by the waiting, listening ears. Another half hour passed away,
and the third man sent out by Lone Wolf came back alone, and with
astounding tidings.

He had found both of the warriors lying within a few yards of each other,
stone dead. He sought for some explanation of the strange occurrence, but
found none, and returned with the news to his leader.

The latter was about as furious as a wild Indian could be, without
exploding. Lone Wolf had his own theory of the thing, and he inquired
particularly as to the manner in which the fatal wounds seemed to have
been inflicted. When they were described, all doubt was removed from the
mind of the chieftain.

He knew where the fatal shots came from, and he determined that there was
no better time to "square accounts." Calling the larger portion of his
company about him, he started backward and away from the ravine, his
purpose being to reach the rear of his enemy by a long detour.




CHAPTER XVIII.

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.


All this was grist for Mickey and Fred. The long silence and inaction--so
far as these two were concerned--of the Apaches convinced the fugitives
that some important interruption was going on, and that it could not fail
to operate in the most direct way in their favor. It was well into the
afternoon when the collision occurred between them and the Apaches, and
enough time had already passed to bring the night quite close at hand. An
hour or so more, and darkness would be upon them.

"I don't belave the spalpeens have found put just the precise spot where
we've stowed away," said Mickey, in his cautious undertone, to his
companion, "for I've no evidence that such is the case."

"They may take it into their heads to come into the fissure again, and
then where are we?"

"Right here, every time. We couldn't get a better spot, unless it might be
at the mouth."

"Don't you think we had better go there?" asked the lad, who could not
feel the assurance of his friend.

"I see nothing to be gained by the same, as Tim O'Loony said when some one
told him that honesty was the best policy. If we start to return there,
they'll find out where we are, and begin to roll stones on us. I don't
want to go along, dodging rocks as big as a house, wid an occasional
rifle-shot thrown in, by way of variety."

"Don't you fear they will creep in and try to surprise us?"

"Not before dark, and then we can shift our position."

"Do you believe there is any hope at all for us in the way of getting
out?"

The Irishman was careful not to arouse too strong hopes in the breast of
the lad, and he tried to be guarded in his reply:

"An hour ago I would have sworn if there war a half-dozen of us in here,
there was no show of our getting away wid our top-knots, for the raison
that there is but one hole through which we could sneak, and there's
twenty of 'em sitting round there, and watching for us; but I faal that
there is some ground for hope."

"What reason for your saying there is hope? Isn't it just as hard to get
out the front without being seen?"

"It might be just now; but there's no telling what them ither spalpeens
mane to do arter the sun goes down. S'pose they get Lone Wolf and his men
in such a big fight that they'd have their hands full, what's to hinder
our sneaking out the back-door during the rumpus, hunting up our mustangs,
or somebody else's, and resooming our journey to New Boston, which these
spalpeens were so impertinent as to interrupt a short time since?"

Fred Munson felt that this was about as rose-colored a view as could be
taken, and indeed a great deal rosier than the situation warranted--at
least, in his opinion.

"Mickey, if that isn't counting chickens before they're hatched, I don't
know what is! While you're supposing things, suppose these Indians don't
do all that, where's going to come our chance of creeping out without
their knowing it?"

Mickey scratched his head in his puzzled way, and replied:

"I'm sorry to obsarve that ye persist in axing knotty questions, as I
reproved me landlord for doing in the ould country, when he found me
digging praities in his patch. There's a good many ways in which we may
get a chance to craap out, and I'm bound to say there be a good many more
by which we can't; but the good Lord has been so good to us, that I can't
help belaving He won't let us drop jist yet, though He may think that the
best thing for us both will be to let the varmints come in and scalp us."

There was a good deal of hope in the Irishman, and a certain contagion
marked it, which Fred Munson felt, but he could not entertain as much of
it as did his older and more experienced friend. Still, he was ready to
make any attempt which offered the least chance of flight. He was hungry
and thirsty, and there was no way of supplying the wants, and he dreaded
the night of suffering to be succeeded by the still more tormenting day.

It was very warm in the ravine, where not a stir of air could reach them.
If they suffered themselves to be cooped up there through the night, they
would be certain to continue there during the following day, for it was
not to be expected by the wildest enthusiast that any way of escape
presented itself under the broad sunlight. The following night must find
them more weakened in every respect; for the chewing of leaves, while it
might afford temporary relief, could not be expected to amount to much in
a run of twenty-four hours. Clearly, if anything at all was to be done or
attempted, it should not be deferred beyond the evening, which was now so
close at hand.

But the objection again came up that whatever Mickey and Fred decided on,
hinged upon the action of parties with whom they had nothing to do, and
with whom, as a matter of course, it was impossible to communicate. If the
Kiowas, as they were suspected to be, should choose to draw off and have
nothing further to do with the business, the situation of the fugitives
must become as despairing and hopeless as in the first case.

There perhaps was some reason for the declaration of Mickey that the
