
"Yes, why?" shouted the rest of the raging fags. "We'll scrag you for
this, darling. Cuckoos are we? Scrag him--put him in the scrum."

W.E. Grim had a very bad five minutes, but when he crawled out of the
scrum, hot, damaged, and dusty, he said viciously--

"I hope Merishall gives you a thou., you beastly cads. You've mucked up
my afternoon, and I'm hanged if I don't tell Lancaster."

Ten minutes after roll-call the janitor let them out, and shortly
afterwards a wretched procession of five emerged from Merishall's room
with two hundred lines from Virgil hanging over each head for a missed
call-over without excuse. Grim worked an artistic revenge on his
scrummagers by calling personally the next half-holiday to inquire if
they would prefer to analyze a green salt or to play a six-a-side
against Merishall's lot. In every instance a Virgil hurtled towards his
head. Having done his duty to his friends, he left them to pious AEneas
and the slope of Avernus, whilst he got another salt from the
science-master, and, with Gus, possessed the laboratory in peace.




CHAPTER XX

ACTON'S TRUMP CARD


On the Saturday before we should go home Acton was due at Aldershot, and
would return the same night, as the fellows hoped, with his laurels
thick upon him. Bourne and Vercoe were staying at school a week later
than we, for the rackets did not come off until our holidays had
commenced. Toby had begged for this almost with tears in his eyes, for
he had a mortal dread of the relaxing process of a week at home.

"You'd have no 'ands, Mr. Bourne, no spring, no eyes, when you toed the
mark at Kensington. I'll send you fit if I have you here."

So Vercoe and Phil agreed to stay.

And now Acton determined to put into operation his long-thought-of
scheme for the paying off of the score against Phil. It was subtle, and
founded on a perfect knowledge of Bourne's character, and a perfect
disregard of the consequences to any one--even including himself. Acton
would have willingly martyred himself, if he could have inflicted a
little of the torments on Bourne too.

There was one rule from which Dr. Moore never swerved a hair's breadth.
Compared to this particular law the stringency of the Old Game
regulation for Thursday was lax indeed. He never had departed from it,
and he never would depart from it. If any fellow took it into his head
to slip out of his house after lights out at ten on any pretence
whatever he was expelled. There was some legend in connection with this
severity, what exactly none of us rightly knew, but according to the
tale the escapade of two fellows years ago, when Corker was new to the
place, had resulted in one of the fellows being shot. Twice had he
expelled fellows while I was at school--Remington and Cunningham--and I
cannot ever forget the old man's deathlike face as he told them to go.
Some fellows broke out and were not found out, for Corker wasn't going
to have any barred windows as in some places. Any one _could_ break out
any night he liked, but he knew what he might expect if he were caught.
There was no help. Remington had been found out, and though there had
been Remingtons in the school since Anne's reign, Corker was inexorable.
He was expelled.

In a word, Acton determined to go to London and to take young Bourne
with him, and so risk certain expulsion for both, supposing they were
discovered. He had no intention of being expelled, though; for he liked
the life at St. Amory's, where incense floated round him all day long,
but he meant, when he had accomplished the ruin of Jack, to let Bourne
senior know it. Acton gloated in advance over Phil's anger, shame, and
consternation, and--this was the cream of the joke--his utter inability
to do anything except keep silence and chew the bitter cud of hopeless
rage against him--the man to whom he would not give the footer cap.
Acton never thought of Jack's share in the matter at all, and yet he was
genuinely fond of him; all he thought of was what would be Philip's
hopeless rage.

Phil, of course, could say nothing to Corker, for he knew it would be
hopeless. And Acton knew that Phil's pride could never bear the idea of
Jack--a Bourne--being expelled from the old place. Therefore he would
keep silence. I don't think I used the wrong adjective when I said it
was subtle. The only question was--could he so manage that Jack would
go? And Acton for good reasons was pretty certain that he could.

Jack was staidly taking a turn up and down the pavement with Grim when,
on passing by Biffen's house, he heard a whistle from one of the
windows, and, on looking up, he saw Acton.

"I want you, Bourne, for five minutes--if you can spare them."

"Of course he can," said Grim, _sotto voce_. "Aren't you a monitor?
Jack, my boy, Acton wants to knight you--or something. You'll find his
boots in the bottom cupboard, if you want to black 'em very much. I
suppose, being only a common or garden fag, my feelings aren't to be
considered for a moment. When you were--for once--talking sensibly for a
Corker fag, you are called away to----"

"Cork all that frivol, old man, till you see me at tea," said Jack,
moving into Biffen's yard.

When Jack was comfortably installed in a chair, Acton bolted his door,
and, somewhat to young Bourne's surprise, seemed rather in a fix how to
start what he had to say. The locking of the door was unusual, and this,
combined with Acton's grave face and hesitating manner, made Jack a
trifle uneasy. Whatever was coming?

"I say, Bourne," at last said his friend, "do you know anything about
betting?"

"Betting!" said Jack, with a vivid blush. "About as much as most of the
fellows know of it. Not more."

"Well, do you mind reading this?" He handed Jack a slip of paper which
contained such cryptic sentences as: "Grape Shot gone wrong, though he
will run. Pocket Book is the tip. If you're on Grape Shot, hedge on best
terms you can get," etc.

"I understand that," said Jack, "you've--if this means you--you've
backed the wrong horse."

"Exactly," said Acton. "I backed Grape Shot for the Lincolnshire
Handicap, and he hasn't a ghost of a chance now. Gone wrong."

"I see," said Jack, absolutely staggered that Acton, a monitor, should
tell him, a fag, that he was betting on horse-racing.

"I see, young 'un, that you seem surprised at my little flutter, but, by
Jove! this will have to be my last. Do you know, Bourne, I'm in an awful
hole."

"I'm very sorry to hear it," said Jack, with no end of concern.

"You see, if Pocket Book pulls the handicap off before I've time to trim
my sails, I lose a lot."

"Much," said Jack, "_for you?_"

"Thirty pounds."

"Whew!" whistled Bourne.

"I get a good allowance from home, Bourne, but I'm bound to say thirty
pounds would cripple me."

"Rather," said Jack, with a gasp.

"Of course, if the worst did come to the worst, I'd have to apply to
home; but there would be, as you might guess, no end of a row about it."

"Then you must hedge," said Jack.

"That is it, exactly. I must back Pocket Book for first place. This is a
sure tip--I can depend upon it."

"Then send to the fellow you bet with, and let him put you on Pocket
Book."

"That is just it, Jack--the bookmaker wouldn't take a bet from me."

"Why ever not?" said Jack, mystified.

"Because I'm a minor--I'm under age."

"Then how do you manage?" said Jack.

"Why, I bet through another man."

"I see," said Jack, for this was but another edition of his own little
adventures. "And that man----"

"Is Raffles," said Acton, quietly.

Jack bounced out of his chair as if he had been stung. "That beast!" he
gasped.

"Raffles?" said Acton, with a slow smile. "I didn't know he was a
beast."

"He is the meanest skunk alive," said Jack. He added fervently, "Acton,
have no dealings with that fellow. He is an abominable sharper."

"Thanks," said Acton, with a slight grimace at Jack's advice. "But, all
the same, I have to deal through Raffles."

"Then write to the fellow."

"I don't know--I've forgotten his address."

"Well, I'm hanged if I understand it!" said Jack, lost in astonishment.
"If you don't know it, and your bookmaker will only bet through Raffles,
you are in a hole--a marvellously deep one."

"There's only one way out--find Raffles."

"And that you can't do."

"And that I think I can do by going to London."

"Well, we're off for the holidays on Tuesday, and you can find Raffles
then."

"I should be hopelessly too late if I waited till then. It would be
almost ruinous to be put on to Pocket Book in a day's time. I must hedge
to-night."

"To-night?" said Jack, in a complete fog. "And you haven't found
Raffles!"

"No, but I think I know where to find him to-night. You know the Coon is
having a match with the Battersea Beauty at the Universal Sporting Club,
and Raffles is pretty sure to be there, and I must see him then."

"But that means going to London, Acton."

"Certainly."

"And Corker would expel you--even you."

"Without a doubt--if he finds out."

"There's a chance that he may."

"Certainly, but it's a mighty slender one, and in any case I mean to--I
_must_--risk it."

"I'm awfully sorry for you."

"Now, Jack, I want you to listen to me," said Acton, very gravely, and
his voice showed his genuine anxiety. "The Coon's match does not
commence until eleven o'clock at night, because an awful lot of the
Universal Sporters are actors and they cannot get away before that time
at earliest. Now, there are two entrances for the members into the club,
one in Pelican Street and the other in Ridge Street. Raffles must enter
by one or the other, and there must be some one at each doorway to give
him my note. I can take the one, and the question is--who will take the
second doorway?"

"Not I, Acton," said Jack, in a blue funk. "Please, Acton, don't ask
me."

"Jack, believe me, you were the last person I wanted to ask. I would
have asked Worcester or Chalmers if it had been any good, but they would
not know Raffles from Adam. It is ten thousand pities, but you are the
only fellow who knows Raffles here. No one else has ever set eyes on
him."

"Acton, it means expulsion," said Jack, hoarsely.

"Certainly for me if I'm caught, but, of course, I've no idea of being
caught. Jack, I'm not going to ask you to come with me. I shall think no
worse of you if you say you won't come, and I cannot take advantage
over you to force you against your own wish, because I lent you money.
Don't think so meanly of me."

"Acton," said Jack, sweating drops of terror, "it _is_ expulsion if
we're caught."

"Jack," said Acton, "have you ever known me to fail yet in anything I
undertake?"

"No."

"Well, I _will_ not fail here. If you like I'll give you my word of
honour we shall not be caught, and, if by a miracle of ill-luck we
should be, I shall see you through. I'll take every iota of blame on my
own shoulders. You'll find yourself captain of the school one day yet."

"If I were expelled, Acton," said Jack, with intense conviction, "the
pater would kill me first, and die himself afterwards; and as for
Phil----"

"Jack," said Acton, "I must see the business through myself. You can't
do it, I see. I must lose the L30."

Jack got up and walked up and down the room in agony.

For five minutes Acton watched his wretched prey torn to pieces by his
conflicting fears--his shame of leaving Acton in the lurch, and his
dread of discovery.

"Acton," said Jack at length, "I can't leave you in the lurch. I'll go
with you to London."

Acton clasped Jack's hand, and said, "Jack, you are a brick. I can only
say I thank you." He had landed his fish, as he knew he would.

Half an hour afterwards Jack said, almost cheerfully, for Acton had
been doing his best to smooth poor Bourne's ruffled feathers--

"But how are we to go to town?"

"I've got a plan," said Acton; "but I must turn it over in my mind
first. If you'll look in, young 'un, after tea, I'll tell you how we do
it. I'm going to see about it now. Once again, Jack, I thank you. You do
stand by a fellow when he's down on his luck."

Acton and Jack went out--the monitor to make arrangements for the
escapade, and Jack to Grim's quarters, where he was due for tea, which
he demolished with comparative cheerfulness, for Jack's confidence in
Acton was illimitable. After he had taken the jump he was not--is not
now--the kind of boy to look back.

At six young Bourne left his friend Grim among a waste of empty teacups,
plates, and jam-pots, and went to Acton's room.

"I've arranged all," said that worthy. "I've seen the proprietor of the
hotel down at Bring, and he's going to have a smart dog-cart and a
smarter horse to do the dozen miles between here and Charing Cross ready
for us at nine. He says we shall be rattled into town within the hour.
So if we aren't in time to spot Raffles we are down on our luck with a
vengeance. Your room is on the ground floor, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Jack, "overlooking Corker's flowerbeds."

"Well, pull up the window after supper as quietly as you can, and slip
into the garden. Then scoot through the field, and you'll find me
waiting for you in the hotel stables. You can pass the word to your
chums in Corker's that you aren't going to be on show after supper, and
then they won't be routing you out."

"My chums are mostly in Biffen's," said Jack. "Grim and Rogers, etc."

"Good omen," said Acton. "Leave your window so that you can easily shove
it up when you come back, and leave your school cap behind, and bring a
tweed instead. Got such an article?"

"Yes."

"How's your room lighted?"

"Oh, we have the electric. It is switched off at ten, so that the light
will not give any trouble, Acton."

"Well, bolt your door, too. It seems as though the fates were fighting
for us, eh, young 'un?"




CHAPTER XXI

LONDON AND BACK


At nine that night the two, as agreed upon, met at Dring in the hotel
stables. There had been no mishaps.

The groom was busy putting the horse into the trap, and, when Jack saw
what a really smart turn-out Acton had engaged, his fears began to
occupy less of his thoughts and the pleasures of a rattling hour's spin
a jolly lot more. Punctually to the minute Jack climbed up beside the
driver, the place of honour, and Acton swung himself up behind; the yard
doors were flung open, and the gig rattled smartly out. The hotel
proprietor had not chanted the praises of his horse in vain. On the
level road it laid itself out to go for all it was worth.

The pleasant music of the jingling harness and the scurrying of the
wheels made as jolly a tune as Jack could wish to hear. There was a
touch of frost in the air, which made the quick motion of the gig bite
shrewdly on his cheeks, and made him button up his overcoat to the chin
and settle his cap well over his ears. Acton threw out jokes, too, from
behind, which made Jack feel no end clever to listen to them, and the
driver now and then restrained his horse's "freshness" with the soothing
mellow whistle which only drivers possess. The farmhouses, hayricks, and
an occasional village, drifted past now to the right, now to the left,
and occasionally they overhauled a leisurely belated cyclist, who at
once began to take an unimportant position in the rear, his lamp growing
less and less down the stretch of long white road.

Soon the houses began to come more frequently, then came the streets
with their long avenues of yellow lights, and within the hour they were
rolling smoothly over the wooden pavements.

"Piccadilly," said Acton. "Drop us at the top of Whitehall, will you?
Then you can take the horse to the mews. Be ready for us outside
Frascati's by twelve. Understand?"

"Yes, sir, at Frascati's by twelve! I know the place." A minute or two
later the two swung off in Trafalgar Square, and the driver rattled away
into the crowd.

Jack was delighted. "Spiffing run, Acton, eh?"

"Glad you liked it, young 'un. Now let us localize the Universal
Sporting Club. I know it's about Covent Garden somewhere." Together they
went up the crowded Strand, Jack enjoying every minute of the bustling
walk to the Garden and imagining that he was a very much daring young
desperado to be so far from his little white bunk at St. Amory's. He
would have been usually fast asleep by this time.

The Universal Sporting Club was not a difficult place to find, and
though all its windows were lighted up, upon its fast shut doors were
two little notices: "This door will be open at 11 p.m. None but members
and friends admitted."

"Well," said Acton, "we've got about twenty minutes before there's any
particular need to begin our watch for Raffles, but some of the members
are hanging round now. The early birds get the best perch for the show.
On the whole, perhaps you'd better prowl about this door now, whilst I
go round the corner and see if I can run our fox to his earth."
