   Than be a man who walks with men,
     But has a frozen heart!


DEFINITIONS.--l. Pipe, whistle. 2. Shrink, to draw back on account of
fear. 3. Triumph, success causing exultation. Realm, the territory over
which authority is used, dominion.


EXERCISES.--With what is the snow man compared in this poem? What is meant
by a man with "a frozen heart"? Do you think such a man would follow the
Golden Rule?



LIII. ROBINSON CRUSOE'S HOUSE. (144)

Daniel DeFoe, the author of "Robinson Crusoe" (from which these selections
are adapted), was born in London, England, in 1661, and died in 1731. He
wrote a number of books; but his "Robinson Crusoe" is the only one that
attained great notoriety.

1. I have already described my habitation, which was a tent under the side
of a rock, surrounded with a strong pale of posts and cables, but I might
now rather call it a wall, for I raised a kind of wall up against it of
turf, about two feet thick on the outside; and, after some time (I think
it was a year and a half) I raised rafters from it, leaning to the rock,
and thatched or covered it with boughs of trees and such things as I could
get to keep out the rain, which I found at some times of the year very
violent.

2. I have already observed how I brought all my goods into this pale, and
into the cave which I had made behind me; but I must observe, too, that at
first this was a confused heap of goods, which, as they lay in no order,
took up all my place, so that I had no room to turn myself. So I set to
work to enlarge my cave and work farther into the earth; for it was a
loose, sandy rock, which yielded easily to the labor I bestowed upon it.

3. And so when I found that I was pretty safe as to beasts of prey, I
worked sideways into the rock; and then, turning to the right again,
worked quite out, and made me a door to come out on the outside of my pale
or fortification. This gave me not only egress and regress, as it was a
back way to my tent and to my storehouse, but gave me room to stow my
goods.

4. And now I began to apply myself to make such necessary things as I
found I most wanted, particularly a chair and a table; for without these I
was not able to enjoy the few comforts I had in the world. I could not
write or eat, or do several things with so much pleasure without a table.

5. So I went to work. I had never handled a tool in my life; and yet in
time by labor, application, and contrivance, I found that I wanted nothing
but I could have made it, especially if I had had tools; however, I made
abundance of things, even without tools, and some with no more tools than
an adz and a hatchet, which perhaps were never made that way before, and
that with infinite labor.

6. For example, if I wanted a board, I had no other way but to cut down a
tree, set it before me, and hew it flat on either side with my ax till I
had brought it to be as thin as a plank, and then dub it smooth with my
adz.

7. It is true, by this method I could make but one board out of a whole
tree; but this I had no remedy for but patience, any more than I had for
the prodigious deal of time and labor which it took me to make a plank or
board; but my time or labor was little worth, and so it was as well
employed one way as another.

8. However, I made me a table and a chair, as I observed above; and this I
did out of the short pieces of boards which I brought on my raft from the
ship; but when I had wrought out some boards, as above, I made large
shelves, of the breadth of a foot and a half, one over another, all along
one side of my cave, to lay all my tools, nails, and ironwork on, and, in
a word, to separate everything at large in their places, that I might come
easily at them.

9. I knocked pieces into the wall of the rock to hang my guns and all
things that would hang up. So that, had my cave been seen, it would have
looked like a general magazine of all necessary things; and I had
everything so ready at my hand that it was a great pleasure to me to see
all my goods in such order, and especially to find my stock of all
necessaries so great.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Hab-i-ta'tion, a dwelling place. Pale, a fence. Ca'bles,
large ropes. Turf, sod. 3. For-ti-fi-ca'tion, a place built for defense
against attack. E'gress, going out. Re'gress, coming back, return. Stow,
to arrange compactly. 4. Ap-ply', to employ diligently. 6. Dub, to cut
down or bring to an even surface. 7. Pro-di'gious, very great. Deal, part,
amount. 9. Mag-a-zine', a storehouse,


EXERCISES.--How did Robinson Crusoe make a house? Of what did he make a
chair and table? How did he obtain boards? What does this lesson teach us
in regard to perseverance?



LIV. ROBINSON CRUSOE'S DRESS. (147)

1. But had any man in England met such a man as I was, it must either have
frightened him or raised a great deal of laughter; and, as I frequently
stood still to look at myself, I could not but smile at the notion of my
traveling through Yorkshire in such a dress.

2. I had a great, high, shapeless cap, made of a goat's skin, with a flap
hanging down behind, as well to keep the sun from me as to shoot the rain
off from running into my neck; nothing being so hurtful in these climates
as the rain upon the flesh under the clothes.

3. I had a short jacket of goatskin, the skirts coming down to about the
middle of the thighs, and a pair of open-kneed breeches of the same; the
breeches were made of the skin of an old goat, and the hair hung down such
a length on either side that it reached to the middle of my legs like
pantaloons.

4. Stockings and shoes I had none; but I made a pair of something, I
scarce know what to call them, like buskins, to flap over my legs, and
lace on either side like spatterdashes; but they were of a most barbarous
shape, as indeed were all the rest of my clothes.

5. I had on a broad belt of goatskin dried, which I drew together with two
thongs of the same, instead of buckles; and, in a kind of frog on each
side of this, instead of a sword and dagger, hung a little saw and
hatchet; one on one side, and one on the other. I had another belt not so
broad, and fastened in the same manner, which hung over my shoulder; and
at the end of it, under my left arm, hung two pouches, both made of
goatskin, too; in one of which hung my powder, in the other my shot.

6. At my back I carried my basket, on my shoulder my gun, and over my head
a great, clumsy, ugly, goatskin umbrella, but which, after all, was the
most necessary thing I had about me, next to my gun.

7. As for my face, the color of it was really not so dark as one might
expect from a man not at all careful of it, and living within nine or ten
degrees of the equator. My beard I had once suffered to grow till it was
about a quarter of a yard long; but, as I had both scissors and razors
sufficient, I had cut it pretty short, except what grew on my upper lip,
which I had trimmed into a large pair of Mahometan whiskers, such as I had
seen worn by some Turks.

8. Of these mustaches or whiskers, I will not say that they were long
enough to hang my hat upon them, but they were of a length and shape
monstrous enough, and such as in England would have passed for frightful.
But all this is by the bye; for, as to my figure, I had so few to observe
me that it was of no manner of consequence; so I say no more on that part.


DEFINITIONS.--4. Bus'kins, coverings for the feet coming some distance up
the leg, and fit for a defense against thorns, etc. Spat'-ter-dash-es,
coverings for the legs to keep them clean from water and mud. Bar'ba-rous,
uncouth, clumsy. 5. Thongs, strips of leather. Frog, a loop similar to
that sometimes used in fastening a cloak or coat. Pouch'es bags. 8.
Mon'strous, very large, enormous.


NOTES.--The novel, "Robinson Crusoe," was first published in 1719. It was
founded on the adventures of Alexander Selkirk, a Scotch buccaneer, who
was cast on the island of Juan Fernandez, west of South America, in 1704,
and remained there for more than four years, before he was rescued.

1. Yorkshire. This was the district of England where, according to the
story, Robinson Crusoe was born and passed his early life.

3. Open-kneed breeches. At this period knee breeches were worn almost
altogether in England. Those referred to here appear to have been loose
about the knee, and not close, as usual.

5. Instead of sword and dagger. It was then the fashion in England for
gentlemen to wear such weapons.

8. Such as in England would have passed for frightful. It was not the
custom in England, in DeFoe's time, to wear a full beard.



LV. SOMEBODY'S DARLING. (150)

1. Into a ward of the whitewashed halls,
     Where the dead and dying lay,
   Wounded by bayonets, shells, and balls,
     Somebody's darling was borne one day;

2. Somebody's darling, so young and brave,
     Wearing yet on his pale, sweet face,
   Soon to be hid by the dust of the grave,
     The lingering light of his boyhood's grace.

3. Matted and damp are the curls of gold,
     Kissing the snow of that fair young brow;
   Pale are the lips of delicate mold
     Somebody's darling is dying now.

4. Back from his beautiful, blue-veined brow,
     Brush all the wandering waves of gold;
   Cross his hands on his bosom now;
     Somebody's darling is still and cold.

5. Kiss him once for somebody's sake,
     Murmur a prayer soft and low;
   One bright curl from its fair mates take;
     They were somebody's pride, you know;

6. Somebody's hand has rested there;
     Was it a mother's, soft and white?
   And have the lips of a sister fair
     Been baptized in the waves of light?

7. God knows best! he was somebody's love:
     Somebody's heart enshrined him there;
   Somebody wafted his name above,
     Night and morn, on the wings of prayer.

8. Somebody wept when he marched away,
     Looking so handsome, brave, and grand;
   Somebody's kiss on his forehead lay;
     Somebody clung to his parting hand.

9. Somebody's watching and waiting for him,
     Yearning to hold him again to her heart;
   And there he lies, with his blue eyes dim,
     And the smiling, childlike lips apart.

10. Tenderly bury the fair young dead,
      Pausing too drop on his grave a tear;
    Carve on the wooden slab at his head,
     "Somebody's darling slumbers here."


DEFINITIONS.--1. Bay'o-net, a short, pointed iron weapon, fitted to the
muzzle of a gun. Dar'ling, one dearly loved. 2. Lin'ger-ing, protracted.
3. Mat'ted, twisted together. Del'i-cate, soft and fair. Mold, shape. 4.
Wan'der-ing, straying. 7. En-shrined', cherished. Waft'ed, caused to
float. 9. Yearn'ing, being eager, longing. 10. Ten'der-ly, gently, kindly.



LVI. KNOWLEDGE IS POWER. (151)

1. "What an excellent thing is knowledge," said a sharp-looking, hustling
little man, to one who was much older than himself. "Knowledge is an
excellent thing," repeated he. "My boys know more at six and seven years
old than I did at twelve. They can read all sorts of books, and talk on
all sorts of subjects. The world is a great deal wiser than it used to he.
Everybody knows something of everything now. Do you not think, sir, that
knowledge is all excellent thing?"

2. "Why, sir," replied the old man, looking grave, "that depends entirely
upon the use to which it is applied. It may be a blessing or a curse.
Knowledge is only an increase of power, and power may be a bad, as well as
a good thing." "That is what I can not understand," said the bustling
little man. "How can power he a bad thing?"

3. "I will tell you," meekly replied the old man; and thus he went on:
"When the power of a horse is under restraint, the animal is useful in
bearing burdens, drawing loads, and carrying his master; but when that
power is unrestrained, the horse breaks his bridle, dashes to pieces the
carriage that he draws, or throws his rider." "I see!" said the little
man.

4. "When the water of a large pond is properly conducted by trenches, it
renders the fields around fertile; but when it bursts through its banks,
it sweeps everything before it and destroys the produce of the fields." "I
see!" said the little man, "I see!"

5. "When the ship is steered aright, the sail that she hoists enables her
sooner to get into port; but if steered wrong, the more sail she carries
the further will she go out of her course." "I see!" said the little man,
"I see clearly!"

6. "Well, then," continued the old man, "if you see these things so
clearly, I hope you can see, too, that knowledge, to be a good thing, must
be rightly applied. God's grace in the heart will render the knowledge of
the head a blessing; but without this, it may prove to us no better than a
curse." "I see! I see!" said the little man, "I see!"


DEFINITIONS.--l. Bus'tling, very active, stirring. Sub'ject, the thing
treated of. 3. Meek'ly, mildly, quietly, gently. Re-straint', anything
which hinders. Bur'dens, loads. 4. Con-duct'ed, led, guided. Trench'es,
ditches. Fer'tile, producing much fruit, rich. Prod'uce, that which is
yielded or produced. 5. Steered', guided, directed. Hoists, raises. 6.
Ap-plied', directed, made use of.


EXERCISES--What is the subject of this lesson? Is knowledge always a
power? Is it always blessing? Relate the several examples of power wrongly
used. If we use the powers that God has given us for bad purposes, what
will our knowledge prove to be?



LVII. GOOD WILL. (153)
By J. T. Trowbridge.--(Adapted)

1. I suppose you all, my boys, are looking for some sort of success in
life; it is right that you should; but what are your notions of success?
To get rich as soon as possible, without regard to the means by which your
wealth is acquired?

2. There is no true success in that: when you have gained millions, you
may yet be poorer than when you had nothing; and it is that same reckless
ambition which has brought many a bright and capable boy, not to great
estate at last, but to miserable failure and disgrace; not to a palace,
but to a prison.

3. Wealth rightly got and rightly used, rational enjoyment, power,
fame,--these are all worthy objects of ambition; but they are not the
highest objects, and you may acquire them all without achieving true
success. But if, whatever you seek, you put good will into all your
actions, you are sure of the best success at last; for whatever else you
gain or miss, you are building up a noble and beautiful character, which
is not only the best of possessions in this world, but also is about all
you can expect to take with you into the next.

4. I say, good will in all your actions. You are not simply to be kind and
helpful to others; but, whatever you do, give honest, earnest purpose to
it. Thomas is put by his parents to learn a business. But Thomas does not
like to apply himself very closely. "What's the use?" he says. "I'm not
paid much, and I'm not going to work much. I'll get along just as easily
as I can, and have as good times as I can."

5. So he shirks his tasks; and instead of thinking about his employer's
interests, or his own self improvement, gives his mind to trifles,--often
to evil things, which in their ruinous effects upon his life are not
trifles. As soon as he is free from his daily duties, he is off with his
companions, having what they call a good time; his heart is with them even
while his hands are employed in the shop or store.

6. He does nothing thoroughly well,--not at all for want of talent, but
solely for lack of good will. He is not preparing himself to be one of
those efficient clerks or workmen who are always in demand, and who
receive the highest wages.

7. There is a class of people who are the pest of every community, workmen
who do not know their trade, men of business ignorant of the first
principles of business. They can never be relied upon to do well anything
they undertake. They are always making blunders which other people have to
suffer for, and which react upon themselves. They are always getting out
of employment, and failing in business.

8. To make up for what they lack in knowledge and thoroughness, they often
resort to trick and fraud, and become not merely contemptible but
criminal. Thomas is preparing himself to be one of this class. You can
not, boys, expect to raise a good crop from evil seed.

9. By Thomas's side works another boy, whom we will call James,--a lad of
only ordinary capacity, very likely. If Thomas and all the other boys did
their best, there would be but small chance for James ever to become
eminent. But he has something better than talent: he brings good will to
his work. Whatever he learns, he learns so well that it becomes a part of
himself.

10. His employers find that they can depend upon Jim. Customers soon learn
to like and trust him. By diligence, self-culture, good habits, cheerful
and kindly conduct, he is laying the foundation of a generous manhood and
a genuine success.

11. In short, boys, by slighting your tasks you hurt yourself more than
you wrong your employer. By honest service you benefit yourself more than
you help him. If you were aiming at mere worldly advancement only, I
should still say that good will was the very best investment you could
make in business.

12. By cheating a customer, you gain only a temporary and unreal
advantage. By serving him with right good will,--doing by him as you
would be done by,--you not only secure his confidence but also his good
will in return. But this is a sordid consideration compared with the
inward satisfaction, the glow and expansion of soul which attend a good
action done for itself alone. If I were to sum up all I have to say to you
in one last word of love and counsel, that one word should be--Good will.


DEFINITIONS.--3. Char'ac-ter, the sum of qualities which distin-guish one
person from another. 4. Purpose, intention, aim. 7. Prin'ci-ples, fixed
rules. 9. Ca-pac'i-ty, ability, the power of re-ceiving ideas. 12.
Sor'did, base, meanly avaricious.


EXERCISES.--What is meant by the phrase "to apply himself," in the fourth
paragraph? What is meant by "a generous manhood," tenth paragraph? By
"expansion of soul," twelfth paragraph? Tell what is meant by "good will,"
as taught by this lesson. How did Tom and James differ in character?



LVIII. A CHINESE STORY. (156)

By Christopher Pearse Cranch, who was born at Alexandria, Va. (then D.
C.), in 1813. He has written some well-known children's stories, besides
numerous poems; but his greatest literary work is "The AEneid of Vergil,
translated into English blank verse." He died in Cambridge Mass., 1892.

1. Two young, near-sighted fellows, Chang and Ching,
   Over their chopsticks idly chattering,
   Fell to disputing which could see the best;
   At last, they agreed to put it to the test.
   Said Chang, "A marble tablet, so I hear,
   Is placed upon the Bo-hee temple near,
   With an inscription on it. Let us go
   And read it (since you boast your optics so),
   Standing together at a certain place
   In front, where we the letters just may trace;
   Then he who quickest reads the inscription there,
   The palm for keenest eyes henceforth shall bear."
   "Agreed," said Ching, "but let us try it soon:
   Suppose we say to-morrow afternoon."

2. "Nay, not so soon," said Chang; "I'm bound to go
   To-morrow a day's ride from Hoang-Ho,
   And sha'n't be ready till the following day:
   At ten A. M., on Thursday, let us say."

3. So 'twas arranged; but Ching was wide-awake:
   Time by the forelock he resolved to take;
   And to the temple went at once, and read,
   Upon the tablet, "To the illustrious dead,
   The chief of mandarins, the great Goh-Bang."
   Scarce had he gone when stealthily came Chang,
   Who read the same; but peering closer, he
   Spied in a corner what Ching failed to see--
   The words, "This tablet is erected here
   By those to whom the great Goh-Bang was dear."

4. So on the appointed day--both innocent
   As babes, of course--these honest fellows went,
   And took their distant station; and Ching said,
   "I can read plainly, 'To the illustrious dead,
   The chief of mandarins, the great Goh-Bang.'"
   "And is that all that you can spell?" said Chang;
