At school next day the members of the new society looked a little
conscious. Their eyes often met, and those eyes spoke volumes. Sometimes
a girl would put her hand up to her neck in a somewhat significant way,
and another girl would respond with a similar signal. There was a sort
of suppressed excitement in the school; but the teachers remarked
nothing. On the contrary, they were pleased with the way lessons were
done, exercises gone through, and work accomplished. The girls were so
completely in league with each other, so full of delight over the new
amusement which Kathleen had started in their midst, that they had no
time to be supercilious or disagreeable to the paying girls, who were
left in peace. They were usually a good deal tormented by the
foundationers, who took their revenge by small spiteful ways--by taking
the ink when they did not want it, by removing good pens and putting bad
ones in their places, by spilling ink on the blotting paper. In short,
they had many ways of rendering the life of a paying girl anything but
happy. To-day, however, all was peace and quiet. Kathleen walked in her
radiant fashion through her lessons; her beautiful face could not but be
an attraction. She was very bright and very smart, and even Alice gave
her an approving glance.

"Mother is right," she thought. "She is a little better than she was.
If only she would take a real interest in her work I should have hopes
of her."

Now Cassandra Weldon had come to the school that day with the intention
of asking Ruth Craven to come home with her. She had a suggestion to
make to Ruth. She knew that the little girl was very poor and very
clever. Cassandra was working very hard for one of the big scholarships,
and her mother had gone to the expense of getting a special coach to
help her at home. Cassandra had spoken to her mother, and her mother had
agreed that Ruth might come back with her each evening and also take
advantage of the services of Miss Renshaw. If Ruth got a scholarship she
would indeed be a happy girl, and it was Cassandra's, opinion that,
although she had been such a short time in the school, she would have a
very good chance if she got a little outside help.

Accordingly Cassandra waited for Ruth outside the school when lessons
were over. During the morning her eyes had travelled in Ruth's direction
pretty often, and her eyes had conveyed to the little girl all sorts of
kind and friendly messages. But Ruth had avoided Cassandra's eyes. She
had made up her mind.

"I can't be two things," she said to herself. "I have elected to go with
the foundationers and with Kathleen O'Hara, although I don't care for
the society, and I don't want to belong to the girls who band themselves
together against the paying girls. But if I do this I certainly can't
take advantage of Cassandra's kindness. I do love her--I am sure I
should love her dearly--but I can't have much to say to her now."

Accordingly, while Cassandra waited for Ruth, hoping that she would
appear at any moment, and that she could tell her what a good thing she
had arranged on her behalf, Ruth avoided Cassandra. Presently Kathleen
O'Hara, dressed somewhat extravagantly, and with her blue velvet cap
perched upon the back of her golden hair, strolled out of school. She
had a crimson sash round her black velvet dress, and a wide lace collar
encircled her neck. She was fastening a heavily embroidered coat of blue
cashmere when Cassandra accosted her.

"How do you do, Miss O'Hara?" she said.

"How are you?" replied Kathleen, just raising her brows, and then
turning to say something to Susy Hopkins.

Cassandra frowned.

"How can Kathleen, who with all her eccentricities is a lady, waste her
time talking to an insignificant little girl like Susy?" thought
Cassandra.

Kathleen seemed to read her neighbor's thoughts, for she slipped her
hand inside Susy's arm.

"I will walk with you a little way," she said; "I have something I want
to say."

"One moment first," said Cassandra. "Have you seen Ruth Craven
anywhere?"

"Oh yes; Ruth has left the school. Didn't you see her go? There she is,
crossing the field. I suppose she is in a hurry to get home."

"Thank you," said Cassandra.

She caught up her books and started running in the direction of Ruth
Craven.

"How tiresome of her to have gone so fast!" she said to herself?

Presently she shouted Ruth's name, and Ruth was obliged to stop.

"Why, Ruth," said Cassandra, "what is the matter with you? You
generally wait to talk to me after school is over. Why are you in such a
hurry?"

"I am not," said Ruth, who was not going to get out of her difficulty by
telling an untruth.

"Well, if you are not in a hurry, why are you running across this field
at the rate of a hunt? It looks as if you were--" Cassandra paused, and
the color came into her cheeks--"as if you were running away from me."

Ruth was silent. Cassandra came close to her and looked into her face.

"What is the matter, Ruth?" she repeated.

"I have promised granny that I would help her with some darning this
afternoon."

"Your granny must do without you, for you have got to come back with
me."

"Oh, indeed, I can't!"

"But you must, my little girl. I have got the most heavenly plan to
suggest to you."

Cassandra laid her hand on Ruth's shoulder. Ruth started away.

"What is it, Ruth? How queer you look! What is the matter?"

"I must get home. I promised granny."

"But listen before you decide. You know Miss Renshaw, don't you?"

"Miss Maria Renshaw, the coach. Yes, I do."

"Don't you remember my pointing her out to you?"

"Of course I remember it, Cassandra; and she looked--oh, lovely!"

"She is far more lovely than she looks--that is, if you mean she is
clever and taking and all the rest. She is just perfectly splendid. She
makes you see a thing at the first glance. She has a way of putting
information into you so that you cannot help knowing. Oh, she is
delightful! And mother says that I may have her to coach me for the big
scholarship--the sixty-pounds-a-year scholarship. You know there are two
of them. There is one quite in your line, and there is one in mine; and
there is no earthly reason why you should not get one and I the other."

"Well?" said Ruth.

Her beautiful, fair, delicately chiselled face had turned pale. She
stood very upright, and looked full at Cassandra.

"It could be easily done, dear little Ruth. Miss Renshaw would just as
soon coach two girls as one, and mother has arranged it. Yes, she has
arranged it absolutely. Miss Renshaw will coach you and me together. You
are to come home with me every evening. She will give us both an hour.
Isn't it too splendid?"

Ruth did not speak.

"Aren't you pleased, Ruth? Don't you think it is very nice of me to
think of my friends? You are my friend, you know."

"Oh no," said Ruth.

"But what is it? What is the matter?"

"I--I can't."

"You can. It will be madness to refuse. Think what a chance is offered
you. If you get Miss Renshaw's instruction you are safe to get that
scholarship; and it is for three years, Ruth. It would send you, with a
little help from your grandfather, perhaps to Holloway College, perhaps
to Somerville or Newnham, or even Girton. Perhaps you could try for a
scholarship in one of these great colleges afterwards. You daren't
refuse it. It means--oh, it means all the difference in your whole
life."

"I know," said Ruth. "Cassandra, I will write to you. I can't decide
just now. I am awfully obliged to you; I can't express what I feel. You
are good; you are very, very good."

Ruth caught one of Cassandra's hands and raised it to her lips.

"You are very good," she said again.

Meanwhile Kathleen O'Hara, after walking a very short way with Susy
Hopkins, gave her an abrupt good-bye and started running in the
direction of the Tennants' house. She did not care a bit for Susy; but
being a member of the Wild Irish Girls, and not only a member, but one
of the Cabinet, she must on all occasions be kind to her. Nevertheless a
commonplace little girl like Susy Hopkins had not one thing in common
with Kathleen.

"Everything is going splendidly," she said to herself. "No fear now that
I shall not have plenty of excitement in the coming by-and-by. I mean to
write to father and ask him whether I may not invite some of the members
of the Cabinet to Carrigrohane. Wouldn't they enjoy it? Kate Rourke, of
course, must come; and dear little Ruth Craven. How pale and sweet Ruth
looked to-day! She is far and away the nicest girl in the school. I am
so glad I have taken steps to prevent that horrid friendship with
Cassandra coming to anything! Ruth mustn't love anybody in the school
very, _very_ much except me. Oh, things are going well, and Alice little
guesses what she is driving me to by her extraordinary behavior."

Kathleen entered the house, banging the door loudly after her, as was
her fashion.

Another little girl had also reached home, but she did not bang the
door. She entered her mother's shop to encounter the flushed and
much-perturbed face of her parent.

"Well, Susy," said Mrs. Hopkins, "I wouldn't have thought it of you."

"Why, what is it, mother?"

"There's nineteen-and-sixpence taken out of the till," said Mrs.
Hopkins. "Some one must have come into the shop, for the accounts are
nineteen-and-sixpence short. When I left the house yesterday there were
three pounds in the till--three pounds and fivepence-halfpenny. You
sold, according to your own showing, a penn'orth of paper, which makes
an extra penny; but when I went into the accounts this morning I found
that the whole amount was only two pounds one shilling and a halfpenny.
Nineteen-and-sixpence is missing. Susy, what does this mean?"

"I am sure, mother, I can't tell you. No one came into the shop;
certainly no one stole the money."

"My dear child, seeing is believing. I assure you there are only two
pounds one shilling and a halfpenny in the till. I scarcely took a penny
this morning, and that nineteen-and-sixpence makes it impossible for me
to pay my rent, as I meant to do, to-day. Who can have come in and
stolen very nearly a pound's worth of my hard-earned money?"

"Nobody, mother dear. Do let me examine the till."

"Are you quite positive that no one came into the shop?"

"Nobody, mother."

"You did not leave the shop even for a moment?"

"Yes; I went to sit in the parlor."

"Oh, Susy? there you are! I trust you with my house and property, and
you leave the shop without any one in it Did you lock the till?"

Susy had an unpleasant memory of having found the till open when she
returned to attend to a customer.

"No" she said, hanging her head.

Mrs. Hopkins uttered a heavy sigh.

"Oh, dear!" she said. "And as you sat in the parlor you could see the
shop. You did not leave the parlor, did you?"

For one minute Susy remembered that she had gone upstairs for an
exercise-book, but she determined not to tell her mother of this further
enormity.

"I was either in the shop or in the parlor all the time. I only went
into the parlor because I could not do my exercises in the shop. But I
sat where I could see everything."

"You couldn't have done so. This money would not have gone without
hands. How am I to manage I don't know. I have lost a large sum for such
a poor woman."

Susy pitied her mother, tried to assure her that the fault was not hers,
was convinced that the money would be found, and went on talking a lot
of nonsense until Mrs. Hopkins fairly lost her temper.

"Examine the drawer for yourself" she said. "I tell, you what it is,
Susy, I won't be able to buy you a new winter frock at all this year;
and you will have to have your boots patched, for I can't afford a new
pair. I was trying to collect a pound towards your winter things, but
this puts a stop to everything."

"Mother doesn't know what a lovely blouse I've got," thought Susy. "When
she sees me in that she'll be quite cheered up."

The moment she thought of the blouse the little girl felt a frantic
desire to run upstairs to look at it.

"Mother," she said, "I don't mind a bit about the winter dress; and if
my boots are neatly patched and well blacked every day, I dare say I can
do with them a little longer. And I will sit with you this afternoon,
mother, and help you to sew. I can't understand who could have stolen
the money. Perhaps it is a practical joke of Tom's; you know he is fond
of doing things of that sort now and then."

"No, it isn't, for I asked him. Who can have come into the shop? Do you
think you fell asleep over your work?"

"Oh, no."

"Then it is a mystery past bearing. If nobody came in, and you never
left either the shop or the parlor, that money was taken out of the till
as though by magic."

"We will find it, mother; we are sure to find it," said Susy; and the
way she said these words aggravated poor Mrs. Hopkins, as she said
afterwards, more than a little.




CHAPTER XII.

TOM HOPKINS AND HIS WAY WITH AUNT CHURCH.


It was quite true that Mrs. Hopkins could ill afford to lose so large a
sum as nineteen-and-sixpence out of her small earnings. During her
husband's lifetime the stationer's shop had gone well and provided a
comfortable living for his wife, son, and daughter. But unfortunately,
in an evil moment he had been induced to put his hand to a bill for a
friend. The friend had, as usually is the case, become bankrupt. Poor
Hopkins had to pay the money, and from that moment the affairs in the
stationer's shop were the reverse of flourishing. In fact, the blow
killed the poor man. He lingered for a time, broken-hearted and unable
to rouse himself, and finally died about three years before the
date of this story. For a time Mrs. Hopkins was quite prostrate, but
being a woman with a good deal of vigor and determination, she induced
one of her relatives to lend her one hundred pounds, and determined to
keep on with the shop. She could not, of course, stock it as fully as
she would have liked; she could never extend her connection beyond mere
stationery, sealing-wax, pens, and a very few books, and Christmas cards
in the winter. Still, she managed to support herself and Tom and Susy;
but it was a scraping along all the time. She had to count every penny,
and, above all things, to avoid going in debt. She was only in debt for
the one hundred pounds, which had been lent to her by an aunt of her
husband's, an old woman of the name of Church, who lived in a
neighboring village about four miles away.

Mrs. Church was quite rich, according to the Hopkinses' ideas of wealth.
She lived alone and hoarded her money. She had not been at all willing
to lend Mrs. Hopkins the hundred pounds; but as she had really been fond
of Mr. Hopkins, and had at one time meant to make him her heir, she had
listened to Mrs. Hopkins's lamentations, and desired her to send Tom to
her to inspect him, and had finally handed over the money, which was to
be paid back by monthly installments within the space of three years.

Mrs. Hopkins was so relieved to get the money that she never thought at
all of the terrible tax it would be to return it. Still, by working hard
morning, noon, and night--she added to her gains by doing fine
needlework for several ladies, who said that no one could embroider like
Mrs. Hopkins--she managed to make two ends just meet together, and she
always continued to send Mrs. Church her two pounds fifteen shillings
and sevenpence on the first of every month. Tom was the one who
generally ran across to the old lady's with the money; and so fond was
she of him that she often gave him a piece of cake, and even on one or
two rare occasions kept him to dinner. Tom enjoyed his visits to Mrs.
Church, and Mrs. Hopkins was sure to encourage him to go to her, as she
hoped against hope that when the old lady died Tom would be left some of
her money.

It was on a Wednesday that Susy sat in the parlor and forgot all about
the interests of the shop; it was on that very night that the tramp had
come in and helped himself to a ten-shilling-piece and some silver out
of the till; and it was on the following Saturday that Mrs. Hopkins, for
the first time since she had borrowed the hundred pounds from Aunt
Church, as she called the old lady, found that she could not return even
a portion of what had just fallen due. She called Tom to her side.

"Tom," she said, "you must go and see Aunt Church this afternoon as soon
as ever you come in. You must go, and you must tell her."

"Of course I'll go, mother," answered the boy. "I always like going to
Aunt Church's; she is very kind to me. She said next time I came along
she'd show me things in her microscope. She has got a beetle's wing,
mother, mounted on glass, and when you gaze down at it it seems to be
covered with beautiful feathers, as long as though they were on a big
bird. And she has got a drop of water full of wriggly things all alive;
and she says we drink it by the gallon, and it is no wonder we feel bad
in our insides. I'll go, right enough. I suppose you have the money
ready?"

"No, Tom, that's just what I have not got. I told you how that night
when I had the misfortune to go and see your aunt and look after her
sick child, some one came into the shop and stole nineteen-and-sixpence
out of the till. I am so short from the loss of that money that I can't
pay Aunt Church for at least another week. Ask her if she'll be kind
enough to give me a week's grace, Tom; that's a good boy. I can't think
how the money was stolen."

"Why don't you put it into the hands of the police?" said Tom.

"Why, Tom," said his mother, looking at him with admiration, "you are a
smart boy. Do you know, I never thought of that. I will go round to the
police-station this very afternoon and get Police-Constable Macartney to
take it up."

"But, mother, the thief, whoever he is, has left the place long before
now. The money was stolen on Wednesday, and this is Saturday morning."

"Well, Tom, there's no saying. Anyhow, I will go round to the
police-station and lodge the information."

Accordingly, while Susy was again trying on her lovely pale-blue
cashmere blouse behind locked doors upstairs, Tom and his mother were
plotting how best to cover the loss of the nineteen-and-sixpence.
Naughty Susy, having made up her mind to deny herself a new frock and
new boots, had given the matter no further consideration. She was
accustomed to the fact that her mother was always in money difficulties.
As long as she could remember, this was the state of things at home. She
had come to the conclusion that grown-up persons were always in a
frantic state about money, and she had no desire to join these anxious
ones herself. As she could not mend matters, she did not see why she
should worry about them.

Tom had a scrap of dinner and then ran off to see Aunt Church. He found
