
Robert Raikes (b. 1735, d. 1811), an English printer and philanthropist,
noted as the founder of Sunday schools.

Howard, John (b. 1726, d. 1790), a celebrated English philanthropist, who
spent much of his life in the endeavor to reform the condition of prisons
in Europe.


XXXIX. FALL OF CARDINAL WOLSEY. (167)

Wolsey. Farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness!
        This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
        The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms,
        And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
        The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
        And, when he thinks, good, easy man, full surely
        His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
        And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
        Like little, wanton boys that swim on bladders,
        This many summers in a sea of glory,
        But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
        At length broke under me, and now has left me,
        Weary and old with service, to the mercy
        Of a rude stream, that must forever hide me.
        Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye:
        I feel my heart new open'd. Oh, how wretched
        Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favors!
        There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
        That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
        More pangs and fears than wars or women have:
        And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
        Never to hope again.

                Enter CROMWELL, and stands amazed.

                        Why, how now, Cromwell!

Crom. I have no power to speak, sir.
Wol.                   What, amazed
      At my misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonder,
      A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,
      I am fall'n indeed.
Crom.                  How does your grace?
Wol.                                        Why, well;
      Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
      I know myself now; and I fed within me
      A peace above all earthly dignities,
      A still and quiet conscience. The king has cured me,
      I humbly thank his grace; and from these shoulders,
      These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken
      A load would sink a navy!--too much honor:
      Oh, 't is a burthen, Cromwell, 'tis a burthen,
      Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!
Crom. I am glad your grace has made that right use of it.
Wol.  I hope I have: I am able now, methinks,
      Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
      To endure more miseries, and greater far,
      Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
      What news abroad?
Crom.                   The heaviest, and the worst,
      Is your displeasure with the king.
Wol.                    God bless him!
Crom. The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen
      Lord chancellor in your place.
Wol.                    That's somewhat sudden:
      But he's a learned man. May he continue
      Long in his highness' favor, and do justice
      For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones,
      When he has run his course, and sleeps in blessings,
      May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on 'em!
      What more?
Crom.         That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,
      Install'd lord archbishop of Canterbury.
Wol.  That's news indeed!
Crom.                   Last, that the Lady Anne,
      Whom the king hath in secrecy long married,
      This day was viewed in open as his queen,
      Going to chapel; and the voice is now
      Only about her coronation.
Wol.  There was the weight that pull'd me down. O Cromwell,
      The king has gone beyond me: all my glories
      In that one woman I have lost forever:
      No sun shall ever usher forth mine honors,
      Or gild again the noble troops that waited
      Upon my smiles. Go! get thee from me! Cromwell;
      I am a poor, fall'n man, unworthy now
      To be thy lord and master: seek the king;
      That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
      What and how true thou art: he will advance thee;
      Some little memory of me will stir him--
      I know his noble nature--not to let
      Thy hopeful service perish, too: good Cromwell,
      Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
      For thine own future safety.
Crom.                                   O my lord,
      Must I, then, leave you? Must I needs forego
      So good, so noble, and so true a master?
      Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
      With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
      The king shall have my service; but my prayers
      Forever and forever shall be yours.
Wol.  Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
      In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me,
      Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
      Let's dry our eyes: and thus far hear me, Cromwell;
      And, when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
      And sleep in dull, cold marble, where no mention
      Of me more must be heard of, say, I taught thee;
      Say, Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,
      And sounded all the depths and shoals of honor,
      Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;
      A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
      Mark but my fall, and that that ruin'd me.
      Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
      By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
      The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?
      Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate thee;
      Corruption wins not more than honesty.
      Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
      To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not:
      Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
      Thy God's, and truth's; then, if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
      Thou fall'st, a blessed martyr! Serve the king;
      And,--prithee, lead me in:
      There, take an inventory of all I have,
      To the last penny; 't is the king's: my robe,
      And my integrity to Heaven, is all
      I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!
      Had I but served my God with half the zeal
      I served my king, He would not in mine age
      Have left me naked to mine enemies.
Crom. Good sir, have patience.
Wol.                            So I have. Farewell
      The hopes of court! my hopes in Heaven do dwell.

                  Shakespeare.--Henry VIII, Act iii, Scene ii.


NOTES.--Wolsey, Cardinal Thomas (b. 1471, d. 1530), was for several years
the favored minister or Henry VIII. of England. He acquired great wealth
and power. In 1522, he was one of the candidates for the Papal Throne. In
1529, he was disgraced at the English court and arrested.

Cromwell, Thomas (b. 1490, d. 1540), was Wolsey's servant, After Wolsey's
death, he became secretary to Henry VIII., and towards the close of his
life was made Earl of Essex.



XL. THE PHILOSOPHER. (171)

John P. Kennedy, 1796-1870. This gentleman, eminent in American politics
and literature, was born in Baltimore, graduated at the College of
Baltimore, and died in the same city. He served several years in the
Legislature of his native state, and three terms in the United States
House of Representatives. He was Secretary of the Navy during a part of
President Fillmore's administration, and was active in sending out the
famous Japan expedition, and Dr. Kane's expedition in search of Sir John
Franklin. Mr. Kennedy wrote several novels, as well as political and other
papers. His writings are marked by ease and freshness, The following
extract is from "Swallow Barn," a series of sketches of early Virginia.
###


From the house at Swallow Barn there is to be seen, at no great distance,
a clump of trees, and in the midst of these a humble building is
discernible, that seems to court the shade in which it is modestly
embowered. It is an old structure built of logs. Its figure is a cube,
with a roof rising from all sides to a point, and surmounted by a wooden
weathercock, which somewhat resembles a fish and somewhat a fowl.

This little edifice is a rustic shrine devoted to Cadmus, and is under the
dominion of parson Chub. He is a plump, rosy old gentleman, rather short
and thickset, with the blood vessels meandering over his face like
rivulets,--a pair of prominent blue eyes, and a head of silky hair not
unlike the covering of a white spaniel. He may be said to be a man of
jolly dimensions, with an evident taste for good living, sometimes sloven
in his attire, for his coat--which is not of the newest--is decorated with
sundry spots that are scattered over it in constellations. Besides this,
he wears an immense cravat, which, as it is wreathed around his short
neck, forms a bowl beneath his chin, and--as Ned says--gives the parson's
head the appearance of that of John the Baptist upon a charger, as it is
sometimes represented in the children's picture books. His beard is
grizzled with silver stubble, which the parson reaps about twice a
week--if the weather be fair.

Mr. Chub is a philosopher after the order of Socrates. He was an emigrant
from the Emerald Isle, where he suffered much tribulation in the
disturbances, as they are mildly called, of his much-enduring country. But
the old gentleman has weathered the storm without losing a jot of that
broad, healthy benevolence with which Nature has enveloped his heart, and
whose ensign she has hoisted in his face. The early part of his life had
been easy and prosperous, until the rebellion of 1798 stimulated his
republicanism into a fever, and drove the full-blooded hero headlong into
a quarrel, and put him, in spite of his peaceful profession, to standing
by his pike in behalf of his principles. By this unhappy boiling over of
the caldron of his valor, he fell under the ban of the ministers, and
tested his share of government mercy. His house was burnt over his head,
his horses and hounds (for, by all accounts, he was a perfect Actaeon)
were "confiscate to the state," and he was forced to fly. This brought him
to America in no very compromising mood with royalty.

Here his fortunes appear to have been various, and he was tossed to and
fro by the battledoor of fate, until he found a snug harbor at Swallow
Barn; where, some years ago, he sat down in that quiet repose which a
worried and badgered patriot is best fitted to enjoy.

He is a good scholar, and, having confined his readings entirely to the
learning of the ancients, his republicanism is somewhat after the Grecian
mold. He has never read any politics of later date than the time of the
Emperor Constantine, not even a newspaper,--so that he may be said to have
been contemporary with AEschines rather than Lord Castlereagh--until that
eventful epoch of his life when his blazing rooftree awakened him from his
anachronistical dream. This notable interruption, however, gave him but a
feeble insight into the moderns, and he soon relapsed to Thucydides and
Livy, with some such glimmerings of the American Revolution upon his
remembrance as most readers have of the exploits of the first Brutus.

The old gentleman had a learned passion for folios. He had been a long
time urging Meriwether to make some additions to his collections of
literature, and descanted upon the value of some of the ancient authors as
foundations, both moral and physical, to the library. Frank gave way to
the argument, partly to gratify the parson, and partly from the
proposition itself having a smack that touched his fancy. The matter was
therefore committed entirely to Mr. Chub, who forthwith set out on a
voyage of exploration to the north. I believe he got as far as Boston. He
certainly contrived to execute his commission with a curious felicity.
Some famous Elzevirs were picked up, and many other antiques that nobody
but Mr. Chub would ever think of opening.

The cargo arrived at Swallow Burn in the dead of winter. During the
interval between the parson's return from his expedition and the coming of
the books, the reverend little schoolmaster was in a remarkably unquiet
state of body, which almost prevented him from sleeping: and it is said
that the sight of the long-expected treasures had the happiest effect
upon him. There was ample accommodation for this new acquisition of
ancient wisdom provided before its arrival, and Mr. Chub now spent a whole
week in arranging the volumes on their proper shelves, having, as report
affirms, altered the arrangement at least seven times during that period.
Everybody wondered what the old gentleman was at, all this time; but it
was discovered afterwards, that he was endeavoring to effect a
distribution of the works according to a minute division of human science,
which entirely failed, owing to the unlucky accident of several of his
departments being without any volumes.

After this matter was settled, he regularly spent his evenings in the
library. Frank Meriwether was hardly behind the parson in this fancy, and
took, for a short time, to abstruse reading. They both consequently
deserted the little family circle every evening after tea, and might have
continued to do so all the winter but for a discovery made by Hazard.

Ned had seldom joined the two votaries of science in their philosophical
retirement, and it was whispered in the family that the parson was giving
Frank a quiet course of lectures in the ancient philosophy, for Meriwether
was known to talk a great deal, about that time, of the old and new
Academicians. But it happened upon one dreary winter night, during a
tremendous snowstorm, which was banging the shutters and doors of the
house so as to keep up a continual uproar, that Ned, having waited in the
parlor for the philosophers until midnight, set out to invade their
retreat--not doubting that he should find them deep in study. When he
entered the library, both candles were burning in their sockets, with
long, untrimmed wicks; the fire was reduced to its last embers, and, in an
armchair on one side of the table, the parson was discovered in a sound
sleep over Jeremy Taylor's "Ductor Dubitantium," whilst Frank, in another
chair on the opposite side, was snoring over a folio edition of Montaigne.
And upon the table stood a small stone pitcher, containing a residuum of
whisky punch, now grown cold. Frank started up in great consternation upon
hearing Ned's footstep beside him, and, from that time, almost entirely
deserted the library. Mr. Chub, however, was not so easily drawn away from
the career of his humor, and still shows his hankering after his
leather-coated friends.


NOTES.--Cadmus is said to have taught the Greeks the use of the alphabet.

Socrates (b. 469, d. 399 B. C.), a noted Athenian philosopher.
Rebellion.--In 1798, the Irish organized and rose against the English
rule. The rebellion was suppressed.

Actaeon [Ak-te'on], a fabled Greek hunter, who was changed into a stag.

Constantine, the Great (b. 272, d, 337), the first Christian emperor of
Rome. He was an able general and wise legislator, In 328, he removed his
capital to Byzantium, which he named Constantinople. AEschines [es'ke-nez]
(b. 389, d. 314 B. C.), an Athenian orator, the rival of Demosthenes.
Castlereagh, Lord (b. 1769, d. 1822), a British statesman. He was in
power, and prominent in the suppression of the Rebellion. Brutus, see p.
145.

Elzevirs [el'ze-virs], the name of a family of Dutch printers noted for
the beauty of their workmanship. They lived from 1540 to 1680.

Academicians.-The Old Academy was founded by Plato, at Athens, about 380
B. C. The New, by Carneades, about two hundred years later.

Jeremy Taylor (b. 1613, d. 1667), an English bishop and writer. His Ductor
Dubitantium, or "Rule of Conscience," was one of his chief works.

Montaigne, Michel (b. 1533, d. 1592), was a celebrated French writer of
peculiar characteristics. He owes his reputation entirely to his "Essais."



XLI. MARMION AND DOUGLAS. (176)

Not far advanced was morning day,
When Marmion did his troop array
  To Surrey's camp to ride;
He had safe conduct for his band,
Beneath the royal seal and hand,
  And Douglas gave a guide.

The train from out the castle drew,
But Marmion stopped to bid adieu:
"Though something I might plain," he said,
  "Of cold respect to stranger guest,
  Sent hither by your king's behest,
While in Tantallon's towers I staid,
  Part we in friendship from your land,
  And, noble Earl, receive my hand."
But Douglas round him drew his cloak,
Folded his arms, and thus he spoke:
  "My manors, halls, and bowers shall still
  Be open, at my sovereign's will,
    To each one whom he lists, howe'er
    Unmeet to be the owner's peer.
  My castles are my king's alone,
  From turret to foundation stone;
  The hand of Douglas is his own;
    And never shall, in friendly grasp,
    The hand of such as Marmion clasp."

Burned Marmion's swarthy cheek like fire,
And shook his very frame for ire;
  And--"This to me!" he said,--
"An 't were not for thy hoary beard,
Such hand as Marmion's had not spared
  To cleave the Douglas' head!
And, first, I tell thee, haughty peer,
He who does England's message here,
Although the meanest in her state,
May well, proud Angus, be thy mate:
And, Douglas, more, I tell thee here,
  Even in thy pitch of pride,
Here, in thy hold, thy vassals near,
  I tell thee, thou'rt defied!
And if thou said'st I am not peer
To any lord in Scotland here,
Lowland or Highland, far or near,
  Lord Angus, thou hast lied!"

On the Earl's cheek the flush of rage
O'ercame the ashen hue of age.
Fierce he broke forth,--"And dar'st thou then
To beard the lion in his den,
  The Douglas in his hall?
And hop'st thou hence unscathed to go?
No, by Saint Bride of Bothwell, no!
Up drawbridge, grooms,--what, warder, ho!
  Let the portcullis fall."
Lord Marmion turned,--well was his need,--
And dashed the rowels in his steed,
Like arrow through the archway sprung;
The ponderous gate behind him rung:
To pass there was such scanty room,
The bars, descending, razed his plume.

The steed along the drawbridge flies,
Just as it trembled on the rise;
Nor lighter does the swallow skim
Along the smooth lake's level brim:
And when Lord Marmion reached his band
He halts, and turns with clenched hand, [1]
And shout of loud defiance pours,
And shook his gauntlet at the towers.

[Transcriber's Note 1: clenched, pronounced "clench-ed".]

"Horse! horse!" the Douglas cried, "and chase!"
But soon he reined his fury's pace:
"A royal messenger he came,
Though most unworthy of the name.
Saint Mary mend my fiery mood!
Old age ne'er cools the Douglas' blood;
I thought to slay him where he stood.
'Tis pity of him, too," he cried;
"Bold he can speak, and fairly ride;
I warrant him a warrior tried."
With this his mandate he recalls,
And slowly seeks his castle halls.
                                   --Walter Scott.


[Illustration: A man in armor on a galloping horse; he is waving a
clenched fist at a group behind a closed iron gate to a castle.]


NOTES:--In the poem from which this extract is taken, Marmion is
represented as an embassador sent by Henry VIII., king of England, to
James IV., king of Scotland, with whom he was at war. Having finished his
mission to James, Marmion was intrusted to the protection and hospitality
of Douglas, one of the Scottish nobles. Douglas entertained him, treated
him with the respect due to his office and to the honor of his sovereign,
yet he despised his private character. Marmion perceived this, and took
umbrage at it, though he attempted to repress his resentment, and desired
to part in peace. Under these circumstances the scene, as described in
this sketch, takes place.

Tantallon is the name of the Douglas castle at Bothwell, Scotland.



XLII. THE PRESENT. (178)

Adelaide Anne Procter, 1825-1864, was the daughter of Bryan Waller
Procter, known in literature as "Barry Cornwall." She is the author of
several volumes of poetry, and was a contributor to "Good Words," "All the
Year Round," and other London periodicals. Her works have been republished
in America.
###


Do not crouch to-day, and worship
  The dead Past, whose life is fled
Hush your voice in tender reverence;
  Crowned he lies, but cold and dead:
For the Present reigns, our monarch,
  With an added weight of hours;
Honor her, for she is mighty!
  Honor her, for she is ours!

See the shadows of his heroes
  Girt around her cloudy throne;
Every day the ranks are strengthened
  By great hearts to him unknown;
Noble things the great Past promised,
  Holy dreams, both strange and new;
But the Present shall fulfill them;
  What he promised, she shall do.

She inherits all his treasures,
  She is heir to all his fame,
And the light that lightens round her
  Is the luster of his name;
She is wise with all his wisdom,
  Living on his grave she stands,
On her brow she bears his laurels,
  And his harvest in her hands.

Coward, can she reign and conquer
  If we thus her glory dim?
Let us fight for her as nobly
  As our fathers fought for him.
God, who crowns the dying ages,
  Bids her rule, and us obey,
Bids us cast our lives before her,
  Bids us serve the great To-day.



XLIII. THE BAPTISM. (180)

John Wilson, 1785-1854, a distinguished Scottish author, was born at
Paisley. When fifteen years of age, he entered the University of Glasgow;
but, three years later, he became a member of Magdalen College, Oxford.
Here he attained eminence both as a student, and as a proficient in
gymnastic games and exercises. Soon after graduating, he purchased an
estate near Lake Windermere, and became a companion of Wordsworth and
Southey; but he soon left his estate to reside in Edinburgh. In 1817, when
"Blackwood's Magazine" was established in opposition to the "Edinburgh
Review," he became chief contributor to that famous periodical. In its
pages, he won his chief fame as a writer. In 1820, he succeeded Dr. Thomas
Brown as Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh;
this position he held for thirty years. His "Lights and Shadows of
Scottish Life" was published in 1822. This is a collection of pathetic and
beautiful tales of domestic life in Scotland. His contributions to
Blackwood appeared over the pseudonym of "Christopher North," or more
familiarly, "Kit North." Professor Wilson was a man of great physical
power and of striking appearance. In character, he was vehement and
impulsive; but his writings show that he possessed feelings of deep
tenderness.
###


The rite of baptism had not been performed for several months in the kirk
of Lanark. It was now the hottest time of persecution; and the inhabitants
of that parish found other places in which to worship God, and celebrate
the ordinances of religion. It was now the Sabbath day, and a small
congregation of about a hundred souls had met for divine service, in a
place more magnificent than any temple that human hands had ever built to
Deity. The congregation had not assembled to the toll of the bell, but
each heart knew the hour and observed it; for there are a hundred sundials
among the hills, woods, moors, and fields; and the shepherd and the
peasant see the hours passing by them in sunshine and shadow.

The church in which they were assembled, was hewn by God's hand out of the
eternal rock. A river rolled its way through a mighty chasm of cliffs,
several hundred feet high, of which the one side presented enormous
masses, and the other corresponding recesses, as if the great stone girdle
had been rent by a convulsion. The channel was overspread with prodigious
fragments of rocks or large loose stones, some of them smooth and bare,
others containing soil and verdure in their rents and fissures, and here
and there crowned with shrubs and trees. The eye could at once command a
long-stretching vista, seemingly closed and shut up at both extremities by
the coalescing cliffs. This majestic reach of river contained pools,
streams, and waterfalls innumerable; and when the water was low--which was
now the case, in the common drought--it was easy to walk up this scene
with the calm, blue sky overhead, an utter and sublime solitude.

On looking up, the soul was bowed down by the feeling of that prodigious
height of unscalable, and often overhanging, cliff. Between the channel
and the summit of the far extended precipices, were perpetually flying
rooks and wood pigeons, and now and then a hawk, filling the profound
abyss with their wild cawing, deep murmur, or shrilly shriek. Sometimes a
heron would stand erect and still, on some little stone island, or rise up
like a white cloud along the black walls of the chasm, and disappear.
Winged creatures alone could inhabit this region. The fox and wild cat
chose more accessible haunts. Yet, here came the persecuted Christians and
worshiped God, whose hand hung over their head those magnificent pillars
and arches, scooped out those galleries from the solid rock, and laid at
their feet the calm water, in its transparent beauty, in which they could
see themselves sitting, in reflected groups, with their Bibles in their
hands.

Here, upon a semicircular ledge of rocks, over a narrow chasm, of which
the tiny stream played in a murmuring waterfall, and divided the
congregation into two equal parts, sat about a hundred persons, all
devoutly listening to their minister, who stood before them on what might
he called a small, natural pulpit of living stone. Up to it there led a
short flight of steps, and over it waved the canopy of a tall, graceful
birch tree. The pulpit stood in the middle of the channel, directly facing
the congregation, and separated from them by the clear, deep, sparkling
pool, into which the scarce-heard water poured over the blackened rock.
The water, as it left the pool, separated into two streams, and flowed on
each side of that altar, thus placing it in an island, whose large, mossy
stones were richly embowered under the golden blossoms and green tresses
of the broom.

At the close of divine service, a row of maidens, all clothed in purest
white, came gliding off from the congregation, and, crossing the murmuring
stream on stepping stones, arranged themselves at the foot of the pulpit
with those who were about to be baptized. Their devout fathers, just as
though they had been in their own kirk, had been sitting there during
worship, and now stood up before the minister. The baptismal water, taken
from that pellucid pool, was lying, consecrated, in an appropriate
receptacle, formed by the upright stones that composed one side of the
pulpit, and the holy rite proceeded.

Some of the younger ones in that semicircle kept gazing down into the
pool, in which the whole scene was reflected; and now and then, in spite
of the grave looks and admonishing whispers of their elders, letting fall
a pebble into the water, that they might judge of its depth, from the
length of time that elapsed before the clear air bells lay sparkling on
the agitated surface. The rite was over, and the religious service of the
day closed by a psalm. The mighty rocks hemmed in the holy sound, and sent
it in a more compact volume, clear, sweet, and strong, up to heaven. When
the psalm ceased, an echo, like a spirit's voice, was heard dying away,
high up among the magnificent architecture of the cliffs; and once more
might be noticed in the silence, the reviving voice of the waterfall.

Just then, a large stone fell from the top of the cliff into the pool, a
loud voice was heard, and a plaid was hung over on the point of a
shepherd's staff. Their wakeful sentinel had descried danger, and this was
his warning. Forthwith, the congregation rose. There were paths, dangerous
to unpracticed feet, along the ledges of the rocks, leading up to several
caves and places of concealment. The more active and young assisted the
elder, more especially the old pastor, and the women with the infants; and
many minutes had not elapsed, till not a living creature was visible in
the channel of the stream, but all of them were hidden, or nearly so, in
the clefts and caverns.

The shepherd who had given the alarm, had lain down again instantly in his
plaid on the greensward, upon the summit of these precipices. A party of
soldiers was immediately upon him, and demanded what signals he had been
making, and to whom; when one of them, looking over the edge of the cliff,
exclaimed, "See, see! Humphrey, We have caught the whole tabernacle of the
Lord in a net at last. There they are, praising God among the stones of
the river Mouse. These are the Cartland Craigs. A noble cathedral!" "Fling
the lying sentinel over the cliffs. Here is a canting Covenanter for you,
deceiving honest soldiers on the very Sabbath day. Over with him, over
with him; out of the gallery into the pit." But the shepherd had vanished
like a shadow, and, mixing with the tall, green broom and bushes, was
making his unseen way toward a wood. "Satan has saved his servant; but
come, my lads, follow me. I know the way down into the bed of the stream,
