I was learning to illuminate, and I took much pride in my room. I
determined to make a text for myself, and to choose a very plain
passage about ill-temper. Mrs. Welment's books supplied me with
plenty. I chose "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath," but I
resolved to have the complete text as it stands in the Bible. It
seemed fair to allow myself to remember that anger is not always a
sin, and I thought it useful to remind myself that if by obstinate
ill-temper I got the victory in a quarrel, it was only because the
devil had got the victory over me. So the text ran full length:--"Be
ye angry, and sin not; let not the sun go down upon your wrath:
neither give place to the devil." It made a very long scroll, and I
put it up over my window, and fastened it with drawing-pins.




CHAPTER VI.

THEATRICAL PROPERTIES--I PREPARE A PLAY--PHILIP BEGINS TO PREPARE THE
SCENERY--A NEW FRIEND.


Philip was at school during the remainder of the year, but I tried to
put my good resolves in practice with the children, and it made us a
more peaceful household than usual. When Philip came home for the
Christmas holidays we were certainly in very pleasant moods--for an
ill-tempered family.

Our friends allow that some quickness of wits accompanies the
quickness of our tempers. From the days when we were very young our
private theatricals have been famous in our own little neighbourhood.
I was paramount in nursery mummeries, and in the children's charade
parties of the district, for Philip was not very reliable when steady
help was needed; but at school he became stage-manager of the
theatricals there.

I do not know that he learned to act very much better than I, and I
think Alice (who was only twelve) had twice the gift of either of us,
but every half he came back more ingenious than before in matters for
which we had neither the talent nor the tools. He glued together yards
of canvas or calico, and produced scenes and drop-curtains which were
ambitious and effective, though I thought him a little reckless both
about good drawing and good clothes. His glue-kettles and size-pots
were always steaming, his paint was on many and more inappropriate
objects than the canvas. A shilling's-worth of gilding powder went
such a long way that we had not only golden crowns and golden
sceptres, and golden chains for our dungeon, and golden wings for our
fairies, but the nursery furniture became irregularly and
unintentionally gilded, as well as nurse's stuff dress, when she sat
on a warrior's shield, which was drying in the rocking-chair.

But these were small matters. Philip gave us a wonderful account of
the "properties" he had made for school theatricals. A dragon painted
to the life, and with matches so fixed into the tip of him that the
boy who acted as the life and soul of this ungainly carcase could wag
a fiery tail before the amazed audience, by striking it on that
particular scale of his dragon's skin which was made of sand-paper.
Rabbit-skin masks, cotton-wool wigs and wigs of tow, seven-league
boots, and witches' hats, thunder with a tea-tray, and all the phases
of the moon with a moderator lamp--with all these things Philip
enriched the school theatre, though for some time he would not take so
much trouble for our own.

But during this last half he had written me three letters--and three
very kind ones. In the latest he said that--partly because he had been
making some things for us, and partly because of changes in the
school-theatrical affairs--he should bring home with him a box of very
valuable "properties" for our use at Christmas. He charged me at once
to prepare a piece which should include a prince disguised as a woolly
beast on two legs with large fore-paws (easily shaken off), a fairy
godmother with a tow wig and the highest hat I could ever hope to see,
a princess turned into a willow-tree (painted from memory of the old
one at home), and with fine gnarls and knots, through which the
princess could see everything, and prompt (if needful), a disconsolate
parent, and a faithful attendant, to be acted by one person, with as
many belated travellers as the same actor could personate into the
bargain. These would all be eaten up by the dragon at the right wing,
and re-enter more belated than ever at the left, without stopping
longer than was required to roll a peal of thunder at the back. The
fifth and last character was to be the dragon himself. The forest
scene would be wanted, and I was to try and get an old cask for a
cave.

I must explain that I was not expected to write a play. We never took
the trouble to "learn parts." We generally took some story which
pleased us out of _Grimm's Fairy Tales_ or the _Arabian Nights_, and
arranged for the various scenes. We each had a copy of the
arrangement, and our proper characters were assigned to us. After this
we did the dialogue as if it had been a charade. We were well
accustomed to act together, and could trust each other and ourselves.
Only Alice's brilliancy ever took us by surprise.

By the time that Philip came home I had got in the rough outline of
the plot. He arrived with a box of properties, the mere size of which
raised a cheer of welcome from the little ones, and red-hot for our
theatricals.

Philip was a little apt to be red-hot over projects, and to cool
before they were accomplished; but on this occasion we had no
forebodings of such evil. Besides, he was to play the dragon! When he
did fairly devote himself to anything, he grudged no trouble and
hesitated at no undertakings. He was so much pleased with my plot and
with the cave, that he announced that he should paint a new forest
scene for the occasion. I tried to dissuade him. There were so many
other things to be done, and the old scene was very good. But he had
learnt several new tricks of the scene-painter's trade, and was bent
upon putting them into practice. So he began his new scene, and I
resolved to work all the harder at the odds and ends of our
preparations. To be driven into a corner and pressed for time always
stimulated instead of confusing me. I think the excitement of it is
pleasant. Alice had the same dogged way of working at a crisis, and we
felt quite confident of being able to finish up "at a push," whatever
Philip might leave undone. The theatricals were to be on Twelfth
Night.

Christmas passed very happily on the whole. I found my temper much
oftener tried since Philip's return, but this was not only because he
was very wilful and very fond of teasing, but because with the younger
ones I was always deferred to.

One morning we were very busy in the nursery, which was our workshop.
Philip's glue-pots and size-pots were steaming, there were coloured
powders on every chair, Alice and I were laying a coat of invisible
green over the cave-cask, and Philip, in radiant good-humour, was
giving distance to his woodland glades in the most artful manner with
powder-blue, and calling on us for approbation--when the housemaid
came in.

"It's _not_ lunch-time?" cried Alice. "It can't be!"

"Get away, Mary," said Philip, "and tell cook if she puts on any more
meals I'll paint her best cap pea-green. She's sending up luncheons
and dinners all day long now: just because she knows we're busy."

Mary only laughed, and said, "It's a gentleman wants to see you,
Master Philip," and she gave him a card. Philip read it, and we waited
with some curiosity.

"It's a man I met in the train," said he, "a capital fellow. He lives
in the town. His father's a doctor there. Granny must invite him to
the theatricals. Ask him to come here, Mary, and show him the way."

"Oughtn't you to go and fetch him yourself?" said I.

"I can't leave this," said Philip. "He'll be all right. He's as
friendly as possible."

I must say here that "Granny" was our maternal grandmother, with whom
we lived. My mother and father were cousins, and Granny's husband was
of that impetuous race to which we belonged. If he had been alive he
would have kept us all in good order, no doubt. But he was dead, and
Granny was the gentlest of old ladies: I fear she led a terrible life
with us all!

Philip's friend came up-stairs. He _was_ very friendly; in fact Alice
and I thought him forward, but he was several years older than Philip,
who seemed proud of the acquaintance. Perhaps Alice and I were biased
by the fact that he spoilt our pleasant morning. He was one of those
people who look at everything one has been working at with such
unintelligent eyes that their indifference ought not to dishearten
one; and yet it does.

"It's for our private theatricals," said Philip, as Mr. Clinton's
amazed stare passed from our paint-covered selves to the new scene.

"My cousins in Dublin have private theatricals," said Mr. Clinton. "My
uncle has built on a room for the theatre. All the fittings and scenes
come from London, and the first costumiers in Dublin send in all the
dresses and everything that is required on the afternoon before the
performance."

"Oh, we're in a much smaller way," said Philip; "but I've some
properties here that don't look bad by candlelight." But Mr. Clinton
had come up to the cask, and was staring at it and us. I knew by the
way Alice got quietly up, and shook some chips with a decided air out
of her apron, that she did not like being stared at. But her movement
only drew Mr. Clinton's especial attention.

"You'll catch it from your grandmamma for making such a mess of your
clothes, won't you?" he asked.

"I _beg_ your pardon?" said Alice, with so perfect an air of not
having heard him that he was about to repeat the question, when she
left the nursery with the exact exit which she had made as a Discreet
Princess repelling unwelcome advances in last year's play.

I was afraid of an outburst from Philip, and said in hasty civility,
"This is a cave we are making."

"They'd a splendid cave at Covent Garden last Christmas," said Mr.
Clinton. "It covered half the stage. An enormously tall man dressed in
cloth of silver stood in the entrance, and waved a spear ten or twelve
feet long over his head. A fairy was let down above that, so you may
be sure the cave was pretty big."

"Oh, here's the dragon," said Philip, who had been rummaging in the
property box. "He's got a fiery tail."

"They were quite the go in pantomimes a few years ago," said Mr.
Clinton, yawning. "My uncle had two or three--bigger than that, of
course."

Philip saw that his friend was not interested in amateur
property-making, and changed the subject.

"What have you been doing this morning?" said he.

"I drove here with my father, who had got to pass your gates. I say,
there's splendid shooting on the marsh now. I want you to come out
with me, and we'll pot a wild duck or two."

"I've no gun," said Philip, and to soften the statement added,
"there's no one here to go out with."

"I'll go out with you. And I say, we could just catch the train back
to the town, and if you'll come and lunch with us, we'll go out a bit
this afternoon and look round. But you must get a gun."

"I should like some fresh air," said Philip, "and as you've come over
for me--"

I knew the appealing tone in his voice was for my ears, for my face
had fallen.

"Could I be going on with it?" I asked, nodding towards the forest
scene.

"Oh dear no! I'll go at it again to-night. It ought all to be painted
by candlelight by rights. I'm not going to desert my post," he added.

"I hope not," said I as good-humouredly as I could; but dismay was in
my heart.




CHAPTER VII.

A QUARREL--BOBBY IS WILLING--EXIT PHILIP.


Philip came back by an evening train, and when he had had something to
eat he came up to the nursery to go on with the scene. We had got
everything ready for him, and he worked for about half-an-hour. But he
was so sleepy, with cold air and exercise, that he did not paint well,
and then he got impatient, and threw it up--"till the morning."

In the morning he set to work, talking all the time about wild duck
and teal, and the price of guns; but by the time he had put last
night's blunders straight, the front door bell rang, and Mary
announced "Mr. Clinton."

Philip was closeted in his room with his new friend till twelve
o'clock. Then they went out into the yard, and finally Mr. Clinton
stayed to luncheon. But I held my peace, and made Alice hold hers. Mr.
Clinton went away in the afternoon, but Philip got the plate-powder
and wash-leather, and occupied himself in polishing the silver
fittings of his dressing-case.

"I think you might do that another time, Philip," said I; "you've not
been half-an-hour at the properties to-day, and you could clean your
bottles and things quite as well after the theatricals."

"As it happens I just couldn't," said Philip; "I've made a bargain,
and bargains won't wait."

Alice and I screamed in one breath, "You're _not_ going to give away
the dressing-case!"--for it had been my father's.

"I said a _bargain_" replied Philip, rubbing harder than ever; "you
can't get hold of a gun every day Without paying down hard cash."

"I hate Mr. Clinton!" said Alice.

It was a very unfortunate speech, for it declared open war; and when
this is done it cannot be undone. There is no taking back those sharp
sayings which the family curse hangs on the tips of our tongues.

Philip and Alice exchanged them pretty freely. Philip called us
selfish, inhospitable, and jealous. He said we grudged his enjoying
himself in the holidays, when he had been working like a slave for us
during the half. That we disliked his friend because he _was_ his
friend, and (not to omit the taunt of sex) that Clinton was too manly
a fellow to please girls, etc., etc. In self-defence Alice was much
more out-spoken about both Philip and Mr. Clinton than she had
probably intended to be. That Philip began things hotly, and that his
zeal cooled before they were accomplished--that his imperiousness laid
him open to flattery, and the necessity of playing first-fiddle
betrayed him into second-rate friendships, which were thrown after the
discarded hobbies--that Mr. Clinton was ill-bred, and with that
vulgarity of mind which would make him rather proud than ashamed of
getting the best of a bargain with his friend--these things were not
the less taunts because they were true.

If the violent scenes which occur in ill-tempered families _felt_ half
as undignified and miserable as they _look_, surely they would be less
common! I believe Philip and Alice would have come to blows if I had
not joined with him to expel her from the room. I was not happy about
it, for my sympathy was on her side of the quarrel, but she had been
the one to declare war, and I could not control Philip. In short, it
is often not easy to keep the peace and be just too, as I should like
to have said to Aunt Isobel, if she had been at home. But she was to
be away until the 6th.

Alice defeated, I took Philip seriously to task. Not about his
friend--the subject was too sore, and Alice had told him all that we
thought, and rather more than we thought on that score--but about the
theatricals. I said if he really was tired of the business we would
throw it up, and let our friends know that the proposed entertainment
had fallen through, but that if he wanted it to go forward he must
decide what help he would give, and then abide by his promise.

We came to terms. If I would let him have a day or two's fun with his
gun, Philip promised to "spurt," as he called it, at the end. I told
him we would be content if he would join in a "thorough rehearsal,"
the afternoon before, and devote himself to the business on the day of
the performance.

"Real business, you know," I added, "with nobody but ourselves. Nobody
coming in to interrupt."

"Of course," said Philip; "but I'll do more than that, Isobel. There's
the scene--"

"_We'll_ finish the scene," said I, "if you don't aggravate Alice so
that I lose her help as well as yours."

Alice was very sulky, which I could hardly wonder at, and I worked
alone, except for Bobby, the only one with anything like a good temper
among us, who roasted himself very patiently with my size-pot, and
hammered bits of ivy, and of his fingers, rather neatly over the cave.
But Alice was impulsive and kind-hearted. When I got a bad headache,
from working too long, she came round, and helped me. Philip was
always going to do so, but as a matter of fact he went out every day
with the old fowling-piece for which he had given his dressing case.

When the ice bore Charles also deserted us, but Alice and I worked
steadily on at dresses and scenery. And Bobby worked with us.

The 5th of January arrived, the day before the theatricals. Philip
spent the morning in cleaning his gun, and after luncheon he brought
it into the nursery to "finish" with a peculiarly aggravating air.

"When shall you be ready to rehearse?" I asked.

"Oh, presently," said Philip, "there's plenty of time yet. It's a
great nuisance," he added, "I'll never have anything to do with
theatricals again. They make a perfect slave of one."

"_You've_ not slaved much, at any rate," said Charles.

"You'd better not give me any of your cheek," said Philip
threateningly.

"We've done without him for a week, I don't know why we shouldn't do
without him to-morrow," muttered Alice from the corner where she was
sewing gold paper stars on to the Enchanted Prince's tunic.

"I wish you could," growled Philip, who took the suggestion more
quietly than I expected; "anybody could do the Dragon, there's no
acting in it!"

"I won't," said Charles, "Isobel gave me the Enchanted Prince or the
Woolly Beast, and I shall stick to my part."

"Could I do the Dragon?" asked Bobby, releasing his hot face from the
folds of an old blue cloak lined with red, in which he was rehearsing
his walk as a belated wayfarer.

"Certainly not," said I, "you're the Bereaved Father and the Faithful
Attendant to begin with, and I hope you won't muddle them. And you're
Twelve Travellers as well, and the thunder, remember!"

"I don't care how many I do, if only I can," said Bobby, drawing his
willing arm across his steaming forehead. "I should like to have a
fiery tail."

"You can't devour yourself once--let alone twelve times," said I
sternly. "Don't be silly, Bob."

It was not Bob I was impatient with in reality, it was Philip.

"If you really mean to desert the theatricals after all you promised,
I would much rather try to do without you," said I indignantly.
