    Gave one long look
    At the cradle nook
  Where the child's faint pulses beat;
And then with softest footsteps
  Retrod the chamber floor,
    And noiselessly groped
    For the latch, and oped,
  And crossed the cottage door.

And through the tempest bravely
  Jane Conquest fought her way,
    By snowy deep
    And slippery steep
  To where her duty lay.
And she journeyed onward, breathless,
  And weary and sore and faint,
    Yet forward pressed
    With the strength, and the zest,
  And the ardor of a saint.

Solemn, and weird, and lonely
  Amid its countless graves,
    Stood the old gray church
    On its tall rock perch,
  Secure from the sea and its waves;
And beneath its sacred shadow
  Lay the hamlet safe and still;
    For however the sea
    And the wind might be,
  There was quiet under the hill.

Jane Conquest reached the churchyard,
  And stood by the old church door,
    But the oak was tough
    And had bolts enough,
  And her strength was frail and poor;
So she crept through a narrow window,
  And climbed the belfry stair,
    And grasped the rope,
    Sole cord of hope,
  For the mariners in despair.

And the wild wind helped her bravely,
  And she wrought with an earnest will,
    And the clamorous bell
    Spoke out right well
  To the hamlet under the hill.
And it roused the slumbering fishers,
  Nor its warning task gave o'er
    Till a hundred fleet
    And eager feet
  Were hurrying to the shore.

And then it ceased its ringing,
  For the woman's work was done,
    And many a boat
    That was now afloat
  Showed man's work had begun.
But the ringer in the belfry
  Lay motionless and cold,
    With the cord of hope.
    The church-bell rope,
  Still in her frozen hold.

How long she lay it boots not,
  But she woke from her swoon at last
    In her own bright room.
    To find the gloom,
  And the grief, and the peril past,
With the sense of joy within her,
  And the Christ's sweet presence near;
    And friends around,
    And the cooing sound
  Of her babe's voice in her ear.

And they told her all the story,
  How a brave and gallant few
    O'ercame each check,
    And reached the wreck,
  And saved the hopeless crew.
And how the curious sexton
  Had climbed the belfry stair,
    And of his fright
    When, cold and white,
  He found her lying there;

And how, when they had borne her
  Back to her home again,
    The child she left
    With a heart bereft
  Of hope, and weary with pain,
Was found within his cradle
  In a quiet slumber laid;
    With a peaceful smile
    On his lips the while,
  And the wasting sickness stayed.

And she said "Twas the Christ who watched it,
  And brought it safely through";
    And she praised His truth
    And His tender ruth
  Who had saved her darling too.




Nathan Hale


To drum beat and heart beat,
  A soldier marches by,
There is color in his cheek,
  There is courage in his eye;
Yet to drum beat and heart beat,
  In a moment he must die.

By starlight and moonlight,
  He seeks the Britons' camp;
He hears the rustling flag,
  And the armed sentry's tramp;
And the starlight and moonlight
  His silent wanderings lamp.

With a slow tread and still tread,
  He scans the tented line,
And he counts the battery guns
  By the gaunt and shadowy pine,
And his slow tread and still tread
  Gives no warning sign.

The dark wave, the plumed wave,
  It meets his eager glance;
And it sparkles 'neath the stars,
  Like the glimmer of a lance--
A dark wave, a plumed wave,
  On an emerald expanse.

A sharp clang, a steel clang,
  And terror in the sound!
For the sentry, falcon-eyed,
  In the camp a spy has found;
With a sharp clang, a steel clang,
  The patriot is bound.

With calm brow, steady brow,
  He listens to his doom.
In his look there is no fear,
  Nor a shadow trace of gloom,
But with calm brow, steady brow,
  He robes him for the tomb.

In the long night, the still night,
  He kneels upon the sod;
And the brutal guards withhold
  E'en the solemn word of God!
In the long night, the still night,
  He walks where Christ hath trod.

'Neath the blue morn, the sunny morn,
  He dies upon the tree;
And he mourns that he can give
  But one life for liberty;
And in the blue morn, the sunny morn
  His spent wings are free.

But his last words, his message words,
  They burn, lest friendly eye
Should read how proud and calm
  A patriot could die.
With his last words, his dying words,
  A soldier's battle cry.

From Fame-leaf and Angel-leaf,
  From monument and urn,
The sad of earth, the glad of Heaven,
  His tragic fate shall learn;
And on Fame-leaf and Angel-leaf,
  The name of Hale shall burn.

    _Francis M. Finch._




The Lips That Touch Liquor Must Never Touch Mine


You are coming to woo me, but not as of yore,
When I hastened to welcome your ring at the door;
For I trusted that he who stood waiting me then,
Was the brightest, the truest, the noblest of men.
Your lips on my own when they printed "Farewell,"
Had never been soiled by "the beverage of hell";
But they come to me now with the bacchanal sign,
And the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine.

I think of that night in the garden alone,
When in whispers you told me your heart was my own,
That your love in the future should faithfully be
Unshared by another, kept only for me.
Oh, sweet to my soul is the memory still
Of the lips which met mine, when they murmured "I will";
But now to their pressure no more they incline,
For the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine!

O John! how it crushed me, when first in your face
The pen of the "Rum Fiend" had written "disgrace";
And turned me in silence and tears from that breath
All poisoned and foul from the chalice of death.
It scattered the hopes I had treasured to last;
It darkened the future and clouded the past;
It shattered my idol, and ruined the shrine,
For the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine.

I loved you--Oh, dearer than language can tell,
And you saw it, you proved it, you knew it too well!
But the man of my love was far other than he
Who now from the "Tap-room" comes reeling to me;
In manhood and honor so noble and right--
His heart was so true, and his genius so bright--
And his soul was unstained, unpolluted by wine;
But the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine.

You promised reform, but I trusted in vain;
Your pledge was but made to be broken again:
And the lover so false to his promises now,
Will not, as a husband, be true to his vow.
The word must be spoken that bids you depart--
Though the effort to speak it should shatter my heart--
Though in silence, with blighted affection, I pine,
Yet the lips that touch liquor must never touch mine!

If one spark in your bosom of virtue remain,
Go fan it with prayer till it kindle again;
Resolved, with "God helping," in future to be
From wine and its follies unshackled and free!
And when you have conquered this foe of your soul,--
In manhood and honor beyond his control--
This heart will again beat responsive to thine,
And the lips free from liquor be welcome to mine.

    _George W. Young._




A Perfect Day


When you come to the end of a perfect day
  And you sit alone with your thought
While the chimes ring out with a carol gay
  For the joy that the day has brought,
Do you think what the end of a perfect day
  Can mean to a tired heart?
When the sun goes down with a flaming ray
  And the dear friends have to part?

Well, this is the end of a perfect day,
  Near the end of a journey, too;
But it leaves a thought that is big and strong,
  With a wish that is kind and true;
For mem'ry has painted this perfect day
  With colors that never fade,
And we find, at the end of a perfect day,
  The soul of a friend we've made.

    _Carrie Jacobs Bond._




_Kate Ketchem_


Kate Ketchem on a winter's night
Went to a party dressed in white.
Her chignon in a net of gold,
Was about as large as they ever sold.
Gayly she went, because her "pap"
Was supposed to be a rich old chap.

But when by chance her glances fell
On a friend who had lately married well,
Her spirits sunk, and a vague unrest
And a nameless longing filled her breast--
A wish she wouldn't have had made known,
To have an establishment of her own.

Tom Fudge came slowly through the throng,
With chestnut hair, worn pretty long.
He saw Kate Ketchem in the crowd,
And knowing her slightly, stopped and bowed;
Then asked her to give him a single flower,
Saying he'd think it a priceless dower.

Out from those with which she was decked,
She took the poorest she could select.
And blushed as she gave it, looking down
To call attention to her gown.
"Thanks," said Fudge, and he thought how dear
Flowers must be at that time of year.

Then several charming remarks he made,
Asked if she sang, or danced, or played;
And being exhausted, inquired whether
She thought it was going to be pleasant weather.
And Kate displayed her "jewelry,"
And dropped her lashes becomingly;
And listened, with no attempt to disguise
The admiration in her eyes.
At last, like one who has nothing to say,
He turned around and walked away.

Kate Ketchem smiled, and said, "You bet.
I'll catch that Fudge and his money yet.
He's rich enough to keep me in clothes,
And I think I could manage him as I chose.
He could aid my father as well as not,
And buy my brother a splendid yacht.
My mother for money should never fret,
And all it cried for the baby should get;
And after that, with what he could spare,
I'd make a show at a charity fair."

Tom Fudge looked back as he crossed the sill,
And saw Kate Ketchem standing still.
"A girl more suited to my mind
It isn't an easy thing to find;
And every thing that she has to wear
Proves her as rich as she is fair.
Would she were mine, and I to-day
Had the old man's cash my debts to pay!
No creditors with a long account,
No tradesmen wanting 'that little amount';
But all my scores paid up when due
By a father-in-law as rich as a Jew!"

But he thought of her brother, not worth a straw,
And her mother, that would be his, in law;
So, undecided, he walked along,
And Kate was left alone in the throng.
But a lawyer smiled, whom he sought by stealth,
To ascertain old Ketchem's wealth;
And as for Kate, she schemed and planned
Till one of the dancers claimed her hand.

He married her for her father's cash;
She married him to cut a dash,
But as to paying his debts, do you know,
The father couldn't see it so;
And at hints for help, Kate's hazel eyes
Looked out in their innocent surprise.
And when Tom thought of the way he had wed
He longed for a single life instead,
And closed his eyes in a sulky mood,
Regretting the days of his bachelorhood;
And said, in a sort of reckless vein,
"I'd like to see her catch me again,
If I were free, as on that night
When I saw Kate Ketchem dressed in white!"

She wedded him to be rich and gay;
But husband and children didn't pay,
He wasn't the prize she hoped to draw,
And wouldn't live with his mother-in-law.
And oft when she had to coax and pout
In order to get him to take her out,
She thought how very attentive and bright
He seemed at the party that winter's night;
Of his laugh, as soft as a breeze of the south,
('Twas now on the other side of his mouth);
How he praised her dress and gems in his talk,
As he took a careful account of stock.

Sometimes she hated the very walls--
Hated her friends, her dinners, and calls;
Till her weak affection, to hatred turned,
Like a dying tallow-candle burned.
And for him who sat there, her peace to mar,
Smoking his everlasting cigar--
He wasn't the man she thought she saw,
And grief was duty, and hate was law.
So she took up her burden with a groan,
Saying only, "I might have known!"

Alas for Kate! and alas for Fudge!
Though I do not owe them any grudge;
And alas for any who find to their shame
That two can play at their little game!
For of all hard things to bear and grin,
The hardest is knowing you're taken in.
Ah, well! as a general thing, we fret
About the one we didn't get;
But I think we needn't make a fuss,
If the one we don't want didn't get us.

    _Phoebe Cary._




Mandalay


By the old Moulmein Pagoda, lookin' eastward to the sea,
There's a Burma girl a-settin', an' I know she thinks o' me;
For the wind is in the palm-trees, an' the temple-bells they say:
"Come you back, you British soldier: come you back to Mandalay!"
    Come you back to Mandalay,
    Where the old flotilla lay:
    Can't you 'ear their paddles chunkin' from Rangoon to Mandalay?
    On the road to Mandalay,
    Where the flyin'-fishes play,
    An' the dawn comes up like thunder outer China 'crost the Bay!

'Er petticut was yaller an' 'er little cap was green,
An' 'er name was Supi-yaw-lat--jes' the same as Theebaw's Queen,
An' I seed her fust a-smokin' of a whackin' white cheroot,
An' a-wastin' Christian kisses on an 'eathen idol's foot;
    Bloomin' idol made o' mud--
    Wot they called the Great Gawd Budd--
    Plucky lot she cared for idols when I kissed 'er where she stud!
    On the road to Mandalay--

When the mist was on the rice-fields an' the sun was droppin' low,
She'd git 'er little banjo an' she'd sing "_Kul-la-lo-lo_!"
With 'er arm upon my shoulder an' her cheek agin my cheek
We useter watch the steamers and the _hathis_ pilin' teak.
    Elephints a-pilin' teak
    In the sludgy, squdgy creek,
    Where the silence 'ung that 'eavy you was arf afraid to speak!
    On the road to Mandalay--

But that's all shove be'ind me--long ago an' fur away,
An' there ain't no 'buses runnin' from the Benk to Mandalay;
An' I'm learnin' 'ere in London what the ten-year sodger tells:
"If you've 'eard the East a-callin', why, you won't 'eed nothin' else."
    No! you won't 'eed nothin' else
    But them spicy garlic smells
    An' the sunshine an' the palm-trees an' the tinkly temple-bells!
    On the road to Mandalay--

I am sick o' wastin' leather on these gutty pavin'-stones,
An' the blasted Henglish drizzle wakes the fever in my bones;
Tho' I walks with fifty 'ousemaids outer Chelsea to the Strand,
An' they talk a lot o' lovin', but wot do they understand?
    Beefy face an' grubby 'and--
    Law! wot _do_ they understand?
    I've a neater, sweeter maiden in a cleaner, greener land!
    On the road to Mandalay--

Ship me somewheres east of Suez where the best is like the worst,
Where there aren't no Ten Commandments, an' a man can raise a thirst;
For the temple-bells are callin', an' it's there that I would be--
By the old Moulmein Pagoda, lookin' lazy at the sea--
    On the road to Mandalay,
    Where the old Flotilla lay,
    With our sick beneath the awnings when we went to Mandalay!
    On the road to Mandalay!
    Where the flyin'-fishes play,
    An' the dawn comes up like thunder outer China 'crost the Bay!

    _Rudyard Kipling._




Columbus


Behind him lay the gray Azores,
  Behind the Gates of Hercules;
Before him not the ghost of shores,
  Before him only shoreless seas.
The good mate said: "Now must we pray,
  For lo! the very stars are gone.
Brave Adm'r'l, speak; what shall I say?"
  "Why, say: 'Sail on! sail on! and on!'"

"My men grow mutinous day by day;
  My men grow ghastly wan and weak."
The stout mate thought of home; a spray
  Of salt wave washed his swarthy cheek,
"What shall I say, brave Adm'r'l, say,
  If we sight naught but seas at dawn?"
"Why, you shall say at break of day:
  'Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!'"

They sailed and sailed, as winds might blow,
  Until at last the blanched mate said:
"Why, now not even God would know
  Should I and all my men fall dead.
These very winds forget their way,
  For God from these dread seas is gone.
Now speak, brave Adm'r'l, speak and say--"
  He said: "Sail on! Sail on! and on!"

They sailed. They sailed. Then spake the mate:
  "This mad sea shows his teeth tonight.
He curls his lips, he lies in wait
  With lifted teeth, as if to bite!
Brave Adm'r'l, say but one good word:
  What shall we do when hope is gone?
The words leapt like a leaping sword;
  "Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!"

Then, pale and worn, he kept his deck,
  And peered through darkness. Ah, that night
Of all dark nights! And then a speck--
  A light! a light! a light! a light!
It grew, a starlit flag unfurled!
  It grew to be Time's burst of dawn.
He gained a world; he gave that world
  Its grandest lesson; "On! sail on!"

    _Joaquin Miller._




"Sister's Best Feller"


My sister's best feller is 'most six-foot-three,
And handsome and strong as a feller can be;
And Sis, she's so little, and slender, and small,
You never would think she could boss him at all;
But, my jing!
She don't do a thing
But make him jump 'round, like he worked with a string!
It jest made me 'shamed of him sometimes, you know,
To think that he'll let a girl bully him so.
