irresistible. To her immense surprise the signal was returned. In
frantic excitement she waved again, and shouted "Hooray!"

"What are you doing, Winona Woodward?" snapped a voice behind her, and
turning guiltily, she found herself face to face with Miss Kelly.

"I--I was only looking at the aeroplane," stammered Winona.

"Come in at once! You know perfectly well that this sort of thing is not
allowed. I am very much surprised and disgusted. If I find you signaling
to gentlemen again from this balcony, I shall change your dormitory.
Whose field-glasses are those?"

"Garnet Emerson's," said Winona sulkily.

"Then you must give them back to Garnet this morning. Remember, that
such unladylike conduct must never happen again at the hostel."

Winona considered herself very much aggrieved. She had waved on the spur
of the moment, and to have her innocent and impulsive act construed into
"signaling to gentlemen," and reproved as "unladylike conduct," was
highly aggravating. Miss Kelly was a disciplinarian, and of a very
suspicious temperament. Her idea of duty was the French one of
"surveillance." She never trusted the girls, or put them upon their
honor; her mode of procedure was to keep an eye upon them, and to pop in
suddenly and surprise them. They resented this attitude extremely.

"Miss Kelly always gives us credit for going to do the very worst!"
grumbled Betty Carlisle.

"She puts ideas into our heads!" declared Doris Hooper indignantly.

The gist of the trouble was this: the girls at the hostel expected to
have as much liberty as if they were in their own homes, while Miss
Kelly, who had formerly been a mistress at St. Chad's, wished to enforce
strict boarding-school rules. It was much more difficult to do this
because the hostel only formed part of a large day school; the general
atmosphere of the place was more free than at a college where all alike
are boarders, and the girls naturally were infected by the prevailing
spirit. A constant source of annoyance was the rule that they must
report themselves in the hostel at 4.15. It was the fashion to linger
after school, and chat in the "gym" or in the playground. It was a
delightful little time, when everybody could meet every one else, and
discuss school news and matches and guilds and other interesting topics.
To be obliged, for no particular reason, to cut short their
conversations and race back to the hostel was annoying. The boarders
evaded the rule as far as possible, but Miss Kelly kept a roll-call, and
they knew that their absences would be duly reported to Miss Bishop.

To Winona, in especial, many of the rules were extremely irksome. At
more than sixteen and a half, she felt it ridiculous to be obliged to
ask permission to go out and buy a lead pencil at the stationer's.
"It's like living in a convent!" she fumed.

Another bone of contention was her preparation. She had been so
accustomed to work in a room by herself at Abbey Close that she found
the presence of others highly distracting. Though silence was enforced,
the girls fluttered the leaves of their books, scratched with their
pens, or even murmured dates under their breath, all of which sounds
were most irritating. Winona begged to be allowed to take her books to
her cubicle, but Miss Kelly would not hear of it.

[Illustration: "TO SEE A REAL LIVE AIRMAN AT SUCH CLOSE QUARTERS WAS NOT
AN ORDINARY EXPERIENCE"]

"I cannot make an exception for one," she replied, "and it would be
impossible to allow girls to work as they liked in the dormitories.
There would be more talking than preparation! You'll stay here with the
others, and I can see for myself what you're doing."

The hint that Miss Kelly suspected her of some ulterior motive for
wishing to study upstairs enraged Winona, but she was obliged to submit,
and to sit, close under the mistress' eye, at the long table, in company
with her fellow-boarders. Her work suffered in consequence, and Miss
Goodson's sarcasms descended on her head. Miss Goodson was not so
patient a teacher as Miss Huntley, and Winona tried her temper at times.
Winona was subject to curious fits of stupidity. Her brains were like a
clock with a broken cog. Sometimes they would work easily, and on other
days she seemed quite unable to grasp the most obvious problems. A
lively imagination may be a very delightful possession, and of use in
the writing of history and literature exercises, but it cannot supply
the place of solid facts, nor is it of the least aid in mathematics, so
Winona's form record was not high.

The hockey season would commence at the beginning of October, but during
September, while the weather was still warm, the girls continued to play
cricket on Wednesdays. The school was fortunate enough to possess large
playing fields; these adjoined the public park, in itself a big area, so
that quite a fine open space lay below the buildings. One afternoon,
just as Winona was having her innings, Elsie Mainwaring uttered a cry,
and pointed overhead. Far up in the clouds was the aeroplane, and it was
gracefully looping the loop.

"It's Harry! He's showing off for our benefit!" squealed Elsie
excitedly. "I told him we should be playing cricket to-day. Oh! didn't
he do it cleverly? He went just straight head over heels in the air!
Let's wave to him, and perhaps he'll come down a little."

Handkerchiefs fluttered out so briskly that the field resembled a
washing day. Miss Barbour was signaling as vigorously as the rest.
Evidently Lieutenant Mainwaring took the display for an invitation, the
biplane descended like a hawk, and to every one's immense gratification
alighted on the school ground. To see a real live airman at such close
quarters was not an ordinary experience. Elsie promptly introduced her
cousin to Miss Barbour and begged that they might all inspect the
machine. Lieutenant Mainwaring good-naturedly explained the various
parts; perhaps he rather enjoyed a visit to a Ladies' School! He did
not stay long, however, but after a few minutes started his engine and
went soaring up again into the blue of the sky, and wheeling over the
towers of the old Minster was soon lost to sight behind some clouds.

"It must be glorious to fly!" sighed Winona.

In spite of Miss Kelly's injunctions she could not help looking out of
her window every morning for the aeroplane, and giving a surreptitious
wave. She told herself that she was only acting patriotically in
cheering on our aerial defenses. The back of the hostel opened into the
school playground, and one day Winona, taking a run there for exercise
before breakfast, heard the familiar whirring, and looking up, beheld
the flying-machine poised just overhead. She heard a shout from the
occupant, and something dropped into the playground. She ran to pick it
up. It was a packet of chocolates! She tried to wave thanks, but the
biplane had moved on, and was now far over the town, Lieutenant
Mainwaring no doubt having enjoyed his little joke of innocent
bomb-dropping.

Now most unfortunately for Winona, Miss Kelly's bedroom window
overlooked the playground, and she had been a witness of the whole
incident. She came out now in extreme wrath, confiscated the chocolates,
and scolded Winona sharply.

"But it's not my fault! I'd no idea he was going to drop anything!"
protested Winona indignantly.

"After what has happened before, I can only draw my own conclusions,"
returned the mistress icily. "You will change to Number 3 dormitory
to-day."

"But, Miss Kelly----"

"Don't argue! I warned you that I should move you if I found any more
signaling going on. Your aunt will have to hear about this!"

When Winona returned to the hostel that afternoon, and went upstairs,
she found that all her possessions had been cleared out of Number 2
dormitory, and placed in Number 3, which being at the side of the house
had no view except the school buildings. The contents of her drawers had
been transferred intact; her brushes, books and home photos were placed
on her new dressing-table, but all the pictures of aeroplanes and the
portrait of Lieutenant Mainwaring, which she had cut out of the Seaton
_Graphic_, had disappeared. Winona sat down on the bed and laughed. She
was very much annoyed, but the humor of the situation appealed to her.

"It's too idiotic of Miss Kelly! Does she think I'm going to elope in an
aeroplane? I never heard of anything so silly in my life! She may tell
Aunt Harriet if she pleases. I don't care! Why, I don't suppose
Lieutenant Mainwaring knows me from any other girl in the school. He
just dropped those chocs. on spec. It was a shame I wasn't allowed to
eat them!"

Miss Kelly, very keen on upholding discipline in her new hostel,
considered that she had successfully squashed an incipient flirtation,
and kept a stern eye on all the elder girls, and most particularly on
Winona, for fear some repetition of the offense might occur. The
boarders were justly indignant.

"Too bad!" was the general verdict. "Winona's not a scrap that sort of
girl really, if Miss Kelly only knew. It's absurd to make such a fuss."

Out of sheer bravado and love of mischief, the remaining occupants of
Number 2 dormitory waved not only handkerchiefs but towels from the
balcony when they heard the whirring of the aeroplane overhead, enjoying
the exciting sensation that any moment they might be pounced upon by
Miss Kelly. No doubt in time they would have been discovered in the act,
but at the end of three days Lieutenant Mainwaring was sent to the
front, and his successor, not having a cousin at the Seaton High School,
took no interest in school girls, and flew over the city oblivious of
everything except his engines.

"I don't suppose he'd notice if we waved a sheet!" said Betty Carlisle
disappointedly.

"The police might though, and they'd think you were signaling to
Germans," replied Doris Hooper. "Come in, Bet, it's no use! Girl alive,
quick! I hear the dragon's fairy footsteps in the passage. Do you want
to get your head bitten off?"

In spite of occasional hostilities with Miss Kelly, Winona managed to
have a good deal of fun at the hostel. The other girls were jolly, and
in the evenings, when preparation was finished, they would play games
together in their sitting-room. There were high jinks in the
dormitories, and small excitements over little happenings, which,
however trivial they might be, provided considerable entertainment to
the participants. Only one really stormy incident occurred during
Winona's term at the hostel, and that had nothing to do with Miss Kelly.

One Saturday morning, when Winona, Betty and Doris were in the town
shopping, they happened to meet Clarice Nixon, who stopped to chat, and
ask for school news.

"I feel fearfully out of things now I've left," said Clarice. "It'll be
a stale winter without hockey."

"Why don't you join a Club?" suggested Winona.

"Shouldn't care to! It would be no fun to play with a team I don't know.
The Seaton Ladies' Club is the only decent one, and I hear they're so
cliquey. I wish we could get up an Old Girls' Hockey Club!"

"Why, that would be simply glorious! What a splendiferous idea! Oh, do
let us try! Then we could have a Past _versus_ Present match. Oh!
wouldn't it be precious?"

"Have you settled up your fixtures?"

"Very nearly."

"Then we ought to get this thing in hand at once. You're Games Captain,
so you ought to organize it. Write round to-day to all the old girls you
know, and ask them to come to a meeting on Monday."

"Isn't that rather soon?" said Betty.

"Not a bit. No time must be wasted, if the club's to be a going concern
for this season. Don't let the grass grow under your feet, is my
advice."

Winona was naturally impulsive. The idea appealed to her so immensely,
that she straightway bought a packet of postcards and a number of
halfpenny stamps, and sent out her invitations. As she was bound to
report herself in the hostel at 4.15, she decided to call the meeting
there at 4.20. It could be held in the sitting-room, and there would be
plenty of time to discuss matters before five o'clock tea. She wrote to
Margaret Howell, Kirsty Paterson, and all the former members of the
Sixth, and was already exulting over the success which she hoped would
accrue. She was sure every one in the school would like the notion when
they heard about it.

On Monday morning when she walked into her form room, she noticed
several of the prefects talking together. They looked at her
significantly as she entered, and Evelyn Richards made a movement as if
about to speak. Grace Olliver, however, laid her hand on Evelyn's arm,
and pointed to the clock, as if deferring the matter. At eleven "break,"
as the girls filed out of the room, Agatha James laid a paper on
Winona's desk. It bore the words:

"Kindly report yourself at once in the prefects' room."

Rather mystified, Winona obeyed the summons. She found the prefects
assembled in their den, looking dignified and perturbed.

"Winona Woodward," began Linda Fletcher, "are you responsible for this
post-card?" showing one of the invitations which had been written on
Saturday. "Beatrice Howell brought it to me first thing this morning, by
Margaret's advice. Margaret couldn't understand why you had sent it to
her."

"I explained on the card," replied Winona eagerly. "It was to try to get
up an Old Girls' Hockey Club!"

"And who gave you authority to call such a meeting?" asked Linda icily.

"Why, I thought as Games Captain----" began Winona, then she stopped,
for the faces of the prefects expressed a righteous wrath that staggered
her.

"It was a most unwarrantable liberty!" continued the head girl. "As
Games Captain you are responsible for the school play and for the
fixtures, but you're certainly not to take upon yourself a matter of
this kind. Why, you're not even a prefect! And no prefect would have
dreamed of calling such a meeting on her own account without consulting
her colleagues."

"I--thought--there wasn't time--to ask," stammered Winona, overcome with
confusion.

"As a matter of fact the suggestion had already been placed before the
prefects, and it was proposed to form an Old Girls' Guild, which would
include several branches, a Hockey Club being among the number. An
initial committee meeting is to be held next Thursday. Margaret Howell
was perfectly well aware of this, and could not understand why you
should have stepped in and called a meeting at the hostel, thus
forestalling our arrangements."

"It's the most abominable cheek I ever heard of!" burst out Agatha
James.

"What were you dreaming of?" demanded Grace Olliver.

Poor Winona! She suddenly saw her innocent, impulsive act in the light
in which it must appear to the prefects. It had never struck her that
she was exceeding her authority, and that she ought to have referred
the matter to the head of the school. The urgency of getting the club
started, so as to enter a Past _v._ Present in her list of fixtures, had
been her uppermost thought. She had indeed made a most terrible blunder.
The feeling against her was evidently one of general censure. Even
Garnet looked grave, and Bessie Kirk was bridling. Linda's manner was
coldly official. The stateliness of her speech was more cutting than
Agatha's explosive wrath. Winona collapsed utterly, and groveled.

"I'm most fearfully sorry!" she apologized. "Indeed I'd never have done
it if I'd thought about it. I was an utter idiot! I really don't know
what possessed me! I just sent off those cards in a hurry. What shall I
do? There isn't time to write back to everybody!"

"I think I can send messages to most of the girls, and if any turn up at
the hostel this afternoon they must be told." Linda's tone was slightly
mollified. "I hardly need impress upon you the necessity in future of
referring everything to headquarters. No school can be run on the basis
of individual enterprise."

Duly chastened, Winona left the prefects' room. She had the further
annoyance in the afternoon of explaining the situation to several comers
who turned up in answer to her invitation. Notwithstanding this
preliminary disturbance, the Old Girls' Guild was started with
thirty-five members on the roll. A Hockey Club and a Dramatic Society
were formed, both of which promised to have a flourishing existence,
and Winona had the satisfaction of fixing a Past _v._ Present match for
the following March. The prefects were magnanimous enough to bear her no
ill-will, so on the whole she came out of a very unpleasant dilemma much
better than she expected.




CHAPTER XIV

The Hockey Season


When the hockey season commenced, Winona got to business. She was wildly
anxious to prove an effective Games Captain, and win credit for the
school. It would be no easy matter to follow so excellent a predecessor
as Kirsty Paterson, but she determined to keep Kirsty's ideals well in
mind, and try to live up to them. One change, which Kirsty had
suggested, Winona at once carried out. The hockey badge was altered. The
new one had the initials S.H.S. embroidered in the school colors on
plain dark blue shields, and looked very imposing on the tunics. There
was another point upon which Winona was resolved to effect a reform. The
field was not in a thoroughly satisfactory condition, and certainly
needed attention. The prefects had put the matter before Miss Bishop,
who referred it to the Governors. Those august personages, mindful of
war economies, decided that for the present it would do well enough, and
would not vote the spending of any money upon its improvement. The bad
news was received with indignation throughout the school.

"It's too stingy for anything! How can we possibly have decent practice
on such a rough old place? I'd like to make them come and try it for
themselves, the mean wretches!" protested Bessie Kirk.

Winona laughed. A vision of the Governors wildly brandishing hockey
sticks flashed across her imagination. She seized her note-book and drew
a fancy portrait of the delicious scene: old Councillor Thomson, very
wheezy and fat, running furiously; bald-headed Mr. Crabbe performing
wonderful acrobatic feats; a worthy J.P. engaged in a tussle with the
Town Clerk; and various other of the City Fathers in interesting and
exciting attitudes. The masterpiece was passed round for general
admiration. The girls sniggered.

"Wish we could show it to them!" said Margaret Kemp. "Perhaps it might
make them realize their responsibilities. It's too sickening of them to
grudge keeping the field in order!"

"Look here, it's no use complaining!" said Winona. "Of course it
relieves one's feelings, but it doesn't make any difference to the
field. I've got a plan to propose. Let us ask Miss Bishop how much it
would cost to hire somebody to do the rolling, and offer to pay for it
ourselves. We could get up a Hockey Concert in aid of it."

"What a frolicsome notion! I'm your man!"

"Wouldn't it be setting a bad precedent?" objected Marjorie Kemp.
"Suppose the Governors stop having the tennis courts cut, and say we may
do it ourselves?"

"We'd put that to Miss Bishop first, and make it well understood."

"It would just make all the difference to the practices to have a roller
at work, even once a week," urged Olave Parry. "Do ask about it, Win!"

Miss Bishop, on being appealed to, considered the suggestion favorably.

"Certainly there's no reason why you shouldn't improve the field, if you
wish," she replied, adding with a smile: "I'll take care that the tennis
courts don't suffer in consequence. It was a prudent thought to mention
them. I expect when the war is over, the Governors may be persuaded to
take the full expense of the playing field too. I'll get an estimate at
once of what the rolling would cost."

Jones, the school janitor, who formerly kept the courts and cricket
pitch in order, had gone to the war, and his place was occupied by a
rheumatic old fellow who could do little more than carry coke and attend
to the heating apparatus. When every able-bodied man seemed fighting or
making munitions, it was difficult to find anybody to roll a hockey
field, A volunteer was procured at last, however, who undertook the job
at the rate of L1 per month, with an extra thirty shillings for putting
the field in good order to begin with. Six or seven pounds, therefore,
would cover the expenses of the season. Winona, mindful of the terrible
offense she had given in connection with the Old Girls' Guild, very
wisely took the matter to Linda Fletcher, who called a united meeting of
Prefects and Games Committee to discuss the best way of raising the
money.

"It will have to be done on a bigger scale than the symposium last
year," said Hilda Langley. "If I remember rightly, that made exactly L2
13_s._ 7_d._, enough for a Form trophy, but not sufficient for this
venture."

"We'd better issue tickets, and sell some of them to parents and
friends," suggested Linda.

"How many will the hall hold?"

"Three hundred at a pinch, if the babes squash up tight."

"They won't mind doing that in a good cause."

"The Dramatic Society ought to take an innings, and provide at least
half the program."

"They'll jump at the opportunity. I believe they have something quite
prepared, and have been yearning for an audience."

"Then by all means let them have one."

"At sixpence a head," added practical Marjorie; "we ought easily to be
able to sell sixpenny tickets."

