"I have not time now to look into that question; but I can assure you
that you will be treated with the greatest consideration on board of my
ship," added Christy as he conducted him below, and left him with Dave
in his own cabin, returning at once to the deck to inquire into the
operations of the first cutter. The boat had been hoisted up to the
davits, and the Magnolia was made fast astern. All hands had been called
when the Bronx got under way, and the men were all at their stations.

Mr. Pennant reported in all its details upon his expedition. Dr.
Connelly said his patient was severely, but not dangerously, wounded; he
would recover, but he would not be fit for duty for two or three weeks.

"While you are here, doctor, I will show you my arm, which is beginning
to be somewhat uncomfortable," said the third lieutenant with a cheerful
smile.

"Are you wounded, Mr. Pennant?" asked the commander, who had listened to
his report at length, without suspecting that he had a wound.

"I was hit in the left arm; but very fortunately the wound did not
disable me," replied the lieutenant as he proceeded to take off his
coat.

"But I cannot dress the wound here, Mr. Pennant," added the surgeon.

"Then I will wait till I have time to attend to it," replied the heroic
officer who treated the injury with contempt; "I have not finished my
report to the captain yet. I will be in the ward room as soon as the
captain is done with me."

"But I can wait, Mr. Pennant," interposed Christy.

"So can I, if you please, captain," added the lieutenant, smiling as
pleasantly as though he had been free from pain, as he could not have
been with the wound in his arm. "I wish to say a few words about the
gentleman in black we captured on board of the sloop."

"Did you learn his name?" asked Christy, greatly interested in what the
officer was about to say.

"No, sir, I did not; I heard no one call him by name. He was in the
cuddy forward when we boarded the Magnolia; and when he came out of the
little cabin, the first thing he said was, 'It was very unwise for you
to order the men to fire upon the boat. It was a great mistake, Captain
Flanger.'"

"That shows that he at least was a non-combatant," added Christy,
pleased to hear this report of his uncle.

"That is all I have to say about him. I studied the skipper of the sloop
and watched him. I am sure he did not fire a musket, and he seemed to
take no part in the affairs of the men on board. Captain Flanger is the
active man of the party; but I have no idea who or what he is. If you
look at the skipper, you will see that he is an octoroon, or something
between a mulatto and a white man, and in my opinion he is not a
cheerful worker on that side of the house. Perhaps the skipper will
be willing to tell you who and what the party are. They claimed to be
private citizens, and that the sloop was bound to Appalachicola; perhaps
the gentleman in black can explain the mission of the party."

"If he can he will not, if they were engaged in an operation in the
interest of the Confederates," added Christy with a smile. "That
gentleman is Colonel Homer Passford."

"He bears your name," said Mr. Pennant.

"He is my uncle; my father's only brother."

"Then I am sorry I brought him in."

"You did your duty, and it was quite right for you to bring him on
board. He is as devoted to the Confederate cause as my father is to the
Union. But go below, and have your wound dressed, Mr. Pennant."

The lieutenant went to the ward room where the surgeon was waiting for
him. Christy called out the skipper of the sloop, and walked into the
waist with him. The octoroon was a large man, of about the size of the
third lieutenant, and he could have made a good deal of mischief if he
had been so disposed.

"Bless the Lord that I am here at last!" exclaimed the skipper, as he
looked furtively about him.

Christy understood him perfectly.




CHAPTER XX

AN EXPEDITION TO ST. ANDREW'S BAY


"What is your name, my man?" asked Christy, as he looked over the
stalwart form of the skipper of the Magnolia.

"Michael Bornhoff," replied the prisoner.

"Are you a Russian?" asked the commander, inclined to laugh at this
singular name of one of the proscribed race.

"No, sir; but I was named after a Russian sailor Captain Flanger picked
up in Havana. I don't mean this Captain Flanger that was on board of the
Magnolia, but his father," replied the stout fellow.

"Are you a free man?"

"No, sir; I belong to Captain Flanger: his father is dead, and left me
to his son."

"Why did you bless the Lord that you were here at last?"

"Because I have been trying to get here for more than a year," replied
the contraband, after looking about him for a moment, and then dropping
his voice as though he feared Captain Flanger might hear what he said.
"Now, mister, will you tell me who you are before I say anything more?
for I shall get my back scored with forty-nine stripes if I open my
mouth too wide;" and again he looked timidly around the deck.

"You are on board of the United States steamer Bronx, and I am the
commander of her," replied Christy, desiring to encourage Michael
Bornhoff to tell all he knew about the expedition in the Magnolia.

The skipper took his cap off, and bowed very low to Christy when he
realized that he was talking to the principal personage on board of the
gunboat. He was well dressed for one in his position, and displayed no
little dignity and self-possession. Perhaps, if he had not been tainted
with a few drops of black blood in his veins, he might have been a
person of some consequence in the Confederate service.

"Not a bad wound at all, Captain Passford," said Mr. Pennant. "The
doctor says I am still fit for duty."

"Captain Passford!" exclaimed Michael Bornhoff, as he heard the name;
and the third lieutenant passed on to take a look at the prisoners.

"That is my name," added Christy, smiling at the earnestness of the
skipper.

"That is a bad name for this child," said the octoroon, shaking his
head. "Are you the son of Colonel Passford?"

"I am not; but I am his nephew," replied the commander, willing to be
perfectly frank with him.

"Bless the Lord that you are his nephew and not his son!" exclaimed
Michael fervently, as he raised his eyes towards the sky, which was
beginning to be visible through the fog. "I have heard about you, for
I was to pilot a vessel out of Cedar Keys when you came up there in
command of the boats. Colonel Passford was over there, and he saw you
on board of the Havana."

"Then we understand each other, Mr. Bornhoff," added Christy.

"Perfectly, Captain Passford; and I would trust you with my freedom,
which is the dearest thing on earth to me. But don't call me 'mister,'
or you will make me forget that I am a nigger," said the skipper,
laughing in his delight to find that he was in good and safe hands.
"Captain Flanger called me Mike always, and that is a good enough name
for me."

"Very well, Mike; you are a free man on board of this ship."

"I ought to be, for I am a whiter man than Captain Flanger."

"Now tell me what you know about that expedition on board of the
Magnolia," said Christy more earnestly. "Mr. Pennant reports that your
passengers claimed that they were peaceable citizens, and that your
sloop was bound to Appalachicola. Was that true?"

"Just then they were peaceable enough; but they were not when Captain
Flanger ordered them to fire on your men. Colonel Passford and I were
the only peaceable citizens on board of the sloop, and I was no citizen
at all," replied the skipper, laughing.

"You are one now, at any rate. Were you bound to Appalachicola?"

"Not just then, captain," chuckled Mike, who seemed to be amused
and delighted to feel that he was telling the secrets of his late
companions.

"We were going to Appalachicola after a while, where we were to pilot
out some vessels loaded with cotton."

"Then there are cotton vessels at that port, are there?" asked Christy,
pricking up his ears at this suggestion.

"Half a dozen of them, and a steamer to tow them to sea."

"Are you sure of this information, Mike?"

"I did not see them there, Captain Passford; but it was your uncle's
business to look after them, as he was doing in St. Andrew's Bay."

"Then my uncle has vessels in that bay which are to run out?" inquired
Christy, deeply interested in the revelations of the skipper.

"Only one, sir: a steamer of five hundred tons, called the Floridian."

"Precisely; that is the vessel we are after. But what was my uncle doing
on board of your sloop, with Captain Flanger and the rest of your
party?"

"My master was the captain of the Floridian, and we came out here to
see if there was any blockader near, that had come up in the fog. The
steamer was to be brought out by the pilot, who has been on board of her
for three days."

"Who were the men with muskets on board of the sloop?"

"Those were the coast guard, sir," replied Mike, chuckling again.

"The coast guard? I don't understand that," replied Christy, puzzled at
the expression.

"Eight of them, sir; and they have been keeping guard on Crooked, St.
Andrew's, and Hurricane Islands, to let them know inside if there was
any blockader coming this way. They had sky-rockets and flags to make
signals with."

"But why were they brought off if the steamer is still in the bay?"

"The Floridian was coming out this morning in the fog, if Captain
Flanger made the signal for her to do so. Then the captain was to go on
board of her, and I was to sail the rest of the party to Appalachicola,"
replied Mike, still chuckling with delight at his ability to give the
commander such important information.

"Then the Floridian is all ready to come out of the bay?" asked Christy,
suppressing the excitement he was beginning to feel.

"All ready, sir; and the signal was a sky-rocket, which the pilot could
see over the fog."

"We will not give them any signal, but we will treat them to some
visitors. Is the steamer armed, Mike?"

"No, sir; not a single big gun, and she has only hands enough to work
her. Steam all up when we came out of the bay, sir," said Mike, laughing
heartily, apparently in spite of himself.

"Call all hands, Mr. Camden," said the commander in brusque tones.

The boatswain's whistle sounded through the steamer. In a moment, as it
were, all hands were in their stations. Nothing like a drill with the
present ship's company had been possible, though the men had been
trained to some extent at the navy-yard and on board of the Vernon; but
the majority of the crew were old men who had served some time on board
of the Bronx, and under the present commander.

The prisoners appeared to be quite as much interested in the proceedings
on deck as the ship's company, and closely observed everything that was
done. Michael Bornhoff was quite excited, and walked the deck hurriedly,
as though he was in search of something to do; but he was very careful
not to go near the place where Captain Flanger was made fast to the
rail.

"Mr. Flint," called the commander to the first lieutenant, as soon as
the crew were assembled on deck, "there is a steamer of five hundred
tons in St. Andrew's Bay, all ready to come out at a given signal from
the party just captured by the first cutter. I propose to capture her
with the boats, and you will take the command of the expedition. The
first and second cutters will be employed, and you will see that they
are ready."

"The boats are in good condition, sir, and they will be ready in five
minutes," replied Mr. Flint, who had come on deck at the call for all
hands, and had hardly learned the results of the recent boat expedition.

"Mr. Camden will take charge of the second cutter," added Christy.

While the crews were making the boats ready, and Mr. Camden was
selecting the extra men for them, as he was instructed to do, Christy
gave the executive officer a brief account of the capture of the sloop,
and an epitome of the information he had obtained from Bornhoff.

"What am I to do, Captain Passford?" asked Mike, who was watching the
proceedings on deck with the most intense interest. "I want to ship in
the Yankee navy as a pilot, for I know this coast from the Mississippi
to Key West."

"Are you a sailor?" asked Christy.

"I went to sea for eleven years, and Captain Flanger, father and son,
put my wages in their pockets."

"You cannot ship as a pilot, only as an able seaman, if you know how to
hand, reef, and steer, and how to make knots and splices."

"I know all that, captain, like I know my name."

"Then I will look upon you as an able seaman until you are formally
enlisted. Mr. Flint, this man is Michael Bornhoff; he is an able seaman
and a pilot in these waters. I think you had better take him with you,
for he is fully informed in regard to the Floridian, which you are to
bring out. Let him have pistols and a cutlass," said Christy.

In ten minutes more the expedition left the ship, and soon disappeared
in the low bank of fog that still hung over the shore. Each of the
cutters had been manned by twelve men besides the officer, and Mike was
an extra hand with the first lieutenant. What remained of the port watch
were on duty, and the rest of the men were dismissed.

Mr. Pennant had the deck, and the commander walked back and forth,
considering the information he had obtained from the skipper of the
Magnolia, of the correctness of which he had no doubt, for Mike
impressed him as a truthful man, and, like all the contrabands, his
interest was all on the side of the Union, which meant freedom to them.
For the first time he began to feel not quite at home in his new
position. He had been compelled to fight for it; but he absolutely
wished that he were the first or second lieutenant rather than the
commander of the vessel.

The traditions of the navy, and of all navies, forbade him to leave his
ship to engage in any enterprise connected with his mission. He had to
take all the responsibility of failure, while he could not take an
active part on such occasions as the present. He had the glory of being
a commander, and of whatever his ship accomplished; but it began to look
like a life of inactivity to him, for he was not greedy of glory, and
all his devotion was for the Union.

He had learned that several vessels were loading with cotton at
Appalachicola, with the intention of running the blockade, if there
was any blockader off Cape St. George. His uncle Homer was engaged in
superintending the fitting out of these vessels, though whether on his
own account or that of the Confederacy, he was not aware. Christy felt
that he ought to follow up the information he had obtained with decided
action; but he was hardly in condition to do so, for he had fifteen
prisoners on board, and he would be obliged to send a prize crew off in
the Floridian when she was brought out, as he was confident she would
be. He could not settle the question at once, and he went down into his
cabin, where his uncle was waiting very impatiently to see him, and had
asked Dave a dozen times in regard to him.

Colonel Passford was naturally very anxious to ascertain what had been
done, and what was to be done, by the Bronx; but the steward was too
discreet to answer any of his questions, and he was not aware that his
son Corny was a prisoner on board as well as himself.




CHAPTER XXI

A NON-COMBATANT ON BOARD THE BRONX


Colonel Passford was reclining on the divan when the commander entered
the cabin; but he rose to his feet as soon as he saw his nephew. Christy
thought he looked thinner and paler than when he had last seen him.
He was now only forty-two years old, but he looked like a man of fifty.

"I have been wanting to see you, Christy," said the planter, as he
approached his nephew. "I learn, with no little astonishment, that you
are the commander of this steamer."

"I am, uncle Homer," replied the young man.

"Then you can tell me better than any one else in regard to my status
on board of the Bronx," added the colonel, who had won this title years
before in the militia. "Am I considered a prisoner of war?"

"I do not so consider you, uncle Homer; but I cannot say how my superior
officer will look at the matter when I report to him. You were taken in
a sloop that fired upon the first cutter of the Bronx, wounding one of
the crew and the officer in command."

"That was the folly of Captain Flanger; and I protested the moment I
discovered what had been done," added the planter, who seemed to be
anxious to relieve himself of all responsibility for the discharge of
the muskets.

"Were you in charge of the sloop, uncle Homer?"

"I was not; I had nothing to do with the sloop. She belonged to Captain
Flanger."

"Who is Captain Flanger?" asked Christy.

"You have him on board, and perhaps he had better answer the question
himself," replied Colonel Passford with a smile.

"It was a superfluous question, for I know all about him. He is the
captain of the Floridian, though that would not make him a combatant
unless he fights his ship; and that is what he did on board of the
Magnolia. I regard him and his companions, except the skipper of the
sloop, as prisoners of war. You proved by your words and conduct that
you were not a combatant, and you are at liberty to depart when you
please."

The young commander did not feel entirely sure that his ruling was
correct, for a naval officer must be learned in a great variety of
subjects which he had not had time to study; but he was willing to take
the responsibility in the present instance.

"It is easy enough to say that I may depart; but how shall I do it?"
added the planter with a smile. "I cannot swim ashore."

"I will put you ashore in a boat at the nearest land when the fog clears
off," replied Christy.

"The nearest land is an island, and there is hardly anything like a
village on the entire Bay of St. Andrew's. The region is deserted now,
and I might wander about there for a month, till I starved to death,
before I could get to a settled region."

"I shall not compel you to land, and you can remain on board till I
report to the flag-officer of the Eastern Gulf squadron, off Pensacola,
if you desire to do so; but you will be subject to his decision and not
mine then."

"I prefer that to starving to death in this region," replied the
colonel.

"Very well, uncle Homer, that is settled," added Christy. "Now, how are
aunt Lydia and Gerty? I hope they are well."

"Very well the last time I saw them, which was three weeks ago. They are
busy making garments for the soldiers," answered the planter.

"When did you last hear from Corny, uncle Homer?"

"It is all of two months since I had any news in regard to him. He is
still a soldier and has not yet been promoted. His company is still at
Fort Gaines; but he has been sent away once or twice on detached duty.
He is not given to writing many letters; but the last time I was in
Mobile I was told that he had again been sent off on some sort of secret
service with a naval officer by the name of Galvinne. I do not know
whether the report was true or not."

"It was quite true, uncle Homer; and he has been quite as unfortunate
as he was in his former expedition to the North," added Christy very
quietly.
