engaged. In fact, one reason why he was chosen was because he had an
excellent habit of minding his own business. Possibly Christy was more
particular on this point than an older officer would have been.

"I think we have made two miles, Mr. Passford," said Beeks, when the men
had pulled about an hour. "Of course, I cannot be sure of the distance
run, for I can only guess at it."

"Run up to the shore, then, and let us see how far off we are," added
Christy.

In a few minutes the bottom of the boat struck on the sand, and it was
forced up far enough to permit the lieutenant to go on shore. Like most
of the islands in this part of the gulf, Santa Rosa was nothing but
sand, which in the eastern end is of a peculiar reddish hue. It is
little more than a sand spit for its whole length, though in some places
the wind has piled up mounds, or dunes.

"Come with me, if you please, Flint," said Christy, as he leaped to the
shore.

Flint followed him, as usual asking no questions, and, if he had any
curiosity in regard to the purposes of his leader, he did not manifest
it. The lieutenant glanced at the trend of the shore, and then walked at
right angles with it. No part of the island was inhabited, or even
occupied, except Fort Pickens and a Union camp. It was a dismal place,
especially in the fog and darkness.

A short walk brought the explorers to the waters of Pensacola Bay. It
was in vain that they tried to penetrate the gloom and the mist, and
nothing could be seen. Flint expressed himself to this effect.

"I did not expect to see anything," replied Christy. "I only came across
here to find how wide the island was at this point. I am satisfied that
we are about where I supposed we were. Half a mile to the westward of us
the island is more than double the breadth it is here."

"I see, sir; if you had found it much wider than it is, you would have
known that you had not gone far enough in the boat," replied Flint.

"Precisely so; I wanted to find where we were before I changed the
course in going farther to the eastward," added Christy.

Flint made no further remark, and they returned to the boat, and seated
themselves in their places. The lieutenant gave the order to shove off.

"We are in no hurry, Beeks; if the men are tired, you can stop longer to
rest them," continued the commander of the expedition.

The men scouted the idea of being tired after a pull of two miles in a
comparatively smooth sea. Christy told them that they might have some
very heavy work to do before they returned to the ship, and he did not
wish to use up their strength unnecessarily.

"Now, keep her east by north for a couple of miles, Beeks," continued
Christy. "That will be as far as we have occasion to go in this
direction. Don't hurry them; take it easy, for it will not be high tide
till half-past twelve, and we may have more time than we shall know how
to use."

The crew pulled very leisurely, and it was over an hour before Beeks
estimated that they had made the two miles. As before, Christy and Flint
were landed, and they walked across the island. But their walk was not
even half the length of the last one; and the spit was so narrow at this
place that the lieutenant was confident he had struck the point he
intended.

"This is our base of operations," said Christy, as he stood on the shore
of the bay. "We have got along very well so far, for it is not time yet
for the music to begin, if it is to begin at all. What are you about,
Flint?"

The master's mate had lain down on the sand at the water's edge, and
his companion was very much puzzled by his attitude. He wondered if his
companion had the stomach-ache, and was not able to stand up.

"I beg your pardon, Lieutenant Passford, but if you will kindly be quiet
for a moment, I hope to be able to answer your question," replied Flint,
in a low tone.

Christy complied with the request, and as he did so, he thought he heard
a noise in the distance, though he was not sure of it. He listened with
all his ears, and some confused sounds came to him; but he could make
nothing of them.

"I heard some sort of a noise," said Flint, rising from his recumbent
position. "But I can make nothing of what I hear. If there was a fresh
breeze, I should say that it was the surf."

"I heard it, too; but I am bothered to make out what it is. Did you get
an idea of any kind?" asked Christy.

"It sounded as though something of a gang of men were at work off in
this direction," replied Flint, pointing east of north. "I am almost
sure I heard the blows of hammers, or something like them."

"The noise I heard might have been almost anything," added Christy.

"What is there off in that direction?" asked Flint, pointing again.

"About north of us is Town Point, and just beyond it is Old Navy Cove,"
said the lieutenant, who had been up the bay in the Bellevite on an
excursion, and who had studied up all the localities.

"Possibly they are repairing a vessel there," suggested Flint.

"They would not do that over there, and certainly not on a dark night,"
argued Christy. "But we will soon find out all about it."

He led the way back to the boat, which he had ordered Beeks to have
carried on the shore. Then they proceeded to bear it across the island
to the bay, where it was put into the water again.




CHAPTER XIX

SOME TROUBLE ON BOARD THE TEASER


It was not a difficult thing for so many men to carry the whaleboat
across the island, and they were disposed to make merry over the novelty
of the task; but they had been instructed not to speak a loud word after
the party left the south side of the island. The noise to which Christy
and Flint had listened indicated that something was going on, though
they could not decide what it was. In the stillness of the night, and
in the absence of any roar of breakers, sounds could be heard a long
distance, though whether they came one mile or two, they could not
determine.

"Get out those cloths, Beeks," said Christy, as soon as the boat had
been put into the water. "Every oar must be very carefully muffled, and
you will see that it is properly done."

"I will have it done in a few minutes, sir," replied the acting
coxswain.

"As I said before, we are in no hurry, and you may take your time to do
it properly," added the lieutenant.

"Those sounds are still to be heard," said Flint, who had been a short
distance from the boat to listen for them.

"I hear them," replied Christy, walking away from the boat to continue
the investigation while they were waiting. "Some kind of a job is in
progress at no great distance from us. From how far off do you calculate
that those sounds come?"

"I think they must come a mile; and I don't believe I can guess any
nearer to it than that, though it is possible they come two miles.
I know little or nothing of the region about here. Suppose we should go
a mile north-northeast from this spot, what should we find there, Mr.
Passford?" asked Flint, apparently greatly interested in the question.

"It would be a point on Pensacola Bay, about half-way between this
island, where we stand, and Town Point," replied Christy. "I should say
it would be in the channel leading into Santa Rosa Sound."

"Precisely so!" exclaimed Flint, in an energetic whisper. "That's the
way they are going to take the Teaser out, and they are doing something
over there to prepare her for the trip in shallow water."

The master's mate was not aware that Christy had suggested to the
captain this way of escape for the Teaser, and he had abandoned the idea
himself. Flint had reached his conclusion from his own premises. They
discussed the matter for some time, though it was impossible to arrive
at any conclusion for the want of data on which to base their reasoning.

"All ready, sir," reported Beeks, coming up to them at this moment.

"How far is the entrance to the sound from Fort Pickens, Mr. Passford?"
asked Flint.

"About four miles."

"Then why should they choose such a night as this for their work?"

"The Bellevite, floating in four fathoms of water on the other side of
the island, could shell them out if they were seen, as they certainly
would be from Fort Pickens," replied Christy.

"That makes it plain enough," added Flint, as they walked towards the
boat.

"But I am not quite willing to believe yet that the Teaser will go out
through the sound. If she could get through at all, it would only be
after getting aground no end of times, and if to-morrow should be a
clear day, she could be seen anywhere on her course," persisted Christy.
"She cannot expect to make eight or ten knots an hour in that shallow
water."

The lieutenant ordered the men into the boat, after she was shoved off
the beach. They worked with such care that not a sound came from her.
The oars were shipped, and the sailors began to row. As instructed, they
pulled very slowly, though such work could not be done in perfect
silence.

"Look out for that binnacle, Beeks," said Christy. "The light from it
may betray us."

"You have not given me the course, sir," replied the coxswain, as he
obeyed the order.

"North-northeast," added Christy, as he settled back in the stern
sheets.

No one was allowed to speak in the boat, and the lieutenant set the
example of silence. But he kept his ears wide open, though the little
noise made by the oars and the rippling of the water prevented him from
hearing anything at first. It was so dark that one could hardly see
another in the boat. It was in vain that Christy watched in the gloom
for the glow of a light; for all was nearly total darkness in every
direction.

In about half an hour they began to hear the sounds which had attracted
their attention on the island, and they proceeded from directly ahead,
indicating that the operations, whatever they were, came from the
entrance to the sound. The workmen were not likely to hear the approach
of the boat while they were making so much noise themselves. In addition
to the sounds they had heard before, they recognized the noise of
escaping steam.

This last discovery made it certain that a steamer was there, though the
listeners could not know whether it was the Teaser or not. Both of the
officers of the expedition, in the uselessness of their eyes, made the
best use they could of their ears. Christy listened to ascertain if
there was more than one steamer present. In a whisper he asked Flint to
consider this question. There was no doubling of the sounds to indicate
more than one steamer.

For ten minutes more Christy listened and was silent; but he was doing
some very heavy thinking, for by this time the boat was very near the
scene of operations, if it could be a scene in that dense darkness.
Every sound, even to the speech of the men, could be distinctly heard.
Still nothing could be seen, and Christy knew that there was a point of
nearness where something could be discerned even in any gloom of night.
He permitted the boat to continue on its course, till he could very
dimly make out an object ahead.

"Way enough," he whispered to Beeks.

The coxswain raised both hands, and made a gesture with them, which
was the signal for the men to cease rowing. The sounds were now more
tangible. Occasionally there were a few raps with a hammer, but the most
of them were the orders of the person in charge.

"I don't believe there are more than a dozen men there," whispered
Flint.

"More than that, I should say; but even if there are two dozen, it is
all the same. Take off the mufflers from the oars, Beeks," continued
Christy. "Then give way with a will, and run for whatever may come in
sight."

Beeks obeyed the order, and in a couple of minutes the boat was driving
into the gloom at her ordinary speed. Something came into view a moment
later, and it was a small steamer.

"Boat, ahoy!" shouted some one from the steamer.

"On board of the steamer!" replied Christy.

"Are you the pilot?" demanded the speaker from the vessel.

"Ay, ay, sir," responded the lieutenant.

"I shall not want you now," continued the man on the steamer.

"How is that?" demanded Christy, as though this was an entirely
unexpected reply.

"I have concluded to make my way out through the sound, Gilder."

"Then my name is Gilder," added Christy, in a low tone.

"I have a plan of my own, and I reckon I shall make it go," proceeded
the captain of the steamer. "The Teaser don't draw much water, and I
know how to help her over the shoal places."

"When do you expect to get through the sound?" asked Christy.

"I don't know when; but I shall get through."

"But you will find a blockader at the east end of the island; and then
you will be as badly off as you are now," argued Christy.

"I don't believe there is any blockader there. Who are all those men in
the boat with you, Gilder?"

"They belong to the water guard," replied Christy, at a venture, and he
thought that would describe them as well as any terms at his command.
"They expected you to go out by the main channel to-night."

"No lie in that," chuckled Flint.

"I wish they would come on board of the Teaser and help me out, for my
men won't work."

"How many men have you?" asked the lieutenant.

"Just fifteen; the rest of my crew were to come on board at midnight,
half an hour before high tide. But the men I have with me won't work,
and I shall not be ready for them, I am afraid."

"What is the reason they won't work?"

"They say they shipped to fight the Yankees, and they are not going to
do such work as lighting up the steamer."

"Perhaps we can bring them to their senses," said Christy, as he ordered
Beeks to give way again.

A few strokes of the oars enabled the officers in the stern sheets to
obtain a full view of the Teaser, and she looked like a trim little
steamer of about two hundred tons. She was rather long, and she had a
very sharp bow. The reports gave her the reputation of being a very fast
sailer.

"Let every man have his arms in order," said Christy impressively, in a
low tone. "Give way with a will, and when you unship your oars have your
weapons ready, though I hardly think you will have to use them at
present."

As the boat dashed towards the little steamer, the sounds of an
altercation came over the water. The angry voice of the captain, if
the late speaker was the captain, and several others were heard in a
dispute; and as the boat came alongside the report of a pistol indicated
that the belligerents were in earnest.

Christy sprang upon the deck of the Teaser, with his revolver in his
hand. Half a dozen men stood in a group by the side of the engine-room,
confronting the man who had done the talking with the boat, as Christy
knew by the sound of his voice.

"We are not held by any papers we signed!" protested one of the men
forward. "We are willing to do our duty, Captain Folkner, but we did not
ship to burrow through the sand, and run the risk of being captured by
the Yankees. We shipped to run the blockade, and that risk is in the
papers."

"I shall take my vessel out as I think best, Lonley; and my men are not
to dictate to me what I am to do," replied Captain Folkner angrily.

"I am willing to leave it to Captain Gilder. You know as well as I do
that the rest of the ship's company would not come on board till the
Teaser was outside of Santa Rosa Island. We appeal to you, Captain
Gilder," said Lonley.

"Why do you object to going out through Santa Rosa Sound?" asked
Christy, willing to do the fair thing, since the mutineers had appealed
to him.

"The Teaser draws ten feet of water with her coal in, and she cannot get
through the sound in a week, if ever."

"Are you willing to go to sea by running the blockade, Lonley?"

"Perfectly willing; and so are the whole ship's company."

"But I won't take the risk of running the blockade. They put a fast
steamer on there to-day, and it is useless," replied Captain Folkner.

The situation was certainly interesting to Christy and his companions.




CHAPTER XX

COMING TO THE POINT


Captain Folkner of the Teaser was evidently somewhat timid, and he had
heard of the arrival of the Bellevite. Just now the large ships-of-war
which had been there were absent on their duty, though they were
expected to return at any time. There was liable to be some
unpleasantness at any time between Fort Pickens and Fort Barrancas;
but everything was quiet just now.

Flint had come on board of the Teaser with Christy, but none of the
boat's crew had attended them. The situation was very novel to the
lieutenant, and he did not feel competent to arbitrate between the
contending parties. Besides, he was not willing to believe that he could
be entirely impartial, for he had a personal and patriotic interest in
the issue of the quarrel.

The seamen, under the leadership of Lonley, who appeared to be an
officer, were the more powerful party, and the more to be dreaded. He
was disposed to decide against them, if he could get them out of the way
by doing so. They were willing to leave the matter to him, and he began
at last to see his way through it.

"The captain of a ship is the authority to be respected, Lonley," said
he, when he had made up his mind what to do.

"We might as well bury ourselves in the sands as try to go through
there," replied the leader of the mutiny, who seemed to be a very
intelligent man, and Christy concluded from his language and manner
that he was not a common sailor.

"That may be; but the captain is supreme on the deck of his own ship,"
argued Christy.

