an inch long. It grows in stiff clusters on short, branching stems. The
shrub, which is sometimes a small tree, is bushy and crooked, with stout
and spreading branches. It is found from Connecticut to Georgia and as
far west as the Indian Territory. It grows among the underbrush in
forests. The bark is scaly and of a reddish-brown color, the leaves are
dark green and smooth on the upper side, paler and sometimes covered
with matted hair on the under side, where the veins show prominently;
they are two or three inches long and generally oval in shape with no
teeth. The flowers are cream-white and grow in flat-topped clusters.


=Wild Plums. Canada Plum=

There is a wild plum that is found in our New England States and in
Canada known as the Canada plum. The plant grows along fences, in
thickets, and by the side of streams. The plum is from one inch to one
and a half inches long and is red or orange in color. It has a tough
skin and a flat stone. The flavor is considered pleasant but the fruit
is generally used for preserving. The leaves have long, sharp points at
the ends and are rather heart-shaped at the base. The flowers, white in
bud, change to pink when opened. They grow in thin clusters.


=Beach Plum=

Usually on sandy and stony beaches, though at times farther inland, you
may find the beach plum. It is a low shrub and grows in clumps. The
fruit is apt to be abundant and is sweet when quite ripe. This plum,
also, is used for preserving. The color of the fruit is from red to
red-purple, it has a bloom over it and grows on a slender stem. The thin
stone is rounded on one edge, sharp on the other, and generally has
pointed ends. The fruit ripens in August and September. The leaf is
oval, has a sharp-pointed tip, is rounded at the base, and has fine,
forward-pointed teeth. There are many white flowers which grow in
clusters along the branches.


=Wild Red Cherry=

The wild red cherry is sour but edible; it is best used as preserves.
The tree is usually small yet sometimes reaches the height of thirty
feet. It is oftenest found in the woods of the north, but also grows
among the mountains as far south as Tennessee. The bark is a
reddish-brown and has rusty dots over it. The leaves are oblong, pointed
at the tips and rather blunt at the base. They are bright green and
glossy. The white flower is much like the cultivated cherry blossom but
smaller; it grows in clusters. The cherries are light red and about the
size of a pea.

[Illustration: CANADA PLUM

SCARLET HAW

WILD BLACK CHERRY

Fruits found principally in the north and the middle west.]


=Sand-Cherry=

Growing in the sand along our eastern coast as far south as New Jersey
and sometimes on the shores of the Great Lakes, the sand-cherry is
found. It is a low, trailing bush, but in some cases sends up erect
branches as high as four feet. The fruit is dark red--black when quite
ripe--and about half an inch long. It grows in small clusters or
solitary, and is said to be sweet and edible. The leaves, dark green on
the upper side, are lighter underneath; they are rather narrow, broadest
toward the end and tapering at the base. The edge is toothed almost to
the base. The flowers are white and thinly clustered.


=Persimmon=

In the Southern, Western, and Middle States, some say as far north as
New York, grows the _persimmon_. Deliciously sweet and spicy when frost
has ripened it, very astringent until ripe. It is plentiful in Kentucky
and one of my earliest memories is of going to market with my mother in
the fall to buy persimmons. There I learned to avoid the fair, perfect
fruit, though to all appearances it was quite ripe, and to choose that
which looked bruised and broken.

The persimmon is about the size of a plum, but is flattened at the
poles. It grows close to the branch and its calyx is large. The color is
yellow generally flushed with red. Some writers describe it as juicy,
but I would not call it that; the flesh is more like custard or soft
jelly.

The tree usually varies in height from thirty to fifty feet, but in some
places is said to reach one hundred or more feet. The trunk is short and
the branches spreading. In the south it often forms a thicket in
uncultivated fields and along roadsides. The bark is dark brown or dark
gray, the surface is scaly and divided into plates. The leaves are
usually a narrow oval with smooth edges; when matured they are dark
green and glossy on the upper side, underneath pale and often downy. The
flower is a creamy-white or greenish-yellow.


=Papaw=

The papaw is another fruit I knew well as a child. It is sometimes
called custard-apple because the flesh resembles soft custard. As I
write I can almost taste the, to me, sickish sweetness of the fruit and
feel the large, smooth, flat seeds in my mouth. In shape the papaw
somewhat resembles the banana, the texture of the skin is the same, but
the surface of the papaw is smoothly rounded and it is shorter and
thicker than the banana, being usually from three to five inches long.
It ripens in September and October. The tree is small, often a shrub,
and it grows wild no farther north than western New York.

There are some cultivated papaw-trees on Long Island, but I do not think
they bear fruit. Certainly none that I have seen have ever fruited. You
will find the tree as far south as Florida and Texas, through the Middle
States and west to Michigan and Kansas. It flourishes in the bottom
lands of the Mississippi Valley and seeks the shade of the forests. The
bark is dark brown with gray blotches; the leaves are large, being from
two to twelve inches long and four inches wide. They are oval, pointed
at the tip and narrowed at the base. When matured they are smooth, dark
green on the upper side and paler beneath. At first the flower is as
green as the leaves, but finally turns a deep red-purple. It grows close
to the branch and is solitary.


=May-Apple=

One of the most delicious wild fruits we have is the _May-apple_ or
_mandrake_. It is finely flavored, sweet and juicy, but being a laxative
one must eat of it sparingly. It is most common in the Middle States and
reaches perfection in Ohio.

The plant is from twelve to eighteen inches high, and the large
umbrella-like leaves are lifted on smooth, straight stems. The fruit
usually grows from the fork of two leaves. It is yellow, lemon-shaped,
and about the size of a plum. The flesh is like that of the plum and
there are numerous seeds in fleshy seed coverings. It ripens in July and
is quite soft when fully ripe. I have sometimes gathered the firm,
yellow May-apples, put them away in a cool, dark, dry place to ripen,
and in taking them out have found them in prime condition. They will
ripen in this way without spoiling if not allowed to touch one another.

The leaves frequently measure a foot in diameter; they have from five to
nine lobes, which are notched and pointed at the tips; the upper side is
darker than the lower. While the fruit of the May-apple is edible, the
leaves and root are poisonous, not to the touch but to the taste. The
flower is a clear white with from eight to twelve rounding petals and it
generally measures about one and a half inches across. The petals expand
in the morning, become erect in the afternoon, and close at night. We
are told that the May-apple is a roadside plant, but I have found it
only in the woods.


=Wild Grapes=

There are several varieties of wild grapes, all, I think, edible but not
all pleasant to the taste. The fox-grape is sweet, but has a musky
flavor and odor, a thick skin, and a tough pulp. The fruit ripens in
September but few care to eat it. The vine grows luxuriantly and is very
common. The summer grape is another tough-skinned grape. It is not musky
but is generally astringent. The vine resembles the fox-grape in growth,
being strong and vigorous. The fruit of the blue grape is sour and hangs
in long, heavy clusters. It is usually found along water-ways.

[Illustration: MAY APPLE MANDRAKE

PARTRIDGE BERRY

Fruits common to most of the States.]


=Frost-Grape or Chicken-Grape=

If you try to eat the _frost-grapes_ before frost you will find them
decidedly sour, but after a good frost they are really fine. They have a
snappy, spicy flavor all their own, and one eats them, like currants,
skin and all. They are small, round, and black with a slight bloom. The
clusters are well-filled and hang loosely. The vine grows luxuriantly,
branching from a large trunk, and is found in wet places and on the
banks of streams, though it does well in the open and in drier soil. It
flourishes in New England and down to Illinois and westward to Nebraska.
The leaves usually suggest three lobes but are mostly undivided. They
are coarsely toothed and the under side bears occasional hairs along the
veins.


=Wild Nuts. Black Walnuts=

Of all the wild-growing foods, nuts are, perhaps, the most nutritious.
The _black walnut_, not plentiful in the Atlantic States but abundant in
the Middle States and in the Mississippi Valley, has a rich, wild
flavor, and a deep-brown stain for the hands that tear it from its
ball-like covering of tough, pimply green which forms the outer husk.
The nut is sometimes oblong, sometimes almost round, with a deeply
grooved, hard, brown shell. It grows in pairs or solitary. The tree is
large, often reaching the height of one hundred feet, and its trunk is
from four to six feet in diameter. The bark is dark brown with deep
vertical grooves and its surface is broken with thick scales. The leaves
are compound, growing on a middle stem which is sometimes two feet long.
Each leaflet is a narrow oval, sharply pointed at the end, and usually
about three inches long. The nuts require frost to ripen them.


=Butternut=

While the _butternut-tree_ is much like the walnut in general
appearance, it does not grow as large. The nuts are different in shape
and in flavor, and the leaflets are hairy instead of smooth. The
butternut does not grow as far north as the walnut, but is often found
side by side with the walnut in the Middle States. The green outer
covering of the nut is oblong and sticky on the surface, and, like the
walnut, will stain the hands. The shell is hard, brown, oblong, and
pointed at one end. It is deeply grooved. The flavor is rich but the nut
being oily soon becomes rancid.


=Hickory-Nuts=

In gathering hickory-nuts you must be able to distinguish between the
edible variety and others that are fair on the outside but bitter
within. There are nine varieties of hickory-nut trees, and in general
appearance they are alike. All have compound leaves and the leaflets are
larger and fewer to the stem than the walnut, usually numbering from
five to eleven. The nuts grow in small clusters as a rule, often in
pairs, and the outer husk separates when ripe into four pieces, allowing
the nut to drop out clean and dry. The full-grown tree is of good size
and is found almost everywhere in the United States.


=Shellbark. Shagbark=

The _shellbark_ or shagbark hickory-nut is one of the best. The flavor,
as every one knows, is sweet and pleasant. It is the bark of the tree
that gives it the name of shagbark, for it separates into long, ragged
strips several inches wide which generally hold to the trunk at the
middle and give it an unkempt, shaggy appearance.


=Mockernut=

The _mockernut_ is the hickory-nut with a dark, brownish-colored shell,
hard and thick and not easily cracked. It is called the mockernut
because while the nut is large, usually larger than the shellbark, the
kernel is very small and difficult to take out of the thick shell.


=Pignut=

I will italicize the _pignut_ because, though I have never eaten it, I
once tried to, and the first taste was all-sufficient. Some writers tell
us that the flavor is sweet or slightly bitter. It was the decidedly
bitter kind that I found lying temptingly clean and white under the
tree. The thin outer husk of the pignut is not much larger than the nut.
It is broader at the top than at the stem, where it narrows almost to a
point. The husk does not open as freely as that of the other
hickory-nuts. It is inclined to cling to the nut; in some cases it only
partially opens and drops with the nut.

[Illustration: SHELLBARK HICKORY NUT

PIGNUT

Hickory nuts, sweet and bitter.]


=Beechnut=

One of the sweetest and most delicately flavored of our native nuts is
the little, triangular _beechnut_. The tree is common and widely
distributed, but few people know anything about the nut. In Kentucky the
nuts used to be plentiful, but I have seen none in New York. It is said
that a beech-tree must be fully forty years old before it will bear
fruit, and that may be the reason the nuts are not oftener found.

The soft-shelled nut is very small, no larger than the tip of your
little finger. The color is pale brown, and it is three-sided with sharp
angles. It is contained in a small, prickly husk and grows both solitary
or in clusters of two or three. When touched by frost the burr opens and
allows the nut to fall out while the burr remains on the tree.

The bark of the beech-tree is ashy gray, and the leaf is oblong, pointed
at the tip, toothed on the edge, and strongly veined.


=Chestnut=

I find that the _chestnut-tree_ is not as well known as its fruit, which
is sold from stands on the street corners of most American cities. A
round, green prickly burr is the husk of the nut, and this is lined
inside with soft, white, velvety down. Nestled closely in this soft bed
lie several dark-brown nuts with soft, polished shells. The first frost
opens the burrs, and the sweet nuts fall to the ground.

You may recognize the tree in midsummer by its long-tasselled,
cream-white blossoms, which hang in profusion from the ends of the
branches. The chestnut is the only forest-tree that blossoms at that
time, so you cannot mistake it. Later you will know it by the prickly
green burrs, which develop quickly. The tree is large and common to most
States. The leaves are from six to eight inches long; they are coarsely
toothed at the edges, sharply pointed at the end, and are prominently
veined on the under side. They grow mostly in tufts drooping from a
common centre.

[Illustration: Nuts with soft shells. Beechnut and chestnut.]


=Bark and Roots of Trees=


=Slippery-Elm=

The inner bark and the root of the _slippery-elm_ are not only pleasant
to the taste but are said to be nutritious. They have a glutinous
quality that gives the tree its name, and the flavor is nutty and
substantial.

This variety of elm is common and is found from the Saint Lawrence River
to Florida. It grows to a height of sixty or seventy feet, with
spreading branches which flatten at the top. The outline of the tree is
much like that of a champagne-glass, wide at the top and narrow at the
stem. The slippery-elm resembles the white elm, but there are
differences by which you can know it. If you stroke the leaf of a white
elm you will find that it is rough one way but smooth the other; stroke
the leaf of the slippery-elm, and it will be rough _both_ ways. The buds
of the white elm are smooth, those of the slippery-elm are _hairy_. Then
you cannot mistake the inner bark of the slippery-elm, which is
fragrant, thick, and gummy. The outer bark is dark brown, with shallow
ridges and large, loose plates. The leaves are oblong, rounded at the
base, and are coarsely toothed. They are prominently veined and are dark
green, paler on the under side.


=Sassafras=

The _sassafras_ grows wild from Massachusetts to Florida, and west
through the Mississippi Valley. It is generally a small tree, from
thirty to fifty feet high, and is often found growing in dense thickets
in uncultivated fields. The edible bark is dark red-brown. It is thick
but not hard and is deeply ridged and scaled. The cracked bark is one
of the characteristics of the tree; it begins to split when the tree is
about three years old. The strong aromatic flavor is held by the bark,
the wood, the roots, the stems, and the leaves. I have never tasted the
fruit, which is berry-like, dark blue, and glossy, and is held by a
thick, scarlet calyx; but the birds are fond of it.

Sassafras tea was at one time considered the best of spring medicines
for purifying the blood, and the bark was brought to market cut in short
lengths and tied together in bunches.

The leaves are varied; on one twig there will sometimes be three
differently shaped leaves. Some will be oval, some with three lobes, and
some mitten-shaped; that is, an oval leaf with a side lobe like the
thumb of a mitten.


=Salads. Watercress=

There is no more refreshing salad than the _watercress_ gathered fresh
from a cool, running brook. It is a common plant, found almost anywhere
in streams and brooks. Its smooth green or brownish leaves lie on the
top of the water; they are compound, with from three to nine small
rounded leaflets. The flavor is peppery and pungent. Watercress
sandwiches are good. The white flowers are small and insignificant and
grow in a small cluster at the end of the stem.


=Dandelion=

A salad of tender, young _dandelion_ leaves is not to be despised, and
the plant grows everywhere. Only the very young leaves, that come up
almost white in the spring, are good. The flavor is slightly bitter with
the wholesome bitterness one likes in the spring of the year. These
young leaves are also good when cooked like spinach. The plant is so
common it does not really call for a description, and if you know it you
can skip the following:

Growing low on the ground, sometimes with leaves lying flat on the
surface, the dandelion sends up a hollow, leafless stem crowned with a
bright-yellow, many-petalled flower about the size of a silver
fifty-cent piece. The seed head is a round ball of white down. The
leaves are deeply notched, much like thistle leaves, but they have no
prickles.


