is weak from loss of blood, as you are, the cold seems to get into his
bones."

Fresh turfs were at once put on the smouldering fire, which one of the
men, leaning down before it, proceeded to blow lustily; and, although
much of the smoke made its way out through a hole in the roof, enough
lingered to render it difficult for Walter to breathe, while his eyes
watered with the sharp fumes. A kettle had been placed on the fire, and
in a very short time, a jar was produced from the corner of the hut, and
a horn of strong spirits and water mixed.

"Here are some cold praties, sir. It's all we have got cooked by us now,
but I can promise you a better meal, later on."

Walter ate the potatoes, and drank the warm mixture. The change from the
cold damp air outside, to the warm atmosphere of the hut, aided the
effects of the spirits; he was first conscious of a warm glow all over
him, and then the voices of the men seemed to grow indistinct.

"You had better stretch yourself on that pile of rushes," the man said,
as Walter gave a start, being on the point of rolling over. "Two or three
hours' sleep will make a man of you, and by that time dinner will be
ready, and your clothes dry."

Walter fell almost instantaneously off to sleep, and it was late in the
afternoon before he woke.

"I am afraid I must have slept a long time," he said, sitting up.

"You have had a fine sleep, surely," one of the men replied; "and it's
dinner and supper, all in one, that you will have."

Walter found his uniform and underclothes neatly folded up by his side,
and speedily dressed himself.

"That sleep has done me a world of good," he said. "I feel quite myself
again."

"That's right, yer honour. When you've had your food, I will make a shift
to dress that wound at the back of yer head. Be jabbers, it's a hard
knock you have had, and a mighty lot of blood you must have lost! Yer
clothes was just stiff with it; but I washed most of it out.

"And now, lads, off with the pot!"

A large pot was hanging over the fire, and, when the lid was taken off, a
smell very pleasant to Walter's nostrils arose. Four flat pieces of wood
served the purpose of plates, and, with a large spoon of the same
material, the man who had brought Walter to the hut, and who appeared to
be the leader of the party, ladled out portions of the contents. These
consisted of rabbit and pieces of beef, boiled up with potatoes and
onions. A large jug filled with water, and a bottle of spirits were
placed in the centre, with the horn which Walter had before used beside
it.

"We are short of crockery," the man said with a laugh. "Here are some
knives, but as for forks, we just have to do without them."

Walter enjoyed his meal immensely. After it was finished, the wooden
platters were removed, and the jug replenished.

"Now, your honour, will you tell us how you got away from the Protestant
rebels, and how was it they didn't make short work of you, when they
caught you? It's a puzzle to us entirely, for the Enniskilleners spare
neither man, woman, nor child."

Walter related the whole circumstances of his capture, imprisonment, and
escape.

"You fooled them nicely," the man said, admiringly. "Sure your honour's
the one to get out of a scrape--and you little more than a boy."

"And what are you doing here?" Walter asked, in return. "This seems a
wild place to live in."

"It's just that," the man said. "We belonged to Kilbally. The
Enniskilleners came that way, and burned it to the ground. They murdered
my wife and many another one. I was away cutting peat with my wife's
brother here. When we came back, everything was gone. A few had escaped
to the bogs, where they could not be followed; the rest was, every
mother's son of them, killed by those murdering villains. Your honour may
guess what we felt, when we got back. Thank God I had no children! We
buried the wife in the garden behind the house, and then started away and
joined a band of rapparees, and paid some of them back in their own coin.
Then, one day, the Enniskilleners fell on us, and most of us were killed.
Then we made our way back to the old village, and came up here and built
us this hut. It's a wonder to us how you got here; for there are bogs
stretching away in all directions, and how you made your way through them
bates us entirely."

"Yours is a sad story, but unfortunately a common one. And how have you
managed to live here?"

"There are plenty of potatoes, for the digging of 'em," the man said,
"for there are a score of ruined villages within a day's walk. As for
meat, there are cattle for the taking, wandering all over the country;
some have lately strayed away; but among the hills there are herds which
have run wild since the days when Cromwell made the country a desert. As
for spirits, I brew them myself. Barley as well as potatoes may be had
for the taking. Then, sometimes, the dog picks up a rabbit. Sometimes,
when we go down for potatoes, we light on a fowl or two; there's many a
one of them running wild among the ruins. As far as eating and drinking
goes, we never did better; and if I could forget the old cottage, and the
sight that met my eyes when I went back to it, I should do well enough,
but, night and day I am dreaming of it, and my heart is sore with longing
for vengeance."

"Why don't you join the army?" Walter asked. "There's plenty of room for
good men, and yesterday's affair has made some vacancies in my own troop.

"What do you say, lads? You would have a chance of crossing swords with
the Enniskilleners, and you could always come back here when the war is
over."

"What do you say, boys?" the man asked his companions. "I am just
wearying for a fight, and I could die contented, if I could but send a
few of those murdering villains to their place, before I go."

The other two men at once agreed. They talked well into the night, and
Walter heard many tales of the savage butchery of unoffending peasants,
by the men who professed to be fighting for religious liberty, which
shocked and sickened him.

It was arranged that they should start on the following morning. The men
said that they could guide him across country to Dundalk without
difficulty, and assured him that he would be little likely to meet with
the enemy, for that the whole country had been so wasted, by fire and
sword, as to offer but little temptation even to the most insatiable of
plunderers.

Accordingly, the next morning they set out, and arrived late that evening
at the camp. Walter found that his father and his followers were absent.
They had returned, much surprised at not having been rejoined by Walter's
party, but on their arrival they had found there the survivors of his
command, who had ridden straight for Dundalk.

After a few hours' stay, to rest the horses, Captain Davenant, with his
own men and two of the troops of cavalry, had ridden out in search of the
Enniskilleners. Larry, who had been almost wild with grief when the news
of the surprise, and, as he believed, the death of Walter, had been
brought in, had accompanied the cavalry.

It was late on the following afternoon before they rode into camp. Larry
was the first to come in, having received permission from Captain
Davenant to gallop on ahead. They had met the enemy, and had inflicted a
decisive defeat upon them, but the greater part had escaped, by taking to
the hills on their wiry little horses, which were able to traverse bogs
and quagmires impassable to the heavy troopers.

Captain Davenant had closely questioned two or three wounded men who fell
into his hands. These all declared that a young officer had been
captured, in the previous fight, that he had been severely wounded, and
carried away senseless, but that he had, in some extraordinary manner,
managed to escape that night. This story had greatly raised Captain
Davenant's hopes that Walter might yet be alive, a hope which he had not
before allowed himself, for a moment, to indulge in; and as he neared
Dundalk, he had readily granted leave for the impatient Larry to gallop
on ahead, and discover if any news had been received of Walter.

Larry's delight, at seeing his young master standing at the door of the
tent, was extreme. He gave a wild whoop, threw his cap high up into the
air, and then, without a word of greeting, turned his horse's head and
galloped away again, at the top of his speed, to carry the good news to
Captain Davenant. Half an hour later, the column rode into camp, and
Walter was clasped in his father's arms.

That evening, Walter's three companions were enrolled in the troop, and,
hearing that there were vacancies for fifteen more, volunteered to return
to the hills, and to bring back that number of men from the peasants
hiding there. This mission they carried out, and, by the end of the week,
Captain Davenant's troop was again made up to its full strength.

The unsuccessful result of the siege of Schomberg's camp greatly damped
Walter's enthusiasm. He had been engaged in two long and tedious
blockades, and, with the exception of some skirmishes round Derry, had
seen nothing whatever of fighting. Neither operation had been attended by
any decisive result. Both had inflicted extreme misery and suffering upon
the enemy, but in neither was the success aimed at attained. At the same
time, the novelty of the life, the companionship of his father and the
other officers of the regiment, and, not least, the good humour and fun
of his attendant, Larry, had made the time pass far more cheerfully to
him than to the majority of those in the army.

As before, when the army arrived at Dublin, Captain Davenant's troop was
posted in and around Bray, the greater portion of it being permitted to
reside in their own homes, until again wanted for active service. Walter,
on his return, was glad to find that his friend John Whitefoot had made
his way home from Derry, and their pleasant intercourse was at once
renewed.

Schomberg's army, when moved to healthy quarters and bountifully supplied
with all kinds of food and necessaries from England, speedily recovered
their health and discipline, and, in a very short time, were again in
condition to take the field.

Early in February, 1690, Brigadier Wolseley, with a detachment of
Enniskilleners and English, marched against Cavan. James had no longer an
army with which he could oppose Schomberg's enterprises. While the latter
had been recovering from the effects of his heavy losses, nothing had
been done to put the Irish army in a condition to take the field again.
They lacked almost every necessary for a campaign. No magazines had been
formed to supply them, when they should again advance; and so short of
forage were they, that it was considered impossible to make any move in
force, until the grass should grow sufficiently to enable the horses to
get into condition.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Berwick marched with eight hundred men from
Dublin, and Brigadier Nugent with a like force from West Meath and
Longford, and arrived at Cavan a few hours before the English reached the
town. The Irish force was composed entirely of infantry, with the
exception of two troops of cavalry. The English force consisted of seven
hundred foot, and three hundred cavalry.

As Cavan did not offer any advantages in the way of defence, the Duke of
Berwick moved his army out into the open field. The English lined the
hedges, and stood on the defensive. The Irish horse commenced the battle
with a furious charge on the Enniskilleners and dragoons, and drove them
from the field; but the English infantry maintained their position so
stoutly that, after a prolonged fight, the Irish retreated into a fort
near the town. The English and Enniskilleners entered Cavan, and at once
began to plunder the place.

Hearing what was going on, the Duke of Berwick sallied out from his fort
to attack them, and gained considerable advantage. Brigadier Wolseley,
being unable to restore discipline among the Enniskilleners, who formed
the great majority of his force, ordered the town to be set on fire in
several places. The troops then collected, and repulsed the Irish with
considerable loss.

The Duke of Berwick had two hundred killed, amongst whom were Brigadier
Nugent and many officers. As the Irish remained in possession of the
fort, and the town was almost entirely destroyed by fire, Brigadier
Wolseley returned with his force to Dundalk.

Shortly afterwards, the Fort of Charlemont was invested by a strong
detachment of Schomberg's army. Teigue O'Regan, the veteran governor,
defended the place with the greatest bravery, and did not capitulate
until the 14th of May, when the last ounce of provisions was consumed.
The garrison were allowed honourable terms, and the eight hundred men who
defended the place, with their arms and baggage, and some two hundred
women and children, were allowed to march away. The Enniskilleners
treated the Irish soldiers and their families with great brutality, as
they passed along, but Schomberg humanely ordered that a loaf of bread
should be given to each man at Armagh. The Irish army were not in
condition to render any assistance to the hard pressed garrison of
Charlemont, until after they had capitulated.

In the meantime, a great army, which was to be led by King William in
person, was being collected in England. It consisted of a strange medley,
collected from almost every European nation--English, Scotch, Irish
Protestants, French Huguenots, Dutch, Swedes, Danes, Brandenburghers,
Swiss, Norwegians, and Hessians. More than half, indeed, were foreigners.
All were well disciplined, armed, and clothed. In all, including the
force under Schomberg, the army amounted to forty-three thousand men, and
fifty cannon.

King William landed at Carrickfergus, on the 14th of June, and the
combined army at once began their southward march. Against this force,
King James collected but twenty thousand men. Of these, six thousand were
French. They had arrived, under the command of the Count de Lauzun, in
March, but they had not increased the numbers of King James's troops, for
he had been obliged to send, in exchange, an equal number of his
best-trained soldiers, under Lord Mountcashel, for service in France. Of
the fourteen thousand native troops, the Irish horse, which was raised
and officered by Irish gentlemen, was excellent, but the infantry was
composed for the most part of raw levies, but half armed, and the only
artillery consisted of twelve guns, which had arrived with the infantry
from France.

It was a sad parting, when Captain Davenant and Walter left home for the
front. The former was filled with gloomy forebodings. He could scarcely
hope that the ill-trained levies of James could succeed against the
vastly superior force, of disciplined troops, with whom they had now to
cope; especially as the latter were led by an able and energetic general,
while the former were hampered by the incompetence and vacillation of
James.

The day before they started, Captain Davenant rode over to the Whitefoots
and had a talk with Jabez.

"I know not how the campaign will go," he said. "If we are beaten, we
shall probably retire to the west, and maintain the war there. In that
case, Dublin will of course fall into the hands of William. Should this
be so, I will ask you to reverse our late position, and to extend what
assistance you can to my wife and mother. It may be that, if I do not
return here, none will disturb them. I have not made myself obnoxious to
my Protestant neighbours, and no one may take the trouble to bring it
before the notice of the English that I am absent, fighting with the army
of King James. If, however, they should do so, and the castle and what
remains of the estates be confiscated, will you lend what aid you can to
the ladies, and my younger boy, until I or Walter return from the war?"

"That will I do, right gladly," Jabez said, heartily. "Should I hear any
talk of what you speak of, I will go up to Dublin with some of our
friends and ministers, and we will testify to the good relations which
have existed between you and your Protestant neighbours, and entreat that
no measures be taken against your estate. Should we not prevail, be
assured that I will look after the comfort of the ladies, as if they were
of my own family.

"I can well understand that Mrs. Davenant, the elder, would not accept
the shelter of our roof, whatever her extremity. She belongs to the
generation of my father, and cannot forget the past; but I will see that
they are well lodged in Bray, and have every protection from molestation
and annoyance there. Should I find, as, alas! may be the case, that the
spirit of religious persecution is fiercely abroad, I will consult with
them, as to whether they may wish to cross the sea until you can join
them, and will make arrangements, as they may direct, for their passage."

"I am truly obliged to you," Captain Davenant said. "It will make me
comfortable to know that, whatsoever may befall me, they will have a
friend in these stormy times."

"Say nought about it," Jabez replied. "Did not you and your son succour
my boy in his extremity? If I do all, and more than all that I can in
this matter, I shall not deem that we are quits."

The Irish army moved forward to the Boyne, which William was approaching
from the north. James's officers endeavoured to dissuade him from setting
everything on the hazard of the battle. They represented that his army,
though now quite unequal to the contest, was rapidly improving in skill
and confidence in itself; that reinforcements were every day expected
from France, which would at least make them equal to the enemy in
numbers; that they were in want of arms, artillery, and stores, all which
might be expected also from France, in a short period; and that their
policy was clearly to protract the war, and wear out the enemy by a
contest of posts and sieges.

Unskilled as his troops might be in the field, they had proved themselves
steady and resolute in the defence of fortified places. They held all the
great fortresses of the kingdom, and it would be easy to provide for the
defence of these, and to occupy William's army in small affairs, till the
winter, when the climate would do execution upon the invaders, while the
Irish would suffer little. Then would be the time to fight.

In the meantime, it was urged, the intrigues the French were actively
