Thus bantering and chaffing each other, we turned our horses' heads in a
direction [v]oblique to that taken by the other hunters, who, with the
exception of Tom Tunison and Jack Herndon, now well up with the dogs,
were struggling along as best they could. For a half mile or more we
cantered down a lane, then turned into a stubble field, and made for a
hill crowned and skirted by a growth of blackjack, through which an
occasional pine had broken, as it seemed, in a vain but noble effort to
touch the sky. Once upon the summit of the hills, we had a majestic view
upon all sides. The fresh morning breezes blew crisp and cool and
bracing, but were not uncomfortable after the exercise we had taken; and
as the clouds that had muffled up the east dispersed themselves or were
dissolved, the generous sun spread layer upon layer of golden light upon
hill and valley and forest and stream.

Away to the left we could hear the hounds, and the music of their
voices, toyed with by the playful wind, rolled itself into melodious
little echoes that broke pleasantly upon the ear, now loud, now faint,
now far and now near. The first burst of speed, which had been terrific,
had settled down into a steady run, but I knew by the sound that the
pace was still tremendous, and I imagined I could hear the silvery
tongue of Flora as she led the eager pack. The cries of the hounds,
however, grew fainter and fainter, until presently they were lost in the
distance.

"He is making a straight shoot for the Turner [v]old fields, two miles
away," I remarked, by way of explanation.

"And pray, why are we here?" Miss de Compton asked.

"To be in at the death. (The fair de Compton smiled [v]sarcastically.)
In the Turner old fields the fox will make his grand double, gain upon
the dogs, head for yonder hill, and come down the ravine upon our
right. At the fence here, within plain view, he will attempt a trick
that has heretofore always been successful, and which has given him a
reputation as a trained fox. I depend upon the intelligence of Flora to
see through 'Old Sandy's' [v]strategy, but if she hesitates a moment, we
must set her right."

I spoke with the confidence of one having experience, and Miss de
Compton smiled and was content. We had little time for further
conversation, for in a few minutes I observed a dark shadow emerge from
the undergrowth on the opposite hill and slip quickly across the open
space of fallow land. It crossed the ravine that intersected the valley,
stole quietly through the stubble to the fence, and there paused a
moment, as if hesitating. In a low voice I called Miss de Compton's
attention to the figure, but she refused to believe that it was the same
fox we had aroused thirty minutes before. Howbeit, it was the
[v]veritable "Old Sandy" himself. I should have known him among a
thousand foxes. He was not in as fine feather as when, at the start, he
had swung his brush across Flora's nose--the pace had told on him--but
he still moved with an air of confidence.

Then and there Miss de Compton beheld a display of fox tactics shrewd
enough to excite the admiration of the most indifferent--a display of
cunning that seemed to be something higher than instinct.

"Old Sandy" paused only a moment. With a bound he gained the top of
the fence, stopped to pull something from one of his fore
feet--probably a cockle bur--and then carefully balancing himself,
proceeded to walk the fence. By this time, the music of the dogs was
again heard in the distance, but "Old Sandy" took his time.
One--two--three--seven--ten--twenty panels of the fence were cleared.
Pausing, he again subjected his fore feet to examination, and licked
them carefully. Then he proceeded on his journey along the fence until
he was at least one hundred yards from where he left the ground. Here
he paused for the first time, gathered himself together, leaped
through the air, and rushed away. As he did so, the full note of the
pack burst upon our ears as the hounds reached the brow of the hill
from the lowlands on the other side.

"Upon my word!" exclaimed Miss de Compton; "that fox ought to go free. I
shall beg Mr. Tunison--"

But before she finished her sentence the dogs came into view, and I
could hardly restrain a shout of triumph as I saw Flora running easily
and unerringly far to the front. Behind her, led by Captain--and so
close together that, as Uncle Plato afterward remarked, "You mout kivver
de whole caboodle wid a hoss-blanket"--were the remainder of the Tunison
kennel, while the Jasper county hounds were strung out behind in wild
but heroic confusion. I felt strongly tempted to give the view-halloo,
and push "Old Sandy" to the wall at once, but I knew that the fair de
Compton would regard the exploit with severe [v]reprobation forever
after. Across the ravine and to the fence the dogs came, their voices,
as they got nearer, crashing through the silence like a chorus of
demons.

Now was the critical moment. If Flora should fail me--!

Several of the older dogs topped the rails, and scattered through the
undergrowth. Flora came over with them, made a small circle, with her
sensitive nose to the damp earth, and then went rushing down the fence.
Past the point where "Old Sandy" took his flying leap she ran, turned
suddenly to the left, and came swooping back in a wide circle. I had
barely time to warn Miss de Compton that she must prepare to do a little
rapid riding, when my favorite, with a fierce cry of delight that
thrilled me through and through, picked up the blazing [v]drag, and away
we went with a scream and a shout. I felt in my very bones that "Old
Sandy" was doomed. I had never seen Flora so prompt and eager; I had
never observed the scent to be better. Everything was auspicious.

We went like the wind. Miss de Compton rode well, and the long stretches
of stubble land through which the chase led were unbroken by ditch or
fence. The pace of the hounds was simply terrific, and I knew that no
fox on earth could long stand up before the white demon that led the
hunt with such splendor.

Five--ten--fifteen minutes we rushed at the heels of the rearmost dogs,
until, suddenly, we found ourselves in the midst of the pack. The scent
was lost! Flora ran about in wide circles, followed by the greater
portion of the dogs. To the left, to the right they went. At that
moment, chancing to look back, I caught a glimpse of "Old Sandy," broken
down and bedraggled, making his way toward a clump of briars. He had
played his last [v]trump and lost. Pushed by the dogs, he had dropped in
his tracks and literally allowed them to run over him. I rode at him
with a shout; there was a short, sharp race, and in a few moments [v]_La
Mort_ was sounded over the famous fox on the horn that the Jasper county
boys did not win.

JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS.


=HELPS TO STUDY=

     This gives a good picture of a fox hunt in the South in the long
     ago. Tell what you like best about it. Who is telling the story?
     Was he young or old? How do you know? What opinion do you form of
     the "fair de Compton"? See if you can get an old man, perhaps a
     negro, to tell you of a fox hunt he has seen.

SUPPLEMENTARY READING

     In Ole Virginia--Thomas Nelson Page.
     Old Creole Days--George W. Cable.
     Swallow Barn--John P. Kennedy.
     The Prophet of the Great Smoky Mountains--Charles Egbert Craddock.


FOOTNOTE:

[177-*] From the _Atlanta Constitution_.




RAIN AND WIND


    I hear the hoofs of horses
      Galloping over the hill,
    Galloping on and galloping on,
      When all the night is shrill
    With wind and rain that beats the pane--
      And my soul with awe is still.

    For every dripping window
      Their headlong rush makes bound,
    Galloping up and galloping by,
      Then back again and around,
    Till the gusty roofs ring with their hoofs,
      And the draughty cellars sound.

    And then I hear black horsemen
      Hallooing in the night;
    Hallooing and hallooing,
      They ride o'er vale and height,
    And the branches snap and the shutters clap
      With the fury of their flight.

    All night I hear their gallop,
      And their wild halloo's alarm;
    The tree-tops sound and vanes go round
      In forest and on farm;
    But never a hair of a thing is there--
      Only the wind and the storm.

    MADISON JULIUS CAWEIN.




THE SOUTHERN SKY


Presently the stars begin to peep out, timidly at first, as if to see
whether the elements here below had ceased their strife, and if the
scene on earth be such as they, from bright spheres aloft, may shed
their sweet influences upon. Sirius, or that blazing world Argus, may be
the first watcher to send down a feeble ray; then follow another and
another, all smiling meekly; but presently, in the short twilight of the
latitude, the bright leaders of the starry host blaze forth in all their
glory, and the sky is decked and spangled with superb brilliants.

In the twinkling of an eye, and faster than the admiring gazer can tell,
the stars seem to leap out from their hiding-places. By invisible hands,
and in quick succession, the constellations are hung out; first of all,
and with dazzling glory, in the azure depths of space appears the great
Southern Cross. That shining symbol lends a holy grandeur to the scene,
making it still more impressive.

Alone in the night-watch, after the sea-breeze has sunk to rest, I have
stood on deck under those beautiful skies, gazing, admiring, rapt. I
have seen there, above the horizon at once and shining with a splendor
unknown to other latitudes, every star of the [v]first magnitude--save
only six--that is contained in the catalogue of the one hundred
principal fixed stars.

There lies the city on the seashore, wrapped in sleep. The sky looks
solid, like a vault of steel set with diamonds. The stillness below is
in harmony with the silence above, and one almost fears to speak, lest
the harsh sound of the human voice, reverberating through those vaulted
"chambers of the south," should wake up echo and drown the music that
fills the soul.

Orion is there, just about to march down into the sea; but Canopus and
Sirius, with Castor and his twin brother, and [v]Procyon, Argus, and
Regulus--these are high up in their course; they look down with great
splendor, smiling peacefully as they precede the Southern Cross on its
western way. And yonder, farther still, away to the south, float the
Magellanic clouds, and the "Coal Sacks"--those mysterious, dark spots in
the sky, which seem as though it had been rent, and these were holes in
the "azure robe of night," looking out into the starless, empty, black
abyss beyond. One who has never watched the southern sky in the
stillness of the night, after the sea-breeze with its turmoil is done,
can have no idea of its grandeur, beauty, and loveliness.

MATTHEW FONTAINE MAURY.


=HELPS TO STUDY=

     Do you know any of the stars or the constellations mentioned? Some
     of them are seen in our latitude, but the southern sky Maury
     describes is south of the equator. The "Southern Cross" is seen
     only below the equator. The "Magellan Clouds" are not far from the
     South Pole.




DAFFODILS


    I wandered lonely as a cloud
      That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
    When all at once I saw a crowd,
      A host of golden daffodils,--
    Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
    Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

    Continuous as the stars that shine
      And twinkle on the milky way,
    They stretched in never-ending line
      Along the margin of the bay.
    Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
    Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

    The waves beside them danced, but they
      Outdid the sparkling waves in glee,--
    A poet could not but be gay
      In such a [v]jocund company.
    I gazed, and gazed, but little thought
    What wealth the show to me had brought.

    For oft, when on my couch I lie,
      In vacant or in pensive mood,
    They flash upon that inward eye
      Which is the bliss of solitude;
    And then my heart with pleasure fills,
    And dances with the daffodils.

    WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.




DAWN


I had occasion, a few weeks since, to take the early train from
Providence to Boston; and for this purpose I rose at two o'clock in the
morning. Everything around was wrapped in darkness and hushed in
silence. It was a mild, serene, midsummer night,--the sky was without a
cloud,--the winds were [v]whist. The moon, then in the last quarter, had
just risen, and the stars shone with a luster but little affected by her
presence.

Jupiter, two hours high, was the herald of the day; the [v]Pleiades,
just above the horizon, shed their sweet influence in the east; Lyra
sparkled near the [v]zenith; Andromeda veiled her newly discovered
glories from the naked eye in the south; the steady Pointers, far
beneath the pole, looked meekly up from the depths of the north to their
sovereign.

Such was the glorious spectacle as I entered the train. As we proceeded,
the timid approach of twilight became more perceptible; the intense blue
of the sky began to soften; the smaller stars, like little children,
went first to rest; the sister-beams of the Pleiades soon melted
together; but the bright constellations of the west and north remained
unchanged. Steadily the wondrous transfiguration went on. Hands of
angels, hidden from mortal eyes, shifted the scenery of the heavens; the
glories of night dissolved into the glories of the dawn.

The blue sky now turned more softly gray; the great watch-stars shut up
their holy eyes; the east began to kindle. Faint streaks of purple soon
blushed along the sky; the whole celestial concave was filled with the
inflowing tides of the morning light, which came pouring down from above
in one great ocean of radiance; till at length, as we reached the Blue
Hills, a flash of purple fire blazed out from above the horizon, and
turned the dewy teardrops of flower and leaf into rubies and diamonds.
In a few seconds, the everlasting gates of the morning were thrown wide
open, and the lord of day, arrayed in glories too severe for the gaze of
man, began his state.

I do not wonder at the superstition of the ancient [v]Magians, who, in
the morning of the world, went up to the hilltops of Central Asia, and,
ignorant of the true God, adored the most glorious work of His hand. But
I am filled with amazement, when I am told that, in this enlightened age
and in the heart of the Christian world, there are persons who can
witness this daily manifestation of the power and wisdom of the Creator,
and yet say in their hearts, "There is no God."

EDWARD EVERETT.


=HELPS TO STUDY=

     What experience did Everett describe? What impresses the mood of
     the early morning? In what latitude did Everett live? What stars
     and constellations did he mention? Trace the steps by which he
     pictured the sunrise. Why did he not wonder at the belief of the
     "ancient Magians"? What thought does cause amazement?




SPRING


    Spring, with that nameless [v]pathos in the air
    Which dwells with all things fair--
    Spring, with her golden suns and silver rain,
    Is with us once again.

    Out in the lonely woods, the jasmine burns
    Its fragrant lamps, and turns
    Into a royal court, with green festoons,
    The banks of dark [v]lagoons.

    In the deep heart of every forest tree,
    The blood is all aglee;
    And there's a look about the leafless bowers,
    As if they dreamed of flowers.

    Yet still, on every side we trace the hand
    Of Winter in the land,
    Save where the maple reddens on the lawn,
    Flushed by the season's dawn;

    Or where, like those strange [v]semblances we find
    That age to childhood bind,
    The elm puts on, as if in Nature's scorn,
    The brown of Autumn corn.

    [Illustration: The Woods in Spring]

    As yet the turf is dark, although you know
    That, not a span below,
    A thousand germs are groping through the gloom,
    And soon will burst their tomb.

    In gardens, you may note, amid the dearth,
    The crocus breaking earth;
    And near the snowdrop's tender white and green,
    The violet in its screen.

    But many gleams and showers need must pass
    Along the budding grass,
    And weeks go by, before the enamored South
    Shall kiss the rose's mouth.

    Still there's a sense of blossoms yet unborn,
    In the sweet airs of morn;
    One almost looks to see the very street
    Grow purple at his feet.

    At times, a fragrant breeze comes floating by,
    And brings, you know not why,
    A feeling as when eager crowds await
    Before a palace gate

    Some wondrous pageant; and you scarce would start,
    If from a beech's heart,
    A blue-eyed [v]Dryad, stepping forth, should say,
    "Behold me! I am May!"

    HENRY TIMROD.




AMONG THE CLIFFS


It was a critical moment. There was a stir other than that of the wind
among the pine needles and dry leaves that carpeted the ground.

The wary wild turkeys lifted their long necks with that peculiar cry of
half-doubting surprise so familiar to a sportsman, then all was still
for an instant. The world was steeped in the noontide sunlight, the
mountain air tasted of the fresh [v]sylvan fragrance that pervaded the
forest, the foliage blamed with the red and gold of autumn, the distant
[v]Chilhowee heights were delicately blue.

That instant's doubt sealed the doom of one of the flock. As the turkeys
stood in momentary suspense, the sunlight gilding their bronze feathers
to a brighter sheen, there was a movement in the dense undergrowth. The
flock took suddenly to wing,--a flash from among the leaves, the sharp
crack of a rifle, and one of the birds fell heavily over the bluff and
down toward the valley.

The young mountaineer's exclamation of triumph died in his throat. He
came running to the verge of the crag, and looked down ruefully into the
