commendations."

"And more than that," the prince put in, "I myself in no small
degree owe my life to them; for when I was pinned down by my horse,
at Saint Denis, they were among the foremost of those who rushed to
my rescue. Busy as I was, I had time to mark well how stoutly and
valiantly they fought.

"Moreover, Monsieur D'Arblay has spoken to me in the highest terms
of both of them, but especially of Monsieur Fletcher; who, as he
declared, saved his life and that of the Count de Laville, by
obtaining their release from the dungeons of Toulouse, by some such
device as that he has used at Niort.

"And now, gentlemen, supper is served. Let us go in at once. We
must have already tried the patience of our good hosts, who are
doing their best to entertain us right royally; and whom I hope to
relieve of part of the burden, in a very few days.

"Monsieur Fletcher, you shall sit between the Admiral and myself;
for you have told us your story but briefly, and afterwards I would
fain question you farther, as to that affair at Toulouse."

The two nobles, indeed, inquired very minutely into all the
incidents of the fight. By closely questioning him, they learned
that the idea of forcing the peasants to lend their horses and
carts, to convey the Huguenot villagers' goods to Laville, was his
own, and occurred to him just as he was about to start from the
first village he entered.

"The success of military operations," the Admiral said, "depends
greatly upon details. It is one thing to lay out a general plan;
another to think, amid the bustle and excitement of action, of the
details upon which success so largely depends; and your thought of
making the men, who were about to join in the slaughter of their
fellow villagers, the means of conveying their goods and chattels
to a place of safety, is one that shows that your head is cool, and
able to think and plan in moments when most men would be carried
away by the excitement of the occasion. I am pleased with you, sir;
and shall feel that, if I have any matter on hand demanding
discretion and prudence, as well as bravery, I can, in spite of
your years, confidently intrust you with it.

"Are you thinking of returning tomorrow to Laville?"

"I was intending to do so, sir. It may be that the people of Niort
may endeavour to revenge the stroke that we have dealt them, and
the forty men with me are necessary for the defence of the
chateau."

"I do not think there is any fear of an attack from Niort," the
Admiral said. "They will know, well enough, that our people are
flocking here from all parts; and will be thinking of defence,
rather than of attack, knowing that, while we are almost within
striking distance, the royal army is not in a condition, as yet, to
march from Paris.

"Where are you resting for the night?"

"My troops are down by the shore, sir. Seeing how full the town
was, I thought it was not worth while to look for quarters; and
intended to sleep down there among them, in readiness for an early
start."

"Then, after supper, I would that you go down to them, and tell
them not to be surprised if you do not join them till morning. Then
return hither for the night. It may be that we may want to speak to
you again."

Late in the evening a page came to Philip and, saying that the
prince wished to speak with him, conducted him to a small
apartment, where he found Conde and the Admiral.

"We have a mission with which we would intrust you, if you are
willing to undertake it," the Admiral said. "It is a dangerous one,
and demands prudence and resource, as well as courage. It seems to
the prince and myself that you possess these qualities; and your
youth may enable you to carry out the mission, perhaps, more easily
than another would do.

"It is no less than to carry a letter, from the prince and myself,
to the Queen of Navarre. She is at present at Nerac. Agents of
Catharine have been trying to persuade her to go with her son to
Paris; but fortunately, she discovered that there was a plot to
seize her, and the young prince her son, at the same time that we
were to be entrapped in Burgundy. De Lossy, who was charged with
the mission of seizing her at Tarbes, was fortunately taken ill;
and she has made her way safely up to Nerac.

"All Guyenne swarms with her enemies. D'Escars and four thousand
Catholics lie scattered along from Perigueux to Bordeaux, and other
bands lie between Perigueux and Tulle. If once past those dangers,
her course is barred at Angouleme, Cognac, and Saintes.

"I want her to know that I will meet her on the Charente. I do not
say that I shall be able to take those three towns, but I will
besiege them; and she will find me outside one of them, if I cannot
get inside. It is all important that she should know this, so that
she may judge whither to direct her course, when once safely across
the river Dronne and out of Guyenne.

"I dare not send a written despatch for, were it to fall into the
hands of the Catholics, they would at once strengthen the garrisons
of the town on the Charente; and would keep so keen a watch, in
that direction, that it would be impossible for the queen to pass.
I will give you a ring, a gift from the queen herself, in token
that you are my messenger, and that she can place every confidence
in you.

"I will leave to you the choice of how you will proceed. You can
take some of your men-at-arms with you, and try to make your way
through with a sudden dash; but as the bridges and fords will be
strongly watched, I think that it will be much wiser for you to go
in disguise, either with or without a companion. Certainty is of
more importance than speed. I found a communication here, sent by
the queen before she started to the authorities of the town, saying
that she should try to make her way to them; and she knew that the
prince and myself would also come here, if we found our personal
safety menaced in Burgundy. She foresaw that her difficulties would
be great; and requested that, if we arrived here, we would send her
word as to our movements, in order that she might accommodate hers
to them.

"I have chosen you for several reasons, one being, as I have told
you, that I see you are quick at forming a judgment, and cool in
danger. The second is that you will not be known to any of the
enemy whom you may meet on your way. Most of the Huguenots here
come from the neighbouring provinces, and would almost certainly be
recognized, by Catholics from the same neighbourhood. Of course you
understand that, if suspicion should fall upon you of being a
messenger from this place, you will have but a short shrift."

"I am quite ready to do my best, sir, to carry out your mission.
Personally I would rather ride fast, with half a dozen men-at-arms;
but doubtless, as you say, the other would be the surest way. I
will take with me my servant, who is shrewd and full of resources
and, being a native of these parts, could pass as a countryman
anywhere. My horses and my four men I will leave here, until my
return. The troop will, of course, start in the morning for
Laville."

"We have another destination for them," the prince said. "A
messenger rode yesterday to Laville, to bid the young count start,
the day after tomorrow, with every man he can raise, to join me
before Niort; for which place I set out, tomorrow at midday. Of
course we had no idea that he had already come to blows with that
city; but we resolved to make its capture our first enterprise,
seeing that it blocks the principal road from Paris hither, and is
indeed a natural outpost of La Rochelle. Niort taken, we shall push
on and capture Parthenay, which still further blocks the road, and
whose possession will keep a door open for our friends from
Brittany, Normandy, and the north. When those places are secured
and garrisoned, we can then set about clearing out the Catholics
from the towns to the south."

"Very well, sir. Then I will give orders to them that they are to
accompany your force tomorrow, and join the count before Niort."

"Here is a large map of the country you will have to traverse. You
had best take it into the next room, and study it carefully;
especially the course and direction of the rivers, and the points
of crossing. It would be shorter, perhaps, if you could have gone
by boat south to Arcachon and thence made your way to Nerac; but
there are wide dunes to be crossed, and pine forests to be
traversed, where a stranger might well die of hunger and thirst.
The people, too, are wild and savage, and look upon strangers with
great suspicion; and would probably have no compunction in cutting
your throat. Moreover, the Catholics have a flotilla at the mouth
of the Gironde, and there would be difficulty and danger in
passing.

"You will, of course, make all speed that you can. I shall
presently see some of the council of the town and, if they tell me
that a boat can take you down the coast as far as the Seudre, some
ten miles north of the mouth of the Gironde, you will avoid the
difficulty of crossing the Boutonne at Saint Jean d'Angely, and the
Charente at Saintes or Cognac. It would save you a quarter of your
journey. I expect them shortly, so that by the time you have
studied the map, I shall be able to tell you more."

An hour later, Philip was again summoned. To his surprise, he found
Maitre Bertram with the prince.

"Our good friend here tells me that he is already acquainted with
you, Monsieur Fletcher. He will house you for tonight, and at
daybreak put you on board a small coasting vessel, which will carry
you down to the mouth of the Seudre. He will also procure for you
whatever disguises you may require, for yourself and your
attendant.

"He has relations with traders in many of the towns. Some of these
are openly of our faith, others are time servers, or are not yet
sufficiently convinced to dare persecution and death for its sake.
He will give you the names of some of these; and you may, at a
push, be able to find shelter with them, obtain a guide, or receive
other assistance.

"Here is the ring. Hide it carefully on the way for, were you
searched, a ring of this value would be considered a proof that you
were not what you seemed.

"You quite understand my message. I pray the queen to trust to no
promises but, using all care to avoid those who would stop her, to
come north as speedily as possible, before the toils close round
her; and you will assure her that she will find me on the Charente,
and that I shall have either taken Cognac, or be occupied in
besieging it."

"If I fail, sir, it shall be from no lack of prudence on my part;
and I hope to prove myself worthy of the high honour that the
prince and yourself have done me, in selecting me for the mission."

"Farewell then," the Admiral said. "I trust that, in ten days'
time, I shall meet you at Cognac. I have arranged with Maitre
Bertram, who will furnish you with the funds necessary for your
expedition."

Philip bowed deeply to the two nobles, and retired with the
merchant. He had directed Pierre to remain among the lackeys at the
foot of the grand staircase, as he would be required presently; and
as he passed through, he beckoned to him to follow.

"You have seen my horses comfortably stabled, Pierre?"

"It was done an hour since, monsieur."

"And my four men understand that they are to remain here, in charge
of them, until I return?"

"Yes, sir. Their own horses are also bestowed here, and mine."

"Very well. We sleep tonight at Maitre Bertram's."

"I am right glad to hear it, sir; for truly this castle is full
from the top to the bottom, and I love not to sleep in a crowd."

"You still have Pierre with you?" the merchant said.

"Yes, and he has turned out an excellent servant. It was a
fortunate day, for me, when I insisted on taking him in spite of
your warning. He is a merry varlet, and yet knows when to joke, and
when to hold his peace. He is an excellent forager--"

"Ah! That I warrant he is," Maitre Bertram put in;

"--And can cook a dinner or a supper with any man in the army. I
would not part with him on any consideration."

"A fellow of that sort, Master Fletcher, is sure to turn out either
a rogue or a handy fellow. I am glad to hear that he has proved the
latter.

"Here we are at the house. At ordinary times we should all be abed
and asleep at this hour, but the place is turned upside down since
the prince and the Admiral arrived; for every citizen has taken in
as many men as his house will hold. I have four gentlemen and
twenty of their retainers lodging here; but I will take you to my
own den, where we can talk undisturbed; for there is much to say
and to arrange, as to this expedition of yours, in which there is
more peril than I should like to encounter. However, that is your
affair. You have undertaken it, and there is nought for me to do,
save to try and make it as successful as possible.

"You have already been studying the map, I hear, and know something
of the route. I have a good map myself, and we will follow the way
together upon it. It would be as well to see whether your rascal
knows anything of the country. In some of his wanderings, he may
have gone south."

"I will question him," Philip said and, reopening the door of the
room, he told Pierre, whom he had bidden follow him upstairs, to
enter.

"I am going down into Gascony, Pierre. It matters not, at present,
upon what venture. I am going to start tomorrow at daylight, in a
craft of Maitre Bertram's, which will land me ten miles this side
the mouth of the Gironde; by which, as you will see, I avoid having
to cross the Charente, where the bridges are all in the hands of
the Catholics. I am going in disguise, and I propose taking you
with me."

"It is all one to me, sir. Where you go, I am ready to follow you.
I have been at Bordeaux, but no farther south.

"I don't know whether you think that three would be too many. Your
men are all Gascons, and one or other of them might know the part
of the country you wish to travel."

"I had not thought of it," Philip said; "but the idea is a good
one. It would depend greatly upon our disguises."

"Do you travel as a man-at-arms, or as a countryman, or a pedlar,
or maybe as a priest, sir?"

"Not as a priest, assuredly," Philip laughed. "I am too young for
that."

"Too young to be in full orders, but not too young to be a
theological student: one going from a theological seminary, at
Bordeaux, to be initiated at Perigueux, or further south to Agen."

Philip shook his head.

"I should be found out by the first priest who questioned me."

"Then, sir, we might go with sacks of ware on our backs, as
travelling pedlars; or, on the other hand, we might be on our way
to take service under the Catholic leaders. If so, we might carry
steel caps and swords, which methinks would suit you better than
either a priest's cowl or a pedlar's pack.

"In that case there might well be three of us, or even four. Two of
your men-at-arms would go as old soldiers, and you and I as young
relations of theirs, anxious to turn our hands to soldiering. Once
in Gascony, their dialect would help us rarely, and our story
should pass without difficulty; and even on the way it would not be
without its use, for the story that they have been living near La
Rochelle but, owing to the concourse of Huguenots, could no longer
stay there; and were therefore making south to see, in the first
place, their friends at home; and then to take service, under some
Catholic lord, would sound likely enough."

"I don't know that we can contrive a better scheme than that,
Maitre Bertram. What do you think?"

"It promises well," the trader agreed.

"Do you know what part of Gascony these men come from, Pierre?"

"They come from near Dax."

"That matters little," Philip said, "seeing that it is only to the
south of Guyenne that we are bound. Still, they will probably have
traversed the province often; and in any case there should be no
trouble in finding our way, seeing that Agen lies on the Garonne,
and we shall only have to keep near the river, all the way from the
point where we are landed. Our great difficulty will be in crossing
the Dordogne, the Dronne, and the Lot, all of which we are likely
to find guarded."

"If you can manage to cross the Garonne here, near Langon," the
merchant said, placing his finger on the map, "you would avoid the
two last rivers and, by keeping west of Bazas, you would be able to
reach Nerac without difficulty. You have to cross somewhere, and it
might be as easy there as at Agen."

"That is so," Philip agreed. "At any rate, we will try there first.

"I don't know which of the men I had best take with me. They are
all shrewd fellows, as Gascons generally are, so I don't know how
to make my choice."

"I don't think there is much difference, sir," Pierre said. "I have
seen enough of them to know, at least, that they are all honest
fellows."

"I would let them decide the matter for themselves," Philip said.
"Some might like to go, and some to stay behind. If I chose two,
the others might consider themselves slighted.

"Do you know where they have bestowed themselves, Pierre?"

"Down in the stables with the horses, sir. I could pretty well put
my hand on them, in the dark."

"Well, go and fetch them hither, then. Say nothing about the
business on which they are required."

In a quarter of an hour Pierre returned, with the four men. Philip
explained to them, briefly, that he wanted two of them to journey
with him, on a mission of some danger, through Guyenne.

"I have sent for you all," he said, "in order that you might
arrange among yourselves which two shall go. Therefore do you
settle the matter, and if you cannot agree, then cast lots and
leave it to fortune. Only, as you are two sets of brothers, these
had best either go or stay together; therefore if you cast lots do
it not singly, but two against two."

"We may as well do it at once, Monsieur Philip," Eustace said. "I
know, beforehand, that we would all choose to follow you; therefore
if you will put two papers into my steel cap, one with my name, and
one with Jacques', Pierre shall draw. If he takes out the one with
my name, then I and Henri will go with you. If he draws Jacques,
then he and Roger shall go."

This was done, and Jacques and Roger won.

"You will have plenty to do, while we are away," Philip said to
Eustace. "There will be seven horses to look after, including my
chargers."

"How long are you likely to be away, sir?"

"I may return in ten days. I may be away three weeks. Should any
evil chance befall us, you will take the horses over to Laville and
hand them over to my cousin; who will, I am sure, gladly take you
and Henri into his service.

"As we leave here at daybreak, you, Jacques, and your brother Roger
had better wrap yourselves up in your cloaks, and lie down in the
hall below. I would that we could, in the morning, procure clothes
for you, older and more worn than those you have on. You are going
as men who have formerly served; but have since been living in a
village, tilling the land, just as you were when you first joined
me."

"Then we have the very clothes ready to hand," Jacques said. "When
we joined you, we left ours with a friend in the town, to hold for
us. There is no saying how long military service may last and, as
our clothes were serviceable, we laid them by. We can go round and
get them, the first thing in the morning; leaving these we wear in
his care, until we return."

"That will do well; but you must be up early, for it is important
we should make our start as soon as possible."

"I also have my old clothes held in keeping for me, by one who
worked in the stable with me," Pierre said. "A man who is going to
the war can always find others ready to take charge of whatever he
may leave behind, knowing full well that the chances are that he
will never return to claim them."

"That simplifies matters," Maitre Bertram said. "There remains only
your dress, Monsieur Philip; and I shall have no difficulty in
getting, from my own knaves, a doublet, cloak, and other things to
suit you. I have plenty of steel caps and swords, in my warehouse."

"You had best leave your breast pieces here," Philip said to the
men. "The number of those who carry them is small, and it will be
enough to have steel caps and swords. We are going to walk fast and
far, and the less weight we carry, the better."



Chapter 10: The Queen Of Navarre.


The sun had just risen when Maitre Bertram, accompanied by four men
in the attire of peasants, went down to the port. Two of them wore
steel caps, and had the appearance of discharged soldiers. The
other two looked like fresh countrymen, and wore the low caps in
use by the peasantry on their heads, carrying steel caps slung by
cords from their shoulder. All four had swords stuck into their
leathern belts. Similar groups might have been seen in hundreds,
all over France, making their way to join the forces of the
contending parties.

[Illustration: Philip and his followers embarking.]

The craft upon which the trader led them was a small one, of four
or five tons burden, manned by three men and a boy.

"You understand, Johan, if you meet with no interruption, you will
land your passengers at the mouth of the Seudre; but if you should
come across any of the craft that have been hovering about the
coast, and find that they are too fast for you, put them ashore
wherever they may direct. If you are too hotly chased to escape,
after landing them, you had best also disembark; and make your way
back by land, as best you can, leaving them to do what they will
with the boat. As like as not they would cut your throats, did they
take you; and if not, would want to know whom you had landed, and
other matters.

"I do not want to lose the craft, which has done me good service in
her time, and is a handy little coaster; but I would rather lose
it, than that you should fall into the hands of the Bordeaux boats
and get into trouble. The fact that you made for shore, to land
passengers, would be sufficient to show that those passengers were
of some importance.

"Now, good luck to you, Master Philip. I trust to see you back here
again, before long."

They kept straight out from La Rochelle to the Isle of Oleron, and
held along close to its shore, lest boats coming out from the
Charente might overhaul them. From the southern end of the island,
it was only a run of some eight miles into the mouth of the Seudre.
A brisk wind had blown, and they made the forty miles' voyage in
seven hours. They could see several white sails far to the south,
as they ran in; but had met with nothing to disquiet them, on the
way. They were rowed ashore in the little boat the craft carried,
and landed among some sand hills; among which they at once struck
off, and walked briskly for a mile inland, so as to avoid any
questionings, from persons they might meet, as to where they had
come from.

Jacques and his brother carried bags slung over their shoulders,
and in these was a store of food with which the merchant had
provided them, and two or three flasks of good wine; so that they
might make a day's journey, at least, without having to stop to
purchase food.

It was two o'clock when they landed, and they had therefore some
five hours of daylight; and before this had faded they had passed
Royan, situated on the Gironde. They did not approach the town but,
keeping behind it, came down upon the road running along the shore,
three miles beyond it; and walked along it until about ten o'clock,
by which time all were thoroughly tired with their unaccustomed
exercise. Leaving the road, they found a sheltered spot among the
sand hills, ate a hearty meal, and then lay down to sleep.

They were afoot again, at daylight. The country was sparsely
populated. They passed through a few small villages, but no place
of any importance until, late in the afternoon, they approached
Blaye, after a long day's tramp. As they thought that here they
might learn something, of the movements of the large body of
Catholic troops Philip had heard of as guarding the passages of the
Dordogne, they determined to enter the town.

They passed through the gates, half an hour before they were
closed, and entered a small cabaret. Here, calling for some bread
and common wine, they sat down in a corner, and listened to the
talk of the men who were drinking there. It was all about the
movements of troops, and the scraps of news that had come in from
all quarters.

"I don't know who they can be all arming against," one said. "The
Queen of Navarre has no troops and, even if a few hundreds of
Huguenots joined her, what could she do? As to Conde and the
Admiral, they have been hunted all over France, ever since they
left Noyers. They say they hadn't fifty men with them. It seems to
me they are making a great fuss about nothing."

"I have just heard a report," a man who had, two or three minutes
before, entered the room said, "to the effect that they arrived
four days since at La Rochelle, with some five or six hundred men,
who joined them on the way."

An exclamation of surprise broke from his hearers.

"Then we shall have trouble," one exclaimed. "La Rochelle is a hard
nut to crack, in itself; and if the prince and the Admiral have got
in, the Huguenots from all the country round will rally there, and
may give a good deal of trouble, after all. What can the Catholic
lords have been about, that they managed to let them slip through
their hands in that way? They must have seen, for some time, that
they were making for the one place where they would be safe; unless
indeed they were making down for Navarre. That would account for
the way in which all the bridges and fords across the rivers are
being watched."

"I expect they are watching both ways," another said. "These
Huguenots always seem to know what is going on, and it is likely
enough that, while our people all thought that Conde was making for
Germany, there was not a Huguenot throughout France who did not
know he was coming west to La Rochelle; and if so, they will be
moving in all directions to join him there, and that is why
D'Escars has got such a force at all the bridges. I heard, from a
man who came in yesterday, that the Lot is watched just as sharply,
from the Garonne through Cahors right on to Espalion; and he had
heard that at Agen, and along the Aveyron, the troops hold the
bridges and fords as if they expected an enemy.

"No doubt, as soon as they hear that Conde and his party are in La
