little rascal, who had no proper respect for his superiors."

Dora did not join in the conversation. Her colour came and went, and she
kept glancing at the handkerchief which Tom Robinson was fluttering
about in his hand.

It was May who stopped short and cried in fresh dismay, "There is blood
on your handkerchief; I believe you have been bitten. What shall we do?"

"What should you do, Miss May?" he answered with a laugh. "It is only a
minute impression left by the fine teeth of your friend. You would have
it that he knew me a little while ago, and it seems we were destined to
be more intimately acquainted."

"Come home with us this minute," cried May, so dead in earnest, that
she grasped his arm, and made as if she would have dragged him forward.
"Father will dress it and heal it. I am so sorry, so ashamed, though
Tray did not know what he was doing."

He laughed again quite merrily, as it sounded. "If Tray did not know, he
did his small best to get rid of me. I daresay I was not treating him
with much ceremony. I am afraid I gave his tail as sharp a pinch as I
could administer before I could get at his neck. No, I am not going home
with you; thanks for the invitation. Do you wish Dr. Millar to think me
crazy? Do you apply to your father for medical assistance when you give
yourself a pin-prick?"

"But the bite of a dog is very different, though Tray is the dog,"
moaned May.

"Tray is in excellent health and spirits; I can vouch for that," said
Tom. "I have not the slightest apprehension of hydrophobia."

"O--h!" said May, with a deeper moan.

Dora had continued silent; indeed she could hardly speak, and her face
had grown more like ashes than paper.

He was standing still, and raising his hat a little awkwardly with his
left hand, in lieu of shaking hands with his right, as they came to the
point where their roads parted.

Dora made a great effort and uttered her remonstrance: "I wish you would
come home with us, and let father look at your hand."

"You too, Miss Dora--nonsense," he said sharply as it sounded.

"If Annie had been here," she persisted, "she would have been of a
hundred times more use than I, but if you'll let me I'll try to tie it
up for you."

She spoke so humbly that he answered her with quick kindness, "And pain
you by exposing a scratch to your notice? No, indeed, all that I'll ask
of you is never to fling stones at strange dogs, though they should be
tearing that unlucky imp of mischief limb from limb."

"It was very unkind of him to speak so rudely of poor Tray," sighed May,
as the sisters hurried home; "although it was Tom Robinson who gave him
to me, I don't think the man has ever put a proper value on the dog. But
I daresay he will call to-morrow though he has not come with us just
now, to ask for Tray, and to see how we are after our fright."

"No, he won't come," said Dora with conviction, and she walked on
silently thinking to herself, "How strong and resolute he was, though he
is not a big man, and how little he minded being bitten. Men are
different from women. Of course, he is nothing to me, but I may be
permitted to admire his courage and coolness. No, he will not come, I
am sure of that, he is the last man to take advantage of an accident and
of his coming to our assistance. Even if he did, and I had ever cared
for him, and there had been no 'Robinson's,' it would be too late and
too bad to change one's mind after we had grown poor and had to work for
ourselves."

Dora was right. Tom Robinson did not come. He contented himself with
intercepting Dr. Millar on his rounds, learning that Dora and May were
no worse for their misadventure, and giving their father a piece of
information.

In consequence of that hint, and under the pretence of having Tray's
wounded leg properly seen to, he was, to May's intense chagrin and
disgust, despatched to a veterinary surgeon's, where he remained for
some time, returning at last a sadder and a wiser dog.




CHAPTER X.

LIFE IN AN HOSPITAL WARD.


St. Ebbe's was a model hospital, with every enlightened improvement in
the treatment of the sick poor, and every humane ordinance which the
highly developed skill and the strongly stimulated benevolence of the
nineteenth century could enforce.

Annie Millar was one of six lady probationers, including a bishop's
daughter, two daughters of squires, and three doctor's daughters like
herself. The matron was the widow of a doctor, who had been eminent
alike for professional talent and philanthropy. She was like-minded. If
she had not her late husband's knowledge and acumen as a medical man,
she had much of his experience, and was full of energy and determination
to better the world, the sick, and the poor, almost whether they would
or not. Very few people could look Mrs. Hull in the face and contradict
her high motives and determined will.

Fortunately, Annie's beauty had not worked the scathing destruction
which Mrs. Millar had anticipated with fear and trembling. An
inflammable medical student or two might have been just singed by the
fire of her charms; an older member of the fraternity might have
neglected for an instant to look up at the card above a bed in order to
turn his head and cast a second admiring glance after the new recruit in
the hospital uniform; but no man forgot his duty or was false to earlier
vows through her allurements.

Mrs. Hull had cast a sharp glance at the dainty figure and flower-like
face under the nurse's linen gown and close cap. Annie's sister
probationers, four of them considerably older than herself, had
telegraphed to each other emphatic--perhaps pardonable enough--signals
that the last accession to their number was so very ornamental they
could hardly expect her to be useful. They must look out for defects,
and prepare to atone for failures by their surpassing attainments. But
the mistake was soon rectified, and fresh light dawned on the doubtful
question. Mrs. Hull was the first to recognize and testify that nothing
was to be feared from Annie Millar's youth and beauty, while something
might be gained by them, because she was far more than pretty--she was a
bright, clever girl, very obedient to orders, and exceedingly anxious
to learn her business. In her St. Ebbe's had secured an auxiliary of the
highest promise. The elder sister probationers soon found that instead
of wanting indulgence, forbearance, and pity, the newcomer was more in
danger of awakening their envy as well as their respect by her quickness
in mastering details, her mental grasp of principles, her inexhaustible
spirit.

Yet poor Annie had no light apprenticeship to serve. The programme,
which extends from making poultices and making beds to receiving
doctors' instructions, understanding them, remembering them, and acting
on them, is neither short nor easy, though a fairly good and trained
intellect and an unswerving devotion to duty will get through it
triumphantly in time. Annie underwent the entire ordeal, while she
doubtless brought a little additional intelligence and capacity and a
few more grains of experience to the task than would have existed if she
had not been Dr. Millar's daughter. In spite of the warm woollen jacket
and cuffs which she wore under her linen gown, her little hands were
covered with the chaps and chilblains which are the scourge of
maids-of-all-work, because of their early rising, hard scrubbing, and
the frequency with which their fingers are wet and dried on chill winter
mornings. Her legs ached, as they had never ached after a night's
dancing, with being on her feet all day long, and day after day,
waiting on her patients and attending on the sisters who were placed
over the respective wards. Her mind, too, was kept on the stretch with
the serious charge of pulses and temperatures, with the grave
responsibility of shelves on shelves of medicine bottles, with acquiring
the best modes of bandaging, fomenting, bleeding, stopping the flow of
blood, so that during the little leisure she had she could not turn to a
book for relief; she fell asleep with sheer fatigue more frequently.

Annie was too high-spirited and independent to feel the loneliness of
her position among strangers, whom she soon converted into friendly
acquaintances, if nothing more, as many a girl--as Dora, for
instance--would have done. But, accustomed as Annie had been all her
life to much closer and warmer relations, she clung to the presence of
Rose in London; and it was a proof of how much the elder sister was used
up, when, even on her days and hours for getting out, it was often with
difficulty that she could bring herself to go and see Rose, or to meet
and walk a portion of the way with her on Rose's progress from Mrs.
Jennings's boarding-house to the Misses Stone's school, where she taught
drawing, or to Mr. St. Foy's art classes, where she learned it.

Annie had suffered considerably from what is known as hospital or
infirmary sore throat, because it is understood to be caused by inhaling
the fumes from the carbolic acid used in the wards. Her rich colour had
to Rose's dismay grown poor and pale for a time. She had laboured under
the still more trying and more dangerous infliction, when the senses
morbidly excited become morbidly acute, and she seemed still to smell
the peculiar air of the wards wherever she went. Then Mrs. Hull insisted
on Annie's leaving for a few days, and bundled her off, without the
power of resistance, to a sister of the matron's, who kindly consented,
as her part of the work, to receive and recruit the temporarily overdone
servants of St. Ebbe's Hospital.

In spite of the strength of Annie's nerves, and her power of controlling
them, she sickened once or twice with a deadly sickness at sights and
sounds worse than her most vivid imagination could have conceived
possible. She had to summon all her courage, together with the
conviction that if she did not overcome the weakness speedily, she would
be compelled to own that she had mistaken her calling, in order to
vanquish the insidious foe.

Sometimes, while she was ready to thank God that it was rather the
exception than the rule, she had to witness the lowest moral degradation
in addition to the sharpest human suffering, and this at an age and with
a nature when the feeling of extreme repulsion, amounting to positive
loathing, is in danger of prevailing. It needed all her faith to do
battle with this worst temptation, and force pity to conquer disgust, to
recognize humbly the frailty of the best and wisest men and women, to
acknowledge willingly, even thankfully, the propriety, if one may so use
the word, of what a preacher has called each Christian's suffering, "the
just for the unjust."

No wonder poor Annie's bright face took frequently a worn and harassed
look in those early days of hospital work.

Yet so great is the elasticity of youth, and so brave and cheerful was
the girl's temperament for the most part, that within an hour of such
prostrating attacks and violent revolts, she would be on her way with
her own little tea-pot to the retiring-room, where the lady probationers
and sisters assembled in order to profit by the great boiler steaming on
the hob for their women's refreshment of tea. It was about the only
servile act which they were required to do for themselves, while they
were the servants of others, and they all enjoyed doing it with true
housewifely relish. Annie, especially, was an adept at such tea-making,
and would propound her theories and circulate specimens of her
performance among her companions who profited by her skill, with a glee
not far removed from the mirth of the Millar girls on many a happy
family gathering in the old nursery or the drawing-room at Redcross.

The whole circumstances of one of the bad days in her lot Annie could
never quite forget. It was a raw, gray winter's day, cheerless above and
below, and all went wrong on it, from the moment Annie opened her sleepy
eyes, leapt shivering out of bed, washed in cold water by her own
choice, in order to rouse herself, dressed by gaslight, swallowed her
coffee scalding hot, and hastened to her particular ward. The sister and
the house-surgeon were, as if affected by the day, a little sour and
surly, and every patient seemed more or less out of tune, dismal,
grumbling, delirious, or in a state of collapse.

It was one of Annie's out-days, and as a matter of duty, but by no means
of enjoyment, she braced herself to change her hospital dress for a
walking dress. After she felt chilled to the bone, she started for a
walk, either to be jostled and forced along in a crowded thoroughfare,
where she too might have said--


    "Although so many surround me,
     I know not one I meet"--

or to creep the length of the cleanest side of the pavement in a
depressingly empty street, where the varying arrangement of the shabby
window curtains and the cards in the dingy windows, offering an endless
supply of rooms to the absent lodging hunter, furnished the sole
entertainment to the listless passer-by.

Annie had been afraid that she would miss Rose on her way to her
classes, and the fear was amply fulfilled--not the most distant glimpse
of Rose was forthcoming. Instead, at a crossing, Ella Carey, in her Aunt
Tyrrel's carriage, whirled by the pedestrian and administered a slight
spattering of mud to her dress. "It ought to have been the other way,"
said Annie bitterly to herself, while she stood still to wipe the sleeve
of her jacket. Yet she knew very well all the time that Ella's offence
had been quite involuntary, and that she had not for a moment recognized
Annie. If it had been so, Ella's round girlish face under its smart hat,
leaning back among the soft cushions not discontentedly, would have
brightened immensely. She would have stopped the carriage and been down
in the street at Annie's side in a moment, for the girl was as
warm-hearted as she had been docile. There was nothing she would have
liked better than to hail a Redcross face, and hear the last news about
Phyllis and May, and Ella's father and mother.

When Annie re-entered the hospital colder and more unrefreshed than she
had left it, she thought that she was at last going to be compensated
for life's rubs--beyond her deserts, she told herself a little
remorsefully. She had been longing all the morning for a letter from
Redcross, small reason as she had to complain of the negligence of her
correspondents there, and a letter with the Redcross post-mark was
awaiting her. She saw before she opened it that it was not from any of
her family. None of them used such creamily smooth and thick note-paper,
or exhibited such a cunningly contrived, elegantly designed monogram.
But even a slight communication from the merest acquaintance was welcome
as a flower in spring, when the acquaintance dwelt in dear old Redcross.
Annie had been thinking fondly of it all day as a place of human
well-being and geniality, free from continual sights and sounds of pain
and sorrow, where everybody got up and sat down, went out and came in,
worked and read, even dawdled and dreamt at will, subject to a few
simple household rules. There was no unyielding iron discipline at
Redcross. There was no hard and fast routine entering through the flesh
and penetrating into the very soul. It was just, dear, deliberate,
mannerly, yet comfortable and kindly Redcross. The writer was Thirza
Dyer, and the reason why one of the Dyers, who had hesitated about
shaking hands with one of the Millars after she was guilty of proposing
to earn her livelihood, wrote a letter to a nurse probationer and
addressed it to a public hospital, calls for an explanation. The Dyers,
in their unceasing efforts to gain by their wealth and its liberal
expenditure a footing in the county circle, had got one foot within the
coveted precincts, and there Thirza found to her own and her sisters'
amazement that nursing, not the rich and great, but common poor people,
was a curious fashion of the day. Lady Luxmore had a cousin who was a
nurse. General Wentworth's wife had a friend professionally engaged in a
London hospital for nine months out of the twelve, who was visiting the
Wentworths this winter. Of course it had begun with the Crimean War, and
the _eclat_ with which lady nurses went out to attend on the wounded
soldiers in the exceptional hospital at Scutari. But whatever was its
origin, the rule was established that nursing even day-labourers and
mechanics with their wives and children, was something very different
from being a drudging governess or broken-down companion. It was like
being a member of the Kyrle Society, with which one of the princes had
to do, or like singing in an East of London concert-room, quite _chic_,
perfectly good form, anybody might take it up and gain rather than lose
caste by the act.

Accordingly, it became an obvious obligation on the Dyers to cultivate
and not to cut the only nurse on their visiting list. With unblushing,
well-nigh naive suddenness, Thirza Dyer, to Annie Millar's bewildered
astonishment, proceeded to start and maintain a correspondence with her.
Two are required for a bargain-making, and Annie was not altogether
disinterested in scribbling the few lines occasionally which warranted
the continuance of the correspondence on Thirza's part. For if Thirza
had lived anywhere else than where she did live, near Redcross, the
answer to her first letter might have been different. Therefore Annie
did not perhaps deserve much solace from these letters, and certainly
this one did not contribute to her exaltation of spirit. It was chiefly
occupied with an account of several _recherchee_ afternoon teas which the
Dyers had held lately at the Manor-house, together with a full
description of the tea-gowns of salmon, canary, and cherry-coloured
plush, lined with _eau-de-nil_ satin, which the Miss Dyers had worn on
these occasions.
