"Pledge has had it in his all the last hour," said Heathcote.

"Shut up, you kids, and don't make such a row.  You can talk when we're
in at supper," said a Fifth-form fellow.

The allusion was a depressing one.  More than once it had crossed our
heroes' minds that supper was coming on; but the chances of their
"cheeking in" (as they called it) to that part of the day's
entertainment were, to say the least, narrow.

At any rate, the allusion made them sad, and they relapsed into silence
as the bowlers changed ends, and Pledge prepared to attack from his new
base.

There was a sudden uncomfortable silence all round the meadow.
Grandcourt felt that if they could weather the storm a few overs longer
they might yet avert the disgrace of a single innings defeat.  Templeton
felt, with decided qualms, that unless the change told quickly, it had
better not have been made at all.  The eleven stepped in a bit, and
watched the ball with anxious faces.  Ponty, alone, with one hand in his
pocket, yawned, and looked somewhere else.  "What's the odds to Ponty?"
thought the seventy, marvelling how any one could look so unconcerned at
such a crisis.

Pledge bowled one of his finest, awkwardest, most disconcerting slows.
The cautious batsman was proof against its syren-like allurements, and
stepped back to block what any one else would have stepped forward to
slog.  The ball broke up sharp against his bat, and Grandcourt began to
breathe again as they saw its progress arrested.

But at that particular moment it appeared to enter dear old Ponty's head
to take his hand out of his pocket and stroll forward a pace or two from
his place at point in the direction of the wicket.  And somehow or
another it seemed to him that while he was there he might as well pick
up the ball, as it dropped off the end of the bat on its way to the
ground.

Which he did.  And as every one looked on, and wondered what little game
he was up to, it occurred to the umpire that it was a catch, and that
the match was at an end.

Whereupon, the truth flashed round the field like an electric shock, and
the crowds broke into the meadow in wild excitement, while the seventy,
crimson with cheers, formed column and went for their men.

Poor Ponty had a hard time of it getting back to the tent, and half
repented of his feat.  But it did him and Templeton good, when they came
upon the headquarters of Grandcourt, to hear the hearty cheers with
which the vanquished hailed their victors.

Chivalry is infectious.  For the next quarter of an hour the meadow was
given up to cheers by Templeton for Grandcourt, and cheers by Grandcourt
for Templeton, in which the gallant seventy-two, despite their numerical
inferiority, held their own with admirable pluck.

Then, a mighty bell tolled out across the meads, and conqueror and
conquered, united in the brotherhood of appetite and good fellowship,
turned in to supper, carrying their cheers with them.

Now was the hour of our heroes' perplexity.  For, be it said to their
credit as gentlemen, that however easily they may have got over their
scruples as to breaking Templeton rules, riding in Templeton coaches,
and enjoying themselves in the Grandcourt meadows, they had some
hesitation about making free with the Grandcourt supper without a rather
more precise invitation than they were already possessed of.

So they lagged a little behind the seventy, put their Templeton badges
conspicuously forward, and tried to look as if supper had never entered
into their calculations.

"Aren't you two fellows coming to supper?" said a Grandcourt senior,
overtaking them as they dawdled along.

"Thanks, awfully," said they; "perhaps there won't be room."

"Rather!" said the hospitable enemy, "you two won't crowd us out."

"We'll sit close, you know," said Dick.

"Better not sit too close to begin with," said the Grandcourt boy,
laughing, "or it'll be real jam before supper's over.  Cut on and join
your fellows, and squeeze into the first seat you can find."

The first seat our heroes found was one between Ponty and the Grandcourt
head master, which, on consideration, they decided not to be
appropriate.  They therefore made hard for the other end of the room,
and wedged themselves in among a lot of jolly Grandcourt juniors, who
hailed them with vociferous cheers, and commenced to load them with a
liberal share of all the good things the hospitable table groaned under.

Happy for Dick and Heathcote had they taken advice and begun the orgy at
half distance!  But they survived the "jam;" and what with chicken pie,
and beef and ham, and gooseberry pie and shandy-gaff, to say nothing of
jokes and laughter, and vows of eternal friendship with every Grandcourt
fellow within hail, they never (to quote the experience of the little
foxes in the nursery rhyme) "they never eat a better meal in all their
life."

They could have gone on all night.  But alas! envious time, that turns
day to night, and hangs its pall between our eyes and the light of our
eyes, put an end to the banquet.  The coaches clattered up to the
Grandcourt gate; the seventy, with their wraps and coats, were escorted,
by their hosts in a body, to the chariots; horns sounded; cheers
answered cheers; caps waved; whips cracked, and in five minutes the
Grandcourt gate was as silent as if it guarded, not a fortress of hearty
schoolboys, but a deserted, time-ruined monastery.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

IN WHICH NEMESIS HAS A BUSY TIME OF IT.

Our heroes had all along had a presentiment that their troubles would
begin some time or other.  They had expected it at the very start; but
it had been put off stage by stage throughout the day, until it really
seemed as if it must make haste, if it was to come at all.

And yet everything had gone so smoothly so far; the day had been so
successful, the match so glorious, the supper so gorgeous, that they
could hardly bring themselves to think Nemesis would really pounce upon
them.

That worthy lady, however, though she often takes long credit, always
pays her debts in the long run, and our heroes found her waiting for
them before Grandcourt was many miles behind them.

They had been baulked in their intention of getting back into the
friendly shelter of coach five at the outset, by the very awkward fact
that Mansfield would stand at the door of Grandcourt, talking to a
friend, until coach five had received its passengers, and started.
Coach six followed, and to the horror of our two skulkers the way was
still blocked.  Things were getting desperate.  The top of number _six_
was packed, and still Mansfield stood across the door.

Should they throw themselves on his mercy, or hurl themselves between
his feet, and overturn him, if haply they might escape in the confusion?
How they hated that Grandcourt fellow who talked to him.  What business
had he to keep a Templeton fellow there catching cold?  Why hadn't all
Grandcourt been ordered to bed directly after supper?

Horrors!  Coach six shouted "All right!" and rattled off.

"We're done for," said Heathcote.  "We may as well show up."

"Stay where you are," said Dick; "we shall have to hang on behind the
coach the Eleven go in."

"But, Dick, they're all monitors!"

"Can't be helped," said Dick, peremptorily.

The Eleven's coach drove up, and all Grandcourt turned out with a final
cheer for their conquerors.  Mansfield shook hands with his friend, and
climbed up on to the box.  The rest followed.  Ponty rambled out among
the last.  He looked up at the crowded roof, and didn't like it.  It was
far too much grind for the dear fellow to swarm up there.

"I'll go inside, Cresswell.  Come on; we'll get a seat each, and make
ourselves comfortable."

Cresswell laughed.

"If you hadn't made that catch, old man," said he, "I'd say you were the
laziest beggar I ever saw.  But as you've a right to give your orders,
I'll obey.  Lead on, mighty captain."

Our heroes shivered, and wondered if any sin in the calendar were equal
to that of sloth!  With all the Eleven on the top, they had had a chance
yet of weathering "Mrs" Nemesis, and hanging on behind.  But with the
captain and whipper-in inside, they might as well try and hang on a
lion's tail.

"All U P, old man," groaned Heathcote.

"Slip out sharp!" said Dick excitedly.  "Our only chance is to get ahead
of them, and pick them up on the road."

Scarcely any one noticed the two dismayed little Templetonians, as they
squeezed out of the gate, with their caps drawn over their eyes, and
their heads diligently turned away from the coach of the Eleven.  One
fellow, however, spotted them, and scared the wits out of them, by
saying "Hallo! here are two youngsters left behind.  Get inside this
coach; there's lots of room.  Look alive, they're starting."

"Oh, thanks!" said Dick, scarcely able to speak for the jumping of his
heart, "we're going to do a trot the first mile or so.  Thanks awfully!
Good-bye."  And to the amazement of the Grandcourtier, the small pair
started to run with their heads down and their fists up, at the rate of
seven miles an hour.

"By George," thought he to himself, "some of those Templeton kids go the
pace."

The pleasant village of Grandcourt was startled that evening, as the
shades of night fell, by the sight of two small boys trotting hard down
the High Street, side by side, some three hundred yards in advance of
the coach which carried the conquering heroes of Templeton; like eastern
couriers who run before the chaise of the great man.  But those two
heeded neither looks nor jeers; their ears were deaf to the cry of "Stop
thief," and shouts of "Two to one on Sandy," stirred no emotions in
their fluttering breasts.  Luckily for them the road began uphill, so
they were able to get a fair start by the time the village was clear.
When at last they pulled up breathless at the road-side, they could see
the lamp of the coach a quarter of a mile down the road, advancing
slowly.

"It's touch and go," said Heathcote, "if we do it without getting
nabbed.  That wretched light shows up everything."

"Yes, I don't like it," said Dick; "we'd better lie down in the ditch,
Georgie, till it's got past.  They'll trot as soon as they get up here
on to the level, and we must make a shot at the step.  Those fellows
inside are sure not to be looking out."

It was an anxious few minutes as the light approached, and shot its rays
over the prostrate bodies of the boys in the ditch.  They dared not lift
their faces as it passed, and it was only when, as Dick had predicted,
the walk changed into a trot, that they started from their lurking-
place, and gave chase.

"Why," groaned Heathcote, as they came up, "it's got no step!"

For once, Dick was gravelled.  The idea that the coach was not like all
the other coaches had never once crossed his mind; and he felt beaten.
The two unhappy pursuers, however, kept up the chase, pawing the
forbidding coach door, very much as kittens paw the outside of a gold-
fish bowl.

Alas! there was nothing to lay hold of; not even a handle or a nail!

"Shall we yell?" gasped Heathcote, nearly at the end of his wind.

"Wait a bit.  Is there anything underneath we could lay hold of?"

They groped, but, as it seemed, fruitlessly.  Dick, however, stooped
again, and next moment turned round radiant.

"There's a bit of string," said he.  "Keep it up, old man, and we'll get
hold of it."

With much diving he succeeded in picking up the end of a casual piece of
string that had somehow got its other end fastened to a nut underneath
the coach.  As quick as thought he whipped out his handkerchief and
looped it on to the string.  Then Heathcote whipped out his handkerchief
and looped it on to Dick's, and between them the two held on grimly, and
tried to fancy their troubles were at an end.

The support of a piece of stray string at the tail of a coach,
supplemented by two pocket-handkerchiefs, may be grateful, but for
practical purposes it is at best a flimsy stay, and had it not been for
occasional hills at which to breathe, our heroes might have found it out
at once.

As it was, they were carried three or four miles on their way by the
purely moral support of their holdfast until the last of the hills was
climbed, and the long steady slope which led down to Templeton opened
before the travellers and reminded the horses of corn and stable.  Then
a trot began, which put the actual support of the extemporised cable to
the test.

Our heroes, worn out already, could not, try all they would, keep it
slack.  Every step it became tauter and tauter, until at last you might
have played a tune upon it.  They made one gallant effort to relieve the
strain, but, alas! it was no good.  There was a crack of the whip ahead,
the horses, full of their coming supper, gave a bound forward, and that
moment on the lonely road, five miles from home, sprawled Heathcote,
with Dick in his lap, and two knotted pocket-handkerchiefs in the dust
at their feet.  They had no breath left to shout, no energy to overtake,
so they sat there panting, watching the coach vanish into the night and
humbly wondering--what next?

"Here's a soak!" said Heathcote at last, recovering speech and slowly
untying his handkerchief from the cable in order to mop his face.

"Yes," said Dick, getting off his friend's lap and looking dismally down
the road; "our ride home didn't come off after all."

"We came off, though!" said Heathcote.  But he corrected himself as he
saw Dick wearily round upon him.  "I mean--I say, what must we do?"

"Stump it," said Dick.  "It's about five miles."

Heathcote whistled.

"Pity we didn't cheek it into our own coach," said he.  "I say, Dick,
what a row there'll be!"

"Of course there will," said Dick.  "Have you only just found that out?
Come along; we'll be late."

Considering it was eight o'clock and they were yet five miles from home,
this last observation was sagacious.

They strolled on for half an hour in silence, mending their pace as they
recovered their wind, until at the end of that time they had settled
down into a steady three-and-a-half miles an hour, and felt rather more
like getting home than they had done.

"Another hour will do it," said Dick.  "I say, we might smuggle in after
all, Georgie.  What a crow if we do, eh?"

Georgie inwardly reflected that there would be a crow of some sort or
other whatever happened, but he prudently reserved his opinion and said,
"Rather!"

"We ought to come to the cross-roads before long," said Dick.  "I hope
to goodness you know which one goes to Templeton."

"No, I don't; but there's bound to be a post."

There was a post, but, though they climbed up it and rubbed their eye-
lashes along each arm, they could get no guiding out of it.  They could
see an L on one arm, and an N on another, and a full stop on each of the
other two, but, even with this intelligence, they felt that the road to
Templeton was still open to doubt, as, indeed, after their wanderings
round and round the sign-post, they presently had to admit was the case
with the road by which they had just come.

"We'd better make ourselves snug here for the night," said Heathcote,
who fully took in the situation.

"That would be coming to a full stop with a vengeance!" said Dick.

"Shut up; I let you off--and, by Jove, here's somebody coming!"

The red embers of a pipe, followed by a hulking nautical form, hove
slowly in sight as he spoke, and never did a sail cheer the eyes of
shipwrecked mariners as did this apparition bring comfort to Dick and
Heathcote.

"I say," said the former, advancing out of the shades and almost
startling the unsuspecting salt, "we've lost our way.  Which road goes
to Templeton?"

The big sailor gave a grunt and lay to in an unsteady way, which
convinced our heroes, unlearned as they were in such matters, that he
wasn't quite sober.

"What d'yer want ter go ter Templeton fur?" demanded he.

"We belong to the school, and we've got left behind."

The sailor laughed an unsympathetic laugh and took his pipe out of his
mouth.

"Yer belong to the school, do yer, and yer've lost yer way?"

"Yes; can you put us right?"

"Yes, I can put yer right," said the brawny young salt, putting his pipe
back between his lips.  "What'll yer stand?"

"We'll give you a shilling," said Dick.

"Yer will?  Yer'll give me a sovereign apiece, or I'll bash yer!"

And he laid a hand on the arm of each of his victims, chuckling and
smoking as he looked down on their puny efforts to escape.

"Turn out yer pockets, nobs!" said he, giving them a slight admonitory
shake.

"I haven't got a sovereign," said Heathcote.

Dick did not even condescend to plead; he fell headlong on his huge
opponent, shouting, in the midst of his blows--

"Let us go, do you hear?  I know your name; you're Tom White, the
boatman, and I'll get you locked up if you don't."

But even this valiant threat, and the still more valiant struggles of
the two boys, availed nothing with the nautical highwayman, who smoked,
and shook the bones of his wretched captives, till they were fain to
call for mercy.

The mercy was dearly bought.  Dick's half-sovereign, Heathcote's twelve
shillings, the penknife with the gouge, among them did not make up the
price.  One by one their pockets were turned inside out, and whatever
there took the fancy of the noble mariner went into the ransom.
Pencils, india-rubber, keys, and even a photograph of Dick's mother were
impounded; while resistance, or even expostulation only added bone-
shaking into the bargain; till, at last, the unhappy lambs were glad to
assist at their own fleecing, in order to expedite their release.

"There yer are," said Tom, when at last the operation was over, "that's
about all I want of yer, my hearties; and if yer want the road to
Templeton, that's she, and good-night to yer, and thank yer kindly.
Next time yer want a sail, don't forget to give an honest jack tar a
turn.  Knows my name, do yer?  Blessed if I ever see you afore."

"You're a beastly, low, tipsy thief," shouted Dick, from a respectful
distance, "and we'll get you paid out for this."

And not waiting for a reply, the two unfortunates, less heavily weighted
than ever, started down the road, snorting with rage and indignation and
full of thoughts of the direst revenge.

Nemesis was coming down on them at last with a vengeance!

Two miles they went before speech came to the relief of their wounded
feelings.

"It's transportation," said Heathcote.

"Cat-o'-nine-tails too," said Dick.

"Jolly good job," said Heathcote.

And they went on another mile.

Then it occurred to them this was not the road along which they had
driven in the morning; and once more the villainy of Tom White broke
upon them in all its blackness.

"He's sent us upon the wrong road!" said Heathcote, beginning at last to
feel that Nemesis was a little overdoing it.

Dick gulped down something, and walked on in silence.

"Where are you going?  What's the use of going on?"

"May as well," said Dick, striding on.  "It's bound to lead somewhere."

In which comfortable conviction they accomplished another half-mile.

Then to their satisfaction, and somewhat to Dick's self-satisfaction,
they heard a low noise ahead, which they knew must be the sea.

"I thought it would bring us out," said Dick.  "When once we get at the
sea, we can't help finding Templeton."

"Unless we take a wrong turn to start with, and then we shall have to
walk all round England before we turn up."

"Shut up, Georgie, we've had foolery enough for one night."

Heathcote collapsed, and another mile brought the two wanderers to the
sea.

Luckily for them, the rising moon came to their rescue in deciding
whereabouts they were.

