been adopted, as the coat-of-arms of the present Republic of Mexico."

Included in the sway of its emperor were many different tribes.  They
were kept in submission by the strong and inexorable hand.  There were
a few tribes, however, which had not been subdued and which still
maintained a more or less precarious independence.  The subject peoples
were only kept from open rebellion by the most rigorous and oppressive
measures.  There was jealousy, humiliation, hoped-for revenge
throughout the entire empire.

Each tribe or people had its own local god, but there was a bond
coherent in the general Mexican religion that had its centre of worship
in the great city, and which all of them followed.  This religion was
one of the most ferocious, degrading and disgusting of any in history.
It required human sacrifice on a larger scale than had ever before been
practised.  Cannibalism was universal.  Captives of war were sacrificed
to the gods and their bodies eaten.  In Mexico, {127} itself, with all
its charm, with all its beauty, with all its luxuries, with all its
verdure and wealth, there were huge pyramids of skulls.  The priests
were ferocious creatures, whose long black locks, never combed, were
matted with blood, as they sacrificed to their awful war-god human
hearts, still palpitating, torn from the victims a moment since alive.
Fiske thus describes the temple pyramid and chief shrine in the great
city:

"On the summit was a dreadful block of jasper, convex at the top, so
that when the human victim was laid upon his back and held down, the
breast was pushed upwards, ready for the priest to make one deep
slashing cut and snatch out the heart.  Near the sacrificial block were
the altars, and sanctuaries of the gods, Tezcatlipoca, Huitzilopochtli,
and others, with idols as hideous as their names.  On these altars
smoked fresh human hearts, of which the gods were fond, while other
parts of the bodies were ready for the kitchens of the communal houses
below.  The gods were voracious as wolves, and the victims as numerous.
In some cases the heart was thrust into the mouth of the idol with a
golden spoon, in others the lips were simply daubed with blood.  In the
temple a great quantity of rattlesnakes, kept as sacred objects were
fed with the entrails of the victims.  Other parts of the body were
given to the menagerie beasts, which were probably also kept for
purposes of religious symbolism.  Blood was also rubbed into the mouths
of the carved serpents upon the jambs and lintels of the houses.  The
walls and floor of the great temple were clotted with blood and shreds
of human flesh, and the smell was like that of a slaughter-house.  Just
outside the temple, in front of the broad street which {128} led across
the causeway to Tlacopan, stood the _tzompantli_, which was an oblong
parallelogram of earth and masonry, one hundred and fifty-four feet
(long) at the base, ascended by thirty steps, on each of which were
skulls.  Round the summit were upward of seventy raised poles about
four feet apart, connected by numerous rows of cross-poles passed
through holes in the masts, on each of which five skulls were filed,
the sticks being passed through the temples.  In the centre stood two
towers, or columns, made of skulls and lime, the face of each skull
being turned outwards, and giving a horrible appearance to the whole.
This effect was heightened by leaving the heads of distinguished
captives in their natural state, with hair and skin on.  As the skulls
decayed they fell from the towers or poles, and they were replaced by
others, so that no vacant place was left."

Concerning the cruelty of the Spaniards, the contrast between the
opposing religions must be considered.  Ruthless as the conquerors
were, there is no possible comparison between the most indifferent
principles of the Christian Religion and the application of the awful
principles of the Mexican religion.  MacNutt, the author of the latest
and best life of Cortes, makes this interesting comment on the
Christianity of the Spanish adventurers of the time:

"Soldier of Spain and soldier of the Cross, for the Cross was the
standard of militant Christianity, of which Spain was the truest
exponent, his religion, devoutly believed in, but intermittently
practised, inspired his ideals, without sufficiently guiding his
conduct.  Ofttimes brutal, he was never vulgar, while as a lover of
sheer daring and of danger for danger's sake, he has never been
eclipsed. . . .  {129} Sixteenth-century Spain produced a race of
Christian warriors whose piety, born of an intense realization of, and
love for a militant Christ, was of a martial complexion, beholding in
the symbol of salvation--the Cross--the standard of Christendom around
which the faithful must rally, and for whose protection and exaltation
swords must be drawn and blood spilled if need be.  They were the
children of the generation which had expelled the Moor from Spain, and
had brought centuries of religious and patriotic warfare to a
triumphant close, in which their country was finally united under the
crown of Castile.  From such forebears the generation of Cortes
received its heritage of Christian chivalry.  The discovery of a new
world, peopled by barbarians, opened a fresh field to Spanish
missionary zeal, in which the kingdom of God upon earth was to be
extended and countless souls rescued from the obscene idolatries and
debasing cannibalism which enslaved them."

In the Mexican Pantheon, however, there was one good god, named
Quetzalcoatl.  He was a Toltec deity, and was venerated as the god of
the air.  He was identified with the east wind which brought the
fertilizing rains.  Some historians and investigators explain him as
purely a mythical personage.  He was supposed to have appeared to the
Toltecs long before the Aztecs came into the land.  He was described in
ancient traditions as a tall, white-faced, bearded man, whose dress
differed from that of the aborigines and included a long white tunic,
upon which were dark red crosses.  His teachings enjoined chastity,
charity, and penance.  He had but one God and preached in the name of
that God.  He condemned human sacrifice and taught the nation
agriculture, metal work and {130} mechanics.  He fixed their calendar
so that it was much more reliable than either the Greek or the Roman.
There were various legends as to his departure, one of them being that
he sailed away across the sea upon a raft composed of serpents, and was
wafted into the unknown East whence he had come.

His color, his dress, his teachings, and his character, are all so
symbolic of Christianity, they are so strange, so unique, so utterly
without an explanation in anything else known of the Aztecs and
Toltecs, that the conclusion that he was a Christian Bishop, wearing a
pallium is almost irresistible.  Why could not some Christian Bishop,
voyaging along the shores of Europe, have been blown far out of his
course by a long-continued easterly gale, finally have landed on the
shores of Mexico and, having done what he could to teach the people,
have built himself some kind of a ship and sailed eastward in the hope
of once more revisiting his native land before he died.  At any rate,
such is the tradition.  It was a tradition or legend which played no
small part in the conquest about to be effected.


IV. The March to Tenochtitlan

Into this loosely compact political and social organization,
hard-headed, clear-sighted, iron-hearted, steel-clad Cortes
precipitated himself.  His was a mind at the same time capable of vast
and comprehensive designs and a most minute attention to small details.
For instance, he laid out the city of Vera Cruz at the place of his
landing.  He caused his men to elect a full corps of municipal officers
from their number.  To this organization he frankly resigned his
commission and the power that he had by the appointment of {131}
Velasquez, which the latter had tried so hard to revoke.  They
immediately elected him captain-general of the expedition with vastly
increased prerogatives and privileges.  Thus he could now, in form at
least, trace his authority to the crown, as represented by this new
colonial municipality and he therefore had behind him the whole power
of the expedition!

With a skill, which showed not only his adroitness, but his
determination, he next caused his men to acquiesce in the scuttling of
the ships which had conveyed them to Mexico!  After saving the cordage,
rigging and everything else that might be useful, which was carefully
stored away in the little fort rapidly building, the vessels were
destroyed beyond repair.  Before this was done, Cortes offered to
reserve one ship for certain malcontents and partisans of Velasquez in
which they might return if they wished.  Nobody took advantage of his
offer.

By this bold and original stroke, he added to his expeditionary force
some one hundred and twenty hardy mariners, who thereafter took part
with the soldiery in all the hazards and undertakings.  With,
therefore, less than six hundred men, sixteen horses, ten small cannon,
and one woman, Cortes prepared to undertake the conquest of this mighty
empire.  It was a small force, but its fighting quality was
unsurpassed.  Lew Wallace thus characterizes them:

"It is hardly worth while to eulogize the Christians who took part in
Cortes's crusade.  History has assumed their commemoration.  I may say,
however, they were men who had acquired fitness for the task by service
in almost every clime.  Some had tilted with the Moor under the walls
of Granada; some had {132} fought the Islamite on the blue Danube; some
had performed the first Atlantic voyage with Columbus; all of them had
hunted the Carib in the glades of Hispaniola.  It is not enough to
describe them as fortune-hunters, credulous, imaginative, tireless;
neither is it enough to write them soldiers, bold, skilful, confident,
cruel to enemies, gentle to each other.  They were characters of the
age in which they lived, unseen before, unseen since; knights errant,
who believed in hippogriff and dragon, but sought them only in lands of
gold; missionaries, who complacently broke the body of the converted
that Christ might the sooner receive his soul; palmers of pike and
shield, who, in care of the Virgin, followed the morning round the
world, assured that Heaven stooped lowest over the most profitable
plantations."

Just what Cortes at first proposed to do is not quite clear.  Indeed,
he himself could not form any definite plan until the circumstances
under which he would be compelled to act, should be more precisely
ascertained.  He was, therefore, an opportunist.  For one thing, he
made up his mind to lead his troops to the capital city willy-nilly,
and there act as circumstances might determine.  He was a statesman as
well as a soldier.  It did not take him long to fathom the
peculiarities of the organization and composition of the Aztec Empire.
He knew that discord existed and he had only to introduce himself to
become a focus for the discontent and rebellion.  By giving a secret
impression that he was for either side, he could play one party against
the other, as best suited his purposes.  He came to bring freedom to
the one, to promote the revolt of the other, check the oppression of
the third, and destroy the presumption of the another {133} tribe, or
warring nation.  So he caused his purposes to be declared.

Cortes's personal character was not by any means above reproach, yet
withal he was a sincere and devoted Christian, strange and inexplicable
as the paradox may seem, but it was an age of devoted Christians, whose
devotion and principles fortunately were not translated into daily
life.  Neither Cortes nor any of his followers--perhaps not even the
priests were of different opinion--thought any less of themselves or
regarded themselves the less worthy Christians: if their conduct toward
the native races did not manifest that continence, restraint and
sympathy which their religion taught.  Cortes was a child of his age;
the other great men of his age were much like him in these things.
Here and there a Las Casas appears, but he shines forth against a dark
and universally extensive background.  Such as the great apostles to
the Indies were lonely exceptions indeed.

All the Spanish conquerors were cruel; but Cortes was not so cruel as
many others.  He was not to be compared to the ruthless Pizarro for
instance.  Save in daring and personal courage, he vastly surpassed the
Lord of Peru in every quality which goes to make a man.  Cortes was
treacherous in his dealings with Montezuma and others, but the man of
his age regarded very lightly the obligation of his word toward a
savage.  Indeed, it was a well-known principle that no faith was
necessarily to be kept with either heretics or heathen and no oath was
binding against the interests of the state.  Cortes, of course, had all
the contempt for the Aztecs that Caucasians usually have for inferior
races, although in his letters, he tried his very best to be fair, to
be just, even to be generous to these {134} people he overcame; and no
one can doubt the sincerity with which he desired to promote the
spreading of the Christian religion.

They did things differently in those days.  Not only did they believe
that the religion of the heathen should be changed by force, but they
believed that in some way they could constrain all people to accept
Christianity.  More blood has been shed in promoting the idea that the
outsider should be compelled to come into the fold than from the
misinterpretation of any other text in the sacred scriptures.  If any
civilized power in the world to-day should send an expeditionary force
into a heathen country, which should signalize its arrival therein by
the desecration of its temples and the destruction of its idols, the
commander would be recalled at once.  We have learned other methods,
methods of persuasion, of reason, of love.  The age of Cortes knew
nothing of these methods, and he was only following out the common
practice when he smashed with his battle-axe the hideous gods of the
Mexicans, and washed and purified with clean water, the reeking, gory,
ill-smelling slaughter-houses which were the Aztec Holy of Holies, and
adorned them with crosses and images of the Blessed Virgin Mary.  When
Charles the IX. offered Henry of Navarre a choice of death, mass, or
the Bastille on the night of Saint Bartholomew, he gave him one more
chance than the early steel-clad militant missionary gave to the
aborigines of the new world--for them there was no Bastille.

Making friends with the Tabascans, and leaving one hundred and fifty
men to guard his base of supplies at Vera Cruz and to watch the coast,
Cortes began his march toward Mexico on the sixteenth day of August,
1519.  He proceeded with the greatest caution.  Bernal {135} Diaz, an
old soldier, who afterward wrote a most vivid and graphic account of
the conquest, of which he was no small part, says that they marched
forward "with their beards on their shoulders," that is, looking from
side to side, constantly.  There was no hurry and there was no need to
tire out the force which was thus facing the danger of a long, hard and
rash adventure.

By the aid of Marina and Aguilar, Cortes speedily learned of places
like Cempoalla, which were hostile to Montezuma and he took in as many
of these places on his march as possible, always with incidents
instructive and valuable.  At Cempoalla, for instance, he met the
tax-gatherers of Montezuma.  He persuaded the Cempoallans to refuse
payment of the tax--an action which would ordinarily have brought down
upon them the fury of the Aztec monarch and would have resulted in
their complete and utter extermination.  He did more.  He caused the
Cacique of Cempoalla--a man so fat and gross, that, like "the little
round belly" of Santa Claus, he "shook like a jelly" so that the
Spaniards called him "The Trembler"--actually to raise his hand against
the tax-gatherers and imprison them.  They would undoubtedly have been
sacrificed and eaten had not Cortes, secretly and by night released
three of them and allowed them to go back to their royal master, after
he had sent two into a safe ward at Vera Cruz.

Montezuma's messengers met him at every town.  "Bearing rich gifts,
they disclosed the possibilities of the _Hinterland_ and germinated in
the brain of Cortes the idea of conquest.  One revelation was confirmed
by another, and, as the evidence of Aztec wealth multiplied the proofs
of internal disaffection throughout the {136} empire stimulated the
confidence of the brooding conqueror.  Disloyalty among the Totonacs,
treachery that only waited an opportunity in Texcoco, an ancient
tradition of hate in Tlascala, and the superstition that obscured the
judgment and paralyzed the action of the despotic ruler--these were the
materials from which the astute invader evolved the machinery for his
conquest."

Montezuma was in a pitiable state of superstitious indecision.  It was
popularly believed that Quetzalcoatl would some day return, and it was
more than probable to the Aztec monarch and his counsellors that he
might be reincarnated in the person of Cortes and his followers.
Indeed, the common name for them among the Mexicans was Teules, which
means gods.  If Cortes was a god it was useless to fight against him.
If he and his were men, they could of course be easily exterminated,
but were they men?  There were a few bold spirits who inclined to this
belief, but not many.  Besides, whatever the rest might be, the
horsemen must be of divine origin.  Cuitlahua, the brother of
Montezuma, and one of the highest and most important of the Aztec
rulers was for attacking them whatever the consequences, but he was
alone in advising this.  It was thought better to temporize.  Perhaps
later on it might be decided whether these strange beings were of
common clay, and there would be plenty of time to exterminate them then.

Montezuma was therefore an opportunist, like Cortes, but there was a
vast difference between them.  Montezuma was a man of great ability,
undoubtedly, or he never could have been chosen by the hereditary
electors to the position he occupied, and he could never have held it
if he had not been.  He was a man over {137} fifty years of age, and
had maintained himself on the throne, in spite of many wars, in which
he had been almost universally victorious.  His judgment and his
decision alike were paralyzed by superstition.  He did the unwisest
thing he could possibly have done.  He sent messengers to Cortes,
bearing rich gifts, gold, feather work, green stones, which the
Spaniards thought were emeralds, vast treasures.  He acknowledged in
effect the wonderful wisdom of Cortes's overlord, the great emperor,
Charles V., in whose name Cortes did everything, taking care always to
have a notary to attest his proclamations to the Indians, but he told
Cortes not to come to Mexico City.  He said that he was poor, that the
journey was a long and hard one; in short, he offered him every
inducement to come with one hand, while he waved him back with the
other.

Treasure was the only motive of the conquerors of Peru.  Cortes was big
enough and great enough to rise above that.  He was after larger things
than the mere filling of his purse, and on several occasions he
relinquished his own share of the booty to the soldiery.  He was an
empire-builder, not a treasure-hunter.

As Cortes progressed through the country, the treasure sent by
Montezuma grew in value, and the prohibitions, which by and by amounted
to entreaties, increased in volume.  We wonder what might have
happened, if young Guatemoc, whom we shall hear of later had occupied
the throne.  Certainly, although the Spaniards would have died
fighting, they would undoubtedly have been overwhelmed, and the
conquest of Mexico might have been postponed for another generation or
two.  It was bound to happen anyway, sooner or later, as far as that
goes.


{138}

V. The Republic of Tlascala

Cortes's progress finally brought him to a remarkable tribe, whose
friendship he succeeded in winning, and which must be added as the
fourth factor, with himself, Marina, and the horses, as the cause of
the downfall of Mexico.  Curiously enough, this tribe had a sort of
republican form of government.  It is usually referred to as the
Republic of Tlascala.  It was an independent confederation composed of
