There was no doubt that Peachy was in an exceedingly mischievous mood
and ready for any prank which came to hand. She dodged with her
followers successfully past the kitchen door, without attracting the
hostile attention of Anastasia or any other of the servants. She was
bent on exploring a patch of the garden which was only accessible from
the rear of the scullery. She had observed it from the vantage-ground of
the roof, and had decided that, by climbing on to a low shed, it would
be quite possible to scale the wall which divided the grounds of the
Villa Camellia from those of its next door neighbor. The girls had
always been extremely curious about the Villa Sutri. From their
dormitory windows they could catch a glimpse of its green shutters and
creeper-covered walls, set away among a thick grove of trees, and they
had decided that its garden looked immensely superior to their own. The
estate belonged to Count Sutri, who often spent part of the winter and
spring among his orange groves and his flowery pergolas. He was supposed
to have a reputation for gardening, and rumors of his wonderful exotics
had circulated round the school. None of the girls, however, had ever
actually been inside the grounds.

Peachy's project was, of course, extremely audacious, and had the Count
been at home she would hardly have dared to let it materialize. She had
heard Mrs. Clark mention on Sunday that their neighbor had started for a
cruise in his yacht, and that he would probably be away for a
considerable time.

"The Villa will be shut up, and only a few gardeners left about the
place," declared Peachy, "and if I know anything of Italian gardeners,
they'll all be sitting smoking inside the summer-house, so we needn't
trouble ourselves to worry about them. It's the opportunity of a
lifetime. I saw the whole thing in a flash from the roof. There's a shed
on our side of the wall and a shed on his. All you have to do is to step
over and get down. Nothing could be simpler. I'm just aching to explore
that garden."

Delia, still thinking of her exeat, demurred, and even Irene's valor
slightly quailed.

"Oh, come on! Be sports!" tempted Peachy. "You'll never get such a
chance in your lives again--never."

So they hesitated, and were lost, and finally followed their leader up
the low, sloping roof of the shed.

As Peachy had prophesied, it was really remarkably easy. They had only
to scale quite a low piece of wall, and drop on to the roof of the shed
on the other side, then scramble down into Count Sutri's garden. In less
than five minutes the feat was accomplished, and three rather awed but
delighted girls were speeding along a green alley in quest of adventure.

There was no doubt about it being a beautiful garden. It was more
carefully kept than that of the Villa Camellia, and contained choicer
and rarer flowers. There were glorious tanks of water-lilies, and there
were pergolas of sweet-scented creepers, and the statues and arbors
utterly eclipsed even those of a public park. It was evidently the
Count's favorite hobby, and he had spared no expense in laying out the
grounds. Rather fearful of being caught by some chance gardener the
girls walked on, holding themselves in readiness to dive away if
necessary and make a quick escape.

"Do you feel like Adam and Eve in Paradise?" queried Delia tremulously.

"Not a bit, because they never got back after they were once turned out.
I wish we could annex this place and add it on to the Villa Camellia.
The Count can't want it while he's away."

The girls wandered about in breathless enjoyment. Stolen waters are
sweet, and somebody else's garden seemed much more attractive than their
own. They did not dare to venture too near the Villa, and kept carefully
away from anything that looked like a grotto or a summer-house, in which
they might find a gardener seated, enjoying his cigarette. At the end of
a rose pergola, however, Peachy made a discovery. It was neither more
nor less than a flight of steps leading down to a door in the ground.
She stood gazing at it with curiosity.

"Now I wonder what that is?" she exclaimed.

[Illustration: "'I WONDER WHAT THAT IS?' SHE EXCLAIMED"

--_Page 183_]

"Looks like the entrance to a mausoleum," shuddered Delia.

"Or the strong room where the Count keeps his money," laughed Irene.

"I don't believe it's either. I shouldn't be surprised if it's the
passage leading to the sea. I know there is one in the Sutri garden, to
get down to the bathing cove. How priceless if we've happened to light
upon it. Is that door open? I'm going to see."

Peachy ran down the steps, turned the handle, and somewhat to her own
astonishment found the door unlocked. She was peering into a long dark
tunnel, at the end of which could be distinguished a faint glint of
light. This was indeed an adventure. It seemed a deed of daring to
explore such hidden depths, but she was out to take risks that
afternoon.

"Come along!" she commanded, bracing up the spirits of her more timorous
comrades.

Holding one another's arms particularly tightly, the three entered the
doorway and began to walk along the underground passage. It sloped
sharply downwards, and was rough under foot, but the farther they
descended the brighter grew the light in front of them. Presently they
had stumbled out of the darkness, and were emerging from a tunnel at the
foot of the cliffs, and stepping out on to the sandy shore of a little
cove.

It had always been a great grievance at the Villa Camellia that the
school had no bathing place, and the girls had greatly coveted the creek
which was the exclusive property of their neighbor, Count Sutri. To find
themselves on a level with the sea, facing the lapping waves, was
exactly what they had hoped. They ran along the sand in huge delight, to
the very edge of the water. It was really a beautiful cove. There were
groups of rocks with smooth pools amongst them, and in the silvery sand
were numbers of tiny fragile shells, very pretty and delicate, and just
the thing for a collection.

"It's a shame it should all belong to one man who probably hardly ever
uses it," flamed Peachy. "Now, if only we could all come down here to
bathe, wouldn't it be a stunt? The cove is really mostly under the
garden of the Villa Camellia. _I_ say it ought to belong to us."

"It's ours for the moment at any rate," said Irene.

"Yes, isn't it great? We've got it all to ourselves," rejoiced Delia,
dancing along the beach with outstretched arms, like an incarnation of
Zephyr or a spring vision of a sea-nymph. She skimmed over the sand
almost as if she were flying, but, as she reached the largest group of
rocks, her exalted mood suddenly dissipated and her high spirits came
down to earth with a thud. Sitting on the other side of the rock, calmly
smoking a cigar, was a middle-aged individual in a tweed coat and a soft
hat. The creek, which they had imagined was their private paradise, was
occupied after all.

Delia fled back to her friends, this time on wings of fright, and
communicated her awful discovery.

"It must be Count Sutri," gasped Peachy.

"He can't have started off in his yacht after all," agreed Irene.

"I don't _think_ he saw me, but I'm not sure about it," panted Delia
breathlessly.

"Whether he did or he didn't we'd better scoot quick," opined Peachy.

So three agitated girls dashed back over the sands and into the dark
tunnel, and hurried as fast as they could up the underground passage,
expecting every moment to hear a footstep behind them and a voice
demanding to know what they were doing trespassing upon the premises. At
the top of the tunnel a horrible surprise awaited them. The door through
which they had entered was shut and bolted. At first they could hardly
believe their ill luck. They groped for the handle in the darkness, and
pushed and pulled and turned and tugged, but all in vain. They even
thumped on the door and called, hoping to attract the attention of a
gardener, but there was no reply. They were hopelessly locked inside the
underground passage.

Now thoroughly frightened they were almost in tears.

"We shall have to go back to the cove," faltered Irene.

"And show ourselves to Count Sutri, and ask him to take us back
somehow," gulped Peachy.

"We're in for the biggest row of our lives with Miss Rodgers," choked
Delia.

There was certainly nothing else to be done. Time was passing quickly,
and unless they could return at once to the Villa Camellia they would be
late for preparation. Very sadly and soberly they walked back along the
seashore to the rocks.

"_You_ explain, Peachy," urged the others, and Peachy, though she did
not relish the task thus thrust upon her, acknowledged that she was the
instigator of the whole affair and therefore responsible for helping her
companions out of a decidedly awkward situation.

The gentleman in the soft hat was still sitting under the shadow of the
rock smoking, but he rose and threw away his cigar as the deputation of
three advanced to address him. Peachy, in her very best Italian, began
to stammer out an explanation and excuses. He listened for a moment or
two, then shook his head and interrupted.

"Sorry I don't speak much Italian. I'm afraid I don't quite understand."

"O-o-h! You're American!" gasped Peachy, her face one broad smile of
relief. "We--we thought you were Count Sutri."

"I haven't that honor! I'm only plain Mr. Bond. I've taken the Count's
villa, though, for two months. Can I be of any service to you?"

"We're Americans too," sparkled Peachy; "at least Delia and I are. We're
at school at the Villa Camellia up there. I--I'm sorry to say we're
trespassing here. We climbed over the wall into your garden and came
down the passage to the shore, and now the door's locked and we can't
get back again."

"And it's nearly preparation time," added Delia desperately.

Mr. Bond's eyes twinkled with amusement.

"I'll take you back," he offered. "It was hard luck to find the door
locked. I've hardly explored the place properly myself yet. I came down
in the lift."

"The lift!" exclaimed Irene in surprise.

"Yes, here it is, and a very convenient arrangement too," said Mr.
Bond, leading the way into an artificial cave close at hand.

Here to the girls' amazement was a perfectly modern and up-to-date
"ascenseur," nicely upholstered and lighted by electricity. Mr. Bond
ushered his visitors inside, closed the door, pressed a button, and
immediately they shot aloft, landing ultimately in a kiosk in Count
Sutri's garden at the top of the cliff. Feeling as if a magician had
used occult means to transport them back to safety, the girls gazed
round highly delighted to find themselves out of the cove. Their host,
to whom they hastily confided some details of how they had penetrated
into his premises, fetched a ladder, and by its aid they mounted to the
roof of the shed, and skipped over the wall on to the top of their own
wood-hut.

"You won't tell Miss Rodgers?" begged Peachy, waving a good-by to their
rescuer after they had all protested their gratitude.

"I guess I know how to keep a secret," he laughed. "I won't betray you.
Hope you'll be in time. There goes your school bell. You've run it fine
but I believe you'll just do it if you hustle up."

Three breathless girls, with minds much too agitated to apply
themselves properly to French translation, slipped into the Villa
Camellia at the eleventh hour, and answered "present" as their names
were read on the roll-call. Peachy's disheveled hair drew down a rebuke
from Miss Bickford, but this was such a very minor evil that she took it
meekly, smoothed the offending elf-locks with her fingers, and composed
her dimples to an expression of docile humility.

"We got out of that very well," she purred in private afterwards.

"Thanks to Mr. Bond and the lift," agreed Irene.

"I guess I'm not going to try anything so risky again," declared Delia.
"It was the fix of my life. I'll be down with nervous prostration
to-morrow. Shouldn't wonder if I raise a temperature to-night. Peachy
Proctor, you may coax and tease as you like, but nothing you say will
ever induce me to climb that wall and go into Count Sutri's garden
again. It's not worth the thrills. Sorry to be a crab, but I mean it."




CHAPTER XIV

The Villa Bleue


Delia's good resolution remained only half fulfilled, for after all she
visited Count Sutri's cove again. This time, however, it was in a
perfectly orthodox fashion. Mr. and Mrs. Bond, meeting Miss Morley at
the house of an American resident in Fossato, invited the whole school
to come and view the garden on Sunday afternoon, and clad in their best
dresses the girls paraded in through the gate, and were shown the
beauties of the lovely grounds. They were taken in relays down in the
lift to the creek by the sea, and afterwards entertained with ice-cream
and biscuits on the terrace in front of the villa, which was all very
interesting and delightful, though not nearly so exciting as the
surreptitious peep which the naughty trio had previously obtained on
their own account. Mr. Bond might indeed be silent on the subject of
that afternoon's adventure, but the expedition into his grounds had been
only a part of Peachy's pranks in her game of "Follow the Leader," and
for one of her sins at any rate she was to be called to account. The
cistern on the top of the roof supplied a tap on the upper landing from
which Anastasia, one of the chambermaids, was accustomed to draw water
with which to fill the bedroom jugs.

On the morning after the events just narrated she took her can as usual,
but was utterly horrified, when she turned the tap, to find the water
running red. She was intensely superstitious, and immediately jumped to
the conclusion that she was the victim of witchcraft, so she flung her
apron over her head, commenced to sob, and deplored the early death
which would probably overtake her. She sat on the landing making quite a
scene, prophesying evil to the other servants who crowded round to
condole and marvel, and showing the bewitched water in her jug with a
mixture of importance and horror. The girls who occupied rooms on the
upper landing were duly thrilled, and, after debating every possible or
impossible solution of the mystery, were on the point of carrying the
tale to Miss Rodgers when Peachy came hurrying along.

"I've only just heard. Don't, _don't_ go to the 'Ogre's Den' about it.
If you love me don't. I guess I know what's happened. The water's _not_
bewitched. If you've any sense left in your silly head come with me on
to the roof and we'll look at the cistern. We'll soon find out what's
the matter. Callie, lend me your butterfly-net, that's a saintly girl!"

Anastasia, though somewhat protesting, allowed herself to be persuaded,
and went with Peachy first to the kitchen floor and then up the iron
staircase to the roof. Approaching the cistern Peachy climbed on to its
edge, lowered her butterfly-net, and presently fished up a wet and
draggled scarlet ribbon which stained her fingers red as she held it out
to Anastasia's astonished gaze.

"I guess it's this that has been bleeding inside the tank and has
stained the water," she explained.

"But, Signorina, I ask how it place itself there?" demanded the still
puzzled chambermaid in her halting English, then mother-wit
overmastering native superstition, she burst into laughter. "Oh! Oh! Oh!
It is no magic but you, Signorina. Who hid my towels? I go to tell Mees
Rodgers. Yes! You shall get into very big scrape!"

"No, Anastasia, don't tell," implored Peachy. "It was only a joke. Look
here! Are you fond of chocolates? I had a box sent me yesterday, and you
shall have them all. It won't do any good to tell Miss Rodgers, will
it?"

"You not come on to this roof again and touch my towels?" conceded
Anastasia doubtfully.

"Never! I promise faithfully."

"Then I not tell."

"Good! You're a white angel. I'll square the girls and get them not to
mind washing in pink water for a day or two. It ought to improve their
complexions. So we'll just say nothing at all about it at headquarters.
That's settled. Anastasia, your English is improving wonderfully; I
guess I'll teach you some American next--it's the finest language in the
world. Botheration, I've soused Callie's butterfly-net. I don't know
what she'll say about it. I'm out of one scrape into another the whole
time. Well, I'd rather face Callie than Miss Rodgers anyhow. She may
storm, but she can't give me bad marks or stop my next exeat. Come
along, Anastasia. We'll take the ribbon with us to show as a trophy. It
will give them a little bit of a surprise downstairs if I'm not
mistaken."

Owing to luck, and to the kindness of Anastasia, Peachy's pranks did
not on this occasion meet with any punishment. Irene, who had been
greatly fearing an exposure of the whole escapade, once more breathed
freely. If the matter had come to the ears of Miss Rodgers the three
girls would certainly have been "gated," and Irene was particularly
anxious not to lose her approaching exeat. It was her turn to go to tea
at the Villa Bleue, and she was looking forward greatly to the occasion.
It would be her first visit, for she had forfeited her privilege earlier
in the term, when she and Lorna lost themselves among the olive groves.
Much to their satisfaction the buddies were invited together, in company
with Mary, Sheila, Monica, and Winnie, who were also on the good conduct
list. Of course there was considerable prinking in front of the
looking-glasses, careful adjusting of hair ribbons and other trifles of
toilet, before the girls considered themselves in party trim and ready
to do credit to the Villa Camellia. Escorted by Miss Brewster, who acted
chaperon, or "policewoman" as Sheila insisted on calling her, they
walked in orderly file down the eucalyptus avenue to the town, past the
hotel, along the esplanade, and up a steep incline to the Villa Bleue.
The hospitable little parsonage seemed an exact materialization of the
personality of its owners. Canon and Mrs. Clark were both small and
smiling and charitable and particularly kind, and their tiny
unpretentious dwelling, with its sunny aspect and its flowers and its
pet birds, was absolutely in keeping with their tone of mind. From some
houses seem to emanate certain mental atmospheres, as if they reflected
the sum total of the thoughts that have collected there, and sensitive
visitors receive subconscious impressions of chilly magnificence,
intellectual activity or a spirit of general tolerance.

The Villa Bleue always felt radiant with kind and cheery impulses, and
its flower-covered walls seemed almost to shine as the girls, secure of
a welcome, parted from Miss Brewster, and ran up the steps to the
pleasant veranda. Mrs. Clark made them at home at once. She had six cosy
basket-chairs waiting for them, and a plateful of most delicious almond
taffy, and she installed them to sit and admire the view, while she
talked and put them at their ease. Schoolgirls are notoriously bashful
visitors, and in certain circumstances all six would have been mum as
mice and entirely devoid of conversation except a conventional yes or
no, but with dear Mrs. Clark's beaming face and warm-hearted manner to
disarm their shyness they were perfectly natural, and enjoyed themselves
as entirely as if they were at a dormitory tea or a sorority supper. The
best part about Mrs. Clark was that she had the happy knack of
forgetting her age and throwing herself back into the mental environment
of sixteen. She was certainly not a stiff hostess; indeed her treatment
of her guests was less conventional than that adopted by Rachel Moseley
at the prefects' parties; she laughed and chatted and asked questions
about the school, till in a few minutes the girls were chattering like
sparrows and behaving as if they had known her for years.

Tea was set out on little basket tables in the veranda, and there were
all the delicious home-made things for which the Villa Bleue had gained
a just reputation--brown scones and honey, potato cakes, Scotch
shortbread, buttered oatmeal biscuits, iced lemon sandwich cake, and
chocolate fingers.

When tea was taken away and the basket tables were once more free, Mrs.
Clark produced dainty cards and scarlet pencils and organized a
competition. It was entitled "Nursery Rhymes," and contained twenty
questions to be answered by the competitors. These ran as follows:


NURSERY RHYMES COMPETITION

          1. Who made Cock Robin's shroud?

          2. Who was exhausted by family cares?

          3. Who disliked insects?

          4. Who showed an interest in
          horticulture?

          5. Who summoned an orchestra?

          6. Who pursued matrimonial intentions
          without the parental sanction?

          7. Who showed religious intolerance?

          8. Who took a joint that did not belong
          to him?

          9. Who deplored the loss of hand gear?

          10. Whose salary was restricted owing to
          slackness in work?

          11. What animal pursued horological
          investigations?

          12. Who made the record high jump?

          13. Who wore a superfluity of jewelry?

          14. Whose culinary efforts were
          temporarily confiscated?

          15. Who pulled Pussy from the well?

          16. Who slept instead of attending to
          business?

          17. Who exhibited sanctimonious
          satisfaction over a meal?

          18. Who lost a number of domestic
          animals?

          19. Who had an accident during the
          performance of their duty?

