made about them, and the saddlery."

"That would be excellent, sir. As I told the general this morning,
I have some rubies and other stones. I have no idea what they are
worth. They were given me by those men I was with, in the forest.
They said that they were very difficult to dispose of, as the mines
are monopolies of government so, when my man Meinik proposed it,
they acceded at once to his request, and handed a number of them
over to me.

"I have not even looked at them. There may be someone, here, who
could tell me what they are worth."

"Yes, I have no doubt some of those Parsee merchants, who have
lately set up stores, could tell you. I should only take down two
or three stones to them, if I were you. If they are really
valuable, you might be robbed of them; but I am rather afraid that
you will not find that they are so. Brigand fellows will hardly
have been likely to give you anything very valuable."

"I don't think that they looked at them, themselves; they were the
proceeds of one day's attack on a number of merchants. They found
them concealed on them, and they were so well satisfied with the
loot they got, in merchandise that they could dispose of, that I
doubt whether they even opened the little packages of what they
considered the most dangerous goods to keep; for if they were
captured, and gems found upon them, it would be sufficient to
condemn them, at once."

"Do you speak Hindustani? If not, I will send one of the clerks
with you."

"Yes, sir; and three or four other of the Indian languages."

"Ah! Then you can manage for yourself.

"When you have seen one of these Parsees, come round to my office.
I shall have seen the paymaster by that time, and have talked over
with him how we can arrange about the horses. I should think that
the best way would be to have a committee of three officers to
value them, and the saddlery; and then you might authorize him to
receive your extra pay as interpreter, and to place it to
Hitchcock's account. You will find your own staff pay more than
ample, here; as there are no expenses, whatever, except your share
of the mess."

"Thank you very much, indeed, Colonel."

In the morning, Stanley took one of the little parcels from the bag
and opened it. It contained thirty stones, of which twenty were
rubies, six sapphires, and four emeralds. They seemed to him of a
good size but, as they were in the rough state, he had no idea what
size they would be, when cut.

There were three of the Parsee merchants. The first he went to
said, at once, that he did not deal in gems. The next he called on
examined the stones carefully.

"It is impossible to say, for certain," he said, "how much they are
worth until they are cut, for there may be flaws in them that
cannot be detected. Now, if I were to buy them like this, I could
not give more than a hundred rupees each. If they are all flawless,
they would be worth much more; but it would be a pure speculation,
and I will not go beyond that sum."

Stanley then visited the third store. The trader here inspected
them a little more carefully than the last had done, examined them
with a magnifying glass, held them up to the light; then he weighed
each stone and jotted down some figures. At last, he said:

"The stones are worth five thousand rupees. If they are flawless,
they would be worth double that. I will give you five thousand
myself or, if you like, I will send them to a friend of mine, at
Madras. He is one of the best judges of gems in India. He shall say
what he will give for them, and you shall pay me five percent
commission. He is an honest trader; you can ask any of the officers
from Madras."

"I will accept that offer, if you will make me an advance of
fifteen hundred rupees upon them; and will pay you, at the rate of
ten percent per annum, interest till you receive the money for
them."

The Parsee again took the gems, and examined them carefully.

"Do you agree to take the jeweller's offer, whatever it is?"

"Yes; that is to say, if it is over the five thousand. If it is
under the five thousand, I will sell them to you at that sum."

"I agree to that," the man said. "But do not fear; if the two
largest stones are without a flaw, they alone are worth five
thousand."

"Let us draw up the agreement, at once," Stanley said.

And, accordingly, the terms were drawn up, in Hindustani, and were
signed by both parties. The Parsee then went to a safe, unlocked
it, and counted out the rupees, to the value of 150 pounds. These
he placed in a bag, and handed them to Stanley who, delighted at
the sum that he had obtained for but a small portion of the gems,
went to the quartermaster general's office.

"We have just finished your business," Colonel Adair said, as he
entered. "Major Moultrie, the paymaster, Colonel Watt, and myself
have examined the horses. I know that Hitchcock paid sixty pounds
apiece for them, at Calcutta. They are both Arabs, and good ones,
and were not dear at the money. Our opinion is that, if they were
put up to auction here, they would fetch 40 pounds apiece; and that
the saddle and bridle, holsters, and accoutrements would fetch
another 20 pounds. There are also a pair of well-finished pistols
in the holsters. They were overlooked, or they would have been put
up in the sale yesterday. They value them at 8 pounds the brace; in
all, 108 pounds.

"Will that suit you? The major will, as I proposed, stop the money
from your pay as a first-class interpreter--that is, two hundred
and fifty rupees a month--so that, in four months and a half, you
will have cleared it off."

"I am very much obliged to you, Colonel; but I have just received
an advance of fifteen hundred rupees, on some of my gems which the
Parsee is going to send to a jeweller, of the name of Burragee, at
Madras."

"I congratulate you, for I hardly hoped that they would turn out to
be worth so much. Burragee is a first-rate man, and you can rely
upon getting a fair price from him. Well, that obviates all
difficulty.

"By the way, I should recommend you to get a light bedstead and
bed, and a couple of blankets, at one of the Parsee stores. Of
course, you did not think of it, yesterday, or you might have
bought Hitchcock's. However, I noticed in one of the Parsees' shops
a number of light bamboo bedsteads; which are the coolest and best
in a climate like this. If you lay a couple of blankets on the
bamboos, you will find that you don't want a mattress."

"I don't know what my duties are, sir, or whether the general will
be wanting me."

"He will not want you, today. Anyhow, he will know that you will be
making your arrangements, and moving into your quarters.

"By the way, Hitchcock brought a syce with him. You must have a man
for your horses, and I have no doubt he will be glad to stay on
with you."

Two hours later Stanley was installed in his quarters--a room some
twelve feet long by eight wide. A bed stood in one corner. There
was a table for writing on, two light bamboo chairs, and an Indian
lounging chair. In the corner was a small bamboo table, on which
was a large brass basin; while a great earthenware jar for water
stood beside it, and a piece of Indian matting covered the floor.

He learned that the staff messed together, in a large room in the
next house; and that he would there get a cup of coffee and a
biscuit, at six in the morning, breakfast at half-past eight, lunch
and dinner; so that he would not have to do any cooking, whatever,
for himself. He had given Meinik a small sum to lay out in cooking
pots and necessaries for his own use.

The syce had gladly entered his employ. Stanley had inspected the
horses which, although light to the eye, would be well capable of
bearing his weight through a long day's work. They were picketed,
with those of the general and staff, in a line behind the house
devoted to the headquarters. After lunch he went into the
general's, and reported himself as ready for duty.

"I shall not want you this afternoon, Mr. Brooke. Here is a plan
showing the position of the different corps. You had better get it
by heart. When it gets cooler, this afternoon, I should advise you
to ride out and examine the position and the roads; so that even at
night you can, if necessary, carry a message to any of the
regiments. The Burmese are constantly creeping up and stabbing our
sentries, and sometimes they attack in considerable force. When
anything like heavy firing begins, it will be your duty to find out
at once what is going on; and bring me word, as it may be necessary
to send up reinforcements.

"In the morning it will be your duty to examine any prisoners who
have been taken during the night, and also natives who have made
their way into the town; in order to ascertain whether any date has
been fixed for their next attack, and what forces are likely to
take part in it. You can make your man useful at this work.

"By the way, I will tell Colonel Adair to put him down on the list
of the quartermaster's native followers. He need not do anything
else but this. But it is likely that the natives will speak more
freely to him than they would to a white officer, and he may as
well be earning thirty rupees a month, and drawing rations, as
hanging about all day, doing nothing."

Thanking the general, Stanley took the plan and, going back to his
quarters, studied it attentively. He told Meinik of the arrangement
that had been made for him, with which the Burman was much pleased.
Thirty rupees a month seemed a large sum to him, and he was glad
that he should not be costing Stanley money for his food.

Three hours later one of his horses was brought round, and he
started on his ride through the camp. There were two roads leading
through the town to the great pagoda. Both were thickly bordered by
religious houses and pagodas--the latter, for the most part, being
in a state of dilapidation. Houses and pagodas alike had been
turned into quarters for the troops, and had been invaluable during
the wet season.

The terrace of the great pagoda was occupied by the 89th Regiment
and the Madras Artillery. This was the most advanced position, and
was the key of the defence. Leaving his horse in charge of his
syce, at the foot of the pagoda hill, Stanley went up to the
terrace and soon entered into conversation with some of the British
officers; who at once recognized him as having been, that morning,
put in orders as the general's aide-de-camp. As he was unknown to
everyone, and no ship had come in for some days, there was
naturally much curiosity felt as to who the stranger was who had
been appointed to a commission, and to the coveted post of
aide-de-camp, in one day.

After chatting for two or three minutes, they conducted Stanley to
the colonel's quarters, a small building at the foot of the pagoda.

"This is Mr. Brooke, Colonel, the gentleman who was gazetted to us,
this morning."

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Brooke; but I should be more glad,
still, if you had been coming to join, for we have lost several
officers from sickness, and there are others unfit for duty. When
did you arrive?"

"I arrived only yesterday morning, sir. I came here in disguise,
having made my way down from Ava."

"Oh, indeed! We heard a report that a white man had arrived, in
disguise, at the lines of the 45th Native Infantry; but we have had
no particulars, beyond that."

"I was captured at Ramoo, sir, while I was acting as an officer of
the native levy. Fortunately I was stunned by the graze of a musket
ball and, being supposed dead, was not killed; as were all the
other officers who fell into the hands of the Burmese. Their fury
had abated by the time I came to myself, and I was carried up to
Ava with some twenty sepoy prisoners. After a time I made my escape
from prison, and took to the forest; where I remained some weeks,
till the search for me had abated somewhat. Then I made my way down
the country, for the most part in a fishing boat, journeying only
at night, and so succeeded in getting in here. Fortunately I speak
the Mug dialect, which is very closely akin to the Burmese."

"Well," the colonel said, "I hope that you will consider the
regiment your home; though I suppose that, until the campaign is at
an end, you will only be able to pay us an occasional visit. You
are lucky in getting the staff appointment. No doubt your being
able to talk Burmese has a great deal to do with it."

"Everything, I think, sir. The general had no one on his staff who
could speak the language and, unless he happened to have with him
one of the very few men here who can do so, often had to wait some
time before a prisoner could be questioned."

He remained chatting for half an hour, and then rode back to the
town; taking the other road to that which he had before traversed.



Chapter 8: The Pagoda.


Two days later a prisoner was captured, when endeavouring to crawl
up the pagoda hill--having slipped past the outposts--and was sent
into headquarters. Stanley questioned him closely; but could obtain
no information, whatever, from him. Telling him to sit down by the
house, he placed a British sentry over him.

"Keep your eye," he said, "on the door of the next house. You will
see a Burman come out. You are to let him talk with the prisoner,
but let no one else speak to him. Don't look as if you had any
orders about him, but stand carelessly by. The fellow will tell us
nothing, but it is likely enough that he will speak to one of his
own countrymen."

"I understand, sir."

Stanley went into his house and told Meinik what he was wanted to
do.

"I will find out," Meinik said confidently and, a minute or two
later, went out and strolled along past the prisoner. As he did so
he gave him a little nod and, returning again shortly, saluted him
in Burmese. The third time he passed he looked inquiringly at the
sentry, as if to ask whether he might speak to the prisoner. The
soldier, however, appeared to pay no attention to him; but stood
with grounded musket, leaning against the wall, and Meinik went up
to the man.

"You are in bad luck," he said. "How did you manage to fall into
the hands of these people?"

"It matters not to you," the Burman said indignantly, "since you
have gone over to them."

"Not at all, not at all," Meinik replied. "Do you not know that
there are many here who, like myself, have come in as fugitives,
with instructions what to do when our people attack? I am expecting
news as to when the soothsayers declare the day to be a fortunate
one. Then we shall all be in readiness to do our share, as soon as
the firing begins."

"It will be on the fourth day from this," the Burman said. "We do
not know whether it will be the night before, or the night after.
The soothsayers say both will be fortunate nights; and the
Invulnerables will then assault the pagoda, and sweep the
barbarians away. The princes and woongees will celebrate the great
annual festival there, two days later."

"That is good!" Meinik said. "We shall be on the lookout, never
fear."

"What are they going to do to me. Will they cut off my head?"

"No, you need not be afraid of that. These white men never kill
prisoners. After they are once taken, they are safe. You will be
kept for a time and, when our countrymen have destroyed the
barbarians and taken the town, they will free you from prison.

"There are some of the white officers coming. I must get away, or
they will be asking questions."

As he walked away, the sentry put his musket to his shoulder and
began to march briskly up and down. A moment later the general
stepped up to him.

"What are you doing, my man? Who put you on guard over that
prisoner?"

"I don't know his name, sir," the sentry said, standing at
attention. "He was a young staff officer. He came to the guard tent
and called for a sentry and, as I was next on duty, the sergeant
sent me with him. He put me to watch this man."

"All right; keep a sharp lookout over him.

"I wonder what Brooke left the fellow here for, instead of sending
him to prison," the general said to Colonel Adair. "We examined
him, but could get nothing out of him, even when I threatened to
hang him."

"I will just run up to his quarters and ask him, sir."

Just as he entered the house, Stanley was coming down the stairs.

"The general wants to know, Mr. Brooke, why you placed a prisoner
under a guard by his house; instead of sending him to the prison,
as usual?"

"I was just coming to tell him, sir."

"Ah, well, he is outside; so you can tell us both together."

"Well, Mr. Brooke, what made you put a sentry over the man, and
leave him here? The men are hard enough worked, without having
unnecessary sentry duty."

"Yes, sir; I only left him for a few minutes. I was convinced the
man knew something, by his demeanour when I questioned him; and I
thought I might as well try if my man could not get more out of him
than I could. So I put a sentry over him, and gave him instructions
that he was to let a Burman, who would come out of this house,
speak to the prisoner; but that no one else was to approach him.

"Then I instructed my man as to the part that he was to play. He
passed two or three times, making a sign of friendship to the
prisoner. Then, as the sentry had apparently no objection to his
speaking to him, he came up. At first the man would say nothing to
him, but Meinik told him that he was one of those who had been sent
to Rangoon to aid, when the assault took place; and that he was
anxiously waiting for news when the favourable day would be
declared by the astrologers, so that he and those with him would be
ready to begin their work, as soon as the attack commenced. The
prisoner fell into the snare, and told him that it would be made
either on the night before or on the night of the fourth day from
this; when the Invulnerables had undertaken to storm the pagoda. It
seems that the date was fixed partly because it was a fortunate
one, and also in order that the princes and head officials might
properly celebrate the great annual festival of the pagoda; which
falls, it seems, on the sixth day from now."

"Excellent indeed, Mr. Brooke. It is a great relief to me to know
when the assault is going to take place, and from what point it
will be delivered. But what made you think of the story that the
Burman was one of a party that had come in to do something?"

"It was what Colonel Adair mentioned at dinner, last evening, sir.
He was saying how awkward it would be if some of these natives who
have come in were to fire the town, just as a strong attack was
