land.

"It is, my boy.  Go and fetch me dry clothes while we haul in the kite
and make her snug."

"When do you mean to start?" asked Leo, as he coiled away the slack of
the line on the reel.

"The first steady fair wind that blows from the south," answered the
Captain, "but we must have one or two experimental trials of the kites
and boats together, before we set out on the real voyage."

"It's a capital idea," returned Leo enthusiastically.  "There's a sort
of neck-or-nothing dash about it that quite suits me.  But, uncle, what
of the Eskimos?  The three boats won't carry the half of them."

"I know that, lad, and shall get over the difficulty by leaving some of
them behind.  Chingatok says they are quite able to take care of
themselves; can easily regain the Greenland shore, find their canoes, or
make new ones, and return to their own land if they choose."

"But, uncle," said Alf, who was by no means as reckless as his brother,
"don't you think it's rather risky to go off into an unknown sea in open
boats, for no one knows how long, to go no one knows exactly where?"

"Why, Alf," returned the Captain with a laugh, "if you were as stupid
about your scientific pursuits as you are about geographical affairs,
you would not be worth your salt.  A sea's a sea, isn't it, whether
known or unknown, and the laws that affect all seas are pretty much
alike.  Of course it is risky.  So is going on a forlorn hope.  So is
shooting with a set of fellows who don't know how to manage their guns.
So is getting on a horse, for it may kick you off or run away.  So is
eating fish, for you may choke yourself.  Everything, almost, is more or
less risky.  You _must_ risk something if you'd discover the North Pole,
which has baffled adventurers from the days of Adam till now.  And you
are wrong in saying that we shall go off for no one knows how long.  The
distance from this island to the Pole is pretty nearly 200 miles.  If
our kites carry us along at the rate of ten miles an hour, we shall
cover the distance in 20 hours.  If we have calms or contrary winds we
may take 20 days.  If storms come, we have not much to fear, for the
weather is warm,--so, too,--is the water.  Then, our boats are
lifeboats--they cannot sink.  As to not knowing where exactly we are
going, why, man, we're going to the North Pole.  Everybody knows where
that is, and we are going to the home of Chingatok, which cannot be very
far from it."

"There, Alf, I hope you are sufficiently answered," said Leo, as he
undid the locking-gear of the kite, which by that time lay prone on its
face, as peaceful as a lamb.

The next three days were spent in flying the other kites, tying them on
the boats, acquiring experience, and making preparations for the voyage.
It was found that, with a moderate breeze, the kites towed the boats at
the rate of ten miles an hour, which was beyond the most sanguine hopes
of the Captain.  Of course they could not beat to windward with them,
but they could sail with a considerable slant, and they prevented the
boats, while thus advancing, from making much leeway by means of deep
_leeboards_, such as are used even at the present day by Dutch ships.

"But I can't understand," said Benjy, after several trials had been
made, "why you should not have fitted sails to the boats, instead of
kites."

"Because a sail only a quarter the size of a kite would upset the boat,"
said the Captain, "and one small enough to suit it would be little
better than a pair of oars.  This kite system is like fitting a gigantic
sail to a lilliputian boat, d'ye see?"

"I see, father.  But I wish it had been a balloon.  It would have been
greater fun to have gone to the Pole in a balloon!"

"A balloon will never go there, nor anywhere else, Benjy, except where
the wind carries it, for a balloon cannot be steered.  It's impossible
in the nature of things--as much so as that dream of the visionary,
perpetual motion."

On the fourth day after their arrival at Great Hope Island the wind blew
strong and steady from the south, and the explorers prepared to start.
The Eskimos had been told that they were to remain behind and shift for
themselves--a piece of news which did not seem to affect them at all,
one way or other.  Those who were selected to go with the explorers were
perfectly willing to do so.  Chingatok, of course, was particularly
ready.  So were his corpulent mother and Tekkona and Oblooria; so also
were Oolichuk, Ivitchuk, and Akeetolik.

It was a splendid sunny afternoon when the kites were finally flown and
attached to the three boats which were commanded respectively by the
Captain Leo, and Alf.  These three sat at the bow of each boat
manipulating the regulators, and keeping the kites fluttering, while the
goods and provisions were put on board.  Then the Eskimo women and crews
stepped in, and the stern ropes were cast loose.

"Let go the check-strings!" shouted the Captain.

This was done.  The huge kites began to strain at once, and the
india-rubber boats went rushing out to sea, leaving the remainder of the
Eskimo band speechless on the shore.  They stood there motionless, with
open mouths and eyes, the very embodiment of unbelieving wonder, till
the boats had disappeared on the horizon.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE OPEN POLAR BASIN AT LAST!  ALF WASHES HIMSELF IN IT.

Who can imagine or describe the feelings of Captain Vane and his young
relatives on finding themselves sweeping at such a magnificent rate over
the great Polar basin?--that mysterious sea, which some believe to be a
sea of thick-ribbed ice, and others suppose to be no sea at all, but dry
land covered with eternal snows.  One theorist even goes the length of
saying that the region immediately around the Pole is absolutely nothing
at all!--only empty space caused by the whirling of the earth,--a space
which extends through its centre from pole to pole!

Much amusement did the Captain derive from the contemplation of these
theories as he crossed over the grand and boundless ocean, and chatted
pleasantly with his son, or Chingatok, or Toolooha, who formed the crew
of his little boat.

The party consisted of thirteen, all told.  These were distributed as
follows:--

In the Captain's boat were the three just mentioned.

In Leo's boat were Butterface, Oolichuk, and Oblooria.  How it came to
pass that Oolichuk and Oblooria were put into the same boat no one
seemed to know, or indeed to care, except Oolichuk himself, who, to
judge from the expression of his fat face, was much pleased.  As for
Oblooria, her mild visage always betokened contentment or resignation--
save when overshadowed by timidity.

In Alf's boat were Anders, Ivitchuk, Akeetolik, and Tekkona.  The
interpreter had been given to Alf because he was not quite so muscular
or energetic as the Captain or his brother, while Anders was eminently
strong and practical.  The Eskimo women counted as men, being as expert
with oar and paddle as they, and very nearly as strong as most ordinary
men.

What added to the romance of the first day's experience was the fact
that, a few hours after they started, a dead calm settled down over the
sea, which soon became like a great sheet of undulating glass, in which
the rich, white clouds, the clear sky, and the boats with their crews,
were reflected as in a moving, oily mirror; yet, strange to say, the
kites kept steady, and the pace of ten or twelve miles an hour did not
abate for a considerable time.  This, of course, was owing to the fact
that there was a continuous current blowing northward in the higher
regions of the atmosphere.  The sun, meantime, glowed overhead with four
mock-suns around him, nevertheless the heat was not oppressive, partly
because the voyagers were sitting at rest, and partly because a slight
current of cool air, the creation of their own progress, fanned their
cheeks.  Still further to add to the charm, flocks of sea-birds circling
in the air or dipping in the water, a berg or two floating in the
distance, a porpoise showing its back fin now and then, a seal or a
walrus coming up to stare in surprise and going down to meditate,
perhaps in wonder, with an occasional puff from a lazy whale,--all this
tended to prevent monotony, and gave life to the lovely scene.

"Is it not the most glorious and altogether astonishing state of things
you ever heard or dreamed of, father?" asked Benjy, breaking a prolonged
silence.

"Out o' sight, my boy, out o' sight," replied the Captain.  "Never heard
nor saw nor dreamed of anything like it before."

"P'raps it _is_ a dream!" said Benjy, with a slightly distressed look.
"How are we ever to know that we're _not_ dreaming?"

The boy finished his question with a sharp cry and leaped up.

"Steady, boy, steady!  Have a care, or you'll upset the boat," said the
Captain.

"What did you do _that_ for, father?"

"What, my boy?"

"Pinch me so hard!  Surely you didn't do it on purpose?"

"Indeed I did, Ben," replied the Captain with a laugh.  "You asked how
you were to know you were not dreaming.  If you had been dreaming that
would have wakened you--wouldn't it?"

"I dare say it would, father," returned the boy, resuming his seat, "but
I'm convinced now.  Don't do it again, please.  I wish I knew what
Chingatok thinks of it.  Try to ask him, father.  I'm sure you've had
considerable experience in his lingo by this time."

Benjy referred here, not only to the numerous conversations which his
father had of late carried on with the giant through the interpreter,
but to the fact that, having been a whaler in years past, Captain Vane
had previously picked up a smattering of various Eskimo dialects.  Up to
that day he had conversed entirely through the medium of Anders, but as
that useful man was now in Alf's boat, the Captain was left to his own
resources, and got on much better than he had expected.

Chingatok turned his eyes from the horizon on which they had been fixed,
and looked dreamily at the Captain when asked what he was thinking
about.

"I have been thinking," said he, "of home, _my_ home over there."  He
lifted his huge right arm and pointed to the north.  "And I have been
thinking," he continued, "that there must be another home up there."  He
raised his hand and pointed to the sky.

"Why do you think so?" asked the Captain in some surprise.

"Because it is so beautiful, so wonderful, so full of light and peace,"
replied the Eskimo.  "Sometimes the clouds, and the wind, and the rain,
come and cover it; but they pass away, and there it is, just the same,
always calm, and bright, and beautiful.  Could such a place have been
made for nothing?  Is there no one up there? not even the Maker of it?
and if there is, does he stay there alone?  Men and women die, but
surely there is something in us that does not die.  If there is no
spirit in us that lives, of what use was it to make us at all?  I think
we shall have a home up there."

Chingatok had again turned his eyes to the horizon, and spoke the
concluding words as if he were thinking aloud.  The Captain looked at
him earnestly for some time in silence.

"You are right, Chingatok," he said at length, or at least attempted to
say as best he could--"you are right.  My religion teaches me that we
have spirits; that God--your God and mine--dwells up there in what we
call heaven, and that His people shall dwell with him after death."

"His people!" repeated the Eskimo with a perplexed look.  "Are some men
his people and some not?"

"Undoubtedly," replied the Captain, "men who obey a chief's commands are
_his_ men--his friends.  Those who refuse to obey, and do every kind of
wickedness, are _not_ his friends, but his enemies.  God has given us
free-wills, and we may reject him--we may choose to be his enemies."

It must not be supposed that Captain Vane expressed himself thus
clearly, but the above is the substance of what he attempted by many a
strange and complicated sentence to convey.  That he had made his
meaning to some extent plain, was proved by Chingatok's reply.

"But I do not know God's commands; how then can I obey them?"

"You may not know them by book," replied the Captain promptly; "for you
have no books, but there is such a thing as the commands or law of God
written in the heart, and it strikes me, Chingatok, that you both know
and obey more of your Maker's laws than many men who have His word."

To this the Eskimo made no answer, for he did not rightly understand it,
and as the Captain found extreme difficulty in expressing his meaning on
such questions, he was quite willing to drop the conversation.
Nevertheless his respect for Chingatok was immensely increased from that
day forward.

He tried to explain what had been said to Benjy, and as that youth's
mind was of an inquiring turn he listened with great interest, but at
last was forced to confess that it was too deep for him.  Thereafter he
fell into a mood of unusual silence, and pondered the matter for a long
time.

Awaking from his reverie at last, he said, abruptly, "How's her head,
father?"

"Due north, Benjy."

He pulled out a pocket-compass about the size of an ordinary watch,
which instrument it was his habit to guard with the most anxious care.

"North!" repeated the boy, glancing at the instrument with a look of
surprise, "why, we're steering almost due east!"

"Ah!  Ben, that comes of your judging from appearances without
knowledge, not an uncommon state of mind in man and boy, to say nothing
of woman.  Don't you know what variation of the compass is?"

"No, father."

"What! have you been so long at sea with me and never heard yet about
the magnetic pole?"

"Never a word, father.  It seems to me that poles are multiplying as we
get further north."

"Oh, Benjy, for shame--fie! fie!"

"Maybe if you had told me about it I might have had less to be shamed
of, and you too, father."

"That's true, Benjy.  That's true.  You're a sharp boy for your age.
But don't be disrespectful to your father, Ben; no good can ever come o'
that.  Whatever you are, be respectful to your old father.  Come, I'll
tell you about it now."

It will have been observed by this time that little Benjamin Vane was
somewhat free in his converse with his father, but it must not therefore
be supposed that he was really insolent.  All his freedom of speech was
vented in good humour, and the Captain knew that.  There was, indeed, a
powerful bond not only of affection but of sympathy between the little
delicate boy and the big strong man.  They thoroughly understood each
other, and between those who understand each other there may be much
freedom without offence, as everybody knows.

"You must understand," began the Captain, "that although the needle of
the mariner's compass is said to point to the north with its head and to
the south with its tail, it does not do so exactly, because the magnetic
poles do not coincide exactly with the geographical poles.  There are
two magnetic poles just as there are two geographical poles, one in the
southern hemisphere, the other in the northern.  D'ye understand!"

"Clear as daylight, father."

"Well, Benjy, the famous Arctic discoverer, Sir James Ross, in 1832,
discovered that the northern magnetic pole was situated in the island of
Boothia Felix, in latitude 70 degrees 5 seconds and longitude 96 degrees
46 seconds West.  It was discovered by means of an instrument called the
dipping needle, which is just a magnetised needle made for dipping
perpendicularly instead of going round horizontally like the mariner's
compass.  A graduated arc is fitted to it so that the amount of dip at
any place on the earth's surface can be ascertained.  At the magnetic
equator there is no dip at all, because the needle being equally distant
from the north and south magnetic poles, remains horizontal.  As you
travel north the needle dips more and more until it reaches the region
of the north magnetic pole when it is almost perpendicular--pointing
straight down.

"Now, it is only on a very few places of the earth's surface that the
horizontal needle points to the true north and south, and its deviation
from the _earth's_ pole in its determination to point to the _magnetic_
pole is called the variation of the compass.  This variation is greater
or less of course at different places, and must be allowed for in
estimating one's exact course.  In our present explorations we have got
so far beyond the beaten track of travel that greater allowance than
usual has to be made.  In fact we have got considerably to the north of
the magnetic pole.  At the same time we are a good way to the east'ard
of it, so that when I see the compass with its letter N pointing to what
I know to be the magnetic north, I take our geographical position into
account and steer almost due east by _compass_, for the purpose of
advancing due north.  D'ye see?"

"I'm not so sure that I do, father.  It seems to me something like the
Irishman's pig which you pull one way when you want him to go another.
However, I'll take your word for it."

"That's right, my boy; when a man can't understand, he must act on
faith, if he _can_, for there's no forcing our beliefs, you know.
Anyhow he must be content to follow till he does understand; always
supposing that he can trust his leader."

"I'm out of my depths altogether now, father.  P'r'aps we'd better
change the subject.  What d'ye say to try a race with Leo?  His boat
seems to be overhauling us."

"No, no, Ben; no racing.  Let us advance into the great unknown north
with suitable solemnity."

"We appear to sail rather better than you do, uncle," shouted Leo, as
his boat drew near.

"That's because you're not so heavily-laden," replied the Captain,
looking back; "you haven't got giants aboard, you see; moreover there's
one o' you rather light-headed."

"Hallo! uncle; evil communications, eh?  You'd better change Benjy for
Oblooria.  She's quite quiet, and never jokes.  I say, may I go ahead of
you?"

"No, lad, you mayn't.  Take a reef in your regulator, and drop into your
proper place."

Obedient to orders, Leo pulled the regulator or check-string until the
kite's position was altered so as to present less resistance to the
wind, and dropped astern of the _Faith_, which was the name given by
Benjy to his father's boat, the other two being named respectively the
_Hope_ and the _Charity_.

The prosperous advance did not, however, last very long.  Towards
evening the three kites suddenly, and without any previous warning,
began to dive, soar, flutter, and tumble about in a manner that would
have been highly diverting if it had not been dangerous.  This no doubt
