tanglements come about that take years to unravel."

If Captain Trench had been a professional prophet he could hardly have
hit the nail more fairly on the head, for he indicated exactly what bad
government has actually done for Newfoundland--only he might have said
centuries instead of years--for its internal resources, even at the
present time, remain to a very great extent undeveloped.  However, not
being a professional prophet, but merely an ancient mariner, the captain
wound up his remark with a recommendation to hoist all sail and lay
their course, as there was no saying how long the mild weather would
last.

For several days after this they plodded steadily onward, sometimes over
the mountains or across the grassy plains, where migrating reindeer
supplied them with abundant venison; at other times among lakelets and
streams, whose excellent fish and innumerable wildfowl provided them
with variety for the table and music for the ear.  Now and then they saw
the great moose-deer, which rivals the horse in size, and once Hendrick
shot one, at a time when they chanced to have consumed their last
caribou steak, and happened to enter a great forest without anything for
supper in their wallets.  For, occasionally, circumstances may render
men supperless even when surrounded by plenty.

At last they reached the great lake, with its beautiful islands, where
Hendrick had set up his home.

The hunter became very silent as they drew near to its shores.

"You seem anxious," remarked Paul, as they approached the lake.  "Have
you reason to fear aught?"

"None--none," replied his friend quickly; "but I never return after a
long absence without feeling anxious."

A loud halloo soon brought the echoing answer in the shrill voice of
little Oscar, whose canoe quickly shot out from the creek.  It was
speedily followed by the deerskin boat, and, when near enough to be
heard, the reply to Hendrick's anxious inquiry was the gratifying
assurance--"All's well!"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

GRUMMIDGE ASSERTS HIMSELF--GREAT DISCOVERIES ARE MADE AND THE CREW
FLITS.

We must turn aside now for a time to inquire into the doings of the crew
of the _Water Wagtail_, whom we left on the little island off the
eastern seaboard of Newfoundland.  At first, when the discovery was made
that the captain, Paul, and Oliver had been put ashore and left to take
care of themselves without weapons or supplies, there was a disposition
on the part of the better men of the crew to apply what we now style
Lynch law to Big Swinton, David Garnet, and Fred Taylor.  "Let's hang
'em," suggested Grummidge, at a meeting of the men when the culprits
were not present.  "Sure an' I'll howld the rope wid pleasure," said
Squill.  "An' I'll help ye," cried Little Stubbs.

But Jim Heron shook his head, and did not quite see his way to that,
while George Blazer protested against such violent proceedings
altogether.  As he was backed up by the majority of the crew, the
proposal was negatived.

"But what are we to do, boys?" cried Grummidge vehemently.  "Are we
goin' to be domineered over by Swinton?  Why, every man he takes a
dislike to, he'll sneak into his tent when he's asleep, make him fast,
heave him into the boat, pull to the big island, land him there, and bid
him good-bye.  There won't be one of us safe while he prowls about an'
gits help from three or four rascals as bad as himself."

"Ay, that's it, boys," said Little Stubbs; "it won't be safe to trust
him.  Hang him, say I."

Stubbs was a very emphatic little man, but his emphasis only roused the
idea of drollery in the minds of those whom he addressed, and rather
influenced them towards leniency.

"No, no," cried the first mate of the _Water Wagtail_ who, since the
wreck, had seldom ventured to raise his voice in council; "I would
advise rather that we should give him a thrashing, and teach him that we
refuse to obey or recognise a self-constituted commander."

"Ah, sure now, that's a raisonable plan," said Squill with something of
sarcasm in his tone; "an' if I might make so bowld I'd suggist that
yoursilf, sor, shud give him the thrashin'."

"Nay, I am far from being the strongest man of the crew.  The one that
is best able should do the job."

The mate looked pointedly at Grummidge as he spoke; but Grummidge, being
a modest man, pretended not to see him.

"Yes, yes, you're right, sir, Grummidge is the very man," cried Stubbs.

"Hear, hear," chorused several of the others.  "Come, old boy, you'll do
it, won't you? and we'll all promise to back you up."

"Well, look 'ee here, lads," said Grummidge, who seemed to have suddenly
made up his mind, "this man has bin quarrellin' wi' me, off an' on,
since the beginning of the voyage, whether I would or not, so it may be
as well to settle the matter now as at another time.  I'll do the job on
one consideration."

"What's that?" cried several men.

"That you promises, on your honour (though none o' you's got much o'
_that_), that when I've done the job you agree to make me captain of the
crew.  It's a moral impossibility, d'ee see, for people to git along
without a leader, so if I agree to lead you in this, you must agree to
follow me in everything--is it so?"

"Agreed, agreed!" chorused his friends, only too glad that one of the
physically strongest among them--also one of the best-humoured--should
stand up to stem the tide of anarchy which they all clearly saw was
rising among them.

"Well, then," resumed Grummidge, "I see Swinton with his three friends
a-comin'.  I'll expect you to stand by an' see fair play, for he's
rather too ready wi' his knife."

While he spoke the comrade in question was seen approaching, with Fred
Taylor and David Garnet, carrying a quantity of cod-fish that had just
been caught.

"You've been holding a meeting, comrades, I think," said Swinton,
looking somewhat suspiciously at the group of men, as he came up and
flung down his load.

"Yes, we have," said Grummidge, advancing, hands in pockets, and with a
peculiar nautical roll which distinguished him.  "You're right, Big
Swinton, we _have_ bin havin' a meetin', a sort of trial, so to speak,
an' as you are the man what's bin tried, it may interest you to know
what sentence has bin passed upon you."

"Oh indeed!" returned Swinton, with a look of cool insolence which he
knew well how to assume, no matter what he felt.  "Well, yes, it _would_
interest me greatly to hear the sentence of the learned judge--whoever
he is."

The fingers of the man fumbled as he spoke at his waist-belt, near the
handle of his knife.  Observing this, Grummidge kept a watchful eye on
him, but did not abate his _nonchalant_ free-and-easy air, as he stepped
close up to him.

"The sentence is," he said firmly but quietly, "that you no longer
presume to give orders as if you was the captain o' this here crew; that
from this hour you fall to the rear and undertake second fiddle--or
fourth fiddle, for the matter o' that; and that you head a party to
guide them in a sarch which is just a-goin' to begin for the two men and
the boy you have so sneakingly betrayed and put on shore--an' all this
you'll have to do with a ready goodwill, on pain o' havin' your brains
knocked out if you don't.  Moreover, you may be thankful that the
sentence is so light, for some o' your comrades would have had you
hanged right off, if others hadn't seen fit to be marciful."

While this sentence was being pronounced, Swinton's expression underwent
various changes, and his face became visibly paler under the steady gaze
of Grummidge.  At the last word he grasped his knife and drew it, but
his foe was prepared.  Like a flash of light he planted his hard
knuckles between Swinton's eyes, and followed up the blow with another
on the chest, which felled him to the ground.

There was no need for more.  The big bully was rendered insensible,
besides being effectually subdued, and from that time forward he quietly
consented to play any fiddle--chiefly, however, the bass one.  But he
harboured in his heart a bitter hatred of Grummidge, and resolved
secretly to take a fearful revenge at the first favourable opportunity.

Soon after that the boat was manned by as many of the crew as it could
contain, and an exploring party went to the spot where Captain Trench
and his companions had been landed, guided thereto by Swinton, and led
by his foe Grummidge, whose bearing indicated, without swagger or
threat, that the braining part of the sentence would be carried out on
the slightest symptom of insubordination on the part of the former.
While this party was away; those who remained on the islet continued to
fish, and to preserve the fish for winter use by drying them in the sun.

We need scarcely add that the exploring party did not discover those for
whom they sought, but they discovered the true nature of the main
island, which, up to that time, they had supposed to be a group of
isles.  When the search was finally given up as hopeless, an examination
of the coast was made, with a view to a change of abode.

"You see, lads," observed Grummidge, when discussing this subject, "it's
quite plain that we shall have to spend the winter here, an' as I was a
short bit to the south of these seas in the late autumn one voyage, I
have reason to believe that we had better house ourselves, an' lay in a
stock o' provisions if we would escape bein' froze an' starved."

"Troth, it's well to escape that, boys," remarked Squills, "for it's
froze I was mesilf wance--all but--on a voyage to the Baltic, an' it's
starved to death was me owld grandmother--almost--so I can spake from
experience."

"An' we couldn't find a better place for winter-quarters than what we
see before us," said Garnet.  "It looks like a sort o' paradise."

We cannot say what sort of idea Garnet meant to convey by this
comparison, but there could be no question that the scene before them
was exceedingly beautiful.  The party had held their consultation on the
crest of a bluff, and just beyond it lay a magnificent bay, the shores
of which were clothed with luxuriant forests, and the waters studded
with many islets.  At the distant head of the bay the formation or dip
of the land clearly indicated the mouth of a large river, while small
streams and ponds were seen gleaming amid the foliage nearer at hand.
At the time the sun was blazing in a cloudless sky, and those thick fogs
which so frequently enshroud the coasts of Newfoundland had not yet
descended from the icy north.

"I say, look yonder.  What's Blazer about?" whispered Jim Heron,
pointing to his comrade, who had separated from the party, and was seen
with a large stone in each hand creeping cautiously round a rocky point
below them.

Conjecture was useless and needless, for, while they watched him, Blazer
rose up, made a wild rush forward, hurled the stones in advance, and
disappeared round the point.  A few moments later he reappeared,
carrying a large bird in his arms.

The creature which he had thus killed with man's most primitive weapon
was a specimen of the great auk--a bird which is now extinct.  It was
the size of a large goose, with a coal-black head and back, short wings,
resembling the flippers of a seal, which assisted it wonderfully in the
water, but were useless for flight, broad webbed feet, and legs set so
far back that on land it sat erect like the penguins of the southern
seas.  At the time of which we write, the great auk was found in myriads
on the low rocky islets on the eastern shores of Newfoundland.
Now-a-days there is not a single bird to be found anywhere, and only a
few specimens and skeletons remain in the museums of the world to tell
that such creatures once existed.  Their extermination was the result of
man's reckless slaughter of them when the Newfoundland banks became the
resort of the world's fishermen.  Not only was the great auk slain in
vast numbers, for the sake of fresh food, but it was salted by tons for
future use and sale.  The valuable feathers, or down, also proved a
source of temptation, and as the birds could not fly to other
breeding-places, they gradually diminished in numbers and finally
disappeared.

"Why, Blazer," exclaimed Heron, "that's one o' the sodger-like birds we
frightened away from our little island when we first landed."

"Ay, an' there's plenty more where this one came from," said Blazer,
throwing the bird down; "an' they are so tame on the rocks round the
point that I do believe we could knock 'em on the head with sticks, if
we took 'em unawares.  What d'ee say to try, lads?"

"Agreed--for I'm gettin' tired o' fish now," said Grummidge.  "How
should we set about it, think 'ee?"

"Cut cudgels for ourselves, then take to the boat creep round to one o'
the little islands in the bay, and go at 'em!" answered Blazer.

This plan was carried out with as little delay as possible.  An islet
was boarded, as Squill said, and the clumsy, astonished creatures lost
numbers of their companions before making their escape into the sea.  A
further treasure was found in a large supply of their eggs.  Laden
almost to the gunwale with fresh provisions, the search-party returned
to their camp--some of them, indeed, distressed at having failed to find
their banished friends, but most of them elated by their success with
the great auks, and the prospect of soon going into pleasant
winter-quarters.

So eager were they all to flit into this new region--this paradise of
Garnet--that operations were commenced on the very next day at early
morn.  The boat was launched and manned, and as much of their property
as it would hold was put on board.

"You call it paradise, Garnet," said Grummidge, as the two carried a
bundle of dried cod slung on a pole between them, "but if you, and the
like of ye, don't give up swearin', an' try to mend your manners, the
place we pitch on will be more like hell than paradise, no matter how
comfortable and pretty it may be."

Garnet was not in a humour either to discuss this point or to accept a
rebuke, so he only replied to the remark with a surly "Humph!"

Landing on the main island to the northward of the large bay, so as to
secure a southern exposure, the boat-party proceeded to pitch their camp
on a lovely spot, where cliff and coppice formed a luxuriant background.
Ramparts of rock protected them from the nor'-west gales, and purling
rivulets hummed their lullaby.  Here they pitched their tents, and in a
short space of time ran up several log huts, the material for which was
supplied in abundance by the surrounding forest.

When the little settlement was sufficiently established, and all the
goods and stores were removed from what now was known as Wreck Island,
they once more launched the boat, and turned their attention to
fishing--not on the Great Bank, about which at the time they were
ignorant, but on the smaller banks nearer shore, where cod-fish were
found in incredible numbers.  Some of the party, however, had more of
the hunter's than the fisher's spirit in them, and prepared to make
raids on the homes of the great auk, or to ramble in the forests.

Squill was among the latter.  One day, while rambling on the sea-shore
looking for shellfish, he discovered a creature which not only caused
him to fire off all the exclamations of his rich Irish vocabulary, but
induced him to run back to camp with heaving chest and distended eyes--
almost bursting from excitement.

"What is it, boy?" chorused his comrades.

"Och! musha!  I've found it at long last!--the great say--sur--no, not
exactly that, but the--the great, sprawlin', long-legged--och! what
shall I say?  The great-grandfather of all the--the--words is wantin',
boys.  Come an' see for yourselves!"



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A GIANT DISCOVERED--NEW HOME AT WAGTAIL BAY--A STRANGE ADDITION TO THE
SETTLEMENT.

The creature which had so powerfully affected the feelings of the
Irishman was dead; but dead and harmless though it was, it drew forth
from his comrades a shout of intense surprise when they saw it, for it
was no less than a cuttlefish of proportions so gigantic that they felt
themselves in the presence of one of those terrible monsters of the
deep, about which fabulous tales have been told, and exaggerated
descriptions given since the beginning of historical time.

"Av he's not the say-sarpint himself, boys," panted Squill, as he
pointed to him with looks of unmitigated admiration, "sure he must be
his first cousin."

And Squill was not far wrong, for it was found that the monstrous fish
measured fifty-two feet between the extremities of its outspread arms.
Its body was about eight feet long and four feet broad.  Its great arms,
of which it had ten radiating from its body, varied in length and
thickness--the longest being about twenty-four feet, and the shortest
about eight.  The under sides of these arms were supplied with
innumerable suckers, while from the body there projected a horny beak,
like the beak of a parrot.

"It's wishin', I am, that I might see wan o' yer family alive," said
Squill, as he turned over the dead arms; "but I'd rather not be embraced
by ye.  Och! what a hug ye could give--an' as to howldin' on--a thousand
limpets would be nothin' to ye."

"A miser grippin' his gold would be more like it," suggested Grummidge.

"I don't expect ever to see one alive," said Little Stubbs, "an' yet
there must surely be more where that came from."

The very next day Squill had his wish gratified, and Stubbs his unbelief
