
If anything could have made Freydissa cry it would have been that
remark, for it implied that she was inclined to weep, while nothing was
further from her thoughts at that time.

She did, however, grasp Krake's hand, but instead of aiding herself by
it to get out of the hole, she gave it such a vigorous and hearty pull
that Krake went souse into the mud beside her.  Before he could recover
himself Freydissa had put her knee on his body, and, using him as a
foot-rest, thrust him deeper down as she stepped out.

The delight with which this was hailed is beyond description, and many a
year passed after that before men grew tired of twitting Krake about the
pleasant mud-bath that had been given him by Freydissa on the occasion
of the celebrated take of salmon at Little River in Vinland.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

SAGE CONVERSE BETWEEN HAKE AND BERTHA--BIARNE IS OUTWITTED--A MONSTER IS
SLAIN, AND SAVAGES APPEAR ON THE SCENE.

Not long after this an event occurred which produced great excitement in
the new settlement; namely, the appearance of natives in the woods.  It
occurred under the following circumstances.

One morning Karlsefin gave orders for one of the exploring parties to be
got ready to go out immediately.  Karlsefin's plan from the beginning
had been to class his men in two divisions.  One half stayed at home to
work, the other half searched the land,--always taking care, however,
not to travel so far but that they could return home in the evening.
They were careful also not to wander far from each other.  Sometimes
Karlsefin went with the exploring party, at other times stayed at home
to superintend the work there, while Biarne or Thorward filled his
place.  On the occasion in question Biarne was in charge.

Soon after the party had started, Hake, who was one of them, observed a
female figure disappear round a copse near the shores of the lake.  At
that part they were about to strike off into the thick woods, so Hake
went up to Biarne and asked leave to go along by the borders of the
lake, saying that he could overtake the party again before they had
reached the Willow Glen, a well-known rendezvous of the hunters and
explorers of the colony.

"Go as thou wilt, Hake," replied Biarne; "only see to it that ye
overtake us before noon, as I intend to go on a totally new path
to-day."

The youth left with a light step, and, on overtaking the female, found,
as he had expected, that it was Bertha.

"You wander far from home to-day," he said, with a deferential
salutation, for Hake's bondage had not robbed him of his breeding.

"I love to wander," answered Bertha, blushing.

Poor Bertha, she could not help blushing.  It was her unfortunate nature
to do so.  When her feelings were touched--ever so little--she blushed,
and then she blushed _because_ she had blushed, and blushed again to
think herself so silly!

"I fear it may be somewhat dangerous to wander far," said Hake,
stopping, for Bertha had stopped and seated herself on the stump of a
fallen tree.

"Dangerous!  Why so?"

"Why, because Skraelingers may find us out any day, and if they should
come upon you unawares so far from home they might carry you off, and no
one would be aware that you were gone until too late to pursue."

"I never thought of that," returned Bertha, with a slightly troubled
look.  "Well, I shall be more careful in future.  But how come you to be
wandering here alone, Hake? did I not hear your name called this morning
among those appointed to go forth and search out what is good and
beautiful and useful in the land?"

"Most true, Bertha, and I have gone forth, and not gone far, and yet
have found something both good and beautiful and useful in the land."

"And pray what may that be?" asked the maiden, with a look of surprise.

Hake did not answer, but the expression of his eyes was more eloquent
than speech.

"Nay, then," said Bertha, looking hastily away, and again blushing--as a
matter of course!  "I am no reader of riddles; and I hate riddles--they
perplex me so.  Besides, I never could find them out.  But, Hake, has
your party gone yet?"

"Yes, some time ago."

"And are you left behind?"

"No, I have leave to go by the margin of the lake."

"Then if you put off time talking with me you will not find it easy to
overtake them; but I forgot: I suppose you count it an easy matter to
overtake ordinary men?"

"I shall not find it difficult," replied the youth briefly; and then,
perceiving that Bertha felt uneasy--apparently at the tenor of the
conversation--he quietly changed it by remarking that he preferred to
walk by the lake for several reasons, one of which was that it reminded
him of Scotland.

"Ah, you profess to love Scotland very much," said Bertha archly, "but
your brother evidently loves it more than you do."

"With good reason, too," replied Hake, "for it has given him a bride,
and it had no such favours for me."

"Indeed! what is her name?" asked the maiden, with much interest.

"Emma."

"Poor Emma," sighed Bertha; "but I hope that Heika will be freed one day
and return to his native land to wed Emma.  Perchance by that time
Scotland may smile upon you too, and give you cause to love it better."

"I love it well already," said Hake, with enthusiasm, "yet am I content
to stay here."

"For shame, Hake! you do not deserve to be a Scot if you mean what you
say."

"I mean what I say, yet do I deserve to be a Scot."

"Come, tell me, then, what this Scotland of yours is like.  I suppose
you deem it more beautiful than Iceland?"

The youth smiled.  "It is not more _wonderful_ than Iceland.  I can say
that with truth--but it is passing fair to look upon.  It is a land of
mountain and flood, of heath-clad braes and grassy knowes.  Its mountain
peaks rise bare and rugged to the skies, where lordly eagles soar.  Its
brawling burns in their infancy dash down these rugged steeps, but as
they grow older flow on through many a hazel dell, where thrush and
blackbird fill the woods with melody--through many flowering pastures,
where cattle browse and lambkins skip on the sunny braes.  Wild-fowl
breed on its reedy lochs, and moor-fowl dwell on its heather hills.  Its
waters teem with the spotted trout and the royal salmon.  Temperate
breezes fan its cheeks, and beauty, in form and colour, revels
everywhere.  Its sons are lovers of their native land, and its daughters
are wondrous fair."

"And yet it would seem," said Bertha, "that not one is fair enough for
you?"

"Nay, Bertha, thy speech is hardly fair.  The heart cannot command its
affection," said Hake, with a smile, "but I regret it not."

"And where does Emma dwell?" asked Bertha.

"Beside my father, near the shores of Forth, not far from a noted town
and castle that stand on the summit of a rocky ridge.  It is named after
Edwin, a Northumbrian king.  A sweet romantic spot--my own dear native
town.  Beside it stands a mountain, which, those who have travelled in
far southern lands tell us, bears some resemblance to a couching lion.
But I never saw a lion, and know not what truth there is in that."

"You almost make me wish to see that land," said Bertha, with a sigh.

"I would you might see it and that it were my fortune to show it to
you."

"That is not likely," said Bertha, with a little laugh.

"I know not.  The most unlikely things happen, and often those that seem
most likely do not come to pass.  What more unlikely than that Karlsefin
should forsake the religion of his fathers?  Yet Karlsefin is now a
Christian."

"Do you know, Hake, much about the nature of this new religion that has
come amongst us, and made so many people change?" asked Bertha, with
sudden earnestness.

"To say truth I don't know much about it.  Only this do I know, that
Karlsefin says the foundation of it is God and man united in Jesus
Christ, and that the guiding principle of it is _love_.  If so, it must
be a sweet religion, and, as far as Karlsefin is concerned, it seems
both good and true; but there are some of its professors whom I know
whose guiding star is self--not love--which goes rather against it,
methinks."

"You do not reason well, Hake; that is against the professors, not
against the religion."

"True; but this religion is said to change those who profess it--what if
they are not changed?"

"Why, then, they are _false_ professors," said Bertha, with a smile.

"It may be so; I know not.  But if you would have further light on the
point, Karlsefin will gladly give it you."

"Well, I will go find him and inquire," said Bertha, rising; "I have
kept you too long already from your comrades.--Farewell."

"Farewell, Bertha," replied the youth, gazing after her as she tripped
lightly away and disappeared behind a thicket.  Then, turning into the
woods, he went off at his utmost speed in the direction of the Willow
Glen.

"Just in time, Hake," said Biarne, as the Scot approached; "we are about
to start off westward to-day, and go as far inland as we can before
dark.  I have long had a desire to search out the land in that
direction.  From the distance of these blue ridges, the size of our lake
and river, and other signs, I am of opinion that this is a great land--
not an island."

"It may be so," replied Hake, looking round on the vast and beautiful
landscape; "I should like well to traverse it.  If a thrall may be
permitted to remark, I would say that a spirited chief would explore
somewhat farther than a day's march from home."

"Perchance a spirited chief might see fit to have his homestead put well
in order before undertaking explorations for his amusement," replied
Biarne, who was not much pleased with Hake's speech.

The Scot made no answer, and after that the party advanced to the
westward, sometimes clearing their way through dense thickets, sometimes
walking under the branching canopy of large trees, and frequently coming
to more open places, in many of which there were little ponds swarming
with wild-fowl.

Towards the afternoon they came to a rocky ridge which was crowned with
trees.  On the other side of it was a deep gorge, near the end of which
some large animal was observed sitting on its haunches.

"Hist! a brown bear!" whispered Biarne.

The bear looked up and growled, for it had heard the approach of the
party.  Nevertheless it appeared to be in a sluggish as well as a sulky
humour, for it gave no indication of any intention either to attack or
run away, but sat still on its haunches swaying its huge head and
shoulders to and fro, and glowering--as Krake said--horribly.

"A fierce monster truly!" observed Hake, fitting an arrow to his bow.

Biarne laid his hand on Hake's arm.

"Hast seen such a brute before?" he inquired.

"Not I," replied Hake.

"Wouldst like to see how the Skraelingers of Greenland treat the white
bears of their land, when so few as only two men chance to meet one in
this fashion?"

"I should like it well."

"Good--I will show you; but first I must explain the manner of it.  When
two Skraelingers see a bear they go up to him with spears.  On
approaching him they separate.  One settles that he is to kill him, the
other agrees to distract his attention.  He who is to kill approaches on
the side next the _heart_.  His comrade goes up and pricks the bear on
the _other_ side.  The bear turns full on him who wounds, exposes his
heart-side, and is instantly thrust through by him who is to kill.  Dost
understand?"

"Perfectly," replied Hake.

"Perhaps you would like to join me in such an adventure, though of
course there is some danger," said Biarne, who was very anxious to
punish Hake for his late advice by giving him a good fright.

Hake smiled in a grim fashion, and taking a short spear from one of his
comrades, looked at Biarne, pointed to the bear, and said:

"Come!"

They advanced together, Biarne also carrying a short spear, while their
comrades stood on the ridge and looked on with much interest.

When Bruin saw the two men approach, he got up and showed himself to be
an uncommonly large bear indeed, insomuch that Biarne glanced at Hake
with some anxiety, and asked if he felt sure of himself, and wasn't
frightened.

Hake laughed lightly, but made no other reply.

"Well, then, have a care, and see that ye be prompt in action.  I will
go to the left side and kill, being used to such work.  Do you separate
from me here and give him the prick on the right side.  Don't get
flurried.  We must approach and act together.  He seems inclined to meet
us half-way, and must not be trifled with; and, harkee, prick him well,
for methinks his hide will prove a tough one."

Hake nodded, and separated from his companion.  Seeing this the bear
stopped.  It had been advancing with a rapidly increasing step, growling
all the way, and with an extremely savage aspect, but this movement of
the enemy perplexed it.  Looking first on one side, and then on the
other, it remained in a state of uncertainty as to which of the two it
should attack.  The enemy took advantage of this--both men ran in upon
it.  As they did so the bear rose on its hind-legs, still glancing
savagely from one side to the other, and in this position appearing a
larger monster than it had seemed before.

"Give it him sharply!" cried Biarne, delaying his death-thrust till the
proper time.

Hake stepped close up to the bear, and plunged his spear into its side
with such vigorous good-will that it went straight through its heart,
and came out at the other side just under the shoulder.

With a tremendous roar it fell and writhed on the ground in a dying
state, while a loud cheer burst from the men on the ridge.

"Why did ye that?" cried Biarne fiercely, stepping up to Hake as though
he would strike him.  "Was it not arranged that _I_ should kill him?"

"The Fates arranged it otherwise," answered the Scot.  "I felt afraid
that my fears might weaken my arm.  To make sure, I gave him a good
thrust.  Besides, did you not tell me that his hide was tough, and
advise me to prick him well?"

Hake looked so innocent, and spoke so gently, that Biarne, who was a
good-natured fellow, laughed in spite of himself as he said--

"Truly thou didst prick him to some purpose.  Well, I do not grudge thee
the honour, and unquestionably it was deftly done.--Here, two of you,
stay behind and skin this fellow.  Cut off the best parts of the meat
also.  Bears of this kind are not bad for food, I dare say.  We will go
on a little farther, and return to you in a short time."

Saying this Biarne resumed his march, followed by the rest of the men.

They had not gone far, however, when one of the party uttered a sudden
exclamation, and pointed to footprints on a soft part of the ground.

"Perhaps the bear's footprints," said one.

"Too small and narrow for that," remarked another.

"We shall trace them till we come to soft ground and make certain," said
Biarne.

They did so, and after walking a hundred yards or so came to a sandy
piece, where the footprints were so clearly defined that there remained
no doubt they were those of a man.  That the marks had not been made by
any wandering member of their own band, was evident also from the form
of the sole of the shoe, as indicated by the prints.

"Now must we be ready to meet with men who may be foes, although I hope
they shall turn out to be friends," said Biarne.  "Come, Hake, there may
be need for haste, therefore do you hie back before us and inform
