"Capital!" shouted Elwood in his excitement, and he was proceeding to
pay the Pah Utah several highly flavored compliments, when he raised his
hand as a warning for them to remain quiet. Bending still further over
the canoe, he soon thrust his hand beneath, and with the same
lightning-like quickness flung a still larger fish up the bank. This was
continued for some time, until he had five fine plump-looking fellows
all shining and fresh, waiting for the hungry stomachs.

They had an abundance of food, and its preparation now only remained.
Here Shasta displayed his remarkable culinary skill. With his keen-edged
hunting-knife he slitted the fish, excepting Terror's portion, which of
course was devoured raw, the entire length of the bodies, and throwing
aside the superfluous portion, then skewered them upon some green prongs
in such a manner that they were completely flat, and the entire internal
and external surface exposed.

The fire, which had been burning some time, was now raked down until
several square feet of live red coals lay bare, when one of the fish was
held down within a few inches. As soon as one side was thoroughly cooked
the other was turned under, and after this same fashion the four were
most speedily and thoroughly prepared for the palate.

"Luxurious!" exclaimed Howard, as he took his prize and buried his teeth
in its flesh. "It is cooked to perfection--a trifle of pepper and salt
would make this the best dish I ever tasted."

"I never enjoyed a meal more," replied Elwood. "But when I come to
think, the first one I tasted in California was nearly as good as this."

Tim was too much engaged to take time for conversation. He waited until
he had filled himself to repletion, when he gave a great sigh of relief
and remarked:

"I ain't hungry--not a bit; I've lost me appetite very quickly. Mr.
Shasta, you're an excellent cook--worthy of the honor of attending to
the wants of Timothy O'Rooney, Esquire."

The Pah Utah paid no heed to this praise, but contented himself with
devouring his fish, which he did until he had all that he wished, when
from some hidden recess he produced a beautifully carved Indian pipe.

"There I'm wid yees agin," remarked Tim, as he replenished his own. "The
pipe is very soothin' to one's faalings after sevare labor, as me
brother's wife used to say after whacking a few hours wid her
broomstick--what is your opinion upon the same, Mr. Shasta?"

The Indian nodded his head and murmured some unintelligible reply.

"Precisely," assented Tim, as he puffed forth a thick volume of smoke;
"that's me own idaas exactly, and the boys here will bear me witness
that I've always contended for the same."

"What's that?" asked Elwood.

"Ax him," replied Tin, nodding his head toward his dusky friend. "He's
able to explain better nor is meself."




CHAPTER XXIX.

A NIGHT DISTURBANCE.


Neither the Pah Utah nor the Irishman were disposed to make a move until
they had finished their "smoke," and both of them whiffed as leisurely
as though they had contracted to spend several hours thus. Howard and
Elwood passed the time in walking around the woods and along the stream,
taking particular care not to go beyond sight of Shasta, whose black
orbs they could see attentively following their movements.

"All aboord!" shouted Tim at the expiration of an hour or so, and the
boys hurried down to the "wharf" with as much alacrity as if they had
heard the last bell of the steamer.

The Indian stood upon the shore with a look of inquiry. He pointed up
stream and then down.

"He is inquiring which way we wish to go," said Howard.

"That, is strange, after bringing us so many miles from the island."

Elwood pointed down stream, but Shasta was not satisfied; he wished to
know something more. He described several circles, terminating each time
by pointing to the north. All three looked inquiringly at one other's
faces. They could not comprehend his meaning.

"What does he wish to say?"

"I am sure I cannot tell."

"He wants us to travel the rest of the way by turning summersits."

Seeing that he was not understood, the Pah Utah took the paddle from the
canoe and made in the air as if he were impelling the boat, then
pausing, he again pointed to the north, and took several long strides in
that direction, as though he were going to walk a long distance.

Elwood's eyes sparkled.

"I know what, he means! I know what he means!"

"What is it?"

"He wishes to ask whether we want to _go a good ways_!"

"You are right," replied Howard. "He doesn't know whether we are hunting
in these parts, and wish to stay in the neighborhood, or whether we are
hurrying home as fast as we can."

Shasta's motions and signs were imitated as nearly as possible, and he
nodded his head and muttered something doubtless to signify that he was
satisfied. Terror whisked into the canoe and took his position in the
prow, while his three masters, if a dog can own that many, arranged
themselves behind him. The tendon still united the two boats, and one
sweep of Pah Utah's paddle sent the two far out into the river, where he
began his work.

For a time our friends gave themselves up to the enjoyment of this
pleasant motion. At each dip of the paddle, or contraction of the iron
muscles of Shasta, they could feel the canoe jump forward as does a
steamboat under the throbs of the mighty engine. At the same time the
motion was light and airy, as if the boat were skimming over the very
surface. Indeed, by shutting the eyes and feeling the light wind fanning
the temples, it was easy to imagine that they were borne through the air
by some great bird whose wings could be felt to pulsate beneath them.

"Look at that machinery!" exclaimed Howard. "Did you ever see anything
like it? Not an ounce of superfluous flesh upon him. See how the muscles
swell and ridge, and yet he doesn't swerve his body a hair's breadth to
the right or left."

"He can 'paddle his own canoe,'" laughed Elwood.

"Look at those shoulders; they are perfect mountains of muscle, and
those sinewy arm! His legs are fully as perfect, and I'll warrant he can
run a dozen miles an hour for a whole day without getting tired. He
would be a dangerous man to meet as an enemy."

"And a good one as a friend."

"Yes; I can hardly see what chances we would have had of reaching the
mouth of the river without his help."

"We had no chance unless we could join a party of hunters and induce
them to go with us."

"Boys," said Tim, looking hard at them, "it isn't right--isn't the
same."

"What do you mean?"

"That Mr. Shasta should tow us along in this shtyle, and we sit in the
owld boat and permit him. No, it's wrong."

The boys admitted that it looked hardly proper, whereupon Tim took the
paddle and began plying it with all the skill of which he was master.
The Pah Utah looked over his shoulder now and then with a strange
expression, as if he were amused at the white man's furious efforts, but
he did not abate his own labor in the least.

Tim O'Rooney made a great deal of splashing, occasionally flirting a
shower of spray over his friends as the paddle took an unexpected twist
in his hand; but, as we have said before, he had had considerable
experience in propelling a canoe, and he gave a little assistance to
their dusky friend.

When the sun was overhead, Shasta directed the prow of the boat toward
the western bank, and they landed in a place somewhat resembling that of
the morning. The boats were drawn upon land in the usual manner, by
which they were concealed from the observation of any passing up or down
stream.

The Indian resorted to the same means by which he had caught the fish in
the morning and with equal success. They were rather smaller, but none
the less savory, either to man or brute. An hour sufficed to rest them
all, and to give Shasta all the pleasure of his pipe that he wished,
while Tim continued his after entering the canoe. Howard and Elwood made
an essay with the paddle, but the result with the latter was that the
instant he so cautiously thrust it beneath the surface, it was suddenly
wrung from his hand, and in an instant left a rod or two astern. This
necessitated a delay in order to pick it up, and the boys concluded to
await another time to perfect themselves in the art of managing an
Indian canoe.

It was not until it was quite dark that they once more set foot upon
land and kindled their fire. There was quite a strong wind blowing, and
the chill of the air appeared to indicate that it came from the snowy
peaks of the Coast Range. Fully an hour was taken in gathering wood,
sticks, broken limbs and branches, for they had concluded to keep it
burning until morning.

The fire was kindled against the trunk of a giant sycamore, and as the
flames waved up the shaggy bark the reflection upon the outstretched
limbs and neighboring trees gave them a weird appearance that made the
boys gather close to the somber-hued Pah Utah as though conscious of his
ability to stand between them and evil.

Tim and Shasta were leisurely smoking their pipes, and Howard and Elwood
were conversing together in low tones of their homes and friends, when a
quick bark from Terror, as he rose to his feet and looked in the
darkness, drew all eyes in one direction. A score of flashing eyes,
gleaming teeth, lank, restless bodies and greedy jaws announced, that a
new danger threatened them.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE WOLVERINES.


The Pah Utah was the only member of the party that did not manifest any
alarm or excitement. Carelessly removing his pipe from his mouth, he
turned his head, looked at the animals a moment, and then resumed
smoking, without giving utterance to a single sound or changing his
posture in the least.

Tim O'Rooney, with an ejaculated prayer, caught up his rifle, and
turning his back toward the fire, stood like a person driven at bay and
waiting to decide in his mind the best way to strike his last blow. In
his haste and alarm his pipe fell from his mouth and lay unheeded at his
feet. Shasta quietly picked it up, handed it to him, and motioned for
him to seat himself upon the ground again. Tim stared alternately at the
animals, the Indian and his pipe, and finally gathered the idea that no
imminent danger threatened them.

Howard and Elwood also held their rifles ready for it charge from the
growling wolverines, for such they were, while the Newfoundland growled
in turn, and glared defiantly at them. The intelligent brute appeared to
comprehend that it would not do for him to sally out and charge upon the
enemy's works, but he stood ready to fight and die in the defense of his
friends.

"Why don't they attack us?" asked Elwood, seeing that they didn't
advance nearer than a dozen feet.

"Don't you know that wild animals are afraid of fire? That is what
restrains them."

"Of course! I didn't think of that. How fortunate that we gathered
enough wood to last!"

"Just look at Shasta! He doesn't even stop smoking!"

"He must know there is no danger."

"Let us try our guns upon them!"

The proposal pleased both, especially as there was no fear but what they
could make every discharge tell. Each of them singled out two of the
largest wolverines, and fired their guns at the same instant. An
ear-splitting clamor succeeded, and as the brutes scampered away in the
darkness two of their number were seen stretched out, quivering and
dying.

The wolverine is an animal found in California which unites the
characteristics of the bear, weasel, fox and wolf. It is sullen and
ferocious, and one of the most troublesome of the wood-denizens. When
first seen it is apt to be mistaken for a small bear, or rather
heavy-looking wolf. The sensuous neck and head bespeak the wolf and
weasel nature, the sly persistency the fox, and the savage stubbornness
that of the bear; while a resemblance to all four can be seen in the
general contour, appearance and habits of the animal.

Attracted, no doubt, by the smell of the cooking fish, a number of these
brutes had slyly gathered and crept to the camp, where, finding their
prey protected by the fire, they proclaimed their furious disappointment
by loud howls--half bark and half yell--springing hither and thither
among each other, sometimes vaulting over each other's backs, and
darting as close to the bristling dog as their mortal dread of the fire
would permit.

Terror stood on the outskirts of the camp, occasionally moving forward
toward the animals, as if to match his long white teeth and massive
strength against their glittering fangs and treacherous ferocity.

When the two guns were discharged the rest disappeared as if a bombshell
had exploded in their midst; but scarcely a dozed seconds elapsed ere
they closed together again, fiercer and more clamorous, if possible,
than before.

In a few moments the boys had their guns reloaded, and they immediately
repeated their former proceeding with precisely the same result. At this
point a surprising occurrence came to pass. The dead wolverines were
pounced upon by their survivors and torn instantly to shreds, and even
devoured with as much avidity as if they were Terror and his human
companions.

"Did you ever hear of such a thing?" asked Elwood, watching them in
great amazement.

"Yes; I have read of wolves doing the same, even when one of their
number was not killed but only wounded slightly."

"Any animals that act in that manner deserve death; so let's send a few
more rifle-balls among them."

"If we keep this up for a few hours I don't see that there will be any
left, and we may rest in peace."

"They will keep on gathering until there are twice that number. If it
wasn't for our fire we should have to take to the trees; and what, then,
would become of poor Terror?"

"He will get into trouble as it is," said Howard, "if we don't keep an
eye on him."

The dog had continued advancing closer to the wolverines, until there
was an imminent probability of a collision occurring between him and two
of the largest, that sprung forward until they were within a few inches
of him, when they darted back again to repeat the feint, seemingly with
the purpose of drawing the Newfoundland further toward their clutches.

Howard spoke sharply to Terror, but he paid no heed to the call. The boy
repeated it with the same uselessness, and he was beginning to become
seriously alarmed for his fate when Shasta laid down his pipe and rose
to his feet. The eyes of the three were now centered upon him.

The Pah Utah left his gun and blanket upon the ground, so that his arms
and breast, excepting a few ornaments, were bare. He then drew his keen
hunting-knife and held it rigidly grasped in his right hand. Stooping
down, he caught a blazing brand with his left, swung it rapidly over his
head a few times to give it additional blaze, and then darted away like
a meteor directly among the wolverines. The latter scattered in greater
terror than ever, but the Indian, instead of returning, actually
followed them.

The brand could only be seen flitting among the trees, its flaming glare
giving a wild, unearthly appearance to the face and breast of the Savage
as he sped swiftly in and out among the trunks and vegetation, like an
avenger bent on destroying the entire band.

One of the largest wolverines, in his wild fear, sprung so close to
Elwood that his tail whisked against him. Ere he could clear himself the
Indian burst upon him, his iron arm flashed out with lightning-like
swiftness, the wire-like fingers caught the brute by the neck, and the
knife was buried so deep in his throat that when he was thrown back he
fell limp and dead to the ground. After which Shasta sat down upon the
ground again, folded his blanket over his shoulders and appeared much
occupied in contemplating the burning sticks before him.

"Mr. Shasta, that was well done!" exclaimed Tim in admiration. "I very
much doubt whether it could be excelled by your humble servant, the
undersigned."

"I very much doubt it also," said Elwood. "I shouldn't fancy chasing
those animals with a firebrand."

"No; if you should drop it or fall down unpleasant consequences might
follow."

The boys kept up their loading and firing among the wolverines until
they had slain over a dozen. But instead of diminishing, the number
continued to increase till there must have been nearly two-score
growling, snapping and snarling around the camp-fire.




CHAPTER XXXI.

SHASTA'S HUMOR.


The camp-fire was kept burning unremittingly until morning, and the
wolverines as unceasingly continued their clamor, so that none of the
parties secured a moment's sleep. The boys were signaled several times
by Shasta to lie down, but they were too unaccustomed to such sights and
sounds to permit them to do so with anything like peace; so they used
their rifles upon the savage animals until prudence advised them to
husband their ammunition until they had better use for it.

Tim O'Rooney was fully as restless as they. He was in continual dread
that some of the treacherous animals would steal up behind him and
fasten their teeth so securely in him that they could not be shaken off.
This uneasiness caused him ever to be shifting his position, now on one
side the fire, now on the other--springing suddenly upward as though he
already felt the nip of their fangs.

The Pah Utah, at this time, displayed a grim humor, so exceptional with
his people, as to be almost incredible, except to the boys who were
witnesses to it. Believing such traits should be encouraged among all
aborigines as an antidote for their melancholy dispositions, it gives us
great pleasure to record it, and it will afford us far greater enjoyment
to testify regarding any other such performances that may come under our
notice.

Tim was standing with his back toward the fire, and his hands,
carelessly crossed behind him. He was intently watching the quarrelsome
animals, and all thoughts of attack in the rear had for the time
departed. Shasta leaned silently forward and lifted a small brand to
relight his pipe, which had gone out some time before. As he was passing
it back to the embers the red coal just grazed one of Tim's fingers,
while at the same instant the Indian imitated the snarl of the wolverine
so exactly that the follow was sure he was seized, and he made the most
agile leap of his life.

"Murther! murther! pull him off, Mr. Shasta, catch hold of him!"
exclaimed the affrighted Irishman, springing wildly on every side of the
fire, and striking with blind fierceness at the imaginary brute in his
rear.

Howard and Elwood laughed till the tears rolled down their cheeks. They
had seen Shasta's trick and they could therefore appreciate it. Never a
smile lit up the grim face of the Pah Utah. He continued leisurely
smoking, his keen black eyes looking dreamily into the fire, as if lost
in some pleasant reverie.

But what of that? Who can doubt, that he laughed internally full as
heartily as the youngsters? Who can tell what surges, and waves, and
ripples of laughter went through and through him, until his whole being
was absorbed in merriment?

Finally Tim's terror passed away and he became comparatively quiet.

"Worrah! worrah!" he exclaimed, panting from his severe exertions. "What
a narra 'scape I had."

"Did he really bite you?"

"Bite me! Didn't ye see him fasten his teeth in me and hang on till I
shuk him off?"

