when I thought of the literal correctness of my friend's quaint
description of what we saw.

The insect was a species of ant-eater.  It was about an inch and a
quarter long, as thick as a crow-quill, and covered with black hair.  It
put its head into a little hole in the ground, and quivered its tail
rapidly.  The ants, which seemed to be filled with curiosity at this
peculiar sight, went near to see what the strange thing could be; and no
sooner did one come within the range of the forceps on the insect's
tail, than it was snapped up.

"Now, that is the most original trapper I ever did see or hear of,"
remarked Peterkin, with a broad grin.  "I've seen many things in my
travels, but I never expected to meet with a beast that could catch
others by merely wagging its tail."

"You forget the hunters of North America," said Jack, "who entice little
antelopes towards them by merely wagging a bit of rag on the end of a
ramrod."

"I forget nothing of the sort," retorted Peterkin.  "Wagging a ramrod is
not wagging a tail.  Besides, I spoke of beasts doing it; men are not
beasts."

"Then I hold you self-convicted, my boy," exclaimed Jack; "for you have
often called _me_ a beast."

"By no means, Jack.  I am not self-convicted, but quite correct, as I
can prove to the satisfaction of any one who isn't a philosopher.  You
never can prove anything to a philosopher."

"Prove it, then."

"I will.  Isn't a monkey a beast?"

"Certainly."

"Isn't a gorilla a monkey?"

"No doubt it is."

"And aren't _you_ a gorilla?"

"I say, lads, it's time to be going," cried Jack, with a laugh, as he
rose and resumed his load.

At that moment Mak uttered an exclamation, and pointed towards a
particular spot in the plain before us, where, close by a clump of
trees, we saw the graceful head and neck and part of the shoulders of a
giraffe.  We were naturally much excited at the sight, this being the
first we had fallen in with.

"You'd better go after it," said Jack to Peterkin, "and take Mak with
you."

"I'd rather you'd go yourself," replied Peterkin; "for, to say truth,
I'm pretty well knocked up to-day.  I don't know how it is--one day one
feels made of iron, as if nothing could tire one; and the next, one
feels quite weak and spiritless."

"Well, I'll go; but I shall not take any one with me.--Take observation
of the sun, Mak, and keep a straight course as you are now going until
night.  D'ye see yonder ridge?"

"Yes, massa."

"Then hold on direct for that, and encamp there.  I'll not be long
behind you, and hope to bring you a giraffe steak for supper."

We endeavoured to dissuade Jack from going out alone, but he said truly
that his load distributed among us all was quite sufficient, without
adding to it by taking away another member of the party.  Thus we
parted; but I felt a strange feeling of depression, a kind of foreboding
of evil, which I could not shake off, despite my utmost efforts.
Peterkin, too, was unusually silent, and I could not avoid seeing that
he felt more anxiety on account of Jack's rashness than he was willing
to allow.  Our friend took with him one of our large-bore rifles, and a
double-barrel of smaller bore slung at his back.

Shortly after parting with him, we descried an ostrich feeding in the
plain before us.  I had long desired to meet with a specimen of this
gigantic bird in its native wilds, and Peterkin was equally anxious to
get a shot at it; so we called a halt, and prepared to stalk it.  We
were aware that the ostrich is a very silly and very timid bird, but not
being aware of the best method of hunting it, we asked Makarooroo to
explain how he was in the habit of doing it.

"You mus' know," he began, "dat bird hims be a mos' ex'roroninary beast.
When hims run hims go fasterer dan--oh! it be dumpossobable for say how
much fast hims go.  You no can see him's legs; dey go same as legs ob
leetle bird.  But hims be horrobably stupid.  Suppose he see you far,
far away, goin' to de wind'ard ob him, he no run 'way to leeward; hims
tink you wants to get round him, so off him start to git past you, and
before hims pass he sometimes come close 'nuff to be shooted or speared.
Me hab spear him dat way, but him's awful differcult to git at for all
dat."

"Well then, Mak, after that lucid explanation, what d'you propose that
we should do?" inquired Peterkin, examining the locks of his rifle.

"Me pruppose dat you go far ober dere, Massa Ralph go not jist so far,
and me go to de wind'ard and gib him fright."

Acting upon this advice, we proceeded cautiously to the several spots
indicated, and our guide set off towards an exposed place, where he
intended to show himself.  In a few minutes we observed the gigantic
bird look up in alarm, and then we saw Makarooroo running like a deer
over the plain.  The ostrich instantly rushed off madly at full speed,
not, as might have been expected, in a contrary direction, or towards
any place of shelter, but simply, as it appeared to me, with no other
end in view than that of getting to windward of his supposed enemy.  I
observed that he took a direction which would quickly bring him within
range of my companion's rifle, but I was so amazed at the speed with
which he ran that I could think of nothing else.

Every one knows that the ostrich has nothing worthy of the name of
wings--merely a small tuft of feathers at each side, with which he
cannot make even an attempt to fly; but every one does not know,
probably, that with his stout and long legs he can pass over the ground
nearly at the ordinary speed of a locomotive engine.  I proved this to
my own satisfaction by taking accurate observation.  On first observing
the tremendous speed at which he was going, I seized my note-book, and
pulling out my watch, endeavoured to count the number of steps he took
in a minute.  This, however, I found was totally impossible; for his
legs, big though they were, went so fast that I could no more count them
than I could count the spokes of a carriage-wheel.  I observed, however,
that there were two bushes on the plain in the direction of his flight,
which he would soon have to pass.  I therefore laid down my note-book
and rifle, and stood with my watch in hand, ready to note the precise
instants at which he should pass the first and second.  By afterwards
counting the number of footsteps on the ground between the bushes, and
comparing the result with the time occupied in passing between the two,
I thus proposed to myself to ascertain his rate of speed.

Scarcely had I conceived this idea when the bird passed the first bush,
and I glanced at my watch; then he passed the second, and I glanced
again.  Thus I noted that he took exactly ten seconds to pass from one
bush to the other.  While I was in the act of jotting this down I heard
the report of Peterkin's rifle, and looking up hastily, saw the
tail-feathers of the ostrich knocked into the air, but the bird itself
passed on uninjured.  I was deeply mortified at this failure, and all
the more so that, from past experience, I had been led to believe that
my friend _never_ missed his mark.  Hurrying up, I exclaimed--

"Why, my dear fellow, what _can_ have come over you?"

Poor Peterkin seemed really quite distressed; he looked quite humbled at
first.

"Ah!" said he, "it's all very well for you to say, `What has come over
you?' but you ought to make allowance for a man who has carried a heavy
load all the forenoon.  Besides, he was almost beyond range.  Moreover,
although I have hunted a good deal, I really have not been in the habit
of firing at animal locomotives under full steam.  Did you ever see such
a slapping pace and such an outrageous pair of legs, Ralph?"

"Never," said I.  "But come with me to yonder bushes.  I'm going to make
a calculation."

"What's a calcoolashun?" inquired our guide, who came up at that moment,
panting violently.

"It's a summation, case of counting up one, two, three, etcetera--and
may be multiplying, subtracting, and dividing into the bargain."

"Ho! dat's what me been do at de missionary school."

"Exactly; but what sort of calculation Ralph means to undertake at
present I know not.  Perhaps he's going to try to find out whether, if
we were to run at the rate of six miles an hour till doomsday, in the
wrong direction, there would be any chance of our ever sticking that
ostrich's tail again on his big body.  But come along; we shall see."

On reaching the spot I could scarcely believe my eyes.  Each step this
bird had taken measured fourteen feet in length!  I always carried a
rolled-up yard-measure about with me, which I applied to the steps, so
that I could make no mistake.  There were exactly thirty of those
gigantic paces between the two bushes.  This multiplied by six gave 180
steps, or 2,520 feet in one minute, which resulted in 151,200 feet, or
50,400 yards, or very nearly thirty miles in the hour.

"No wonder I only knocked his tail off," said Peterkin.

"On the contrary," said I, "the wonder is that under the circumstances
you hit the bird at all."

On further examination of the place where we had seen the ostrich before
it was alarmed, we ascertained that his ordinary walking pace varied
from twenty to twenty-six inches in length.

After this unsuccessful hunt we returned to our comrades, and proceeded
to the rendezvous where we expected to find Jack; but as he was not
there, we concluded that he must have wandered farther than he intended,
so, throwing down our packs, we set about preparing the camp and a good
supper against his return.  Gradually the sun began to sink low on the
horizon; then he dipped below it, and the short twilight of those
latitudes was rapidly merging into night; but Jack did not return, and
the uneasiness which we had all along felt in regard to him increased so
much that we could not refrain from showing it.

"I'll tell you what it is, Ralph," cried Peterkin, starting up suddenly:
"I'm not going to sit here wasting the time when Jack may be in some
desperate fix.  I'll go and hunt for him."

"Me tink you right," said our guide; "dere is ebery sort ob ting here--
beasties and mans.  P'raps Massa Jack am be kill."

I could not help shuddering at the bare idea of such a thing, so I at
once seconded my companion's proposal, and resolved to accompany him.

"Take your double-barrel, Ralph, and I'll lend our spare big gun to
Mak."

"But how are we to proceed? which way are we to go?  I have not the most
distant idea as to what direction we ought to go in our search."

"Leave that to Mak.  He knows the ways o' the country best, and the
probable route that Jack has taken.  Are you ready?"

"Yes.  Shall we take some brandy?"

"Ay; well thought of.  He'll perhaps be the better of something of that
sort if anything has befallen him.  Now, then, let's go."

Leaving our men in charge of the camp, with strict injunctions to keep
good watch and not allow the fires to go down, lest they should be
attacked by lions, we three set forth on our nocturnal search.  From
time to time we stood still and shouted in a manner that would let our
lost friend know that we were in search of him, should he be within
earshot, but no answering cry came back to us; and we were beginning to
despair, when we came upon the footprints of a man in the soft soil of a
swampy spot we had to cross.  It was a clear moonlight night, so that we
could distinguish them perfectly.

"Ho!" exclaimed our guide, as he stooped to examine the marks.

"Well, Mak, what do you make of it?" inquired Peterkin anxiously.

Mak made no reply for a few seconds; then he rose, and said earnestly,
"Dat am Massa Jack's foot."

I confess that I was somewhat surprised at the air of confidence with
which our guide made this statement; for after a most careful
examination of the prints, which were exceedingly indistinct, I could
discern nothing to indicate that they had been made by Jack.

"Are you sure, Mak?" asked Peterkin.

"Sartin sure, massa."

"Then push on as fast as you can."

Presently we came to a spot where the ground was harder and the prints
more distinct.

"Ha! you're wrong, Mak," cried Peterkin, in a voice of disappointment,
as he stooped to examine the footsteps again.  "Here we have the print
of a naked foot; Jack wore shoes.  And, what's this? blood!"

"Yis, massa, me know dat Massa Jack hab shoes.  But dat be him's foot
for all dat, and him's hurt somehow for certain."

The reader may imagine our state of mind on making this discovery.
Without uttering another word, we quickened our pace into a smart run,
keeping closely in the track of Jack's steps.  Soon we observed that
these deviated from side to side in an extraordinary manner, as if the
person who made them had been unable to walk straight.  In a few minutes
more we came on the footprints of a rhinoceros--a sight which still
further increased our alarm.  On coming out from among a clump of low
bushes that skirted the edge of a small plain, we observed a dark object
lying on the ground about fifty yards distant from us.  I almost sank
down with an undefinable feeling of dread on beholding this.

We held our rifles in readiness as we approached it at a quick pace, for
we knew not whether it was not a wild animal which might spring upon us
the moment we came close enough.  But a few seconds dispelled our dread
of such an attack and confirmed our worst fears, for there, in a pool of
blood, lay Jack's manly form.  The face was upturned, and the moon,
which shone full upon it, showed that it was pale as death and covered
with blood.  His clothes were rent and dishevelled and covered with
dust, as if he had struggled hard with some powerful foe, and all round
the spot were footprints of a rhinoceros, revealing too clearly the
character of the terrible monster with which our friend had engaged in
unequal conflict.

Peterkin darted forward, tore open Jack's shirt at the breast, and laid
his hand upon his heart.

"Thank God," he muttered, in a low, subdued tone, "he's not dead!
Quick, Ralph--the brandy-flask."

I instantly poured a little of the spirit into the silver cup attached
to the flask, and handed it to Peterkin, who, after moistening Jack's
lips, began assiduously to rub his chest and forehead with brandy.
Kneeling down by his side I assisted him, while I applied some to his
feet.  While we were thus engaged we observed that our poor friend's
arms and chest had received several severe bruises and some slight
wounds, and we also discovered a terrible gash in his right thigh which
had evidently been made by the formidable horn of the rhinoceros.  This,
and the other wounds which were still bleeding pretty freely, we
stanched and bound up, and our exertions were at length rewarded by the
sight of a faint tinge of colour returning to Jack's cheeks.  Presently
his eyes quivered, and heaving a short, broken sigh, he looked up.

"Where am I, eh?  Why, what's wrong? what has happened?" he asked
faintly, in a tone of surprise.

"All right, old boy.  Here, take a swig of this, you abominable
gorilla," said Peterkin, holding the brandy-flask to his mouth, while
one or two tears of joy rolled down his cheeks.

Jack drank, and rallied a little.

"I've been ill, I see," he said gently.  "Ah!  I remember now.  I've
been hurt--the rhinoceros; eh, have you killed it?  I gave it a good
shot.  It must have been mortal, I think."

"Whether you've killed it or not I cannot tell," said I, taking off my
coat and putting it under Jack's head for a pillow, "but it has pretty
nearly killed _you_.  Do you feel worse, Jack?"

I asked this in some alarm, observing that he had turned deadly pale
again.

"He's fainted, man; out o' the way!" cried Peterkin, as he applied the
brandy again to his lips and temples.

In a few seconds Jack again rallied.

"Now, Mak, bestir yourself," cried Peterkin, throwing off his coat.
"Cut down two stout poles, and we'll make some sort of litter to carry
him on."

"I say, Ralph," whispered Jack faintly, "do look to my wounds and see
that they are all tightly bound up.  I can't afford to lose another drop
of blood.  It's almost all drained away, I believe."

While I examined my friend's wounds and readjusted the bandages, my
companions cut down two poles.  These we laid on the ground parallel to
each other and about two feet apart, and across them laid our three
coats, which we fastened in a rough fashion by means of some strong
cords which I fortunately happened to have with me.  On this rude litter
we laid our companion, and raised him on our shoulders.  Peterkin and I
walked in rear, each supporting one of the poles; while Makarooroo,
being the stoutest of the three, supported the entire weight of the
other ends on his broad shoulders.  Jack bore the moving better than we
had expected, so that we entertained sanguine hopes that no bones were
