enough to think of attemptin' such a thing.  Then, he can scarcely be
deceivin' us in sayin' that he met three Redskins carryin' off a white
man--an' what good could it do him if he is?  Besides, he is goin' out
of his way to sarve us."

"It is impossible for me to answer your question, Paul, but I understand
enough of both French and German to know that his broken English is a
mere sham--a mixture, and a bad one too, of what no German or Frenchman
would use--so it's not likely to be the sort of bad English that a Swede
would speak.  Moreover, I have caught him once or twice using English
words correctly at one time and wrongly at another.  No, you may depend
on it that, whatever his object may be, he is deceiving us."

"It's mesilf as agrees wid ye, sor," said Flinders, who had been
listening attentively to the conversation.  "The man's no more a Swede
than an Irishman, but what can we do wid oursilves!  True or false, he's
ladin' us in the diriction we want to go, an' it would do no good to say
to him, `Ye spalpeen, yer decavin' of us,' for he'd only say he wasn't;
or may be he'd cut up rough an' lave us--but after all, it might be the
best way to push him up to that."

"I think not" said Bevan.  "Doesn't English law say that a man should be
held innocent till he's proved guilty?"

"It's little I know or care about English law," answered Flinders, "but
I'm sure enough that Irish law howlds a bad man to be guilty till he's
proved innocent--at laste av it dosn't it should."

"You'd better go an' pump him a bit, Mr Fred," said Bevan; "we're close
up to the Sawback range; another hour an' we'll be among the mountains."

They were turning round the spur of a little hillock as he spoke.
Before Fred could reply a small deer sprang from its lair, cast on the
intruders one startled gaze, and then bounded gracefully into the bush,
too late, however, to escape from Bevan's deadly rifle.  It had barely
gone ten yards when a sharp crack was heard; the animal sprang high into
the air, and fell dead upon the ground.

"Bad luck to ye, Bevan!" exclaimed Flinders, who had also taken aim at
it, but not with sufficient speed, "isn't that always the way ye do?--
plucks the baste out o' me very hand.  Sure I had me sights lined on it
as straight as could be; wan second more an' I'd have sent a bullet
right into its brain, when _crack_! ye go before me.  Och! it's onkind,
to say the laste of it.  Why cudn't ye gi' me a chance?"

"I'm sorry, Flinders, but I couldn't well help it.  The critter rose
right in front o' me."

"Vat a goot shote you is!" exclaimed the botanist riding back to them
and surveying the prostrate deer through his blue spectacles.

"Ay, and it's a lucky shot too," said Fred, "for our provisions are
running low.  But perchance we shan't want much more food before
reaching the Indian camp.  You said, I think, that you have a good guess
where the camp lies, Mister--what shall we call you?"

"Call me vat you please," returned the stranger, with a peculiar smile;
"I is not partickler.  Some of me frunds calls me Mr Botaniste."

"Well, Mr Botanist, the camp cannot be far off now, an' it seems to me
that we should have overtaken men travelling on foot by this time."

"Ye vill surely come on de tracks dis naight or de morrow," replied the
botanist, riding forward, after Bevan had secured the carcass of the
deer to his saddle-bow, "bot ye must have patience, yoong blood be
always too hote.  All in goot time."

With this reply Fred was fain to content himself, for no amount of
pressure availed to draw anything more satisfactory out of their strange
guide.

Before sunset they had penetrated some distance into the Sawback range,
and then proceeded to make their encampment for the night under the
spreading branches of a lordly pine!



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

Tables are frequently turned in this world in more senses than one.  As
was said in the last chapter, the romantic pair who were in search of
the Indians did not find those for whom they sought but as fickle
fortune willed it, those for whom they sought found _them_.  It happened
thus.

Soon after the Rose of Oregon and her young champion, with their
captors, had passed through the Long Gap, crossed the plain, and entered
the Sawback Hills, they fell in with a band of twenty Indians, who from
their appearance and costume evidently belonged to the same tribe as
their captors.  From the manner in which they met also, it seemed that
they had been in search of each other, and had something interesting to
communicate, for they gesticulated much, pointed frequently to the sky,
and to various directions of the compass, chattered excitedly, showed
their brilliant teeth in fitful gleams, and glittered quite awfully
about the eyes.

They paid little attention at first to their prisoners, who remained
sitting on their steeds looking on with interest and some anxiety.

"O Betty, what would I not give to have my arms free just now!  What a
chance it would be for a bold dash and a glorious run!"

"You'd make little of it on such rough ground, Tolly."

"Pooh!  I'd try it on any ground.  Just fancy, I'd begin with a clear
leap over that chief's head--the one there wi' the feathers an' the long
nose that's makin' such hideous faces--then away up the glen, over the
stones, down the hollows, shoutin' like mad, an' clearin' the brooks and
precipices with a band o' yellin' Redskins at my tail!  Isn't it enough
to drive a fellow wild to be on the brink of such a chance an' miss it?
I say, haven't you got a penknife in your pocket--no?  Not even a pair
o' scissors?  Why, I thought you women never travelled without
scissors!"

"Alas!  Tolly, I have not even scissors; besides, if I had, it would
take me at least two minutes with all the strength of my fingers to cut
the thongs that bind you with scissors, and I don't think the Redskins
would stand quietly by and look on while I did it.  But what say you to
_me_ trying it by myself?"

"Quite useless," returned Tolly.  "You'd be caught at once--or break
your neck.  And you'd never get on, you know, without me.  No, no, we've
got fairly into a fix, an' I don't see my way out of it.  If my hands
were free we might attempt anything, but what can a fellow do when tied
up in this fashion?"

"He can submit, Tolly, and wait patiently."

Tolly did not feel inclined to submit, and was not possessed of much
patience, but he was too fond of Betty to answer flippantly.  He
therefore let his feelings escape through the safety-valve of a great
sigh, and relapsed into pensive silence.

Meanwhile the attention of the band of savages was attracted to another
small band of natives which approached them from the eastward.  That
these were also friends was evident from the fact that the larger band
made no hostile demonstration, but quietly awaited the coming up of the
others.  The newcomers were three in number, and two of them bore on
their shoulders what appeared to be the body of a man wrapped up in a
blanket.

"They've got a wounded comrade with them, I think," said little Trevor.

"So it would seem," replied Betty, with a dash of pity in her tone, for
she was powerfully sympathetic.

The savages laid the form in the blanket on the ground, and began to
talk earnestly with their comrades.

"It's not dead yet anyhow," remarked Tolly, "for I see it move.  I
wonder whether it is a man or a woman.  Mayhap it's their old
grandmother they're giving a little exercise to.  I've heard that some
o' the Redskins are affectionate sort o' fellows, though most of 'em are
hard enough on the old folk."

As he spoke he looked up in Betty's face.  Just as he did so a startling
change came over that face.  It suddenly became ashy pale, the large
eyes dilated to their utmost extent, and the mouth opened with a short
gasp.

In great alarm the boy turned his eyes in the direction in which the
girl gazed so fixedly, and then his own visage assumed a somewhat
similar appearance as he beheld the pale, thin, cadaverous countenance
of his friend Tom Brixton, from off which a corner of the blanket had
just slipped.  But for the slight motion above referred to Tom might
have been mistaken for a dead man, for his eyes were closed and his lips
bloodless.

Uttering a sudden shout Tolly Trevor flung himself headlong off the pony
and tried to get on his feet but failed, owing to his hands being tied
behind him.  Betty also leaped to the ground, and, running to where Tom
lay, went down on her knees and raised his head in her hands.

The poor youth, being roused, opened his eyes.  They were terribly
sunken and large, but when they met those of Betty they enlarged to an
extent that seemed positively awful, and a faint tinge of colour came to
his hollow cheeks.

"Betty!" he whispered; "can--can it be possible?"

"Yes, it is I!  Surely God must have sent me to save your life!"

"I fear not, dear--"

He stopped abruptly and shut his eyes.  For a few moments it seemed as
if he were dead, but presently he opened them again, and said, faintly,
"It is too late, I fear.  You are very kind, but I--I feel so terribly
weak that I think I am dying."

By this time Tolly, having managed to get on his feet stood beside his
friend, on whom he gazed with intense anxiety.  Even the Indians were
solemnised by what appeared to be a death-scene.

"Have you been wounded!" asked the girl, quickly.

"No; _only_ starved!" returned Tom, a slight smile of humour flickering
for a second on his pale face even in that hour of his extremity.

"Have the Indians given you anything to eat since they found you?"

"They have tried to, but what they offered me was dry and tough; I could
not get it down."

The girl rose promptly.  "Tolly, fetch me some water and make a fire.
Quick!" she said, and going up to an Indian, coolly drew from its sheath
his scalping-knife, with which she cut Tolly's bonds.  The savage
evidently believed that such a creature could not possibly do evil, for
he made no motion whatever to check her.  Then, without a word more, she
went to the saddle-bags on the obstinate horse, and, opening one of
them, took out some soft sugar.  The savage who held the horse made no
objection.  Indeed, from that moment the whole band stood silently by,
observing the pretty maiden and the active boy as they moved about,
regardless of everything but the work in hand.

The Rose of Oregon constituted herself a sick-nurse on that occasion
with marvellous facility.  True, she knew nothing whatever about the
duties of a sick-nurse or a doctor, for her father was one of those
fortunate men who are never ill, but her native tact and energy
sufficed.  It was not her nature to stand by inactive when anything
urgent had to be done.  If she knew not what to do, and no one else did,
she was sure to attempt something.  Whether sugar-and-water was the best
food for a starving man she knew not, but she did know--at least she
thought--that the starvation ought to be checked without delay.

"Here, Mr Brixton, sip a little of this," she said, going down on her
knees, and putting a tin mug to the patient's mouth.

Poor Tom would have sipped prussic acid cheerfully from _her_ hand!  He
obeyed, and seemed to like it.

"Now, a little more."

"God bless you, dear girl!" murmured Tom, as he sipped a little more.

"There, that will do you good till I can prepare something better."

She rose and ran to the fire which Tolly had already blown up almost to
furnace heat.

"I filled the kettle, for I knew you'd want it," said the boy, turning
up his fiery-red visage for a moment, "It can't be long o' boiling with
such a blaze below it."

He stooped again and continued to blow while Betty cut some dried meat
into small pieces.  Soon these were boiled, and the resulting soup was
devoured by the starving man with a zest that he had never before
experienced.

"Nectar!" he exclaimed faintly, smiling as he raised his eyes to Betty's
face.

"But you must not take too much at a time," she said, gently drawing
away the mug.

Tom submitted patiently.  He would have submitted to anything patiently
just then!

During these proceedings the Indians, who seemed to be amiably disposed,
looked on with solemn interest and then, coming apparently to the
conclusion that they might as well accommodate themselves to
circumstances, they quietly made use of Tolly's fire to cook a meal for
themselves.

This done, one of them--a noble-looking savage, who, to judge from his
bearing and behaviour, was evidently their chief--went up to Betty, and,
with a stately bend of the head, said, in broken English, "White woman
git on horse!"

"And what are you going to do with this man?" asked Betty, pointing to
the prostrate form of Tom.

"Unaco will him take care," briefly replied the chief (meaning himself),
while with a wave of his hand he turned away, and went to Tolly, whom he
ordered to mount the pony, which he styled the "littil horse."

The boy was not slow to obey, for he was by that time quite convinced
that his only chance of being allowed to have his hands left free lay in
prompt submission.  Any lurking thought that might have remained of
making a grand dash for liberty was effectually quelled by a big savage,
who quietly took hold of the pony's rein and led it away.  Another
Indian led Betty's horse.  Then the original three who had found Tom
took him up quite gently and carried him off, while the remainder of the
band followed in single file.  Unaco led the way, striding over the
ground at a rate which almost forced the pony to trot, and glancing from
side to side with a keen look of inquiry that seemed to intimate an
expectation of attack from an enemy in ambush.

But if any such enemy existed he was careful not to show himself, and
the Indian band passed through the defiles and fastnesses of the Sawback
Hills unmolested until the shades of evening began to descend.

Then, on turning round a jutting rock that obstructed the view up a
mountain gorge, Unaco stopped abruptly and held up his hand.  This
brought the band to a sudden halt and the chief, apparently sinking on
his knees, seemed to melt into the bushes.  In a few minutes he returned
with a look of stern resolve on his well-formed countenance.

"He has discovered something o' some sort, I--"

Tolly's remark to his fair companion was cut short by the point of a
keen knife touching his side, which caused him to end with "hallo!"

The savage who held his bridle gave him a significant look that said,
"Silence!"

After holding a brief whispered conversation with several of his braves,
the chief advanced to Betty and said--

"White man's in the bush.  Does white woman know why?"

Betty at once thought of her father and his companions, and said--

"I have not seen the white men.  How can I tell why they are here?  Let
me ride forward and look at them--then I shall be able to speak."

A very slight smile of contempt curled the chiefs lip for an instant as
he replied--

"No.  The white woman see them when they be trapped.  Unaco knows one.
He is black--a devil with two face--many face, but Unaco's eyes be
sharp.  They see far."

So saying, he turned and gave some directions to his warriors, who at
once scattered themselves among the underwood and disappeared.  Ordering
the Indians who carried Tom Brixton to follow him, and the riders to
bring up the rear, he continued to advance up the gorge.

"A devil with two faces!" muttered Tolly; "that must be a queer sort o'
beast!  I _have_ heard of a critter called a Tasmanian devil, but never
before heard of an Oregon one with two faces."

An expressive glance from the Indian who guarded him induced the lad to
continue his speculations in silence.

On passing round the jutting rock, where Unaco had been checked in his
advance, the party at once beheld the cause of anxiety.  Close to the
track they were following were seen four men busily engaged in making
arrangements to encamp for the night.

It need scarcely be said that these were our friends Paul Bevan, Fred
Westly, Flinders, and the botanist.

The moment that these caught sight of the approaching party they sprang
to their arms, which of course lay handy, for in those regions, at the
time we write of, the law of might was in the ascendant.  The appearance
and conduct of Unaco, however, deceived them, for that wily savage
advanced towards them with an air of confidence and candour which went
far to remove suspicion, and when, on drawing nearer, he threw down his
knife and tomahawk, and held up his empty hands, their suspicions were
entirely dispelled.

"They're not likely to be onfriendly," observed Flinders, "for there's
only five o' them altogither, an' wan o' them's only a bit of a boy an'
another looks uncommon like a wo--"

He had got thus far when he was checked by Paul Bevan's exclaiming, with
a look of intense surprise, "Why, that's Betty!--or her ghost!"

Flinders's astonishment was too profound to escape in many words.  He
only gave vent to, "Musha! there's Tolly!" and let his lower jaw drop.

"Yes, it's me an' the Beautiful Nugget" cried Tolly, jumping off the
pony and running to assist the Nugget to dismount, while the bearers of
Tom Brixton laid him on the ground, removed the blanket, and revealed
his face.

The exclamations of surprise would no doubt have been redoubled at this
sight if the power of exclamation had not been for the time destroyed.
The sham botanist in particular was considerably puzzled, for he at once
recognised Tom and also Betty, whom he had previously known.  Of course
he did not know Tolly Trevor; still less did he know that Tolly knew
_him_.

Unaco himself was somewhat surprised at the mutual recognitions, though
his habitual self-restraint enabled him to conceal every trace of
emotion.  Moreover, he was well aware that he could not afford to lose
time in the development of his little plot.  Taking advantage,
therefore, of the surprise which had rendered every one for the moment
more or less confused, he gave a sharp signal which was well understood
by his friends in the bush.

Instantly, and before Tolly or Betty could warn their friends of what
was coming, the surrounding foliage parted, as if by magic, and a circle
of yelling and painted Redskins sprang upon the white men.  Resistance
was utterly out of the question.  They were overwhelmed as if by a
cataract and, almost before they could realise what had happened, the
arms of all the men were pinioned behind them.

At that trying hour little Tolly Trevor proved himself to be more of a
man than most of his friends had hitherto given him credit for.

The savages, regarding him as a weak little boy, had paid no attention
to him, but confined their efforts to the overcoming of the powerful and
by no means submissive men with whom they had to deal.

Tolly's first impulse was to rush to the rescue of Paul Bevan; but he
was remarkably quick-witted, and, when on the point of springing,
observed that no tomahawk was wielded or knife drawn.  Suddenly grasping
the wrist of Betty, who had also naturally felt the impulse to succour
her father, he exclaimed--

"Stop!  Betty.  They don't mean murder.  You an' I can do nothing
against so many.  Keep quiet; p'r'aps they'll leave us alone."

As he spoke a still deeper idea flashed into his little brain.  To the
surprise of Betty, he suddenly threw his arms round her waist and clung
to her as if for protection with a look of fear in his face, and when
the work of binding the captives was completed the Indians found him
still labouring to all appearance under great alarm.  Unaco cast on him
one look of supreme scorn, and then, leaving him, like Betty, unbound,
turned towards Paul Bevan.

"The white man is one of wicked band?" he said, in his broken English.

"I don't know what ye mean, Redskin," replied Paul; "but speak your own
tongue, I understand it well enough to talk with ye."

The Indian repeated the question in his native language, and Paul,
replying in the same, said--

"No, Redskin, I belong to no band, either wicked or good."

"How come you, then, to be in company with this man?" demanded the
Indian.

In reply Paul gave a correct account of the cause and object of his
being there, explained that the starving man before them was the friend
for whom he sought, that Betty was his daughter, though how she came to
be there beat his comprehension entirely, and that the botanist was a
stranger, whose name even he did not yet know.

"It is false," returned the chief.  "The white man speaks with a forked
tongue.  He is one of the murderers who have slain my wife and my
child."

A dark fierce frown passed over the chief's countenance as he spoke, but
it was quickly replaced by the habitual look of calm gravity.

