"I have often talked with Phoenician captains about this disease, and
they tell me that it is terribly infectious, insomuch that those who are
smitten with it are compelled to live apart and keep away from men.  If
Bladud remains here the disease will surely spread through the house,
and thence through the town."

Poor Hudibras fell into a chair, and covered his face with both hands,
while the doctor quietly retired.

It is impossible to describe the consternation that ensued when the
terrible fact was made known.  Of course the news spread into the town,
and the alarm became general, for at various times the Phoenician
mariners had entertained the islanders with graphic descriptions of the
horrors connected with this loathsome disease, and it soon became
evident, that even if the king and his family were willing to run the
risk of infection by keeping Bladud near them, his people and warriors
would insist on the banishment of the smitten man.

To Bladud himself the blow was almost overwhelming--almost, but not
quite, for the youth was possessed of that unselfish, self-sacrificing
spirit which, in all ages of the world's history, has bid defiance to
misfortune, by bowing the head in humble submission to the will of God.
He knew well the nature of the dread disease by which he had been
attacked, and he shuddered at the thought that, however long he might be
spared to live, it would sap his strength, disfigure his person, and
ultimately render his face hideous to look upon, while a life of
absolute solitude must from that day forward be his portion.  No wonder
that in the first rush of his dismay, he entertained a wild thought of
putting an end to his own existence.  There was only one gleam of
comfort to him, and that was, the recollection that he had caught the
disease in a good cause--in the rescue of a poor old woman from
destruction.  The comfort of the thought was not indeed great, still it
was something in the awful desolation that overwhelmed him at the time.

While travelling in the East, a short time previous to setting sail for
home, he had come across an old woman who was being chased by a wild
bull.  Her flight would have been short-lived in any case, for there
chanced to be a steep precipice not far from her, towards which she ran
in her terror and scrambled hastily down until she reached a spot where
she could go no further without losing her foothold.  To the rock she
clung and screamed in her despair.

It was her screams that first attracted Bladud's attention.  Rushing
forward, he was just in time to see the bull--which could not check its
mad career--plunge over the cliff, at the bottom of which it was killed
by the fall.

Bladud at once began to descend to the help of the poor woman.  As he
did so, the words "unclean! unclean!" met his ear.  The woman was a
leper, and, even in her dire extremity, the force of habit caused her to
give the usual warning which the Eastern law requires.  A shudder passed
through the prince's frame, for he knew well the meaning of the cry--but
as he looked down and saw the disfigured face and the appealing eyes
turned towards him, a gush of intense pity, and of that disregard of
self which is more or less characteristic of all noble natures, induced
him to continue his descent until he reached the poor creature.
Grasping her tightly round the waist, he assisted her up the perilous
ascent, and finally placed her in safety at the top of the cliff.

For a time Bladud felt some anxiety as to the result of the risk he had
run, but did not mention his adventure to any one.  Gradually the fear
wore off, and at length that feeling of invulnerability which is so
strong in youth, induced him to dismiss the subject from his thoughts
altogether.  He had quite forgotten it until the doctor's statement fell
upon him with the stunning violence of a thunder-clap.

It is usually when deep sorrows and great difficulties are sent to them,
that men and women find out the quality of their natures.  Despair,
followed by listless apathy, might well have seized on one who, a few
days before, possessed all the advantages of great physical strength and
manly beauty, with what appeared to be sound health and a bright life
before him.  But, instead of giving way, he silently braced himself for
a lifelong conflict.  He did not turn, in his extremity, to the gods of
his fathers--whatever these might be--for he did not believe in them,
but he did believe in one good supreme Being.  To Him he raised his
heart, offered an unspoken prayer, and felt comforted as well as
strengthened in the act.

Then, being a man of prompt action, he thoughtfully but quickly formed
his plans, having previously made fast his door--for well he knew that
although his strong-minded father might keep him at arm's-length, his
loving mother and sister would not only come to talk with him, but
would, despite all risks, insist on embracing him.

That he was not far wrong was proved the same evening, for when the king
revealed the terrible news to his wife and daughter, they went straight
to Bladud's door and knocked for admission.

"Who goes there?" demanded the prince.

"Your mother.  Let me in, Bladud."

"I may not do so just now, dear mother.  Tomorrow you shall know all.
Rest content.  I feel better."

In the dead of night Bladud went out softly and sought the hut where
Captain Arkal and Maikar slept.  He found them conversing in great
sorrow about the terrible calamity that had overtaken their friend when
he entered.  They started up in surprise to receive him.

"Keep off," he said, shrinking back.  "Touch me not!  I know not whether
the disease may not be catching even at its present stage.  Sit down.  I
will stand here and tell you what I want you to tell my mother in the
morning."

The two men silently obeyed, and the prince continued.

"I am on the point of leaving home--it may be for ever.  The Disposer of
all things knows that.  The disease, as you know, is thought to be
incurable.  If so, I shall die where no one shall find me.  If health
returns I shall come back.  It will be of no use to search for me; but I
think that will not be attempted.  Indeed, I know that my father would
be compelled to banish me if I wished to remain at home.  It is partly
to spare him the pain of doing so that I banish myself of my own accord;
and partly to avoid leaving infection behind me that I go without
farewell.  Let my dear mother and sister understand this clearly--and--
comfort them if you can."

"But where will you go to and what will you do?" asked the captain
anxiously.

"That I do not yet know.  The forests are wide.  There is plenty of room
for man and beast.  This only will I reveal to you.  To-night I shall
call at the hut of Beniah the Hebrew.  He is a wise man and will advise
me.  If I send news of myself it shall be through him.  But tell not
this to any one.  It would only bring trouble on the old man.  Farewell,
my comrades.  I will remember you as brothers--always.  May the
All-powerful One watch over us."

Unable to restrain himself, little Maikar sprang up with the obvious
intention of rushing at his friend and seizing his hand, but the prince
stepped back, shut the door against him, and, in another moment, was
gone.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

AN EAVESDROPPER IN THE CAVE.

An hour later Beniah the Hebrew, who had been obliged to postpone for a
time his journey to the North, was startled by hearing footsteps
approaching his hut in the dell.  It was so unusual an event at that
hour of the night, that he arose quickly and grasped the six-foot staff
which was his only weapon.

At a much earlier hour Branwen had retired to rest in the inner cave,
and was buried in that profound sleep which proverbially accompanies
innocence and youth.  The noise in the outer cave partially aroused her,
but, turning on her other side with a profound sigh, she prepared for a
little more of the perquisites of innocence and youth.  Presently she
was startled into a condition of absolute wide-awakeness by the sound of
a well-known voice, but it suddenly changed into that of the Hebrew.

"I've dreamt it, I suppose," she muttered, in a tone of regret;
nevertheless, she listened.

"Come in," said Beniah, evidently to some one outside of his door.

"I may not enter--I am a leper," answered the first voice; and Branwen
sat up, with her great beautiful eyes opened to the utmost, and
listening intently, though she could not make out clearly what was said.

"It matters not; I have no fear.  Come in.  What!  Prince Bladud!"
exclaimed Beniah in astonishment as our hero entered.

"Even so.  But how is it that you know me?"

"I saw you once, and, once seen, you are not easily forgotten.  But what
mean ye about being a leper?"

"Keep at a safe distance, and I will tell you."

Hereupon the prince began to give the old man an account of his illness;
the opinion expressed by the doctor as to its nature; and the
determination he had formed of forsaking home, and retiring to the
solitude of some unfrequented part of the forest for the remainder of
his life.

It would have been a sight worth looking at--had there been light to see
it--the vision of Branwen, as she stood in the passage in partial
_deshabille_, with her eyes wide, her lips parted, her heart beating,
and a wealth of auburn hair curling down her back, listening, as it
were, with every power of her soul and body.  But she could not hear
distinctly.  Only a disconnected word reached her now and then.  In a
state of desperate curiosity she returned to her cave.

A few minutes later a noise was heard by the two men in the outer cave;
and a little old woman in a grey shawl was seen to thrust a plank over
the chasm and totter across towards them.

Poor Beniah was horrified.  He did not know what to do or say.  Happily
he was one of those men whose feelings are never betrayed by their
faces.

The old woman hobbled forward and sat down on a stool close to them.
Looking up in their faces, she smiled and nodded.

In doing so she revealed the fact that, besides having contorted her
face into an unrecognisable shape, she had soiled it in several places
with streaks of charcoal and earth.

"Who is this?" asked Bladud in surprise.  Before the old man could
reply, the old woman put her hand to her ear, and, looking up in the
prince's face, shouted, in tones that were so unlike to her own natural
voice that Beniah could scarce believe his ears--

"What say you, young man?  Speak out; I'm very deaf."

With a benignant smile Bladud said that he had merely asked who she was.

"Haven't you got eyes, young man?  Don't you see that I'm a little old
woman?"

"I see that," returned the prince, with a good-humoured laugh; "and I
fear you're a deaf old woman, too."

"Eh?" she said, advancing her head, with her hand up at the ear.

"You seem indeed to be extremely deaf," shouted the prince.

"What does he say?" demanded the old woman, turning to the Hebrew.

By this time Beniah had recovered his self-possession.  Perceiving that
the maiden was bent on carrying out her _role_, and that he might as
well help her, he put his mouth close to her ear, and shouted in a voice
that bid fair to render her absolutely deaf--

"He says he thinks you are extremely deaf; so I think you had better
hold your tongue and let us go on with our conversation."

"Deaf, indeed!" returned the woman in a querulous tone; "so I am, though
I hear you well enough when you shout like that.  Perhaps he'll be as
deaf as I am when he's as old.  There's nothing like youth for pride and
impudence.  But go on, never mind me."

"She's a poor creature who has sought refuge with me from her
persecutors," said Beniah, turning to the prince, while the old woman
fell to crooning a wild song in a low voice, accompanying the music--if
such it may be called--by a swaying motion of her body to and fro.

Seeing that she meant to sit there, and that she apparently heard
nothing, Bladud resumed the conversation where it had been interrupted.

"Now, as I was saying, you know the country in all directions, and can
tell me of the most likely part where I can find what I want--a solitude
where I shall be able to escape from the face of man, and build a hut to
live in till I die.  It may be long, it may be short, before death
relieves me.  Meanwhile, I can hunt and provide myself with food till
the time comes."

The crooning of the old woman stopped at this point, and she sank her
face on her hands as if she had fallen asleep.

"I know of a man--a hunter," said Beniah, "a wild sort of being, who
lives a long way from here, in a beautiful part of the land, where there
is a wonderful swamp with a hot spring in the midst of it.  Besides
hunting, the man who lives there cultivates the ground a little, and
keeps a few cattle and pigs.  It may be that he can put you in the way
of finding what you want; and you need not tell him about your disease,
for you are not yet sure about it.  Thus you will have an opportunity of
keeping out of the way of men until you find out whether the doctor is
right about it.  He may be wrong, you know.  Diseases sometimes resemble
each other without being the same."

Bladud shook his head.

"There can be no doubt that I am doomed," he said.  "I know the disease
too well."

The Hebrew also believed that, if the doctor was right in his opinion,
there was no hope for the youth.  Being unwilling, however, to dwell
upon this point, he asked--

"How did you come by it?"

"Very simply," answered the prince, who thereupon entered into a graphic
account of the incident which we have already recorded.  Having done so,
he made up his mind, after some further talk, to pay a visit to the
hunter who dwelt in the region of the Hot Swamp.

"But you will not surely go without arms?" said Beniah.

"Why not?  If I am doomed to die at any rate, why should I take the life
of any man to save my own?"

"Let me at least give you a bow and a sheaf of arrows.  You cannot
procure food without these."

"Well, you are right.  I will accept your kind offer.  To say truth, my
heart was so crushed at first by this blow, that such matters did not
occur to me when I left; for it is terrible to think of having to die of
a slow disease without father, mother, or sister to comfort one!"

"It is indeed, my son," returned Beniah with much feeling.  "If you will
accept it, I can give you a word of comfort."

"Give it me," said Bladud; "for I need it much,--if it be but true."

"It is true," returned the Hebrew earnestly; "for in one of the books of
our holy men who spoke for the All-Father, it is written, `When my
father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.'"

"It is a good word," returned the prince; "and I can well believe it
comes from the All-Father, for is He not also All-Good?  Yet I can
scarcely claim it as mine, for my father and mother have not forsaken
me, but I them."

A few minutes more, and Bladud rose to depart.  He took the bow and
arrows in his left hand, and, totally forgetting for the moment the duty
of keeping himself aloof from his fellow-men, he shook hands warmly with
Beniah, patted the old woman kindly on the shoulder, and went out into
the dark night.

The moment he was gone Branwen started up with flashing eyes that were
still bedewed with tears, and seized the old man's hand.

"Child," he said, "thou hast been weeping."

"Who could listen to his telling of that old woman's escape from the
bull and the precipice without tears?" she replied.  "But tell me, what
is this terrible disease that has smitten the prince?"

"It is one well known and much dreaded in the East--called leprosy."

Here the Hebrew went into a painfully graphic account of the disease;
the frightful disfigurement it caused, and its almost, if not quite,
certain termination in death.

"And have the queen and Hudibras actually let him go away to die alone?"
she exclaimed.

"Not so, my child.  Before you interrupted us he told me that he had
left home by stealth on purpose.  But, Branwen," continued the old man
with some severity, "how could you run such a risk of being discovered?"

"I ran no risk," she replied, with a laugh.

"Besides, it was not fair to pretend to be deaf and thus obtain all his
secrets."

"I don't care whether it was fair or not," replied the girl with a
wilful shake of her head.  "And was it fair of you to back me up as you
did?"

"Your rebuke is just, yet it savours of ingratitude.  I should not have
done so, but I was completely taken aback.  Do you know that your face
is dirty?"

"I know it.  I made it so on purpose.  Now tell me--when are you going
away to tell my father and brothers about me?"
