unutterable despair on the faces of the scattered remnant of the
bereaved and starving people.

It was impossible, in the circumstances, for Harold Seadrift to give
these wretched people more than very slight relief.  He gave them as
much of his stock of provisions as he could spare, and was glad when the
necessity of continuing the journey on foot relieved him from such
mournful scenes by taking him away from the river's bank.

Hiring a party of the strongest men that he could find among them, he at
length left his canoes, made up his goods, food, and camp-equipage into
bundles of a shape and size suitable to being carried on the heads of
men, and started on foot for the Manganja highlands.

"Seems to me, sir," observed Disco, as they plodded along together on
the first morning of the land journey--"seems to me, sir, that Chimbolo
don't stand much chance of findin' his wife alive."

"Poor fellow," replied Harold, glancing back at the object of their
remarks, "I fear not."

Chimbolo had by that time recovered much of his natural vigour, and
although not yet able to carry a man's load, was nevertheless quite
capable of following the party.  He walked in silence, with his eyes on
the ground, a few paces behind Antonio, who was a step or two in rear of
his leader, and who, in virtue of his position as "bo's'n" to the party,
was privileged to walk hampered by no greater burden than his gun.

"We must keep up his sperrits, tho', poor chap," said Disco, in the
hoarse whisper with which he was wont to convey secret remarks, and
which was much more fitted to attract attention than his ordinary voice.
"It 'ud never do to let his sperrits down; 'cause w'y? he's weak, an'
if he know'd that his wife was dead, or took off as a slave, he'd never
be able to go along with us, and we couldn't leave him to starve here,
you know."

"Certainly not, Disco," returned Harold.  "Besides, his wife _may_ be
alive, for all we know to the contrary.--How far did he say the village
was from where we landed, Antonio?"

"'Bout two, t'ree days," answered the bo's'n.

That night the party encamped beside the ruins of a small hamlet where
charred sticks and fragments of an African household's goods and
chattels lay scattered on the ground.

Chimbolo sat down here on the ground, and, resting his chin on his
knees, gazed in silence at the ruin around him.

"Come, cheer up, old fellow," cried Disco, with rather an awkward effort
at heartiness, as he slapped the negro gently on the shoulder; "tell
him, Antonio, not to let his heart go down.  Didn't he say that
what-dee-call-the-place--his village--was a strong place, and could be
easily held by a few brave men?"

"True," replied Chimbolo, through the interpreter, "but the Manganja men
are not very brave."

"Well, well, never mind," rejoined the sympathetic tar, repeating his
pat on the back, "there's no sayin'.  P'raps they got courage w'en it
came to the scratch.  P'raps it never came to the scratch at all up
there.  Mayhap you'll find 'em all right after all.  Come, never say die
s'long as there's a shot in the locker.  That's a good motto for 'ee,
Chimbolo, and ought to keep up your heart even tho' ye _are_ a nigger,
'cause it wos inwented by the great Nelson, and shouted by him, or his
bo's'n, just before he got knocked over at the glorious battle of
Trafalgar.  Tell him that, Antonio."

Whether Antonio told him all that, is extremely doubtful, although he
complied at once with the order, for Antonio never by any chance
declined at least to attempt the duties of his station, but the only
effect of his speech was that Chimbolo shook his head and continued to
stare at the ruins.

Next morning they started early, and towards evening drew near to Zomba.

The country through which, during the previous two days, they had
travelled, was very beautiful, and as wild as even Disco could desire--
and, by the way, it was no small degree of wildness that could slake the
thirst for the marvellous which had been awakened in the breast of our
tar, by his recent experiences in Africa.  It was, he said--and said
truly--a real out-and-out wilderness.  There were villages everywhere,
no doubt but these were so thickly concealed by trees and jungle that
they were not easily seen, and most of them were at that time almost
depopulated.  The grass was higher than the heads of the travellers, and
the vegetation everywhere was rankly luxuriant.  Here and there open
glades allowed the eye to penetrate into otherwise impenetrable bush.
Elsewhere, large trees abounded in the midst of overwhelmingly
affectionate parasites, whose gnarled lower limbs and twining tendrils
and pendant foliage gave a softness to the landscape, which contrasted
well with the wild passes and rugged rocks of the middle distance, and
the towering mountains which rose, range beyond range, in the far
distance.

But as the party approached the neighbourhood of Zomba mountains, few of
them were disposed to give much heed to the beauties of nature.  All
being interested in Chimbolo, they became more or less anxious as to
news that awaited him.

On turning a spur of one of the mountains which had hitherto barred
their vision, they found themselves suddenly face to face with a small
band of Manganja men, whose woe-begone countenances told too eloquently
that the hand of the destroyer had been heavy upon them.

Of course they were questioned by Chimbolo, and the replies they gave
him were such as to confirm the fears he had previously entertained.

The Ajawa, they said, had, just the day before, burnt their villages,
stolen or destroyed their property, killed many of their kinsmen, and
carried off their wives and children for slaves.  They themselves had
escaped, and were now on their way to visit their chief, who was at that
time on the banks of the Zambesi, to beg of him to return, in order that
he might bewitch the guns of the Ajawa, and so render them harmless!

"Has a woman of your tribe, named Marunga, been slain or captured?"
asked Chimbolo eagerly.

To this the men replied that they could not tell.  Marunga, they said,
was known well to them by name and sight.  They did not think she was
among the captives, but could not tell what had become of her, as the
village where she and her little boy lived had been burnt, and all who
had not been killed or captured had taken to the bush.  Marunga's
husband, they added, was a man named Chimbolo--not a Manganja man, but a
friend of the tribe--who had been taken by the slavers, under command of
a Portuguese half-caste named Marizano, about two years before that
time.

Chimbolo winced as though he had been stung when Marizano's name was
mentioned, and a dark frown contracted his brows when he told the
Manganja men that _he_ was Chimbolo, and that he was even then in search
of Marunga and her little boy.

When all this had been explained to Harold Seadrift he told the men that
it was a pity to waste time in travelling such a long way to see their
chief, who could not, even if he wished, bewitch the guns of the Ajawa,
and advised them to turn back and guide him and his men to the place
where the attack had been made on the Manganja, so that a search might
be made in the bush for those of the people who had escaped.

This was agreed to, and the whole party proceeded on their way with
increased speed, Chimbolo and Harold hoping they might yet find that
Marunga had escaped, and Disco earnestly desiring that they might only
fall in with the Ajawa and have a brush with them, in which case he
assured the negroes he would show them a way of bewitching their guns
that would beat their chief's bewitchment all to sticks and stivers!

The village in which Marunga had dwelt was soon reached.  It was, as
they had been told by their new friends, a heap of still smouldering
ashes; but it was not altogether destitute of signs of life.  A dog was
observed to slink away into the bush as they approached.

The moment Chimbolo observed it he darted into the bush after it.

"Hallo!" exclaimed Disco in surprise; "that nigger seems to have took a
sudden fancy to the cur?--Eh, Antonio, wot's the reason of that, think
'ee?"

"Dunno; s'pose where dog be mans be?"

"Ah! or womans," suggested Disco.

"Or womans," assented Antonio.

Just then they heard Chimbolo's shout, which was instantly followed by a
succession of female shrieks.  These latter were repeated several times,
and sounded as though the fugitives were scattering.

"Hims find a nest of womins!" exclaimed Jumbo, throwing down his load
and dashing away into the bush.

Every individual of the party followed his example, not excepting Harold
and Disco, the latter of whom was caught by the leg, the moment he left
the track, by a wait-a-bit thorn--most appropriately so-called, because
its powerful spikes are always ready to seize and detain the unwary
passer-by.  In the present instance it checked the seaman's career for a
few seconds, and rent his nether garments sadly; while Harold, profiting
by his friend's misfortune, leaped over the bush, and passed on.  Disco
quickly extricated himself, and followed.

They were not left far behind, and overtook their comrades just as they
emerged on an open space, or glade, at the extremity of which a sight
met their eyes that filled them with astonishment, for there a troop of
women and one or two boys were seen walking towards them, with Chimbolo
in front, having a child on his left shoulder, and performing a sort of
insane war-dance round one of the women.

"He's catched her!" exclaimed Disco, with excited looks, just as if
Chimbolo had been angling unsuccessfully for a considerable time, and
had hooked a stupendous fish at last.

And Disco was right.  A few of the poor creatures who were so recently
burnt out of their homes, and had lost most of those dearest to them,
had ventured, as if drawn by an irresistible spell, to return with timid
steps to the scene of their former happiness, but only to have their
worst fears confirmed.  Their homes, their protectors, their children,
their hopes, all were gone at one fell swoop.  Only one among them--one
who, having managed to save her only child, had none to mourn over, and
no one to hope to meet with--only one returned to a joyful meeting.  We
need scarcely say that this was Marunga.

The fact was instantly made plain to the travellers by the wild manner
in which Chimbolo shouted her name, pointed to her, and danced round
her, while he showed all his glistening teeth and as much of the whites
of his eyes as was consistent with these members remaining in their
orbits.

Really it was quite touching, in spite of its being ludicrous, the way
in which the poor fellow poured forth his joy like a very child,--which
he was in everything except years; and Harold could not help
remembering, and recalling to Disco's memory, Yoosoof's observations
touching the hardness of negroes' hearts, and their want of natural
affection, on the morning when his dhow was captured by the boat of the
"Firefly."

The way in which, ever and anon, Chimbolo kissed his poor but now happy
wife, was wondrously similar to the mode in which white men perform that
little operation, except that there was more of an unrefined smack in
it.  The tears which _would_ hop over his sable cheeks now and then
sparkled to the full as brightly as European tears, and were perhaps
somewhat bigger; and the pride with which he regarded his little son,
holding him in both hands out at arms'-length, was only excelled by the
joy and the tremendous laugh with which he received a kick on the nose
from that undutiful son's black little toes.

But Yoosoof never chanced to be present when such exhibitions of negro
feeling and susceptibility took place.  How could he, seeing that men
and women and children--if black--fled from him, and such as he, in
abject terror?  Neither did Yoosoof ever chance to be present when women
sat down beside their blackened hearths, as they did that night, and
quietly wept as though their hearts would burst at the memory of little
voices and manly tones--not silent in death, but worse than that--gone,
gone _for ever_!  Doubtless they felt though they never heard of, and
could not in words express, the sentiment--

  "Oh for the touch of a vanished hand,
  And the sound of a voice that is still."

Yoosoof knew not of, and cared nothing for, such feelings as these.  We
ask again, how could he?  His only experience of the negro was when
cowering before him as a slave, or when yelling in agony under his
terrible lash, or when brutalised and rendered utterly apathetic by
inhuman cruelty.

Harold learned, that night on further conversation with the Manganja
men, that a raid had recently been made into those regions by more than
one band of slavers, sent out to capture men and women by the Portuguese
half-castes of the towns of Senna and Tette, on the Zambesi, and that
they had been carrying the inhabitants out of the country at the rate of
about two hundred a week.

This however was but a small speck, so to speak, of the mighty work of
kidnapping human beings that was going on--that is _still_ going on in
those regions.  Yoosoof would have smiled--he never laughed--if you had
mentioned such a number as being large.

But in truth he cared nothing about such facts, except in so far as they
represented a large amount of profit accrueing to himself.

The result of Harold Seadrift's cogitations on these matters was that he
resolved to pass through as much of the land as he could within a
reasonable time, and agreed to accompany Chimbolo on a visit to his
tribe, which dwelt at some distance to the north of the Manganja
highlands.



CHAPTER NINE.

IN WHICH A SAVAGE CHIEF ASTONISHES A SAVAGE ANIMAL.

There is something exceedingly pleasant in the act of watching--
ourselves unseen--the proceedings of some one whose aims and ends appear
to be very mysterious.  There is such a wide field of speculation opened
up in which to expatiate, such a vast amount of curious, we had almost
said romantic, expectation created; all the more if the individual whom
we observe be a savage, clothed in an unfamiliar and very scanty garb,
and surrounded by scenery and circumstances which, albeit strange to us,
are evidently by no means new to him.

Let us--you and me, reader,--quitting for a time the sad subject of
slavery, and leaping, as we are privileged to do, far ahead of our
explorers Harold Seadrift and his company, into the region of Central
Africa; let you and me take up a position in a clump of trees by the
banks of yonder stream, and watch the proceedings of that negro--negro
chief let me say, for he looks like one,--who is engaged in some
mysterious enterprise under the shade of a huge baobab tree.

The chief is a fine, stately, well-developed specimen of African
manhood.  He is clothed in black tights manufactured in nature's loom,
in addition to which he wears round his loins a small scrap of
artificial cotton cloth.  If an enthusiastic member of the Royal Academy
were in search of a model which should combine the strength of Hercules
with the grace of Apollo, he could not find a better than the man before
us, for, you will observe, the more objectionable points about _our_
ideal of the negro are not very prominent in him.  His lips are not
thicker than the lips of many a roast-beef-loving John Bull.  His nose
is not flat, and his heels do not protrude unnecessarily.  True, his
hair is woolly, but that is scarcely a blemish.  It might almost be
regarded as the crisp and curly hair that surrounds a manly skull.  His
skin is black--no doubt about that, but then it is _intensely_ black and
glossy, suggestive of black satin, and having no savour of that
dirtiness which is inseparably connected with whitey-brown.  Tribes in
Africa differ materially in many respects, physically and mentally, just
as do the various tribes of Europe.

This chief, as we have hinted, is a "savage;" that is to say, he differs
in many habits and points from "civilised" people.  Among other
peculiarities, he clothes himself and his family in the fashion that is
best suited to the warm climate in which he dwells.  This display of
wisdom is, as you know, somewhat rare among civilised people, as any one
may perceive who observes how these over-clothe the upper parts of their
children, and leave their tender little lower limbs exposed to the
rigours of northern latitudes, while, as if to make up for this
inconsistency by an inconsistent counterpoise, they swathe their own
tough and mature limbs in thick flannel from head to foot.

It is however simple justice to civilised people to add here that a few
of them, such as a portion of the Scottish Highlanders, are consistent
inasmuch as the men clothe themselves similarly to the children.

Moreover, our chief, being a savage, takes daily a sufficient amount of
fresh air and exercise, which nine-tenths of civilised men refrain from
doing, on the economic and wise principle, apparently, that engrossing
and unnatural devotion to the acquisition of wealth, fame, or knowledge,
will enable them at last to spend a few paralytic years in the enjoyment
of their gains.  No doubt civilised people have the trifling little
drawback of innumerable ills, to which they say (erroneously, we think)
that flesh is heir, and for the cure of which much of their wealth is
spent in supporting an army of doctors.  Savages know nothing of
indigestion, and in Central Africa they have no medical men.

There is yet another difference which we may point out: savages have no
literature.  They cannot read or write therefore, and have no permanent
records of the deeds of their forefathers.  Neither have they any
religion worthy of the name.  This is indeed a serious evil, one which
civilised people of course deplore, yet, strange to say, one which
consistency prevents some civilised people from remedying in the case of
African savages, for it would be absurdly inconsistent in Arab
Mohammedans to teach the negroes letters and the doctrines of their
faith with one hand, while with the other they lashed them to death or
dragged them into perpetual slavery; and it would be equally
inconsistent in Portuguese Christians to teach the negroes to read
"Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to
them," while "domestic slavery" is, in their so-called African
territories, claimed as a right and the traffic connected with it
sanctioned.

Yes, there are many points of difference between civilised people and
savages, and we think it right to point this out very clearly, good
reader, because the man at whom you and I are looking just now is a
savage.
