"Ye-ow, look at them--there's a lot!" hooted the Welchers.

"There's old Parson!" yelled Telson, Bosher, and King, as the youthful
hero in question strutted magnificently down to the landing.

"What cheer, stuck-up jackass?" howled the Welchers, with an insulting
laugh; "why don't you grin?"

This remark was suggested by Parson grandly waving his handkerchief and
smiling to his admiring friends.

But it is time to quit these friends and make our way to the boats
themselves, which now lie waiting for their crews to embark.

This is always a tedious process for onlookers.  The shifting of
stretchers, the getting-out of oars, the arrangement of rudder strings,
and the delicate trimming of the boat, may be interesting enough to the
crews themselves, but only feed the impatience of onlookers.

And as usual hitches are bound to occur.  Coates has got the oar
belonging to Crossfield.  And when this mistake has been remedied,
Bloomfield in the other boat suddenly discovers that his stretcher is a
little weak, and insists on waiting till a new one is brought.

Finally everything is ready, and the two boats slowly swing out into
mid-stream.  The schoolhouse boat has won the toss, for it takes up the
inside berth, amid the triumphant cheers of its partisans.

"Hurrah! you're inside," they cry.

"Mind you put them into the bank," is the derisive echo of the enemy.

"Now, Fairbairn; now, you fellows," cries Wyndham's voice.

"Now, boss Riddell--mind your eye.  Pull your left when you want to go
right," shout the facetious Welchers.

Riddell had long got past the stage of being flurried by shouts from the
bank.  He feels nervous undoubtedly, but he does not look it, as he
quietly tries his rudder-lines and settles himself on his seat.

Fairbairn is as cool as ever.  To look at him he might be just starting
for a quiet saunter up-stream.  And the crew behind him are equally
composed, as they lie on their oars waiting for the start.

But the Parrett's crew, as they come smartly up and take their outside
berth, receive an ovation far beyond that of their rivals.  They are
undoubtedly the popular crew, as well as the favourites.

Every man in the boat has done something for Willoughby in times past,
and as the boys see their heroes ready now for a fresh triumph, they
forget all about their little tyrannies indoors, and cheer them like
mad.

"Bravo Parrett's.  Bravo, Bloomfield!  Hurrah, captain!  You're to win."

Even the Welchers for the moment join in the popular clamour.

"Go it, you cripples!" cries Cusack, encouragingly; "no milksop
captains.  Two to one on Bloomfield!"

All this time the boats are lying in position.  Mr Parrett on the
little steam-launch behind surveys them critically, and satisfies
himself that all is square.  Then he advances to the prow of his boat
and shouts the usual question.

The next moment he gives the word, and the two boats dart forward like
arrows from a bow, and the race has begun.

Gilks and Silk up above Willow Corner heard the shout which greeted the
start, and turned anxiously towards the direction from which it came.

"They're off now!" said Silk, trying to appear more unconcerned than he
really was.

"Yes; no mistake about it!" said Gilks, whose anxiety was certainly not
less than that of his friend.

"How long before we see them?"

"Three minutes; they ought to get into the School Reach by then."

Neither spoke for a minute.  Then Silk said, "What a row the fellows are
making!"

"Yes," said Gilks; "there's a bigger crowd than I ever saw down this
year."

Another silence.  And then presently in the far distance, at the end of
the School Reach, they could see first the smoke of Mr Parrett's
launch, then a black moving crowd on the bank, and finally two white
specks on the water.

"There they are!" said Gilks.

"Can you tell which is which?" asked Silk.

"No, not yet."

An anxious minute followed.  The doctor and his party on the point
opposite left their tent and came down to the water's edge; spectators
who had been getting tired of waiting now freshened up and made final
and desperate attempts to improve their position, while those who meant
to fall in with the runners buttoned their jackets and turned up their
trouser ends.

"Schoolhouse inside!" exclaimed Gilks, suddenly, as the sun momentarily
caught the blue oars of the inside boat.

This was all that could be ascertained for the moment.  From where they
sat the blue and the red flags seemed to be coming towards them exactly
abreast.

The crowd advanced with a roar, above which it was impossible to hear
the name of the leading crew.  But presently, as the two boats
approached the corner, a slight turn inwards enabled them to answer the
question for themselves.

"We lead!" exclaimed Silk.

Silk was a Welcher and Gilks a schoolhouse boy, but "we" meant
Parrett's.

Yes, the red flag was ahead, though only a little.

"How long before they're at the point?"

"Half a minute.  I say, how splendidly the schoolhouse are steering,
though!"

Silk laughed.  "More than Parrett's are!  Young Parson's taking them
round rather sharp, isn't he?"

"No; he always turns in like that; it's better than the long sweep.  Now
look out!"

During this brief dialogue the two boats had come on towards the corner.
As far as Gilks and Silk could see at present Parrett's led by about
half a length, which advantage, however, it stood to lose owing to its
outside position at the corner.  Parson, however, knew what he was about
even better than Riddell, who had kept a magnificent course down the
reach, but who now seemed afraid to take full advantage of the sharp
corner.  The Parrett's coxswain, on the other hand, with his half-length
to the good, began turning his boat's head early, even at the risk of
running dangerously close on his rival's water, and so saved as much as
possible of the lost ground.

It was an anxious moment, for as the boats came round that corner so the
race usually depended.  The crowd on the banks well knew the crisis, and
shouted out their warnings and encouragements to the rival coxswains
with redoubled eagerness.

"Now then, Riddell! round you go!  Pull your right!"

"Steered indeed, Parrett's!  Bravo, Parson!"

The corner was half-turned, the boats lay nearly level, each coxswain
pulling hard with his right line, when suddenly there was a shock in the
Parrett's boat, followed by a loud shout from Parson, and next moment
the boat was shooting helplessly straight towards the bank, from which
it was only saved by a prompt order to "Backwater all!" from Bloomfield.

What could it be?  The shouts on the bank died away into sudden
stillness, and fellows forgot even to keep up with the schoolhouse boat,
which, followed by the steam-launch, rowed steadily on towards the
winning-post.

What was it?  The answer soon became known, when Parson, standing in his
boat, waved the broken end of a rudder-line above his head.  At the
critical point of the race this had failed, and in consequence all the
efforts of the rowers were useless, and--and the schoolhouse boat was
Head of the River!

The rage, excitement, and disappointment at such an unlooked-for
termination to the great struggle was beyond description, as the reader
may imagine.  A general rush was made for the unlucky boat, and shouts
and recriminations and taunts and condolences bore witness to the mixed
feelings of the spectators.

Some demanded a fresh race there and then, some suggested foul play,
others urged the boat to row on and make the best race they could of it,
others boldly claimed the victory for Parrett's, since they led at the
moment of the accident.

Amidst all this tumult the unlucky boat slowly backed into mid-stream,
and turned towards home, Parson steering no longer by rudder but by word
of mouth.  As it did so, a distant report announced that the schoolhouse
boat had reached the winning-post; whereat the Parrett partisans set up
a loud defiant shout, which they maintained during the entire homeward
progress of their ill-starred boat.

Among the few who remained on the scene of the accident were Gilks and
Silk, both pale and agitated.

The latter, as has been said, was painfully interested in the result of
the race.  To him the defeat of Parrett's meant more than the mere
disappointment of a hope or the humiliation by a rival.  It meant the
loss of a good deal more money than he possessed, and the miscarriage of
a good deal which he had expected with absolute confidence to win.  No
wonder then that his face was white and his voice trembling as he
rounded on his friend.

"You fool!" exclaimed he, with an oath.

It was rather hard surely on Gilks, who may have encouraged his friend
to rely on the victory of the Parrett's boat, but who certainly was as
much astounded and mortified by the accident as he was.

"There must be another race," said he, hurriedly.  "They can't take this
as decisive, I tell you.  They _must_ have another."

"You wouldn't have said so if the right boat had won," said Silk, with a
sneer.

"I can't make it out," said Gilks, looking very miserable.

"Fools never can," snarled Silk, turning on his heel.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

FOUL PLAY.

Willoughby reassembled after the eventful boat-race in a state of fever.
The great event which was to settle everything had settled nothing, and
the suspense and excitement which was to have been set at rest remained
still as unsatisfied as ever, and intensified by a feeling of rage and
disappointment.

As boys dropped in in groups from the course, and clustered round the
school gate, one might have supposed by their troubled faces that
instead of a rudder-line having broken both crews had been capsized and
drowned.

The Parrett's partisans particularly were loud in their clamour for a
new race, and many of them freely insinuated foul play as the cause of
the accident.

The schoolhouse, on the other hand, indignantly repelled the charge, and
dared their opponents defiantly to meet them again.  And amidst all this
wrangling and bickering, the Welchers dispensed their taunts and
invectives with even-handed impartiality, and filled in just what was
wanted to make the scene one of utter confusion and Babel.

"I tell you we'd have beaten them hollow," shouted Wibberly to the
company in general.

"No you wouldn't!" retorted Wyndham; "we were ahead and our men were as
fresh as yours, every bit!"

"Ya--boo--cheats!  Told you there'd be no fair play with such a pack,"
shouted the Welchers.

"Look here, who are you calling a cheat?" said Wyndham, very red in the
face, edging up to the speaker.

"You, if you like," shouted Pilbury and Cusack.

"I'll knock your heads together when I catch you," said Wyndham, with
lofty disgust, not intending to put himself out for two juniors.

A loud laugh greeted the threat.

Meanwhile, fellows were running up every moment.  Some who had been
waiting for the boats at the winning-post had only just heard the news,
and came in red-hot with excitement to learn particulars.

"It's all a vile dodge," howled Wibberly, "to get their boat to the head
of the river."

"I'll bet anything the precious captain's at the bottom of it," shouted
another.  "He'd stick at nothing, I know."

"Yes, and you'll see, now they'll funk another race!"

"Who'll funk another race?" roared the hot-headed Wyndham.  "I'll row
you myself, you asses, the lot of you."

Another derisive laugh followed at the speaker's expense.

"It's not our fault if your line broke," cried a schoolhouse boy.  "It's
your lookout.  You should have seen it was right before you started."

"Yes.  You wouldn't have been so anxious for a new race if it was our
line had broken," said Wyndham.

"Yes, we would.  We're not afraid of you!"

"Yes, you are."

"No, we aren't.  You're a set of cheats.  Couldn't win by fair means, so
you've tried foul."

"I'll fight any one who says so," retorted Wyndham.

How long the wrangle might have gone on, and to what riot it might have
led, cannot be told.  It was at its hottest, and a general fight seemed
imminent, when a diversion was caused by the sudden appearance of Parson
running at full speed up the path from the river.

There was something unusual in the looks and manner of the Parretts'
coxswain, which even his misadventure that afternoon was not sufficient
to account for.  He bore tidings of some sort, it was evident, and by
common consent the clamour of the crowd was suspended as he approached.

Among the first to hail him at shouting distance was Telson.

"What's up, old man?" he cried.

Parson rushed on a dozen yards or so before he answered.  Then he
yelled, in a voice half-choked with excitement, "The line was cut!  It's
foul play!"

The howl which arose from the agitated crowd at this amazing piece of
news--amazing even to those who had most freely raised the cry of foul
play--was one the like of which Willoughby never heard before or since.
Mingled rage, scorn, incredulity, derision, all found vent in that one
shout--and then suddenly died into silence as Parson began again.

"They've looked at the place where it broke," he gasped.  "It's a clean
cut half-way through.  I knew it was foul play!"

Once again the shout drowned his voice.

"Who did it?" shrieked a voice, before Parson could resume.

Parson glared round wrathfully for the speaker.

"I don't know," he replied.  "Sorry for him if I did!"

This valiant invective from the honest little fag failed even to appear
ludicrous in the midst of the general excitement.  Further words were
now interrupted by the appearance of the Parretts' crew coming slowly up
the walk.

This was the signal for a general cheer and rush in their direction, in
the midst of which the defeated heroes with difficulty struggled up to
the school.  Wrath and indignation were on all their faces.  In reply to
the hundred inquiries showered upon them they said nothing, but forced
their way through the press sullenly, heedless of the cheers of their
sympathisers or the silence of their opponents.

The crowd slowly fell back to let them pass, and watched them disappear
into the school.  Then they turned again towards the path from the
river, and waited with grim purpose.

The news announced by Parson and confirmed by the black looks of the
injured crew had fallen like a thunderbolt, and for the moment
Willoughby was stunned.  The boys could not--would not--believe that one
of their number could be guilty of such an act.  And yet, how could they
disbelieve it?

In a few minutes there was a cry of "Here they are!" and at the same
moment the schoolhouse crew appeared on the walk.  They, victors though
they were, looked troubled and dispirited as they approached, talking
eagerly among themselves, and unconcerned apparently about the crowd
which in ominous silence awaited them.

They certainly did not look like guilty persons, and it is most probable
not even the wildest libeller in Willoughby would have cared positively
to charge any one of them with the dishonourable deed.

But for all that, they had won in consequence of that deed, and that was
quite sufficient to set three-fourths of the crowd against them.

As they came up a loud groan and cries of "Cheats!  Foul play!" suddenly
arose.  Startled by the unexpected demonstration, the five heroes looked
up with flushed faces.

"Cheats!  Cowards!" reiterated the hostile section, beginning at the
same time to surge towards them.

Foremost among these was Tucker of Welch's house and Wibberly of
Parrett's, who, as the crowd behind pressed forward, were carried with
their abusive taunts on their lips into the midst of the schoolhouse
group.  The latter, as may be imagined, were in anything but the humour
for an assault of this sort, and their leaders instantly resented it in
a _very_ practical manner.

"Where are you coming to?" demanded Fairbairn, flinging Wibberly from
him into the arms of his followers.

Before Wibberly could recover his balance the crowd had closed in by a
sudden impulse, and with a loud shout had set upon the crew.

"Have them over, Parrett's!" shouted a voice, as Wibberly staggered back
a second time before Fairbairn's stalwart arm, while at the same moment
Tucker received a similar rebuff from Crossfield.

The summons was promptly answered, and a dash was made on the five
schoolhouse boys with a view to carrying out the threat literally, when
Wyndham's voice shouted, "Rescue here! schoolhouse, come on!"

Instantly the whole crowd seemed to resolve itself by magic into two
parties, and a short but desperate battle ensued.

The fire had been waiting for weeks for a match, and now the flare-up
had come.  Nobody knew whom he hit out at or by whom he was attacked
that forenoon.  The pent-up irritation of half a term found vent in that
famous battle in which the schoolhouse boys fought their way inch by
inch up to the door of their house.

Luckily for them, the most formidable of their rivals were not upon the
field of action, and in due time the compact phalanx of seniors, aided
by Wyndham and his band of recruits, forced their way through superior
numbers, and finally burst triumphantly through and gained their
stronghold.

But the victory was hardly bought, for the slaughter had been great.

Coates had a black eye, and Porter's jacket was torn from his back.
Riddell had twice been knocked down and trodden on, while Wyndham,
Telson, and others of the rescuing party were barely recognisable
through dust and bruises.  On the other side the loss had been even
greater.  Tucker and Wibberly, the only two monitors engaged, were
completely doubled up, while the number of maimed and disabled Limpets
and juniors was nearly beyond counting.

So ended the great battle at the school gate, and it ended only just in
time, for as the schoolhouse boys finally gained their quarters, and the
enemy picked itself up and turned surlily schoolwards, the doctor and
his party arrived on the scene and gave a finishing touch to the rout.

That evening was a sore one for Willoughby.  Sore not only in respect of
bruised bodies and swollen faces, but still more in the sense of
disappointment, suspicion, and foul play.

Among the most violent of the Parrett's the whole mystery of the thing
was perfectly clear.  These philosophers could see it all from beginning
to end, and were astonished any one else should be so dull as not to see
it too.

"Of course, it's a regularly arranged thing," said Wibberly, whose face
was enveloped in a handkerchief and whose lips were unusually thick.
"They've vowed all along to keep their boat at the head of the river,
and they've managed it."

"Yes," said another.  "They knew what they had to expect if Bloomfield
got there.  I can see it all."

"But you don't mean to say," said Strutter, "the Premier," "that you
think any one of those fellows would do such a thing as cut our rope?"

"I don't know," said Wibberly.  "I don't see why they shouldn't.  I
don't fancy they'd stick at a trifle, the cads!"

"If Gilks had been in the boat," said another, "I could have believed it
of him, but he was as anxious for us to win as we were ourselves."

"No wonder; he and his friend Silk have been betting right and left on
us, I hear."

"Well, I suppose there's bound to be a new race," said Strutter.

"I don't know," replied Wibberly.  "I'd be just as well pleased if
Bloomfield refused.  The vile cheats!"

Bloomfield, be it said to his credit, was no party to these reckless
accusations.  Mortified as he was beyond description, and disappointed
by the collapse of his ambition, he yet scouted the idea of any one of
his five rivals being guilty of so dirty a trick as the cutting of his
boat's rudder-line.  At the same time he was as convinced as any one
that foul play had been at the bottom of the accident, and the
perpetrator of the mean act was undoubtedly a schoolhouse boy.  What
mortified him most was that he did not feel as positive by any means as
others that his boat, without the accident, would have won the race.  He
had been astonished and even disheartened by the performance of the
rival crew, who had stuck to him in a manner he had not looked for, and
which had boded seriously for the final result.

It was this reflection, more even than the thought of the broken line,
which troubled him that evening.  Could it be possible that his luck was
deserting him?

His companions were troubled by no such suggestion.  Indignation was the
uppermost feeling in their breasts.  Whoever had done the deed, it was a
vile action, and till the culprit was brought to justice the whole
schoolhouse was responsible in their eyes.

"I wonder a single one of them can hold up his head," exclaimed Game.

"I hope to goodness Bloomfield won't demand a fresh race.  _I_ won't row
if he does," said Ashley.

"And the worst of it is they'll try to make out now they would have won
in any case.  I heard one of them say so myself this very afternoon."

"Let them say what they like," said Ashley.  "Nobody will believe them."

Perhaps these hot-headed heroes, had they been able to overhear a
conversation that was going on at that very time in the captain's study,
would have discovered that at any rate it was not the immediate
intention of the schoolhouse to insist that the victory was theirs.

Riddell had recovered somewhat from his rough handling that afternoon,
but he looked pale and dejected as, along with his friend Fairbairn, he
sat and discussed for the twentieth time the event of the day.

"It's quite evident we must offer them a fresh race," said he.

"Yes, I think so," said Fairbairn.  "It's hard lines, for I expect it
won't be easy to get our men up to the mark again after they are once
run down."

"We can't help that," said Riddell.  "It's the least we can do."

"Of course.  But I don't see, Riddell, old man, that we are bound to
hang down our heads over this business.  Whoever did it did as mean a
trick to us as ever he did to them.  I'd like to have him a minute or
two, even if he was my own brother."

"Well," said Riddell, "to my mind it seems like a disgrace to the whole
house, and the least we can do is to offer to row again."

"Oh, rather; that's settled.  I say," added Fairbairn, "I'd give
anything to get at the bottom of it.  I saw the boats locked up last
night, and I was there when they were taken out this morning.  I can't
imagine how it was done."

"It seemed a clean cut, didn't it?"

"Yes; about three-quarters of the way through.  Whoever did it must have
been up to his business, for he only touched the right cord on which all
the strain comes at the corner."

"It must have been done between five o'clock yesterday and this
morning," said Riddell.  "If the cut had been there yesterday the line
would have given at the corner to a certainty."

"Oh, yes; it must have been done in the night."

"Doesn't the boatman know anything about it?"

"No; I asked him.  He says no one opened the door after the boats had
gone in except himself and the boat-boy."

"It's horribly mysterious," said Riddell.  "But, I say, hadn't we better
offer the new race at once?"

"All serene."

"Had we better write?" asked Riddell.

