agreed about it."

"No we ain't," interrupted Jenkins, angrily.

"Well, the most on us, then," retorted Buxley.

"Shut up, you radical!" said Nobbs, giving the tailor a facetious slap
on the back, "an' let's hear what the Prime Minister himself has got to
say about it."

"What is the subject under discussion?" inquired Dominick, who, with
Otto, joined the group of men at the moment and flung down a basket of
fine fish which he had just caught in the lagoon.

He turned to Dr Marsh for an answer.

"Do _you_ explain your difficulties," said the doctor to the blacksmith.

"Well, sir," said Nobbs, "here's where it is.  When I fust comed ashore
an' set up my anvil an' bellows I went to work with a will, enjyin' the
fun o' the thing an' the novelty of the sitivation; an' as we'd lots of
iron of all kinds I knocked off nails an' hinges an' all sorts o' things
for anybody as wanted 'em.  Similarly, w'en Abel Welsh comed ashore he
went to work with his mates at the pit-saw an' tossed off no end o'
planks, etceterer.  But you see, sir, arter a time we come for to find
that we're workin' to the whole population for nothin', and while
everybody else is working away at his own hut or garden, or what not,
_our_ gardens is left to work themselves, an' _our_ huts is nowhere!
Now, as we've got no money to pay for work with, and as stones an'
shells won't answer the purpus--seein' there's a sight too much of 'em--
the question is, what's to be done?"

"Not an easy question to answer, Nobbs," said Dominick, "and one that
requires serious consideration.  Perhaps, instead of trying to answer it
at present, we might find a temporary expedient for the difficulty until
a Committee of the House--if I may say so--shall investigate the whole
problem."  (Hear, hear from Malone, Redding, and Buxley, and a growl
from Jenkins.) "I would suggest, then, in the meantime, that while Nobbs
and Welsh,--who are, perhaps, the most useful men among us--continue to
ply their trades for the benefit of the community, every man in the
community shall in turn devote a small portion of time to working in the
gardens and building the huts of these two men."  (Hear, hear, from a
great many of the hearers, and dissenting growls from a few.) "But,"
continued Dominick, "as there are evidently some here who are not of an
obliging disposition, and as the principle of willing service lies at
the root of all social felicity, I would further suggest that, until our
Queen is crowned and the Government fairly set up, all such labour shall
be undertaken entirely by volunteers."

This proposal was agreed to with boisterous acclaim, and nearly the
whole community volunteered on the spot.  While this little difficulty
was being overcome, Pauline lay sleeping in the palace hard by, and the
enthusiastic cheer with which the conclusion of Dominick's speech was
received awoke her.

"There--I know'd they'd do it!" exclaimed the lady of the bedchamber
fiercely; "lie still, cushla! an' shut your purty eyes.  Maybe you'll
drop off again!"

A humorous smile beamed in Pauline's countenance and twinkled in her
eyes.

"Thank you, dear nurse, I've had enough of sleep.  Indeed, I begin to
feel so strong that I think I shall very soon be able to undergo that--"

Pauline stopped and burst into a fit of merry laughter.

"It's that caronation, now, ye'll be thinkin' av?" said the widow Lynch,
with a reproving look.  "Faix, it's no laughin' matter ye'll find it,
dear.  It's onaisy is the hid as wears a crown."

"Why you talk, nurse, as if you had worn one yourself, and knew all
about its troubles."

"Sure, av I didn't, me progenissors did, in Munster, before you English
konkered us an' turned us topsy-turvy.  But nivver mind.  I don't bear
no ill-will to 'ee, darlint, bekaise o' the evil deeds o' yer
forefathers.  I'm of a forgivin' disposition.  An' it's a good quane
you'll make, too, av ye don't let the men have too much o' their own
way.  But I do think that you an' me togither'll be more than a match
for them all.  D'ee think ye could stand the caronation now, dear?"

"Yes, I think I could.  But really, you know, I find it so hard to
believe it is not all a joke, despite the grave deputations that have
waited on me, and the serious arguments they have used.  The idea of
making me--_Me_--a Queen!"

Again Pauline Rigonda gave way to merry laughter, and again did her lady
of the bedchamber administer a reproof by expressing the hope that she
might take the matter as lightly a year hence.

This pertinacious reference to possible trouble being mingled with the
contemplated honour checked Pauline's disposition to laugh, and she had
quite recovered her gravity when her brother Otto entered.

"Pina, I've come to tell you that they've fixed the coronation for
Monday next if you feel up to it, and that the new palace is begun--a
very different one, let me tell you, from this wretched affair with its
tumble-down walls and low roof."

"Indeed--is it so very grand?"

"Grand!  I should think it is.  Why, it has got three rooms--_three_
rooms--think o' that!  Not countin' a splendid out-house stuck on
behind, about ten feet square and over six feet high.  Each of the three
rooms is twelve feet long by ten broad; seven feet high, and papered
with palm leaves.  The middle one is the hall of Audience and Justice--
or injustice if you like--the Council Chamber, the House of Parliament,
the mess-room, and the drawing-room.  The one on the right with two
windows, from which are magnificent views, is your Majesty's
sleeping-room and boudoir; that on the left is the ditto of Prime
Minister Dominick and his Chief Secretary Prince Otto.  The sort of
hen-coop stuck on behind is to be the abode of the Court Physician, Dr
John Marsh--whom, by the way, you'll have to knight--and with whom is to
be billeted the Court Jester, Man-at-Arms, Man-of-all-work and general
retainer, little Buxley.  So, you see, it's all cut and dry, though of
course it will take some little time to finish the palace in all its
multitudinous details.  Meanwhile I have been sent to sound you as to
Monday next.  Will you be able and ready?"

"If I could only get myself to believe," answered Pauline, as she leaned
on one elbow on her couch, and toyed contemplatively with a fold of the
shawl that covered her, "that the people are really in earnest, I--"

"Really in earnest!" repeated Otto.  "Why, Pina, never were people more
in earnest in this world.  If you'd heard and seen them talking about it
as I have, you'd not doubt their earnestness.  Besides, you have no idea
how needful you are to the community.  The fact is, it is composed of
such rough and rowdy elements--though of course there are some
respectable and well-principled fellows among them--that nothing short
of a power standing high above them and out o' their reach will have any
influence with them at all.  There are so many strong, determined, and
self-willed men amongst them that there's no chance of their ever
agreeing to submit to each other; so, you see, you are a sort of good
angel, before whom they will be only too glad to bow--a kind of superior
being, whom they will reverence, and to whom they will submit--a human
safety-valve, in short, to prevent the community from blowing up--a
species of--of--"

Here Pauline burst into another of her irrepressible fits of laughter,
and being joined therein by Prince Otto, called forth a remonstrance
from Mrs Lynch, who declared that if that was the way they were goin'
to manage the affairs of state, she would be obliged to advise the
settlers to change their minds and set up a republic.

"An' sure, mother," said Otto, who was a privileged favourite, "nothing
could be better, with yourself as President."

"Go along wid ye, boy, an' do yer dooty.  Tell the people that Miss
Pauline will be ready--wind an' weather permittin'."

"Am I to take back that message, Pina?" asked Otto, with a look of glee.

"Well, I suppose you may."

It was not in the nature of things that a coronation in the
circumstances which we have described should take place without being
more or less intermingled with the unavoidable absurdities which mark
the coronations of older and more densely peopled lands.  It was felt
that as the act was a seriously meant reality, and no mere joke, it
should be gone about and accomplished with all due solemnity and proper
ceremonial, somewhat after the pattern--as Teddy Malone suggested--of a
Lord Mayor's Show; a suggestion, by the way, which did not conduce to
the solemnity of the preliminary discussions.

There was one great difficulty, however, with which the embryo nation
had to contend, and this was that not one of the community had ever seen
a coronation, or knew how the details of the matter should be arranged.

In these circumstances an assembly of the entire nation was convened to
consider the matter.  As this convention embraced the women (except, of
course, the queen elect), it included the babies, and as most of these
were self-assertive and well-developed in chest and throat, it was found
necessary to relegate them and the women to an outer circle, while the
men in an inner circle tackled the problem.

The widow Lynch, being quite irrepressible except by physical force, and
even by that with difficulty, was admitted on sufferance to the inner
circle, and took part in the discussions.

Like most large assemblies, this one was found so unmanageable, that,
after an hour or two of hopeless wrangling, Buxley the tailor started up
with dishevelled hair and glaring eyeballs, and uttered a yell that
produced a momentary silence.  Seizing the moment, he said--

"I moves that we apint a committee to inquire into the whole matter an'
report."

"Hear, hear, and well said!" shouted a multitude of voices.

"An' _I_ moves," cried Mrs Lynch, starting forward with both arms up
and all her fingers rampant, "that--"

"No, no, mother," interrupted Buxley, "you must second the motion."

"Howld yer tongue, ye dirty spalpeen!  Isn't it the second motion that
I'm puttin'?  _I_ moves that the committee is Mr Dumnik Rig Gundy an'
Dr Marsh--"

"An' _Mister_ Nobbs," shouted a voice.

"An' _Mister_ Joe Binney," said another.

"An' _little_ Mister Buxley, be way of variashun," cried Teddy Malone.

"An' Mistress Lynch, for a change," growled Jabez Jenkins.

"Hear, hear!  No, no!  Hurrah!  Nonsense!  Howld yer tongue!  Be
serious!"--gradually drowned in a confusion of tongues with a yelling
accompaniment from infantry in the outer circle.

It was finally agreed, however, that the arrangements for the coronation
should be left entirely to a committee composed of Dominick, Dr Marsh,
Joe Binney, and Hugh Morris--Joe being put forward as representing the
agricultural interest, and Hugh the malcontents.  Teddy Malone was added
to make an odd number, "for there's luck in odd numbers," as he himself
remarked on accepting office.

Immediately after the general meeting broke up, these five retired to
the privacy of a neighbouring palm grove, where, seated on a verdant and
flowering bank, they proceeded calmly to discuss details.

"You see, my friends," said Dominick, "it must be our most earnest
endeavour to carry out this important matter in a serious and
business-like manner.  Already there is too much of a spirit of levity
among the people, who seem to look at the whole affair as a sort of game
or joke, playing, as it were, at national life, whereas we actually
_are_ an independent nation--"

"A small wan, av coorse," murmured Malone.

"Yes, a small one, but not the less real on that account, so that we are
entitled to manage our own affairs, arrange our own government, and,
generally, to act according to our united will.  These islands and their
surroundings are unknown--at least they are not put down on any chart; I
believe we have discovered them.  There are no inhabitants to set up a
counter claim; therefore, being entitled to act according to our will,
our appointment of a queen to rule us--under limited powers, to be
hereafter well considered and clearly written down--is a reality; not a
mere play or semi-jest to be undone lightly when the fancy takes us.
That being so, we must go to work with gravity and earnestness of
purpose."

Teddy Malone, who was an impressionable creature, here became so
solemnised that his lengthening visage and seriously wrinkled brow
rendered gravity--especially on the part of Dr Marsh--almost
impossible.

Overcoming his feelings with a powerful effort the doctor assented to
what Dominick said, and suggested that some mild sort of ceremonial
should be devised for the coronation, in order to impress the beholders
as well as to mark the event.

"That's so," said Teddy Malone, "somethin' quiet an' orderly, like an
Irish wake, or--.  Ah! then ye needn't smile, doctor.  It's the quietest
an' most comfortin' thing in life is an Irish wake whin it's gone about
properly."

"But we don't want comforting, Teddy," said Dominick, "it is rather a
subject for rejoicing."

"Well, then, what's to hinder us rejoicin' in comfort?" returned Teddy.
"At all the wakes I ivver attinded there was more rejoicin' than
comfortin' goin' on; but that's a matter of taste, av coorse."

"There'll have to be a crown o' some sort," remarked Hugh Morris.

"You're right, lad," said Joe Binney.  "It wouldn't do to make it o'
pasteboard, would it?  P'r'aps that 'ud be too like playin' at a game,
an' tin would be little better."

"What else can we make it of, boys?" said Malone, "we've got no goold
here--worse luck! but maybe the carpenter cud make wan o' wood.  With a
lick o' yellow paint it would look genuine."

"Nonsense, Teddy," said the doctor, "don't you see that in this life men
should always be guided by circumstances, and act with propriety.  Here
we are on an island surrounded by coral reefs, going to elect a queen;
what more appropriate than that her crown should be made of coral."

"The very thing, doctor," cried Malone, with emphasis, "och! it's the
genius ye have!  There's all kinds o' coral, red and white, an' we could
mix it up wi' some o' that fine-coloured seaweed to make it purty."

"It could be made pritty enough without seaweed," said Binney, "an' it's
my notion that the women-folk would be best at makin' of it."

"Right, Joe, right, so, if you have no objection, we will leave it to
them," said Dominick, "and now as to the ceremonial?"

"A pursession," suggested Joe Binney.

"Just so," said Hugh Morris, "the very thing as was in my mind."

"And a throne," cried Malone, "there couldn't be a proper quane widout a
throne, you know.  The carpenter can make that, anyhow, for there's wood
galore on the island--red, black, an' white.  Yis, we must have a grand
throne, cut, an' carved, an' mounted high, so as she'll have two or
three steps to climb up to it."

In regard to the procession and the throne there was considerable
difference of opinion, but difficulties were got over and smoothed down
at last by the tact and urbanity of Dominick, to whom, finally, the
whole question of the coronation was committed.  Thus it frequently
happens among men.  In the multitude of counsellors there is wisdom
enough, usually, to guide in the selection of the fittest man to take
the helm in all important affairs.

And that reminds us that it is high time to terminate this long
digression, and guide our readers back to the beginning of the chapter,
where we stated that the important day had at last arrived.

Happily, in those highly favoured climes weather has not usually to be
taken much into account.  The sun arose out of the ocean's breast with
the same unclouded beauty that had marked his rise every morning for a
week previously, and would probably mark it for a week to come.  The
sweet scents of the wooded heights floated down on the silver strand;
the sharks ruffled the surface of the lagoon with their black fins, the
birds hopped or flew from palm-tree to mimosa-bush, and the waterfowl
went about according to taste on lazy or whistling wings, intent on
daily business, much as though nothing unusual were "in the air."

But it was otherwise with the human family on Big Island.  Unwonted
excitement was visible on almost every face.  Bustle was in every
action.  Preparations were going on all round, and, as some members of
the community were bent on giving other members a surprise, there was
more or less of secrecy and consequent mystery in the behaviour of every
one.

By breakfast-time little Mrs Nobbs, the blacksmith's laughter-loving
wife, had nearly laughed herself into fits of delight at the crown,
which she assisted Mrs Welsh and the widow Lynch to fabricate.  The
last had devised it, Mrs Welsh had built it in the rough, and Mrs
Nobbs had finished it off with the pretty little wreath of red and white
branching coral that formed its apex.  Apart from taste it was a
stupendous erection.

"But don't you think that it's too big and heavy?" cried Mrs Nobbs,
with a shrieking giggle and clapping of her hands, as she ran back to
have a distant view of it.

"Pooh!" exclaimed Mrs Lynch contemptuously, "too heavy?  No, it's
nothin', my dear, to what the kings an' quanes of Munster wore."

"But Miss Pauline is neither a king nor a queen of Munster, an' I do
