It stood in an upright position like a man, and was above four feet
high.  It had a bald head, grey whiskers, and an intensely black
wrinkled face, and, at the moment Jim Scroggles' eyes encountered it,
that face was working itself into such a variety of remarkable and
hideous contortions that no description, however graphic, could convey a
correct notion of it to the reader's mind.  Seen behind the bars of an
iron cage it might, perhaps, have been laughable; but witnessed as it
was, in the depths of a lonely forest, it was appalling.

Jim Scroggles' knees began to shake.  He was fascinated with horror.
The huge ape was equally fascinated with terror.  It worked its wrinkled
visage more violently than ever.  Jim trembled all over.  In another
second the sheego displayed not only all its teeth--and they were
tremendous--but all its gums, and they were fearful to behold, besides
being scarlet.  Roused to the utmost pitch of fear, the sheego uttered a
shriek that rang through the forest like a death-yell.  This was the
culminating point.  Jim Scroggles turned and fled as fast as his long
and trembling legs could carry him.

The sheego, at the same instant, was smitten with an identically similar
impulse.  It turned, uttered another yell, and fled in the opposite
direction; and thus the two ran until they were both out of breath.
What became of the monkey we cannot tell; but Jim Scroggles ran at
headlong speed straight before him, crashing through brake and bush, in
the full belief that the sheego was in hot pursuit, until he came to a
mangrove swamp; here his speed was checked somewhat, for the trees grew
in a curious fashion that merits special notice.

Instead of rising out of the ground, the mangroves rose out of a sea of
mud, and the roots stood up in a somewhat arched form, supporting their
stem, as it were, on the top of a bridge.  Thus, had the ground beneath
been solid, a man might have walked _under_ the roots.  In order to
cross the swamp, Jim Scroggles had to leap from root to root--a feat
which, although difficult, he would have attempted without hesitation.
But Jim was agitated at that particular moment.  His step was uncertain
at a time when the utmost coolness was necessary.  At one point the leap
from one root to the next was too great for him.  He turned his eye
quickly to one side to seek a nearer stem; in doing so he encountered
the gaze of a serpent.  It was not a large one, probably about ten feet
long, but he knew it to be one whose bite was deadly.  In the surprise
and fear of the moment he took the long leap, came short of the root by
about six inches, and alighted up to the waist in the soft mud.

Almost involuntarily he cast his eyes behind him, and saw neither sheego
nor serpent.  He breathed more freely, and essayed to extricate himself
from his unpleasant position.  Stretching out his hands to the root
above his head, he found that it was beyond his reach.  The sudden fear
that this produced caused him to make a violent struggle, and in his
next effort he succeeded in catching a twig; it supported him, for a
moment, then broke, and he fell back again into the mud.  Each
successive struggle only sank him deeper.  As the thick adhesive
semi-liquid clung to his lower limbs and rose slowly on his chest, the
wretched man uttered a loud cry of despair.  He felt that he was brought
suddenly face to face with death in its most awful form.  The mud was
soon up to his arm-pits.  As the hopelessness of his condition forced
itself upon him, he began to shout for help until the dark woods
resounded with his cries; but no help came, and the cold drops of sweat
stood upon his brow as he shrieked aloud in agony, and prayed for mercy.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

JIM SCROGGLES RESCUED, AND GLYNN AND AILIE LOST--A CAPTURE, UPSET,
CHASE, ESCAPE, AND HAPPY RETURN.

The merciful manner in which God sends deliverance at the eleventh hour
has been so often experienced and recognised, that it has originated the
well-known proverb, "Man's extremity is God's opportunity;" and this
proverb is true not only in reference to man's soul, but often, also, in
regard to his temporal affairs.

While the wretched sailor was uttering cries for help, which grew
feebler every moment as he sank deeper and deeper into what now he
believed should be his grave, his comrades were hastening forward to his
rescue.

Alarmed at his prolonged absence, they had armed themselves, and set out
in search of him, headed by the trader and led by the negro, who tracked
his steps with that unerring certainty which seems peculiar to all
savages.  The shrieks uttered by their poor comrade soon reached their
ears, and after some little difficulty, owing to the cries becoming
faint, and at last inaudible, they discovered the swamp where he lay,
and revived his hope and energy by their shouts.  They found him nearly
up to the neck in mud, and the little of him that still remained above
ground was scarcely recognisable.

It cost them nearly an hour, with the aid of poles, and ropes
extemporised out of their garments, to drag Jim from his perilous
position and place him on solid ground; and after they had accomplished
this, it took more than an hour longer to clean him and get him
recruited sufficiently to accompany them to the spot where they had left
the canoe.

The poor man was deeply moved; and when he fully realised the fact that
he was saved, he wept like a child, and then thanked God fervently for
his deliverance.  As the night was approaching, and the canoe, with
Ailie in it, had been left in charge only of Glynn Proctor, Jim's
recovery was expedited as much as possible, and as soon as he could walk
they turned to retrace their steps.

Man knows not what a day or an hour will bring forth.  For many years
one may be permitted to move on "the even tenor of his way," without
anything of momentous import occurring to mark the passage of his little
span of time as it sweeps him onward to eternity.  At another period of
life, events, it may be of the most startling and abidingly impressive
nature, are crowded into a few months or weeks, or even days.  So it was
now with our travellers on the African river.  When they reached the
spot where they had dined, no one replied to their shouts.  The canoe,
Glynn, and the child were gone.

On making this terrible discovery the whole party were filled with
indescribable consternation, and ran wildly hither and thither, up and
down the banks of the river, shouting the names of Glynn Proctor and
Ailie, until the woods rang again.  Captain Dunning was almost mad with
anxiety and horror.  His imagination pictured his child in every
conceivable danger.  He thought of her as drowned in the river and
devoured by crocodiles; as carried away by the natives into hopeless
captivity; or, perhaps, killed by wild beasts in the forest.  When
several hours had elapsed, and still no sign of the missing ones could
be discovered, he fell down exhausted on the river's bank, and groaned
aloud in his despair.

But Ailie was not lost.  The Heavenly Father in whom she trusted still
watched over and cared for her, and Glynn Proctor's stout right arm was
still by her side to protect her.

About half-an-hour after the party had gone off in search of their lost
companion, a large canoe, full of negroes, came sweeping down the river.
Glynn and Ailie hid themselves in the bushes, and lay perfectly still,
hoping they might be passed by.  But they forgot that the blue smoke of
their fire curled up through the foliage and revealed their presence at
once.  On observing the smoke, the savages gave a shout, and, running
their canoe close in to the bank, leaped ashore and began to scamper
through the wood like baboons.

Only a few minutes passed before they discovered the two hiders, whom
they surrounded and gazed upon in the utmost possible amazement,
shouting the while with delight, as if they had discovered a couple of
new species of monkey.  Glynn was by nature a reckless and hasty youth.
He felt the power of a young giant within him, and his first impulse was
to leap upon the newcomers, and knock them down right and left.
Fortunately, for Ailie's sake as well as his own, he had wisdom enough
to know that though he had possessed the power of ten giants, he could
not hope, singly, to overcome twenty negroes, all of whom were strong,
active, and lithe as panthers.  He therefore assumed a good-humoured
free-and-easy air, and allowed himself and Ailie to be looked at and
handled without ceremony.

The savages were evidently not ill-disposed towards the wanderers.  They
laughed a great deal, and spoke to each other rapidly in what, to Glynn,
was of course an unknown tongue.  One who appeared to be the chief of
the party passed his long black fingers through Ailie's glossy curls
with evident surprise and delight.  He then advanced to Glynn, and said
something like--

"Holli--boobo--gaddle--bump--um--peepi--daddle--dumps."

To which Glynn replied very naturally, "I don't understand you."

Of course he did not.  And he might have known well enough that the
negro could not understand _him_.  But he deemed it wiser to make a
reply of some kind, however unintelligible, than to stand like a post
and say nothing.

Again the negro spoke, and again Glynn made the same reply; whereupon
the black fellow turned round to his comrades and looked at them, and
they, in reply to the look, burst again into an immoderate fit of
laughter, and cut a variety of capers, the very simplest of which would
have made the fortune of any merry-andrew in the civilised world, had he
been able to execute it.  This was all very well, no doubt, and
exceedingly amusing, not to say surprising; but it became quite a
different matter when, after satisfying their curiosity, these dark
gentlemen coolly collected the property of the white men, stowed it away
in the small canoe, and made signs to Glynn and Ailie to enter.

Glynn showed a decided objection to obey, on which two stout fellows
seized him by the shoulders, and pointed sternly to the canoe, as much
as to say, "Hobbi-doddle-hoogum-toly-whack," which, being interpreted
(no doubt) meant, "If you don't go quietly, we'll force you."

Again the young sailor's spirit leaped up.  He clenched his fists, his
brow flushed crimson, and, in another instant, whatever might have been
the consequence, the two negroes would certainly have lain recumbent on
the sward, had it not suddenly occurred to Glynn that he might, by
appearing to submit, win the confidence of his captors, and, at the
first night-encampment, quietly make his escape with Ailie in his arms!

Glynn was at that romantic age when young men have a tendency to think
themselves capable of doing almost anything, with or without ordinary
facilities, and in the face of any amount of adverse circumstance.  He
therefore stepped willingly and even cheerfully into the canoe, in which
his and his comrades' baggage had been already stowed, and, seating
himself in the stern, took up the steering-paddle.  He was ordered to
quit that post, however, in favour of a powerful negro, and made to sit
in the bow and paddle there.  Ailie was placed with great care in the
centre of the canoe among a heap of soft leopard-skins; for the savages
evidently regarded her as something worth preserving--a rare and
beautiful specimen, perhaps, of the white monkey!

This done, they leaped into their large canoe, and, attaching the
smaller one to it by means of a rope, paddled out from the bank, and
descended the stream.

"Oh!  Glynn," exclaimed Ailie, in a whisper--for she felt that things
were beginning to look serious--"what _are_ we to do?"

"Indeed, my pet, I don't know," replied Glynn, looking round and
encountering the gaze of the negro in the stern, at whom he frowned
darkly, and received a savage grin by way of reply.

"I would like _so_ much to say something to you," continued Ailie, "but
I'm afraid _he_ will know what I say."

"Never fear, Ailie; he's as deaf as a post to our language.  Out with
it."

"Could you not," she said, in a half-whisper, "cut the rope, and then
paddle away back while _they_ are paddling down the river?"

Glynn laughed in spite of himself at this proposal.

"And what, my pretty one," he said, "what should we do with the fellow
in the stern?  Besides, the rascals in front might take it into their
heads to paddle after us, you know, and what then?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Ailie, beginning to cry.

"Now, don't cry, my darling," said Glynn, looking over his shoulder with
much concern.  "I'll manage to get you out of this scrape somehow--now
see if I don't."

The youth spoke so confidently, that the child felt somehow comforted,
so drying her eyes she lay back among the leopard-skins, where, giving
vent to an occasional sob, she speedily fell fast asleep.

They continued to advance thus in silence for nearly an hour, crossed a
small lake, and again entered the river.  After descending this some
time, the attention of the whole party was attracted to a group of
hippopotami, gambolling in the mud-banks and in the river a short
distance ahead.  At any other time Glynn would have been interested in
the sight of these uncouth monsters, but he had seen so many within the
last few days that he was becoming comparatively indifferent to them,
and at that moment he was too much filled with anxiety to take any
notice of them.  The creatures themselves, however, did not seem to be
so utterly indifferent to the strangers.  They continued their gambols
until the canoes were quite near, and then they dived.  Now,
hippopotami, as we have before hinted, are clumsy and stupid creatures,
so much so that they occasionally run against and upset boats and
canoes, quite unintentionally.  Knowing this, the natives in the large
canoe kept a sharp look-out in order to steer clear of them.

They had almost succeeded in passing the place, when a huge fellow, like
a sugar-punchean, rose close to the small canoe, and grazed it with his
tail.  Apparently he considered this an attack made upon him by the
boat, for he wheeled round in a rage, and swam violently towards it.
The negro and Glynn sprang to their feet on the instant, and the former
raised his paddle to deal the creature a blow on the head.  Before he
could do so, Glynn leaped lightly over Ailie, who had just awakened,
caught the savage by the ankles, and tossed him overboard.  He fell with
a heavy splash just in front of the cavernous jaws of the hippopotamus!
In fact, he had narrowly escaped falling head-first into the creature's
open throat.

The nearness of the animal at the time was probably the means of saving
the negro's life, for it did not observe where he had vanished to, as he
sank under its chin, and was pushed by its forelegs right under its
body.  In its effort to lay hold of the negro, the hippopotamus made a
partial dive, and thus passed the small canoe.  When it again rose to
the surface the large canoe met its eye.  At this it rushed, drove its
hammer-like skull through the light material of which it was made, and
then seizing the broken ends in its strong jaws upset the canoe, and
began to rend it to pieces in its fury.

Before this occurred, the crew had leaped into the water, and were now
swimming madly to the shore.  At the same moment Glynn cut the line that
fastened the two canoes together, and seizing his paddle, urged his
craft up the river as fast as possible.  But his single arm could not
drive it with much speed against the stream, and before he had advanced
a dozen yards, one of the natives overtook him and several more followed
close behind.  Glynn allowed the first one to come near, and then gave
him a tremendous blow on the head with the edge of the paddle.

The young sailor was not in a gentle frame of mind at that time, by any
means.  The blow was given with a will, and would probably have
fractured the skull of a white man; but that of a negro is proverbially
thick.  The fellow was only stunned, and fell back among his comrades,
who judiciously considering that such treatment was not agreeable and
ought not to be courted, put about, and made for the shore.

Glynn now kept his canoe well over to the left side of the stream while
the savages ran along the right bank, yelling ferociously and
occasionally attempting to swim towards him, but without success.  He
was somewhat relieved, and sent them a shout of defiance, which was
returned, of course with interest.  Still he felt that his chance of
escape was poor.  He was becoming exhausted by the constant and violent
exertion that was necessary in order to make head against the stream.
The savages knew this, and bided their time.

As he continued to labour slowly up, Glynn came to the mouth of a small
stream which joined the river.  He knew not where it might lead to, but
feeling that he could not hold out much longer, he turned into it,
without any very definite idea as to what he would attempt next.  The
stream was sluggish.  He advanced more easily, and after a few strokes
of the paddle doubled round a point and was hid from the eyes of the
negroes, who immediately set up a yell and plunged into the river,
intending to swim over; but fortunately it was much too rapid in the
middle, and they were compelled to return.  We say fortunately, because,
had they succeeded in crossing, they would have found Glynn in the
bushes of the point behind which he had disappeared, in a very exhausted
state, though prepared to fight to the last with all the energy of
despair.

As it was, he had the extreme satisfaction of seeing his enemies, after
regaining the right bank, set off at a quick run down the river.  He now
remembered having seen a place about two miles further down that looked
like a ford, and he at once concluded his pursuers had set off to that
point, and would speedily return and easily recapture him in the narrow
little stream into which he had pushed.  To cross the large river was
impossible--the canoe would have been swamped in the rapid.  But what
was to hinder him from paddling close in along the side, and perhaps
reach the lake while the negroes were looking for him up the small
stream?

He put this plan into execution at once; and Ailie took a paddle in her
small hands and did her utmost to help him.  It wasn't much, poor thing;
but to hear the way in which Glynn encouraged her and spoke of her
efforts, one would have supposed she had been as useful as a full-grown
man!  After a couple of hours' hard work, they emerged upon the lake,
and here Glynn felt that he was pretty safe, because, in the still
water, no man could swim nearly as fast as he could paddle.  Besides, it
was now getting dark, so he pushed out towards a rocky islet on which
there were only a few small bushes, resolved to take a short rest there,
and then continue his flight under cover of the darkness.

While Glynn carried ashore some biscuit, which was the only thing in the
boat they could eat without cooking, Ailie broke off some branches from
the low bushes that covered the little rocky islet, and spread them out
on a flat rock for a couch; this done, she stood on the top of a large
stone and gazed round upon the calm surface of the beautiful lake, in
the dark depths of which the stars twinkled as if there were another sky
down there.

"Now, Ailie," said Glynn, "come along and have supper.  It's not a very
tempting one, but we must content ourselves with hard fare and a hard
bed to-night, as I dare not light a fire lest the negroes should observe
it and catch us."

"I'm sorry for that," replied the child; "for a fire is _so_ nice and
cheery; and it helps to keep off the wild beasts, too, doesn't it?"

"Well, it does; but there are no wild beasts on such a small rock as
this, and the sides are luckily too steep for crocodiles to crawl up."

"Shall we sleep here till morning?" asked Ailie, munching her hard
biscuit and drinking her tin pannikinful of cold water with great
relish, for she was very hungry.

"Oh, no!" replied Glynn.  "We must be up and away in an hour at
farthest.  So, as I see you're about done with your luxurious supper, I
propose that you lie down to rest."

Ailie was only too glad to accede to this proposal.  She lay down on the
branches, and after Glynn had covered her with a blanket, he stretched
himself on a leopard-skin beside her, and both of them fell asleep in
five minutes.  The mosquitoes were very savage that night, but the
sleepers were too much fatigued to mind their vicious attacks.

Glynn slept two hours, and then he wakened with a start, as most persons
do when they have arranged, before going to sleep, to rise at a certain
hour.  He rose softly, carried the provisions back to the canoe, and in
