old man, of his own race, levelling a carbine at him saying,

"Give it up, boys.  Don't one of ye lift a hand."

Bill could not lift his, with the arrow in his arm.  The man Steve had
tied could not move his elbows.  The man on the ground was ruefully
looking into the barrel of Murray's rifle.  Besides, here was Red Wolf,
springing forward, with his lance in one hand and his revolver in the
other, while Rita held his horse, and Ni-ha-be sat upon her own, with
her second arrow on the string.

"We give it up," said Bill.  "But what are you fellers up to?  I see.
You're the two miners, and you're down on us because we jumped your
claim to that thar gold ledge."

"Wall, Bill," grumbled one of his comrades, "I don't blame 'em for
that; but they needn't ha' took sides with redskins."

Red Wolf lowered his lance and stuck his pistol in his belt.  "Your
prisoners.  Not mine," he said to Murray.  "Glad to meet friend.  Come
in good time."

He spoke in Mexican Spanish, but Murray understood him, and so did the
miners.

"Hear him, Bill!  He knows them two fellers.  That's why they ain't
afraid to prospect away down here."

He had made a bit of a mistake, but Murray answered, short and sharp,

"Young brave take friend's advice.  Jump on horse.  Take young squaws
back to camp.  Tell chief to ride hard.  Kill pony.  Get away fast."

"Who shall I tell him you are?"

"Say you don't know.  Tell him I'm an enemy.  Killed you.  Killed young
squaws.  Going to kill him."

There was a sort of grim humor in Murray's face as he said that.  Not
only Red Wolf, but the two girls, understood it, and the latter would
have given a good deal to be able to tell the "white head," as they
called him, and his handsome young friend, how thankful they both were.

Steve had not said a word, but he was narrowly watching the three
miners for any signs of an effort to get loose.  He and Murray might
have been able to upset the two unwounded men in a fair fight, but it
was just as likely to be the other way.

"It's that other one, Steve.  He's watching his chance.  That's it.
Draw it hard.  Now he won't be cutting any capers."

The expression of the miner's eyes promised the unfriendliest kind of
"capers" if he should ever get an opportunity to cut them.

"It's no use, boys," said Bill.  "Mister, will you jest cut this arrer,
close to my arm, so's I can pull it out?"

"I will in a minute.  It's as good as a tie of deer-skin jest now.
Watch 'em, Steve!"

He walked forward a few steps as he spoke, and looked long and hard
into the face of Rita.

"Too bad! too bad!  They'd better have killed her, like they did mine.
It's awful to think of a white girl growing up to be a squaw.  Ride for
your camp, young man.  I'll take care of these three."

"I will send out warriors to help you.  You shall see them all burnt
and cut to pieces."

"Oh, Rita!" whispered Ni-ha-be; "they ought to be burnt."

Rita was gazing at the face of old Murray, and did not say a word in
reply.

"Come," said Red Wolf; "the great chief is waiting for us."

And then he added to Murray and Steve,

"The lodges of the Apaches are open to their friends.  You will come?"

"Steve, you had better say yes.  It may be a lift for you."

"I will come some day," said Steve, quickly.  "I don't know when."

"The white head must come too.  He has the heart of an Apache, and his
hand is strong for his friends.  We must go now."

He looked at the three miners for a moment, as if he disliked leaving
them behind, and then he bounded upon his pony, and the two girls
followed him swiftly down the pass.

"Was he not handsome, Rita?"

Ni-ha-be was thinking of Steve Harrison, but Rita replied,

"Oh, very handsome!  His hair is white, and his face is wrinkled, but
he is so good.  He is a great warrior, too.  The bad pale-face went
down before him like a small boy."

"His hair is not white, it is brown as the hair of a young buffalo.
His face is not wrinkled.  He is a young brave.  He will be a chief."

"Oh, that other one!  I hardly looked at him.  I hope they will come.
I want to see them again."

Red Wolf rode too fast for them to say much, and he did not pause until
he reached the very presence of Many Bears and his counsellors.

There were already signs, in all directions, that the camp was
beginning to break up, as well as tokens of impatience on the face of
the chief.

"Where go?" he said, angrily.  "Why do young squaws ride away when they
are wanted?"

Ni-ha-be was about to answer, but Red Wolf had his own story to tell
first, and he sternly bade her to hold her tongue till he had made his
report.  It was eagerly listened to.

Pale-face enemies so near!  Who could they be?  White friends, too,
ready to fight for them against other white men, and send them warning
of danger!  That was more remarkable yet.

A trusty chief and a dozen braves were instantly ordered to dash into
the pass, bring back the three prisoners, and learn all they could of
the "white head" and his young companion.

Perhaps Steve Harrison would hardly have felt proud of the names which
was given him on the instant.  The only feat the Apaches knew of his
performing was the thorough manner in which, according to Red Wolf, he
had tied up those two miners; and so for lack of any other name they
spoke of him as the "Knotted Cord."  It was not long before Murray
himself was known in that council by a long word, terribly hard to
pronounce for any but an Apache, but that might be translated "Send
Warning."  He had actually earned a "good name" among his old enemies.

Rita and Ni-ha-be were saved any farther scolding.  There was no time
for that now, and the chief was more than ever anxious to ask questions
of the "talking leaves," now he was sure of the neighborhood of danger.

Rita was puzzled.

"Ask about the bad pale-faces.  Who are they?"

She took her three magazines from the folds of her antelope-skin tunic
with trembling hands, for she was dimly beginning to understand that
they could not tell her of things which were to be.  It seemed to her,
in that moment, that she could not read or remember a single word of
English.

The one she opened first was not one which contained the pictures of
the cavalry; but Rita's face instantly brightened, and she handed it to
her father.  There were five or six pages, one after the other, each of
which contained a picture, large or small, of men engaged in mining for
gold among the Western sierras.

The chief gravely turned the leaves till he came to a sketch that drew
from him a sharp and sullen "Ugh!"

He had hit it, and there could be no mistake.

There were the sturdy miners, with rifles instead of picks, making a
gallant charge upon an attacking party of Indians.

"No need to talk.  Great chief see for himself.  No lie.  I remember.
Kill some of them.  Rest got away.  Now they come to strike the
Apaches.  Ugh!"

That was a "fancy sketch" by some Eastern artist; but it must have been
nearly true to life when an Apache chief could say he had been one of
the very crowd of Indians who were being shot at in the picture.

"That do now.  Talk more by-and-by.  Big fight come."

The part of that band which could not fight was hurried forward at the
best speed that could be made, while Many Bears rapidly transformed his
buffalo-hunters into "warriors."  All that was needed was to give them
a chance to paint themselves in sufficiently hideous manner for the
"war-path," and deal out to them a double allowance of cartridges for
their rifles.

When that was done they made a formidable-looking array, and the last
chance of the Lipans or any other enemies for "surprising" them was
gone.

Then they rode slowly on after their women and children, and the braves
came back from the pass to report to Many Bears that Send Warning,
Knotted Cord, and their three prisoners had gone no one could guess
whither.




CHAPTER XIII

For a moment Murray and Steve stood looking after the retreating forms of
Red Wolf and his sisters.

"I say," exclaimed Bill, "you're a pretty pair of white men!  Do you mean
to turn us three over to them Apaches?"

"Who are you, anyway?  Tell me a straight story, and I'll make up my
mind."

"Well, there's no use tryin' to cover our tracks, I s'pose.  We belong to
the outfit that set up thar own marks on your ledge thar, last night.  It
wasn't any more our blame than any of the rest."

Murray nodded to Steve, as much as to say, "Keep still.  We're learning
something.  Let him talk."  But he replied to Bill,

"There's too many of your crowd for us to tackle.  Where are the rest of
you?"

"All coming down this way.  We was sent ahead to scout."

"So you thought you'd make your outfit safe by picking a quarrel with the
Apaches."

"Now, stranger, you've got me thar.  'Twas a fool thing to do."

"Well, I'll tell you what we'll do.  You three stand up and swear you
bear no malice or ill-will to me and my mate, and you and your crowd'll
do us no harm, and I'll let you go."

"How about the mine?"

"Never mind about the mine.  If your Captain and the rest are as big
fools as you three, there won't any of you come back to meddle with the
mine.  The Apaches'll look out for that.  There'll be worse than they are
behind you, too."

He was speaking of the Lipans, but Bill's face grew longer as he
listened, and so did the faces of his two friends.

"You know about that, do ye?"

"I know enough to warn you."

"Well, all I kin say is, we've got that dust, bars, nuggets, and all, and
we fit hard for it, and we're gwine to keep it."

"What can you do with it here?"

"Here?  We're gwine to Mexico.  It'll take a good while to spend a pile
like that.  It took the Chinese a year and a half to stack it up."

"Well, if you don't start back up the pass pretty soon, you won't have
any chance.  Do you think you can keep your word with us?"

"Reckon we kin, with white men like you.  So'll all the rest, when we
tell 'em it don't cover the mine.  You take your own chances on that."

"We do."

"Then we've no ill-will about this little scrimmage.  Mebbe you did us a
good turn."

"You may say that.  Tell your mates I warn 'em to let the Indians alone
down here.  There's too many of 'em."

"Tell you what, now, old man, there's something about you that ain't so
bad, arter all."

That was the remark of the first miner Murray set loose, but the second
added,

"You've got a hard fist of your own, though.  My head rings yet."

"It'd ring worse if it had been cracked by an Apache war-club.  You and
your mates travel!"

They plunged into the thicket for their horses, and when they came out
again Murray and Steve had disappeared.

"Gone, have they?" said Bill.  "And we don't know any more about 'em than
we did before.  What'll Captain Skinner say?"

"What'll we say to him?  That's what beats me.  And to the boys?  I don't
keer to tell 'em we was whipped in a minute and tied up by an old man, a
boy, two girl squaws, and a redskin."

"It don't tell well, that's a fact."

It was the truth, however, and the three miners rode away up the pass in
a decidedly uncomfortable frame of mind.

Murray had beckoned Steve to follow him, and they had slipped away among
the rocks and bushes, but not too far to see what became of the three
miners.

"They might have kept their word, Steve, and they might not.  We were at
their mercy, standing out there.  They could have shot us from the cover."

"Oh, they are white men--not Indians.  They never would do such a thing
as that!"

"Wouldn't they!  Didn't you hear him confess that they were trying to
steal your mine?  And didn't he say they were robbers, running away with
stolen gold?  Murderers, too?  That's the kind of white men that stir up
nine-tenths of all the troubles with the Indians.  Let alone the Apaches:
that tribe never did keep a treaty."

"The one we saw to-day looked like a Lipan."

"So he did, and he stood right up for the girls.  He's a brave fellow.
And, Steve, one of those young squaws was no more an Indian than you or I
be.  It makes my heart sore and sick to think of it.  A fine young girl
