will.

"Strange!" thought the man, as he moved slowly forward.  "Was this split
made hundreds--perhaps thousands--of years ago, for the purpose of
enabling me to escape?"

"Certainly not--absurd, presumptuous idea," answered Unbelief, smartly.

"It was," remarked Faith, slowly, "made, no doubt, for hundreds--it may
be millions--of other purposes, but among these purposes the saving of
your life was certainly in the mind of Him who `knows all things from
the beginning,' and with whom even the falling of a sparrow is a matter
for consideration."

We do not assert that John Mitford's reasoning took the precise form of
these words, for many minds can think somewhat profoundly without being
able to express themselves clearly; but some such thoughts undoubtedly
coursed through John's mind, as he moved through that subterranean
labyrinth, and finally emerged--through a narrow crack, not so large as
an ordinary door--upon the inner margin of a stupendous cavern.

With a fervent "Thank God!" and a hopeful leap of the heart, the poor
man beheld the waters of the sea rushing up to his very feet; and beyond
the cave's mouth lay the grand ocean itself, like a bright picture in a
black frame.  But what was that projecting from the water, not twenty
yards from where he stood?  The broken mast of a sunken wreck!
Mitford's heart almost stood still, for he became aware that he had made
his way to the very cavern, in which the ill-fated _Lapwing_ had met her
doom, and around him were masses of wreckage that had been washed up and
thrown on the rocks at the inner end of the cave where he stood.

An involuntary shudder passed through the man's frame as he glanced
round expecting to see the dead bodies of his late shipmates.  But
nothing of the kind was visible, and the spars, masts, and other
wreckage which had reached the rocks had been shattered into "matchwood"
by frequent gales.

John Mitford now hastened in eager hope along the sides of the cave
towards its mouth, intending to go out to the base of the cliffs,
forgetting, in his eagerness, that the mouth could not be reached
without a boat.  He soon discovered this, and was then thrown into
another fit of despair by remembering that he could not swim.

Oh! how bitterly he blamed himself for having neglected to acquire such
a simple accomplishment.  He might have learnt it when young, had he not
been indifferent, or lazy about it.  Often had he been advised to learn
it by companions, but had treated the matter lightly and let the chance
go by--and now, only fifty yards or so of deep water intervened between
the end of the ledges of rock and the outside of the cavern, where he
might perhaps find foothold enough to scramble along the base of the
cliffs--but those fifty yards were equal to the Atlantic to him, he
could not swim that distance to save his life.  Once or twice, in a fit
of desperation, he had almost plunged in to attempt it, and take his
chance.  Fortunately his courage failed.  Had he taken the plunge his
fate would no doubt have been sealed.

Returning to the inner end of the cave he searched among the wreckage
for wood, with which to make a raft, but it was so shattered that he
found no pieces large enough to be thus used.  He found, however, a
barrel of pork and another of pease jammed into a crevice.  These proved
an immense relief to his feelings, for they secured him against absolute
starvation, which he had begun to think stared him in the face.

From that time forward the unfortunate man made incessant and wild
efforts to get out of the cave.  He climbed and scrambled about until
his clothes were almost torn off his back.  He gathered the largest
masses of wood he could find and tied them together in bundles, until he
had made something like a raft; but John was not a handy workman; his
raft overturned the first time he tried it, and went to pieces, and he
would have been drowned at that time if he had not been within grasping
distance of the rocks.  As it was, he got a fright which made him
finally turn from that method of escape in despair.

Then the raw pork and hard pease tried him severely, and brought on a
complaint which lasted a considerable time and greatly reduced his
strength, but John was tough, and recovered--though not much more than
the skeleton of his former self remained.

Thus he continued to exist in that cavern, during all the time that his
wife and friends were mourning him as dead; and in this condition was he
there seated, on the morning in which this chapter opens.

"Weary, weary--desolation!" moaned the unfortunate man, lifting his head
and gazing round, with the air of one from whom all hope has long since
departed.

It is said, or supposed, that when a spoke in Fortune's wheel is at the
lowest, there must needs be a rise.  Mitford's experience at this time
would seem to give ground for belief in the saying; for the word
"desolation" had scarcely passed his lips, when distant voices of men
were heard, causing his heart to bound violently.  Next moment a boat
glided in front of the cave's mouth.

John Mitford sprang up and gave vent to a yell!

Hope raised to strong life after being long deferred; despair suddenly
trampled in the dust; joy bounding as from the tomb into rampant being--
and a host of indescribable sentiments and passions found vent in that
tremendous, that inconceivable howl!

And its effect on those in the boat?--Well--

That morning our exploring party had resumed their voyage with somewhat
saddened hearts, for they remembered the look of the coast well, and
knew that an hour or so would bring them to the cave where the _Lapwing_
had gone down.  Even Black Ned had become sentimental, and given vent to
a few expressions of a semi-religious nature!

"We can't be far from it now," said Dr Hayward, as the men ceased
rowing, and the boat glided slowly, silently along.

"It's a gruesome place," remarked Black Ned, in a low voice.

"To think that so many lives were lost here--or hereabouts," murmured
Tomlin.

"An' their ghost, maybe, hangin' about!" suggested Slag, with a
superstitious glance over his shoulder.

Just then Hayward bade O'Connor get up and stand in the bow with the
boat-hook, ready to fend off,--an order which the Irishman, having been
somewhat awed by the tone of the conversation, obeyed in silence.

It was at this point that they glided in front of the cave, and drew
forth the yell which burst upon them like a clap of thunder.  The shock
to the nervous system of each was terrific.  In the case of O'Connor it
was visible, for he fell flat back into the bottom of the boat and
fetched Jarring a tremendous whack on the head with the boat-hook in
falling.  Afterwards, Terrence asserted stoutly that a slip of the foot
as he stood on the th'ort was the cause, but those who knew him best
held that it was "a case of nerves."

Need it be said that, on recovering nervous equilibrium, the joy of
rescuers and rescued was intense?

"Come along, let's take 'im home at wanst," cried the Irishman, when
they had got the poor dazed man into the boat.  "Isn't it Peggy that'll
open her eyes an' screech for joy when she sots her eyes on ye!"

"We'll have to wash and comb an' clothe him first," said Tomlin.

He did not say "shave," for they had no razors,--and by that time the
beards of most of the party were as long as Mitford's; but their locks
had been trimmed by means of a clasp-knife super-sharpened, whereas
Mitford's were in wildest disorder.

That night they encamped in the wreck-cave, made a fire, and prepared a
splendid supper of pork and pea-soup for John and themselves, after
which they subjected their recovered comrade to a scrubbing and cropping
and repairing of habiliments that almost proved fatal to his
constitution.  Next day they loaded the boat with all the pork and pease
they could find, as well as portions of cordage that might be useful.
Then they started off on the return journey.

It was a fine day when they reached the encampment, where the coxswain
and the women were on the look-out.  Massey, of course, was the first to
observe, as the boat approached, that an extra hand was in it; but he
wisely said nothing at first.  Then his heart began to beat as it used
to do when he brought in rescued men and women from wrecks, for the
truth suddenly flashed upon him.  He glanced at Peggy.  Poor thing, her
sad eyes had wandered from the approaching boat and were resting
wistfully on the horizon beyond.

"Nell," murmured the coxswain in a deep, earnest whisper to his wife,
who stood at his elbow, "the tide's a-goin' to rise again wi' poor
Peggy, if my eyes are tellin' truth."

"What d'ee mean, Bob?" asked Nellie, with a quick, anxious look.

"Five men went away, Nell; _six_ are comin' back!"

As he spoke, a tall figure rose up in the stern of the boat and waved a
hand.

Nellie glanced quickly at her friend.  She was standing with glaring
eyes, parted lips, and a deathly pallor on her worn face.

"Peggy!"

The familiar word came rolling to the shore, and a piercing shriek
replied to it as the poor woman threw up both hands and fell backward
into the ready arms of the coxswain's wife, who had sprung to her side
in anticipation of some such catastrophe.

There was the voice of prayer and thanksgiving that night in the hut on
the lonely shore--such thanksgiving as we might conceive filled the
hearts of Jairus and of the widow of Nain in the days of old.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 12.

The state of things on the island was now considerably improved.  Peggy,
under the influence of gratitude for restored felicity, became more
helpful than she had formerly been, and more loquacious than ever.  Her
female companions, being amiable and easily pleased, were rather amused
than otherwise, at the continuous flow of discursive, sometimes
incomprehensible, and always good-natured small talk--particularly small
talk--with which she beguiled the hours that might have otherwise hung
heavily on their minds while their hands were busily engaged with the
bone-needles and sinew threads which the coxswain had manufactured for
them.  For the clothes with which they had landed on the island--
especially those of the men--had begun to wear out after eight or ten
months, and new garments had to be made, while repairs never ceased.

Meanwhile, the men were fully occupied each day in hunting seals or
fishing, cutting firewood with the axe they had found in the hut, and in
making their home more comfortable.  A door was fitted to the hut; a
wooden partition was put up to cut off more effectually the women's
apartment from that of the men; the open crevices in the walls were
stopped up with moss, and many other improvements were made.  A few
nails extracted from the walls of the hut were converted into
fish-hooks, by means of the file which had been found, and Nellie spun
some excellent fishing-lines from flax found growing wild in abundance.
The file also enabled them to strike fire with broken flints picked up
on the shore.  The ash of burnt cotton, as the doctor knew, makes good
tinder; so in the public interest, John Mitford agreed to part with the
ragged remains of the cotton shirt he had long worn--quite
unnecessarily--over his woollen jersey.  Thus they could afford to let
the fire go out, and were relieved from constant watching, as well as
anxiety in regard to it.

They did not, however, cease their nocturnal vigils, for the hope of
deliverance never died out, though it at last sank very low.  Besides
keeping their seal-skin flag flying, they kindled a beacon-fire every
night, to guard and replenish which became the nightly duty of one or
other of the men--watch and watch about--all the time they stayed on the
island.

During the earlier part of each night, however, the beacon-fire was not
watched.  It was merely lighted and left for some hours to look after
itself.  During this period, after supper, the whole party were wont to
draw round the blazing fire in the hut, and each contributed his or her
share to the entertainment of the social circle.  Then it was that
lugubrious John Mitford developed amazing powers of inventive
story-telling, and Joe Slag came out strong with thrilling lifeboat
tales, every word of which Bob Massey corroborated, while Terrence
O'Connor displayed powers of sarcastic criticism of the highest order,
and Tomlin, Black Ned, and the women proved an intensely appreciative
audience.  But the latter were not merely listeners.  True, Peggy did
nothing for the general good.  Having quite exhausted her lungs with
incessant talk during each day, she was fortunately almost incapable of
speech in the evening, but Nellie, who possessed a voice as sweet as
herself, and clear and true as that of a nightingale, was induced to
"favour the company"--chiefly with pathetic or patriotic ditties and
hymns--while Eva thrilled her audience with terrible tales of slavery,
in many of which she had acted a part.  Of course Dr Hayward lent his
aid, both with song and story; but, like a true leader, he devoted
himself chiefly to drawing out the powers of his companions, directing
or diverting the flow of conversation, and keeping order.  He also
instituted what may be truly styled family worship at night, by
repeating from memory portions of the word of, God and engaging in
prayer just before retiring to rest.  Bob Massey and Tomlin were induced
to help him in this, and never was a prayer put up from that hut in
which there was not an earnest petition that a ship might be sent for
their deliverance.

"But a ship is long, long o' comin'," said Slag to Jarring as he
accompanied the latter part of the way to the beacon-fire one night when
it was Black Ned's turn to watch.

"A ship'll come, Joe, when God sees fit to send it," said Ned.

Slag glanced at his comrade in surprise, the reply was so very unlike
Ned's usual style of speech that he felt uncertain whether it was
uttered in earnest.

"The only thing I feel an awful longin' for now, at times, is a bit o'
'baccy," continued Ned.

"So does I, Ned, an' I sometimes think Dr Hayward has got the advantage
of us there, for he never smoked, so he says, an' in coorse it stands to
reason that he can't have no longin' for a thing he don't want--an' he
seems as jolly an' happy as the best of us without it!"

"Ay, jollier and happier!" replied Ned, shortly.

"But, I say, Ned, don't ye ever feel a longin' for grog?  Ye used to be
raither fond of it."

"No--not now, Joe.  It's the best thing as ever happened to me, bein'
cast on this here island--wi' Dr Hayward to give a feller a word of
advice."

Slag, who felt a sort of self-righteous superiority over his comrade,
inasmuch as _he_ had never given way to drink, said, "You should be
thankful for that, Ned."

"I _am_ thankful," returned the other in a tone that induced Slag to say
no more.

It was a very dark night, and cold, so that Black Ned involuntarily
shuddered as he approached the beacon-fire alone--Joe having left him--
and commenced to heap on fuel.  Then rain began to fall heavily.  There
was no shelter, and the watchman was soon drenched to the skin.  Heaping
on more logs till the fire roared again, he tried to warm himself, and
stood so close to the blaze that his garments smoked--they would have
burnt had they not been wet--but no heat seemed to penetrate the
shivering frame of Black Ned.

Next morning the poor man was smitten with a raging fever.  From the
first the doctor had little hope of his recovery.  With a constitution
fatally injured by dissipation and drink, his chance was very small; but
