Attention is called to Figs. 120 and 121. Let us assume that the field
magnets A, A are the positives, and the magnets B, B the negatives. The
revolving armature has also four magnet coils, two of them, C, C, being
positive, and the other two, D, D, negative, each of these magnet coils
being so connected up that they will reverse the polarities of the
magnets.

[Illustration: _Figs. 120-121._ ACTION OF MAGNETS IN A DYNAMO]

Now in the particular position of the revolving armature, in Fig. 120,
the magnets of the armature have just passed the respective poles of the
field magnets, and the belt E is compelled to turn the armature past the
pole pieces by force in the direction of the arrow F. After the armature
magnets have gone to the positions in Fig. 121, the positives A try to
draw back the negatives D of the armature, and at the same time the
negatives B repel the negatives D, because they are of the same
polarities.

This repulsion of the negatives A, B continues until the armature poles
C, D have slightly passed them, when the polarities of the magnets C, D
are changed; so that it will be seen, by reference to Fig. 122, that D
is now retreating from B, and C is going away from A--that is, being
forced away contrary to their natural attractive influences, and in Fig.
123, when the complete cycle is nearly finished, the positives are again
approaching each other and the negatives moving together.

[Illustration: _Figs. 122-123._ CYCLE ACTION IN DYNAMO]

In this manner, at every point, the sets of magnets are compelled to
move against their magnetic pull. This explains the dynamo.

Now take up the cycle of the motor, and note in Fig. 124 that the
negative magnets D of the armature are closely approaching the positive
and negative magnets, on one side; and the positive magnets C are
nearing the positive and negatives on the other side. The positives A,
therefore, attract the negatives D, and the negative B exert a pull on
the positives C at the same time. The result is that the armature is
caused to revolve, as shown by the dart G, in a direction opposite to
the dart in Fig. 120.

[Illustration: _Figs. 124-125._ ACTION OF MAGNETS IN MOTOR]

When the pole pieces of the magnets C, D are about to pass magnets A, B,
as shown in Fig. 125, it is necessary to change the polarities of the
armature magnets C, D; so that by reference to Fig. 126, it will be seen
that they are now indicated as C-, and D+, respectively, and have moved
to a point midway between the poles A, B (as in Fig. 125), where the
pull on one side, and the push on the other are again the same, and the
last Figure 127 shows the cycle nearly completed.

The shaft of the motor armature is now the element which turns the
mechanism which is to be operated. To convert electrical impulses into
power, as thus shown, results in great loss. The first step is to take
the steam boiler, which is the first stage in that source which is the
most common and universal, and by means of fuel, converting water into
steam. The second is to use the pressure of this steam to drive an
engine; the third is to drive the dynamo which generates the electrical
impulse; and the fourth is the conversion from the dynamo into a motor
shaft. Loss is met with at each step, and the great problem is to
eliminate this waste.

[Illustration: _Figs. 126-127._ POSITIONS OF MAGNETS IN MOTOR]

The great advantage of electrical power is not in utilizing it for
consumption at close ranges, but where it is desired to transmit it for
long distances. Such illustrations may be found in electric railways,
and where water power can be obtained as the primal source of energy,
the cost is not excessive. It is found, however, that even with the most
improved forms of mechanism, in electrical construction, the internal
combustion engines are far more economical.


_Transmission of Energy_

One of the great problems has been the transmission of the current to
great distances. By using a high voltage it may be sent hundreds of
miles, but to use a current of that character in the cars, or shops, or
homes, would be exceedingly dangerous.

To meet this requirement transformers have been devised, which will take
a current of very high voltage, and deliver a current of low tension,
and capable of being used anywhere with the ordinary motors.

THE TRANSFORMER.--This is an electrical device made up of a core or
cores of thin sheet metal, around which is wound sets of insulated
wires, one set being designed to receive the high voltage, and the other
set to put out the low voltage, as described in a former chapter.

These may be made where the original output is a very high voltage, so
that they will be stepped down, first from one voltage to a lower, and
then from that to the next lower stage. This is called the "Step down"
transformer, and is now used over the entire world, where large voltages
are generated.

ELECTRIC FURNACES.--The most important development of electricity in the
direction of heat is its use in furnaces. As before stated, an intense
heat is capable of being generated by the electric current, so that it
becomes the great agent to use for the treatment of refractory material.

In furnaces of this kind the electric arc is the mechanical form used to
produce the great heat, the only difference being in the size of the
apparatus. The electric furnace is simply an immense form of arc light,
capable of taking a high voltage, and such an arc is enclosed within a
suitable oven of refractory material, which still further conserves the
heat.

WELDING BY ELECTRICITY.--The next step is to use the high heat thus
capable of being produced, to fuse metals so that they may be welded
together. It is a difficult matter to unite two large pieces of metal by
the forging method, because the highest heat is required, owing to their
bulk, and in addition immense hammers, weighing tons, must be employed.

Electric welding offers a simple and easy method of accomplishing the
result, and in the doing of which it avoids the oxidizing action of the
forging heat. Instead of heating the pieces to be welded in a forge, as
is now done, the ends to be united are simply brought into contact, and
the current is sent through the ends until they are in a soft condition,
after which the parts are pressed together and united by the simple
merging of the plastic condition in which they are reduced by the high
electric heat.

This form of welding makes the most perfect joint, and requires no
hammering, as the mass of the metal flows from one part or end to the
other; the unity is a perfect one, and the advantage is that the metals
can be kept in a semi-fluid state for a considerable time, thus assuring
a perfect admixture of the two parts.

With the ordinary form of welding it is necessary to drive the heated
parts together without any delay, and at the least cooling must be
reheated, or the joint will not be perfect.

The smallest kinds of electric heating apparatus are now being made, so
that small articles, sheet metal, small rods, and like parts can be
united with the greatest facility.




CHAPTER XVIII

X-RAY, RADIUM, AND THE LIKE


The camera sees things invisible to the human eye. Its most effective
work is done with beams which are beyond human perception. The
photographer uses the _Actinic_ rays. Ordinary light is composed of the
seven primary colors, of which the lowest in the scale is the red, and
the highest to violet.

Those below the red are called the Infra-red, and they are the Hertzian
waves, or those used in wireless telegraphy. Those above the violet are
called Ultra-violet, and these are employed for X-ray work. The former
are produced by the high tension electric apparatus, which we have
described in the chapter relating to wireless telegraphy; and the
latter, called also the Roentgen rays, are generated by the Crookes'
Tube.

This is a tube from which all the atmosphere has been extracted so that
it is a practical vacuum. Within this are placed electrodes so as to
divert the action of the electrical discharge in a particular direction,
and this light, when discharged, is of such a peculiar character that
its discovery made a sensation in the scientific world.

The reason for this great wonder was not in the fact that it projected a
light, but because of its character. Ordinary light, as we see it with
the eye, is capable of being reflected, as when we look into a mirror at
an angle. The X-ray will not reflect, but instead, pass directly through
the glass.

Then, ordinary light is capable of refraction. This is shown by a ray of
light bending as it passes through a glass of water, which is noticed
when the light is at an angle to the surface.

The X-ray will pass through the water without being changed from a
straight line. The foregoing being the case, it was but a simple step to
conclude that if it were possible to find a means whereby the human eye
could see within the ultra-violet beam, it would be possible to see
through opaque substances.

From the discovery so important and far reaching it was not long until
it was found that if the ultra-violet rays, thus propagated, were
transmitted through certain substances, their rates of vibration would
be brought down to the speeds which send forth the visible rays, and now
the eye is able to see, in a measure at least, what the actinic rays
show.

This discovery was but the forerunner of a still more important
development, namely, the discovery of _radium_. The actual finding of
the metal was preceded by the knowledge that certain minerals, and
water, as well, possessed the property of radio-activity.

Radio-activity is a word used to express that quality in metals or other
material by means of which obscure rays are emitted, that have the
capacity of discharging electrified bodies, and the power to ionize
gases, as well as to actually affect photograph plates.

Certain metals had this property to a remarkable degree, particularly
uranium, thorium, polonium, actinium, and others, and in 1898 the
Curies, husband and wife, French chemists, isolated an element, very
ductile in its character, which was a white metal, and had a most
brilliant luster.

Pitchblende, the base metal from which this was extracted, was
discovered to be highly radio-active, and on making tests of the product
taken from it, they were surprised to find that it emitted a form of
energy that far exceeded in calculations any computations made on the
basis of radio-activity in the metals hitherto examined.

But this was not the most remarkable part of the developments. The
energy, whatever it was, had the power to change many other substances
if brought into close proximity. It darkens the color of diamonds,
quartz, mica, and glass. It changes some of the latter in color, some
kinds being turned to brown and others into violet or purple tinges.

Radium has the capacity to redden the skin, and affect the flesh of
persons, even at some considerable distance, and it is a most powerful
germicide, destroying bacteria, and has been found also to produce some
remarkable cures in diseases of a cancerous nature.

The remarkable similarity of the rays propagated by this substance, with
the X-rays, lead many to believe that they are electrical in their
character, and the whole scientific world is now striving to use this
substance, as well as the more familiar light waves of the Roentgen
tube, in the healing of diseases.

It is not at all remarkable that this use of it should first be
considered, as it has been the history of the electrical developments,
from the earliest times, that each successive stage should find
advocates who would urge its virtues to heal the sick.

It was so when the dynamo was invented, when the high tension current
was produced; and electrical therapeutics became a leading theme when
transmission by induction became recognized as a scientific fact.

It is not many years since the X-rays were discovered, and the first
announcement was concerning its wonderful healing powers.

This was particularly true in the case of radium, but for some reason,
after the first tests, all experimenters were thwarted in their
theories, because the science, like all others, required infinite
patience and experience. It was discovered, in the case of the X-ray,
that it must be used in a modified form, and accordingly, various
modifications of the waves were introduced, called the _m_ and the _n_
rays, as well as many others, each having some peculiar qualification.

In time, no doubt, the investigators will find the right quality for
each disease, and learn how to apply it. Thus, electricity, that most
alluring thing which, in itself, cannot be seen, and is of such a
character that it cannot even be defined in terms which will suit the
exact scientific mind, is daily bringing new wonders for our
investigation and use.

It is, indeed, a study which is so broad that it has no limitations, and
a field which never will be exhausted.

THE END




GLOSSARY OF WORDS
USED IN TEXT OF THIS VOLUME


Acid.             Accumulator material is sulphuric acid, diluted
                    with water.

Active            That part of the material in accumulator plates
  Material.         which is acted upon by the electric current.

Accumulator.      A cell, generally known as a storage battery, which
                    while it initially receives a charge of electricity,
                    is nevertheless, of such a character, owing to the
                    active material of which it is made, that it
                    accumulates, or, as it were, generates electricity.

Aerial Wire,      The wire which, in wireless  telegraphy, is carried
  or Conductor.     up into the air to connect the antennae with the
                    receiving and sending apparatus.

Alarm, Burglar.   A circulating system in a building, connected up with
                    a bell or other signaling means.

Alloy.            A mixture of two or more metals; as copper and zinc
                    to make brass; nickel and zinc to form German silver.

Alternating Current. A current which goes back and forth in opposite
                    directions, unlike a direct current which flows
                    continuously in one direction over a wire.

Alternation.      The term applied to a change in the direction of an
                    alternating current, the frequency of the alternations
                    ranging up to 20,000 or more vibrations per second.

Amber.            A resin, yellow in color, which when rubbed with a
                    cloth, becomes excited and gives forth negative
                    electricity.

Ammeter.          An instrument for measuring the quantity or flow of
                    electricity.

Ampere.           The unit of current; the term in which strength of
                    the current is measured. An ampere is an
                    electromotive force of one volt through a resistance
                    of one ohm.

Annunciator.      A device which indicates or signals a call given from
                    some distant point.

Anode.            The positive terminal in a conducting circuit, like
                    the terminal of the carbon plate in a battery. It is
                    a plate in an electroplating bath from which the
                    current goes over to the cathode or negative plate or
                    terminal.

Arc.              A term employed to designate the gap, or the current
                    which flows across between the conductors, like the
                    space between the two carbons of an arc lamp, which
                    gives the light.

Armature.         A body of iron, or other suitable metal, which is in
                    the magnetic field of a magnet.

Armature Bar.     The piece which holds the armature. Also one of a
                    series of bars which form the conductors in armature
                    windings.

Armature Coil.    The winding around an armature, or around the core
                    of an armature.

Armature Core.    The part in a dynamo or motor which revolves,
                    and on which the wire coils are wound.

