back. Then came such a bucking, leaping, and prancing as many had never
witnessed before.

"He'll be killed!" cried many of the ladies. "The horse will have him
under in another moment." But such fears were groundless. Darnell knew
exactly what he was doing, and in the end the fiery steed had to give
in, completely conquered.

On the last Sunday in camp, Chaplain Brown delivered an impressive
sermon, to which all listened with grave attention. After he had
finished, Theodore Roosevelt spoke to the men in a feeling way.

"I told them how proud I was of them," he says. "But warned them not to
think that they could go back and rest on their laurels, bidding them
remember that though for ten days or so the world would be willing to
treat them as heroes, yet after that time they would find they would
have to get down to hard work just like anybody else, unless they were
willing to be regarded as worthless do-nothings." This was the best
possible advice, and it is believed that many of the soldiers profited
by it.

Before the men were mustered out, they treated their beloved commander
to a genuine surprise. They had had a fine bronze of a "Bronco Buster"
made, and this was presented to Colonel Roosevelt on behalf of the whole
regiment. It touched him deeply, and to-day this bronze is one of his
most highly prized gifts.

At last came news that the Rough Riders would be mustered out of the
United States service the next day. That evening a great celebration
took place, in which all of the men joined, each according to his own
notion of what a celebration should be. Large bonfires were lit, and
here some delivered speeches, the soldiers from the colleges sang, those
with Indian blood in them gave a characteristic dance, and cowboys and
ranchmen did "double-shuffles" and "cut up" as suited them.

On the morning of September 15, four months after the Rough Riders had
been organized, the colors were lowered in camp, the men were mustered
out, and officers and privates shook hands and said good-by.

"It was the greatest sight I ever saw," says one of the number. "Not
until that moment came did we realize what it meant to part with those
who had fought with us in battle and suffered the hardships of life in
the trenches. Strange friendships had been formed, some between those
who were very rich and very poor, and others between those who were well
educated and very ignorant. One man who was studying for a professional
life had as his particular chum a rough cowboy who had never spent six
months over his books. But the two had stood by each other and suffered,
and I really believe they were willing to lay down their lives for each
other.

"Many of the men could hardly bear to part with Colonel Roosevelt. He
had stuck by them through thick and thin, and they worshipped him. Some
shook hands half a dozen times, and some hardly dared to speak for fear
of breaking down. I never expect to see the match of that scene again."




CHAPTER XIX

NOMINATED FOR GOVERNOR OF NEW YORK--A ROUGH RIDER WAY OF
CAMPAIGNING--ELECTED GOVERNOR--IMPORTANT WORK AT ALBANY--THE HOMESTEAD
AT OYSTER BAY--CHOPPING DOWN A TREE FOR EXERCISE


The war with Spain was at an end, and Uncle Sam had now to turn his
attention to the Philippines, where for many months to come military
disturbances of a more or less serious nature were to take place.

Theodore Roosevelt might have remained in the army, and had he done so
there is no doubt but that he would have swiftly risen to a rank of
importance.

But the people of the State of New York willed otherwise.

"He is a great military man," they said. "But he was likewise a fine
Police Commissioner and a Civil Service Commissioner, fighting
continually for what was right and good. Let us make him our next
governor."

The convention that nominated Theodore Roosevelt for the highest office
in the Empire State met at Saratoga, September 27, 1898, just twelve
days after the Rough Riders were mustered out. At that time Frank S.
Black was governor of the state, having been elected two years before by
a large majority. The governor had many friends, and they said he
deserved another term.

"Roosevelt is not a citizen of this state," said they. "He gave up his
residence here when he went to Washington to become Assistant Secretary
of the Navy."

"We don't want him anyway," said other politicians, who had not
forgotten how the Rough Rider had acted when in the Assembly. "If he
gets into office, it will be impossible to manage him." And they worked
night and day to defeat the hero of San Juan Hill.

On the day of the convention, the hall where it was held was jammed with
people. The people were also crowded in the street outside, and on every
hand were seen Rough Rider badges.

"It was a Roosevelt crowd from top to bottom," says one who was there.
"You heard his name everywhere--in the hotels, on the streets, no
matter where you went. Every once in a while somebody would shout,
'Three cheers for Teddy!' and the cheers would be given with a will."

As soon as the convention had settled down to business, Governor Black
was put up for nomination, and then the Hon. Chauncey M. Depew presented
the name of Theodore Roosevelt. He spoke of what had been done in Cuba,
and added:--

"The Rough Riders endured no hardships nor dangers which were not shared
by their Colonel. He helped them dig their ditches; he stood beside them
in the deadly dampness of the trenches. No floored tent for him if his
comrades must sleep on the ground and under the sky. In that world-famed
charge of the Rough Riders up the hill of San Juan, their Colonel was a
hundred feet in advance."

There was a prolonged cheering when Theodore Roosevelt's name was
mentioned, and hundreds waved their handkerchiefs and flags. Other
speeches followed, and at last came the voting. Out of the total number
cast Theodore Roosevelt received seven hundred and fifty-three and
Governor Black two hundred and eighteen.

"I move we make the nomination of Theodore Roosevelt unanimous!" cried
Judge Cady, who had previously presented the name of Governor Black. And
amid continued cheering this was done.

Theodore Roosevelt had been nominated on the regular Republican ticket.
In opposition, the Democrats nominated Augustus Van Wyck, also well
known, and likewise of as old Dutch stock as Roosevelt himself.

The campaign was a decidedly strenuous one. The Democrats made every
effort to win, while on the other hand the Republicans who had wanted
Governor Black for another term did not give to Mr. Roosevelt the
support promised when his nomination had been made unanimous.

"We shall be defeated," said more than one friend to Roosevelt. "It
seems a shame, but we cannot arouse the party as it should be aroused."

"I will see what I can do myself," answered the former leader of the
Rough Riders. And he arranged to make a complete tour of the State,
taking in almost every city and town of importance. When some of the
old campaign managers heard of this, they came to Roosevelt in great
alarm.

"You mustn't do it," they said. "It will ruin you."

"I will risk it," was the answer of the candidate. And forthwith he
started on his tour, taking a handful of his Rough Rider friends with
him.

It was a brilliant stroke on the part of Theodore Roosevelt, and it told
tremendously in his favor. Wherever he went, the people turned out in
large crowds to see him and to listen to what he or his Rough Rider
companions had to say. Citizens by the hundred came up to shake him by
the hand and wish him success. Parades were organized to do him honor,
and at night there would be brilliant illuminations and fireworks.

"We have aroused the party," said he, when the tour was at an end. And
so it proved. Although Van Wyck was popular, Theodore Roosevelt was
elected to the high office of governor by seventeen thousand plurality.

It was certainly a high position for such a young man to occupy. He was
barely forty years of age, yet as governor of New York he ruled twice as
many people as did George Washington when first President of the United
States.

He entered on his new duties with as much zeal as he had displayed when
organizing the Rough Riders, and in a few weeks had the reins of
government well in hand. It is said that while he was governor he was
never surprised by those who opposed him. When they wanted facts and
figures he was able to produce them, and he never supported or vetoed a
measure unless he was morally certain he was on the right side. He was
open-faced to the last degree, and what he said he meant.

During his term of office many measures of importance were considered,
but in a work of this kind it is not necessary to go into details. For
several important offices he nominated men of his own selection, despite
the protests of some older politicians, and these selections proved
first-class.

During his term as governor, Mr. Roosevelt did a great work for many
poor people in New York City, who worked in what are called "sweat
shops,"--small, close quarters, not fit for working purposes, in which
men, women, and children make clothing and other articles. He enforced
what was known as the Factory Law, and the owners of the "sweat-shops"
had to seek larger and more sanitary quarters for their employees. He
also took a strong hand in reforming the administration of the canals,
which had been one-sided and unfair.

But perhaps his greatest work was in behalf of a measure meant to make
the great corporations of New York State pay their fair share of the
general taxes. In the past these corporations had had great rights
conferred upon them, and they had paid little or nothing in return.

"This is unjust," said Governor Roosevelt. "They should pay their taxes
just as the poorest citizen is compelled to pay his tax."

When the corporations heard this, many of the men in control were
furious, and they threatened the governor in all sorts of ways. They
would defeat him if he ever again came up for election, and defeat him
so badly that he would never again be heard of.

"Do as you please, gentlemen," said the governor. "I am here to do my
duty, and I intend to do it." And he called an extra session of the
legislature for that purpose. It is said that much money was used by
some corporations to defeat Governor Roosevelt's will, but in the end a
modified form of the bill was passed. Since that time other bills along
similar lines have become laws; so that the great corporations have to
pay millions of dollars which in the past they had escaped paying. Such
measures are of immense benefit to the ordinary citizen, and for his
share in this work Theodore Roosevelt deserves great credit.

It was while governor of New York that Mr. Roosevelt gave to the public
his book entitled "The Rough Riders." It contains a history of that
organization from his personal point of view, and makes the most
fascinating kind of reading from beginning to end. It was well received,
and added not a little to the laurels of the writer as an author.

Although much of his time was spent at Albany as Executive, Theodore
Roosevelt had not given up the old homestead at Oyster Bay on Long
Island, and thither he went for rest and recreation, taking his entire
family, which, as has been said, consisted of his wife and six children,
with him.

The old Roosevelt homestead is on a hill about three miles distant from
the village. The road to the house winds upward through a wilderness of
trees and brushwood. At the top of the hill, where the house stands, is
a cleared space, free to the strong breezes of Long Island Sound. It is
on the north shore, about twenty-five miles from City Hall, New York.

The house is a large, three-story affair, with crossed gables, and a
large semicircular veranda at one end. Inside there is a wide hall, and
all the rooms are of good size, with broad windows and inviting open
fireplaces. One room is fitted up as Mr. Roosevelt's "den," with many
bookcases filled with books, and with rare prints of Washington,
Lincoln, and other celebrities on the walls, and with not a few trophies
of the hunt added. In this room Mr. Roosevelt has done much of his work
as an author.

It is said that Abraham Lincoln not only chopped wood for a living, but
that he rather enjoyed the outdoor exercise. Be that as it may, it
remains a fact that Mr. Roosevelt frequently goes forth into the woods
on his estate to fell a tree, or split one up, just for the exercise
thus afforded. This he did while he was governor of New York, and once
astonished some newspaper men who had come to see him on business by the
dexterity with which he cut a large tree trunk in two. He even invited
his visitors to "take a hack at it" themselves, but they respectfully
declined.

He still kept up his athletic exercise, and one of his favorite
amusements was to go on long horseback rides, either alone, or with some
relative or friend. At other times he would go deep into the woods with
his young sons, showing them how to bring down the nuts from the trees,
or how to use their guns on any small game that chanced to show itself.
His family life was then, as it has always been, a happy one; but of
this let us speak later.

[Illustration: THE ROOSEVELT HOMESTEAD AT OYSTER BAY.

(_Photograph by Pach Bros., N.Y._)]




CHAPTER XX

GREAT RECEPTION TO ADMIRAL DEWEY--GOVERNOR ROOSEVELT'S INCREASED
POPULARITY--LAST ANNUAL MESSAGE AS GOVERNOR--VISIT TO CHICAGO--REMARKABLE
SPEECH ON THE STRENUOUS LIFE


Although the war with Spain was over, the people of the United States
had not forgotten the wonderful work accomplished by Admiral Dewey and
his men at Manila, and when the dauntless naval fighter returned to this
country, people everywhere arose to do him honor.

"He well deserves it," said Governor Roosevelt. And he appointed
September 29 and 30, 1899, as public holidays, to be observed throughout
the entire State as days of general thanksgiving. These days were
commonly called "Dewey Days."

The reception to the Admiral and to the other naval heroes was to take
place in New York and vicinity, and for many days the citizens were busy
decorating their homes and places of business with flags and bunting
and pictures, and immense signs of "Welcome," some in letters several
feet long. At the junction of Broadway, Fifth Avenue, and Twenty-Third
Street, an immense triumphal arch was erected, and reviewing stands
stretched along the line of parade for many miles.

On the day before the grand reception, Governor Roosevelt, with some
members of his staff, called upon Admiral Dewey on board of the
_Olympia_, and offered the State's greeting. A pleasant time was had by
all, and the governor assured the sea hero that the people of New York
and vicinity were more than anxious to do him honor.

It had been arranged that a naval parade should be held on the first day
of the reception, and a land parade on the day following. The course of
the naval parade was up the Hudson River past Grant's Tomb, and the
grand procession on the water included the _Olympia_, the Admiral's
flag-ship, and the _New York_, _Indiana_, _Massachusetts_, _Texas_,
_Brooklyn_, and a large number of other war-ships of lesser importance,
besides an immense number of private steam-yachts and other craft.

The day dawned clear and bright, and the banks of the Hudson were lined
from end to end with people. When the procession of war-ships swept up
the stream, loud was the applause, while flags waved everywhere, and
whistles blew constantly. When passing Grant's Tomb every war-ship fired
a salute, and the mass of sound echoing across the water was positively
deafening.

As the _Olympia_ swept up the river, fired her salute, and then came to
anchor a short distance below the last resting-place of General Grant,
Admiral Dewey stood on the bridge of his flag-ship, a small, trim
figure, with a smile and a wave of the hand for everybody. The surging
people could see him but indistinctly, yet there was much hand clapping,
and throats grew sore with cheering.

But there was another figure in that naval parade, the person of one
also dear to the hearts of the people. It was the figure of Theodore
Roosevelt, dressed, not as a Rough Rider, but as a civilian, standing at
the rail of a steamer used by the New York State officials. When the
people saw and recognized that figure, the cheering was as wild as
ever.

"It is Roosevelt!" ran from mouth to mouth. "The hero of San Juan Hill!"

"Hurrah for the Rough Riders and their gallant leader!" came from
others. And the cheering was renewed.

In the evening there was a grand display of fireworks and illuminated
floats. The immense span of the Brooklyn Bridge was a mass of lights,
and contained the words "Welcome, Dewey" in lettering which covered
several hundred feet. All of the war-ships had their search-lights in
operation, and it can truthfully be said that for once the metropolis
was as light as day.

But all of this was as nothing compared with the land parade which
followed. Never before had the streets of New York been so jammed with
people. At many points it was impossible to move, yet the crowds were
good-natured and patriotic to the core. The parade started at Grant's
Tomb and ended at Washington Square, and was between five and six hours
in passing. Admiral Dewey rode in a carriage with Mayor Van Wyck, and
received another ovation. At the Triumphal Arch the Admiral reviewed
the parade, and here he was accorded additional honors.

In this parade Governor Roosevelt rode on horseback, in civilian dress.
As he came down the street, the immense crowds recognized him from afar,
and the hand clapping and cheering was tremendous, and lasted long after
he was out of sight.

"It's our own Teddy Roosevelt!" cried the more enthusiastic.

"Hurrah for the governor! Hurrah for the colonel of the Rough Riders!"

"Hurrah for the coming President!" said another. And he spoke better
than he knew.

This demonstration came straight from the people's heart, and it could
not help but affect Theodore Roosevelt. Sitting astride of his
dark-colored horse like a veteran, he bowed right and left. Next to
Dewey, he was easily the greatest figure in the parade.

On January 3, 1900, Governor Roosevelt sent his last annual message to
