
"I can stand it till I die!"

"I don't think it is worth while to stand it quite so long as that."

"I do! What right has the principal to deny us even a drop of water?"

"What right have we to stand out, and refuse to do our duty? Howe's
fellows started the water tanks, and--"

"We didn't do it!" interrupted Raymond, savagely. "I won't stand it."

Rushing out into the steerage, he went to the water jar, in one corner.
It was empty, though there was a breaker of water on deck for the use
of the Faithful, who were thirsty. He was mad, and ready for desperate
steps. He hastened to the mess-room of Howe, and entered just as that
worthy was taking a draught from the bottle he had filled at the tanks
the evening before.

"What's that?" demanded he.

"Water," replied Howe, good-naturedly.

"Give us a drink--will you? I'm almost choked," asked Raymond, glad to
see that there was still an alternative.

"No, I thank you," answered Howe, putting the stopper back into the
bottle. "We don't do the heavy jobs, and then provide for those who are
too cowardly to help us."

"We are in the same boat with you; and it isn't fair to let our fellows
suffer while you have water."

"You wouldn't go in with us. We have only a bottle apiece," pleaded
Howe.

Raymond appealed to others in the room, but all of them were of one
mind. The salt beef had created a tremendous thirst among those who had
eaten it, and all who had water made large draughts upon the supply.
The bottles had contained pickles, olives, ketchup, and other similar
articles, so that the water was not very palatable. In the course of
the forenoon, Raymond and his party stealthily attempted to obtain
possession of these bottles, but the runaways were too vigilant for
them; and before dinner the thirsty ones were exceedingly
uncomfortable, to say the least. They tried to conceal their condition
from the Faithful as much as possible, but they were all very nervous
and disquieted.

At one o'clock, after the regular dinner of roast beef and rice pudding
had been served to the Faithful, the tables were again prepared for the
rebels; but the bill of fare was corned beef and hard bread--not a drop
of water. Peaks and the head steward paced the unsteady floor, as they
had done at breakfast time. Raymond, whose tongue and lips were parched
with thirst, became desperate again, and attempted to force his way
into the kitchen. He was seized by the boatswain, and the more he
struggled, the more he was shaken up. He refused to behave himself, and
Peaks thrust him into the brig.




CHAPTER IX.

THE LAST OF THE MUTINEERS.


The gale continued to blow ugly and gusty during the day, until eight
bells in the afternoon. The fog hung heavy over the ocean, and the bell
was rung every five minutes, in accordance with the English Admiralty
instructions. The ship had been standing close-hauled to the
north-north-west since noon, when she had tacked, at the warning of the
fog signal, made at some light station on the coast of France, in the
vicinity of Cape de La Hague. For four hours she had been on her
present course, and was therefore approaching the coast of England
again. At the beginning of the first dog-watch, there were some signs
of a change of weather. The fog appeared to be lifting, and the wind
came in less violent gusts.

In the steerage, among the rebels, the most unalloyed misery prevailed.
The runaways had exhausted their supply of water under the pressure of
thirst caused by the salt provision, though they had not yet begun to
be very uncomfortable. Certainly they had, as yet, no thought of
yielding, but were rather studying up the means of obtaining a new
supply of water. Raymond's party were only waiting for the boatswain's
call to ask permission to join their shipmates on deck; but, most
provokingly, no call came. Their leader had been discharged from the
brig as soon as he ceased to be violent; for the principal did not wish
to punish any one for the mutiny, preferring to let it work its own
cure on the diet he had prescribed.

With the exception of the rebels, every one seemed to be particularly
jolly. The principal had explained his policy to them, and they were
entirely satisfied. All the evolutions of seamanship were performed
with remarkable precision even in the gale, demonstrating that the crew
had not lost their prestige, when the will was right. In the cabin,
even, the rough sea did not dampen the spirits of the passengers, who
had been, in a measure, accustomed to the rude action of the sea by
their voyage in the steamer and in the Josephine. The Grand Protectress
of the Order of the Faithful was full of life and spirits, and watched
with the deepest interest the progress of the rebellion in the
steerage.

In Raymond's party the suffering from thirst had become intolerable.
Lindsley's back had been broken early in the forenoon, but Raymond
declared that he would never yield--he would die first.

"What's the use?" demanded Lindsley. "We are whipped out, sold out,
played out, and used up. My tongue is as dry as a piece of
wash-leather."

"I don't like to give it up," replied Raymond. "It looks mean to back
out."

"Just look at it a moment. We are suffering for the sins of Howe's
fellows. They let off the water, saving a supply for themselves, and
our fellows are really the only ones who suffer for their deed. We are
sustaining them, even while they won't give us a drop of water to
moisten our lips. For one, I never will get into such a scrape again.
We have been fools, and whenever I see the runaways go one way, I'm
going the other."

"All hands, on deck, ahoy!" shouted the boatswain at the main hatch.

"That means me," said Lindsley, rushing to the ladder. "Come along,
Raymond. Howe and his fellows have been stingy and mean enough to be
left alone."

Most of the crew were on deck when the call was piped. Lindsley led the
way up the ladder, and Raymond followed him. The last argument of his
friend had evidently converted the latter, for, however much he
disliked to yield, it was not so bad as supporting the cause of such
fellows as Howe, who would not even give him a drink of water. And the
idea of enduring positive suffering for the evil deed of the runaways
was not pleasant. They had let the water out of the tanks, but Raymond
and his friends were the only ones who had thus far suffered in
consequence of the act. It was these reflections which absolutely drove
him upon deck, rather than any disposition to undo the wrong he had
done.

A lift of the fog had revealed the Bill of Portland, a narrow neck of
land projecting outside the channel from the English coast. The wind
was hauling to the northward, and the prospect of fair weather was very
good. The order was given to turn out one of the reefs in the topsails.
The appearance of the Raymond party was noticed by Mr. Lowington, and
even the passengers observed those who wore neither the white nor the
blue ribbon. As soon as the rebels reached the deck, they discovered
the water breaker in the waist. They charged upon it with a fury which
required the interference of an officer; but half a pint was served out
to each of them before they were sent aloft.

The reefs were turned out, and the ship came about on the other tack.
Nothing had been seen of the Josephine since the fog settled down upon
the squadron the night before; but the principal had no fears in regard
to her safety. Fog-horns, guns, and bells warn the voyager of his
approach to any of the perils of the shore; and the experienced
navigator can interpret these signals so as to avoid all danger.

"South-west by west, half west," said Paul Kendall, who was the acting
sailing-master on duty, giving out the course to the quarter-master in
charge of the wheel.

"South-west by west, half west," repeated the latter.

"Where will that take us?" asked Grace Arbuckle, who watched everything
that was said and done with deep interest.

"That course will take the ship to a point off Ushant, which is an
island near the coast of France, not far from Brest," replied Paul, who
took especial pleasure in explaining to her the working of the vessel.

"How far is it from here?"

"From the Bill of Portland, which is the land you see astern of us, the
distance to Ushant is one hundred and fifty-seven miles."

"How long will it take us to go there?"

"That will depend entirely upon the wind," laughed Paul. "We are
logging ten knots just now, which would bring us off Ushant about ten
o'clock to-morrow forenoon. But the wind is going down, and we may not
get there till to-morrow night."

"Well, I'm in no hurry; and I rather hope it will not blow very hard,"
added Grace.

"That's just my wish. If the water only holds out, I don't care."

"But there is something more for the Grand Protectress to do," said
Grace.

"A dozen more who are to take the first degree; but I do not know
whether they will be willing to be initiated."

"Why not?"

"Raymond, who is generally a good fellow, has been very ugly. Perhaps
he feels better now he has quenched his thirst."

"May I speak to him?"

"Certainly, if you wish to do so."

Paul conducted the Grand Protectress to the waist, where the head
steward was giving the Raymond party another half pint of water apiece.
They were very thirsty, and, as boys understand the word, they had
doubtless suffered a great deal for the want of water. As they had
returned to their duty, and yielded the point, Mr. Lowington had
directed that they should be frequently supplied, until they were
satisfied. The general opinion was, that they had already been severely
punished, not only by the thirst they had endured, augmented as it was
by their diet of salt beef and hard bread, but in the mortification
they had experienced at the failure of their scheme. The latter
punishment was quite as severe as the former.

"Miss Arbuckle wishes to speak to you, Raymond," said Paul, addressing
the discomfited leader of the mild party.

"What for?" demanded he.

"She will explain for herself."

"Does she want to preach to me?"

"I think not. Of course you are not compelled to see her, if you don't
wish to do so," added Paul, who could not see why any one should not
wish to converse with Grace.

"I will hear what she has to say," said Raymond, with a condescension
which Paul did not like.

The commodore presented the delinquent to the young lady. Raymond
touched his cap, and bowed politely.

"I am very glad to see you on deck, Mr. Raymond, for I have wished to
make your acquaintance since last evening," Grace began.

"Thank you. I was not aware that I had any claims upon your
consideration."

"I see you wear no ribbon. Shall I furnish you with one?"

"I don't know what it is for?" said Raymond, glancing at the white
ribbon on the commodore's breast. "What does it mean?"

"I can't tell you anything about it just yet. I suppose you are very
sorry for what you have done."

"I feel better since I have had a drink of water," replied Raymond,
good-naturedly; and there was no doubt that he spoke the literal truth.

"I regret that it was necessary to deprive you of water."

"It was not my fault. I had nothing to do with emptying the water
tanks," pleaded the culprit. "It was the runaways who did that."

"Then you were in bad company."

"I think so myself," answered Raymond, candidly, for he was still under
the influence of the clinching argument which had induced him to come
on deck.

At this point the conversation was interrupted by the call of the
principal, who summoned the Raymond party into his presence on the
quarter-deck.

"Are you satisfied?" asked Mr. Lowington, with a pleasant smile on his
face, when the rebels had assembled before him.

"No, sir," replied Raymond, promptly, and before any other of the party
could give a different answer.

"Why did you come on deck, then?"

"We couldn't stand it any longer without water."

"Is that the reason why you came on deck?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then you may return to your former diet till you are satisfied," added
the principal, pleasantly.

"We don't wish to do that, sir."

"Didn't I understand you to say that you were not satisfied."

"I am not, sir," continued Raymond, stoutly. "I don't think it was fair
to--"

"Stop!" interposed the principal, rather sharply. "I do not purpose to
listen to your grievances. You have undertaken to redress them
yourselves, and I see no reason why you should not persevere till you
are satisfied."

"We can't live on salt junk and hard bread without any water, sir."

"Can't you, indeed? You should have thought of that before you joined
hands with those who started the water out of the tanks."

"We did not even know that they meant to start the water, or,
afterwards, that they had done it, till the cook said so. We are not
responsible for what they did."

"Perhaps not; yet you were in the hold, in full fellowship with them.
But I do not intend to argue the matter with you."

"We are ready to return to our duty, sir, whether we are satisfied or
not," added Raymond.

"O, you are?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, as long as you are willing to do your duty, I suppose it does
not matter whether you are satisfied or not."

Raymond made no reply, and could not help wondering that he had been so
simple as to believe the principal would ask an explanation of
mutineers.

"Are you willing to obey all orders?" continued Mr. Lowington.

"Yes, sir."

"And the others?"

"Yes, sir," replied Raymond's followers.

"Will you refrain from all communication with those in the steerage who
still refuse to do duty?"

"I will," answered Raymond, who had before made up his mind to do this.

"Especially you will not inform them of anything which takes place on
deck, or give them the benefit of any explanation you may hear," said
the principal. "Those who assent to these terms will walk over to
windward."

The party, who could not help wondering at this singular treatment of
what they regarded as a very difficult matter, walked squarely up to
the weather-rail of the ship, and halted there. The remarks of the
principal, and the pledge he exacted, seemed to explain the strange
conduct of the white and the blue ribbon bands in the steerage. No one
had been able to ascertain definitely what those badges meant.

"Very well. I am satisfied, if you are not," said Mr. Lowington,
mildly. "You deserve punishment, but it shall depend upon your future
conduct whether you receive it or not. You will go forward."

When the party reached the waist, they were confronted by Grace and
Paul.

"You have promised to be faithful--have you not?" asked she.

"Yes; but I'm not satisfied," replied the leader.

"Then I confer upon you the first degree of the Order of the Faithful,"
added Grace. "Its emblem is a yellow ribbon;" and she pinned the
decoration upon Raymond's breast.

"What does it mean?" he asked.

She explained its meaning, and then initiated his companions.

"How happens it that we have yellow ribbon while others have white or
blue ones?" asked Lindsley.

"Because you have taken only the first degree, being the last ones to
come. If you do well, and are faithful, you shall be raised to the
second, and then to the third degree," replied Grace, with a vivacity
which was not at all impaired by the laughter of the initiates, who, as
others before them had, regarded the order as a pleasant joke.

"When you have proved yourselves worthy, you will be advanced to the
second degree by the Grand Protectress," added Paul. "The motto of the
concern is, '_Vous ne pouvez pas faire un sifflet de la queue d'un
cochon_;' and I think you have fully proved the truth of the saying.
The meaning of the sentence is one of the secrets of the order. Do you
promise not to reveal it?"

"I do, for one," laughed Lindsley. "I haven't the least idea myself
what it means."

"Nor I," added all the others."

