calls you?" sighed Fanny, bearing Polly away to be cuddled.

Every one echoed the exclamation next day; and many loving eyes followed
the little figure in the drab frock as it went quietly about, doing for
the last time the small services which would help to make its absence
keenly felt. Polly was to go directly after an early dinner, and having
packed her trunk, all but one tray, she was told to go and take a run
while grandma finished. Polly suspected that some pleasant surprise
was going to be put in; for Fan did n't offer to go with her, Maud kept
dodging about with something under her apron, and Tom had just whisked
into his mother's room in a mysterious manner. So Polly took the hint
and went away, rejoicing in the thought of the unknown treasures she was
to carry home.

Mr. Shaw had not said he should come home so early, but Polly thought he
might, and went to meet him. Mr. Shaw did n't expect to see Polly, for
he had left her very busy, and now a light snow was falling; but, as he
turned into the mall there was the round hat, and under it the bright
face, looking all the rosier for being powdered with snow-flakes, as
Polly came running to meet him.

"There won't be any one to help the old gentleman safely home
to-morrow," he said, as Polly took his hand in both hers with an
affectionate squeeze.

"Yes, there will; see if there is n't," cried Polly, nodding and
smiling, for Fan had confided to her that she meant to try it after her
friend had gone.

"I'm glad of it. But, my dear, I want you to promise that you will
come and make us a visit every winter, a good long one," said Mr. Shaw,
patting the blue mittens folded round his hand.

"If they can spare me from home, I'd love to come dearly."

"They must lend you for a little while, because you do us all good, and
we need you."

"Do I? I don't see how; but I'm glad to hear you say so," cried Polly,
much touched.

"I can't tell you how, exactly; but you brought something into my house
that makes it warmer and pleasanter, and won't quite vanish, I hope,
when you go away, my child."

Polly had never heard Mr. Shaw speak like that before, and did n't know
what to say, she felt so proud and happy at this proof of the truth of
her mother's words, when she said that "even a little girl could exert
an influence, and do some good in this big, busy world." She only gave
her friend a grateful look sweeter than any words, and they went on
together, hand in hand, through the "soft-falling snow."

If Polly could have seen what went into that top tray, she would have
been entirely overcome; for Fanny had told grandma about the poor little
presents she had once laughed at, and they had all laid their heads
together to provide something really fine and appropriate for every
member of the Milton family. Such a mine of riches! and so much
good-will, affection, and kindly forethought was packed away in the
tempting bundles, that no one could feel offended, but would find an
unusual charm about the pretty gifts that made them doubly welcome. I
only know that if Polly had suspected that a little watch was ticking
away in a little case, with her name on it, inside that trunk, she never
could have left it locked as grandma advised, or have eaten her dinner
so quietly. As it was, her heart was very full, and the tears rose to
her eyes more than once, everyone was so kind, and so sorry to have her
go.

Tom did n't need any urging to play escort now; and both Fan and Maud
insisted on going too. Mrs. Shaw forgot her nerves, and put up some
ginger-bread with her own hands; Mr. Shaw kissed Polly as if she had
been his dearest daughter; and grandma held her close, whispering in a
tremulous tone, "My little comfort, come again soon"; while Katy waved
her apron from the nursery window, crying, as they drove, away, "The
saints bless ye, Miss Polly, dear, and sind ye the best of lucks!"

But the crowning joke of all was Tom's good-by, for, when Polly was
fairly settled in the car, the last "All aboard!" uttered, and the train
in motion, Tom suddenly produced a knobby little bundle, and thrusting
it in at the window, while he hung on in some breakneck fashion, said,
with a droll mixture of fun and feeling in his face, "It's horrid;
but you wanted it, so I put it in to make you laugh. Good-by, Polly;
good-by, good-by!"

The last adieu was a trifle husky, and Tom vanished as it was uttered,
leaving Polly to laugh over his parting souvenir till the tears ran down
her cheeks. It was a paper bag of peanuts, and poked down at the very
bottom a photograph of Tom. It was "horrid," for he looked as if taken
by a flash of lightning, so black, wild, and staring was it; but Polly
liked it, and whenever she felt a little pensive at parting with her
friends, she took a peanut, or a peep at Tom's funny picture, which made
her merry again.

So the short journey came blithely to an end, and in the twilight she
saw a group of loving faces at the door of a humble little house, which
was more beautiful than any palace in her eyes, for it was home.




CHAPTER VIII. SIX YEARS AFTERWARD


"WHAT do you think Polly is going to do this winter?" exclaimed Fanny,
looking up from the letter she had been eagerly reading.

"Going to deliver lectures on Woman's Rights," said the young gentleman
who was carefully examining his luxuriant crop of decidedly auburn hair,
as he lounged with both elbows on the chimney-piece.

"Going to set her cap for some young minister and marry him in the
spring," added Mrs. Shaw, whose mind ran a good deal upon match-making
just now.

"I think she is going to stay at home, and do all the work,'cause
servants cost so much; it would be just like her," observed Maud, who
could pronounce the letter R now.

"It's my opinion she is going to open a school, or something of that
sort, to help those brothers of hers along," said Mr. Shaw, who had put
down his paper at the sound of Polly's name.

"Every one of you wrong, though papa comes nearest the truth," cried
Fanny; "she is going to give music lessons, and support herself, so that
Will may go to college. He is the studious one, and Polly is very proud
of him. Ned, the other brother, has a business talent, and don't care
for books, so he has gone out West, and will make his own way anywhere.
Polly says she is n't needed at home now, the family is so small, and
Kitty can take her place nicely; so she is actually going to earn her
own living, and hand over her share of the family income to Will. What a
martyr that girl does make of herself," and Fanny looked as solemn as if
Polly had proposed some awful self-sacrifice.

"She is a sensible, brave-hearted girl, and I respect her for doing it,"
said Mr. Shaw, emphatically. "One never knows what may happen, and it
does no harm for young people to learn to be independent."

"If she is as pretty as she was last time I saw her, she'll get pupils
fast enough. I would n't mind taking lessons myself," was the gracious
observation of Shaw, Jr., as he turned from the mirror, with the
soothing certainty that his objectionable hair actually was growing
darker.

"She would n't take you at any price," said Fanny, remembering Polly's
look of disappointment and disapproval when she came on her last visit
and found him an unmistakable dandy.

"You just wait and see," was the placid reply.

"If Polly does carry out her plan, I wish Maud to take lessons of her;
Fanny can do as she likes, but it would please me very much to have one
of my girls sing as Polly sings. It suits old people better than your
opera things, and mother used to enjoy it so much."

As he spoke, Mr. Shaw's eye turned toward the corner of the fire where
grandma used to sit. The easy-chair was empty now, the kind old face was
gone, and nothing but a very tender memory remained.

"I'd like to learn, papa, and Polly is a splendid teacher, I know; she
's always so patient, and makes everything so pleasant. I do hope she
will get scholars enough to begin right away," said Maud.

"When is she coming?" asked Mrs. Shaw, quite willing to help Polly,
but privately resolving that Maud should be finished off by the most
fashionable master in the city.

"She does n't say. She thanks me for asking her here, as usual, but says
she shall go right to work and had better begin with her own little room
at once. Won't it seem strange to have Polly in town, and yet not with
us?"

"We'll get her somehow. The little room will cost something, and she
can stay with us just as well as not, even if she does teach. Tell her I
say so," said Mr. Shaw.

"She won't come, I know; for if she undertakes to be independent, she
'll do it in the most thorough manner," answered Fanny, and Mrs. Shaw
sincerely hoped she would. It was all very well to patronize the little
music-teacher, but it was not so pleasant to have her settled in the
family.

"I shall do what I can for her among my friends, and I dare say she will
get on very well with young pupils to begin with. If she starts right,
puts her terms high enough, and gets a few good names to give her the
entre into our first families, I don't doubt she will do nicely, for I
must say Polly has the manners of a lady," observed Mrs. Shaw.

"She's a mighty taking little body, and I'm glad she's to be in town,
though I'd like it better if she did n't bother about teaching, but
just stayed here and enjoyed herself," said Tom, lazily.

"I've no doubt she would feel highly honored to be allowed to devote
her time to your amusement; but she can't afford expensive luxuries, and
she don't approve of flirting, so you will have to let her go her own
way, and refresh herself with such glimpses of you as her engagements
permit," answered Fanny, in the sarcastic tone which was becoming
habitual to her.

"You are getting to be a regular old maid, Fan; as sharp as a lemon, and
twice as sour," returned Tom, looking down at her with an air of calm
superiority.

"Do be quiet, children; you know I can't bear anything like contention.
Maud, give me my Shetland shawl, and put a cushion at my back."

As Maud obeyed her mother, with a reproving look at her erring brother
and sister, a pause followed, for which every one seemed grateful. They
were sitting about the fire after dinner, and all looked as if a little
sunshine would do them good. It had been a dull November day, but all of
a sudden the clouds lifted, and a bright ray shot into the room. Every
one turned involuntarily to welcome it, and every one cried out, "Why,
Polly!" for there on the threshold stood a bright-faced girl, smiling as
if there was no such thing as November weather in the world.

"You dear thing, when did you come?" cried Fanny, kissing both the
blooming checks with real affection, while the rest hovered near,
waiting for a chance.

"I came yesterday, and have been getting my nest in order; but I could
n't keep away any longer, so I ran up to say 'How do you do?'" answered
Polly, in the cheery voice that did one's heart good to hear.

"My Polly always brings the sunshine with her," and Mr. Shaw held out
his hands to his little friend, for she was his favorite still.

It was good to see her put both arms about his neck, and give him a
tender kiss, that said a great deal, for grandma had died since Polly
met him last and she longed to comfort him, seeing how gray and old he
had grown.

If Tom had had any thoughts of following his father's example, something
in Polly's manner made him change his mind, and shake hands with a
hearty "I'm very glad to see you, Polly," adding to himself, as he
looked at the face in the modest little bonnet: "Prettier than ever, by
Jove!"

There was something more than mere prettiness in Polly's face, though
Tom had not learned to see it yet. The blue eyes were clear and steady,
the fresh mouth frank and sweet, the white chin was a very firm one in
spite of the dimple, and the smooth forehead under the little curls
had a broad, benevolent arch; while all about the face were those
unmistakable lines and curves which can make even a plain countenance
comely, by breathing into it the beauty of a lovely character. Polly had
grown up, but she had no more style now than in the days of the round
hat and rough coat, for she was all in gray, like a young Quakeress,
with no ornament but a blue bow at the throat and another in the hair.
Yet the plain suit became her excellently, and one never thought of the
dress, looking at the active figure that wore it, for the freedom of her
childhood gave to Polly that good gift, health, and every movement was
full of the vigor, grace, and ease, which nothing else can so surely
bestow. A happy soul in a healthy body is a rare sight in these days,
when doctors flourish and every one is ill, and this pleasant union was
the charm which Polly possessed without knowing it.

"It does seem so good to have you here again," said Maud, cuddling
Polly's cold hand, as she sat at her feet, when she was fairly
established between Fanny and Mr. Shaw, while Tom leaned on the back of
his mother's chair, and enjoyed the prospect.

"How do you get on? When do you begin? Where is your nest? Now tell all
about it," began Fanny, who was full of curiosity about the new plan.

"I shall get on very well, I think, for I've got twelve scholars to
begin with, all able to pay a good price, and I shall give my first
lesson on Monday."

"Don't you dread it?" asked Fanny.

"Not much; why should I?" answered Polly, stoutly.

"Well, I don't know; it's a new thing, and must be a little bit hard at
first," stammered Fanny, not liking to say that working for one's living
seemed a dreadful hardship to her.

"It will be tiresome, of course, but I shall get used to it; I shall
like the exercise, and the new people and places I must see will amuse
me. Then the independence will be delightful, and if I can save a little
to help Kitty along with, that will be best of all."

Polly's face shone as if the prospect was full of pleasure instead of
work, and the hearty good will with which she undertook the new task,
seemed to dignify her humble hopes and plans, and make them interesting
in the sight of others.

"Who have you got for pupils?" asked Mrs. Shaw, forgetting her nerves
for a minute.

Polly named her list, and took a secret satisfaction in seeing the
impression which certain names made upon her hearers.

"How in the world did you get the Davenports and the Greys, my dear?"
said Mrs. Shaw, sitting erect in her surprise.

"Mrs. Davenport and mother are relations, you know."

"You never told us that before!" "The Davenports have been away some
years, and I forgot all about them. But when I was making my plan, I
knew I must have a good name or two to set me going, so I just wrote
and asked Mrs. D. if she would help me. She came and saw us and was very
kind, and has got these pupils for me, like a dear, good woman as she
is."

"Where did you learn so much worldly wisdom, Polly?" asked Mr. Shaw,
as his wife fell back in her chair, and took out her salts, as if this
discovery had been too much for her.

"I learnt it here, sir," answered Polly, laughing. "I used to think
patronage and things of that sort very disagreeable and not worth
having, but I've got wiser, and to a certain extent I'm glad to use
whatever advantages I have in my power, if they can be honestly got."

"Why did n't you let us help you in the beginning? We should have been
very glad to, I'm sure," put in Mrs. Shaw, who quite burned to be known
as a joint patroness with Mrs. Davenport.

"I know you would, but you have all been so kind to me I did n't want
to trouble you with my little plans till the first steps were taken.
Besides, I did n't know as you would like to recommend me as a teacher,
though you like me well enough as plain Polly."

"My dear, of course I would, and we want you to take Maud at once,
and teach her your sweet songs. She has a fine voice, and is really
suffering for a teacher."

A slight smile passed over Polly's face as she returned her thanks for
the new pupil, for she remembered a time when Mrs. Shaw considered her
"sweet songs" quite unfit for a fashionable young lady's repertoire.
"Where is your room?" asked Maud.

"My old friend Miss Mills has taken me in, and I am nicely settled.
Mother did n't like the idea of my going to a strange boarding-house,
so Miss Mills kindly made a place for me. You know she lets her rooms
without board, but she is going to give me my dinners, and I'm to get
my own breakfast and tea, quite independently. I like that way, and it
's very little trouble, my habits are so simple; a bowl of bread and
milk night and morning, with baked apples or something of that sort, is
all I want, and I can have it when I like."

"Is your room comfortably furnished? Can't we lend you anything, my
dear? An easy-chair now, or a little couch, so necessary when one comes
in tired," said Mrs. Shaw, taking unusual interest in the affair.

"Thank you, but I don't need anything, for I brought all sorts of home
comforts with me. Oh, Fan, you ought to have seen my triumphal entry
into the city, sitting among my goods and chattels, in a farmer's cart."
Polly's laugh was so infectious that every one smiled and forgot to be
shocked at her performance. "Yes," she added, "I kept wishing I could
meet you, just to see your horrified face when you saw me sitting on
my little sofa, with boxes and bundles all round me, a bird-cage on one
side, a fishing basket, with a kitten's head popping in and out of the
hole, on the other side, and jolly old Mr. Brown, in his blue frock,
perched on a keg of apples in front. It was a lovely bright day, and I
enjoyed the ride immensely, for we had all sorts of adventures."

"Oh, tell about it," begged Maud, when the general laugh at Polly's
picture had subsided.

"Well, in the first place, we forgot my ivy, and Kitty came running
after me, with it. Then we started again, but were soon stopped by a
great shouting, and there was Will racing down the hill, waving a pillow
in one hand and a squash pie in the other. How we did laugh when he
came up and explained that our neighbor, old Mrs. Dodd, had sent in a
hop-pillow for me, in case of headache, and a pie to begin housekeeping
with. She seemed so disappointed at being too late that Will promised
to get them to me, if he ran all the way to town. The pillow was easily
disposed of, but that pie! I do believe it was stowed in every part of
the wagon, and never staid anywhere. I found it in my lap, then on the
floor, next, upside down among the books, then just on the point
of coasting off a trunk into the road, and at last it landed in my
rocking-chair. Such a remarkable pie as it was, too, for in spite of all
its wanderings, it never got spilt or broken, and we finally ate it for
lunch, in order to be left in peace. Next, my kitty got away, and I
had a chase over walls and brooks before I got her, while Mr. Brown
sat shaking with fun, to see me run. We finished off by having the
book-shelves tumble on our heads as we went down a hill, and losing
my chair off behind, as we went up a hill. A shout made us pause, and,
looking back, there was the poor little chair rocking all by itself in
the middle of the road, while a small boy sat on the fence and whooped.
It was great fun, I do assure you."

Polly had run on in her lively way, not because she thought her
adventures amounted to much, but from a wish to cheer up her friends,
who had struck her as looking rather dull and out of sorts, especially
Mr. Shaw; and when she saw him lean back in his chair with the old
hearty laugh, she was satisfied, and blessed the unlucky pie for amusing
him.

