All agreed to let it be so, and when the bits were ready drew in turn.
This time fate was evidently on Merry's side, and no one grumbled when
she showed the longest paper.

"Go and dress, then come back, and we'll plan how we are to be placed
before we call up the boys," commanded Jill, who was manager, since she
could be nothing else.

The girls retired to the bedroom and began to "rig up," as they called
it; but discontent still lurked among them, and showed itself in sharp
words, envious looks, and disobliging acts.

"Am I to have the white silk and the feather?" asked Merry, delighted
with the silvery shimmer of the one and the graceful droop of the other,
though both were rather shabby.

"You can use your own dress. I don't see why you should have
everything," answered Susy, who was at the mirror, putting a wreath of
scarlet flowers on her red head, bound to be gay since she could not be
pretty.

"I think I'd better keep the plume, as I haven't anything else that is
nice, and I'm afraid Emma wouldn't like me to lend it," added Annette,
who was disappointed that Mabel was not to be the Beauty.

"_I_ don't intend to act at all!" declared Mabel, beginning to braid up
her hair with a jerk, out of humor with the whole affair.

"_I_ think you are a set of cross, selfish girls to back out and keep
your nice things just because you can't _all_ have the best part.
I'm ashamed of you!" scolded Molly, standing by Merry, who was sadly
surveying her mother's old purple silk, which looked like brown in the
evening.

"I'm going to have Miss Delano's red brocade for the Queen, and I shall
ask her for the yellow-satin dress for Merry when I go to get mine, and
tell her how mean you are," said Juliet, frowning under her gilt-paper
crown as she swept about in a red table-cloth for train till the brocade
arrived.

"Perhaps you'd like to have Mabel cut her hair off, so Merry can have
that, too?" cried Susy, with whom hair was a tender point.

"Light hair isn't wanted, so Ju will have to give hers, or you'd better
borrow Miss Bat's frisette," added Mabel, with a scornful laugh.

"I just wish Miss Bat was here to give you girls a good shaking. Do let
someone else have a chance at the glass, you peacock!" exclaimed Molly
Loo, pushing Susy aside to arrange her own blue turban, out of which she
plucked the pink pompon to give Merry.

"Don't quarrel about me. I shall do well enough, and the scarlet shawl
will hide my ugly dress," said Merry, from the corner, where she sat
waiting for her turn at the mirror.

As she spoke of the shawl her eye went in search of it, and something
that she saw in the other room put her own disappointment out of her
head. Jill lay there all alone, rather tired with the lively chatter,
and the effort it cost her not to repine at being shut out from the
great delight of dressing up and acting.

Her eyes were closed, her net was off, and all the pretty black curls
lay about her shoulders as one hand idly pulled them out, while the
other rested on the red shawl, as if she loved its glowing color and
soft texture. She was humming to herself the little song of the dove and
the donjon, and something in the plaintive voice, the solitary figure,
went straight to Merry's gentle heart.

"Poor Jilly can't have any of the fun," was the first thought; then came
a second, that made Merry start and smile, and in a minute whisper
so that all but Jill could hear her, "Girls, I'm not going to be the
Princess. But I've thought of a splendid one!"

"Who?" asked the rest, staring at one another, much surprised by this
sudden announcement.

"Hush! Speak low, or you will spoil it all. Look in the Bird Room, and
tell me if that isn't a prettier Princess than I could make?"

They all looked, but no one spoke, and Merry added, with sweet
eagerness, "It is the only thing poor Jill can be, and it would make
her so happy; Jack would like it, and it would please every one, I know.
Perhaps she will never walk again, so we ought to be very good to her,
poor dear."

The last words, whispered with a little quiver in the voice, settled
the matter better than hours of talking, for girls are tender-hearted
creatures, and not one of these but would have gladly given all the
pretty things she owned to see Jill dancing about well and strong again.
Like a ray of sunshine the kind thought touched and brightened every
face; envy, impatience, vanity, and discontent flew away like imps at
the coming of the good fairy, and with one accord they all cried,--

"It will be lovely; let us go and tell her!"

Forgetting their own adornment, out they trooped after Merry, who ran
to the sofa, saying, with a smile which was reflected in all the other
faces, "Jill, dear, we have chosen another Princess, and I know you'll
like her."

"Who is it?" asked Jill, languidly, opening her eyes without the least
suspicion of the truth.

"I'll show you;" and taking the cherished veil from her own head, Merry
dropped it like a soft cloud over Jill; Annette added the long plume,
Susy laid the white silk dress about her, while Juliet and Mabel lifted
the scarlet shawl to spread it over the foot of the sofa, and Molly tore
the last ornament from her turban, a silver star, to shine on Jill's
breast. Then they all took hands and danced round the couch, singing, as
they laughed at her astonishment, "There she is! There she is! Princess
Jill as fine as you please!

"Do you really mean it? But can I? Is it fair? How sweet of you! Come
here and let me hug you all!" cried Jill, in a rapture at the surprise,
and the pretty way in which it was done.

The grand scene on the Twenty-second was very fine, indeed; but the
little tableau of that minute was infinitely better, though no one saw
it, as Jill tried to gather them all in her arms, for that nosegay of
girlish faces was the sweeter, because each one had sacrificed her own
little vanity to please a friend, and her joy was reflected in the eyes
that sparkled round the happy Princess.

"Oh, you dear, kind things, to think of me and give me all your best
clothes! I never shall forget it, and I'll do anything for you. Yes!
I'll write and ask Mrs. Piper to lend us her ermine cloak for the king.
See if I don't!"

Shrieks of delight hailed this noble offer, for no one had dared to
borrow the much-coveted mantle, but all agreed that the old lady would
not refuse Jill. It was astonishing how smoothly everything went
after this, for each was eager to help, admire, and suggest, in the
friendliest way; and when all were dressed, the boys found a party
of very gay ladies waiting for them round the couch, where lay the
brightest little Princess ever seen.

"Oh, Jack, I'm to act! Wasn't it dear of the girls to choose me? Don't
they look lovely? Aren't you glad?" cried Jill, as the lads stared and
the lasses blushed and smiled, well pleased at the frank admiration the
boyish faces showed.

"I guess I am! You are a set of trumps, and we'll give you a first-class
spread after the play to pay for it. Won't we, fellows?" answered
Jack, much gratified, and feeling that now he could act his own part
capitally.

"We will. It was a handsome thing to do, and we think well of you for
it. Hey, Gus?" and Frank nodded approvingly at all, though he looked
only at Annette.

"As king of this crowd, I call it to order," said Gus, retiring to the
throne, where Juliet sat laughing in her red table-cloth.

"We'll have 'The Fair One with Golden Locks' next time; I promise you
that," whispered Ed to Mabel, whose shining hair streamed over her blue
dress like a mantle of gold-colored silk.

"Girls are pretty nice things, aren't they? Kind of 'em to take Jill
in. Don't Molly look fine, though?" and Grif's black eyes twinkled as he
planned to pin her skirts to Merry's at the first opportunity.

"Susy looks as gay as a feather-duster. I like her. She never snubs a
fellow," said Joe, much impressed with the splendor of the court ladies.

The boys' costumes were not yet ready, but they posed well, and all had
a merry time, ending with a game of blind-man's-buff, in which every one
caught the right person in the most singular way, and all agreed as they
went home in the moonlight that it had been an unusually jolly meeting.

So the fairy play woke the sleeping beauty that lies in all of us, and
makes us lovely when we rouse it with a kiss of unselfish good-will,
for, though the girls did not know it then, they had adorned themselves
with pearls more precious than the waxen ones they decked their Princess
in.




Chapter XI. "Down Brakes"


The greatest people have their weak points, and the best-behaved boys
now and then yield to temptation and get into trouble, as everybody
knows. Frank was considered a remarkably well-bred and proper lad, and
rather prided himself on his good reputation, for he never got into
scrapes like the other fellows. Well, hardly ever, for we must confess
that at rare intervals his besetting sin overcame his prudence, and he
proved himself an erring, human boy. Steam-engines had been his idols
for years, and they alone could lure him from the path of virtue. Once,
in trying to investigate the mechanism of a toy specimen, which had its
little boiler and ran about whistling and puffing in the most delightful
way, he nearly set the house afire by the sparks that dropped on the
straw carpet. Another time, in trying experiments with the kitchen
tea-kettle, he blew himself up, and the scars of that explosion he still
carried on his hands.

He was long past such childish amusements now, but his favorite haunt
was the engine-house of the new railroad, where he observed the habits
of his pets with never-failing interest, and cultivated the good-will
of stokers and brakemen till they allowed him many liberties, and were
rather flattered by the admiration expressed for their iron horses by a
young gentleman who liked them better even than his Greek and Latin.

There was not much business doing on this road as yet, and the two
cars of the passenger-trains were often nearly empty, though full
freight-trains rolled from the factory to the main road, of which this
was only a branch. So things went on in a leisurely manner, which gave
Frank many opportunities of pursuing his favorite pastime. He soon knew
all about No. 11, his pet engine, and had several rides on it with Bill,
the engineer, so that he felt at home there, and privately resolved that
when he was a rich man he would have a road of his own, and run trains
as often as he liked.

Gus took less interest than his friend in the study of steam, but
usually accompanied him when he went over after school to disport
himself in the engine-house, interview the stoker, or see if there was
anything new in the way of brakes.

One afternoon they found No. 11 on the side-track, puffing away as if
enjoying a quiet smoke before starting. No cars were attached, and no
driver was to be seen, for Bill was off with the other men behind the
station-house, helping the expressman, whose horse had backed down a
bank and upset the wagon.

"Good chance for a look at the old lady," said Frank, speaking of the
engine as Bill did, and jumping aboard with great satisfaction, followed
by Gus.

"I'd give ten dollars if I could run her up to the bend and back," he
added, fondly touching the bright brass knobs and glancing at the fire
with a critical eye.

"You couldn't do it alone," answered Gus, sitting down on the grimy
little perch, willing to indulge his mate's amiable weakness.

"Give me leave to try? Steam is up, and I could do it as easy as not;"
and Frank put his hand on the throttle-valve, as if daring Gus to give
the word.

"Fire up and make her hum!" laughed Gus, quoting Bill's frequent order
to his mate, but with no idea of being obeyed.

"All right; I'll just roll her up to the switch and back again.
I've often done it with Bill;" and Frank cautiously opened the
throttle-valve, threw back the lever, and the great thing moved with a
throb and a puff.

"Steady, old fellow, or you'll come to grief. Here, don't open that!"
shouted Gus, for just at that moment Joe appeared at the switch, looking
ready for mischief.

"Wish he would; no train for twenty minutes, and we could run up to
the bend as well as not," said Frank, getting excited with the sense of
power, as the monster obeyed his hand so entirely that it was impossible
to resist prolonging the delight.

"By George, he has! Stop her! Back her! Hold on, Frank!" cried Gus, as
Joe, only catching the words "Open that!" obeyed, without the least idea
that they would dare to leave the siding.

But they did, for Frank rather lost his head for a minute, and out upon
the main track rolled No. 11 as quietly as a well-trained horse taking a
familiar road.

"Now you've done it! I'll give you a good thrashing when I get back!"
roared Gus, shaking his fist at Joe, who stood staring, half-pleased,
half-scared, at what he had done.

"Are you really going to try it?" asked Gus, as they glided on with
increasing speed, and he, too, felt the charm of such a novel adventure,
though the consequences bid fair to be serious.

"Yes, I am," answered Frank, with the grim look he always wore when his
strong will got the upper hand. "Bill will give it to us, any way, so we
may as well have our fun out. If you are afraid, I'll slow down and you
can jump off," and his brown eyes sparkled with the double delight of
getting his heart's desire and astonishing his friend at the same time
by his skill and coolness.

"Go ahead. I'll jump when you do;" and Gus calmly sat down again,
bound in honor to stand by his mate till the smash came, though rather
dismayed at the audacity of the prank.

"Don't you call this just splendid?" exclaimed Frank, as they rolled
along over the crossing, past the bridge, toward the curve, a mile from
the station.

"Not bad. They are yelling like mad after us. Better go back, if you
can," said Gus, who was anxiously peering out, and, in spite of his
efforts to seem at ease, not enjoying the trip a particle.

"Let them yell. I started to go to the curve, and I'll do it if it costs
me a hundred dollars. No danger; there's no train under twenty minutes,
I tell you," and Frank pulled out his watch. But the sun was in his
eyes, and he did not see clearly, or he would have discovered that it
was later than he thought.

On they went, and were just rounding the bend when a shrill whistle in
front startled both boys, and drove the color out of their cheeks.

"It's the factory train!" cried Gus, in a husky tone, as he sprang to
his feet.

"No; it's the five-forty on the other road," answered Frank, with a
queer thrill all through him at the thought of what might happen if it
was not. Both looked straight ahead as the last tree glided by, and the
long track lay before them, with the freight train slowly coming down.
For an instant, the boys stood as if paralyzed.

"Jump!" said Gus, looking at the steep bank on one side and the river on
the other, undecided which to try.

"Sit still!" commanded Frank, collecting his wits, as he gave a warning
whistle to retard the on-coming train, while he reversed the engine and
went back faster than he came.

A crowd of angry men was waiting for them, and Bill stood at the open
switch in a towering passion as No. 11 returned to her place unharmed,
but bearing two pale and frightened boys, who stepped slowly and
silently down, without a word to say for themselves, while the freight
train rumbled by on the main track.

Frank and Gus never had a very clear idea as to what occurred during the
next few minutes, but vaguely remembered being well shaken, sworn at,
questioned, threatened with direful penalties, and finally ordered off
the premises forever by the wrathful depot-master. Joe was nowhere to be
seen, and as the two culprits walked away, trying to go steadily, while
their heads spun round, and all the strength seemed to have departed
from their legs, Frank said, in an exhausted tone,--

"Come down to the boat-house and rest a minute."

Both were glad to get out of sight, and dropped upon the steps red,
rumpled, and breathless, after the late exciting scene. Gus generously
forebore to speak, though he felt that he was the least to blame;
and Frank, after eating a bit of snow to moisten his dry lips, said,
handsomely,--

"Now, don't you worry, old man. I'll pay the damages, for it was my
