"I've got a place, Uncle Hugh."

"You have,--where?"

"With Smith & Thompson, No.--Broadway."

"What sort of a store? I don't remember the name."

"It is a retail dry-goods store."

"Did you like the looks of your future employer?"

"I don't know," said Paul, hesitating, "He looked as if he might be a
pretty sharp man in business, but I have seen others that I would rather
work for. However, beggars mustn't be choosers. But there was one thing
I was disappointed about."

"What was that, Paul?"

"About the wages."

"How much will they give you?"

"Only a dollar and a quarter a week, at first."

"That is small, to be sure."

"The most I think of, Uncle Hugh, is, that I shall still be an expense
to you. I hoped to get enough to be able to pay my board from the
first."

"My dear boy," said the sexton, kindly, "don't trouble yourself on that
score. It costs little more for three than for two, and the little I
expend on your account is richly made up by the satisfaction we feel in
your society, and your good conduct."

"You say that to encourage me, Uncle Hugh," said Paul. "You have done
all for me. I have done nothing for you."

"No, Paul, I spoke the truth. Hester and I have both been happier since
you came to us. We hope you will long remain with us. You are already as
dear to us as the son that we lost."

"Thank you, Uncle Hugh," said Paul, in a voice tremulous with feeling.
"I will do all I can to deserve your kindness."




XXI.

SMITH AND THOMPSON'S YOUNG MAN.


At seven o'clock the next morning Paul stood before Smith & Thompson's
store.

As he came up on one side, another boy came down on the other, and
crossed the street.

"Are you the new boy?" he asked, surveying Paul attentively.

"I suppose so," said Paul. "I've engaged to work for Smith & Thompson."

"All right. I'm glad to see you," said the other.

This looked kind, and Paul thanked him for his welcome.

"O." said the other, bursting into a laugh, "you needn't trouble
yourself about thanking me. I'm glad you've come, because now I shan't
have to open the store and sweep out. Just lend a hand there; I'll help
you about taking down the shutters this morning, and to-morrow you'll
have to get along alone."

The two boys opened the store.

"What's your name?" asked Paul's new acquaintance.

"Paul Prescott. What is yours?"

"Nicholas Benton. You may call me MR. Benton."

"Mr. Benton?" repeated Paul in some astonishment.

"Yes; I'm a young man now. I've been Smith & Thompson's boy till now.
Now I'm promoted."

Paul looked at MR. Benton with some amusement. That young man was
somewhat shorter than himself, and sole proprietor of a stock of pale
yellow hair which required an abundant stock of bear's grease to keep
it in order. His face was freckled and expressionless. His eyebrows and
eyelashes were of the same faded color. He was dressed, however,
with some pretensions to smartness. He wore a blue necktie, of large
dimensions, fastened by an enormous breast-pin, which, in its already
tarnished splendor, suggested strong doubts as to the apparent gold
being genuine.

"There's the broom, Paul," said Mr. Benton, assuming a graceful position
on the counter.

"You'll have to sweep out; only look sharp about raising a dust, or
Smith'll be into your wool."

"What sort of a man is Mr. Smith?" asked Paul, with some curiosity.

"O, he's an out and outer. Sharp as a steel trap. He'll make you toe the
mark."

"Do you like him?" asked Paul, not quite sure whether he understood his
employer's character from the description.

"I don't like him well enough to advise any of my folks to trade with
him," said Mr. Benton.

"Why not?"

"He'd cheat 'em out of their eye teeth if they happened to have any,"
said the young man coolly, beginning to pick his teeth with a knife.

Paul began to doubt whether he should like Mr. Smith.

"I say," said Mr. Benton after a pause, "have you begun to shave yet?"

Paul looked up to see if his companion were in earnest.

"No," said he; "I haven't got along as far as that. Have you?"

"I," repeated the young man, a little contemptuously, "of course I have.
I've shaved for a year and a half."

"Do you find it hard shaving?" asked Paul, a little slyly.

"Well, my beard is rather stiff," said the late BOY, with an important
air, "but I've got used to it."

"Ain't you rather young to shave, Nicholas?" asked Paul.

"Mr. Benton, if you please."

"I mean, Mr. Benton."

"Perhaps I was when I begun. But now I am nineteen."

"Nineteen?"

"Yes, that is to say, I'm within a few months of being nineteen. What do
you think of my moustache?"

"I hadn't noticed it."

"The store's rather dark," muttered Mr. Benton, who seemed a little
annoyed by this answer. "If you'll come a little nearer you can see it."

Drawing near, Paul, after some trouble, descried a few scattering hairs.

"Yes," said he, wanting to laugh, "I see it."

"Coming on finely, isn't it?" asked Mr. Nicholas Benton, complacently.

"Yes," said Paul, rather doubtfully.

"I don't mind letting you into a secret," said Benton, affably, "if you
won't mention it. I've been using some of the six weeks' stuff."

"The what?" asked Paul, opening his eyes.

"Haven't you heard of it?" inquired Benton, a little contemptuously.
"Where have you been living all your life? Haven't you seen it
advertised,--warranted to produce a full set of whiskers or moustaches
upon the smoothest face, etc. I got some a week ago, only a dollar. Five
weeks from now you'll see something that'll astonish you."

Paul was not a little amused by his new companion, and would have
laughed, but that he feared to offend him.

"You'd better get some," said Mr. Benton. "I'll let you just try mine
once, if you want to."

"Thank you," said Paul; "I don't think I want to have a moustache just
yet."

"Well, perhaps you're right. Being a boy, perhaps it wouldn't be
advisable."

"When does Mr. Smith come in?"

"Not till nine."

"And the other clerks?"

"About eight o'clock. I shan't come till eight, to-morrow morning."

"There's one thing I should like to ask you," said Paul. "Of course you
won't answer unless you like."

"Out with it."

"How much does Mr. Smith pay you?"

"Ahem!" said Benton, "what does he pay you?"

"A dollar and a quarter a week."

"He paid me a dollar and a half to begin with."

"Did he? He wanted me to come first at a dollar."

"Just like him. Didn't I tell you he was an out and outer? He'll be sure
to take you in if you will let him."

"But," said Paul, anxiously, "he said he'd raise it in a month or two."

"He won't offer to; you'll have to tease him. And then how much'll he
raise it? Not more than a quarter. How much do you think I get now?"

"How long have you been here?"

"A year and a half."

"Five dollars a week," guessed Paul.

"Five! he only gives me two and a half. That is, he hasn't been paying
me but that. Now, of course, he'll raise, as I've been promoted."

"How much do you expect to get now?"

"Maybe four dollars, and I'm worth ten any day. He's a mean old
skinflint, Smith is."

This glimpse at his own prospects did not tend to make Paul feel very
comfortable. He could not repress a sigh of disappointment when he
thought of this mortifying termination of all his brilliant prospects.
He had long nourished the hope of being able to repay the good sexton
for his outlay in his behalf, besides discharging the debt which his
father had left behind him. Now there seemed to be little prospect of
either. He had half a mind to resign his place immediately upon the
entrance of Mr. Smith, but two considerations dissuaded him; one, that
the sum which he was to receive, though small, would at least buy his
clothes, and besides, he was not at all certain of obtaining another
situation.

With a sigh, therefore, he went about his duties.

He had scarcely got the store ready when some of the clerks entered, and
the business of the day commenced. At nine Mr. Smith appeared.

"So you're here, Peter," remarked he, as he caught sight of our hero.

"Paul," corrected the owner of that name.

"Well, well, Peter or Paul, don't make much difference. Both were
apostles, if I remember right. All ready for work, eh?"

"Yes, sir," said Paul, neither very briskly nor cheerfully.

"Well," said Mr. Smith, after a pause, "I guess I'll put you into the
calico department. Williams, you may take him under your wing. And now
Peter,--all the same, Paul,--I've got a word or two to say to you, as I
always do to every boy who comes into my store. Don't forget what you're
here for? It's to sell goods. Take care to sell something to every man,
woman, and child, that comes in your way. That's the way to do business.
Follow it up, and you'll be a rich man some day."

"But suppose they don't want anything?" said Paul.

"Make 'em want something," returned Smith, "Don't let 'em off without
buying. That's my motto. However, you'll learn."

Smith bustled off, and began in his nervous way to exercise a general
supervision over all that was going on in the store. He seemed to be all
eyes. While apparently entirely occupied in waiting upon a customer, he
took notice of all the customers in the store, and could tell what they
bought, and how much they paid.

Paul listened attentively to the clerk under whom he was placed for
instruction.

"What's the price of this calico?" inquired a common-looking woman.

"A shilling a yard, ma'am," (this was not in war times.)

"It looks rather coarse."

"Coarse, ma'am! What can you be thinking of? It is a superfine piece of
goods. We sell more of it than of any other figure. The mayor's wife was
in here yesterday, and bought two dress patterns off of it."

"Did she?" asked the woman, who appeared favorably impressed by this
circumstance.

"Yes, and she promised to send her friends here after some of it. You'd
better take it while you can get it."

"Will it wash?"

"To be sure it will."

"Then I guess you may cut me off ten yards."

This was quickly done, and the woman departed with her purchase.

Five minutes later, another woman entered with a bundle of the same
figured calico.

Seeing her coming, Williams hastily slipped the remnant of the piece out
of sight.

"I got this calico here," said the newcomer, "one day last week. You
warranted it to wash, but I find it won't. Here's a piece I've tried."

She showed a pattern, which had a faded look.

"You've come to the wrong store," said Williams, coolly. "You must have
got the calico somewhere else."

"No, I'm sure I got it here. I remember particularly buying it of you."

"You've got a better memory than I have, then. We haven't got a piece of
calico like that in the store."

Paul listened to this assertion with unutterable surprise.

"I am quite certain I bought it here," said the woman, perplexed.

"Must have been the next store,--Blake & Hastings. Better go over
there."

The woman went out.

"That's the way to do business," said Williams, winking at Paul.

Paul said nothing, but he felt more than ever doubtful about retaining
his place.




XXII.

MR. BENTON'S ADVENTURE.


One evening, about a fortnight after his entrance into Smith &
Thompson's employment, Paul was putting up the shutters, the business
of the day being over. It devolved upon him to open and close the store,
and usually he was the last one to go home.

This evening, however, Mr. Nicholas Benton graciously remained behind
and assisted Paul in closing the store. This was unusual, and surprised
Paul a little. It was soon explained, however.

"Good-night, Nicholas,--I mean, Mr. Benton," said Paul.

"Not quite yet. I want you to walk a little way with me this evening."

Paul hesitated.

"Come, no backing out. I want to confide to you a very important
secret."

He looked so mysterious that Paul's curiosity was aroused, and
reflecting that it was yet early, he took his companion's proffered arm,
and sauntered along by his side.

"What's the secret?" he asked at length, perceiving that Nicholas was
silent.

"Wait till we get to a more retired place."

He turned out of Broadway into a side street, where the passers were
less numerous.

"I don't think you could guess," said the young man, turning towards our
hero.

"I don't think I could."

"And yet," continued Benton, meditatively, "it is possible that you may
have noticed something in my appearance just a little unusual, within
the last week. Haven't you, now?"

Paul could not say that he had.

Mr. Benton looked a little disappointed.

"Nobody can tell what has been the state of my feelings," he resumed
after a pause.

"You ain't sick?" questioned Paul, hastily.

"Nothing of the sort, only my appetite has been a good deal affected.
I don't think I have eaten as much in a week as you would in a day," he
added, complacently.

"If I felt that way I should think I was going to be sick," said Paul.

"I'll let you into the secret," said Mr. Benton, lowering his voice, and
looking carefully about him, to make sure that no one was within hearing
distance--"I'M IN LOVE."

This seemed so utterly ludicrous to Paul, that he came very near losing
Mr. Benton's friendship forever by bursting into a hearty laugh.

"I didn't think of that," he said.

"It's taken away my appetite, and I haven't been able to sleep nights,"
continued Mr. Benton, in a cheerful tone. "I feel just as Howard
Courtenay did in the great story that's coming out in the Weekly Budget.
You've read it, haven't you?"

"I don't think I have," said Paul.

"Then you ought to. It's tiptop. It's rather curious too that the lady
looks just as Miranda does, in the same story."

"How is that?"

"Wait a minute, and I'll read the description."

Mr. Benton pulled a paper from his pocket,--the last copy of the Weekly
Budget,--and by the light of a street lamp read the following extract to
his amused auditor.

"Miranda was just eighteen. Her form was queenly and majestic. Tall and
stately, she moved among her handmaidens with a dignity which
revealed her superior rank. Her eyes were dark as night. Her luxuriant
tresses,--there, the rest is torn off," said Mr. Benton, in a tone of
vexation.

"She is tall, then?" said Paul.

"Yes, just like Miranda."

"Then," said our hero, in some hesitation, "I should think she would not
be very well suited to you."

"Why not?" asked Mr. Benton, quickly.

"Because," said Paul, "you're rather short, you know."

"I'm about the medium height," said Mr. Benton, raising himself upon his
toes as he spoke.

"Not quite," said Paul, trying not to laugh.

"I'm as tall as Mr. Smith," resumed Mr. Benton, in a tone which warned
Paul that this was a forbidden subject. "But you don't ask me who she
is."
