slightest pity for his pangs of unrequited affection. Cecily winced when
Pat caught a mouse, visited a school chum the day the pigs were killed
that she might not hear their squealing, and would not have stepped on a
caterpillar for anything; yet she did not care at all how much she made
the brisk Cyrus suffer.

Then, suddenly, all our spring gladness and Maytime hopes were blighted
as by a killing frost. Sorrow and anxiety pervaded our days and
embittered our dreams by night. Grim tragedy held sway in our lives for
the next fortnight.

Paddy disappeared. One night he lapped his new milk as usual at Uncle
Roger's dairy door and then sat blandly on the flat stone before it,
giving the world assurance of a cat, sleek sides glistening, plumy tail
gracefully folded around his paws, brilliant eyes watching the stir and
flicker of bare willow boughs in the twilight air above him. That was
the last seen of him. In the morning he was not.

At first we were not seriously alarmed. Paddy was no roving Thomas,
but occasionally he vanished for a day or so. But when two days passed
without his return we became anxious, the third day worried us greatly,
and the fourth found us distracted.

"Something has happened to Pat," the Story Girl declared miserably. "He
never stayed away from home more than two days in his life."

"What could have happened to him?" asked Felix.

"He's been poisoned--or a dog has killed him," answered the Story Girl
in tragic tones.

Cecily began to cry at this; but tears were of no avail. Neither was
anything else, apparently. We searched every nook and cranny of barns
and out-buildings and woods on both the King farms; we inquired far and
wide; we roved over Carlisle meadows calling Paddy's name, until Aunt
Janet grew exasperated and declared we must stop making such exhibitions
of ourselves. But we found and heard no trace of our lost pet. The Story
Girl moped and refused to be comforted; Cecily declared she could not
sleep at night for thinking of poor Paddy dying miserably in some corner
to which he had dragged his failing body, or lying somewhere mangled and
torn by a dog. We hated every dog we saw on the ground that he might be
the guilty one.

"It's the suspense that's so hard," sobbed the Story Girl. "If I just
knew what had happened to him it wouldn't be QUITE so hard. But I don't
know whether he's dead or alive. He may be living and suffering, and
every night I dream that he has come home and when I wake up and find
it's only a dream it just breaks my heart."

"It's ever so much worse than when he was so sick last fall," said
Cecily drearily. "Then we knew that everything was done for him that
could be done."

We could not appeal to Peg Bowen this time. In our desperation we would
have done it, but Peg was far away. With the first breath of spring she
was up and off, answering to the lure of the long road. She had not
been seen in her accustomed haunts for many a day. Her pets were gaining
their own living in the woods and her house was locked up.




CHAPTER XI. THE WITCH'S WISHBONE


When a fortnight had elapsed we gave up all hope.

"Pat is dead," said the Story Girl hopelessly, as we returned one
evening from a bootless quest to Andrew Cowan's where a strange gray
cat had been reported--a cat which turned out to be a yellowish brown
nondescript, with no tail to speak of.

"I'm afraid so," I acknowledged at last.

"If only Peg Bowen had been at home she could have found him for us,"
asserted Peter. "Her skull would have told her where he was."

"I wonder if the wishbone she gave me would have done any good," cried
Cecily suddenly. "I'd forgotten all about it. Oh, do you suppose it's
too late yet?"

"There's nothing in a wishbone," said Dan impatiently.

"You can't be sure. She TOLD me I'd get the wish I made on it. I'm going
to try whenever I get home."

"It can't do any harm, anyhow," said Peter, "but I'm afraid you've left
it too late. If Pat is dead even a witch's wishbone can't bring him back
to life."

"I'll never forgive myself for not thinking about it before," mourned
Cecily.

As soon as we got home she flew to the little box upstairs where she
kept her treasures, and brought therefrom the dry and brittle wishbone.

"Peg told me how it must be done. I'm to hold the wishbone with both
hands, like this, and walk backward, repeating the wish nine times. And
when I've finished the ninth time I'm to turn around nine times, from
right to left, and then the wish will come true right away."

"Do you expect to see Pat when you finish turning?" said Dan
skeptically.

None of us had any faith in the incantation except Peter, and, by
infection, Cecily. You never could tell what might happen. Cecily
took the wishbone in her trembling little hands and began her backward
pacing, repeating solemnly, "I wish that we may find Paddy alive, or
else his body, so that we can bury him decently." By the time Cecily
had repeated this nine times we were all slightly infected with the
desperate hope that something might come of it; and when she had
made her nine gyrations we looked eagerly down the sunset lane, half
expecting to see our lost pet. But we saw only the Awkward Man turning
in at the gate. This was almost as surprising as the sight of Pat
himself would have been; but there was no sign of Pat and hope flickered
out in every breast but Peter's.

"You've got to give the spell time to work," he expostulated. "If Pat
was miles away when it was wished it wouldn't be reasonable to expect to
see him right off."

But we of little faith had already lost that little, and it was a very
disconsolate group which the Awkward Man presently joined.

He was smiling--his rare, beautiful smile which only children ever
saw--and he lifted his hat to the girls with no trace of the shyness and
awkwardness for which he was notorious.

"Good evening," he said. "Have you little people lost a cat lately?"

We stared. Peter said "I knew it!" in a triumphant pig's whisper. The
Story Girl started eagerly forward.

"Oh, Mr. Dale, can you tell us anything of Paddy?" she cried.

"A silver gray cat with black points and very fine marking?"

"Yes, yes!"

"Alive?"

"Yes."

"Well, doesn't that beat the Dutch!" muttered Dan.

But we were all crowding about the Awkward Man, demanding where and when
he had found Paddy.

"You'd better come over to my place and make sure that it really is your
cat," suggested the Awkward Man, "and I'll tell you all about finding
him on the way. I must warn you that he is pretty thin--but I think
he'll pull through."

We obtained permission to go without much difficulty, although the
spring evening was wearing late, for Aunt Janet said she supposed none
of us would sleep a wink that night if we didn't. A joyful procession
followed the Awkward Man and the Story Girl across the gray, star-litten
meadows to his home and through his pine-guarded gate.

"You know that old barn of mine back in the woods?" said the Awkward
Man. "I go to it only about once in a blue moon. There was an old barrel
there, upside down, one side resting on a block of wood. This morning
I went to the barn to see about having some hay hauled home, and I had
occasion to move the barrel. I noticed that it seemed to have been
moved slightly since my last visit, and it was now resting wholly on the
floor. I lifted it up--and there was a cat lying on the floor under it.
I had heard you had lost yours and I took it this was your pet. I was
afraid he was dead at first. He was lying there with his eyes closed;
but when I bent over him he opened them and gave a pitiful little mew;
or rather his mouth made the motion of a mew, for he was too weak to
utter a sound."

"Oh, poor, poor Paddy," said tender-hearted Cecily tearfully.

"He couldn't stand, so I carried him home and gave him just a little
milk. Fortunately he was able to lap it. I gave him a little more at
intervals all day, and when I left he was able to crawl around. I think
he'll be all right, but you'll have to be careful how you feed him for a
few days. Don't let your hearts run away with your judgment and kill him
with kindness."

"Do you suppose any one put him under that barrel?" asked the Story
Girl.

"No. The barn was locked. Nothing but a cat could get in. I suppose
he went under the barrel, perhaps in pursuit of a mouse, and somehow
knocked it off the block and so imprisoned himself."

Paddy was sitting before the fire in the Awkward Man's clean, bare
kitchen. Thin! Why, he was literally skin and bone, and his fur was dull
and lustreless. It almost broke our hearts to see our beautiful Paddy
brought so low.

"Oh, how he must have suffered!" moaned Cecily.

"He'll be as prosperous as ever in a week or two," said the Awkward Man
kindly.

The Story Girl gathered Paddy up in her arms. Most mellifluously did he
purr as we crowded around to stroke him; with friendly joy he licked our
hands with his little red tongue; poor Paddy was a thankful cat; he was
no longer lost, starving, imprisoned, helpless; he was with his comrades
once more and he was going home--home to his old familiar haunts of
orchard and dairy and granary, to his daily rations of new milk and
cream, to the cosy corner of his own fireside. We trooped home joyfully,
the Story Girl in our midst carrying Paddy hugged against her shoulder.
Never did April stars look down on a happier band of travellers on the
golden road. There was a little gray wind out in the meadows that
night, and it danced along beside us on viewless, fairy feet, and sang
a delicate song of the lovely, waiting years, while the night laid her
beautiful hands of blessing over the world.

"You see what Peg's wishbone did," said Peter triumphantly.

"Now, look here, Peter, don't talk nonsense," expostulated Dan. "The
Awkward Man found Paddy this morning and had started to bring us word
before Cecily ever thought of the wishbone. Do you mean to say you
believe he wouldn't have come walking up our lane just when he did if
she had never thought of it?"

"I mean to say that I wouldn't mind if I had several wishbones of the
same kind," retorted Peter stubbornly.

"Of course I don't think the wishbone had really anything to do with
our getting Paddy back, but I'm glad I tried it, for all that," remarked
Cecily in a tone of satisfaction.

"Well, anyhow, we've got Pat and that's the main thing," said Felix.

"And I hope it will be a lesson to him to stay home after this,"
commented Felicity.

"They say the barrens are full of mayflowers," said the Story Girl. "Let
us have a mayflower picnic tomorrow to celebrate Paddy's safe return."




CHAPTER XII. FLOWERS O' MAY


Accordingly we went a-maying, following the lure of dancing winds to a
certain westward sloping hill lying under the spirit-like blue of spring
skies, feathered over with lisping young pines and firs, which cupped
little hollows and corners where the sunshine got in and never got out
again, but stayed there and grew mellow, coaxing dear things to bloom
long before they would dream of waking up elsewhere.

'Twas there we found our mayflowers, after faithful seeking. Mayflowers,
you must know, never flaunt themselves; they must be sought as
becomes them, and then they will yield up their treasures to the
seeker--clusters of star-white and dawn-pink that have in them the very
soul of all the springs that ever were, re-incarnated in something it
seems gross to call perfume, so exquisite and spiritual is it.

We wandered gaily over the hill, calling to each other with laughter
and jest, getting parted and delightfully lost in that little pathless
wilderness, and finding each other unexpectedly in nooks and dips and
sunny silences, where the wind purred and gentled and went softly. When
the sun began to hang low, sending great fan-like streamers of radiance
up to the zenith, we foregathered in a tiny, sequestered valley, full
of young green fern, lying in the shadow of a wooded hill. In it was a
shallow pool--a glimmering green sheet of water on whose banks nymphs
might dance as blithely as ever they did on Argive hill or in Cretan
dale. There we sat and stripped the faded leaves and stems from our
spoil, making up the blossoms into bouquets to fill our baskets with
sweetness. The Story Girl twisted a spray of divinest pink in her brown
curls, and told us an old legend of a beautiful Indian maiden who died
of a broken heart when the first snows of winter were falling, because
she believed her long-absent lover was false. But he came back in the
spring time from his long captivity; and when he heard that she was dead
he sought her grave to mourn her, and lo, under the dead leaves of the
old year he found sweet sprays of a blossom never seen before, and
knew that it was a message of love and remembrance from his dark-eyed
sweet-heart.

"Except in stories Indian girls are called squaws," remarked practical
Dan, tying his mayflowers together in one huge, solid, cabbage-like
bunch. Not for Dan the bother of filling his basket with the loose
sprays, mingled with feathery elephant's-ears and trails of creeping
spruce, as the rest of us, following the Story Girl's example, did. Nor
would he admit that ours looked any better than his.

"I like things of one kind together. I don't like them mixed," he said.

"You have no taste," said Felicity.

"Except in my mouth, best beloved," responded Dan.

"You do think you are so smart," retorted Felicity, flushing with anger.

"Don't quarrel this lovely day," implored Cecily.

"Nobody's quarrelling, Sis. I ain't a bit mad. It's Felicity. What on
earth is that at the bottom of your basket, Cecily?"

"It's a History of the Reformation in France," confessed poor Cecily,
"by a man named D-a-u-b-i-g-n-y. I can't pronounce it. I heard Mr.
Marwood saying it was a book everyone ought to read, so I began it
last Sunday. I brought it along today to read when I got tired picking
flowers. I'd ever so much rather have brought Ester Reid. There's so
much in the history I can't understand, and it is so dreadful to read of
people being burned to death. But I felt I OUGHT to read it."

"Do you really think your mind has improved any?" asked Sara Ray
seriously, wreathing the handle of her basket with creeping spruce.

"No, I'm afraid it hasn't one bit," answered Cecily sadly. "I feel that
I haven't succeeded very well in keeping my resolutions."

"I've kept mine," said Felicity complacently.

