sheltered them from their fire. The spirits of the defenders began to
sink rapidly, as they saw that in a very short time great breaches would
be made in the walls, and that all the horrors and disasters of a city
taken by assault awaited them. The Bishop of Quimper who was within the
walls, entered into secret negotiations with his nephew, Henry de Leon,
who had gone over to the enemy after the surrender of Nantes, and was
now with the besieging army. The besiegers, delighted to find an ally
within the walls who might save them from the heavy losses which
an assault would entail upon them, at once embraced his offers, and
promised him a large recompense if he would bring over the other
commanders and nobles. The wily bishop set to work, and the consequences
were soon visible. Open grumbling broke forth at the hardships which
were endured, and at the prospect of the wholesale slaughter which would
attend a storm when all hope of a successful resistance was at an end.

"I fear, Walter," Sir John said one morning, "that the end is at hand.
On all sides submission is spoken of, and all that I can say to keep up
their spirits is useless. Upon our own little band we can rely, but
I doubt if outside them a single determined man is to be found in the
town. In vain do I speak of the arrival of Sir Walter Manny. Nearly
ninety days have elapsed since we sailed, and all hope of his coming
is gone. I point out to them that contrary winds have been blowing, and
that at any moment he may arrive; but they will not hear me. The bishop
has gained over the whole of them by his promises that none shall be
molested in property or estate should they surrender."

"It is sad to see the countess," Walter replied; "she who has shown
such high spirit throughout the siege now does nothing but weep, for she
knows that with her and her child in the hands of the French the cause
of the count is lost. If she could carry off the child by sea she would
not so much care for the fall of the town, but the French ships lie
thick round the port, and there is no hope of breaking through."

Two days later the conspiracy came to a head, and the people, assembling
round the countess's house, clamoured for surrender. The breaches were
open, and the enemy might pour in at any time and put all to the
sword. The countess begged for a little further delay, but in vain, and
withdrew to the turret where she had for so many weary weeks watched the
horizon, in hopes of seeing the sails of the approaching fleet. Walter
was at the time with Sir John Powis on the walls.

Presently a large body of French were seen approaching headed by Henry
de Leon, who summoned the town to surrender. Many standing on the walls
shouted that the gates should be thrown open; but Sir John returned for
answer that he must consult the countess, and that upon her answer must
depend whether he and his men would defend the breach until the last.

"Come with me, Walter," he said, "we must fain persuade the countess. If
she says no, we Englishmen will die in the breach; but though ready
to give my life for so brave a lady, I own that it is useless to fight
longer. Save our own little band not one in the town will lift a sword
again. Such resistance as we can offer will but inflame them to fury,
and all the horrors of a sack will be inflicted upon the inhabitants.
There she is, poor lady, on the turret, gazing, as usual, seaward."

Suddenly they saw her throw up her arms, and then, turning towards the
city, she cried, as she perceived the English knight: "I see them! I see
them! The English fleet are coming!"

"Run up, Walter," Sir John exclaimed, "maybe the countess is distraught
with her sorrows."

Walter dashed up to the turret, and looking seaward beheld rising over
the horizon a number of masts.

"Hurrah! Sir John," he shouted, "we are saved, the English fleet is in
sight."

Many others heard the shout, and the tidings ran like lightning through
the town. In wild excitement the people ran to the battlements and
roofs, and with cheering and clapping of hands hailed the appearance of
the still far-distant fleet. The church bells rang out joyfully and the
whole town was wild with excitement.

The Bishop of Quimper, finding that his plans were frustrated, gathered
around him some of those who had taken a leading part in the intrigue.
These, leaving the city by a gate at which they had placed some of their
own faction to open it to the French, issued out and made their way to
the assailants' camp, to give news of the altered situation. Don Louis
at once ordered an attack to be made with his whole force, in hopes
of capturing the place before the arrival of the English succour. But,
animated by their new hopes, those so lately despondent and ready to
yield manned the breaches and repulsed with great slaughter all attempts
on the part of the French to carry them. While the struggle was still
going on, the countess, aided by the wives of the burghers, busied
herself in preparing a sumptuous feast in honour of her deliverers who
were fast approaching, their ships impelled by a strong and favourable
breeze. The vessels of the French hastily drew off, and the English
fleet sailed into the port hailed by the cheers of the inhabitants.
The countess herself received Sir Walter Manny on his landing, and
the townspeople vied with each other in offering hospitality to the
men-at-arms and archers.

"Ah! Sir John Powis," Sir Walter exclaimed, "what, are you here? I had
given you up for lost. We thought you had gone down in the gale the
night you started."

"We were separated from the fleet, Sir Walter, but the master held on,
and we arrived here four days after we put out. We took part in the
siege of Rennes, and have since done our best to aid the countess here."

"And their best has been much," the countess said; "not to say how
bravely they have fought upon the walls, it is to Sir John and his
little band that I owe it that the town was not surrendered days ago.
They alone remained steadfast when all others fell away, and it is due
to them that I am still able, as mistress of this town, to greet you on
your arrival. Next to Sir John himself, my thanks are due to your young
esquire, Walter Somers, who has cheered and stood by me, and to whose
suggestions I owe it that I was able at the first to sally out and
destroy the French camp while they were attacking the walls, and so
greatly hindered their measures against the town. And now, sir, will you
follow me? I have prepared for you and your knights such a banquet of
welcome as our poor means will allow, and my townspeople will see that
good fare is set before your soldiers."

That evening there was high feasting in the town, although the crash
of the heavy stones cast by the French machines against the walls never
ceased. Early the next morning Sir Walter Manny made a survey of the
place and of the disposition of the enemy, and proposed to his knights
to sally forth at once and destroy the largest of the enemy's machines,
which had been brought up close to the walls. In a few minutes the
knights were armed and mounted. Three hundred knights and esquires were
to take part in the sortie, they were to be followed by a strong body of
men-at-arms.

As soon as the gates were opened a number of archers issued out, and
taking their place at the edge of the moat, poured a rain of arrows upon
the men working the machine and those guarding it. Most of these took to
flight at once, the remainder were cut down by the men-at-arms, who at
once proceeded to hew the machine in pieces with the axes with which
they were provided. Sir Walter himself and his mounted companions
dashed forward to the nearer tents of the French camps, cut down all who
opposed them, and setting fire to the huts retired towards the city.

By this time the French were thoroughly alarmed, and numbers of knights
and men-at-arms dashed after the little body of English cavalry. These
could have regained the place in safety, but in the chivalrous spirit of
the time they disdained to retire without striking a blow. Turning their
horses, therefore, and laying their lances in rest, they charged the
pursuing French.

For a few minutes the conflict was desperate and many on both sides were
overthrown; then, as large reinforcements were continually arriving
to the French, Sir Walter called off his men and retired slowly.
On reaching the moat he halted his forces. The knights wheeled and
presented a firm face to the enemy, covering the entrance of their
followers into the gate. The French chivalry thundered down upon the
little body, but were met by a storm of arrows from the archers lining
the moat. Many knights were struck through the bars of their vizors or
the joints of their mail. The horses, though defended by iron trappings,
fell dead under them, or, maddened by pain, dashed wildly through the
ranks, carrying confusion with them, and the French commanders, seeing
how heavy were their losses, called off their men from the assault. Sir
Walter Manny with his party remained without the gate until the
enemy had re-entered their camp, and then rode into the town amid
the acclamations of the inhabitants, the countess herself meeting her
deliverers at the gate and kissing each, one after the other, in token
of her gratitude and admiration.

The arrival of the reinforcements and the proof of skill and vigour
given by the English leader, together with the terror caused by the
terrible effect of the English arrows, shook the resolution of Don Louis
and his troops. Deprived of half their force by the absence of Charles
of Blois, it was thought prudent by the leaders to withdraw at once, and
the third morning after the arrival of Sir Walter Manny the siege was
raised, and the French marched to join Charles of Blois before the
Castle of Auray.

Even with the reinforcements brought by Sir Walter Manny, the forces of
the Countess of Montford were still so greatly inferior to those of the
divisions of the French army that they could not hope to cope with them
in the field until the arrival of the main English army, which the King
of England himself was to bring over shortly. Accordingly the French
laid siege to and captured many small towns and castles. Charles of
Blois continued the siege of Auray, and directed Don Louis with his
division to attack the town of Dinan. On his way the Spaniard captured
the small fortress of Conquet and put the garrison to the sword. Sir
Walter Manny, in spite of the inferiority of his force, sallied out
to relieve it, but it was taken before his arrival, and Don Louis had
marched away to Dinan, leaving a small garrison in Conquet. It was again
captured by Sir Walter, but finding it indefensible he returned with
the whole of his force to Hennebon. Don Louis captured Dinan and then
besieged Guerande. Here he met with a vigorous resistance, but carried
it by storm, and gave it up to be pillaged by his soldiers. He now
sent back to Charles of Blois the greater part of the French troops
who accompanied him, and embarked with the Genoese and Spanish, 8000
in number, and sailed to Quimperle, a rich and populous town in Lower
Brittany.

Anchoring in the River Leita, he disembarked his troops, and leaving
a guard to protect the vessels marched to the interior, plundering
and burning, and from time to time despatching his booty to swell
the immense mass which he had brought in his ships from the sack of
Guerande.

Quimperle lies but a short distance from Hennebon, and Sir Walter Manny
with Almeric de Clisson, a number of English knights, and a body of
English archers, in all three thousand men, embarked in the ships in
the port, and entering the Leita captured the enemy's fleet and all his
treasure. The English then landed, and dividing into three bodies, set
out in search of the enemy.

The English columns marched at a short distance apart so as to be able
to give each other assistance in case of attack. The news of the English
approach soon reached the Spaniards, who were gathered in a solid body,
for the enraged country people, armed with clubs and bills, hung on
their flanks and cut off any stragglers who left the main body. Don
Louis at once moved towards the sea-coast, and coming in sight of one of
the English divisions, charged it with his whole force.

The English fought desperately, but the odds of seven to one were
too great, and they would have been overpowered had not the other two
divisions arrived on the spot and fallen upon the enemy's flanks.
After a severe and prolonged struggle the Genoese and Spaniards were
completely routed. The armed peasantry slew every fugitive they could
overtake, and of the 7000 men with whom Don Louis commenced the battle
only 300 accompanied him in his flight to Rennes, the troops of Sir
Walter and de Clisson pursuing him to the very gates of that city. Sir
Walter marched back with his force to the ships, but finding the wind
unfavourable returned to Hennebon by land, capturing by the way the
castle of Goy la Foret. Their return was joyfully welcomed, not only
for the victory which they had achieved, but because the enemy was again
drawing near to the town. Auray had fallen. The brave garrison, after
existing for some time upon the flesh of their horses, had endeavoured
to cut their way through the besiegers. Most of them were killed in the
attempt, but a few escaped and made their way to Hennebon.

Vannes, an important town, and Carhaix quickly surrendered, and the
French force was daily receiving considerable reinforcements. This arose
from the fact that large numbers of French nobles and knights had, with
their followers, taken part with Alfonso, King of Castile and Leon, in
his war with the Moors. This had just terminated with the expulsion of
the latter from Spain, and the French knights and nobles on their way
home for the most part joined at once in the war which their countrymen
were waging in Bretagne.

Seeing the great force which was gathering for a fresh siege of
Hennebon, Sir Walter Manny and the Countess of Montford sent an urgent
message to King Edward for further support. The king was not yet ready,
but at the beginning of August he despatched a force under the command
of the Earl of Northampton and Robert of Artois. It consisted of
twenty-seven knights bannerets and 2000 men-at-arms. Before, however, it
could reach Hennebon the second siege of that city had begun. Charles of
Blois had approached it with a far larger army than that with which he
had on the first occasion sat down before it. Hennebon was, however,
much better prepared than at first for resistance. The walls had
been repaired, provisions and military stores laid up, and machines
constructed. The garrison was very much larger, and was commanded by
one of the most gallant knights of the age, and the citizens beheld
undaunted the approach of the great French army.

Four days after the French had arrived before Hennebon they were joined
by Don Louis, who had been severely wounded in the fight near Quimperle,
and had lain for six weeks at Rennes. Sixteen great engines at once
began to cast stones against the walls, but Sir Walter caused sandbags
to be lowered, and so protected the walls from the attack that little
damage was done. The garrison confident in their powers to resist,
taunted the assailants from the walls, and specially enraged the
Spaniards and Don Louis by allusions to the defeat at Quimperle.

So furious did the Spanish prince become that he took a step
unprecedented in those days of chivalry. He one morning entered the tent
of Charles of Blois, where a number of French nobles were gathered,
and demanded a boon in requital of all his services. Charles at once
assented, when, to his surprise and horror, Prince Louis demanded that
two English knights, Sir John Butler and Sir Hubert Frisnoy, who had
been captured in the course of the campaign and were kept prisoners at
Faouet, should be delivered to him to be executed. "These English," he
said, "have pursued, discomforted, and wounded me, and have killed the
nephew whom I loved so well, and as I have none other mode of vengeance
I will cut off their heads before their companions who lie within those
walls."

Charles of Blois and his nobles were struck with amazement and horror
at the demand, and used every means in their power to turn the savage
prince from his purpose, but in vain. They pointed out to him that his
name would be dishonoured in all countries where the laws of chivalry
prevailed by such a deed, and besought him to choose some other boon.
Don Louis refused to yield, and Charles of Blois, finding no alternative
between breaking his promise and delivering his prisoners, at last
agreed to his request.

The prisoners were sent for, and were informed by Don Louis himself of
their approaching end. At first they could not believe that he was in
earnest, for such a proceeding was so utterly opposed to the spirit
of the times that it seemed impossible to them. Finding that he was in
earnest they warned him of the eternal stain which such a deed would
bring upon his name. The Spaniard, however, was unmoved either by their
words or by the entreaties of the French nobles but told them that he
would give them a few hours to prepare for death, and that they should
be executed in sight of the walls after the usual dinner hour of the
army.

In those days sieges were not conducted in the strict manner in which
they are at present, and non-combatants passed without difficulty to
and fro between town and camp. The news, therefore, of what was intended
speedily reached the garrison, whom it filled with indignation and
horror. A council was immediately called, and Sir Walter Manny proposed
a plan, which was instantly adopted.

Without loss of time Almeric de Clisson issued forth from the great gate
of Hennebon, accompanied by 300 men-at-arms and 1000 archers. The latter
took post at once along the edge of the ditches. The men-at-arms rode
straight for the enemy's camp, which was undefended, the whole army
being within their tents at dinner. Dashing into their midst the English
and Breton men-at-arms began to overthrow the tents and spear all that
were in them. Not knowing the extent of the danger or the smallness of
the attacking force, the French knights sprang up from table, mounted,
and rode to encounter the assailants.

For some time these maintained their ground against all assaults until,
finding that the whole army was upon them, Almeric de Clisson gave order
for his troop to retire slowly upon the town. Fighting every step of the
ground and resisting obstinately the repeated onslaught of the French,
Clisson approached the gate. Here he was joined by the archers, who with
bent bows prepared to resist the advance of the French. As it appeared
that the garrison were prepared to give battle outside the walls, the
whole French army prepared to move against them.

In the meantime Sir Walter Manny, with 100 men-at-arms and 500 horse
archers, issued by a sally-port on the other side of the town, and with
all speed rode round to the rear of the French camp. There he found
none to oppose him save servants and camp-followers, and making his way
straight to the tent of Charles of Blois, where the two knights were
confined, he soon freed them from their bonds. They were mounted without
wasting a moment's time upon two spare horses, and turning again the
whole party rode back towards Hennebon, and had reached the postern gate
before the fugitives from the camp reached the French commanders and
told them what had happened.

Seeing that he was now too late, because of De Clisson's sortie, Charles
of Blois recalled his army from the attack, in which he could only have
suffered heavily from the arrows of the archers and the missiles from
