should be deemed consecrated ground to-day. With stronger truth be it
said that a devout heart may consecrate a den of thieves, as an evil
one may convert a temple to the same. My heart, perhaps, has no such
holy, nor, I would fain trust, such impious, potency. It must suffice
that, though my form be absent, my inner man goes constantly to
church, while many whose bodily presence fills the accustomed seats
have left their souls at home. But I am there even before my friend
the sexton. At length he comes--a man of kindly but sombre aspect, in
dark gray clothes, and hair of the same mixture. He comes and applies
his key to the wide portal. Now my thoughts may go in among the dusty
pews or ascend the pulpit without sacrilege, but soon come forth again
to enjoy the music of the bell. How glad, yet solemn too! All the
steeples in town are talking together aloft in the sunny air and
rejoicing among themselves while their spires point heavenward.
Meantime, here are the children assembling to the Sabbath-school,
which is kept somewhere within the church. Often, while looking at the
arched portal, I have been gladdened by the sight of a score of these
little girls and boys in pink, blue, yellow and crimson frocks
bursting suddenly forth into the sunshine like a swarm of gay
butterflies that had been shut up in the solemn gloom. Or I might
compare them to cherubs haunting that holy place.

About a quarter of an hour before the second ringing of the bell
individuals of the congregation begin to appear. The earliest is
invariably an old woman in black whose bent frame and rounded
shoulders are evidently laden with some heavy affliction which she is
eager to rest upon the altar. Would that the Sabbath came twice as
often, for the sake of that sorrowful old soul! There is an elderly
man, also, who arrives in good season and leans against the corner of
the tower, just within the line of its shadow, looking downward with a
darksome brow. I sometimes fancy that the old woman is the happier of
the two. After these, others drop in singly and by twos and threes,
either disappearing through the doorway or taking their stand in its
vicinity. At last, and always with an unexpected sensation, the bell
turns in the steeple overhead and throws out an irregular clangor,
jarring the tower to its foundation. As if there were magic in the
sound, the sidewalks of the street, both up and down along, are
immediately thronged with two long lines of people, all converging
hitherward and streaming into the church. Perhaps the far-off roar of
a coach draws nearer--a deeper thunder by its contrast with the
surrounding stillness--until it sets down the wealthy worshippers at
the portal among their humblest brethren. Beyond that entrance--in
theory, at least--there are no distinctions of earthly rank; nor,
indeed, by the goodly apparel which is flaunting in the sun would
there seem to be such on the hither side. Those pretty girls! Why will
they disturb my pious meditations? Of all days in the week, they
should strive to look least fascinating on the Sabbath, instead of
heightening their mortal loveliness, as if to rival the blessed angels
and keep our thoughts from heaven. Were I the minister himself, I must
needs look. One girl is white muslin from the waist upward and black
silk downward to her slippers; a second blushes from top-knot to
shoe-tie, one universal scarlet; another shines of a pervading yellow,
as if she had made a garment of the sunshine. The greater part,
however, have adopted a milder cheerfulness of hue. Their veils,
especially when the wind raises them, give a lightness to the general
effect and make them appear like airy phantoms as they flit up the
steps and vanish into the sombre doorway. Nearly all--though it is
very strange that I should know it--wear white stockings, white as
snow, and neat slippers laced crosswise with black ribbon pretty high
above the ankles. A white stocking is infinitely more effective than a
black one.

Here comes the clergyman, slow and solemn, in severe simplicity,
needing no black silk gown to denote his office. His aspect claims my
reverence, but cannot win my love. Were I to picture Saint Peter
keeping fast the gate of Heaven and frowning, more stern than pitiful,
on the wretched applicants, that face should be my study. By middle
age, or sooner, the creed has generally wrought upon the heart or been
attempered by it. As the minister passes into the church the bell
holds its iron tongue and all the low murmur of the congregation dies
away. The gray sexton looks up and down the street and then at my
window-curtain, where through the small peephole I half fancy that he
has caught my eye. Now every loiterer has gone in and the street lies
asleep in the quiet sun, while a feeling of loneliness comes over me,
and brings also an uneasy sense of neglected privileges and duties.
Oh, I ought to have gone to church! The bustle of the rising
congregation reaches my ears. They are standing up to pray. Could I
bring my heart into unison with those who are praying in yonder church
and lift it heavenward with a fervor of supplication, but no distinct
request, would not that be the safest kind of prayer?--"Lord, look
down upon me in mercy!" With that sentiment gushing from my soul,
might I not leave all the rest to him?

Hark! the hymn! This, at least, is a portion of the service which I
can enjoy better than if I sat within the walls, where the full choir
and the massive melody of the organ would fall with a weight upon me.
At this distance it thrills through my frame and plays upon my
heart-strings with a pleasure both of the sense and spirit. Heaven be
praised! I know nothing of music as a science, and the most elaborate
harmonies, if they please me, please as simply as a nurse's lullaby.
The strain has ceased, but prolongs itself in my mind with fanciful
echoes till I start from my reverie and find that the sermon has
commenced. It is my misfortune seldom to fructify in a regular way by
any but printed sermons. The first strong idea which the preacher
utters gives birth to a train of thought and leads me onward step by
step quite out of hearing of the good man's voice unless he be indeed
a son of thunder. At my open window, catching now and then a sentence
of the "parson's saw," I am as well situated as at the foot of the
pulpit stairs. The broken and scattered fragments of this one
discourse will be the texts of many sermons preached by those
colleague pastors--colleagues, but often disputants--my Mind and
Heart. The former pretends to be a scholar and perplexes me with
doctrinal points; the latter takes me on the score of feeling; and
both, like several other preachers, spend their strength to very
little purpose. I, their sole auditor, cannot always understand them.

Suppose that a few hours have passed, and behold me still behind my
curtain just before the close of the afternoon service. The hour-hand
on the dial has passed beyond four o'clock. The declining sun is
hidden behind the steeple and throws its shadow straight across the
street; so that my chamber is darkened as with a cloud. Around the
church door all is solitude, and an impenetrable obscurity beyond the
threshold. A commotion is heard. The seats are slammed down and the
pew doors thrown back; a multitude of feet are trampling along the
unseen aisles, and the congregation bursts suddenly through the
portal. Foremost scampers a rabble of boys, behind whom moves a dense
and dark phalanx of grown men, and lastly a crowd of females with
young children and a few scattered husbands. This instantaneous
outbreak of life into loneliness is one of the pleasantest scenes of
the day. Some of the good people are rubbing their eyes, thereby
intimating that they have been wrapped, as it were, in a sort of holy
trance by the fervor of their devotion. There is a young man, a
third-rate coxcomb, whose first care is always to flourish a white
handkerchief and brush the seat of a tight pair of black silk
pantaloons which shine as if varnished. They must have been made of
the stuff called "everlasting," or perhaps of the same piece as
Christian's garments in the _Pilgrim's Progress_, for he put them
on two summers ago and has not yet worn the gloss off. I have taken a
great liking to those black silk pantaloons. But now, with nods and
greetings among friends, each matron takes her husband's arm and paces
gravely homeward, while the girls also flutter away after arranging
sunset walks with their favored bachelors. The Sabbath eve is the eve
of love. At length the whole congregation is dispersed. No; here, with
faces as glossy as black satin, come two sable ladies and a sable
gentleman, and close in their rear the minister, who softens his
severe visage and bestows a kind word on each. Poor souls! To them the
most captivating picture of bliss in heaven is "There we shall be
white!"

All is solitude again. But hark! A broken warbling of voices, and now,
attuning its grandeur to their sweetness, a stately peal of the organ.
Who are the choristers? Let me dream that the angels who came down
from heaven this blessed morn to blend themselves with the worship of
the truly good are playing and singing their farewell to the earth. On
the wings of that rich melody they were borne upward.

This, gentle reader, is merely a flight of poetry. A few of the
singing-men and singing-women had lingered behind their fellows and
raised their voices fitfully and blew a careless note upon the organ.
Yet it lifted my soul higher than all their former strains. They are
gone--the sons and daughters of Music--and the gray sexton is just
closing the portal. For six days more there will be no face of man in
the pews and aisles and galleries, nor a voice in the pulpit, nor
music in the choir. Was it worth while to rear this massive edifice to
be a desert in the heart of the town and populous only for a few hours
of each seventh day? Oh, but the church is a symbol of religion. May
its site, which was consecrated on the day when the first tree was
felled, be kept holy for ever, a spot of solitude and peace amid the
trouble and vanity of our week-day world! There is a moral, and a
religion too, even in the silent walls. And may the steeple still
point heavenward and be decked with the hallowed sunshine of the
Sabbath morn!




THE WEDDING-KNELL.


There is a certain church, in the city of New York which I have always
regarded with peculiar interest on account of a marriage there
solemnized under very singular circumstances in my grandmother's
girlhood. That venerable lady chanced to be a spectator of the scene,
and ever after made it her favorite narrative. Whether the edifice now
standing on the same site be the identical one to which she referred I
am not antiquarian enough to know, nor would it be worth while to
correct myself, perhaps, of an agreeable error by reading the date of
its erection on the tablet over the door. It is a stately church
surrounded by an enclosure of the loveliest green, within which appear
urns, pillars, obelisks, and other forms of monumental marble, the
tributes of private affection or more splendid memorials of historic
dust. With such a place, though the tumult of the city rolls beneath
its tower, one would be willing to connect some legendary interest.

The marriage might be considered as the result of an early engagement,
though there had been two intermediate weddings on the lady's part and
forty years of celibacy on that of the gentleman. At sixty-five Mr.
Ellenwood was a shy but not quite a secluded man; selfish, like all
men who brood over their own hearts, yet manifesting on rare occasions
a vein of generous sentiment; a scholar throughout life, though always
an indolent one, because his studies had no definite object either of
public advantage or personal ambition; a gentleman, high-bred and
fastidiously delicate, yet sometimes requiring a considerable
relaxation in his behalf of the common rules of society. In truth,
there were so many anomalies in his character, and, though shrinking
with diseased sensibility from public notice, it had been his fatality
so often to become the topic of the day by some wild eccentricity of
conduct, that people searched his lineage for a hereditary taint of
insanity. But there was no need of this. His caprices had their origin
in a mind that lacked the support of an engrossing purpose, and in
feelings that preyed upon themselves for want of other food. If he
were mad, it was the consequence, and not the cause, of an aimless and
abortive life.

The widow was as complete a contrast to her third bridegroom in
everything but age as can well be conceived. Compelled to relinquish
her first engagement, she had been united to a man of twice her own
years, to whom she became an exemplary wife, and by whose death she
was left in possession of a splendid fortune. A Southern gentleman
considerably younger than herself succeeded to her hand and carried
her to Charleston, where after many uncomfortable years she found
herself again a widow. It would have been singular if any uncommon
delicacy of feeling had survived through such a life as Mrs. Dabney's;
it could not but be crushed and killed by her early disappointment,
the cold duty of her first marriage, the dislocation of the heart's
principles consequent on a second union, and the unkindness of her
Southern husband, which had inevitably driven her to connect the idea
of his death with that of her comfort. To be brief, she was that
wisest but unloveliest variety of woman, a philosopher, bearing
troubles of the heart with equanimity, dispensing with all that should
have been her happiness and making the best of what remained. Sage in
most matters, the widow was perhaps the more amiable for the one
frailty that made her ridiculous. Being childless, she could not
remain beautiful by proxy in the person of a daughter; she therefore
refused to grow old and ugly on any consideration; she struggled with
Time, and held fast her roses in spite of him, till the venerable
thief appeared to have relinquished the spoil as not worth the trouble
of acquiring it.

The approaching marriage of this woman of the world with such an
unworldly man as Mr. Ellenwood was announced soon after Mrs. Dabney's
return to her native city. Superficial observers, and deeper ones,
seemed to concur in supposing that the lady must have borne no
inactive part in arranging the affair; there were considerations of
expediency which she would be far more likely to appreciate than Mr.
Ellenwood, and there was just the specious phantom of sentiment and
romance in this late union of two early lovers which sometimes makes a
fool of a woman who has lost her true feelings among the accidents of
life. All the wonder was how the gentleman, with his lack of worldly
wisdom and agonizing consciousness of ridicule, could have been
induced to take a measure at once so prudent and so laughable. But
while people talked the wedding-day arrived. The ceremony was to be
solemnized according to the Episcopalian forms and in open church,
with a degree of publicity that attracted many spectators, who
occupied the front seats of the galleries and the pews near the altar
and along the broad aisle. It had been arranged, or possibly it was
the custom of the day, that the parties should proceed separately to
church. By some accident the bridegroom was a little less punctual
than the widow and her bridal attendants, with whose arrival, after
this tedious but necessary preface, the action of our tale may be said
to commence.

The clumsy wheels of several old-fashioned coaches were heard, and the
gentlemen and ladies composing the bridal-party came through the
church door with the sudden and gladsome effect of a burst of
sunshine. The whole group, except the principal figure, was made up of
youth and gayety. As they streamed up the broad aisle, while the pews
and pillars seemed to brighten on either side, their steps were as
buoyant as if they mistook the church for a ball-room and were ready
to dance hand in hand to the altar. So brilliant was the spectacle
that few took notice of a singular phenomenon that had marked its
entrance. At the moment when the bride's foot touched the threshold
the bell swung heavily in the tower above her and sent forth its
deepest knell. The vibrations died away, and returned with prolonged
solemnity as she entered the body of the church.

"Good heavens! What an omen!" whispered a young lady to her lover.

"On my honor," replied the gentleman, "I believe the bell has the good
taste to toll of its own accord. What has she to do with weddings? If
you, dearest Julia, were approaching the altar, the bell would ring
out its merriest peal. It has only a funeral-knell for her."

The bride and most of her company had been too much occupied with the
bustle of entrance to hear the first boding stroke of the bell--or, at
least, to reflect on the singularity of such a welcome to the altar.
They therefore continued to advance with undiminished gayety. The
gorgeous dresses of the time--the crimson velvet coats, the gold-laced
hats, the hoop-petticoats, the silk, satin, brocade and embroidery,
the buckles, canes and swords, all displayed to the best advantage on
persons suited to such finery--made the group appear more like a
bright-colored picture than anything real. But by what perversity of
taste had the artist represented his principal figure as so wrinkled
and decayed, while yet he had decked her out in the brightest splendor
of attire, as if the loveliest maiden had suddenly withered into age
and become a moral to the beautiful around her? On they went, however,
and had glittered along about a third of the aisle, when another
stroke of the bell seemed to fill the church with a visible gloom,
dimming and obscuring the bright-pageant till it shone forth again as
from a mist.

This time the party wavered, stopped and huddled closer together,
while a slight scream was heard from some of the ladies and a confused
whispering among the gentlemen. Thus tossing to and fro, they might
have been fancifully compared to a splendid bunch of flowers suddenly
shaken by a puff of wind which threatened to scatter the leaves of an
old brown, withered rose on the same stalk with two dewy buds, such
being the emblem of the widow between her fair young bridemaids. But
her heroism was admirable. She had started with an irrepressible
shudder, as if the stroke of the bell had fallen directly on her
heart; then, recovering herself, while her attendants were yet in
dismay, she took the lead and paced calmly up the aisle. The bell
continued to swing, strike and vibrate with the same doleful
regularity as when a corpse is on its way to the tomb.

"My young friends here have their nerves a little shaken," said the
widow, with a smile, to the clergyman at the altar. "But so many
weddings have been ushered in with the merriest peal of the bells, and
yet turned out unhappily, that I shall hope for better fortune under
such different auspices."

"Madam," answered the rector, in great perplexity, "this strange
occurrence brings to my mind a marriage-sermon of the famous Bishop
Taylor wherein he mingles so many thoughts of mortality and future woe
that, to speak somewhat after his own rich style, he seems to hang the
bridal-chamber in black and cut the wedding-garment out of a
coffin-pall. And it has been the custom of divers nations to infuse
something of sadness into their marriage ceremonies, so to keep death
in mind while contracting that engagement which is life's chiefest
business. Thus we may draw a sad but profitable moral from this
funeral-knell."

But, though the clergyman might have given his moral even a keener
point, he did not fail to despatch an attendant to inquire into the
mystery and stop those sounds so dismally appropriate to such a
marriage. A brief space elapsed, during which the silence was broken
only by whispers and a few suppressed titterings among the
wedding-party and the spectators, who after the first shock were
disposed to draw an ill-natured merriment from the affair. The young
have less charity for aged follies than the old for those of youth.
The widow's glance was observed to wander for an instant toward a
window of the church, as if searching for the time-worn marble that
she had dedicated to her first husband; then her eyelids dropped over
their faded orbs and her thoughts were drawn irresistibly to another
grave. Two buried men with a voice at her ear and a cry afar off were
calling her to lie down beside them. Perhaps, with momentary truth of
feeling, she thought how much happier had been her fate if, after
years of bliss, the bell were now tolling for her funeral and she were
followed to the grave by the old affection of her earliest lover, long
her husband. But why had she returned to him when their cold hearts
shrank from each other's embrace?

Still the death-bell tolled so mournfully that the sunshine seemed to
fade in the air. A whisper, communicated from those who stood nearest
the windows, now spread through the church: a hearse with a train of
several coaches was creeping along the street, conveying some dead man
to the churchyard, while the bride awaited a living one at the altar.
Immediately after, the footsteps of the bridegroom and his friends
were heard at the door. The widow looked down the aisle and clenched
the arm of one of her bridemaids in her bony hand with such
unconscious violence that the fair girl trembled.

"You frighten me, my dear madam," cried she. "For heaven's sake, what
is the matter?"

"Nothing, my dear--nothing," said the widow; then, whispering close to
her ear, "There is a foolish fancy that I cannot get rid of. I am
expecting my bridegroom to come into the church with my two first
husbands for groomsmen."

"Look! look!" screamed the bridemaid. "What is here? The funeral!"

As she spoke a dark procession paced into the church. First came an
old man and woman, like chief mourners at a funeral, attired from head
to foot in the deepest black, all but their pale features and hoary
hair, he leaning on a staff and supporting her decrepit form with his
nerveless arm. Behind appeared another and another pair, as aged, as
black and mournful as the first. As they drew near the widow
recognized in every face some trait of former friends long forgotten,
but now returning as if from their old graves to warn her to prepare a
shroud, or, with purpose almost as unwelcome, to exhibit their
wrinkles and infirmity and claim her as their companion by the tokens
of her own decay. Many a merry night had she danced with them in
youth, and now in joyless age she felt that some withered partner
should request her hand and all unite in a dance of death to the music
of the funeral-bell.

While these aged mourners were passing up the aisle it was observed
that from pew to pew the spectators shuddered with irrepressible awe
as some object hitherto concealed by the intervening figures came full
in sight. Many turned away their faces; others kept a fixed and rigid
stare, and a young girl giggled hysterically and fainted with the
laughter on her lips. When the spectral procession approached the
altar, each couple separated and slowly diverged, till in the centre
appeared a form that had been worthily ushered in with all this gloomy
pomp, the death-knell and the funeral. It was the bridegroom in his
shroud.

No garb but that of the grave could have befitted such a death-like
aspect. The eyes, indeed, had the wild gleam of a sepulchral lamp; all
else was fixed in the stern calmness which old men wear in the coffin.
The corpse stood motionless, but addressed the widow in accents that
seemed to melt into the clang of the bell, which fell heavily on the
air while he spoke.

"Come, my bride!" said those pale lips. "The hearse is ready; the
sexton stands waiting for us at the door of the tomb. Let us be
married, and then to our coffins!"

How shall the widow's horror be represented? It gave her the
ghastliness of a dead man's bride. Her youthful friends stood apart,
shuddering at the mourners, the shrouded bridegroom and herself; the
whole scene expressed by the strongest imagery the vain struggle of
the gilded vanities of this world when opposed to age, infirmity,
sorrow and death.

The awestruck silence was first broken by the clergyman.

"Mr. Ellenwood," said he, soothingly, yet with somewhat of authority,
"you are not well. Your mind has been agitated by the unusual
circumstances in which you are placed. The ceremony must be deferred.
As an old friend, let me entreat you to return home."

"Home--yes; but not without my bride," answered he, in the same hollow
accents. "You deem this mockery--perhaps madness. Had I bedizened my
aged and broken frame with scarlet and embroidery, had I forced my
withered lips to smile at my dead heart, that might have been mockery
or madness; but now let young and old declare which of us has come
hither without a wedding-garment--the bridegroom or the bride."

He stepped forward at a ghostly pace and stood beside the widow,
contrasting the awful simplicity of his shroud with the glare and
glitter in which she had arrayed herself for this unhappy scene. None
that beheld them could deny the terrible strength of the moral which
his disordered intellect had contrived to draw.

"Cruel! cruel!" groaned the heartstricken bride.

"Cruel?" repeated he; then, losing his deathlike composure in a wild
bitterness, "Heaven judge which of us has been cruel to the other! In
youth you deprived me of my happiness, my hopes, my aims; you took
away all the substance of my life and made it a dream without reality
enough even to grieve at--with only a pervading gloom, through which I
walked wearily and cared not whither. But after forty years, when I
have built my tomb and would not give up the thought of resting
there--no, not for such a life as we once pictured--you call me to the
altar. At your summons I am here. But other husbands have enjoyed your
youth, your beauty, your warmth of heart and all that could be termed
your life. What is there for me but your decay and death? And
therefore I have bidden these funeral-friends, and bespoken the
sexton's deepest knell, and am come in my shroud to wed you as with a
burial-service, that we may join our hands at the door of the
sepulchre and enter it together."

It was not frenzy, it was not merely the drunkenness of strong emotion
in a heart unused to it, that now wrought upon the bride. The stern
lesson of the day had done its work; her worldliness was gone. She
seized the bridegroom's hand.

"Yes!" cried she; "let us wed even at the door of the sepulchre. My
life is gone in vanity and emptiness, but at its close there is one
true feeling. It has made me what I was in youth: it makes me worthy
of you. Time is no more for both of us. Let us wed for eternity."

With a long and deep regard the bridegroom looked into her eyes, while
a tear was gathering in his own. How strange that gush of human
feeling from the frozen bosom of a corpse! He wiped away the tear,
even with his shroud.

"Beloved of my youth," said he, "I have been wild. The despair of my
whole lifetime had returned at once and maddened me. Forgive and be
forgiven. Yes; it is evening with us now, and we have realized none of
our morning dreams of happiness. But let us join our hands before the
altar as lovers whom adverse circumstances have separated through
life, yet who meet again as they are leaving it and find their earthly
affection changed into something holy as religion. And what is time to
the married of eternity?"

Amid the tears of many and a swell of exalted sentiment in those who
felt aright was solemnized the union of two immortal souls. The train
of withered mourners, the hoary bridegroom in his shroud, the pale
features of the aged bride and the death-bell tolling through the
whole till its deep voice overpowered the marriage-words,--all marked
the funeral of earthly hopes. But as the ceremony proceeded, the
organ, as if stirred by the sympathies of this impressive scene,
poured forth an anthem, first mingling with the dismal knell, then
rising to a loftier strain, till the soul looked down upon its woe.
And when the awful rite was finished and with cold hand in cold hand
the married of eternity withdrew, the organ's peal of solemn triumph
drowned the wedding-knell.




THE MINISTER'S BLACK VEIL.

A PARABLE.[1]


The sexton stood in the porch of Milford meeting-house pulling lustily
at the bell-rope. The old people of the village came stooping along
the street. Children with bright faces tripped merrily beside their
parents or mimicked a graver gait in the conscious dignity of their
Sunday clothes. Spruce bachelors looked sidelong at the pretty
maidens, and fancied that the Sabbath sunshine made them prettier than
on week-days. When the throng had mostly streamed into the porch, the
sexton began to toll the bell, keeping his eye on the Reverend Mr.
Hooper's door. The first glimpse of the clergyman's figure was the
signal for the bell to cease its summons.

