signature the people at the prison would be sure to obey."

"Then," Victor said, "it must be either Danton or Robespierre."

"Or Marat," Harry added; "I think he is as powerful as either of
the others."

"He is the worst of them, anyhow," Victor said. "There is something
straightforward about Danton. No doubt he is ambitious, but I think
his hatred of us all is real. He is a terrible enemy, and will
certainly stick at nothing. He is ruthless and pitiless, but I do
not think he is double-faced. Robespierre is  ambitious too, but
I think he is really acting according to his principles, such as
they are. He would be pitiless too, but he would murder on principle.

"He would sign unmoved the order for a hundred heads to fall if he
thought their falling necessary or even useful for the course of
the Revolution, but I do not think he would shed a drop of blood
to satisfy private enmity. They call him the 'incorruptible.' He is
more dangerous than Danton, for he has no vices. He lives simply,
and they say is fond of birds and pets. I do not think we should
make much of either Danton or him, even if we got them in our power.

"Danton would be like a wild beast in a snare. He would rage with
fury, but I do not think that he would be intimidated into signing
what we require, not do I think would Robespierre. Marat is a
different creature altogether. He is simply venomous. He hates the
world, and would absolutely rejoice in slaughter. So loathsome is
he in appearance that even his colleagues shrink from him. He is a
venomous reptile whom it would be a pleasure to slay, as it would
be to put one's heel upon a rattlesnake. Whether he is a coward
or not I do not know, but I should think so. Men of his type are
seldom brave. I think if we had him in our hands we might frighten
him into doing what we want."

"Then Marat it shall be," Harry said; "that much is settled. Tomorrow
we will find out something about his  habits. Till we know about
that we cannot form any plan whatever. Let us meet at dinner-time
at our usual place. Then we will  go outside the Assembly and wait
till he comes out. Fortunately we both know him well by sight.  He
will be sure to go, surrounded, as usual, by a mob of his admirers,
to the Jacobin Club. From there we can trace him to his home. No
doubt anyone could tell us where he lives, but it would be dangerous
to ask. When we have found that out we can decide upon our next
step."

They were, however, saved the trouble they contemplated, for they
learned from the conversation of two men among the mob, who cheered
Marat as he entered the Assembly, what they wanted to know.

"Marat is the man for me," one of them said. "He hates the aristocracy;
he would bathe in their blood. I never miss reading his articles
in the Friend of the People. His cry is always 'Blood! Blood!' He
does not ape the manner of the bourgeois. He does not wash his face
and put on clean linen. He is a  great man, but he is as dirty as
the best of us. He still lives in his old lodgings, though he could
move if he liked into any of the fine houses whose owners are in
the prisons. He wants no servants, but lives just as we do. Vive
Marat!"

"Where does the great citizen live?" Victor asked the men in a
tone of earnest entreaty. On learning the address they took their
way to the dirty and disreputable street where Marat lodged.

"The citizen Marat lives in this street, does he not?" Victor asked
a man lounging at the door of a cabaret.

"Yes, in that house opposite. Do you want him?"

"No; only I was curious to see the house where the friend of the
people lives, and as I was passing the end of the street turned
down.  Will you drink a glass?"

"I am always ready for that," the man said, "but in these hard
times one cannot do it as often as one would like."

"That is true enough," Victor said as they took their seats at
a table. "And so Marat lives over there; it's not much of a place
for a great man."

"It is all he wants," the other said carelessly; "and he is safer
here than he would be in the richer quarters. There would be a plot
against him, and those cursed Royalists would kill him if they had
the chance; but he is always escorted home from the club by a band
of patriots."

In the evening Harry and Victor returned to the street and watched
until Marat returned from the Jacobin Club. His escort of men with
torches and bludgeons left him at the door, but two or three went
upstairs with him, and until far in the night visitors came and
went. Then the light in the upper room was extinguished.

"It is not such an easy affair," Victor said as they moved away;
"and you see, as that man in the wine-shop told us, there is an
old woman who cooks for him, and it is much more difficult to seize
two people without an alarm being given than one."

"That is so," Harry agreed; "but it must be done somehow.  Every
day matters grow more threatening, and those bands of scoundrels
from Marseilles have not been brought all this way for nothing.
The worst of it is, we have such a short time to act. Marat does
not seem to be ever alone from early morning until late at night.
Supposing we did somehow get the order of release from him at night
we could not present it till the  morning, and before we could
present it some one might arrive and discover him fastened up, and
might take the news to the prison before we could get them out."

"Yes, that is very serious," Victor agreed. "I begin to despair,
Henri."

"We must not do that," Harry rejoined. "You see we thought it
impossible before till Jeanne gave us the idea. There must be some
way out of it if we could only hit upon it. Perhaps by to-morrow
morning an idea will occur to one of us. And there is another thing
to be thought of; we must procure disguises for them. It would be
of no use whatever getting them out unless we could conceal them
after they are freed. It would not do for them to go to Louise
Moulin's.  She has three visitors already, and the arrival of more
to stay with her would be sure to excite talk among the neighbours.
The last orders are so strict about the punishment of anyone giving
shelter to enemies of the republic, that people who let rooms will
all be suspicious. The only plan will be to get them out of the city
at once. It will be difficult for them to make their way through
France on foot, for in every town and village there is the strictest
look-out kept for suspected persons. Still, that must be risked;
there is no other way."

"Yes, we must see about that to-morrow, Henri; but I do not think
the marquise could support a journey, for they would have to sleep
in the fields. Moreover, she will probably elect to stay near her
children until all can go together. Therefore I think that it will
be best for her to come either to you or me. We can take an additional
room, saying that our mother is coming up from the country to keep
house for us."

"Yes, that would be much the best plan, Victor. And now here we
are close home. I hope by the time we meet in the morning one of
us may have hit upon some plan or other for getting hold of this
scoundrel."

"I have hit upon an idea, Victor," Harry said when they met the
next morning.

"I am glad to hear it, for though I have lain awake all night I
could think of nothing. Well, what is your idea?"

"Well, you see, Marat often goes out in the morning alone. He is
so well known and he is so much regarded by the lower class that
he has no fear of any assault being made upon him during the day.

"My plan is that we should follow him till he gets into some street
with few people about. Then I would rush upon him, seize him, and
draw a knife to strike, shouting, 'Die, villain!' You should be
a few paces behind, and should run up and strike the knife out of
my hand, managing at the same moment to tumble over Marat and fall
with him to the ground. That would give me time to bolt. I would
have a beard on, and would have my other clothes under the blouse.
I would rush into the first doorway and run up stairs, pull off
my beard, blouse, and blue pantaloons, and then walk quietly down.
You would, of course, rush up stairs and meet me on the way. I
should say I had just met a fellow running up stairs, and should
slip quietly off."

"It would be a frightful risk, Henri, frightful!"

"No, I think it could be managed easily enough. Then, of course,
Marat would be very grateful to you, and you could either get him
to visit your lodgings or could go up to his, and once you had
been there you could manage to outsit his last visitor at night,
and then we could do as we agreed."

"But, you know, we thought we should hardly have time in the morning,
Henri!"

"No, I have been thinking of that, and I have come to the conclusion
that our best plan would be to seize him and hold a dagger to his
heart, and threaten to kill him instantly if he did not accompany
us. Then we would go down with him into the street and walk arm in
arm with him to your lodging. We could thrust a ball of wood into
his mouth so that he could not call out even if he had the courage
to do so, which I don't think he would have if he were assured that
if he made the slightest sound we would kill him. Then we could
make him sign the order and leave him fastened up there. It would
be better to take him to your lodgings than mine, in case my visits
to Louise Moulin should have been noticed, and when he is released
there will be a hue and cry after his captors."

"The best plan will be to put a knife into his heart at once the
minute you have got the order signed," Victor said savagely; "I
should have no more hesitation in killing him than stamping on a
snake."

"No, Victor; the man is a monster, but we cannot kill him in cold
blood; besides, we should do more harm than good to the cause, for
the people would consider he had died a martyr to his championship
of their rights, and would be more furious than ever against the
aristocracy."

"But his account of what he has gone through will have just the
same effect, Henri."

"I should think it probable he would keep the story to himself.
What has happened once may happen again; and besides, his cowardice
in signing the release of three enemies of the people in order to
save his life would tell against him. No, I think he would keep
silence. After we have got them safe away we can return and so
far loosen his bonds that he would be able, after a time, to free
himself.  Five minutes' start would be all that we should want."

But the plan was not destined to be carried out. It was the morning of
the 2d of September, 1792, and as they went down into the quarter
where the magazines of old clothes were situated, in order to
purchase the necessary disguises, they soon became sensible that
something unusual was in the air. Separating, they joined the groups
of men at the corners of the streets and tried to learn what was
going on, but none seemed to know for certain. All sorts of sinister
rumours were about. Word had been passed that the Jacobin bands
were to be in readiness that evening. Money had been distributed.
The Marseillais had dropped hints that a blow was to be struck at
the tyrants. Everywhere there was a suppressed excitement among
the working-classes; an air of gloom and terror among the bourgeois.

After some time Harry and Victor came together again and compared
their observations. Neither had learned anything definite, but both
were sure that something unusual was about to take place.

"It may be that a large number of fresh arrests are about to be
made," Harry said. "There are still many deputies who withstand
the violence of the Mountain. It may be that a blow is going to be
struck against them."

"We must hope that that is it," Victor said, "but I am terribly
uneasy."

Harry had the same feeling, but he did his best to reassure his
friend, and proposed that they should at once set about buying
the disguises, and that on the following morning they should carry
into effect their plan with reference to  Marat. The dresses were
bought.  Two suits, such as a respectable mechanic would wear on
Sundays or holidays, were first purchased. There was then a debate
as to the disguise for the marquise; it struck them at once that it
was strange for two young workmen to be purchasing female attire,
but, after some consultation, they decided upon a bonnet and long
cloak, and these Victor went in and bought, gaily telling the
shopkeeper that he was buying a birthday present for his old mother.

They took the clothes up to Harry's room, agreeing that Louise could
easily buy the rest of the garments required for the marquise as
soon as she was free, but they decided to say nothing about the
attempt that was about to be made until it was over, as it would
cause an anxiety which the old woman would probably be unable to
conceal from the girls.

Victor did not accompany Harry to his room; they had never, indeed,
visited each other in their apartments, meeting always some little
distance away in order that their connection should be unobserved,
and that, should one be arrested, no suspicion would follow the
other. As soon as he had deposited the clothes Harry sallied out
again, and on rejoining Victor they made their way down to the
Hotel de Ville, being too anxious to remain quiet. They could learn
nothing from the crowd which was, as usual, assembled before the
Hotel.

There was a general impression that something was about to happen,
but none could give any definite reason for their belief. All day
they wandered about restless and anxious. They fought their way
into the galleries of the Assembly when the doors opened, but for
a time nothing new took place.

The Assembly, in which the moderates had still a powerful voice,
had protested against the assumption of authority by the council of
the Commune sitting at the Hotel de Ville. But the Assembly lacked
firmness, the Commune every day gained in power. Already warrants
of arrest were prepared against the Girondists, the early leaders
of the movement.

Too restless to remain in the Assembly, Victor and Harry again
took their steps to the Hotel de Ville. Just as they arrived there
twenty-four persons, of whom twenty-two  were priests, were brought
out from the prison of the Maine by a party of Marseillais, who
shouted, "To the Abbaye!" These ruffians pushed the prisoners into coaches
standing at the door, shouting: "You will not arrive at the prison;
the people are waiting to tear you in pieces." But the people looked
on silently in sullen apathy.

"You see them," the Marseillais shouted. "There they are. You are
about to march to Verdun. They only wait for your departure to
butcher your wives and children."

Still the crowd did not move. The great mass of the people had no
share in the bloody deeds of the Revolution; these were the work of
a few score of violent men, backed by the refuse of the population.
A few shouts were raised here and there of, "Down with the priests!"
But more of the crowd joined in the shouts which Victor and Harry
lustily raised of, "Shame, down with the Marseillais!" Victor would
have pressed forward to attack the Marseillais had not Harry held
his arm tightly, exclaiming in his ear:

"Restrain yourself, Victor. Think of the lives that depend upon
ours. The mob will not follow you. You can do nothing yourself.
Come, get out of the crowd."

So saying he dragged Victor away. It was well that they could not
see what was taking place in the coaches, or Victor's fury would
have been ungovernable, for several of the ruffians had drawn their
swords and were hacking furiously at their prisoners.

"We will follow them," Harry said, when he and Victor had made
their way out of the crowd; "but you must remember, Victor, that,
come what may, you must keep cool. You would only throw away your
life uselessly; for Marie's sake you must keep calm. Your life
belongs to her, and you have no right to throw it away."

"You are right, Henri," Victor said gloomily; "but how can one look
on and see men inciting others to massacre? What is going to take
place? We must follow them."

"I am ready to follow them," Harry said; "but you must not go
unless you are firmly resolved to restrain your feelings whatever
may happen. You can do no possible good, and will only involve
yourself in the destruction of others."

"You may trust me," the young count said; "I will be calm for
Marie's sake."

Harry had his doubts as to his friend's power of self-control, but
he was anxious to see what was taking place, and they joined the
throng that followed the coaches. But they were now in the rear,
and could see nothing that was taking place before them. When the
carriages reached the Abbaye the prisoners alighted. Some of them
were at once cut down by the Marseillais, the rest fled into the
hall, where one of the committees was sitting. Its members, however,
did nothing to protect them, and looked on while all save two were
massacred unresistingly. Then the Marseillais came out brandishing
their bloody weapons and shouting, "The good work has begun; down
with the priests! Down with the enemies of the people!"

The better class of people in the crowd assembled at the Hotel de
Ville had not followed the procession to the Abbaye. They had been
horror-struck at the words and actions of the Marseillais, and
felt that this was the beginning of the fulfilment of the rumours
of the last few days.

The murder of the first prisoner was indeed the signal for every
man of thought or feeling and of heart to draw back from the
