
"No, sir."

"I am surprised that he should not have done so. I sent for him as well
as you."

"I believe he is coming by the next train," said Frank, indifferently.
"He thought he could not get ready in time for my train."

"He should not have left you to come at such a time."

"I didn't wish him to inconvenience himself, Mr. Manning. If it had been
his mother, it would have been different."

Mr. Manning did not reply. He understood very well that there was no
love lost between Mark and his stepson.




CHAPTER III

FRANK'S BEREAVEMENT


Early in the evening Mark made his appearance. Supper had been over for
an hour, and everything was cold. In a house where there is sickness,
the regular course of things is necessarily interrupted, and, because he
could not have his wants attended to immediately, Mark saw fit to
grumble and scold the servants. He was not a favorite with them, and
they did not choose to be bullied.

Deborah, who had been in the house for ten years, and so assumed the
independence of an old servant, sharply reprimanded the spoiled boy.

"You ought to be ashamed, Mr. Mark," she said, "of making such a fuss
when my poor mistress lies upstairs at the point of death."

"Do you know who you are talking to?" demanded Mark, imperiously, for he
could, when speaking with those whom he regarded as inferiors, exchange
his soft tones for a voice of authority.

"I ought to know by this time," answered Deborah, contemptuously. "There
is no other in the house like you, I am glad to say."

"You are very impertinent. You forget that you are nothing but a
servant."

"A servant has the right to be decently treated, Mr. Mark."

"If you don't look out," said Mark, in a blustering tone, "I will report
you to my father, and have you kicked out of the house."

Deborah was naturally incensed at this rude speech, but she was spared
the trouble of replying. Frank entered the room at this moment in time
to hear Mark's last speech.

"What is this about being kicked out of the house?" he asked, looking
from Mark to Deborah, in a tone of unconscious authority, which
displeased his stepbrother.

"That is my business," replied Mark, shortly.

"Mr. Mark has threatened to have me kicked out of the house because he
has to wait for his supper," said Deborah.

"It wasn't for that. It was because you were impertinent. All the same,
I think it is shameful that I can't get anything to eat."

"I regret, Mark," said Frank, with cool sarcasm, "that you should be
inconvenienced about your meals. Perhaps you will excuse it, as my poor
mother is so sick that she requires extra attention from the servants.
Deborah, if possible, don't let Mark wait much longer. It seems to be
very important that he should have his supper."

"He shall have it," assured Deborah, rather enjoying the way in which
Mark was put down; "that is, if he don't get me kicked out of the
house."

"You had better not make any such threats in the future, Mark," said
Frank, significantly.

"Who's to hinder?" blustered Mark.

"I am," answered Frank, pointedly.

"You are nothing but a boy like me," retorted Mark.

"My mother is mistress here, and I represent her."

"Things may change soon," muttered Mark; but Frank had left the room and
did not hear him.

Mark did not trouble himself even to inquire for his stepmother, but
went out to the stable and lounged about until bedtime. He seemed very
much bored, and so expressed himself.

Frank wished to sit up all night with his mother, but, as she had a
professional nurse, it was thought best that he should obtain his
regular rest, the nurse promising to call the family if any change
should be apparent in her patient's condition.

About half-past four in the morning there was a summons.

"Mrs. Manning is worse," said the nurse. "I don't think she can last
long."

One last glance of love--though she could no longer speak--assured Frank
that she knew him and loved him to the last.

The memory of that look often came back to him in the years that
followed, and he would not have parted with it for anything that earth
could give.

Just as the clock struck five, his mother breathed her last. The boy
gazed upon the inanimate form, but he was dazed, and could not realize
that his mother had left him, never to return.

"She is gone," said Mr. Manning, softly.

"Dead!" ejaculated Frank.

"Yes, her sufferings are over. Let us hope she is better off. My boy, I
think you had better return to your bed. You can do nothing for your
mother now."

"I would rather stay here," said Frank, sadly. "I can at least look at
her, and soon I shall lose even that comfort."

The thought was too much for the poor boy, and he burst into tears.

"Do as you please, Frank," assented Mr. Manning. "I feel for you, and I
share in your grief. I will go and tell Mark of our sad loss."

He made his way to Mark's chamber and entered. He touched Mark, who was
in a doze, and he started up.

"What's the matter?" he asked, crossly.

"Your poor mother is dead, Mark."

"Well, there was no need to wake me for that," said the boy, irritably.
"I can't help it, can I?"

"I think, my son, you might speak with more feeling. Death is a solemn
thing."

"There's nobody here but me," said Mark, sneering.

"I don't catch your meaning," said his father, showing some annoyance,
for it is not pleasant to be seen through.

"Why should you care so much?" continued Mark. "I suppose you will be
well provided for. Do you know how she has left the property? How much
of it goes to Frank?"

"I can't say," said Mr. Manning. "I never asked my wife."

"Do you mean to say, father, that you don't know how the property is
left?" asked Mark, with a sharp glance at his father.

"I may have my conjectures," said Mr. Manning, softly. "I don't think my
dear wife would leave me without some evidences of her affection.
Probably the bulk of the estate goes to your brother, and something to
me. Doubtless we shall continue to live here, as I shall naturally be
your brother's guardian."

"Don't call him my brother," said Mark.

"Why not? True, he is only your stepbrother; but you have lived under
the same roof, and been to school together, and this ought to strengthen
the tie between you."

"I don't like Frank," said Mark. "He puts on altogether too many airs."

"I had not observed that," said his father.

"Well, I have. Only this evening he saw fit to speak impudently to me."

"Indeed! I am really amazed to hear it," said Mr. Manning, softly.

"Oh, he thinks he is the master of the house, or will be," said Mark,
"and he presumes on that."

"He is unwise," said Mr. Manning. "Even if the whole property descends
to him, which I can hardly believe possible, I, as his guardian, will
have the right to control him."

"I hope you'll do it, father. At any rate, don't let him boss over me,
for I won't stand it."

"I don't think he will boss over you," answered his father, in a slow,
measured voice, betraying, however, neither anger nor excitement. "Of
course, I should not permit that."

Mark regarded his father fixedly.

"I guess the old man knows what's in the will," he said to himself. "He
knows how to feather his own nest. I hope he's feathered mine, too."

Mr. Manning passed from his son's chamber and went softly upstairs,
looking thoughtful.

Anyone who could read the impassive face would have read trouble in
store for Frank.




CHAPTER IV

MRS. MANNING'S WILL


During the preparations for the funeral Frank was left pretty much to
himself.

Mr. Manning's manner was so soft, and to him had been so deferential,
that he did not understand the man. It didn't occur to him that it was
assumed for a purpose.

That manner was not yet laid aside. His stepfather offered to comfort
him, but Frank listened in silence. Nothing that Mr. Manning could say
had the power to lighten his load of grief. So far as words could
console him, the sympathy of Deborah and the coachman, both old
servants, whom his mother trusted, had more effect, for he knew that it
was sincere, and that they were really attached to his mother.

Of Mr. Manning he felt a profound distrust, which no words of his could
remove.

Meanwhile, Mr. Manning was looking from an upper window down the fine
avenue, and his eye ranged from left to right over the ample estate with
a glance of self-complacent triumph.

"All mine at last!" he said to himself, exultingly. "What I have been
working for has come to pass. Three years ago I was well-nigh penniless,
and now I am a rich man. I shall leave Mark the master of a great
fortune. I have played my cards well. No one will suspect anything
wrong. My wife and I have lived in harmony. There will be little wonder
that she has left all to me. There would be, perhaps, but for the manner
in which I have taken care he shall be mentioned in the will--I mean, of
course, in the will I have made for her."

He paused, and, touching a spring in the wall, a small door flew open,
revealing a shallow recess.

In this recess was a folded paper, tied with a red ribbon.

Mr. Manning opened it, and his eyes glanced rapidly down the page.

"This is the true will," he said to himself. "I wish I could summon
courage to burn it. It would be best out of the way. That, if found
out, would make me amenable to the law, and I must run no risk. In this
secret recess it will never be found. I will replace it, and the
document which I have had prepared will take its place, and no one will
be the wiser."

On the day after the funeral, the family solicitor and a few intimate
friends, who had been invited by Mr. Manning, assembled in the drawing
room of the mansion to hear the will read.

Mr. Manning himself notified Frank of the gathering and its object.

He found our hero lying on the bed in his chamber, sad and depressed.

"I don't like to intrude upon your grief, my dear boy," said his
stepfather, softly, "but it is necessary. The last will of your dear
mother and my beloved wife is about to be read, and your presence is
necessary."

"Couldn't it be put off?" asked Frank, sadly. "It seems too soon to
think of such things."

"Pardon me, my dear Frank, but it is quite needful that there should be
an immediate knowledge of the contents of the will, in order that the
right person may look after the business interests of the estate. I
assure you that it is the invariable custom to read the will immediately
after the funeral."

"If that is the custom, and it is necessary, I have nothing to say. When
is the will to be read?"

"At three o'clock, and it is now two."

"Very well, sir; I will come down in time."

"Of course there can't be much doubt as to the contents of the will,"
pursued Mr. Manning. "You are doubtless the heir, and as you are a
minor, I am probably your guardian. Should such be the case, I hope
that the relations between us may be altogether friendly."

"I hope so," said Frank, gravely.

At three o'clock the members of the family, with a few outside friends,
gathered in the drawing room. The family solicitor, Mr, Ferret, held in
his hand what purported to be the last will of Mrs. Manning.

The widowed husband had directed the lawyer to the bureau of the
deceased lady as likely to contain her will. It was found without
trouble in the topmost drawer.

Deborah and the coachman had speculated as to whether they would be
invited to attend at the reading of the will.

Their doubts were set at rest by an invitation from Mr. Manning himself.

"You were so long in the service of my dear wife," he said, "that it is
fitting that you be present at the reading of her will, in which it is
quite probable that you may be personally interested."

"He is uncommonly polite, I am sure," thought Deborah, disposed for the
moment to think more favorably of the man whom she had never been able
to like.

"My friends," said the lawyer, after a preliminary cough, "you are
assembled to listen to the will of Mrs. Manning, just deceased. The
document which I hold in my hand I believe to be such an instrument. I
will now open if for the first time."

He untied the ribbon, and began reading the will.

It commenced with the usual formula, and proceeded to a few bequests of
trifling amount.

Deborah and Richard Green were each left two hundred dollars, "as a
slight acknowledgment of their faithful service."

One or two friends of the family were remembered, but to an
inconsiderable extent. Then came the important clause:

"All the rest and residue of the property of which I may die possessed I
leave to my beloved husband, James Manning, whose devoted affection has
made happy the last years of my life. Having implicit confidence in his
good judgment and kindness of heart, I request him to make proper
provision for my dear son Frank, whose happiness I earnestly desire. I
hope that he will consent to be guided by the wisdom and experience of
his stepfather, who, I am sure, will study his interests and counsel him
wisely. In my sorrow at parting with my dear son, it is an unspeakable
comfort to me to feel that he will have such a guardian and protector."

Frank listened with amazement, which was shared by all present.

Practically, he was disinherited, and left wholly dependent upon his
stepfather.




CHAPTER V

DISINHERITED


The contents of the will created general astonishment. There was not one
in the room who didn't know the devotion of Mrs. Manning to her son
Frank, yet, while speaking of him affectionately, she had treated him,
as they considered, most cruelly. Why should she have left such a
dangerous power in her husband's hands?

And how was Mr. Manning affected?

He summoned to his face an expression of bewilderment and surprise,
and, feeling that all eyes were fixed upon, him, he turned toward the
lawyer.

"Mr. Ferret," he said, "I need hardly say that this will surprises me
very much, as I see that it does the friends who are present. Are you
sure that there is no codicil?"
