
"I wish there really were fairies," said Jane. "Wouldn't it be nice to
have three wishes granted you . . . or even only one? What would you wish
for, girls, if you could have a wish granted? I'd wish to be rich and
beautiful and clever."

"I'd wish to be tall and slender," said Diana.

"I would wish to be famous," said Priscilla. Anne thought of her hair
and then dismissed the thought as unworthy.

"I'd wish it might be spring all the time and in everybody's heart and
all our lives," she said.

"But that," said Priscilla, "would be just wishing this world were like
heaven."

"Only like a part of heaven. In the other parts there would be summer
and autumn . . . yes, and a bit of winter, too. I think I want glittering
snowy fields and white frosts in heaven sometimes. Don't you, Jane?"

"I . . . I don't know," said Jane uncomfortably. Jane was a good girl,
a member of the church, who tried conscientiously to live up to her
profession and believed everything she had been taught. But she never
thought about heaven any more than she could help, for all that.

"Minnie May asked me the other day if we would wear our best dresses
every day in heaven," laughed Diana.

"And didn't you tell her we would?" asked Anne.

"Mercy, no! I told her we wouldn't be thinking of dresses at all there."

"Oh, I think we will . . . a LITTLE," said Anne earnestly. "There'll be
plenty of time in all eternity for it without neglecting more important
things. I believe we'll all wear beautiful dresses . . . or I suppose
RAIMENT would be a more suitable way of speaking. I shall want to wear
pink for a few centuries at first . . . it would take me that long to get
tired of it, I feel sure. I do love pink so and I can never wear it in
THIS world."

Past the spruces the lane dipped down into a sunny little open where
a log bridge spanned a brook; and then came the glory of a sunlit
beechwood where the air was like transparent golden wine, and the leaves
fresh and green, and the wood floor a mosaic of tremulous sunshine. Then
more wild cherries, and a little valley of lissome firs, and then a hill
so steep that the girls lost their breath climbing it; but when they
reached the top and came out into the open the prettiest surprise of all
awaited them.

Beyond were the "back fields" of the farms that ran out to the upper
Carmody road. Just before them, hemmed in by beeches and firs but open
to the south, was a little corner and in it a garden  . . . or what had
once been a garden. A tumbledown stone dyke, overgrown with mosses and
grass, surrounded it. Along the eastern side ran a row of garden cherry
trees, white as a snowdrift. There were traces of old paths still and
a double line of rosebushes through the middle; but all the rest of the
space was a sheet of yellow and white narcissi, in their airiest, most
lavish, wind-swayed bloom above the lush green grasses.

"Oh, how perfectly lovely!" three of the girls cried. Anne only gazed in
eloquent silence.

"How in the world does it happen that there ever was a garden back
here?" said Priscilla in amazement.

"It must be Hester Gray's garden," said Diana. "I've heard mother speak
of it but I never saw it before, and I wouldn't have supposed that it
could be in existence still. You've heard the story, Anne?"

"No, but the name seems familiar to me."

"Oh, you've seen it in the graveyard. She is buried down there in the
poplar corner. You know the little brown stone with the opening gates
carved on it and 'Sacred to the memory of Hester Gray, aged twenty-two.'
Jordan Gray is buried right beside her but there's no stone to him. It's
a wonder Marilla never told you about it, Anne. To be sure, it happened
thirty years ago and everybody has forgotten."

"Well, if there's a story we must have it," said Anne. "Let's sit right
down here among the narcissi and Diana will tell it. Why, girls, there
are hundreds of them . . . they've spread over everything. It looks as if
the garden were carpeted with moonshine and sunshine combined. This is
a discovery worth making. To think that I've lived within a mile of this
place for six years and have never seen it before! Now, Diana."

"Long ago," began Diana, "this farm belonged to old Mr. David Gray. He
didn't live on it . . . he lived where Silas Sloane lives now. He had one
son, Jordan, and he went up to Boston one winter to work and while
he was there he fell in love with a girl named Hester Murray. She
was working in a store and she hated it. She'd been brought up in the
country and she always wanted to get back. When Jordan asked her to
marry him she said she would if he'd take her away to some quiet spot
where she'd see nothing but fields and trees. So he brought her to
Avonlea. Mrs. Lynde said he was taking a fearful risk in marrying a
Yankee, and it's certain that Hester was very delicate and a very poor
housekeeper; but mother says she was very pretty and sweet and Jordan
just worshipped the ground she walked on. Well, Mr. Gray gave Jordan
this farm and he built a little house back here and Jordan and Hester
lived in it for four years. She never went out much and hardly anybody
went to see her except mother and Mrs. Lynde. Jordan made her this
garden and she was crazy about it and spent most of her time in it. She
wasn't much of a housekeeper but she had a knack with flowers. And then
she got sick. Mother says she thinks she was in consumption before she
ever came here. She never really laid up but just grew weaker and weaker
all the time. Jordan wouldn't have anybody to wait on her. He did it all
himself and mother says he was as tender and gentle as a woman. Every
day he'd wrap her in a shawl and carry her out to the garden and she'd
lie there on a bench quite happy. They say she used to make Jordan kneel
down by her every night and morning and pray with her that she might die
out in the garden when the time came. And her prayer was answered. One
day Jordan carried her out to the bench and then he picked all the roses
that were out and heaped them over her; and she just smiled up at him
. . . and closed her eyes . . . and that," concluded Diana softly, "was
the end."

"Oh, what a dear story," sighed Anne, wiping away her tears.

"What became of Jordan?" asked Priscilla.

"He sold the farm after Hester died and went back to Boston. Mr. Jabez
Sloane bought the farm and hauled the little house out to the road.
Jordan died about ten years after and he was brought home and buried
beside Hester."

"I can't understand how she could have wanted to live back here, away
from everything," said Jane.

"Oh, I can easily understand THAT," said Anne thoughtfully. "I wouldn't
want it myself for a steady thing, because, although I love the fields
and woods, I love people too. But I can understand it in Hester. She
was tired to death of the noise of the big city and the crowds of people
always coming and going and caring nothing for her. She just wanted to
escape from it all to some still, green, friendly place where she could
rest. And she got just what she wanted, which is something very few
people do, I believe. She had four beautiful years before she died. . .
four years of perfect happiness, so I think she was to be envied more
than pitied. And then to shut your eyes and fall asleep among roses,
with the one you loved best on earth smiling down at you . . . oh, I think
it was beautiful!"

"She set out those cherry trees over there," said Diana. "She told
mother she'd never live to eat their fruit, but she wanted to think that
something she had planted would go on living and helping to make the
world beautiful after she was dead."

"I'm so glad we came this way," said Anne, the shining-eyed. "This is
my adopted birthday, you know, and this garden and its story is the
birthday gift it has given me. Did your mother ever tell you what Hester
Gray looked like, Diana?"

"No . . . only just that she was pretty."

"I'm rather glad of that, because I can imagine what she looked like,
without being hampered by facts. I think she was very slight and small,
with softly curling dark hair and big, sweet, timid brown eyes, and a
little wistful, pale face."

The girls left their baskets in Hester's garden and spent the rest
of the afternoon rambling in the woods and fields surrounding it,
discovering many pretty nooks and lanes. When they got hungry they had
lunch in the prettiest spot of all . . . on the steep bank of a gurgling
brook where white birches shot up out of long feathery grasses. The
girls sat down by the roots and did full justice to Anne's dainties,
even the unpoetical sandwiches being greatly appreciated by hearty,
unspoiled appetites sharpened by all the fresh air and exercise they had
enjoyed. Anne had brought glasses and lemonade for her guests, but for
her own part drank cold brook water from a cup fashioned out of birch
bark. The cup leaked, and the water tasted of earth, as brook water
is apt to do in spring; but Anne thought it more appropriate to the
occasion than lemonade.

"Look do you see that poem?" she said suddenly, pointing.

"Where?" Jane and Diana stared, as if expecting to see Runic rhymes on
the birch trees.

"There . . . down in the brook . . . that old green, mossy log with the
water flowing over it in those smooth ripples that look as if they'd
been combed, and that single shaft of sunshine falling right athwart it,
far down into the pool. Oh, it's the most beautiful poem I ever saw."

"I should rather call it a picture," said Jane. "A poem is lines and
verses."

"Oh dear me, no." Anne shook her head with its fluffy wild cherry
coronal positively. "The lines and verses are only the outward garments
of the poem and are no more really it than your ruffles and flounces are
YOU, Jane. The real poem is the soul within them  . . . and that beautiful
bit is the soul of an unwritten poem. It is not every day one sees a
soul . . . even of a poem."

"I wonder what a soul . . . a person's soul . . . would look like," said
Priscilla dreamily.

"Like that, I should think," answered Anne, pointing to a radiance of
sifted sunlight streaming through a birch tree. "Only with shape and
features of course. I like to fancy souls as being made of light. And
some are all shot through with rosy stains and quivers . . . and some
have a soft glitter like moonlight on the sea . . . and some are pale and
transparent like mist at dawn."

"I read somewhere once that souls were like flowers," said Priscilla.

"Then your soul is a golden narcissus," said Anne, "and Diana's is like
a red, red rose. Jane's is an apple blossom, pink and wholesome and
sweet."

"And your own is a white violet, with purple streaks in its heart,"
finished Priscilla.

Jane whispered to Diana that she really could not understand what they
were talking about. Could she?

The girls went home by the light of a calm golden sunset, their baskets
filled with narcissus blossoms from Hester's garden, some of which Anne
carried to the cemetery next day and laid upon Hester's grave. Minstrel
robins were whistling in the firs and the frogs were singing in the
marshes. All the basins among the hills were brimmed with topaz and
emerald light.

"Well, we have had a lovely time after all," said Diana, as if she had
hardly expected to have it when she set out.

"It has been a truly golden day," said Priscilla.

"I'm really awfully fond of the woods myself," said Jane.

Anne said nothing. She was looking afar into the western sky and
thinking of little Hester Gray.




XIV

A Danger Averted


Anne, walking home from the post office one Friday evening, was joined
by Mrs. Lynde, who was as usual cumbered with all the cares of church
and state.

"I've just been down to Timothy Cotton's to see if I could get Alice
Louise to help me for a few days," she said. "I had her last week, for,
though she's too slow to stop quick, she's better than nobody. But
she's sick and can't come. Timothy's sitting there, too, coughing and
complaining. He's been dying for ten years and he'll go on dying for
ten years more. That kind can't even die and have done with it . . . they
can't stick to anything, even to being sick, long enough to finish it.
They're a terrible shiftless family and what is to become of them I
don't know, but perhaps Providence does."

Mrs. Lynde sighed as if she rather doubted the extent of Providential
knowledge on the subject.

"Marilla was in about her eyes again Tuesday, wasn't she? What did the
specialist think of them?" she continued.

"He was much pleased," said Anne brightly. "He says there is a great
improvement in them and he thinks the danger of her losing her sight
completely is past. But he says she'll never be able to read much or
do any fine hand-work again. How are your preparations for your bazaar
coming on?"

The Ladies' Aid Society was preparing for a fair and supper, and Mrs.
Lynde was the head and front of the enterprise.

"Pretty well . . . and that reminds me. Mrs. Allan thinks it would be nice
to fix up a booth like an old-time kitchen and serve a supper of baked
beans, doughnuts, pie, and so on. We're collecting old-fashioned fixings
everywhere. Mrs. Simon Fletcher is going to lend us her mother's braided
rugs and Mrs. Levi Boulter some old chairs and Aunt Mary Shaw will lend
us her cupboard with the glass doors. I suppose Marilla will let us have
her brass candlesticks? And we want all the old dishes we can get. Mrs.
Allan is specially set on having a real blue willow ware platter if we
can find one. But nobody seems to have one. Do you know where we could
get one?"

"Miss Josephine Barry has one. I'll write and ask her if she'll lend it
for the occasion," said Anne.

"Well, I wish you would. I guess we'll have the supper in about a
fortnight's time. Uncle Abe Andrews is prophesying rain and storms for
about that time; and that's a pretty sure sign we'll have fine weather."

The said "Uncle Abe," it may be mentioned, was at least like other
prophets in that he had small honor in his own country. He was, in
fact, considered in the light of a standing joke, for few of his weather
predictions were ever fulfilled. Mr. Elisha Wright, who labored under
the impression that he was a local wit, used to say that nobody in
Avonlea ever thought of looking in the Charlottetown dailies for weather
probabilities. No; they just asked Uncle Abe what it was going to be
tomorrow and expected the opposite. Nothing daunted, Uncle Abe kept on
prophesying.

"We want to have the fair over before the election comes off," continued
Mrs. Lynde, "for the candidates will be sure to come and spend lots of
money. The Tories are bribing right and left, so they might as well be
given a chance to spend their money honestly for once."

Anne was a red-hot Conservative, out of loyalty to Matthew's memory,
but she said nothing. She knew better than to get Mrs. Lynde started
on politics. She had a letter for Marilla, postmarked from a town in
British Columbia.

"It's probably from the children's uncle," she said excitedly, when she
got home. "Oh, Marilla, I wonder what he says about them."

"The best plan might be to open it and see," said Marilla curtly. A
close observer might have thought that she was excited also, but she
would rather have died than show it.

Anne tore open the letter and glanced over the somewhat untidy and
poorly written contents.

"He says he can't take the children this spring . . . he's been sick most
of the winter and his wedding is put off. He wants to know if we can
keep them till the fall and he'll try and take them then. We will, of
course, won't we Marilla?"

"I don't see that there is anything else for us to do," said Marilla
rather grimly, although she felt a secret relief. "Anyhow they're not so
much trouble as they were . . . or else we've got used to them. Davy has
improved a great deal."

"His MANNERS are certainly much better," said Anne cautiously, as if she
were not prepared to say as much for his morals.

Anne had come home from school the previous evening, to find Marilla
away at an Aid meeting, Dora asleep on the kitchen sofa, and Davy in
the sitting room closet, blissfully absorbing the contents of a jar of
Marilla's famous yellow plum preserves . . .  "company jam," Davy called
it . . . which he had been forbidden to touch. He looked very guilty when
Anne pounced on him and whisked him out of the closet.
