          Bill was a scamp, Sir;
          Bill was a thief!
          Bill stole an egg, Sir;
          Bill came to grief.
    Ol' Bill Possum, it served him right;
    And he is no more, for he died last night."

"Very good, Sah, very good. Ah cert'nly am obliged to yo'all for yo'
serenade," said a voice that seemed to come out of the tree at Reddy's
back.

Reddy Fox sprang up as if some one had stuck a pin into him. Every
hair stood on end, as he looked up at Unc' Billy's doorway. Then his
teeth began to chatter with fright. Looking out of Unc' Billy's
doorway and grinning down at him was something that looked for all the
world like Unc' Billy himself.

"It must be his ghost!" said Reddy, and tucking his tail between his
legs, he started up the Crooked Little Path as fast as his legs could
take him.

Reddy never once looked back. If he had, he might have seen Unc' Billy
Possum climb down from the hollow tree and shake hands with Jimmy
Skunk, who had just come along.

"How did Ah do it? Why, Ah just pretended Ah was daid, when Farmer
Brown's boy caught me," explained Unc' Billy. "Of course he' wouldn't
kill a daid Possum. So when he tossed me down on the chopping-block
and turned his back, Ah just naturally came to life again, and here
Ah am."

Unc' Billy Possum grinned broader than ever, and Jimmy Skunk grinned,
too.




III

UNC' BILLY POSSUM SENDS FOR HIS FAMILY


The news that Unc' Billy Possum wasn't dead at all but was back in his
hollow tree in the Green Forest soon spread through all the Green
Forest and over the Green Meadows. Everybody hastened to pay their
respects, that is everybody but Reddy Fox. Unc' Billy and his partner,
Jimmy Skunk, told every one who called how Reddy Fox had thought that
Unc' Billy was a ghost and had been frightened almost to death, so
that he ran away as fast as his legs could take him. Unc' Billy
grinned as he told how Reddy had sat under the hollow tree and tried
to sing because he was so glad that Unc' Billy was dead, and all the
little people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows laughed until
their sides ached when in a funny, cracked voice Unc' Billy sang the
song for them.

Thereafter whenever one of them caught sight of Reddy Fox at a safe
distance, he would shout:

   "Ol' Bill Possum, he's gone before!
    Ol' Bill Possum, he is no more!"

It got so that Reddy never came down on the Green Meadows in the
daytime, and at night he avoided meeting any one if possible, even his
old friend, Bobby Coon. And of course Reddy Fox hated Unc' Billy
Possum more than ever.

But Unc' Billy didn't care, not he! He knew that all the rest of the
little people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows thought him
the smartest of them all, because of the way in which he had fooled
Bowser the Hound and Farmer Brown's boy. He liked his neighbors, he
liked the Green Forest, and so he made up his mind that this was the
place for him to stay.

But in spite of all his friends, Unc' Billy was lonesome. The longer
he stayed, the more lonesome he grew, Unc' Billy wanted his family,
whom he had left way down in "Ol' Virginny." Finally he told Jimmy
Skunk all about it, and for once Unc' Billy had forgotten how to grin.
Yes, Sir, Unc' Billy had forgotten how to grin. Instead he just wept,
wept great big tears of lonesomeness.

"Ah reckon Ah'll have to go back to Ol' Virginny, Ah cert'nly do,"
said Unc' Billy Possum.

Jimmy Skunk grew very thoughtful. Since he and Unc' Billy Possum had
been in partnership, Jimmy had had more eggs to eat than ever before
in his whole life. Now Unc' Billy was talking about going away. Jimmy
thought very hard. Then he had a bright idea.

"Why not send for your family to come here and live in the Green
Forest, Uncle Billy?" he asked.

Unc' Billy stopped crying. His two little eyes looked up sharply. "How
do yo'all reckon Ah can send word?" he asked.

Jimmy scratched his head. "There's Mr. Skimmer the Swallow; he's
fixing to go South. Perhaps he'll take the message to your family,"
said he.

"The very thing!" cried Unc' Billy Possum, wiping his eyes. "Ah thanks
yo', Sah. Ah does, indeed. Ah'll see Mistah Skimmer at once."

And without another word Unc' Billy Possum started down the Crooked
Little Path for the Green Meadows to look for Skimmer the Swallow.




IV

BOBBY COON ENTERS THE WRONG HOUSE


After Unc' Billy Possum had arranged with Skimmer the Swallow, who was
going South, to take a message to his family in "Ol' Virginny,"
telling them to come and join him in the Green Forest, he at once
began to make preparations to receive them. Unc' Billy isn't any too
fond of work. He had a lot rather that some one else should do the
work for him, and he is smart enough to fix it so that usually some
one else does.

But getting ready to receive his family was different. No one else
could arrange things to suit him. This was Unc' Billy's own job, and
he tended right to it every minute of the day. First of all he had to
clean house. He had been keeping bachelor's hall so long in the big
hollow tree that things were not very tidy. So Unc' Billy cleaned
house, and while he worked he whistled and sang. Peter Rabbit, passing
that way, overheard Unc' Billy singing:

   "Mah ol' woman is away down Souf--
            Come along! Come along!
    Ain't nothin' sharper than the tongue in her mouf--
            Come along! Come along!
    She once was pretty, but she ain't no mo',
    But she cooks mah meals an' she sweeps mah flo';
    She darns mah stockings an' she mends mah coat,
    An' she knows jes' how mah chillun fer to tote--
            Come along! Come along!

   "Mah pickaninnies am a-headin' dis way--
            Come along! Come along!
    Daddy am a-watchin' fo' 'em day by day--
            Come along! Come along!
    Mah ol' haid aches when Ah thinks ob de noise
    De's boun' to be wid dem gals an' boys,
    But Ah doan care if it busts in two
    If de good Lord brings dem chillun troo--
            Come along! Come along!"

Every little while Unc' Billy Possum would sit down to rest, for he
wasn't used to so much real work. But finally he got his house clean
and made as comfortable as possible, and about that time be began to
think how good an egg would taste. The more he thought about it, the
more he wanted that egg.

"It's no use talking, Ah just naturally has to have that egg," said
Unc' Billy to himself, and off he started for Farmer Brown's.

Now Unc' Billy was hardly out of sight when along came Bobby Coon.
Bobby Coon was absent-minded, or else he was so sleepy that he didn't
know what he was doing, for Bobby Coon had been out all night. Anyway,
when he reached Unc' Billy Possum's hollow tree, he began to climb up
it just as if it were his own. He looked in at Unc' Billy's door.
There was the most comfortable bed that he had seen for a long time.
He looked this way and he looked that way. Nobody was in sight. Then
he looked in at Unc' Billy's door once more. That bed certainly did
look soft and comfortable. Bobby Coon chuckled to himself.

"I believe I'll just see if that bed is as comfortable as it looks,"
said he.

And two minutes later Bobby Coon was curled up fast asleep in Unc'
Billy Possum's bed.




V

BOBBY COON IS WAKED UP


   "Dey's a-coming, dey's a-coming, dey's a-coming mighty soon.
    But dey can't come soon enuff fo' me!
    Dey's a-coming, dey's a-coming at de turning ob de moon,
    Whar Ah waits in mah ol' holler tree!"

Unc' Billy Possum was singing to himself, as he slowly trudged home
from Farmer Brown's hen-house. He was feeling very good, very good
indeed, was Unc' Billy Possum. No one appreciates strictly fresh eggs
more than Unc' Billy does, and he had found more than he could eat
waiting for him in Farmer Brown's hen-house. Now his stomach was full,
his house had been cleaned and put to rights, ready for his family
when they should arrive from "Ol' Virginny," and he had nothing to do
but wait for them. So he trudged along and sang in a funny, cracked
voice.

Presently he came to his big hollow tree and started to climb up to
the door of his house. Half way up he broke off short in the middle of
his song and sat down on a convenient branch. He put one ear against
the trunk of the tree and listened. Then he put the other ear against
the tree and listened. There certainly was a funny noise, and it
seemed to come from right inside his hollow tree. Unc' Billy turned
and looked up at his doorway, scratching his head thoughtfully with
one hand.

"Mah goodness!" said Unc' Billy, "it cert'nly sounds like there was
somebody in mah house!"

Then very softly Unc' Billy crept up to his doorway and peeped in. It
was dark inside, so that Unc' Billy could see little else than that
his nice, freshly made, comfortable bed was all mussed up. But if he
couldn't see, he could hear. Oh, yes, indeed, Unc' Billy could hear
perfectly well, and what he heard was a snore! There was some one in
Unc' Billy's house, and more than that, they were fast asleep in Unc'
Billy's bed.

"Mah goodness! Mah goodness!" exclaimed Unc' Billy Possum, and his two
sharp little eyes began to snap. Then he stuck his head in at the door
and shouted:

"Hi, yo'all! What yo' doing in mah house?"

The only answer was another snore. Unc' Billy waited a minute. Then he
put his head in once more.

"Yo' better come out of mah house, Mr. Who-ever-yo'-are, before Ah
comes in and puts yo' out!" shouted Unc' Billy.

The only answer was a snore louder than before. Then Unc' Billy quite
