whose frantic shrieks pierced the soul of our youthful hero.

The course of the road was by the river's side for nearly half a mile,
and crossed the stream at a wooden bridge but a few rods from the place
where the boys were fishing.

Bobby Bright's impulses were noble and generous; and without stopping
to consider the peril to which the attempt would expose him, he boldly
resolved to stop that horse, or let the animal dash him to pieces on
the bridge.

"Now or never!" shouted he, as he leaped from the rock, and ran with
all his might to the bridge.

The shrieks of the lady rang in his ears, and seemed to command him,
with an authority which he could not resist, to stop the horse.  There
was no time for deliberation; and, indeed, Bobby did not want any
deliberation.  The lady was in danger; if the horse's flight was not
checked, she would be dashed in pieces; and what then could excuse him
for neglecting his duty?  Not the fear of broken limbs, of mangled
flesh, or even of a sudden and violent death.

It is true Bobby did not think of any of these things; though, if he
had, it would have made no difference with him.  He was a boy who would
not fight except in self-defence, but he had the courage to do a deed
which might have made the stoutest heart tremble with terror.

Grasping a broken rail as he leaped over the fence, he planted himself
in the middle of the bridge, which was not more than half as wide as
the road at each end of it, to await the coming of the furious animal.
On he came, and the piercing shrieks of the affrighted lady nerved him
to the performance of his perilous duty.

The horse approached him at a mad run, and his feet struck the loose
planks of the bridge.  The brave boy then raised his big club, and
brandished it with all his might in the air.  Probably the horse did
not mean any thing very bad; was only frightened, and had no wicked
intentions towards the lady; so that when a new danger menaced him in
front, he stopped suddenly, and with so much violence as to throw the
lady forward from her seat upon the dasher of the chaise.  He gave a
long snort, which was his way of expressing his fear.  He was evidently
astonished at the sudden barrier to his further progress, and commenced
running back.

"Save me!" screamed the lady.

"I will, ma'am; don't be scared!" replied Bobby, confidently, as he
dropped his club, and grasped the bridle of the horse, just as he was
on the point of whirling round to escape by the way he had come.

"Stop him!  Do stop him!" cried the lady.

"Whoa!" said Bobby, in gentle tones, as he patted the trembling horse
on his neck.  "Whoa, good horse!  Be quiet!  Whoa!"

The animal, in his terror, kept running backward and forward; but Bobby
persevered in his gentle treatment, and finally soothed him, so that he
stood quiet enough for the lady to get out of the chaise.

"What a miracle that I am alive!" exclaimed she when she realized that
she stood once more upon the firm earth.

"Yes, ma'am, it is lucky he didn't break the chaise.  Whoa!  Good
horse!  Stand quiet!"

"What a brave little fellow you are!" said the lady, as soon as she
could recover her breath so as to express her admiration of Bobby's
bold act.

"O, I don't mind it," replied he, blushing like a rose in June.  "Did
he run away with you?"

"No; my father left me in the chaise for a moment while he went into a
store in the village, and a teamster who was passing by snapped his
whip, which frightened Kate so that she started off at the top of her
speed.  I was so terrified, that I screamed with all my might, which
frightened her the more.  The more I screamed, the faster she ran."

"I dare say.  Good horse!  Whoa, Kate!"

"She is a splendid creature; she never did such a thing before.  My
father will think I am killed."

By this time, Kate had become quite reasonable, and seemed very much
obliged to Bobby for preventing her from doing mischief to her
mistress; for she looked at the lady with a glance of satisfaction,
which her deliverer interpreted as a promise to behave better in
future.  He relaxed his grasp upon the bridle, patted her upon the
neck, and said sundry pleasant things to encourage her in her assumed
purpose of doing better.  Kate appeared to understand Bobby's kind
words, and declared as plainly as a horse could declare that she would
be sober and tractable.

"Now, ma'am, if you will get into the chaise again, I think Kate will
let me drive her down to the village."

"O, dear!  I should not dare to do so."

"Then, if you please, I will drive down alone, so as to let your father
know that you are safe."

"Do."

"I am sure he must feel very bad, and I may save him a great deal of
pain, for a man can suffer a great deal in a very short time."

"You are a little philosopher, as well as a hero, and if you are not
afraid of Kate, you may do as you wish."

"She seems very gentle now;" and Bobby turned her round, and got into
the chaise.

"Be very careful," said the lady.

"I will."

Bobby took the reins, and Kate, true to the promise she had virtually
made, started off at a round pace towards the village.

He had not gone more than a quarter of a mile of the distance when he
met a wagon containing three men, one of whom was the lady's father.
The gestures which he made assured Bobby he had found the person whom
he sought, and he stopped.

"My daughter!  Where is she?" gasped the gentleman, as he leaped from
the wagon.

"She is safe, sir," replied Bobby, with all the enthusiasm of his warm
nature.

"Thank God!" added the gentleman, devoutly as he placed himself in the
chaise by the side of Bobby.




CHAPTER II.

IN WHICH BOBBY BLUSHES SEVERAL TIMES, AND DOES A SUM IN ARITHMETIC.

Mr. Bayard, the owner of the horse, and the father of the lady whom
Bobby had saved from impending death, was too much agitated to say
much, even to the bold youth who had rendered him such a signal
service.  He could scarcely believe the intelligence which the boy
brought him; it seemed too good to be true.  He had assured himself
that Ellen--for that was the young lady's name--was killed, or
dreadfully injured.

Kate was driven at the top of her speed, and in a few moments reached
the bridge, where Ellen was awaiting his arrival.

"Here I am, father, alive and unhurt!" cried Ellen, as Mr. Bayard
stopped the horse.

"Thank Heaven my child!" replied the glad father, embracing his
daughter.  "I was sure you were killed."

"No, father; thanks to this bold youth, I am uninjured."

"I am under very great obligations to you, young man," continued Mr.
Bayard, grasping Bobby's hand.

"O, never mind, sir;" and Bobby blushed just as he had blushed when the
young lady spoke to him.

"We shall never forget you--shall we, father?" added Ellen.

"No, my child; and I shall endeavor to repay, to some slight extent,
our indebtedness to him.  But you have not yet told me how you were
saved."

"O, I merely stopped the horse; that's all," answered Bobby, modestly.

"Yes, father, but he placed himself right before Kate when she was
almost flying over the ground.  When I saw him, I was certain that he
would lose his life, or be horribly mangled for his boldness,"
interposed Ellen.

"It was a daring deed, young man, to place yourself before an
affrighted horse in that manner," said Mr. Bayard.

"I didn't mind it, sir."

"And then he flourished a big club, almost as big as he is himself, in
the air, which made Kate pause in her mad career, when my deliverer
here grasped her by the bit and held her."

"It was well and bravely done."

"That it was, father; not many men would have been bold enough to do
what he did," added Ellen, with enthusiasm.

"Very true; and I feel, that I am indebted to him for your safety.
What is your name, young man?"

"Robert Bright, sir."

Mr. Bayard took from his pocket several pieces of gold, which he
offered to Bobby.

"No, I thank you, sir," replied Bobby, blushing.

"What! as proud as you are bold?"

"I don't like to be paid for doing my duty."

"Bravo!  You are a noble little fellow!  But you must take this money,
not as a reward for what you have done, but as a testimonial of my
gratitude."

"I would rather not, sir."

"Do take it, Robert," added Ellen.

"I don't like to take it.  It looks mean to take money for doing one's
duty."

"Take it, Robert, to please me;" and the young lady smiled so sweetly
that Bobby's resolution began to give way.  "Only to please me, Robert."

"I will, to please you; but I don't feel right about it."

"You must not be too proud, Robert," said Mr. Bayard, as he put the
gold pieces into his hand.

"I am not proud, sir; only I don't like to be paid for doing my duty."

"Not paid, my young friend.  Consider that you have placed me under an
obligation to you for life.  This money is only an expression of my own
and my daughter's feelings.  It is but a small sum, but I hope you will
permit me to do something more for you, when you need it.  You will
regard me as your friend as long as you live."

"Thank you, sir."

"When you want any assistance of any kind, come to me.  I live in
Boston; here is my business card."

Mr. Bayard handed him a card, on which Bobby read, "F. Bayard & Co.,
Booksellers and Publishers, No. ---- Washington Street, Boston."

"You are very kind, sir."

"I want you should come to Boston and see us too," interposed Ellen.
"I should be delighted to show you the city, to take you to the
Athenaeum and the Museum."

"Thank you."

Mr. Bayard inquired of Bobby about his parents, where he lived, and
about the circumstances of his family.  He then took out his memorandum
book, in which he wrote the boy's name and residence.

"I am sorry to leave you now, Robert, but I have over twenty miles to
ride to-day.  I should be glad to visit your mother, and next time I
come to Riverdale, I shall certainly do so."

"Thank you, sir; my mother is a very poor woman, but she will be glad
to see you."

"Now, good by, Robert."

"Good by," repeated Ellen.

"Good by."

Mr. Bayard drove off, leaving Bobby standing on the bridge with the
gold pieces in his hand.

"Here's luck!" said Bobby, shaking the coin.  "Won't mother's eyes
stick out when she sees these shiners?  There are no such shiners in
the river as these."

Bobby was astonished, and the more he gazed at the gold pieces, the
more bewildered he became.  He had never held so much money in his hand
before.  There were three large coins and one smaller one.  He turned
them over and over, and finally ascertained that the large coins were
ten dollar pieces, and the smaller one a five dollar piece.  Bobby was
not a great scholar, but he knew enough of arithmetic to calculate the
value of his treasure.  He was so excited, however, that he did not
arrive at the conclusion half so quick as most of my young readers
would have done.

"Thirty-five dollars!" exclaimed Bobby, when the problem was solved.
"Gracious!"

"Hallo, Bob!" shouted Tom Spicer, who had got tired of fishing;
besides, the village clock was just striking twelve, and it was time
for him to go home.

Bobby made no answer, but hastily tying the gold pieces up in the
corner of his handkerchief, he threw the broken rail he had used in
stopping the horse where it belonged, and started for the place where
he had left his fishing apparatus.

"Hallo, Bob!"

"Well, Tom?"

"Stopped him--didn't you?"

"I did."

"You were a fool; he might have killed you."

"So he might; but I didn't stop to think of that.  The lady's life was
in danger."

"What of that?"

"Every thing, I should say."

"Did he give you any thing?"

"Yes;" and Bobby continued his walk down to the river's side.

"I say, what did he give you, Bobby?" persisted Tom, following him.

"O, he gave me a good deal of money."

"How much?"
