slowly on.

"Now I must go back," said Grace, as they neared the corner.

Just then Anne exclaimed very softly, "Look, Grace, isn't that Marian
and her cavalier?"

"Where!" asked Grace, turning quickly.

"Across the street, coming in this direction. I do believe Marian is
crying, too. They are crossing now, and will pass us. I don't think
they've seen us yet."

Completely absorbed in their own affairs the approaching couple had not
noticed either Grace or Anne.

"How could I have been so foolish!" the two girls heard Marian say
tearfully.

"Don't be an idiot," her companion answered in rough tones. "You may win
yet. I had inside information that it was safe to put the money on it.
You act like a baby." Then he muttered something that was inaudible to
the listeners.

"You are very unkind, Henry," wailed Marian.

But in the next instant Henry Hammond had seen the two girls. With a
savage "cut it out, can't you! Don't let every one know your business,"
his scowling expression changed to the polite smiling mask that he
habitually wore.

But Grace, who in spite of her former disagreement with him, had for
Marian's sake favored him with a cool bow when he happened to cross her
path even after Marian had stopped speaking, was up in arms at his
display of rudeness to the girl who had cut herself off from her dearest
friends to please him.

Marian averted her face as they passed opposite the chums, but her
companion, who was preparing to bow, became suddenly disconcerted by the
steady, scornful gaze of two pairs of eyes, that looked their full
measure of contempt, and hastily turning his attention to Marian passed
by without speaking.

"Contemptible coward!" raged Grace. "Did you hear what he said, Anne?"

"I should have cut his acquaintance on the spot."

"There is something queer about all this," mused Grace. "This is the
second conversation of the sort that has taken place between those two
that I have overheard. I wonder if he has persuaded Marian to put money
into his real estate schemes, for I believe they are nothing but
schemes."

"But Marian has no money of her own," protested Anne. "Don't you
remember how delighted she was when she deposited the judge's check and
received her first check book?"

"I wonder--"

Grace paused. A sudden suspicion entered her mind, that she instantly
dismissed.

"You don't believe--" began Anne, but Grace stopped her.

"No, dear," she answered firmly. "We mustn't ever allow ourselves to
entertain such a thought. Marian may have foolishly risked money of her
own that we know nothing of, but as for anything else--Marian is still a
member of our sorority and the honor of the Phi Sigma Tau is above
reproach."




CHAPTER XVII

ANNE BECOMES FAMOUS


That Anne Pierson was to play a six weeks' engagement in New York under
the management of the great Southard was a nine days' matter of wonder
in Oakdale.

In spite of the fact that Anne tried to keep the news within her
immediate circle of friends, it spread like wildfire.

"You'll just have to let me tell it, Anne," laughed Nora O'Malley. "I
can't keep it to myself."

Rather to Anne's surprise, there was little disapproval expressed in
regard to her coming engagement. Those who had seen her enact "Rosalind"
in the High School production of "As You Like It," fully described in
"Grace Harlowe's Junior Year at High School," had been then
convinced that her ability was little short of genius. But the interest
of the thing deepened when the story crept about that this engagement
meant a college career for her, and Anne became the idol of the hour.

"The whole town has gone mad over Anne," replied Jessica. "I expect to
see a howling populace at the station when she leaves for New York
to-morrow."

The three chums were seated upon the single bed in Anne's little room at
the Pierson cottage, while Anne sat on the floor before an open trunk,
busily engaged in packing.

"What shall we do without you!" lamented Grace. "Positively I have
sorrowfully accompanied departing friends to the station so many times
since school began that it's becoming second nature to me."

"Good-bye, forever; good-bye, forever," hummed Nora.

"Stop it instantly, Nora," commanded Grace. "Don't harrow my feelings
until the time comes."

"Anne, you must write to us often," stipulated Jessica.

"Of course I shall," replied Anne. "Remember you are all coming down to
see me, the very first Saturday that you can. I do hope the boys can
make arrangements to be there at the same time."

"How lovely it was of Mrs. Gibson to suggest a theatre party and offer
to chaperon us," said Nora.

"Everyone has been too sweet for anything," replied Anne, looking up
from her task with a fond smile at the three eager faces of her friends.

"You didn't have the least bit of trouble about getting away from
school, did you?" asked Jessica.

"No," replied Anne. "You see, I have enough counts to graduate now. I'm
not depending on any of my June exams. I can easily make up the time
when I come back."

"I imagine Marian Barber wishes that she hadn't been quite so hasty,"
said Nora. "She is going to miss an awfully nice trip."

"Perhaps we ought to send her an invitation," suggested Jessica.

"No, Jessica," said Grace gravely. "Marian must be the one to make
advances. If she comes back to us, it must be of her own free will. We
have done our part."

"Can we do anything to help you, Anne?" asked Grace.

"Yes," replied Anne, looking ruefully at the overflowing trunk. "You can
all come over and sit upon this trunk. I never shall get the lid down
any other way."

This having been successfully accomplished, the three girls took leave
of Anne, who promised to be on hand for a final session that night at
Grace's.

Before eight o'clock the next morning Anne departed for New York, laden
with flowers, magazines and candy, bestowed upon her by the Phi Sigma
Tau, who had risen before daybreak in order to be in time to see her
off. She had purposely chosen an early train, as she wished to arrive in
New York before the darkness of the winter evening closed in.

Mr. Southard and his sister were to meet her at the Jersey station, but
careful little soul that she was, Anne decided that in case anything
unforeseen arose to prevent their coming, she would have less difficulty
in finding her way about in daylight.

"Take good care of yourself, Anne," commanded Nora, patting Anne on the
shoulder.

"You do the same," replied Anne. "Don't forget that theatre party,
either."

"We'll be there," Grace assured her, as she followed Anne up the aisle
with her suit case. "By the way, Anne, here's my sweater. I thought you
might need it during rehearsals. The stage is likely to be draughty."

"Grace Harlowe, you are too good to me," murmured Anne, as she
reluctantly took the package that Grace thrust into her unwilling hands.

"All aboard," shouted the brakeman, and with a hasty kiss Grace hurried
down the steps to join her friends, who stood on the station platform
waving their farewells to the brown-eyed girl who was to separate from
them for the first time since the beginning of their High School career.

The days slipped quickly away, and the girl chums heard frequently from
Anne, who had arrived at her destination in safety, was met by the
Southards and carried off to their comfortable home. She was enjoying
every minute of her stay, she wrote them, and every one was very kind to
her. Miss Southard was a dear, and she was looking forward to the visit
of the Phi Sigma Tau with almost as much enthusiasm as Anne herself.

The boys had been duly informed of Anne's good fortune, and the Saturday
of the third week of Anne's engagement had been the date fixed upon for
the theatre party. Tom Gray would bring Arnold Evans. Hippy, David and
Reddy would join them in New York. Then the five boys would repair to
the hotel where the girls were to stop, accompanied by Mrs. Gibson and
James Gardiner, who was again invited to make the number even.

Intense excitement prevailed in school when it was learned that the Phi
Sigma Tau were to go to New York to see Anne as "Rosalind," and the five
girls were carried upon the top wave of popularity.

Marian and Eleanor alone remained aloof, evincing no outward interest in
the news, although both thought rather enviously of the good time in New
York that awaited the girls they had repudiated.

The eventful Saturday came at last, and the five girls, chaperoned by
Mrs. Gibson, with James Gardiner for a bodyguard, boarded the same
express that had carried Anne off and were whirled away to the
metropolis.

As soon as they arrived in New York they were conveyed by taxicabs to
their hotel and on entering the reception room were hailed with delight
by the boys, who had arrived only half an hour before. While they were
busily engaged in exchanging news, Anne hurried in from a rehearsal, was
seized by Grace, then passed from one to the other until, freeing
herself, she said, laughing:

"Do let me stand still for a second. I haven't had a really good look at
any of you yet."

"What do you mean by becoming a Shakespearian star without consulting me
first!" demanded David, with mock severity, although there was a rather
wistful look in his eyes as they looked into Anne's. David preferred to
keep Anne the little High School girl he had known for the past three
years. Theatrical stars were somewhat out of his firmament.

"Don't worry," Anne assured him. "It's only for three more weeks. I'll
be back in Oakdale in plenty of time to finish up my senior year with
the girls."

"Anne, you haven't any idea of how much we have missed you," cried Nora.
"We can't get used to being without you."

"I've missed you, too," responded Anne who stood with Grace's arm around
her, smiling lovingly at her little circle of friends.

"Of course I have had a good many rehearsals--one every day, and
sometimes two--so the time has fairly raced by; but when the play is
over and I am on the way home at night, then I think of all of you, and
it seems as though I must take the next train back to Oakdale."

"Do let me talk," interposed Hippy, who had hitherto been devoting his
attention to Nora. "No one knows how I long to be back in Oakdale, fair
village of my birth, home of the chafing dish and the cheerful chocolate
cream. 'Tis there that the friends of my youth flourish, and the grass
green banner of O'Malley waves. Take me back; oh, take me--"

"You will be taken away back and set down with a jar in about two
seconds if you are seized with another of those spells," promised Tom
Gray, turning a withering glance upon Hippy.

"What sort of jar," asked Hippy, with an interested grin. "A cooky jar
or merely a glass candy jar? Be sure you make it a full one."

"It will be a full one," replied Tom with emphasis, "and will last you
for a long time."

"I don't believe I'll take up with your proposition," said Hippy
hastily. "There is something about the tone of your voice that makes my
spinal column vibrate with nervous apprehension. I think I had better
confine my conversation strictly to Nora. She is sympathetic and also
skilled in argument."

With this, he took Nora by the arm and would have marched her out of the
group had she not protested so vigorously that he turned from her in
disgust and began questioning James Gardiner as to how he managed to
survive the journey and what methods he had used to insure good behavior
on the part of his charges, much to the embarrassment of that youth, who
was anything but a "ladies' man."

"My dear young people," finally said Mrs. Gibson, laughingly, "this
impromptu reception is liable to last all night unless it is checked by
a stern hand. It is almost five o'clock, and we haven't even seen our
rooms yet. Besides, Anne will have to leave before long for the theatre.
Let us hurry with our dressing, order an early dinner and keep Anne here
for it. Shall you be able to stay?" she asked, turning to Anne.

"I think so," replied Anne. "I do not have to be in the theatre until
after seven. But I am not dressed for dinner," she added, looking
doubtfully at her street costume. "You see, I came straight from
rehearsal."

"Never mind, Anne," interposed Grace, "you are a star, and stars have
the privilege of doing as they choose. At least that's what the Sunday
papers say. Miriam and I are going to room together. Come up with us."

Mrs. Gibson had engaged rooms ahead for her party, and the girls soon
found themselves in very luxurious quarters, with a trim maid on hand to
attend to their wants.

The boys had engaged rooms on the floor above that occupied by Mrs.
Gibson and the Phi Sigma Tau. James Gardiner heaved a sigh of relief as
he deposited his suit case beside Tom's in the room to which they had
been assigned.

"Girls are an awful responsibility," he remarked gloomily, with a
care-worn expression that made Tom shout with laughter. "I like them all
right enough, but not in bunches."

By making a special effort, the party was ready by six o'clock to
descend to dinner, which was served to them in a private dining room,
Mrs. Gibson having thoughtfully made this arrangement, in order to give
the young folks as much time together as possible.

They made a pretty picture as they sat at the round table, the delicate
finery of the girls gaining in effect from the sombre evening coats of
the boys. Mrs. Gibson, gowned in white silk with an overdress of black
chiffon, sat at the head of the table and did the honors of the
occasion.

"I feel frightfully out of place in this company of chivalry and
beauty," Anne remarked, looking fondly about her at the friends whose
presence told more plainly than words could have done the place she
occupied in their hearts.

"Think how we shall fade into insignificance to-night when you hold
forth with the great Southard," retorted Nora. "I shall consider myself
honored by even a mere bow from you, after you have taken curtain calls
before a New York audience."

"When I was with Edwin Booth," began Hippy reminiscently, "he often said
to me, 'Hippy, my boy, my acting is nothing compared to yours. You
are--'"

"A first cousin to Ananias and Sapphira," finished David derisively.

"Never heard of them," replied Hippy unabashed. "Not branches of our
family tree. As I was saying--"

"Never mind what you were saying," said Nora in cutting tones. "Listen
to me. It is seven o'clock. Anne must go, and in a taxicab, at that."

"Where shall we see you after the performance, dear?" asked Grace.

"Mr. Southard has obtained special permission for all of you to go
behind the scenes after the play."

"How lovely!" cried the girls.

"My curiosity will at last be satisfied. I have always wanted to go
