observe the following rules:

RULE II.--Avoid the omission of unaccented vowels.

EXAMPLES.

Incorrect      Correct            Incorrect      Correct
---------      -----------        ----------     ---------
Sep'rate       sep-a-rate         Ev'dent        ev-i-dent
met-ric'l      met-ric-al         mem'ry         mem-o-ry
'pear          ap-pear            'pin-ion       o-pin-ion
com-p'tent     com-pe-tent        pr'pose        pro-pose
pr'cede        pre-cede           gran'lar       gran-u-lar
'spe-cial      es-pe-cial         par-tic'lar    par-tic-u-lar



RULE III.--Avoid sounding incorrectly the unaccented vowels.

EXAMPLES.

Incorrect       Correct            Incorrect       Correct
----------      -----------        ------------    ------------
Sep-er-ate      sep-a-rate         Mem-er-ry       mem-o-ry
met-ric-ul      met-ric-al         up-pin-ion      o-pin-ion
up-pear         ap-pear            prup-ose        pro-pose
com-per-tent    com-pe-tent        gran-ny-lar     gran-u-lar
dum-mand        de-mand            par-tic-e-lar   par-tic-u-lar
ob-stur-nate    ob-sti-nate        ev-er-dent      ev-i-dent


REMARK I.--In correcting errors of this kind in words of more than one
syllable, it is very important to avoid a fault which is the natural
consequence of an effort to articulate correctly. Thus, in endeavoring to
sound correctly the a in met'ric-al, the pupil is very apt to say
met-ric-al'. accenting the last syllable instead of the first.

REMARK 2.--The teacher should bear it in mind that in correcting a fault
there is always danger of erring in the opposite extreme. Properly
speaking, there is no danger of learning to articulate too distinctly, but
there is danger of making the obscure sounds too prominent, and of reading
in a slow, measured, and unnatural manner.

RULE IV.--Utter distinctly the terminating subvocals and aspirates.

EXAMPLES.

Incorrect     Correct      Incorrect     Correct
---------     -------      ---------     -------
An'           and          Mos'          mosque
ban'          band         near-es'      near-est
moun'         mound        wep'          wept
mor-nin'      morn-ing     ob-jec'       ob-ject
des'          desk         sub-jec       sub-ject


REMARK 1.--This omission is still more likely to occur when several
consonants come together.


EXAMPLES.

Incorrect     Correct          Incorrect      Correct
---------     --------         ---------      ----------
Thrus'        thrusts          Harms'         harm'st
beace         beasts           wrongs'        wrong'st
thinks'       thinkst          twinkles'      twinkl'dst
weps'         weptst           black'ns       black'n'dst


REMARK 2.--In all cases of this kind these sounds are omitted, in the
first instance, merely because they are difficult, and require care and
attention for their utterance, although after a while it becomes a habit.
The only remedy is to devote that care and attention which may be
necessary. There is no other difficulty, unless there should be a defect
in the organs of speech, which is not often the case.

RULE V.--A void blending syllables which belong to different words.

EXAMPLES.

INCORRECT.            CORRECT.
----------            ------------
He ga-zdupon.         He gazed upon.
Here res tsis sed.    Here rests his head.
Whattis sis sname?    What is his name?
For ranninstantush.   For an instant hush.
Ther ris sa calm,     There is a calm.
For tho stha tweep.   For those that weep.
God sglorou simage.   God's glorious image.


EXERCISES IN ARTICULATION.

This exercise and similar ones will afford valuable aid in training the
organs to a distinct articulation.

  Every vice fights against nature.
  Folly is never pleased with itself.
  Pride, not nature, craves much.
  The little tattler tittered at the tempest.
  Titus takes the petulant outcasts.
  The covetous partner is destitute of fortune.
  No one of you knows where the shoe pinches.
  What can not be cured must be endured.
  You can not catch old birds with chaff.
  Never sport with the opinions of others.
  The lightnings flashed, the thunders roared.
  His hand in mine was fondly clasped.
  They cultivated shrubs and plants.
  He selected his texts with great care.
  His lips grow restless, and his smile is curled half into scorn.
  Wisdom's ways are ways of pleasantness.
  O breeze, that waftst me on my way!
  Thou boast'st of what should be thy shame.
  Life's fitful fever over, he rests well.
  Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons?
  From star to star the living lightnings flash.
  And glittering crowns of prostrate seraphim.
  That morning, thou that slumber'd'st not before.
  Habitual evils change not on a sudden.
  Thou waft'd'st the rickety skiffs over the cliffs.
  Thou reef'd'st the haggled, shipwrecked sails.
  The honest shepherd's catarrh.
  The heiress in her dishabille is humorous.
  The brave chevalier behaves like a conservative.
  The luscious notion of champagne and precious sugar.

III. INFLECTIONS.

Inflections are slides of the voice upward or downward. Of these, there
are two: the rising inflection and the falling inflection.

The Rising Inflection is that in which the voice slides upward, and is
marked thus ('); as,

   Did you walk'? Did you walk.

The Falling Inflection is that in which the voice slides downward, and is
marked thus ('); as,

  I did not walk'. I did not walk.

Both inflections are exhibited in the following question:

  Did you walk' or ride'? walk or ride.

In the following examples, the first member has the rising and the second
member the falling inflection:

EXAMPLES.[1]

  Is he sick', or is he well'?
  Did you say valor', or value'?
  Did you say statute', or statue'?
  Did he act properly', or improperly'?

[Footnote 1: These questions and similar ones, with their answers, should
be repeatedly pronounced with their proper  inflection, until the
distinction between the rising and falling inflection is well understood
and easily made by the learner. He will be assisted in this by
emphasizing strongly the word which receives the inflection, thus. Did
you RIDE' or did you WALK'?]

In the following examples, the inflections are used in a contrary order,
the first member terminating with the falling and the second with the
rising inflection:

EXAMPLES.

  He is well', not sick'.
  I said value', not valor'.
  I said statue', not statute'.
  He acted properly', not improperly'.


FALLING INFLECTIONS.

Rule VI.--The falling inflection is generally proper wherever the sense is
complete.

EXAMPLES.

  Truth is more wonderful than fiction'.
  Men generally die as they live'.
  By industry we obtain wealth'.


REMARK.--Parts of a sentence often make complete sense in themselves, and
in this case, unless qualified or restrained by the succeeding clause, or
unless the contrary is indicated by some other principle, the falling
inflection takes place according to the rule.


EXAMPLES

  Truth is wonderful', even more so than fiction'.

  Men generally die as they live' and by their actions we must judge of
  their character'.


Exception.--When a sentence concludes with a negative clause, or with a
contrast or comparison (called also antithesis), the first member of which
requires the falling inflection, it must close with the rising inflection.
(See Rule XI, and paragraph 2, Note.)

EXAMPLES.

No one desires to be thought a fool'.

I come to bury' Caesar, not to praise' him.

He lives in England' not in France'.


REMARK.--In bearing testimony to the general character of a man we say:

  He is too honorable' to be guilty of a vile' act.

But if he is accused of some act of baseness, a contrast is at once
instituted between his character and the specified act, and we change the
inflections, and say:

  He is too honorable' to be guilty of such' an act.

A man may say in general terms:

  I am too busy' for projects'.

But if he is urged to embark in some particular enterprise, he will
change the inflections, and say:

  I am too busy' for projects'.

In such cases, as the falling inflection is required in the former part by
the principle of contrast and emphasis (as will hereafter be more fully
explained), the sentence necessarily closes with the rising inflection.
Sometimes, also, emphasis alone seems to require the rising inflection on
the concluding word. See exception to Rule VII.

(5.-2.)


STRONG EMPHASIS.

RULE VII.--Language which demands strong emphasis generally requires the
falling inflection.

EXAMPLES.
1. Command or urgent entreaty; as,

  Begone',
  Run' to your houses, fall' upon your knees,
  Pray' to the Gods to intermit the plagues.

  0, save' me, Hubert' save' me I My eyes are out
  Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.


2. Exclamation, especially when indicating strong emotion; as,

  0, ye Gods'! ye Gods'! must I endure all this?

  Hark'! Hark'! the horrid sound
  Hath raised up his head.


For interrogatory exclamation, see Rule X, Remark.



SERIES OF WORDS OR MEMBERS.

3. A series of words or members, whether in the beginning or middle of a
sentence, if it does not conclude the sentence, is called a commencing
series, and usually requires the rising inflection when not emphatic.

EXAMPLES OF COMMENCING SERIES.

  Wine', beauty', music', pomp', are poor expedients to heave off the load
  of an hour from the heir of eternity'.

  I conjure you by that which you profess,
  (Howe'er you came to know it,) answer me;
  Though you untie the winds and let them fight
  Against the churches'; though the yeasty waves
  Confound and swallow navigation' up;
  Though bladed corn be lodged, and trees blown down';
  Though castles topple on their warders' heads';
  Though palaces and pyramids do slope
  Their heads to their foundations'; though the treasures
  Of nature's germens tumble altogether',
  Even till destruction sicken'; answer me
  To what I ask' you.


4. A series of words or members which concludes a sentence is called a
concluding series, and each member usually has the falling inflection.

EXAMPLE OF CONCLUDING SERIES.

They, through faith, subdued kingdoms', wrought righteousness' obtained
promises', stopped the mouths of lions', quenched the violence of fire',
escaped the edge of the sword', out of weakness were made strong', waxed
valiant in fight', turned to flight the armies of the aliens'.


REMARK.--When the emphasis on these words or members is not marked, they
take the rising inflection, according to Rule IX.

EXAMPLES.

  They are the offspring of restlessness', vanity', and idleness'.
  Love', hope', and joy' took possession of his breast.

5. When words which naturally take the rising inflection become emphatic
by repetition or any other cause, they often take the falling inflection.

Exception to the Rule.--While the tendency of emphasis is decidedly to the
use of the falling inflection, sometimes a word to which the falling
inflection naturally belongs changes this, when it is emphatic, for the
rising inflection.

EXAMPLES.

  Three thousand ducats': 't is a good round sum'.
  It is useless to point out the beauties of nature to one who is blind'.

Here sum and blind, according to Rule VI, would take the falling
inflection, but as they are emphatic, and the object of emphasis is to
draw attention to the word emphasized, this is here accomplished in part
by giving an unusual inflection. Some speakers would give these words the
circumflex, but it would he the rising circumflex, so that the sound would
still terminate with the rising inflection.

RULE VIII.--Questions which can not be answered by yes or no, together
with their answers, generally require the falling inflection.

EXAMPLES.

Where has he gone'?    Ans. To New York'.
What has he done'?     Ans. Nothing'.
Who did this'?         Ans. I know not'.
When did he go'?       Ans. Yesterday'.


REMARK.--It these questions are repeated, the inflection is changed
according to the principle stated under the Exception to Rule VII.


RISING INFLECTION.

RULE IX.--Where a pause is rendered proper by the meaning, and the sense
is incomplete, the rising inflection is generally required.

EXAMPLES.

To endure slander and abuse with meekness' requires no ordinary degree of
self-command',

Night coming on', both armies retired from the field of battle'.

As a dog returneth to his vomit', so a fool returneth to his folly'.

REMARK.--The person or object addressed, in ordinary conversation, comes
under this head.

EXAMPLES.

Fathers'! we once again are met in council.

My lords'! and gentlemen'! we have arrived at an awful crisis.

Age'! thou art shamed.

Rome'! thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!


Exception.--Where a word which, according to this rule, requires the
rising inflection, becomes emphatic, it generally has the falling
inflec-tion; as, when a child addresses his father, he first says,
Father'! but if he repeats it emphatically, he changes the inflection, and
says, Father'! Father'! The falling inflection is also used in formal
address; as, Fellow--citizens', Mr. President', etc.

EXAMPLES.

When we aim at a high standard, if we do not attain' it, we shall secure a
high degree of excellence.

Those who mingle with the vicious, if they do not become depraved', will
lose all delicacy of feeling.

RULE X.--Questions which may be answered by yes or no, generally require
the rising, and their answers the falling inflection.

EXAMPLES.

Has he arrived'? Yes'.
Will he return'? No'.
Does the law condemn him'? It does not'.

Exception.--If these questions are repeated emphatically, they take the
falling inflection, according to Rule VII.

EXAMPLES.

Has he arrived'?
Will he return'?
Does the law condemn him'?

REMARK.--When a word or sentence is repeated as a kind of interrogatory
exclamation, the rising inflection is used according to the principles of
this rule.

EXAMPLES.

You ask, who would venture' in such a cause! Who would venture'? Rather
say, who would not' venture all things for such an object!

He is called the friend' of virtue. The friend'! ay! the enthusiastic
lover' the devoted protector' rather.

So, also, when one receives unexpected information he exclaims, Ah'!
indeed'!

REMARK.--In the above examples the words "venture," "friend," "ah," etc.,
may be considered as interrogatory exclamations, because if the sense were
carried out it would be in the form of question; as, "Do you ask who would
venture'?" "Do you say that he is the friend' of virtue?" "Is it
possible'?" and thus they would receive the rising inflection according to
this rule.



RISING AND FALLING INFLECTIONS.

RULE XI.--The different members of a sentence expressing comparison, or
contrast, or negation and affirmation, or where the parts are united by or
used disjunctively, require different inflections; generally the rising
inflection in the first member, and the falling inflection in the second
member. This order is, however, sometimes inverted.

