I was visiting the institution and saw the prisoners file out into the
yard. I recognized this man instantly. Do you know how long he has been
here?"

"For two weeks I should think."

"He has some dishonest scheme in his head, I have no doubt. Have you a
bank in Milford?"

"Yes."

"He may have some design upon that."

"He is very intimate with our bookkeeper, so his nephew tells me."

Mr. Thorndike looked startled.

"Ha! I scent danger to my friend, Mr. Jennings. He ought to be
apprised."

"He shall be, sir," said Carl, firmly.

"Will you see him to-night?"

"Yes, sir; I am not only in his employ, but I live at his house."

"That is well."

"Perhaps I ought to go home at once."

"No attempt will be made to rob the office till late. It is scarcely
eight o'clock. I don't know, however, but I will walk around to the
house with you, and tell your employer what I know. By the way, what
sort of a man is the bookkeeper?"

"I don't know him very well, sir. He has a nephew in the office, who was
transferred from the factory. I have taken his place."

"Do you think the bookkeeper would join in a plot to rob his employer?"

"I don't like him. To me he is always disagreeable, but I would not like
to say that."

"How long has he been in the employ of Mr. Jennings?"

"As long as two years, I should think."

"You say that this man is intimate with him?"

"Leonard Craig--he is the nephew--says that Mr. Philip Stark is at his
uncle's house every evening."

"So he calls himself Philip Stark, does he?"

"Isn't that his name?"

"I suppose it is one of his names. He was convicted under that name,
and retains it here on account of its being so far from the place of his
conviction. Whether it is his real name or not, I do not know. What is
the name of your bookkeeper?"

"Julius Gibbon."

"I don't remember ever having heard it. Evidently there has been some
past acquaintance between the two men, and that, I should say, is hardly
a recommendation for Mr. Gibbon. Of course that alone is not enough to
condemn him, but the intimacy is certainly a suspicious circumstance."

The two soon reached the house of Mr. Jennings, for the distance was
only a quarter of a mile.

Mr. Jennings seemed a little surprised, but gave a kindly welcome to
his unexpected guest. It occurred to him that he might have come to give
some extra order for goods.

"You are surprised to see me," said Thorndike. "I came on a very
important matter."

A look of inquiry came over the face of Mr. Jennings.

"There's a thief in the village--a guest at the hotel--whom I recognize
as one of the most expert burglars in the country."

"I think I know whom you mean, a man of moderate height, rather thick
set, with small, black eyes and a slouch hat."

"Exactly."

"What can you tell me about him?"

Mr. Thorndike repeated the statement he had already made to Carl.

"Do you think our bank is in danger?" asked the manufacturer.

"Perhaps so, but the chief danger threatens you."

Mr. Jennings looked surprised.

"What makes you think so?"

"Because this man appears to be very intimate with your bookkeeper."

"How do you know that?" asked the little man, quickly.

"I refer you to Carl."

"Leonard Craig told me to-night that this man Stark spent every evening
at his uncle's house."

Mr. Jennings looked troubled.

"I am sorry to hear this," he said. "I dislike to lose confidence in any
man whom I have trusted."

"Have you noticed anything unusual in the demeanor of your bookkeeper of
late?" asked Thorndike.

"Yes; he has appeared out of spirits and nervous."

"That would seem to indicate he is conspiring to rob you."

"This very day, noticing the change in him, I offered him a week's
vacation. He promptly declined to take it."

"Of course. It would conflict with the plans of his confederate. I don't
know the man, but I do know human nature, and I venture to predict that
your safe will be opened within a week. Do you keep anything of value in
it?"

"There are my books, which are of great value to me."

"But not to a thief. Anything else?"

"Yes; I have a tin box containing four thousand dollars in government
bonds."

"Coupon or registered?"

"Coupon."

"Nothing could be better--for a burglar. What on earth could induce you
to keep the bonds in your own safe?"

"To tell the truth, I considered them quite as safe there as in the
bank. Banks are more likely to be robbed than private individuals."

"Circumstances alter cases. Does anyone know that you have the bonds in
your safe?"

"My bookkeeper is aware of it."

"Then, my friend, I caution you to remove the bonds from so unsafe a
depository as soon as possible. Unless I am greatly mistaken, this man,
Stark, has bought over your bookkeeper, and will have his aid in robbing
you."

"What is your advice?"

"To remove the bonds this very evening," said Thorndike.

"Do you think the danger so pressing?"

"Of course I don't know that an attempt will be made to-night, but it
is quite possible. Should it be so, you would have an opportunity to
realize that delays are dangerous."

"Should Mr. Gibbon find, on opening the safe to-morrow morning, that the
box is gone, it may lead to an attack upon my house."

"I wish you to leave the box in the safe."

"But I understand that you advised me to remove it."

"Not the box, but the bonds. Listen to my plan. Cut out some newspaper
slips of about the same bulk as the bonds, put them in place of the
bonds in the box, and quietly transfer the bonds in your pocket to your
own house. To-morrow you can place them in the bank. Should no burglary
be attempted, let the box remain in the safe, just as if its contents
were valuable."

"Your advice is good, and I will adopt it," said Jennings, "and thank
you for your valuable and friendly instruction."

"If agreeable to you I will accompany you to the office at once. The
bonds cannot be removed too soon. Then if anyone sees us entering, it
will be thought that you are showing me the factory. It will divert
suspicion, even if we are seen by Stark or your bookkeeper."

"May I go, too?" asked Carl, eagerly.

"Certainly," said the manufacturer. "I know, Carl, that you are devoted
to my interests. It is a comfort to know this, now that I have cause to
suspect my bookkeeper."

It was only a little after nine. The night was moderately dark, and Carl
was intrusted with a wax candle, which he put in his pocket for use in
the office. They reached the factory without attracting attention, and
entered by the office door.

Mr. Jennings opened the safe--he and the bookkeeper alone knew the
combination--and with some anxiety took out the tin box. It was possible
that the contents had already been removed. But no! on opening it,
the bonds were found intact. According to Mr. Thorndike's advice, he
transferred them to his pocket, and substituted folded paper. Then,
replacing everything, the safe was once more locked, and the three left
the office.

Mr. Thorndike returned to the hotel, and Mr. Jennings to his house, but
Carl asked permission to remain out a while longer.

"It is on my mind that an attempt will be made to-night to rob the
safe," he said. "I want to watch near the factory to see if my suspicion
is correct."

"Very well, Carl, but don't stay out too long!" said his employer.

"Suppose I see them entering the office, sir?"

"Don't interrupt them! They will find themselves badly fooled. Notice
only if Mr. Gibbon is of the party. I must know whether my bookkeeper is
to be trusted."



CHAPTER XXIV.

THE BURGLARY.


Carl seated himself behind a stone wall on the opposite side of the
street from the factory. The building was on the outskirts of the
village, though not more than half a mile from the post office, and
there was very little travel in that direction during the evening. This
made it more favorable for thieves, though up to the present time
no burglarious attempt had been made on it. Indeed, Milford had been
exceptionally fortunate in that respect. Neighboring towns had been
visited, some of them several times, but Milford had escaped.

The night was quite dark, but not what is called pitchy dark. As
the eyes became accustomed to the obscurity, they were able to see
a considerable distance. So it was with Carl. From his place of
concealment he occasionally raised his head and looked across the way to
the factory. An hour passed, and he grew tired. It didn't look as if the
attempt were to be made that night. Eleven o'clock pealed out from the
spire of the Baptist Church, a quarter of a mile away. Carl counted the
strokes, and when the last died into silence, he said to himself:

"I will stay here about ten minutes longer. Then, if no one comes, I
will give it up for tonight."

The time was nearly up when his quick ear caught a low murmur of voices.
Instantly he was on the alert. Waiting till the sound came nearer, he
ventured to raise his head for an instant above the top of the wall.

His heart beat with excitement when he saw two figures approaching.
Though it was so dark, he recognized them by their size and outlines.
They were Julius Gibbon, the bookkeeper, and Phil Stark, the stranger
staying at the hotel.

Carl watched closely, raising his head for a few seconds at a time above
the wall, ready to lower it should either glance in his direction. But
neither of the men did so. Ignorant that they were suspected, it was the
farthest possible from their thoughts that anyone would be on the watch.

Presently they came so near that Carl could hear their voices.

"I wish it was over," murmured Gibbon, nervously.

"Don't worry," said his companion. "There is no occasion for haste.
Everybody in Milford is in bed and asleep, and we have several hours at
our disposal."

"You must remember that my reputation is at stake. This night's work may
undo me."

"My friend, you can afford to take the chances. Haven't I agreed to give
you half the bonds?"

"I shall be suspected, and shall be obliged to stand my ground, while
you will disappear from the scene."

"Two thousand dollars will pay you for some inconvenience. I don't see
why you should be suspected. You will be supposed to be fast asleep
on your virtuous couch, while some bad burglar is robbing your worthy
employer. Of course you will be thunderstruck when in the morning the
appalling discovery is made. I'll tell you what will be a good dodge for
you."

"Well?"

"Offer a reward of a hundred dollars from your own purse for the
discovery of the villain who has robbed the safe and abstracted the
bonds."

Phil Stark burst out into a loud guffaw as he uttered these words.

"Hush!" said Gibbon, timidly. "I thought I heard some one moving."

"What a timid fool you are!" muttered Stark, contemptuously. "If I had
no more pluck, I'd hire myself out to herd cows."

"It's a better business," said Gibbon, bitterly.

"Well, well, each to his taste! If you lose your place as bookkeeper,
you might offer your services to some farmer. As for me, the danger,
though there isn't much, is just enough to make it exciting."

"I don't care for any such excitement," said Gibbon, dispiritedly. "Why
couldn't you have kept away and let me earn an honest living?"

"Because I must live as well as you, my dear friend. When this little
affair is over, you will thank me for helping you to a good thing."

Of course all this conversation did not take place within Carl's
hearing. While it was going on, the men had opened the office door and
entered. Then, as Carl watched the window closely he saw a narrow gleam
of light from a dark lantern illuminating the interior.

"Now they are at the safe," thought Carl.

We, who are privileged, will enter the office and watch the proceedings.

Gibbon had no difficulty in opening the safe, for he was acquainted with
the combination. Stark thrust in his hand eagerly and drew out the box.

"This is what we want," he said, in a tone of satisfaction. "Have you a
key that will open it?"

"No."

"Then I shall have to take box and all."

"Let us get through as soon as possible," said Gibbon, uneasily.

"You can close the safe, if you want to. There is nothing else worth
taking?"

"No."

"Then we will evacuate the premises. Is there an old newspaper I can use
to wrap up the box in? It might look suspicious if anyone should see it
in our possession."

"Yes, here is one."

He handed a copy of a weekly paper to Phil Stark, who skillfully wrapped
up the box, and placing it under his arm, went out of the office,
leaving Gibbon to follow.

"Where will you carry it?" asked Gibbon.

"Somewhere out of sight where I can safely open it. I should have
preferred to take the bonds, and leave the box in the safe. Then the
bonds might not have been missed for a week or more."

"That would have been better."

That was the last that Carl heard. The two disappeared in the darkness,
and Carl, raising himself from his place of concealment, stretched his
cramped limbs and made the best of his way home. He thought no one would
be up, but Mr. Jennings came out from the sitting-room, where he had
flung himself on a lounge, and met Carl in the hall.

"Well?" he said.

"The safe has been robbed."

"Who did it?" asked the manufacturer, quickly.

"The two we suspected."

"Did you see Mr. Gibbon, then?"

"Yes; he was accompanied by Mr. Stark."

"You saw them enter the factory?"

"Yes, sir; I was crouching behind the stone wall on the other side of
the road."

"How long were they inside?"

"Not over fifteen minutes--perhaps only ten."

"Mr. Gibbon knew the combination," said Jennings, quietly. "There was no
occasion to lose time in breaking open the safe. There is some advantage
in having a friend inside. Did you see them go out?"

"Yes, sir."

"Carrying the tin box with them?"

"Yes, sir. Mr. Stark wrapped it in a newspaper after they got outside."

"But you saw the tin box?"

"Yes."

"Then, if necessary, you can testify to it. I thought it possible that
Mr. Gibbon might have a key to open it."

"I overheard Stark regretting that he could not open it so as to
abstract the bonds and leave the box in the safe. In that case, he said,
it might be some time before the robbery was discovered."

"He will himself make an unpleasant discovery when he opens the box. I
don't think there is any call to pity him, do you, Carl?"

"No, sir. I should like to be within sight when he opens it."

The manufacturer laughed quietly.

"Yes," he said; "if I could see it I should feel repaid for the loss of
the box. Let it be a lesson for you, my boy. Those who seek to enrich
themselves by unlawful means are likely in the end to meet with
disappointment."

"Do you think I need the lesson?" asked Carl, smiling.

"No, my lad. I am sure you don't. But you do need a good night's rest.
Let us go to bed at once, and get what sleep we may. I won't allow the
burglary to keep me awake."

He laughed in high good humor, and Carl went up to his comfortable room,
where he soon lost all remembrance of the exciting scene of which he had
been a witness.

Mr. Jennings went to the factory at the usual time the next morning.

As he entered the office the bookkeeper approached him pale and excited.

"Mr. Jennings," he said, hurriedly, "I have bad news for you."

"What is it, Mr. Gibbon?"

"When I opened the safe this morning, I discovered that the tin box had
been stolen."

Mr. Jennings took the news quietly.

"Have you any suspicion who took it?" he asked.

"No, sir. I--I hope the loss is not a heavy one."

