into the deep water, and he was drowned.

WILLIAM AND JACOB GRIMM




    THEY DIDN'T THINK

    danger  folks  seized


    Once a trap was baited
      With a piece of cheese;
    It tickled so a little mouse,
      It almost made him sneeze.
    An old rat said, "There's danger,
      Be careful where you go!"
    "Nonsense!" said the other,
      "I don't think you know!"
    So he walked in boldly--
      Nobody in sight--
    First he took a nibble,
      Then he took a bite;
    Close the trap together
      Snapped as quick as wink,
    Catching mousey fast there,
      'Cause he didn't think.

    Once there was a robin,
      Lived outside the door,
    Who wanted to go inside
      And hop upon the floor.
    "No, no," said the mother,
      "You must stay with me;
    Little birds are safest
      Sitting in a tree."
    "I don't care," said Robin,
      And gave his tail a fling,
    "I don't think the old folks
      Know quite everything."
    Down he flew, and kitty seized him
      Before he'd time to blink;
    "Oh," he cried, "I'm sorry,
      But I didn't think."

    PHOEBE CARY

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

TOM THUMB--I

thumb  people  suit  reins  fought
frightened  brought  thistledown


In the days of King Arthur, there lived a wise man named Merlin.

He knew all the fairies and where they lived.

Even the fairy queen was a friend of his.

Once, while he was traveling, night overtook him in a deep forest.

He rapped at the door of a small cottage and asked for some food.

Merlin looked so hungry and poor that the farmer and his wife took pity
on him.

They not only gave him a bowl of milk with some brown bread, but they
said he might stay through the night.

Merlin saw that, in spite of their pleasant cottage, both the farmer and
his wife were very sad.

"Why are you sad?" asked Merlin.

"You seem to have a good farm, a pleasant cottage, and many things to
make you happy."

"Ah!" said the woman, "we are unhappy because we have no child.

I should be the happiest woman in the world if I had a son.

Why, even if he were no bigger than my husband's thumb, we should love
him dearly."

"That would be indeed a very strange kind of child," said Merlin, "but
I hope you may have your wish."

Now Merlin was on his way to call on the queen of the fairies.

When he came to her castle the next day, he told the fairy queen the
wish of the farmer's wife.

The queen of the fairies said, "The good woman shall have her wish. I
will give her a son no larger than her husband's thumb."


TOM THUMB--II

Soon after this the good farmer's wife had a son. He was, indeed, just
the size of his father's thumb.

People came from far and wide to see the tiny boy.

One day the fairy queen and some other fairies came to see him.

The queen kissed the little boy and named him Tom Thumb.

[Illustration]

Each of the other fairies made Tom a gift.

He had a shirt made of silk from a spider's web, a coat of thistledown,
a hat made from the leaf of an oak, tiny shoes made from a mouse's skin,
and many other gifts besides.

Tom never grew any larger than a man's thumb, but he could do many
clever tricks.

One day his mother was mixing a pudding.

Tom leaned over the edge of the bowl to see how it was made.

He slipped, and in he went, head first.

His mother did not see him fall, and kept stirring and stirring the
pudding.

Tom could not see nor hear, but he kicked and kicked inside the pudding.

The pudding moved and tossed about.

His mother was afraid.

She did not know what to think.

"There must be witches in it," she said.

She went to the window to throw the pudding out.

Just then a poor beggar was passing by the house.

"Here is a pudding you may have, if you like," said Tom's mother.

The beggar thanked her and put it into his basket.

He had not gone very far, when Tom got his head out of the pudding and
shouted in a shrill voice:

"Take me out! take me out!"

The poor beggar was so frightened that he dropped his basket, pudding
and all, and ran off as fast as he could.

Tom crawled out of the pudding, climbed out of the basket, and ran home.

His mother washed him and put him to bed.


TOM THUMB--III

Not long after this Tom's mother took him with her when she went to milk
the cow.

That he might not get lost, she tied him to a wisp of hay.

When Tom's mother was not looking, the cow took the wisp of hay into her
mouth.

She began to chew and chew.

Tom began to jump about and shout.

He frightened the cow so that she opened her great mouth and out Tom
jumped.

Then Tom's mother took him in her apron and ran with him to the house,
but he was not hurt in the least.

[Illustration]

One day Tom was in the field helping his father.

"Let me drive the horse home," said Tom "You drive the horse!" said his
father.

"How could you hold the reins?"

"I could stand in the horse's ear and tell him which way to go," said
Tom.

So his father put him in the horse's ear, and he drove safely home.

"Mother! mother!" cried Tom.

But when Tom's mother came out, she could see no one.

She began to be afraid.

"Where are you, Tom?" she cried.

"Here I am in the horse's ear. Please take me down," said Tom.

His mother lifted him gently down, kissed him, and gave him a blackberry
for his supper.

Tom's father made him a whip out of a straw.

Tom tried to drive the cows, but he fell into a deep ditch.

There a great bird saw him and thought he was a mouse.

The bird seized Tom in her claws and carried him toward her nest.

As they were passing over the sea, Tom got away and fell into the water,
where a great fish swallowed him at one mouthful.

Soon after this the fish was caught, and it was such a big one that it
was sent at once to King Arthur.

When the cook cut open the fish, out jumped Tom Thumb. Tom was brought
before the king, and his story was told.


TOM THUMB--IV

The king grew very fond of Tom and his wise sayings. He took Tom with
him wherever he went.

If it began to rain, Tom would creep into the king's pocket and sleep
until the rain was over.

The king had a new suit made for Tom, and gave him a needle for a sword.

A mouse was trained for Tom to ride.

The king and queen never tired of seeing him ride his queer little horse
and bravely wave his sword.

One day, as they were going hunting, a cat jumped out and caught Tom's
mouse.

[Illustration]

Tom drew his sword and tried to drive the cat away.

The king ran to help poor Tom, but the little mouse was dead, and Tom
was scratched and bitten.

Tom was put to bed, but he did not die.

No indeed! he was soon well again, and fought many brave battles and did
many brave deeds to please the king.

_English Fairy Tale_




[Illustration]

    SUPPOSE

    wouldn't  pouring  earnest  lady


    Suppose, my little lady,
      Your doll should break her head,
    Could you make it whole by crying
      Till your eyes and nose are red?
    And wouldn't it be better far
      To treat it as a joke,
    And say you're glad 'twas Dolly's,
      And not your head that broke?

    Suppose you're dressed for walking,
      And the rain comes pouring down,
    Will it clear off any sooner
      Because you scold and frown?
    And wouldn't it be nicer
      For you to smile than pout,
    And so make sunshine in the house
      When there is none without?

    Suppose your task, my little man,
      Is very hard to get,
    Will it make it any easier
      For you to sit and fret?
    And wouldn't it be wiser
      Than waiting like a dunce,
    To go to work in earnest,
      And learn the thing at once?

    ALICE CARY




[Illustration]

CINDERELLA--I


Once upon a time there lived a maiden named Cinderella.

Her mother was dead, and she had to work very, very hard in the kitchen.

She had two older sisters, but they were cross to little Cinderella.

They made her stay among the pots and the kettles and do all the hard
work about the house.

Sometimes, to keep warm, she crept in among the cinders.

That is why she was called Cinderella.

One day the sisters came dancing into the house. "We have been invited
to the king's ball," they cried.

At length the day of the great ball came, and the two sisters rode away
in their fine silk dresses.

Poor Cinderella, who had to stay behind, looked at her old ragged
clothes, and burst into tears.

"Alas," she cried, "why should I always have to stay in the kitchen
while my sisters dress in silks and satins?"

Hardly had she spoken when there stood before her a dear little old lady
with a golden wand in her hand.

"My child," she cried, "I am your fairy godmother, and you shall go to
the ball, too.

First go into the garden, Cinderella, and bring to me the largest
pumpkin you can find."

When Cinderella had done this, the fairy waved her golden wand over the
yellow pumpkin.

In a flash, it was not a pumpkin at all, but a beautiful yellow coach.

"Now bring me four white mice, two large ones and two small ones."

In a moment Cinderella brought a trap full of mice into the room.

The fairy waved her golden wand, and the two largest mice were turned
into two snow-white horses.

Two small mice became two men, one a coachman, the other a footman.

"But how am I to go in these clothes?" said Cinderella.

"Ah, let me see," said the fairy, and she slowly waved her wand over the
maiden's head.

[Illustration]

Oh, what a change!

The rags tumbled to the floor.

And, what do you think! in their place was a beautiful pink silk dress.

The ugly shoes fell off.

And, lo! a tiny pair of glass slippers were on Cinderella's little feet.

"Now listen to what I say," said the fairy godmother. "You must not stay
after the clock strikes twelve.

At that time your coach will again be a pumpkin, the men will be mice,
and you will have on your old ragged dress."

Cinderella said she would not forget.

Then she jumped into the coach, and away she drove to the king's ball.


CINDERELLA--II

The king's son was charmed with Cinderella.

She was so very beautiful that he would dance with her and with no one
else.

Cinderella had such a good time that she forgot about the clock.

It began to strike twelve--one, two, three.

Cinderella ran from the room.

Down the steps of the palace she flew.

She ran so fast that she lost one of her little glass slippers.

The clock finished striking.

Lo! the coach turned into a pumpkin.

The horses and men turned into mice.

Poor Cinderella had to walk home in her ragged clothes.

The next morning the prince found Cinderella's little glass slipper on
the stairs.

"There is only one maiden in all the world who can wear so tiny a
slipper," said the prince. "I will marry her and no other."

The prince hunted far and wide for a maiden who could put it on. Many
tried, but none could do it.

At last he came to the house where Cinderella lived. The two older
sisters tried and tried to put the slipper on their large feet.

While the prince was waiting, Cinderella came into the room.

"Let me try it," she said.

"You!" cried the older sisters. "You could never put it on."

"Let her try it," said the prince.

At once the little glass slipper was fitted to the tiny foot.

[Illustration]

Then Cinderella stood up; her ragged clothes turned into a beautiful
silk dress, and there were two little slippers on her two little feet.

Then the prince knew that Cinderella was the one he had danced with at
the ball, and taking her hand, he led her out to his coach.

Soon they were married and lived happily ever after.

_English Fairy Tale_




    RAINDROPS
