The report that Baxter had bet against his own school spread, and
the bully became more unpopular than ever.  But this did not daunt
him, and soon he had a dozen other bets on, aggregating fifty
dollars or more.

"It's a mystery to me where he gets so much money," said Dick to
Captain Blossom one day, "Is his father rich?"

"I can't tell you," answered the youthful commander of Company A.
"Fact of the matter is nobody knows much about Baxter--not even
Mumps his chum.  Nobody ever comes to see him, and he seldom ever
gets any letters, yet he always has all the spending money he
wants."

"Perhaps he's got a gold mine somewhere," laughed Dick.

"I don't know about that, but I do know that there are days when
he hasn't a cent, and the next day he will have just such a roll
of bills as you saw him with day before yesterday--and the money
doesn't come to him through the mail either."

"Perhaps Captain Putnam deals it out to him."

Captain Harry shook his head.  "Not much!  The captain wouldn't
let him have more than five dollars at a time.  I've been through
the mill, and I know."

Here the matter was dropped, but Dick had good cause to remember
this conversation later on.

The distance from Putnam Hall to Pornell Academy was a mile and a
half, and it was arranged that the football team, Captain Putnam,
George Strong, and several others should ride to the latter place
in the Hall carriages while the others walked the distance.
Thanksgiving dawned bright and clear.  The morning was spent in
the Hall chapel, and dinner was served promptly at twelve.

"Don't eat too much," cautioned Sam.  "I want every player to be
wide awake today."

The start was signalized by a grand flourish of tin horns; and
away went the two carriages with the horses on a gallop, followed
by a large number of the cadets on foot, organized into their
regular companies, with Major Bart Conners at the head of the
battalion.  The boys were in their best uniforms, and certainly
presented an imposing appearance as they marched behind the music
of their drums and fifes.

When the grounds at Pornell Academy were reached, they were found
to be more than three quarters full, for the proprietor of the
place had opened up for the benefit of the public at large, and
many had come from Cedarville and the surrounding territory.  The
grandstand was already comfortably filled, many coming into the
part reserved for the Hall folks on tickets of invitation issued
by Sam and indorsed by Captain Putnam.

"Here they come!" yelled the boys of Pornell.  "Three cheers for
Putnam Hall!"

The cheers were given with a will; and, getting the football team
and the other cadets together, Putnam Hall gave a rousing cheer in
return for Pornell Academy.

Then the football teams disappeared into their respective dressing
rooms, and the newly arrived cadets took their places in the
grandstand.  A timekeeper and referee had already been appointed
by Sam and the rival captain, at a meeting at the Hall three days
before.

"My! what a crowd!" exclaimed Tom, as he surveyed the multitude.
"I didn't think we were going to have such an audience as this!"

"Nor I," returned Sam.  "We must do our level best, fellows!"

"That's what!" came from several.  "If we get whipped--"

"Remember what Baxter did--that's enough to nerve anybody on,"
finished Larry Colby.

"By the way, where is Baxter?"

"Sneaked out of the ranks," answered another player.  "Nobody
wanted to march with him."

"Well, I don't blame them," concluded Sam.

"Doctor Pornell now put in an appearance and desired to know if
the football team did not wish to march around the oval escorted
by his own players.

"Certainly!" cried Sam. "And to show this is a purely friendly
match, let us march side by side," he went on, and this was also
arranged.  The Putnam Hall drum-and-fife corps led the march, and
each player strode forth with a rival at his side.  The march
brought forth a wild round of applause and a veritable shrieking
of tin horns and cracking of wooden clappers.

After the march each team was allowed quarter of an hour for
practicing.  The Pornellites came out first and tumbled over the
leather in lively fashion.  The Putnamites soon followed.

"They may be all right, but they haven't the weight," said one of
the rivals.  And this appeared true, for each Pornellite, man for
man, was at least five pounds heavier than his opponent.  But
weight does not always count for everything, even in a football
match.

"Time for practice is up!" came presently, and the two teams drew
away from the gridiron.  Then there was a toss-up for goals, and
Pornell won and took the east end, that which was most favored by
the slight breeze that was blowing.

And then the great game began.




CHAPTER XVI

THE GREAT FOOTBALL GAME


The halves were to be of twenty minutes each, so no time was lost
in putting the leather into the field.  It was Putnam's kick-off,
and on the instant the ball went sailing into the air, to land
well into Pornell's territory.  Then came a grand rush, and before
the words can be put down twenty-two lads were at it nip-and-tuck
to get possession of the sphere.

"It's Pornell's ball!"

"Say, but ain't this going to be a snappy game!"

"Our fellows have the ball!"

"There she goes up five yards into Putnam ground!"

"Carry that ball back!" yelled Dick excitedly.  "Don't let them
gain an inch!"

"Whoop her up for Pornell!"

And then came a wild blare of tin horns and a waving of the
academy colors, brown and white.  The waving of the Hall colors,
an American flag set in a border of green, came also, with an
equal din from horns and wooden clappers.

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!"

So, the game went on for ten minutes, and the Pornellites had
gained exactly twenty-five yards--no more.

"Looks like a stand-off," said several.  "Say, maybe those young
soldiers aren't game!"

"That's what--but we'll wax 'em!" was the answer, and then of a
sudden came another yell, for Pornell had the ball and was pushing
it straight ahead for Putnam's goal.

"Ten yards!"

"Five yards more!"

"Fifteen yards more!"

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!"

Toot! toot-a-root-toot! Clack-clack-clack, bang!

The Pornellites were now wild, but they stared blankly as they saw
plucky Tom Rover snatch the leather up and run back twenty yards
with it.

"He's going right through with it!"

"There goes Hardy after him!"

"Down they go!"

"Lushear has the ball!  It's going back!"

"Run, Lushear, run!  A dollar if you make it!"

"They can't catch him!  Oh, pshaw!  Down he goes!"

"But the ball is safe!  A touchdown!  Hurrah!"

The cry was correct.  Just three minutes before the end of the
first half the Pornell team scored a touchdown.  Instantly
preparations were made to kick a goal if possible.  But the kick
was a failure, and the two sides retired for the half with the
score standing 4 to 0 in Pornell Academy's favor.

Glumly the Hall boys retired to their dressing room, there to be
rubbed down by their chums.  "It's too bad, it certainly is," came
from a dozen sympathizers.

"But it can't be helped.  Don't give up yet."

"They are too heavy for us in mass play," said Sam.  "We must try
more running away with the leather."  And so it was agreed.

Soon the gong rang, and they re-entered the field.

"Now, Putnam Hall, do your best!  We are looking at you!"

"They can't play a little bit," sneered Dan Baxter.  "I'm ashamed
of them," and he smiled to himself, thinking the fifty dollars put
up on the game was already as good as won.

Sam had given his team some explicit instructions, and these were
now being followed.  As soon as the ball came into Putnam's
possession there was a run on their part that carried the sphere
twenty yards into their opponents territory.

"Go in and win, Putnam!"

"That's the way to do it!"

"Take it from them, Pornell!  Go for it!  Take it!"

And Pornell did take it, and half the distance gained was lost.

Both teams were now warmed up, and for fully five minutes the ball
flew back and forth, remaining at the end of that time almost in
the center of the gridiron.

Then Pornell tried some heavy mass play, but lost the leather on a
fumble, and it came into Tom Rover's possession.

Away flew Tom, as though a legion of demons were after him,
straight for Pornell's goal.  The crowd began to shout itself
hoarse.

"See Tom Rover!  Go it, Tom, old boy, go it!"

"He can't carry it through!  See, Conkey and Largren are after
him!"

"There he goes down!  Conkey has the leather!"

This was true, but ere Conkey could start to run Fred Garrison
brought him to earth and the ball rolled out into the field.

Sam and a Pornell halfback made a rush for it.

"My ball!" yelled the Pornellite, who was twenty pounds heavier
than the little captain.

"Not today!" retorted Sam, and snatched it from under his very
feet.  Before the Pornellite could recover from his astonishment,
Sam was pelting up the field with all the nimbleness of his agile
legs.

"Hurrah for Sam Rover!"

"Great Caesar! see him leg it!  They can't catch him!"

"There he goes over the line!"

"A touchdown!  The game is a tie!"

"Quick, fellows!" cried Sam. "Only five more minutes, remember.
Who is to kick?"

It was a player named Larcom.  But Larcom was not equal to it, for
the wind was rising and blowing in several directions at once.

"No goal!  The game is a tie!"

"Put the ball out again!"

"Only four minutes to play!"

Again the football went forth, and again the crowd pounced upon it.
The Pornellites were now desperate and massed themselves as never
before. They pushed forward ten yards--fifteen--twenty--almost
thirty. It looked as if they would score another touchdown, if not
kick a goal. But now Sam Rover sent a certain sign to his players. It
was taking a risk, but it was worth trying.

The ball came over to the right of the field and spun like
lightning to the left.  Fred caught it up, ran ten yards, and
passed it to Larry Colby, who turned it over to Tom.   Away it
went to Sam, and then to Frank.  The Pornellites were bewildered.
Where was the ball?

"Putnam has it!"

"There she goes!  Hurrah for Frank Harrington.  Another
touchdown!"

It was true.  Putnam Hall had scored another touchdown.  A
tremendous yelling and cheering broke out, in the midst of which
the gong sounded.  The game was over, and our boys had won the
victory.

In a twinkle the gridiron was covered with swarming students, and
Sam and his fellow players were hoisted up on willing shoulders,
to be trotted around the oval.  "Hurrah for Pornell!" they
shouted.  "Hurrah for Putnam!" came back the cry.  It had been a
bitter but friendly contest, and victors and vanquished shook
hands over and over again.

Of course many students of Pornell were bitterly disappointed, but
no one felt so sour over the whole afternoon's doing as did Dan
Baxter.  In all he had lost over fifty dollars, and now neither
his fellow students nor the boys of Pornell Academy wanted
anything to do with him.  "I haven't any use for a chap who bets
against his own crowd," was the comment of one academy student,
and he voiced the sentiment of all.  Only Mumps stuck to his chum,
and the two soon left the grounds together.

By four o'clock the cadets were on their way back to Putnam Hall,
the carriages moving behind the two companies of young soldiers,
who sang and shouted themselves hoarse as they moved along.  Even
Captain Putnam entered into the spirit of the affair.  "Brings me
back to the days when I was a cadet myself," he said to George
Strong.

Directly after supper a huge bonfire was lit on the playground,
and the students were allowed to have their own fun until eleven
o'clock.  The football team was, of course, the center of
attraction, and Sam and Tom came in for their full share of
honors.

While the festivities of this Thanksgiving Eve were at their
height, a sudden thought struck Dick.  Captain Putnam had given
the cadets permission to go beyond bounds if any cared to do so,
and he hurried away, his intention being to call upon Dora
Stanhope and see how she was faring.  Although Dick would not
admit it, he thought a great deal of Dora, and he was sorry that
she was in danger of having the detestable Josiah Crabtree for a
stepfather.

It was a clear, moonlight night, and he hurried off in the best of
spirits, taking a short cut by way of a road through the woods.
As he walked along he remembered how Tom had met in this vicinity
the thief who had stolen the watch.

"I wonder if I'll meet him," he thought, but no tramp put in an
appearance; indeed, he did not see a soul until the Stanhope
homestead was reached.

A light was burning brightly in the sitting room, and the curtains
were drawn down to within six inches of the bottom of the windows.
Dick was about to ascend the porch, when he changed his mind and
walked softly to one of the windows.

"If they have a lot of company I won't disturb them on a holiday
like this," he thought, and peeped under one of the curtains.

The sight that met his gaze filled him with astonishment and
indignation.  Only two persons were present, Dora and Josiah
Crabtree.  Crabtree had the girl by the left wrist, and had one
hand raised as if to strike his prisoner.




CHAPTER XVII

DICK AT THE STANHOPE COTTAGE


"The villain!"

Such were the words which sprang involuntarily to Dick's lips as
he gazed at the scene before him.  He was filled with bitter
indignation and could hardly resist the temptation to break in the
window and leap to Dora's assistance.

As he paused, he saw Dora push Crabtree back and leap to the
opposite side of the center table.

"Don't you dare to touch me, Mr. Crabtree!" came loud enough for
Dick to hear quite, plainly.

"I want you to behave yourself, young lady," stormed Josiah
Crabtree.

"I know how to do that without your advice."

"No, you don't.  You have set your mother against me.  If it
hadn't been for you, we would be married long ago."

"I believe a daughter has a right to advise her mother concerning
a stranger, Mr. Crabtree."

"A stranger!"

"Well, an outsider--if you like that better."

