beautiful white silk stockings embroidered in an open pattern, and far
finer than anything which Katy would have thought of choosing for herself.

"Don't they look exactly like Cousin Helen?" she said, fondling them. "Her
things always are choicer and prettier than anybody's else, somehow. I
can't think how she does it, when she never by any chance goes into a
shop. Who can this be from, I wonder?"

"This" was the second little package. It proved to contain a small volume
bound in white and gold, entitled, "Advice to Brides." On the fly-leaf
appeared this inscription:--

    To Katherine Carr, on the occasion of her approaching bridal,
    from her affectionate teacher,


                                    MARIANNE NIPSON.

    1 Timothy, ii. 11.

Clover at once ran to fetch her Testament that she might verify the
quotation, and announced with a shriek of laughter that it was: "Let the
women learn in silence with all subjection;" while Katy, much diverted,
read extracts casually selected from the work, such as: "A wife should
receive her husband's decree without cavil or question, remembering that
the husband is the head of the wife, and that in all matters of dispute
his opinion naturally and scripturally outweighs her own."

Or: "'A soft answer turneth away wrath.' If your husband comes home
fretted and impatient, do not answer him sharply, but soothe him with
gentle words and caresses. Strict attention to the minor details of
domestic management will often avail to secure peace."

And again: "Keep in mind the epitaph raised in honor of an exemplary wife
of the last century,--'She never banged the door.' Qualify yourself for a
similar testimonial."

"Tanta never does bang doors," remarked Amy, who had come in as this last
"elegant extract" was being read.

"No, that's true; she doesn't," said Clover. "Her prevailing vice is to
leave them open. I like that truth about a good dinner 'availing' to
secure peace, and the advice to 'caress' your bear when he is at his
crossest. Ned never does issue 'decrees,' though, I fancy; and on the
whole, Katy, I don't believe Mrs. Nipson's present is going to be any
particular comfort in your future trials. Do read something else to take
the taste out of our mouths. We will listen in 'all subjection.'"

Katy was already deep in a long epistle from Rose.

"This is too delicious," she said; "do listen." And she began again at the
beginning:--

    MY SWEETEST OF ALL OLD SWEETS,--Come to your wedding! Of course
    I shall. It would never seem to me to have any legal sanction
    whatever if I were not there to add my blessing. Only let me
    know which day "early in June" it is to be, that I may make
    ready. Deniston will fetch us on, and by a special piece of good
    luck, a man in Chicago--whose name I shall always bless if only
    I can remember what it is--has been instigated by our mutual
    good angel to want him on business just about that time; so that
    he would have to go West anyway, and would rather have me along
    than not, and is perfectly resigned to his fate. I mean to come
    three days before, and stay three days after the wedding, if I
    may, and altogether it is going to be a lark of larks. Little
    Rose can talk quite fluently now, and almost read; that is, she
    knows six letters of her picture alphabet. She composes poems
    also. The other day she suddenly announced,--

    "Mamma, I have made up a sort of a im. May I say it to you?"

    I naturally consented, and this was the


                  IM.

    Jump in the parlor,
    Jump in the hall,
    God made us all!


    Now did you ever hear of anything quite so dear as that, for a
    baby only three years and five months old? I tell you she is a
    wonder. You will all adore her, Clover particularly. Oh, my dear
    little C.! To think I am going to see her!

    I met both Ellen Gray and Esther Dearborn the other day, and
    where do you think it was? At Mary Silver's wedding! Yes, she is
    actually married to the Rev. Charles Playfair Strothers, and
    settled in a little parsonage somewhere in the Hoosac
    Tunnel,--or near it,--and already immersed in "duties." I can't
    think what arguments he used to screw her up to the rash act;
    but there she is.

    It wasn't exactly what one would call a cheerful wedding. All
    the connection took it very seriously; and Mary's uncle, who
    married her, preached quite a lengthy funeral discourse to the
    young couple, and got them nicely ready for death, burial, and
    the next world, before he would consent to unite them for this.
    He was a solemn-looking old person, who had been a missionary,
    and "had laid away three dear wives in foreign lands," as he
    confided to me afterward over a plate of ice-cream. He seemed
    to me to be "taking notice," as they say of babies, and it is
    barely possible that he mistook me for a single woman, for his
    attentions were rather pronounced till I introduced my husband
    prominently into conversation; after that he seemed more
    attracted by Ellen Gray.

    Mary cried straight through the ceremony. In fact, I imagine she
    cried straight through the engagement, for her eyes looked wept
    out and had scarlet rims, and she was as white as her veil. In
    fact, whiter, for that was made of beautiful _point de Venise_,
    and was just a trifle yellowish. Everybody cried. Her mother and
    sister sobbed aloud, so did several maiden aunts and a
    grandmother or two and a few cousins. The church resounded with
    guggles and gasps, like a great deal of bath-water running out
    of an ill-constructed tub. Mr. Silver also wept, as a business
    man may, in a series of sniffs interspersed with silk
    handkerchief; you know the kind. Altogether it was a most
    cheerless affair. I seemed to be the only person present who was
    not in tears; but I really didn't see anything to cry about, so
    far as I was concerned, though I felt very hard-hearted.

    I had to go alone, for Deniston was in New York. I got to the
    church rather early, and my new spring bonnet--which is a
    superior one--seemed to impress the ushers, so they put me in a
    very distinguished front pew all by myself. I bore my honors
    meekly, and found them quite agreeable, in fact,--you know I
    always did like to be made much of,--so you can imagine my
    disgust when presently three of the stoutest ladies you ever saw
    came sailing up the aisle, and prepared to invade _my_ pew.

    "Please move up, Madam," said the fattest of all, who wore a
    wonderful yellow hat.

    But I was not "raised" at Hillsover for nothing, and remembering
    the success of our little ruse on the railroad train long ago, I
    stepped out into the aisle, and with my sweetest smile made room
    for them to pass.

    "Perhaps I would better keep the seat next the door," I murmured
    to the yellow lady, "in case an attack should come on."

    "An attack!" she repeated in an accent of alarm. She whispered
    to the others. All three eyed me suspiciously, while I stood
    looking as pensive and suffering as I could. Then after
    confabulating together for a little, they all swept into the
    seat behind mine, and I heard them speculating in low tones as
    to whether it was epilepsy or catalepsy or convulsions that I
    was subject to. I presume they made signs to all the other
    people who came in to steer clear of the lady with fits, for
    nobody invaded my privacy, and I sat in lonely splendor with a
    pew to myself, and was very comfortable indeed.

    Mary's dress was white satin, with a great deal of point lace
    and pearl passementerie, and she wore a pair of diamond
    ear-rings which her father gave her, and a bouquet almost but
    not quite as large, which was the gift of the bridegroom. He has
    a nice face, and I think Silvery Mary will be happy with him,
    much happier than with her rather dismal family, though his
    salary is only fifteen hundred a year, and pearl passementerie,
    I believe, quite unknown and useless in the Hoosac region. She
    had loads of the most beautiful presents you ever saw. All the
    Silvers are rolling in riches, you know. One little thing made
    me laugh, for it was so like her. When the clergyman said,
    "Mary, wilt thou take this man to be thy wedded husband?" I
    distinctly saw her put her fingers over her mouth in the old,
    frightened way. It was only for a second, and after that I
    rather think Mr. Strothers held her hand tight for fear she
    might do it again. She sent her love to you, Katy. What sort of
    a gown are _you_ going to have, by the way?

    I have kept my best news to the last, which is that Deniston has
    at last given way, and we are to move into town in October. We
    have taken a little house in West Cedar Street. It is quite
    small and very dingy and I presume inconvenient, but I already
    love it to distraction, and feel as if I should sit up all night
    for the first month to enjoy the sensation of being no longer
    that horrid thing, a resident of the suburbs. I hunt the paper
    shops and collect samples of odd and occult pattern, and compare
    them with carpets, and am altogether in my element, only longing
    for the time to come when I may put together my pots and pans
    and betake me across the mill-dam. Meantime, Roslein is living
    in a state of quarantine. She is not permitted to speak with any
    other children, or even to look out of window at one, for fear
    she may contract some sort of contagious disease, and spoil our
    beautiful visit to Burnet. She sends you a kiss, and so do I;
    and mother and Sylvia and Deniston and grandmamma, particularly,
    desire their love.


    Your loving

                ROSE RED.

"Oh," cried Clover, catching Katy round the waist, and waltzing wildly
about the room, "what a delicious letter! What fun we are going to have!
It seems too good to be true. Tum-ti-ti, tum-ti-ti. Keep step, Katy. I
forgive you for the first time for getting married. I never did before,
really and truly. Tum-ti-ti; I am so happy that I must dance!"

"There go my letters," said Katy, as with the last rapid twirl, Rose's
many-sheeted epistle and the "Advice to Brides" flew to right and left.
"There go two of your hair-pins, Clover. Oh, do stop; we shall all be in
pieces."

Clover brought her gyrations to a close by landing her unwilling partner
suddenly on the sofa. Then with a last squeeze and a rapid kiss she began
to pick up the scattered letters.

"Now read the rest," she commanded, "though anything else will sound flat
after Rose's."

"Hear this first," said Elsie, who had taken advantage of the pause to
open her own letter. "It is from Cecy, and she says she is coming to spend
a month with her mother on purpose to be here for Katy's wedding. She
sends heaps of love to you, Katy, and says she only hopes that Mr.
Worthington will prove as perfectly satisfactory in all respects as her
own dear Sylvester."

"My gracious, I should hope he would," put in Clover, who was still in the
wildest spirits. "What a dear old goose Cecy is! I never hankered in the
least for Sylvester Slack, did you, Katy?"

"Certainly not. It would be a most improper proceeding if I had," replied
Katy, with a laugh. "Whom do you think this letter is from, girls? Do
listen to it. It's written by that nice old Mr. Allen Beach, whom we met
in London. Don't you recollect my telling you about him?"

    MY DEAR MISS CARR,--Our friends in Harley Street have told me a
    piece of news concerning you which came to them lately in a
    letter from Mrs. Ashe, and I hope you will permit me to offer
    you my most sincere congratulations and good wishes. I recollect
    meeting Lieutenant Worthington when he was here two years ago,
    and liking him very much. One is always glad in a foreign land
    to be able to show so good a specimen of one's young countrymen
    as he affords,--not that England need be counted as a foreign
    country by any American, and least of all by myself, who have
    found it a true home for so many years.

    As a little souvenir of our week of sight-seeing together, of
    which I retain most agreeable remembrances, I have sent you by
    my friends the Sawyers, who sail for America shortly, a copy of
    Hare's "Walks in London," which a young _protegee_ of mine has
    for the past year been illustrating with photographs of the many
    curious old buildings described. You took so much interest in
    them while here that I hope you may like to see them again. Will
    you please accept with it my most cordial wishes for your
    future, and believe me


    Very faithfully your friend,
                             ALLEN BEACH.

"What a nice letter!" said Clover.

"Isn't it?" replied Katy, with shining eyes, "what a thing it is to be a
gentleman, and to know how to say and do things in the right way! I am so
surprised and pleased that Mr. Beach should remember me. I never supposed
he would, he sees so many people in London all the time, and it is quite a
long time since we were there, nearly two years. Was your letter from Miss
Inches, John?"

"Yes, and Mamma Marian sends you her love; and there's a present coming by
express for you,--some sort of a book with a hard name. I can scarcely
make it out, the Ru--ru--something of Omar Kay--y--Well, anyway it's a
book, and she hopes you will read Emerson's 'Essay on Friendship' over
before you are married, because it's a helpful utterance, and adjusts the
mind to mutual conditions."

"Worse than 1 Timothy, ii. 11," muttered Clover. "Well, Katy dear, what
next? What _are_ you laughing at?"

"You will never guess, I am sure. This is a letter from Miss Jane! And she
has made me this pincushion!"

The pincushion was of a familiar type, two circles of pasteboard covered
with gray silk, neatly over-handed together, and stuck with a row of
closely fitting pins. Miss Jane's note ran as follows:--

    HILLSOVER, April 21.


    DEAR KATY,--I hear from Mrs. Nipson that you are to be married
    shortly, and I want to say that you have my best wishes for your
    future. I think a man ought to be happy who has you for a wife.
    I only hope the one you have chosen is worthy of you. Probably
    he isn't, but perhaps you won't find it out. Life is a knotty
    problem for most of us. May you solve it satisfactorily to
    yourself and others! I have nothing to send but my good wishes
    and a few pins. They are not an unlucky present, I believe, as
    scissors are said to be.

    Remember me to your sister, and believe me to be with true
    regard,


    Yours,               JANE A. BANGS.

"Dear me, is that her name?" cried Clover. "I always supposed she was
baptized 'Miss Jane.' It never occurred to me that she had any other
title. What appropriate initials! How she used to J.A.B. with us!"

"Now, Clovy, that's not kind. It's a very nice note indeed, and I am
touched by it. It's a beautiful compliment to say that the man ought to be
happy who has got me, I think. I never supposed that Miss Jane could pay a
compliment."

"Or make a joke! That touch about the scissors is really jocose,--for Miss
Jane. Rose Red will shriek over the letter and that particularly rigid
pincushion. They are both of them so exactly like her. Dear me! only one
letter left. Who is that from, Katy? How fast one does eat up one's
pleasures!"

"But you had a letter yourself. Surely papa said so. What was that? You
haven't read it to us."

"No, for it contains a secret which you are not to hear just yet," replied
Clover. "Brides mustn't ask questions. Go on with yours."

"Mine is from Louisa Agnew,--quite a long one, too. It's an age since we
heard from her, you know."

    ASHBURN, April 24.


    DEAR KATY,--Your delightful letter and invitation came day
    before yesterday, and thank you for both. There is nothing in
    the world that would please me better than to come to your
    wedding if it were possible, but it simply isn't. If you lived
    in New Haven now, or even Boston,--but Burnet is so dreadfully
    far off, it seems as inaccessible as Kamchatka to a person who,
    like myself, has a house to keep and two babies to take care of.

    Don't look so alarmed. The house is the same house you saw when
    you were here, and so is one of the babies; the other is a new
    acquisition just two years old, and as great a darling as Daisy
    was at the same age. My mother has been really better in health
    since he came, but just now she is at a sort of Rest Cure in
    Kentucky; and I have my hands full with papa and the children,
    as you can imagine, so I can't go off two days' journey to a
    wedding,--not even to yours, my dearest old Katy. I shall think
    about you all day long on _the_ day, when I know which it is,
    and try to imagine just how everything looks; and yet I don't
    find that quite easy, for somehow I fancy that your wedding will
    be a little different from the common run. You always were
    different from other people to me, you know,--you and
    Clover,--and I love you so much, and I always shall.

    Papa has taken a kit-kat portrait of me in oils,--and a blue
    dress,--which he thinks is like, and which I am going to send
    you as soon as it comes home from the framers. I hope you will
    like it a little for my sake. Dear Katy, I send so much love
    with it.

    I have only seen the Pages in the street since they came home
    from Europe; but the last piece of news here is Lilly's
    engagement to Comte Ernest de Conflans. He has something to do
    with the French legation in Washington, I believe; and they
    crossed in the same steamer. I saw him driving with her the
    other day,--a little man, not handsome, and very dark. I do not
    know when they are to be married. Your Cousin Clarence is in
    Colorado.

    With two kisses apiece and a great hug for you, Katy, I am
    always


    Your affectionate friend,
                            LOUISA.

"Dear me!" said the insatiable Clover, "is that the very last? I wish we
had another mail, and twelve more letters coming in at once. What a
blessed institution the post-office is!"




CHAPTER III.

THE FIRST WEDDING IN THE FAMILY.


The great job of the cake-making over, a sense of leisure settled on the
house. There seemed nothing left to be done which need put any one out of
his or her way particularly. Katy had among her other qualities a great
deal of what is called "forehandedness." To leave things to be attended to
at the last moment in a flurry and a hurry would have been intolerable to
her. She firmly believed in the doctrine of a certain wise man of our own
day who says that to push your work before you is easy enough, but to pull
it after you is very hard indeed.

All that winter, without saying much about it,--for Katy did not "do her
thinking outside her head,"--she had been gradually making ready for the
great event of the spring. Little by little, a touch here and a touch
there, matters had been put in train, and the result now appeared in a
surprising ease of mind and absence of confusion. The house had received
its spring cleaning a fortnight earlier than usual, and was in fair, nice
order, with freshly-beaten carpets and newly-washed curtains. Katy's
dresses were ordered betimes, and had come home, been tried on, and folded
away ten days before the wedding. They were not many in number, but all
were pretty and in good taste, for the frigate was to be in Bar Harbor and
Newport for a part of the summer, and Katy wanted to do Ned credit, and
look well in his eyes and those of his friends.

All the arrangements, kept studiously simple, were beautifully
systematized; and their very simplicity made them easy to carry out. The
guest chambers were completely ready, one or two extra helpers were
engaged that the servants might not be overworked, the order of every meal
for the three busiest days was settled and written down. Each of the
younger sisters had some special charge committed to her. Elsie was to
wait on Cousin Helen, and see that she and her nurse had everything they
wanted. Clover was to care for the two Roses; Johnnie to oversee the table
arrangements, and make sure that all was right in that direction. Dear
little Amy was indefatigable as a doer of errands, and her quick feet were
at everybody's service to "save steps." Cecy arrived, and haunted the
house all day long, anxious to be of use to somebody; Mrs. Ashe put her
time at their disposal; there was such a superabundance of helpers, in
fact, that no one could feel over taxed. And Katy, while still serving as
main spring to the whole, had plenty of time to write her notes, open her
wedding presents, and enjoy her friends in a leisurely, unfatigued fashion
which was a standing wonderment to Cecy, whose own wedding had been of the
onerous sort, and had worn her to skin and bone.

"I am only just beginning to recover from it now," she remarked
plaintively, "and there you sit, Katy, looking as fresh as a rose; not
tired a bit, and never seeming to have anything on your mind. I can't
think how you do it. I never was at a wedding before where everybody was
not perfectly worn out."

"You never were at such a simple wedding before," explained Katy. "I'm not
ambitious, you see. I want to keep things pretty much as they are every
day, only with a little more of everything because of there being more
people to provide for. If I were attempting to make it a beautiful,
picturesque wedding, we should get as tired as anybody, I have no doubt."

Katy's gifts were numerous enough to satisfy even Clover, and comprised
all manner of things, from a silver tray which came, with a rather stiff
note, from Mrs. Page and Lilly, to Mary's new flour-scoop, Debby's sifter,
and a bottle of home-made hair tonic from an old woman in the "County
Home." Each of the brothers and sisters had made her something, Katy
having expressed a preference for presents of home manufacture. Mrs. Ashe
gave her a beautiful sapphire ring, and Cecy Hall--as they still called
her inadvertently half the time--an elaborate sofa-pillow embroidered by
herself. Katy liked all her gifts, both large and small, both for what
they were and for what they meant, and took a good healthy, hearty
satisfaction in the fact that so many people cared for her, and had worked
to give her a pleasure.

Cousin Helen was the first guest to arrive, five days before the wedding.
When Dr. Carr, who had gone to Buffalo to meet and escort her down, lifted
her from the carriage and carried her indoors, all of them could easily
have fancied that it was the first visit happening over again, for she
looked exactly as she did then, and scarcely a day older. She happened to
have on a soft gray travelling dress too, much like that which she wore on
the previous occasion, which made the illusion more complete.

But there was no illusion to Cousin Helen herself. Everything to her
seemed changed and quite different. The ten years which had passed so
lightly over her head had made a vast alteration in the cousins whom she
remembered as children. The older ones were grown up, the younger ones in
a fair way to be so; even Phil, who had been in white frocks with curls
falling over his shoulders at the time of her former visit to Burnet, was
now fifteen and as tall as his father. He was very slight in build, and
looked delicate, she thought; but Katy assured her that he was perfectly
well, and thin only because he had outgrown his strength.

It was one of the delightful results of Katy's "forehandedness" that she
could command time during those next two days to thoroughly enjoy Cousin
Helen. She sat beside her sofa for hours at a time, holding her hand and
talking with a freedom of confidence such as she could have shown to no
one else, except perhaps to Clover. She had the feeling that in so doing
she was rendering account to a sort of visible conscience of all the
events, the mistakes, the successes, the glad and the sorry of the long
interval that had passed since they met. It was a pleasure and relief to
her; and to Cousin Helen the recital was of equal interest, for though she
knew the main facts by letter, there was a satisfaction in collecting the
little details which seldom get fully put into letters.

One subject only Katy touched rather guardedly; and that was Ned. She was
so desirous that her cousin should approve of him, and so anxious not to
raise her expectations and have her disappointed, that she would not half
say how very nice she herself thought him to be. But Cousin Helen could
"read between the lines," and out of Katy's very reserve she constructed
an idea of Ned which satisfied her pretty well.

So the two happy days passed, and on the third arrived the other anxiously
expected guests, Rose Red and little Rose.

They came early in the morning, when no one was particularly looking for
them, which made it all the pleasanter. Clover was on the porch twisting
the honeysuckle tendrils upon the trellis when the carriage drove up to
the gate, and Rose's sunny face popped out of the window. Clover
recognized her at once, and with a shriek which brought all the others
downstairs, flew down the path, and had little Rose in her arms before any
one else could get there.

"You see before you a deserted wife," was Rose's first salutation.
"Deniston has just dumped us on the wharf, and gone on to Chicago in that
abominable boat, leaving me to your tender mercies. O Business, Business!
what crimes are committed in thy name, as Madame Roland would say!"

"Never mind Deniston," cried Clover, with a rapturous squeeze. "Let us
play that he doesn't exist, for a little while. We have got you now, and
we mean to keep you."

"How pleasant you look!" said Rose, glancing up the locust walk toward the
house, which wore a most inviting and hospitable air, with doors and
windows wide open, and the soft wind fluttering the vines and the white
curtains. "Ah, there comes Katy now." She ran forward to meet her while
Clover followed with little Rose.

"Let me det down, pease," said that young lady,--the first remark she had
made. "I tan walk all by myself. I am not a baby any more."

"_Will_ you hear her talk?" cried Katy, catching her up. "Isn't it
wonderful? Rosebud, who am I, do you think?"

"My Aunt Taty, I dess, betause you is so big. Is you mawwied yet?"

"No, indeed. Did you think I would get 'mawwied' without you? I have been
waiting for you and mamma to come and help me."

"Well, we is here," in a tone of immense satisfaction. "Now you tan."

The larger Rose meanwhile was making acquaintance with the others. She
needed no introductions, but seemed to know by instinct which was each boy
and each girl, and to fit the right names to them all. In five minutes she
seemed as much at home as though she had spent her life in Burnet. They
bore her into the house in a sort of triumph, and upstairs to the blue
bedroom, which Katy and Clover had vacated for her; and such a hubbub of
talk and laughter presently issued therefrom that Cousin Helen, on the
other side the entry, asked Jane to set her door open that she might enjoy
the sounds,--they were so merry.

Rose's bright, rather high-pitched voice was easily distinguishable above
the rest. She was evidently relating some experience of her journey, with
an occasional splash by way of accompaniment, which suggested that she
might be washing her hands.

"Yes, she really has grown awfully pretty; and she had on the loveliest
dark-brown suit you ever saw, with a fawn-colored hat, and was altogether
dazzling; and, do you know, I was really quite glad to see her. I can't
imagine why, but I was! I didn't stay glad long, however."

"Why not? What did she do?" This in Clover's voice.

"Well, she didn't do anything, but she was distant and disagreeable. I
scarcely observed it at first, I was so pleased to see one of the old
Hillsover girls; and I went on being very cordial. Then Lilly tried to put
me down by running over a list of her fine acquaintances, Lady this, and
the Marquis of that,--people whom she and her mother had known abroad. It
made me think of my old autograph book with Antonio de Vallombrosa, and
the rest. Do you remember?"

"Of course we do. Well, go on."

"At last she said something about Comte Ernest de Conflans,--I had heard
of him, perhaps? He crossed in the steamer with 'Mamma and me,' it seems;
and we have seen a great deal of him. This appeared a good opportunity to
show that I too have relations with the nobility, so I said yes, I had met
him in Boston, and my sister had seen a good deal of him in Washington
last winter.

"'And what did she think of him?' demanded Lilly.

"'Well,' said I, 'she didn't seem to think a great deal about him. She
says all the young men at the French legation seem more than usually
foolish, but Comte Ernest is the worst of the lot. He really _does_ look
like an absolute fool, you know,' I added pleasantly. Now, girls, what was
there in that to make her angry? Can you tell? She grew scarlet, and
glared as if she wanted to bite my head off; and then she turned her back
and would scarcely speak to me again. Does she always behave that way when
the aristocracy is lightly spoken of?"

"Oh, Rose,--oh, Rose," cried Clover, in fits of laughter, "did you really
tell her that?"

"I really did. Why shouldn't I? Is there any reason in particular?"

"Only that she is engaged to him," replied Katy, in an extinguished voice.

"Good gracious! No wonder she scowled! This is really dreadful. But then
why did she look so black when she asked where we were going, and I said
to your wedding? That didn't seem to please her any more than my little
remarks about the nobility."

"I don't pretend to understand Lilly," said Katy, temperately; "she is an
odd girl."

"I suppose an odd girl can't be expected to have an even temper,"
remarked Rose, apparently speaking with a hairpin in her mouth. "Well,
I've done for myself, that is evident. I need never expect any notice in
future from the Comtesse de Conflans."
