"What's the matter, Harry?" asked Mr. Lowington, as he rushed over the
bridge, followed by the gardener and his assistants, just as Harry was
picking himself up and rubbing his head.

"They were stealing your peaches, and I tried to stop them," replied
Harry. "They have taken some of them now."

Mr. Lowington glanced at the favorite tree, and his brow lowered with
anger and vexation. His paper before the "Pomological" could be
illustrated by only nine peaches, instead of thirteen.

"Who stole them, Harry?" demanded the disappointed fruit-grower.

The nephew hesitated a moment, and the question was repeated with more
sternness.

"Robert Shuffles; Isaac Monroe was with him, but he didn't take any of
the peaches."

"What is the matter with your head, Harry?" asked his uncle, when he
observed him rubbing the place where the blow had fallen.

"Shuffles struck me and knocked me down, when I called out for you."

"Did he? Where is he now?"

"He and Monroe ran up the walk to the back of the garden."

"That boy shall be taken care of," continued Mr. Lowington, as he walked
up the path towards the point where the marauders had entered. "The
Academy is fast becoming a nuisance to the neighborhood, because there
is neither order nor discipline among the students."

The thieves had escaped, and as it would be useless to follow them, Mr.
Lowington went back to the house; but he was too much annoyed at the
loss of his splendid peaches, which were to figure so prominently before
the "Pomological," to permit the matter to drop without further notice.

"Did he hurt you much, Harry?" asked Mr. Lowington as they entered the
house.

"Not much, sir, though he gave me a pretty hard crack," answered Harry.

"Did you see them when they came into the garden?"

"No, sir? I was fixing my water-wheel in the brook, when I heard them at
the tree. I went up, and tried to prevent Shuffles from taking the
peaches. I caught hold of him, and pulled him away. He said he couldn't
stop to lick me then, but he'd do it within twenty-four hours. Then he
hit me when I called for help."

"The young scoundrel! That boy is worse than a pestilence in any
neighborhood. Mr. Baird seems to have no control over him."

Suddenly, and without any apparent reason, Mr. Lowington's compressed
lips and contracted brow relaxed, and his face wore its usual expression
of dignified serenity. Harry could not understand the cause of this
sudden change; but his uncle's anger had passed away. The fact was, that
Mr. Lowington happened to think, while his indignation prompted him to
resort to the severest punishment for Shuffles, that he himself had been
just such a boy as the plunderer of his cherished fruit. At the age of
fifteen he had been the pest of the town in which he resided. His father
was a very wealthy man, and resorted to many expedients to cure the boy
of his vicious propensities.

Young Lowington had a taste for the sea, and his father finally procured
a midshipman's warrant for him to enter the navy. The strict discipline
of a ship of war proved to be the "one thing needful" for the
reformation of the wild youth; and he not only became a steady young
man, but a hard student and an accomplished officer. The navy made a man
of him, as it has of hundreds of the sons of rich men, demoralized by
idleness and the absence of a reasonable ambition.

When Mr. Lowington was thirty years old, his father died, leaving to
each of his three children a quarter of a million; and he had resigned
his position in the navy, in order to take care of his property, and to
lead a more domestic life with his wife and daughter than the discipline
of the service would permit.

He had taken up his residence in Brockway, the early home of his wife.
It was a large town on the sea shore, only a few miles from the
metropolis of New England, thus combining all the advantages of a home
in the city and in the country. For several years he had been happy in
his peaceful retirement. But not wealth, nor even integrity and piety,
can bar the door of the lofty mansion against the Destroyer of the race.
His wife died of an hereditary disease, which gave no indication of its
presence till she had passed her thirtieth year. Two years later, his
daughter, just blooming into maturity, followed her mother down to the
silent tomb, stricken in her freshness and beauty by the same insidious
malady.

The husband and father was left desolate. His purest and fondest hopes
were blighted; but, while he was submissive to the will of the Father,
who doeth all things well, he became gloomy and sad. He was not seen to
smile for a year after the death of his daughter, and it was three years
before he had recovered even the outward semblance of his former
cheerfulness. He was rich, but alone in the world. He continued to
reside in the home which was endeared to him by the memories of his
loved and lost ones.

When his wife's sister died in poverty, leaving two children, he had
taken them to his home, and had become a father to them. Harry Martyn
was a good boy, and Josephine Martyn was a good girl; but they were not
his own children. There was something wanting--an aching void which they
could not fill, though Mr. Lowington was to them all that could be asked
or expected of a parent.

Mr. Lowington busied himself in various studies and experiments; but
life had ceased to be what it was before the death of his wife and
daughter. He wanted more mental occupation; he felt the need of greater
activity, and he was tempted to return to the navy, even after his
absence of ten years from the service; but this step, for many reasons,
was not practicable. At the time when his garden was invaded by the
vandal students from the Brockway Academy, he was still thinking what he
could do to save himself from the inglorious life of ease he was
leading, and, at the same time, serve his country and his race.

Shuffles had robbed his garden of some of his choicest fruit; had struck
his nephew a severe blow on the head, and threatened to inflict still
greater chastisement upon him in the future. Mr. Lowington was justly
indignant; and his own peace and the peace of the neighborhood demanded
that the author of the mischief should be punished, especially as he was
an old transgressor. It was absolutely necessary that something should
be done, and the retired naval officer was in the right frame of mind to
do it. Just then, when he was wrought up to the highest pitch of
indignation, his anger vanished. Shuffles at sixteen was the counterpart
of himself at fifteen.

This was certainly no reason why the hand of justice should be stayed.
Mr. Lowington did not intend to stay it, though the thought of his own
juvenile depravity modified his view, and appeased his wrath. He put on
his hat and left the house. He walked over to the Academy, and being
shown to the office of the principal, he informed him of the
depredations committed in his garden.

"Who did it, Mr. Lowington?" demanded the principal, with proper
indignation in his tones and his looks.

"Shuffles."

"I need not have asked. That boy gives me more trouble than all the
others put together," added Mr. Baird, with an anxious expression. "And
yet what can I do with him?"

"Expel him," replied Mr. Lowington, laconically.

"I don't like to do that."

"Why not?"

"It would be an injury to me."

"Why so?"

"It would offend his father, who is a person of wealth and influence.
When Shuffles came to Brockway ten other boys came with him. He was
expelled from another institution, which so incensed his father that he
induced the parents of ten others to take their sons out, and send them
to me. If I expel Shuffles, I shall lose about a dozen of my students,
and I can't afford to do that."

"But must the neighborhood suffer from his depredations?"

"I will talk with the boy; I will keep him in his room for a week."

"I'm afraid the boy needs severer measures. If this were the first, or
even the third time, I would, not say so much."

"My dear sir, what can I do?"

"The boy needs strict discipline. If I were still in the navy, and had
him aboard my ship, I could make a man of him."

"I don't think anything can be done."

"Something must be done, Mr. Baird. My garden shall not be robbed with
impunity."

"I will do what I can, Mr. Lowington."

But the owner of the stolen fruit was by this time satisfied that
nothing would be done. The principal of the Brockway Academy had not
force nor influence enough to control such a boy as Shuffles. Mr.
Lowington took his leave, determined to apply to another tribunal for
the correction of the evil. That night the peach thieves were arrested,
and put in the lock-up. The next day they were tried, found guilty, and
sentenced to pay a fine and costs, which Mr. Baird promptly paid. Within
a week Mr. Lowington's stable was burned to the ground. Shuffles was
seen near the building just before the fire broke out; but it could not
be proved that he was the incendiary, though no one doubted the fact. He
was arrested, but discharged on the examination.

"You see how it is, Mr. Lowington," said the principal of the Academy,
as the two gentlemen met after the examination. "It would have been
better for you if you had not prosecuted the boy for stealing the
peaches."

"I don't think so," replied Mr. Lowington. "I must do my duty, without
regard to consequences; and you will pardon me if I say you ought to do
the same."

"If I expel the boy he would burn the house over my head."

"Then you think he burned my stable?"

"I don't know; it cannot be proved that he did."

"I have no doubt of the fact. I have no ill will against the boy. I only
desire to protect myself and my neighbors from his depredations."

"I think you were very unfortunate in the method you adopted, Mr.
Lowington," replied the principal of the Academy. "It has reacted upon
yourself."

"Shall this boy steal my fruit and burn my buildings with impunity?"
added Mr. Lowington, with considerable warmth.

"Certainly not."

"I applied to you for redress, Mr. Baird."

"I told you I would talk with the boy."

"Such a reprobate as that needs something more than talk."

"What would you do with him, sir?" demanded Mr. Baird, earnestly.

"I hardly know. I should certainly have expelled him; but that, while it
protects the Academy, does not benefit the boy."

"It would only harden the boy."

"Very likely; and his remaining will harden a dozen more by his
influence. Mr. Baird, I shall be obliged to take my nephew out of your
institution," added Mr. Lowington, seriously.

"Take him out?"

"I must, indeed."

"Why so?" asked Mr. Baird, who was touched in a very tender place.

"Because I am not willing to keep him under the influence of such an
example as this Shuffles sets for his companions. As the matter now
stands, the young rascal has more influence in the Academy than you
have. You cannot manage him, and you dare not expel him. The boy knows
this, and he will not leave his advantage unused."

"I hope you won't take Harry out of the school," said Mr. Baird.

"I must."

"Others may do the same."

"I cannot help it; with my view of the matter, they can hardly do
otherwise."

"But you see, sir, what the effect of this step must be."

"Mr. Baird, I must be frank with you. You have declined to expel
Shuffles, while you know that his influence is bad. You asked me what
you should do? and I told you. Now, you prefer to retain Shuffles, but
you must lose others. Permit me to say that you should do your duty
without regard to consequences."

"I cannot afford to lose my scholars."

"Your position is a difficult one. I grant, Mr. Baird; but without
discipline you can do nothing for yourself or the boys."

Mr. Lowington went home, Harry was taken from the Academy, and a dozen
parents and guardians followed the example of the advocate for
discipline. Mr. Baird was in despair. The institution was falling to
pieces for the want of discipline. The principal had not the nerve to
enforce order, even with the limited means within his reach. He went to
see Mr. Lowington and begged him to assist in stemming the tide which
was setting against the Brockway Academy. The retired naval officer
became deeply interested in the subject of school discipline in general,
especially in its connection with the education of rich men's sons given
to insubordination. He pitied poor Mr. Baird in his perplexities, for he
was a good man and an excellent teacher.

In the mean time Shuffles grew worse instead of better. Finding that he
could have his own way, that the principal was no match for him, his
influence for evil was stronger than Mr. Baird's for good. The worthy
schoolmaster had finally resolved to expel his troublesome student,
when Mr. Lowington one day surprised him by offering to buy out the
Academy at a price far exceeding its value. He gladly accepted the offer
as the best solution of the problem, and the naval officer became
principal of the Brockway Academy.

Mr. Lowington did not expel the refractory pupil at once. He waited for
an overt act; but Shuffles found the anaconda of authority tightening
upon him. He attempted to vindicate himself before his fellow-students
by setting fire to a haystack on the marsh, belonging to the new
principal. A searching investigation followed, and Shuffles was
convicted. Mr. Lowington wrote to the boy's father, announcing his
expulsion. Mr. Shuffles went to Brockway full of wrath, and threatened
the new head of the institution with the loss of a large number of his
scholars if he disgraced his son by expelling him. If the boy had done
wrong,--and he supposed he had,--let him be talked to; let him be
confined to his room for a day or two; but he must not be expelled; it
was a disgrace to the boy.

The principal was as firm as a rock, and Mr. Shuffles was calm when he
found that threats were unavailing. Mr. Lowington pointed out to his
visitor the perils which lay in the path of his son. Mr. Shuffles began
to be reasonable, and dined with the principal. A long and earnest
consideration of the whole matter took place over the dessert. The fiat
of expulsion was revoked, and young Shuffles was turned over to the
ex-naval officer, with full power to discipline him as he thought best.
Mr. Lowington had converted the father, and he hoped he should be able
to convert the son.

After dinner, Mr. Shuffles went down the bay with his host in the yacht.
On the way they passed the school ship Massachusetts, to which boys are
sentenced by the courts for crime and vagrancy, and on board of which
they are disciplined and educated. Mr. Lowington explained the
institution to his guest.

"An excellent idea," said Mr. Shuffles.

"It is just the place for your son," replied Mr. Lowington.

"But it is for criminals."

"Very true."

"Robert is not a criminal."

"If he is not now, he soon will be, if he continues in his present
course. If I had him on shipboard, I could make a man of him."

"Then I wish you had him on shipboard."

"Perhaps I may yet," replied the principal, with a smile. "I did not
purchase the Academy with the intention of becoming a pedagogue, in the
ordinary sense of the word. I have no intention of remaining in it."

"I hope you will."

"I have been thinking of fitting up a vessel like the school ship, that
rich men's sons may have the benefit of such an institution without the
necessity of committing a crime. I could do more for the boys in a month
on board ship than I could in a year at Brockway."

This was the first mention which Mr. Lowington made of his plan, though
he had been considering it for several weeks. Mr. Shuffles hoped that
this idea of a nautical academy would be reduced to practice; for he now
felt that it was just what his son needed. The project was discussed
during the rest of the trip.

The history of the scheme, from its inception, need not be followed in
detail. Many persons were consulted in regard to it; there were plenty
to approve, and plenty to disapprove; but in October the keel of a four
hundred ton ship was laid down. The object of this marine institution
was thoroughly explained, and before the ship was ready for launching
there were applications for every berth on board of her.

The idea was exceedingly popular among the boys, all of whom were
anxious to be students on board, especially as it was already hinted
that the ship would visit Europe. To parents it held out for their sons
all the benefits of a sea voyage, with few of its disadvantages. It
would furnish healthy exercise and a vigorous constitution to its
pupils.

In March of the following year the ship was at anchor in Brockway
harbor, ready to receive her juvenile crew.



