As the professor spoke, he leaned back in his chair and awaited a reply.

"I hardly know what it would be right to ask," returned Walter
hesitatingly. "How much did you pay your last assistant?"

"I paid him fifteen dollars a month and his traveling expenses."

This was a good deal more than Walter had made since he had undertaken
to earn his own living, yet there seemed small chance of laying up
anything out of it.

"May I ask, sir," he inquired, "do you meet with pretty good success in
disposing of your balm?"

"Yes; the public knows a good thing when it is brought to its
attention."

"Would you be willing to pay my expenses and ten per cent. commission on
sales?"

"Why do you prefer this to a stated salary?"

"Because it would be an incentive to do my best. Then if I helped you to
a successful sale I should be paid in proportion."

"I have an idea. You look blooming and healthy. Are you willing I should
advertise you as one who has been snatched from death by my celebrated
balm?"

"I don't think I would like it, sir. It would be imposing upon the
public."

"I merely suggested it, but I won't insist upon it. I suppose you are
thoroughly honest and reliable?"

Walter smiled.

"I don't know that my assurance will satisfy you, but I can truly say
that I am."

"You look it, and I trust a good deal to appearances. I will accept your
assurance."

"Thank you, sir."

"Can you join me at once?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then I will expect you to bring your baggage here during the day--the
sooner the better. You will then receive your instructions."

Walter was very glad to hear this, for his purse was so nearly exhausted
that it was comforting to think his lodging and meals would hereafter
be paid by some one else. When he came to reflect upon the nature of his
duties--general assistant to a quack doctor, playing on village commons
and in country halls to draw a crowd of prospective customers, he felt
that it was hardly a thing to be proud of. With his college training
he ought to be qualified for something better, but the cold, hard fact
stared him in the face that it was the only employment that offered, and
he must accept it or starve. Walter had become practical. His limited
acquaintance with the world had made him so, and he was not going to
refuse bread and butter because it was offered by a quack doctor.

Within an hour Walter had given up his room--the rent had been paid in
advance--and transferred his luggage to the Hotel Brevoort, where he was
assigned a small apartment on the upper floor.

"I shall leave the city in two days," said the professor. "I have put an
advertisement into the daily papers which brings customers to the hotel,
but I depend chiefly upon my sales on the road."

"Do you travel on the cars?" asked Walter.

"No; I have a neat wagon in which I carry a supply of bottles of balm,
and this enables me to stop where I like. I prefer villages to very
large towns and cities. It is better for me to visit places where there
are no drug-stores, as the people are more dependent on what is brought
to them."

"When you are in the city shall I get my commission?"

"Ahem! I am not clear as to that," answered Professor Robinson
thoughtfully. "You see you are not called upon to play."

"Suppose you give me five per cent. in Chicago and large places."

"Very well. I will do so. I will settle with you at the end of every
week, if that will be satisfactory."

"Yes, sir."

Two days afterward a light wagon drew up in front of the hotel, drawn
by a strong horse, and Walter helped the professor to put a trunk
of medicine in the back part. Then he seated himself with Professor
Robinson on the front seat, and they set out in the direction of the
suburbs.

A new life was opening before Walter. What it would lead to he could not
guess. At any rate, it promised him a living, and this was a practical
advantage which he had learned to appreciate.

"How long have you been in this business, professor?" he asked.

"Ten years," answered the professor.

"How did you happen to go into it?"

"I'll tell you. Ten years ago I found myself in a tight place. I was on
my uppers, as the actors say. A friend, who was a drug clerk, gave me
the recipe for my balm, I borrowed a hundred dollars, had a quantity
made up, and set out on the road."

"And now?"

"Now I am worth fifteen thousand dollars, well invested, and can make a
good living every year."

All this was encouraging to Walter. He was eager to begin his work.




CHAPTER XX

ON THE ROAD


On a small common, near the center of the village of Brandon--for
special reasons I do not give the real names of places visited by the
travelers--Professor Robinson halted his wagon and signed to Walter to
commence playing.

"Give 'em something popular," he said.

Walter struck up "Annie Rooney," and followed it up with "McGinty."

Within ten minutes fifty persons were gathered about the wagon. Then the
professor held up his hand and Walter stopped.

"Gentlemen," began the professor, "my young assistant will soon charm
you again with the dulcet strains of his violin. But it is necessary for
me to combine business with pleasure, and it affords me satisfaction
to call your attention to the surpassing merits of my Liquid Balm, only
twenty-five cents a bottle. It is a sovereign remedy for most of the
diseases that flesh is heir to. All diseases of the stomach, liver,
and lungs are, if not cured, very greatly mitigated by this wonderful
medicine. It is the only remedy for consumption that can be relied upon.
Why, gentlemen, a year since I was selling in a small town in Ohio.
Among those who gathered about me was a hollow-cheeked man with a
churchyard cough. He asked me if I would undertake to cure him. I
answered that I would guarantee nothing, but was convinced that his
life would be prolonged by the use of my balm. He bought half-a-dozen
bottles. Where do you think that man is now?"

Voice in the crowd: "In the grave."

"Not a bit of it, gentlemen. He is hale and hearty, his face is
full, his color healthy, and he tips the scales at one hundred and
seventy-five pounds. I was myself surprised at the extraordinary
efficacy of my wonderful medicine. He used in all a dozen bottles,
giving me a second order later on, and so for the paltry sum of three
dollars was drawn back from the brink of the grave, and restored to life
and health. Now, who will buy a bottle?"

This appeal sold eight bottles.

A saffron-faced man came forward and asked if the balm could cure
liver-complaint.

"My friend," said the professor, "if you will try the balm--you ought to
have half-a-dozen bottles, as it is uncertain when I shall come this way
again--your liver will become O. K. and your face will be as fresh and
blooming as that of a twelve-year-old boy."

This prospect seemed so encouraging that the saffron-faced man bought
four bottles, and took the professor's address.

At the end of about twenty minutes Walter struck up again, a lively
dancing tune, and was listened to with evident pleasure.

When all who desired the balm seemed to have invested, the professor
brought out a supply of toilet soaps, and sold to the amount of a couple
of dollars.

At the end of two hours he packed up his wares, Walter took a seat
beside him, and they started for the next village.

"You had a pretty good sale, professor," said Walter.

"Yes; as well as I can calculate I took in about ten dollars."

Walter reflected with pleasure that his commission would amount to a
dollar.

The professor had another way of utilizing remedies. When he put up for
the night at a hotel, he usually succeeded in paying a part of his
hotel bill in medicine or toilet articles. As his average profits on the
former were seventy per cent., and on the latter forty, it may be seen
that this was greatly to his advantage. Walter did not wonder that he
had already accumulated a small competence.

On the fourth evening, as Walter was leaving the supper-table, a tall
young man, looking something like the stock pictures of Uncle Sam, came
up to him.

"Say, young fellow," he commenced, "some of us young people are going
to have a dance at the schoolhouse hall, but we haven't got no fiddler.
Peter Jackson, who generally plays for us, has got the lumbago and can't
play. What'll you charge?"

"What do you generally pay Mr. Jackson?" asked Walter.

"Three dollars an evening."

"Do you think I can play as well as he?"

"You kin play enough sight better. He can't play no tunes that ain't
fifty years old."

"Very well, I will charge you the same, that is, if the professor
doesn't object."

"Go ahead and see him and let me know."

Walter sought the professor and laid the matter before him.

"All right!" was the answer. "I've no objection. You can give
me one-third of the money and keep the rest yourself. Is that
satisfactory?"

"Perfectly so, sir." Walter played till one o'clock. He felt rather
tired when he got through, but he saw that he was making a favorable
impression, and the two dollars which he would receive for himself would
be of great service.

The man who first spoke to him paid him the money.

"I hope I gave satisfaction," said Walter.

"Yes, you did, and no mistake; but some of the girls were sorry they
couldn't have you for a partner."

Walter blushed.

"I am afraid," he said, "that I couldn't play and dance, too."

At his age few young men are indifferent to the favorable opinion of
young ladies, and Walter would have been glad to have participated in
the dancing. However, just at present, money was more acceptable to him
than anything else.

When the week was concluded, the professor looked over his accounts and
ascertained that Walter's commission amounted to nine dollars and sixty
cents. The two dollars he had received for outside services carried his
week's earnings to nearly twelve dollars.

He had been out with Professor Robinson a month when he had a surprise.
It was in the town of Glenwood. His violin drew the usual crowd, who
were listening with complimentary attention, when a young man, who
casually paused to judge of the musician's merits, started in amazement.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed to a young lady who accompanied him. "That's my
classmate, Sherwood."

"What do you mean, Hugh?" asked the young lady.

"I mean that the young man who is playing the violin is my college
classmate, Walter Sherwood."

"But what on earth can have put him in such a position? Is he poor?"

"He had the reputation of being rich in college, but I remember that at
the close of the sophomore year he was reported to have lost his money."

"He is nice-looking!" said the young lady, after a critical examination
of Walter.

"Yes, and he's no end of a nice fellow. I am truly sorry that he is so
reduced."

"Shall you go and speak to him?"

"Yes; but I shall have to wait till he is at leisure."

"Then I will go home by myself and leave you to confer together; and, by
the way, Hugh, you know we are to have a little company to-night. Do you
think your friend would play for us? He really plays uncommonly well."

"I will invite him as a guest. I shouldn't want to treat him as a
professional performer. We can afford to treat him as an equal, for he
is of good family, and brought up as a gentleman."

"I am quite willing to receive him as such."

Hugh Longwood remained in the crowd, and when the playing was over
pushed up to the wagon. Walter was assisting the professor in serving
out bottles of the famous balm.

"You may give me a bottle, Walter," said Longwood.

"By gracious, Hugh Longwood!" exclaimed Walter. "Who would have expected
to see you here?"

"This is my home. But we certainly do meet under strange circumstances.
What on earth led you into this business?"

"Thrift, thrift, Hugh," answered Walter, with a smile. "Let me tell you
that I am making a good living and benefiting my fellow men."

"But it is such a change from Euclid College."

"True."

"Such a come down!"

"I don't know about that. I am afraid my career there was not
particularly creditable. Now I am working and earning my own living. Can
you wait till we get through here? Then I will talk with you as long as
you like."

"Agreed. I am curious to hear of your adventures." Professor Robinson
proposed to stay in Glenwood overnight, so that Walter had plenty of
time to see his friend.

"My sister is to have a party of friends this evening, and she
commissions me to invite you."

"But," hesitated Walter, "I have no dress suit here."

"You look well enough."

"Besides, I am filling a very humble position."

"We know who you are, and that you are a gentleman. That is enough. Will
you come?"

"Yes, I will," answered Walter, heartily. "It will be like a taste of
the old life."

"And if we should ask you to favor us on the violin?"

"I shall be glad to contribute to the pleasure of the evening. But you
haven't told me why you are not back at college."

"My father is anxious to have me help him in his business. His health
is not what it was. Not being likely to set the river on fire in
any literary profession, I decided to give up the college for the
counting-room."

"I think you did right."




CHAPTER XXI

MISS LONGWOOD'S PARTY


At eight o'clock Walter reached the Longwood mansion. It would have been
early for a party in the city, but Glenwood people were sensible, and,
beginning early, were able to close in good season.

The house was a handsome one, and the rooms, tastefully furnished, were
blazing with light, and already half full.

Walter was quite at home in society, and advancing, greeted Hugh and
his sister, by whom he was cordially received, and introduced to other
members of the family.

About nine o'clock dancing commenced. Walter did not think it out of
place to ask the hand of Laura Longwood, being so intimate with
her brother. She had just accepted his invitation to dance, when a
dark-complexioned young man, dressed in the extreme of the fashion, and
evidently possessing a very high opinion of his appearance and position,
approached, and with a ceremonious bow said: "Miss Longwood, may I have
the pleasure of dancing with you?"

"Not this time, Mr. Murdock," answered the young lady. "I am engaged to
Mr. Sherwood."

Murdock upon this turned his glance upon Walter, whose dress, it must be
confessed, was scarcely befitting the occasion, but it will readily be
understood that he could not carry a dress suit about with him.

"Oh!" said Murdock, and his scornful glance spoke volumes.

"Let me introduce you to Mr. Sherwood, my brother's friend," continued
the young lady.

"I am indeed honored by the introduction," said Murdock, bowing very
