
"What have I to do with that?"

"It is hardly necessary to explain. The evening he lost the money you
were with him. Two days after, you pay me one of the bills which he
lost," said the tailor.

"Do you mean to say I stole 'em?" demanded Luke.

"It looks like it, unless you can explain how you came by the blotted
bill."

"I don't believe I paid you the bill. Very likely it was some one else."

"I thought you would say that, so I called Colman's attention to it.
However, if your employer admits paying you the bills, of course you are
all right."

Luke remembered very well that he was paid in fives, and that such an
appeal would do him no good.

"Does Walton know this?" he asked, sinking into a chair, and wiping the
perspiration from his brow.

"Yes; he suspected you."

"I'd like to choke him!" said Luke, fiercely. "The miserly scoundrel!"

"It seems to me he is justified in trying to recover his money. What
have you done with the rest of it?"

"Tell me what will be done to me," said Luke, sullenly.

"I didn't steal it. I only picked it up when he dropped it. He deserves
to lose it, for being so careless."

"Why didn't you tell him you had found it?"

"I meant to give it to him after a while. I only wanted to keep it long
enough to frighten him."

"That was dangerous, particularly as you used it."

"I meant to give him back other money."

"I don't think that excuse will avail you in court."

"Court of justice!" repeated Luke, turning pale.

"He won't have me taken up--will he?"

"He will unless you arrange to restore all the money."

"I've paid you part of it."

"That I shall hand over to him. Have you the rest?"

"I've spent a few dollars. I've got eight dollars left."

"You had better give it to me."

Reluctantly, Luke drew out his pocketbook and passed the eight dollars
to Mr. Merrill.

"Now when will you pay the rest?"

"In a few weeks," said Luke.

"That won't do. How much do you earn a week?"

"Fifteen dollars."

"How much do you pay for board?"

"Four dollars."

"Then you will be able to pay eleven dollars at the end of this week."

"I can't get along without money," said Luke.

"You will have to till you pay back the money, unless you prefer
appearing before a court of justice."

Luke was just going out when the tailor called him back.

"I believe you owe me thirty dollars. When are you going to pay it?"

"I can't pay it yet a while," said Luke.

"I think you had better," said the tailor quietly.

"I'll pay you as soon as I can."

"You make eleven dollars a week over and above your board and spend it
on drink, billiards and fast horses. You are fully able to pay for your
clothes promptly and I advise you to do it."

"I'll pay you as soon as I can."

"If you neglect to do it, I may as well tell you that I shall let it be
known that you stole Walton's pocketbook."

An expression of alarm overspread Luke's face, and he hastily made the
required promise. But he added, "I didn't steal it. I only found it."

"The whole story would be told, and people might think as they pleased.
But it is much better for you to avoid all this by paying your bills."

Luke Harrison left the tailor's shop in a very unhappy and disgusted
frame of mind.

"If I had the sense to wait till it blew over," he said to himself, "I
should have escaped all this: I didn't think Merrill would act so mean.
Now I'm in for paying his infernal bill besides. It's too bad."

Just then he came upon Frank Heath, who hailed him.

"Luke, come and play a game of billiards."

"If you'll promise not to beat me. I haven't got a cent of money."

"You haven't? What have you done with those bills you had this
afternoon?"

"I've paid 'em over to Merrill," said Luke, hesitating.

"He was in a deuced stew about his bill."

"When are your pants going to be ready?"

"I don't know," said Luke, with a pang of sorrow.

"Merrill's making them, isn't he?"

"He says he won't till I pay the whole bill."

"Seems to me your credit ain't very good, Luke."

"It's good enough, be he's hard up for money. I guess he's going to
fail. If you'll lend me a couple of dollars, I'll go around and have a
game."

Frank Heath laughed.

"You'll have to go to some one else, Luke," he said.

Luke passed a disagreeable evening. Cut off by his want of money from
his ordinary amusements, and depressed by the thought that things would
be no better till he had paid his bills, he lounged about, feeling that
he was a victim of ill luck. It did not occur to him that that ill luck
was of his own bringing.





CHAPTER XXII. THE COMING OF THE MAGICIAN


The week passed and Luke carefully avoided our hero going so far as to
cross the street so as not to meet him. On Saturday evening, according
to his arrangement, Luke was to have paid the surplus of his wages,
after meeting his board bill, to Mr. Merrill, for Harry.

But he did not go near him. On Monday, the tailor meeting him, inquired
why he had not kept his agreement.

"The fact is," said Luke, "I have been unlucky."

"How unlucky?"

"I had my wages loose in my pocket, and managed to lose them somehow."

"That is very singular," said the tailor, suspiciously.

"Why is it singular?" asked Luke. "Didn't Harry Walton lose his money?"

"You seem to have lost yours at a very convenient time."

"It's hard on me," said Luke. "Owing so much, I want to pay as quick as
I can, so as to have my wages to myself. Don't you see that?"

"Where do you think you lost the money?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Luke.

"Well," said Merrill, dryly, "I hope you will take better care of your
wages next Saturday evening."

"I mean to. I can't afford to lose anymore."

"I don't believe, a word of what he says about losing his money," said
the tailor, privately, to Harry. "I think it's only a trick to get rid
of paying you."

"Don't you think he'll pay me?" asked Harry.

"He won't if he can help it," was the answer. "He's a slippery customer.
I believe his money is in his pocket at this moment."

Mr. Merrill was not quite right; but it was only as to the whereabouts
of the money. It was in Luke's trunk. He intended to run away, leaving
all his creditors in the lurch. This was the "new way to pay old debts,"
which occurred to Luke as much the easiest.

The next Saturday evening, Mr. Merrill waited in vain for a call from
his debtor.

"What excuse will he have now?" he thought.

On Monday morning he learned that Luke had left town without acquainting
anyone with his destination. It transpired, also, that he was owing at
his boarding house for two weeks' board. He was thus enabled to depart
with nearly thirty dollars, for parts unknown.

"He's a hard case," said Mr. Merrill to Harry. "I am afraid he means to
owe us for a long time to come."

"Where do you think he is gone?" asked Harry.

"I have no idea. He has evidently been saving up money to help him out
of town. Sometime we may get upon his track, and compel him to pay up."

"That won't do me much good," said Harry, despondently. And then he told
the tailor why he wanted the money. "Now," he concluded, "I shan't be
able to have the money ready in time."

"You'll have most of it ready, won't you?"

"I think I will."

"I would lend you the money myself," said the tailor, "but I've got a
heavy payment to meet and some of my customers are slow pay, though I
have not many as bad as Luke Harrison."

"Thank you, Mr. Merrill," said Harry. "I am as much obliged to you as if
you could lend the money."

But it is said that misfortunes never come singly. The very next day Mr.
Leavitt received a message from the wholesale dealer to whom he sold his
shoes, that the market was glutted and sales slow.

"I shall not want any more goods for a month or two," the letter
concluded. "I will let you know, when I more."

Mr. Leavitt read this letter aloud in the shop.

"So it seems we are to have a vacation," he said. "That's the worst of
the shoe trade. It isn't steady. When it's good everybody rushes into
it, and the market soon gets overstocked. Then there's no work for
weeks."

This was a catastrophe for which Harry was no prepared. He heard the
announcement with a grave face, for to him it was a serious calamity.
Twenty-three dollars were all that he had saved from the money lost and
this would be increased by a dollar or two only, when he had settled up
with Mr. Leavitt. If he stayed here did not obtain work, he must pay his
board, and that would soon swallow up his money. Could he get work in
any other shop? That was an important question.

"Do you think I can get into any other shop in town?" he inquired
anxiously of Mr. Leavitt.

"You can try, Harry; but I guess you'll find others no better off than
I."

This was not very encouraging, but Harry determined not to give up
without an effort. He devoted the next day to going around among the
shoe shops; but everywhere he met with unfavorable answers. Some had
ready suspended. Others were about to do so.

"It seems as if all my money must go," thought Harry, looking
despondently at his little hoard. "First the ten dollars Luke Harrison
stole. Then work stopped. I don't know but it would be better for me to
go home."

But the more Harry thought of this, the less he liked it. It would be an
inglorious ending to his campaign. Probably now he would not be able to
carry out his plan of paying for the cow; but if his father should
lose it, he might be able, if he found work, to buy him another Squire
Green's cow was not the only cow in the world and all would not be lost
if he could not buy her.

"I won't give up yet," said Harry, pluckily. "I must expect to meet with
some bad luck. I suppose everybody does. Something'll turn up for me if
I try to make it."

This was good philosophy. Waiting passively for something to turn up is
bad policy and likely to lead to disappointment; but waiting actively,
ready to seize any chance that may offer, is quite different. The world
is full of chances, and from such chances so seized has been based many
a prosperous career.

During his first idle day, Harry's attention was drawn to a handbill
which had been posted up in the store, the post office, the tavern, and
other public places in the village. It was to this effect:


"PROFESSOR HENDERSON,

"The celebrated Magician,

"Will exhibit his wonderful feats of Magic and Sleight of Hand in the
Town Hall this evening, commencing at 8 o'clock. In the course of the
entertainment he will amuse the audience by his wonderful exhibition of
Ventriloquism, in which he is unsurpassed.

"Tickets 25 cents. Children under twelve, 15 cents."


In a country village, where amusements are few, such entertainments
occupy a far more important place than in a city, where amusements
abound.

"Are you going to the exhibition, Walton?" asked Frank Heath.

"I don't know," said Harry.

"Better come. It'll be worth seeing."

In spite of his economy, our hero wanted to go.

"The professor's stopping at the tavern. Come over, and we may see him,"
said Frank.





CHAPTER XXIII. THE VENTRILOQUIST


The boys went into the public room of the tavern. In the center was
a stove, around which were gathered a miscellaneous crowd, who had
assembled, as usual, to hear and talk over the news of the day. At the
farther end of the room was a bar, where liquor and cigars were sold.
The walls of the room, which was rather low-studded, were ornamented by
sundry notices and posters of different colors, with here and there
an engraving of no great artistic excellence--one representing a horse
race, another a steamer of the Cunard Line, and still another, the
Presidents of the United States grouped together, with Washington as the
central figure.

"Have a cigar, Walton?" asked Frank Heath.

"No, thank you, Frank."

"You haven't got so far along, hey?"

"I don't think it would do me any good," said Harry.

"Maybe not; but jolly comfortable on a cold night. The worst of it is,
it's mighty expensive."

Frank walked up to the bar and bought a ten-cent cigar. He returned and
sat down on a settee.

"The magician isn't here," said Harry.

"Hush, he is here!" said Frank, in a low voice, as the door opened, and
a tall, portly man entered the room.

Professor Henderson--for it was he--walked up the bar, and followed
Frank Heath's example in the purchase of a cigar Then he glanced
leisurely round the apartment. Apparently, his attention was fixed by
our hero, for he walked up to him, and said: "Young man, I would like to
speak to you."

"All right, sir," said Harry, in surprise.

"If you are not otherwise occupied, will you accompany me to my room?"

"Certainly, sir," returned Harry, in fresh wonder.

"Perhaps he's going to take in Walton as partner," Frank Heath suggested
to Tom Frisbie.

"I wonder what he want anyway?" said Frisbie. "Why didn't he take you?"

"Because I'm too sharp," said Frank. "I should see through his tricks."

Meanwhile, Harry had entered the professor's chamber.

"Sit down," said the magician. "I'll tell you what I want of you. I want
you to take tickets at the door of hall to-night. Can you do it?"

"Yes, sir," said Harry, promptly.

"It seems easy enough," said the professor; "but not everyone can do it
rapidly without making mistakes. Are you quick at figures?"

"I am usually considered so," said our hero.

"I won't ask whether you are honest, for you would so, of course."

"I hope--" commenced Harry.
