
"I know Snowball will like this house," said Boy Blue.

The next morning Snowball let him see her chickens.

"Cluck, clack, cluck!" she said.

"Oh, how pretty they are!" said Boy Blue.

"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.

"You have seven dear little snowballs."

Snowball was proud of her babies,

Boy Blue put them in his hat.

They were too little to walk.

"Come, Snowball," he said, "I have a new house for you."

"Cluck, cluck! This is a good house," she said.

Snowball and her seven little balls were very happy.

Boy Blue took good care of them, and they grew fast.

When the summer was over, he had eight big white snowballs.




FIRE-CRACKER


Fourth of July! Fourth of July!

This is the best day for boys in all the year.

Boy Blue liked the Fourth of July.

He liked fire-crackers and torpedoes and fire-balloons.

He liked everything that made a noise.

This was the Fourth of July, but poor little Boy Blue had no
fire-crackers.

He could not even blow his horn.

Little Sister was sick, and Mamma had said he must be very quiet.

It did not seem one bit like the Fourth of July.

He was sitting on the steps, whistling and trying not to care.

"Boy Blue," called his father, "I have something to show you out here."

The little boy jumped up and ran to the barn as fast as he could.

Perhaps he was going to have some fire-works after all!

He ran into the barn, and what do you think he saw?

There stood a little pony.

He had a glossy brown coat and a white star on his forehead.

"Oh! oh!" cried Boy Blue. "Is this pony for me?"

"Yes, my boy, it is for your very own."

"What a beautiful pony! What is his name, Papa?"

"I do not know his name."

[Illustration]

"You must name him yourself."

"'Star' would be a good name,--or I might call him 'Brownie.'

"Oh, I know a good name! I shall call him 'Fire-cracker.'"

"This is the Fourth of July, you know, and I did want some
fire-crackers so much!"

Fire-cracker was a good little pony.

He and his master soon became very fond of each other.

Boy Blue learned to ride on his pony's back, and he took long rides
with his father.

One day he said, "I wish I had a pony cart, then I could take Little
Sister to ride.

"Fire-cracker is very strong. I am sure he could draw both of us, if we
did not go very fast."

Papa thought that was a good idea.

The next day he took Boy Blue to town to buy a pony cart.

They went to two or three stores but they could not find one small
enough for Fire-cracker to draw.

At last Boy Blue saw one in a window.

It was painted blue and had red wheels.

It had a seat just big enough for Boy Blue and Little Sister.

So Papa and Boy Blue went into the store and bought it.

The next morning Boy Blue took Little Sister for a ride.

Fire-cracker was very careful.

He walked slowly and looked around very often to see the two children.

Perhaps he was thinking, "How fine we all look this morning!

"That is a very pretty carriage, and I like this harness, too.

"My coat shines in the sun and Boy Blue put a red ribbon in my mane.

"How proud he looks, holding the reins!

"I think he likes to take Little Sister for a ride.

"I like to see them both so happy.

"Good-bye, I am going to trot fast now."




BOY BLUE'S DREAM


It was a very hot day.

Boy Blue had played all the morning and he was tired.

Little Sister had been making mud pies and she was tired, too.

Mamma was too busy to read to them.

"Come, Little Sister," said Boy Blue, "It is too hot to play. I will
read my story-book to you."

"Where shall we go?" asked the little girl.

"Let us sit under the maple tree," said her brother. "It looks cool
there."

Little Sister had her baby doll.

She rocked back and forth as Boy Blue read to her.

Soon Little Sister and her doll were fast asleep.

All at once Boy Blue heard a voice.

He listened. It seemed to be saying:--

 "Little Boy Blue, come blow your horn,
  The sheep's in the meadow,
  The cow's in the corn."

[Illustration]

"Oh," thought the little boy, "I must hurry!"

He looked for his horn. There it lay in the grass.

But he was so sleepy,--he couldn't run after the sheep.

In a moment he fell asleep.

Then he heard the voice again:--

  "Little Boy Blue, come blow your horn,
    The sheep's in the meadow,
    The cow's in the corn."

Yes, he could see the cow eating the corn in the field.

And there was the sheep in the meadow, eating the fresh green grass.

He must call them away.

So he took up the horn and put it to his mouth.

Then he blew one loud call.

"Oh!" he said, as he opened his eyes, "What a loud noise that was!"

Then he laughed and rubbed his eyes.

"I guess I was dreaming," he said.

"I guess I was dreaming, too," said Little Sister, opening her blue
eyes.

Then she waked up her doll, and Boy Blue went on reading from his
story-book.




  Mary had a little lamb,
    Its fleece was white as snow,
  And everywhere that Mary went
    The lamb was sure to go.

  He followed her to school one day,
    Which was against the rule.
  It made the children laugh and play
    To see a lamb at school.

  And so the teacher put him out,
    But still he lingered near,
  And waited patiently about
    Till Mary did appear.




MARY'S LAMB


Of course you know all about Mary and her little lamb.

The little girl in this story was named Mary, and she had a little
lamb, too.

Mary was Boy Blue's cousin.

She lived in the city, and her father owned a big toy-store.

Mary liked to go to the store with him.

She liked to see all the dolls and toys and books.

Sometimes she played store with her own toys.

But I must tell you about her lamb.

One summer Mary went to the country to visit Boy Blue.

Of course there were cows, and pigs, and sheep, and lambs on the farm,

Mary liked the lambs best, and one of them was a great pet.

She called him Fleecy, and pulled sweet clover for him to eat.

Fleecy followed Mary all over the farm. Sometimes he even ran down the
road after her.

When Mary was going home her uncle said to her, "You may take Fleecy
with you, if you wish."

So the next day Fleecy had a long ride in the train.

[Illustration]

I don't think he liked it very well, but he didn't say a word.

When Mary took him out of the box he was glad to run about in the yard.

He soon became used to his new home.

He liked to play with the children.

They often played hide and seek.

When they hid behind the trees he could always find them.

