into the boat and row out a little way, I shall get an idea of your
style of rowing."

"I would rather row out alone," said James, haughtily, with a
disparaging look at Herbert.

"Unfortunately that won't do as well. You must learn to row with one oar
first."

"Then suppose you get into the boat with me."

"That won't do as well. I am much heavier than you. Now you and Herbert
are about the same weight."

"Very well, then," said James, and turning to Herbert, he said,
ungraciously: "Will you row with me?"

"If you desire it," said Herbert.

"Get in, then."

When they returned Cameron made some criticisms Upon their rowing. They
started out again but Herbert profited better by the instructions he had
received and the young collegian said so when they returned.

James was far from liking this and when Cameron asked him if he would
try another row he answered: "No, I am tired of it."

"If you get tired so soon, I am afraid you will have to strengthen your
arms by gymnastic exercises."

"Oh, I am not tired. I don't feel like rowing."

"Then suppose we walk back to the village. Does your way lie with ours?"

"Nearly all the way," said James.

He enjoyed the idea of walking with the collegian, but it was rather
a drawback that Herbert was to share that pleasure with him. Still he
could not very well suggest that Herbert should leave them.

"Have you seen my father's house?" asked James.

"Perhaps, without knowing whose it was."

"You couldn't help knowing it. It is the best in the village," said
James, pompously.

Cameron looked at him curiously.

"If he comes to Yale," he thought, "and puts on these airs, he'll be
taken down without ceremony."

"Oh, indeed!" he said aloud, dryly.

"Are you going to stay here long?" asked James.

"I can't say how long. I am here for my health."

"You must come and see us. My father will be very glad to see you. My
aunt has written us about you."

"Indeed! May I ask your aunt's name?"

"Her name is Davenport--Mrs. John Davenport. She lives in New Haven."

"Oh, yes, I have met her."

Cameron smiled to himself. The lady referred to was not unlike her
brother and nephew, being pompous and presuming--one, indeed, whom he
secretly disliked.

"She wants me to prepare for Yale," said James.

"Of course we Yale men are biased, but we think no student can do better
than to come to Yale."

"My father wants me to be a professional man--a lawyer."

"A good profession. Do you think you should like it?"

"Yes," said James, complacently. "It's a very genteel profession.
Besides, most of our public men are lawyers. I might stand a chance to
get into public life."

"Should you like it?"

"Yes, I should like to be a member of Congress. My father has a good
deal of influence and I am his only son, so I should have a very good
chance; don't you think so?"

"It would seem so," said Cameron, with a quiet smile. "I think you had
better come to Yale. You would be improved in many ways."

He referred to the possibility of James having some of the self-conceit
taken out of him; but then the squire's son interpreted the remark as a
compliment. "Have you ever thought of going to college, Herbert?" asked
Cameron, turning to our hero.

"I always thought I should like to go," answered Herbert, "but I never
thought there was any chance of it."

James laughed scornfully.

"No, I should think not," he said.

"Why?" asked Cameron, meaning to draw him out.

"He's too poor," said James.

"You, I suppose, have no trouble in that way?"

"My father is the richest man in Wrayburn."

"That is lucky for you," said the collegian.

"I shouldn't like to be as poor as Carter."

"It isn't pleasant or convenient to be poor," said Herbert, quietly. "I
don't mean always to be poor."

"You probably will be," said James. "Poor boys don't always stay poor."

"There isn't much chance for you to rise."

"I don't know why," said Herbert.

"Then it seems, Herbert," said Cameron, smiling, "there is not much
chance of my welcoming you at Yale."

"I wish there was."

"So you will have to be content with serving as my professor here."

James did not understand this allusion, but privately wondered how
Cameron could talk so intimately with a boy in Herbert's low social
position.

"I turn off here," he said. "That is our house."

"Is it?" said Cameron, indifferently.

"Your friend seems to have a very vain idea of his high position," said
Cameron, when James was out of hearing.

"And a very low idea of mine," added Herbert.

"Does that disturb you?"

"A little. He carries it so far as to be annoying."

"Circumstances may change with you both."

"I hope they may with me," said Herbert. "I don't want James to come
down in the world, but I hope to rise."

The next day Cameron was honored by a special call from Squire Leech,
who left an invitation for the young collegian to take tea with him the
following afternoon. This invitation Cameron accepted.




CHAPTER XXII

ANDREW TEMPLE


About half-past four o'clock one afternoon a tall, dark-complexioned
man, wearing a white hat, inscribed his name in the register of the
Wrayburn hotel.

"Can you tell here Mr. Leech lives?" he inquired of the landlord.

"He lives about a quarter of a mile from here. I can send some one with
you to show you the house."

Just then Herbert came downstairs from Mr. Cameron.

"Herbert," said the landlord, "here is a gentleman wants to go to Squire
Leech's. Would you mind showing him the way?"

"I will do so with pleasure," said our hero, politely. "Are you ready to
go now, sir?"

"Yes," said the stranger. "Landlord, please assign me a room and have my
bag carried up."

"All right, sir."

"Now, my lad, I am ready. It isn't far, is it?"

"About five minutes' walk--that is all, sir."

"I never was in Wrayburn--much going on here?"

"Not much, sir. It is a quiet town."

"Mr. Leech--Squire Leech, I think you call him--was an old schoolmate
of mine. We went to the Brandon Academy together. I suppose he is rich,
eh?"

"He is the richest man in Wrayburn."

"I am glad to hear it," said the other, in a tone of satisfaction. "What
do you think he is worth?"

"Some say a hundred thousand dollars."

"Very good!" commented Andrew Temple, for this was his name in the hotel
register--"for the country, I mean. In the city that wouldn't make a
rich man."

"Wouldn't it?" asked Herbert, who had supposed a man worth a hundred
thousand dollars rich anywhere.

"No, to be sure not. It costs a great deal more to live. Why, I myself
am worth something like that; but in New York nobody regards me as
rich."

"I should feel rich with ten thousand," said Herbert.

"That would about pay my expenses for a year."

"Squire Leech doesn't spend anywhere near that. I don't believe it costs
him two thousand dollars a year."

"Very likely. There's a great deal of difference between the country and
the city."

"Is it easy to make money in the city?" asked Herbert.

"Yes, if a man is sharp and has some money to start with. Do you think
of going there?"

"I am afraid it would be of no use. I have no money to start with, and I
am afraid I am not smart."

"Wait and I may give you a lift. Here's my card."

"Thank you, sir," said Herbert, as he read: "Andrew Temple, No.--Nassau
Street, Room 12."

"That's my office; I speculate in stocks."

"Is that a good business?"

"Capital, if you know the ropes. If you ever come to the city, call at
my office."

"Thank you, sir. Here is Squire Leech's house."

"I am much obliged to you. Allow me to compensate you for your trouble";
and Mr. Temple thrust his thumb and forefinger into his vest pocket.

"Oh, no, sir, I don't want pay," said Herbert, hurriedly.

Mr. Temple had made the offer as a matter of form and was relieved to
find it declined. He said "good-night" graciously and advanced to the
front door.

"Is Squire Leech at home?" he inquired of the servant.

"Yes, sir; I believe so. Won't you walk in?"

"Thank you. Please hand your master that card."

Squire Leech did not recall Mr. Temple's name, and greeted him
distantly. Not so Mr. Temple. He rose, and shook the squire's passive
hand energetically.

"Why, Leech, it seems like old times seeing you again."

"You have the advantage of me," said the squire.

"You don't mean to say you've forgotten Temple--Andrew Temple? Why, we
were at the Brandon Academy together."

"I suppose I ought to remember you."

"To be sure you ought. We were very good friends in the old days."

One reason of the squire's distant manner was that Mr. Temple, though
a rich man according to his own account, had a somewhat seedy look.
The squire was afraid he intended to ask for help on the score of old
friendship. It was with a hesitating voice, therefore, that he asked:

"How has the world treated you?"

"I am not rich, to be sure. Probably I am not worth more than a hundred
thousand dollars, at the outside; but before five years roll over my
head, I see my way clear to half a million."

Squire Leech's manner changed instantaneously.

"I am glad to see you," he said, cordially. "How long have you been in
town?"

"Only just arrived. I inquired my way here as soon as I heard that you
were living here."

"Are you at the hotel?"

"Yes. I left my luggage there."

"You must come and stop with me. We will talk over old times."

"Thank you; it would be much pleasanter for me, of course. In fact, I
came to Wrayburn on account of your being here. I happened to be in the
neighborhood, and I said 'I must see Leech at any rate.' So here I am.
Fortune has smiled on you, I hope?"

"Yes," said the squire, "I am comfortable."

"The boy that guided me here said that you were the richest man in
Wrayburn."

"I believe I am," said the squire, complacently. "I am worth somewhere
about the same as you."

"That's fair; it is more for you than for me. It costs me ten thousand
dollars a year to live in the city."

"Does it?" inquired Leech.

"I've sometimes thought of going to the country, where my expenses would
be much less; but, after all, you can make much more money in the city."

"You think there are opportunities of making money rapidly there?" asked
his companion.

"No doubt of it."

"I should like to talk with you on that subject after supper. Now,
I will go and tell Mrs. Leech you are here. We will send for your
carpetbag after supper."

Squire Leech was a covetous man. He had a passion for money-making
and he had availed himself of all the opportunities which the country
afforded. He had about as much property as his friend. He began to think
he had been plodding along in a very slow, unsatisfactory manner. He
would make careful inquiries and perhaps Temple would put him in the way
of doubling his money. Upon the whole, therefore, he was very glad
to see Mr. Temple, and introduced him to his wife and son as an old
schoolmate with whom he had once been very intimate.




CHAPTER XXIII

TEMPLE THE TEMPTER


"This is my son, James, Mr. Temple," said the squire, as the young
gentleman came in to supper a little late.

"Indeed! How old are you, James?"

James took in at a glance the visitor's appearance, which did not give
the impression of prosperity, and answered, with haughty condescension:
"I am almost sixteen."

"I congratulate you, Mr. Leech," said Temple. "I am not blessed with a
son. I would gladly give twenty thousand dollars could I have a son of
your boy's age."

James pricked up his ears. Temple spoke as if he had the twenty thousand
dollars to give. He must be a man of property and so entitled to
respect.

"What are you going to do with your boy?"

"I have not decided. Perhaps he may go to college."

"I think I shall be a lawyer," said James.

"A good profession. Some of our New York lawyers make great incomes."

"Do you live in New York?" asked James.

"Yes; that is my residence. You must establish yourself in the city when
you are ready to practice."

"That is just what I want to do; I don't want to bury myself in a
one-horse country town like this."

"And be a one-horse lawyer," suggested Temple, laughing. "Quite right,
my young friend. In the city alone you will find a broad field of
action."

"That's just the way I think," said James.

"I needn't say I would do all in my power to push you, and I flatter
myself I have some influence."

"You are very kind, Mr. Temple," said Mrs. Leech; "but I hoped that
James could still continue to live with us."

"You can't expect me to live at home all my life," said James,
impatiently.
