jumped up and paced about the room.

"Nothing has happened to the child; at least, we know of nothing, do
we, Betty?" said Miss Dorner. "We have both tried to teach her good
manners, for we found that she lacked them sadly. We did it chiefly
on your account. Sorry as I am to say it, Frederick, I have to tell
you that the child's disposition is so terribly obstinate one can
hardly do anything with her. The more we fought against it and tried
to bring her on the right path, the worse it got and the more she would
insist on having her way.

"What have we not said against this terrible disfigurement! And all
for nothing! The more we said, the more Cornelli would pull her hair
into her eyes. So I gave it up, for I saw that only physical punishment
would help in such a case and I wanted to leave that to you; I did not
come into your house for that. I do not even dare to decide if that
would help. I have really never in all my life seen such a stubborn
child. I shall certainly admire anybody who can bring her to rights."

The director had marched up and down the room with restless steps. Now
he suddenly stood still.

"But good gracious!" he exclaimed, "there must certainly be a way to
help a child of ten years. Are there no means except chastisement to
bring up a young creature like her? What an abominable thought! I will
not believe such a thing! Can you give me no advice? What could I do?
Ladies surely know how to educate a little girl. Something simply has
to be done right away. I am to blame for my neglect and for leaving
her too long in the wrong hands. Oh, what would my Cornelia say if she
could see her child?" Mr. Hellmut threw himself down in his chair and
put his hands before his face.

"Please calm yourself, Frederick! It is not your fault at all, for you
can't fight against her disposition," the cousin said soothingly. "We
have thought of a way of helping the child. You might send her to a
boarding school in town where there are a great many children and young
girls. Children often help each other by rubbing up against one another
and by noticing each other's faults and mistakes."

"Do you think that this might help Cornelli?" asked the father
doubtfully. "Cornelli is not used to being rubbed against and laughed
at."

"For that reason it would make a still deeper impression on her,"
answered the cousin. "You can believe me when I say that this may be
the only means to break her obstinacy, and I am not sure that even
this will help. If such a school can't break her will, nobody on earth
can reform her; you can believe me, Frederick."

"She is still very young to be sent away from home," said the father,
full of pity. "But I fear that you are right. She could not get better
here, only worse, and so it will probably have to be. Do you know of
a boarding school you could recommend?"

The cousin answered that she knew of one, and offered to take the
necessary steps as soon as she was again at home. Miss Dorner hoped
in vain that her cousin's humor would change and that he would become
again the merry and sociable companion of old days. He tried with all
his might to be entertaining when they met at table; but he always had
to glance at his little girl, who sat at her place dumb and seemingly
afraid even to glance about her. A deep shadow always came across his
features, and one could see that it was hard for him to mingle in the
general conversation.

Miss Dorner at last had enough of his unfriendly attitude. As a last
means to break it and to shake him up a little, she said to him on the
third day after his arrival: "It seems to me, Frederick, that you are
too much occupied even to remember your duties as a host. We are
thinking of going back to town. Are you willing?"

"I understand your decision absolutely," Mr. Hellmut answered politely.
"You are right in telling me that I am the most unpleasant host that
could be found, but I hope you understand that the change in Cornelli
has spoiled everything for me and has only filled me with the thought
of how to help her. I hope very much that you will visit my house again
at a pleasanter time. You can order the carriage whenever you want it."

The cousin had not expected this answer. "You go entirely too far,
Frederick," she said angrily. "How can a man sacrifice everything and
change all his ideas for the sake of such a child?"

"You seem to forget that it is my Cornelia's and my only child,"
answered the Director. "But we shall not talk about it any more, because
we could not understand each other. I am so grateful for your goodwill
that I do not want to cause you any anger at the end."

Two days later the carriage stood before the door. Both ladies stepped
in and Mina stepped in after them. The latter had known so well how
to make herself liked by them that they were taking her to town, for
Mina had wished to become a maid in the city to get away from country
people. One of the ladies was to take her as chambermaid, but it had
not been settled yet which of them would do so.

Esther was terribly indignant because Mina was leaving a good house
for no reason whatsoever. Since Esther had been managing in the
Director's home she had always felt the honor of the house to be her
own. Full of resentment, she was standing behind her master, who was
shaking hands as a last farewell.

Miss Mina was looking towards the other side, where Cornelli stood:
"Won't you even give me your hand? This is not very friendly of you.
That is just the way you are," she said to the child in a low voice.

Now Esther broke forth: "Miss Mina," she called out as loudly as she
could, "please be so kind as to tell the ladies on the trip who left
the dusty marks on the sofa by standing on it. They were not from a
child's shoe."

Mina blushed a deep scarlet and Miss Dorner, full of astonishment,
looked at her glowing face. She expected a fitting retort, but none
came.

"Go ahead, Matthew," Miss Dorner ordered excitedly. She did not desire
a further explanation.

Mr. Hellmut had moved away.

Cornelli now took Esther's broad hand inside both her own and pressed
it hard. A ray of joy flitted over her features, the first after a
long, long time. "Oh, I am so glad that you said that, Esther; I am
more glad than you can think," she said eagerly. "If you had not said
that, they would have thought all their lives that I had done it and
denied it. But how does Mina know who did it?"

"She knows, because she did it herself," Esther replied.

"Oh, oh! So she did it with her own feet," Cornelli exclaimed. "It is
better that she has gone then. We'd rather be left alone here, wouldn't
we, Esther, just you and I?"

"Yes, indeed," said the cook, full of satisfaction. "Just tell your
father that I do not mind double work, but that I do mind deceitful
ways."

Cornelli had not spoken to her father since he had come back. She was
shy before him, because she realized that the sight of her displeased
him. She was, however, quite sure that she could never change and
always had to be like that. She was also certain that he would only
abhor her more if he ever found out what was hidden under her locks
of hair. She therefore went slowly and hesitatingly towards his room
in order to give him Esther's message. In former times she had always
run to him gaily, whenever she had something to tell him. Since then
things had changed.

"It will never again be that way," she said to herself. The thought
seemed to weigh so heavily on her that she suddenly stood still. At
that moment her father opened the door in front of which she stood.
"Oh, here you are, Cornelli," he said delightedly. "Did you want to
pay me a little visit? We have really hardly seen each other. Come in
here! I was just going to get you, for I want to speak with you."

Cornelli entered, not saying a word and avoiding her father's glance.

"Come, Cornelli," he said, leading her through the room and sitting
down beside her. "I have something to tell you that will make you very
happy. You have changed so much during my absence and so little to
your advantage that something has to be done for your education. It
is high time. I shall take you to a boarding school in town, where you
can be with many other children and young girls. You will have the
chance to learn many things from them and to make friends with many.
You will be sure to change there, then you can return to bring your
father joy. I cannot enjoy you now, for I do not know what ails you.
It may be better after you get some education. I expect to take you
away next week."

Cornelli's face became snow white from sudden terror. First she uttered
no sound, but soon she burst into violent tears.

"Oh, Papa," she sobbed, "leave me at home! I'll be good. Oh, don't
send me to town to so many children! Oh, I can't, I can't. Oh, Papa,
don't send me away!"

Mr. Hellmut could not bear to see Cornelli's tears and still less to
hear her supplications. "But for her own good it has to be," he said
to himself to strengthen his resolution. Cornelli's lamentations were
too much for him and he rushed away.

Several hours later, the time had come for supper and he returned from
the iron foundry.

Esther came to meet him: "Oh, I am glad that you have come, Director,"
she said excitedly. "When I went up to Cornelli just now she was crying.
I wanted her to taste some of the little plum cakes she usually likes
so much, but the poor child only shrieked: 'Oh, leave me here, leave
me here!' Oh, Mr. Hellmut, what if Cornelli should get sick and die?"

"Nonsense, Esther," he returned; "children do not die from obstinacy."

The master of the house had tried to speak harshly, but he did not
quite succeed. He ran straight upstairs to Cornelli's room and saw the
child on her knees in front of the bed. Her head was pressed into the
pillows and she cried as if her heart was breaking.

"Oh, don't send me away, don't send me away!" she cried as soon as he
entered.

He saw that Cornelli was trembling all over from fear and excitement.
"I cannot endure this," he said to himself, and seizing his hat ran
out of the house.

Martha was sitting in her peaceful little chamber, busy with her mending
and thinking about Cornelli. She was wondering what would happen now
that she was again left alone with her father. She wondered if the old
days would come back, or if something new was going to be done for
Cornelli's education. The door was suddenly flung open and Mr. Hellmut
entered.

"Oh, Martha, I do not know what to do," he said to her in a perturbed
manner. "You simply have to help me. You knew my wife and you know my
child and love her; and besides, she is attached to you. Tell me what
has come over her. Since when has she been so frightfully stubborn?
Was the child always that way, or has she only grown more stubborn
lately? Have you noticed how she has changed in my absence?"

"There is nothing so very much the matter with Cornelli, Mr. Hellmut.
Cornelli is not an ill-natured child, I am sure of that. But won't you
take a seat, Director?" Martha interrupted her speech, placing a chair
now here and now there for her visitor, who was running excitedly to
and fro. But he refused, for he was too restless to settle down.

"It was really a very abrupt and sudden change for the child, and it
was hard for her to have everything so different all at once," Martha
said. "Even an older child might have become shy under those conditions,
and Cornelli is still very young. It is hard for a small plant to have
too much done for it all at once and too suddenly; it has to have time
to develop, and the better the plant the more carefully it should be
tended."

"I hope you are not trying to insinuate that it was not good for
Cornelli to at last get into the right hands," said Mr. Hellmut,
standing still in the middle of the room. "I have to reckon it as a
great blessing that she was thrown with ladies of culture and
refinement, who could awaken in her everything that was good, noble
and fine, and could teach her many things. My Cornelia would have done
this herself, above all others, for she was in all those things the
most striking example. The child has not a trace of her, not even in
her looks; everything is lost that used to remind me of her."

"Oh, Mr. Hellmut, if I might be allowed to say anything else, I would
only add one word," Martha replied calmly. "I have always found that
a little love goes further than many good rules. I know that a young
child can be frightened by harsh words more than grown-up people
realize. Afterwards they cannot understand the cause of the shy behavior
which is the result. Cornelli has not lost her mother's eyes, only one
cannot see them under her hanging fringes."

"Yes, that's it, Martha, this horrible disfigurement, this obstinacy
which holds fast to it all. The shy, spiritless manner, the absolutely
changed ways of the child hurt and worry me so. It takes away all my
joy and all my courage and paralyzes all hope for the future. It has
absolutely spoiled my life."

The visitor had gotten more and more stirred up as he went on. "So I
shall help her in the only way I know of: I shall send her to a boarding
school. I just told her about it and she acted as if she were absolutely
desperate. I simply cannot look upon her terrible despair. I actually
feel as if my Cornelia could have no peace in Heaven if she heard her
child's supplications."

"Oh, Director, if you could only keep Cornelli at home for a little
while, so that she could calm down," Martha said humbly. "Cornelli has
had to go through so many new experiences lately that it would be good
for her to stay quietly at home for a while. In the meantime you could
get her more accustomed to the idea of leaving home, so that it would
not scare her so dreadfully. I promise to do all I can too, Mr. Hellmut.
I will tell her pleasant things about the school and the nice children
that she might meet there."

"That is a fine idea, Martha," Mr. Hellmut said, a little more calmly.
"Please do all you possibly can to make the idea pleasant and desirable
to the child. Do not forget, Martha, that you are my only help."

After these words Mr. Hellmut went away.

"Oh, the good kind Director!" said Martha, following him with her eyes.
"What help can old, stupid Martha be to him, I wonder. But I shall
certainly do whatever I can."

Arrived at home, Mr. Hellmut went straight up to Cornelli's room. She
was still kneeling at her bed in the same attitude, and still crying
bitterly.

"Get up, Cornelli, and stop crying," he said. "I meant well with you,
but you did not understand me. You shall stay at home for the present;
later on you may feel differently about it. You can go to Martha
to-morrow. Listen well to her words, for she is your best friend."

Cornelli could not have heard a more consoling word. It sounded so
hopeful after all the horrible news about going away.

"Can't I go to Martha right away?" she said longingly.

"Yes, you can, Cornelli," replied her father, "but you have not eaten
anything yet."

"That does not matter," said Cornelli, already running down the stairs.

At last Cornelli was running again. She flew quickly up the little
stairs and into Martha's room.

"I have to go away, Martha, but not right away. Papa says that I have
