she went, the soft light fell upon the roots of flowers, and they
with new life spread forth in the warm ground, and forced fresh sap
to the blossoms above.  Brightly they bloomed and danced in the
soft light, and the Frost-Spirits tried in vain to harm them, for when
they came beneath the bright clouds their power to do evil left them.

From his dark castle the King looked out on the happy flowers,
who nodded gayly to him, and in sweet colors strove to tell him
of the good little Spirit, who toiled so faithfully below,
that they might live.  And when he turned from the brightness without,
to his stately palace, it seemed so cold and dreary, that he folded
Violet's mantle round him, and sat beneath the faded wreath upon his
ice-carved throne, wondering at the strange warmth that came from it;
till at length he bade his Spirits bring the little Fairy from
her dismal prison.

Soon they came hastening back, and prayed him to come and see
how lovely the dark cell had grown.  The rough floor was spread
with deep green moss, and over wall and roof grew flowery vines,
filling the air with their sweet breath; while above played the clear,
soft light, casting rosy shadows on the glittering drops that lay
among the fragrant leaves; and beneath the vines stood Violet,
casting crumbs to the downy little moles who ran fearlessly about
and listened as she sang to them.

When the old King saw how much fairer she had made the dreary cell
than his palace rooms, gentle thoughts within whispered him to grant
her prayer, and let the little Fairy go back to her friends and home;
but the Frost-Spirits breathed upon the flowers and bid him see how
frail they were, and useless to a King.  Then the stern, cold thoughts
came back again, and he harshly bid her follow him.

With a sad farewell to her little friends she followed him, and
before the throne awaited his command.  When the King saw how pale and
sad the gentle face had grown, how thin her robe, and weak her wings,
and yet how lovingly the golden shadows fell around her and brightened
as they lay upon the wand, which, guided by patient love, had made
his once desolate home so bright, he could not be cruel to the one
who had done so much for him, and in kindly tone he said,--

"Little Fairy, I offer you two things, and you may choose
between them.  If I will vow never more to harm the flowers you may
love, will you go back to your own people and leave me and my Spirits
to work our will on all the other flowers that bloom? The earth
is broad, and we can find them in any land, then why should you care
what happens to their kindred if your own are safe? Will you do this?"

"Ah!" answered Violet sadly, "do you not know that beneath
the flowers' bright leaves there beats a little heart that loves
and sorrows like our own?  And can I, heedless of their beauty,
doom them to pain and grief, that I might save my own dear blossoms
from the cruel foes to which I leave them?  Ah no! sooner would I
dwell for ever in your darkest cell, than lose the love of those
warm, trusting hearts."

"Then listen," said the King, "to the task I give you.  You shall
raise up for me a palace fairer than this, and if you can work
that miracle I will grant your prayer or lose my kingly crown.
And now go forth, and begin your task; my Spirits shall not harm you,
and I will wait till it is done before I blight another flower."

Then out into the gardens went Violet with a heavy heart; for
she had toiled so long, her strength was nearly gone.  But the
flowers whispered their gratitude, and folded their leaves as if they
blessed her; and when she saw the garden filled with loving friends,
who strove to cheer and thank her for her care, courage and strength
returned; and raising up thick clouds of mist, that hid her from the
wondering flowers, alone and trustingly she began her work.

As time went by, the Frost-King feared the task had been
too hard for the Fairy; sounds were heard behind the walls of mist,
bright shadows seen to pass within, but the little voice was never
heard.  Meanwhile the golden light had faded from the garden,
the flowers bowed their heads, and all was dark and cold as when
the gentle Fairy came.

And to the stern King his home seemed more desolate and sad; for
he missed the warm light, the happy flowers, and, more than all,
the gay voice and bright face of little Violet.  So he wandered
through his dreary palace, wondering how he had been content
to live before without sunlight and love.

And little Violet was mourned as dead in Fairy-Land, and many tears
were shed, for the gentle Fairy was beloved by all, from the Queen
down to the humblest flower.  Sadly they watched over every bird
and blossom which she had loved, and strove to be like her in
kindly words and deeds.  They wore cypress wreaths, and spoke of her
as one whom they should never see again.

Thus they dwelt in deepest sorrow, till one day there came to them an
unknown messenger, wrapped in a dark mantle, who looked with wondering
eyes on the bright palace, and flower-crowned elves, who kindly
welcomed him, and brought fresh dew and rosy fruit to refresh the
weary stranger.  Then he told them that he came from the Frost-King,
who begged the Queen and all her subjects to come and see the palace
little Violet had built; for the veil of mist would soon be withdrawn,
and as she could not make a fairer home than the ice-castle, the King
wished her kindred near to comfort and to bear her home.  And while
the Elves wept, he told them how patiently she had toiled, how
her fadeless love had made the dark cell bright and beautiful.

These and many other things he told them; for little Violet had won
the love of many of the Frost-Spirits, and even when they killed the
flowers she had toiled so hard to bring to life and beauty, she spoke
gentle words to them, and sought to teach them how beautiful is love.
Long stayed the messenger, and deeper grew his wonder that the Fairy
could have left so fair a home, to toil in the dreary palace of his
cruel master, and suffer cold and weariness, to give life and joy to
the weak and sorrowing.  When the Elves had promised they would come,
he bade farewell to happy Fairy-Land, and flew sadly home.

At last the time arrived, and out in his barren garden, under a canopy
of dark clouds, sat the Frost-King before the misty wall, behind which
were heard low, sweet sounds, as of rustling trees and warbling birds.

Soon through the air came many-colored troops of Elves.  First the
Queen, known by the silver lilies on her snowy robe and the bright
crown in her hair, beside whom flew a band of Elves in crimson and
gold, making sweet music on their flower-trumpets, while all around,
with smiling faces and bright eyes, fluttered her loving subjects.

On they came, like a flock of brilliant butterflies, their shining
wings and many-colored garments sparkling in the dim air; and soon
the leafless trees were gay with living flowers, and their sweet
voices filled the gardens with music.  Like his subjects, the King
looked on the lovely Elves, and no longer wondered that little Violet
wept and longed for her home.  Darker and more desolate seemed his
stately home, and when the Fairies asked for flowers, he felt ashamed
that he had none to give them.

At length a warm wind swept through the gardens, and the mist-clouds
passed away, while in silent wonder looked the Frost-King and
the Elves upon the scene before them.

Far as eye could reach were tall green trees whose drooping boughs
made graceful arches, through which the golden light shone softly,
making bright shadows on the deep green moss below, where the fairest
flowers waved in the cool wind, and sang, in their low, sweet voices,
how beautiful is Love.

Flowering vines folded their soft leaves around the trees,
making green pillars of their rough trunks.  Fountains threw their
bright waters to the roof, and flocks of silver-winged birds flew
singing among the flowers, or brooded lovingly above their nests.
Doves with gentle eyes cooed among the green leaves, snow-white clouds
floated in the sunny shy, and the golden light, brighter than before,
shone softly down.

Soon through the long aisles came Violet, flowers and green leaves
rustling as she passed.  On she went to the Frost-King's throne,
bearing two crowns, one of sparkling icicles, the other of pure
white lilies, and kneeling before him, said,--

"My task is done, and, thanks to the Spirits of earth and air, I have
made as fair a home as Elfin hands can form.  You must now decide.
Will you be King of Flower-Land, and own my gentle kindred for your
loving friends?  Will you possess unfading peace and joy, and the
grateful love of all the green earth's fragrant children?  Then take
this crown of flowers.  But if you can find no pleasure here,
go back to your own cold home, and dwell in solitude and darkness,
where no ray of sunlight or of joy can enter.

"Send forth your Spirits to carry sorrow and desolation over
the happy earth, and win for yourself the fear and hatred of those
who would so gladly love and reverence you.  Then take this glittering
crown, hard and cold as your own heart will be, if you will shut out
all that is bright and beautiful.  Both are before you.  Choose."

The old King looked at the little Fairy, and saw how lovingly
the bright shadows gathered round her, as if to shield her
from every harm; the timid birds nestled in her bosom, and the
flowers grew fairer as she looked upon them; while her gentle friends,
with tears in their bright eyes, folded their hands beseechingly,
and smiled on her.

Kind thought came thronging to his mind, and he turned to look at
the two palaces.  Violet's, so fair and beautiful, with its rustling
trees, calm, sunny skies, and happy birds and flowers, all created
by her patient love and care.  His own, so cold and dark and dreary,
his empty gardens where no flowers could bloom, no green trees dwell,
or gay birds sing, all desolate and dim;--and while he gazed, his own
Spirits, casting off their dark mantles, knelt before him and besought
him not to send them forth to blight the things the gentle Fairies
loved so much.  "We have served you long and faithfully," said they,
"give us now our freedom, that we may learn to be beloved by the sweet
flowers we have harmed so long.  Grant the little Fairy's prayer;
and let her go back to her own dear home.  She has taught us that
Love is mightier than Fear.  Choose the Flower crown, and we will be
the truest subjects you have ever had."

Then, amid a burst of wild, sweet music, the Frost-King placed
the Flower crown on his head, and knelt to little Violet; while far
and near, over the broad green earth, sounded the voices of flowers,
singing their thanks to the gentle Fairy, and the summer wind
was laden with perfumes, which they sent as tokens of their gratitude;
and wherever she went, old trees bent down to fold their slender
branches round her, flowers laid their soft faces against her own,
and whispered blessings; even the humble moss bent over the little
feet, and kissed them as they passed.

The old King, surrounded by the happy Fairies, sat in Violet's
lovely home, and watched his icy castle melt away beneath the bright
sunlight; while his Spirits, cold and gloomy no longer, danced
with the Elves, and waited on their King with loving eagerness.
Brighter grew the golden light, gayer sang the birds, and the
harmonious voices of grateful flowers, sounding over the earth,
carried new joy to all their gentle kindred.


 Brighter shone the golden shadows;
   On the cool wind softly came
 The low, sweet tones of happy flowers,
   Singing little Violet's name.
 'Mong the green trees was it whispered,
   And the bright waves bore it on
 To the lonely forest flowers,
   Where the glad news had not gone.

 Thus the Frost-King lost his kingdom,
   And his power to harm and blight.
 Violet conquered, and his cold heart
   Warmed with music, love, and light;
 And his fair home, once so dreary,
   Gay with lovely Elves and flowers,
 Brought a joy that never faded
   Through the long bright summer hours.

 Thus, by Violet's magic power,
   All dark shadows passed away,
 And o'er the home of happy flowers
   The golden light for ever lay.
 Thus the Fairy mission ended,
   And all Flower-Land was taught
 The "Power of Love," by gentle deeds
   That little Violet wrought.


As Sunny Lock ceased, another little Elf came forward; and this was
the tale "Silver Wing" told.



EVA'S VISIT TO FAIRY-LAND.


DOWN among the grass and fragrant clover lay little Eva by the
brook-side, watching the bright waves, as they went singing by under
the drooping flowers that grew on its banks.  As she was wondering
where the waters went, she heard a faint, low sound, as of far-off
music.  She thought it was the wind, but not a leaf was stirring,
and soon through the rippling water came a strange little boat.

It was a lily of the valley, whose tall stem formed the mast,
while the broad leaves that rose from the roots, and drooped again
till they reached the water, were filled with gay little Elves,
who danced to the music of the silver lily-bells above, that rang
a merry peal, and filled the air with their fragrant breath.

On came the fairy boat, till it reached a moss-grown rock; and here
it stopped, while the Fairies rested beneath the violet-leaves,
and sang with the dancing waves.

Eva looked with wonder on their gay faces and bright garments, and
in the joy of her heart sang too, and threw crimson fruit for the
little folks to feast upon.

They looked kindly on the child, and, after whispering long among
themselves, two little bright-eyed Elves flew over the shining water,
and, lighting on the clover-blossoms, said gently, "Little maiden,
many thanks for your kindness; and our Queen bids us ask if you will
go with us to Fairy-Land, and learn what we can teach you."

"Gladly would I go with you, dear Fairies," said Eva, "but I cannot
sail in your little boat.  See!  I can hold you in my hand, and could
not live among you without harming your tiny kingdom, I am so large."

Then the Elves laughed gayly, as they folded their arms about her,
saying, "You are a good child, dear Eva, to fear doing harm to those
weaker than yourself.  You cannot hurt us now.  Look in the water
and see what we have done."

Eva looked into the brook, and saw a tiny child standing between
the Elves.  "Now I can go with you," said she, "but see, I can
no longer step from the bank to yonder stone, for the brook seems now
like a great river, and you have not given me wings like yours."

But the Fairies took each a hand, and flew lightly over the stream.
The Queen and her subjects came to meet her, and all seemed glad to
say some kindly word of welcome to the little stranger.  They placed
a flower-crown upon her head, laid their soft faces against her own,
and soon it seemed as if the gentle Elves had always been her friends.

"Now must we go home," said the Queen, "and you shall go with us,
little one."

Then there was a great bustle, as they flew about on shining wings,
some laying cushions of violet leaves in the boat, others folding the
Queen's veil and mantle more closely round her, lest the falling dews
should chill her.

The cool waves' gentle plashing against the boat, and the sweet chime
of the lily-bells, lulled little Eva to sleep, and when she woke
it was in Fairy-Land.  A faint, rosy light, as of the setting sun,
shone on the white pillars of the Queen's palace as they passed in,
and the sleeping flowers leaned gracefully on their stems, dreaming
beneath their soft green curtains.  All was cool and still, and the
Elves glided silently about, lest they should break their slumbers.
They led Eva to a bed of pure white leaves, above which drooped
the fragrant petals of a crimson rose.

"You can look at the bright colors till the light fades, and then
the rose will sing you to sleep," said the Elves, as they folded the
soft leaves about her, gently kissed her, and stole away.

Long she lay watching the bright shadows, and listening to the song
of the rose, while through the long night dreams of lovely things
floated like bright clouds through her mind; while the rose bent
lovingly above her, and sang in the clear moonlight.

With the sun rose the Fairies, and, with Eva, hastened away to
the fountain, whose cool waters were soon filled with little forms,
and the air ringing with happy voices, as the Elves floated in the
blue waves among the fair white lilies, or sat on the green moss,
smoothing their bright locks, and wearing fresh garlands of dewy
flowers.  At length the Queen came forth, and her subjects gathered
round her, and while the flowers bowed their heads, and the trees
hushed their rustling, the Fairies sang their morning hymn to
the Father of birds and blossoms, who had made the earth so fair a
home for them.

Then they flew away to the gardens, and soon, high up among the
tree-tops, or under the broad leaves, sat the Elves in little groups,
taking their breakfast of fruit and pure fresh dew; while the
bright-winged birds came fearlessly among them, pecking the same
ripe berries, and dipping their little beaks in the same flower-cups,
and the Fairies folded their arms lovingly about them, smoothed their
soft bosoms, and gayly sang to them.

"Now, little Eva," said they, "you will see that Fairies are not
idle, wilful Spirits, as mortals believe.  Come, we will show you
what we do."

They led her to a lovely room, through whose walls of deep green
leaves the light stole softly in.  Here lay many wounded insects,
and harmless little creatures, whom cruel hands had hurt; and pale,
drooping flowers grew beside urns of healing herbs, from whose fresh
leaves came a faint, sweet perfume.

Eva wondered, but silently followed her guide, little Rose-Leaf,
who with tender words passed among the delicate blossoms,
pouring dew on their feeble roots, cheering them with her loving words
and happy smile.

Then she went to the insects; first to a little fly who lay in a
flower-leaf cradle.

"Do you suffer much, dear Gauzy-Wing?" asked the Fairy.  "I will
bind up your poor little leg, and Zephyr shall rock you to sleep."
So she folded the cool leaves tenderly about the poor fly, bathed his
wings, and brought him refreshing drink, while he hummed his thanks,
and forgot his pain, as Zephyr softly sung and fanned him with her
waving wings.

They passed on, and Eva saw beside each bed a Fairy, who with gentle
hands and loving words soothed the suffering insects.  At length
they stopped beside a bee, who lay among sweet honeysuckle flowers,
in a cool, still place, where the summer wind blew in, and the green
leaves rustled pleasantly.  Yet he seemed to find no rest, and
murmured of the pain he was doomed to bear.  "Why must I lie here,
while my kindred are out in the pleasant fields, enjoying the sunlight
and the fresh air, and cruel hands have doomed me to this dark place
and bitter pain when I have done no wrong?  Uncared for and forgotten,
I must stay here among these poor things who think only of themselves.
Come here, Rose-Leaf, and bind up my wounds, for I am far more useful
than idle bird or fly."

Then said the Fairy, while she bathed the broken wing,--

"Love-Blossom, you should not murmur.  We may find happiness in
seeking to be patient even while we suffer.  You are not forgotten or
uncared for, but others need our care more than you, and to those
who take cheerfully the pain and sorrow sent, do we most gladly give
our help.  You need not be idle, even though lying here in darkness
and sorrow; you can be taking from your heart all sad and discontented
feelings, and if love and patience blossom there, you will be better
for the lonely hours spent here.  Look on the bed beside you; this
little dove has suffered far greater pain than you, and all our care
can never ease it; yet through the long days he hath lain here, not an
unkind word or a repining sigh hath he uttered.  Ah, Love-Blossom,
the gentle bird can teach a lesson you will be wiser and better for."

Then a faint voice whispered, "Little Rose-Leaf, come quickly, or
I cannot thank you as I ought for all your loving care of me."

So they passed to the bed beside the discontented bee, and here upon
the softest down lay the dove, whose gentle eyes looked gratefully
upon the Fairy, as she knelt beside the little couch, smoothed the
soft white bosom, folded her arms about it and wept sorrowing tears,
while the bird still whispered its gratitude and love.

"Dear Fairy, the fairest flowers have cheered me with their sweet
breath, fresh dew and fragrant leaves have been ever ready for me,
gentle hands to tend, kindly hearts to love; and for this I can only
thank you and say farewell."

Then the quivering wings were still, and the patient little dove
was dead; but the bee murmured no longer, and the dew from the flowers
fell like tears around the quiet bed.

Sadly Rose-Leaf led Eva away, saying, "Lily-Bosom shall have a grave
tonight beneath our fairest blossoms, and you shall see that
gentleness and love are prized far above gold or beauty, here in
Fairy-Land.  Come now to the Flower Palace, and see the Fairy Court."

Beneath green arches, bright with birds and flowers, beside singing
waves, went Eva into a lofty hall.  The roof of pure white lilies
rested on pillars of green clustering vines, while many-colored
blossoms threw their bright shadows on the walls, as they danced below
in the deep green moss, and their low, sweet voices sounded softly
through the sunlit palace, while the rustling leaves kept time.

Beside the throne stood Eva, and watched the lovely forms around her,
as they stood, each little band in its own color, with glistening
wings, and flower wands.

Suddenly the music grew louder and sweeter, and the Fairies knelt,
and bowed their heads, as on through the crowd of loving subjects
