

SUBVOCALS AND ASPIRATES (13)

Subvocals are those sounds in which the vocalized breath is more or less
obstructed.

Aspirates consist of breath only, modified by the vocal organs.

Words ending with subvocal sounds may be selected for practice on the
subvocals; words beginning or ending with aspirate sounds may be used for
practice on aspirates. Pronounce these words forcibly and distinctly,
several times in succession; then drop the other sounds, and repeat the
subvocals and aspirates alone. Let the class repeat the words and
elements, at first, in concert; then separately.



TABLE OF SUBVOCALS AND ASPIRATES. (14)

Subvocals. as in

b          babe
d          bad
g          nag
j          judge
v          move
th         with
z          buzz
z          azure (azh-)
w          wine

Aspirates. as in

p          rap
t          at
k          book
ch         rich
f          life
th         smith
s          hiss
sh         rush
wh         what


REMARK.--These eighteen sounds make nine pairs of cognates. In
articulating the aspirates, the vocal organs are put in the position
required in the articulation of the corresponding subvocals; but the
breath is expelled with some force, without the utterance of any vocal
sound. The pupil should first verify this by experiment, and then practice
on these cognates.

The following subvocals and aspirate have no cognates:

SUBVOCAL  as in

l         mill
ng        sing
m         rim
r         rule
n         run
y         yet



ASPIRATE.

h, as in hat.



SUBSTITUTES. (14)

Substitutes are characters used to represent sounds ordinarily represented
by other characters.

TABLE OF SUBSTITUTES.
Sub  for  as in

a    o    what
y    i    hymn
e    a    there
c    s    cite
e    a    freight
c    k    cap
i    e    police
ch   sh   machine
i    e    sir
ch   k    chord
o    u    son
g    j    cage
o    oo   to
n    ng   rink
o    oo   would
s    z    rose
o    a    corn
s    sh   sugar
o    u    worm
x    gz   examine
u    oo   pull
gh   f    laugh
u    oo   rude
ph   f    sylph
y    i    my
qu   k    pique
qu   kw   quick



FAULTS TO BE REMEDIED. (15)

The most common faults of articulation are dropping an unaccented vowel,
sounding incorrectly an unaccented vowel, suppressing final consonants,
omitting or mispronouncing syllables, and blending words.


1. Dropping an unaccented vocal.

EXAMPLES.

CORRECT         INCORRECT

gran'a-ry       gran'ry
a-ban'don       a-ban-d'n
im-mor'tal      im-mor-t'l
reg'u-lar       reg'lar
in-clem'ent     in-clem'nt
par-tic'u-lar   par-tic'lar
des'ti-ny       des-t'ny
cal-cu-la'tian  cal-cl'a-sh'n
un-cer'tain     un-cer-t'n
oc-ca'sion      oc-ca-sh'n
em'i-nent       em'nent
ef'i-gy         ef'gy
ag'o-ny         ag'ny
man'i-fold      man'fold
rev'er-ent      rev'rent
cul'ti-vate     cult'vate


2. Sounding incorrectly an unaccented vowel.

EXAMPLES.

CORRECT          INCORRECT

lam-en-ta'-tion  lam-un-ta-tion
ter'ri-ble       ter-rub-ble
e-ter'nal        e-ter-nul
fel'on-y         fel-er-ny
ob'sti-nate      ob-stun-it
fel'low-ship     fel-ler-ship
e-vent'          uv-ent
cal'cu-late      cal-ker-late
ef'fort          uf-fort
reg'u-lar        reg-gy-lur


EXERCISES. (16)

The vocals most likely to be dropped or incorrectly  sounded are
italicized.

  He attended divine service regularly.
  This is my particular request.
  She is universally esteemed.
  George is sensible of his fault.
  This calculation is incorrect.
  What a terrible calamity.
  His eye through vast immensity can pierce.
 Observe these nice dependencies.
  He is a formidable adversary.
  He is generous to his friends.
  A tempest desolated the land.
  He preferred death to servitude.
  God is the author of all things visible and invisible.


3. Suppressing the final subvocals or aspirates.

EXAMPLE (16)

  John an' James are frien's o' my father.
  Gi' me some bread.
  The want o' men is occasioned by the want o' money.
  We seldom fine' men o' principle to ac' thus.
  Beas' an' creepin' things were foun' there.


EXERCISES. (17)

  He learned to write.
  The masts of the ship were cast down.
  He entered the lists at the head of his troops.
  He is the merriest fellow in existence.
  I regard not the world's opinion.
  He has three assistants.
  The depths of the sea.
  She trusts too much to servants.
  His attempts were fruitless.
  He chanced to see a bee hovering over a flower.


4. Omitting or mispronouncing whole syllables.

EXAMPLES.

Correct             is improperly pronounced

Lit'er-ar-ry         lit-rer-ry
co-tem'po-ra-ry      co-tem-po-ry
het-er-o-ge'ne-ous   het-ro-ge-nous
in-quis-i-to'ri-al   in-quis-i-to-ral
mis'er-a-ble         mis-rer-ble
ac-com'pa-ni-ment    ac-comp-ner-ment


EXERCISE

  He devoted his attention chiefly to literary pursuits.
  He is a miserable creature.
  His faults were owing to the degeneracy of the times.
  The manuscript was undecipherable.
  His spirit was unconquerable.
  Great industry was necessary for the performance of the task.


5. Blending the end of one word with the beginning of the next.

EXAMPLES

  I court thy gif sno more.
  The grove swere God sfir stemples.
  My hear twas a mirror, that show' devery treasure.
  It reflecte deach beautiful blosso mof pleasure.
  Han d'me the slate.
  This worl dis all a fleeting show,
  For man' sillusion given.


EXERCISES. (18)

  The magistrates ought to arrest the rogues speedily.
  The whirlwinds sweep the plain.
  Linked to thy side, through every chance I go.
  But had he seen an actor in our days enacting Shakespeare.
  What awful sounds assail my ears?
  We caught a glimpse of her.
  Old age has on their temples shed her silver frost.
  Our eagle shall rise mid the whirlwinds of war,
  And dart through the dun cloud of battle his eye.
  Then honor shall weave of the laurel a crown,
  That beauty shall bind on the brow of the brave.



II. INFLECTION. (18)

Inflection is a bending or sliding of the voice either upward or downward.

The upward or rising inflection is an upward slide of the voice, and is
marked by the acute accent, thus, ('); as,

   Did you call'? Is he sick'?

The downward or falling inflection is a downward slide of the voice, and
is marked by the grave accent, thus, ('); as,

   Where is London'? Where have you been'?

Sometimes both the rising and falling inflections are given to the same
sound. Such sounds are designated by the circumflex, thus, (v) or thus,
(^). The former is called the rising circumflex; the latter, the falling
circumflex; as,

  But nobody can bear the death of Clodius.

When several successive syllables are uttered without either the upward or
downward slide, they are said to be uttered in a monotone, which is marked
thus, (--); as,

  Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean--roll

EXAMPLES. (19)

  Does he read correctly' or incorrectly'?

In reading this sentence, the voice should slide somewhat as represented
in the following diagram:

  Does he read cor-rectly or incorrect-ly?


  If you said vinegar, I said sugar,

To be read thus:

  If you said vinegar, I said sugar,


  If you said yes, I said no.

To be read thus:

  If you said yes, I said no.


  What! did he say no?

To be read thus:

  What! did he say no?


  He did'; he said no',

To be read thus;

  He did; he said no.


  Did he do it voluntarily', or involuntarily'?

To be read thus:

  Did he do it voluntarily, or involuntarily?


  He did it voluntarily', not involuntarily',

To be read thus:

  He did it voluntarily, not involuntarily.



EXERCISES. (20)

Do they act prudently', or imprudently'?

Are they at home', or abroad'?

Did you say Europe', or Asia'?

Is he rich', or poor'?

He said pain', not pain'.

Are you engaged', or at leisure'?

Shall I say plain', or pain'?

He went home' not abroad'.

Does he say able', or table'?

He said hazy' not lazy'?

Must I say flat', or flat'?

You should say flat' not flat'.

My father', must I stay'?

Oh! but he paused upon the brink.

It shall go hard with me, but I shall use the weapon.

Heard ye those loud contending waves,
  That shook Cecropia's pillar'd state'?
Saw ye the mighty from their graves
  Look up', and tremble at your fate'?

First' Fear', his hand, its skill to try',
  Amid the chords bewildered laid';
And back recoiled', he knew not why'
  E'en at the sound himself had made'.


Where be your gibes' now? your gambols'? your songs'? your flashes of
merriment, that were wont to set the table on a roar'?

Thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
Holy; "I dwell in the high and holy place."



FALLING INFLECTION. (21)

RULE I.--Sentences, and parts of sentences which make complete sense in
themselves, require the falling inflection.


EXAMPLES. (21)

1. By virtue we secure happiness'.

2. For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven': I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God':  I will sit, also, upon the mount
of the congregation, in the sides of the north'.

3. The wind and the rain are over'; calm is the noon of the day\: the
clouds are divided in heaven'; over the green hills flies the inconstant
sun'; red through the stormy vale comes down the stream'.

4. This proposition was, however, rejected,' and not merely rejected, but
rejected with insult'.

Exception.--Emphasis sometimes reverses this rule, and requires the rising
inflection, apparently for the purpose of calling attention to the idea of
an unusual manner of expressing it.

EXAMPLES. (21)

1. I should not like to ride in that car'.
2. Look out! A man was drowned there yesterday'.
3. Presumptuous man! the gods' take care of Cato',


RULE II.--The language of emphasis generally requires the falling
inflection.

EXAMPLES. (22)

1. Charge', Chester, charge'; on', Stanley, on'.

2. Were I an American, as I am an Englishman, while a single' foreign
troop' remained' in my country, I would never' lay down my arms'--never',
never', never.'

3. Does anyone suppose that the payment of twenty shillings, would have
ruined Mr. Hampden's fortune? No'. But the payment of half twenty
shillings, on the principle' it was demanded, would have made him a
slave'.

4. I insist' upon this point': I urge' you to it; I press' it, demand' it.

5. All that I have', all that I am', and all that I hope' in this life, I
am now ready', here, to stake' upon it.


RULE III.--Interrogative sentences and members of sentences, which
can not be answered by yes or no, generally require the falling inflection.

EXAMPLE. (22)

1. How many books did he purchase'?

2. Why reason ye these things in your hearts'?

3. What see' you, that you frown so heavily to-day'?

4. Ah! what is that flame which now bursts on his eye'?

5. Whence this pleasing hope', this fond desire',
   This longing after immortality'?


Exception.--When questions usually requiring  the falling inflection are
emphatic or repeated, they take the rising inflection.


EXAMPLES. (22)

1. Where did you say he had gone'?

2. To whom did you say the blame was to be imputed'?

3. What is' he? A knave. What' is he? A knave, I say.


RISING INFLECTION. (23)

RULE IV.--The rising inflection is generally used where the sense is
dependent or incomplete.

REMARK.--This inflection is generally very slight, requiring an acute and
educated ear to discern it, and it is difficult to teach pupils to
distinguish it, though they constantly use it. Care should be taken not to
exaggerate it.

EXAMPLES. (23)

1. Nature being exhausted', he quietly resigned himself to his fate.

2. A chieftain to the Highlands bound',
   Cries', "Boatman, do not tarry!"

3. As he spoke without fear of consequences', so his actions were
marked with the most unbending resolution,

4. Speaking in the open air', at the top of the voice', is an admirable
exercise.

5. If then, his Providence' out of our evil, seek to bring forth good', our
labor must be to prevent that end.

6. He', born for the universe', narrowed his mind,
   And to party gave up what was meant for mankind.


REMARK.--The names of persons or things addressed, when not used
emphatically, are included in this rule.

7. Brother', give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick!,
   Let me embrace thee in my weary arms.

8. O Lancaster', I fear thy overthrow.

9. Ye crags' and peaks', I'm with you once again.

Exception 1.--Relative emphasis often reverses this and the first rule,
because emphasis is here expressed in part by changing the usual
inflections.

EXAMPLES. (23)

1. If you care not for your property', you surely value your life'.

2. If you will not labor for your own' advancement, you should regard
that of your children'.

3. It is your place to obey', not to command'.

4. Though by that course he should not destroy his reputation', he will
lose all self-respect'.

Exception 2.--The names of persons addressed in a formal speech, or
when used emphatically, have the falling inflection.


EXAMPLES. (24)

1. Romans, countrymen, and lovers', hear me for my cause, etc.

2. Gentlemen of the jury', I solicit your attention, etc.

3. O Hubert', Hubert', save me from these men.


RULE V.--Negative sentences and parts of sentences, usually require
the rising inflection.


EXAMPLES. (24)

1. It is not by starts of application that eminence can be attained'.

2. It was not an eclipse that caused the darkness at the crucifixion of
our Lord'; for the sun and moon were not relatively in a position' to
produce an eclipse'.

3. They are not fighting': do not disturb' them: this man is not expiring
with agony': that man is not dead': they are only pausing'.

4. My Lord, we could not have had such designs'.

5. You are not left alone to climb the steep ascent': God is with you, who
never suffers the spirit that rests on him to fail.


Exception 1.--Emphasis may reverse this rule.


EXAMPLE. (24)

We repeat it, we do not' desire to produce discord; we do not' wish to
kindle the flames of a civil war.


Exception 2.--General propositions and commands usually have the
falling inflection.


EXAMPLES. (25)

God is not the author of sin'. Thou shalt not kill.

RULE VI.--Interrogative sentences, and members of sentences which
can be answered by yes or no generally require the rising inflection.


EXAMPLES. (25)

1. Are fleets and armies necessary to a work of love and reconciliation'?
