"Dat means something," exclaimed Hans, decidedly, "and I must find out
what it is."

By simply looking up-stream, he could discern this fleet of miniature
boats coming down toward him in a straight line.  In the clear sunlight
they were visible for a great distance, and it was no difficult matter
to determine their starting point.  Some two hundred yards above,
another tree projected out over the water very much the same as that
upon which Hans was seated, so similar in fact that he had often used
it for the same purpose.  As the line of the pieces of bark pointed
directly toward these, there was but little doubt that here they were
launched upon the water.

"It can't be dat Quanonshet and Madokawandock is dere," mused Hans
Vanderbum, "for to try to worry deir poor old fader.  Dey're too big
Dutchmen to build such boats, and dey wouldn't know how to make 'em
float under me if dey did.  No; dere's somebody out on dat tree, and
he's doing it to make me look up at him.  I'm looking but I can't see
notting."

He shaded his eyes as he spoke, and looked long and searchingly at the
tree, but for a considerable time could discover nothing unusual about
it.  At length, however, he fancied that he saw one of the limbs sway
gently backward and forward in a manner that could hardly be caused by
the wind.  Gradually it began to dawn upon him that if there was any
person upon the tree, he meant that his presence should not be
suspected by the Shawnees along the bank.  Accordingly Hans Vanderbum
was more circumspect in his observations.

Still watching the tree, he soon discovered something else that he
thought was meant to attract his eye.  The water directly beneath it
flashed and sparkled as if it was disturbed by some object.  Straining
his gaze, he finally discerned what appeared to be a human hand swaying
backward and forward.

"Dat is enough!" thought Hans Vanderbum.  "Dere's somebody dere dat
wants to see me, and is afeard of dese oder chaps about, so I goes to
him."

Working his way cautiously backward, he reached the land and started
apparently to return to his wigwam.  As he did so, he looked at the
Shawnees and was gratified to see that their suspicions had not been
aroused by his movements.  Proceeding some distance, he hid his fish
and line and made his way up the river, escaping the Shawnees by means
of a long _detour_.

Reaching the stream and tree, he was somewhat taken aback by not
finding any one at all.  Considerably perplexed, he looked about him.

"Can't be dat Quanonshet and Madokawandock have been fooling deir poor
old fader again," said he.  "I'm purty sure I seen some one on the
tree, when dem pieces of bark come swimming downstream."

A subdued whistle reached his ear.  Looking behind him, he saw a Huron
Indian standing a few yards away.  The eyes of both lit up as they
encountered the gaze of each other, for they were both friends and old
acquaintances.

"Ish dat you, Oonomoo?" inquired Hans Vanderbum.

"Yeh--me--Oonomoo," replied the Indian, pronouncing his name somewhat
differently from the Dutchman, (and from that by which we have before
referred to him).

"Was dat you on de tree out dere?"

"Yeh, me--Oonomoo out dere on log."

"And did you make dem pieces of bark to come swimming down by me?"

"Yeh, me made 'em."

"And shtirred de water wid yer hand and moved de limb?"

"Yeh, Oonomoo do all dat."

"I shpose you wanted to see me?"

"Yeh, wanted to see you--want talk wid you," said the Huron, motioning
for Hans to follow him.  The latter did not hesitate to do so, as he
had perfect faith in his honesty, knowing much of his history.  The
savage led the way some distance into the woods, where they were not
likely to be seen or overheard, and then stopped and confronted his
companion.

"Where'd you come from, Oonomoo?" asked the latter.

"From fightin' de Shawnees," replied the savage, proudly.

"Yaw, I sees yer am in de war-paint.  Did you get many?"

"The lodge of Oonomoo is full of the scalps of the cowardly Shawnees,
taken many moons ago," answered the Huron, his eyes flashing fire and
his breast heaving at the remembrance of his exploits.  This reply was
made in the Shawnee language, as he spoke it as well as one of their
warriors; and, as Hans also understood it, the conversation was now
carried on in that tongue.

"When did you see Annie Stanton last?" inquired the Dutchman, showing
considerable interest.

"Several moons ago, when the sun was in the woods and the waters were
asleep."

"Is her husband, that rascally Ferrington, living?"

Oonomoo replied that he was.

"And is their baby, too?"

"Yes, they have two pappooses."

"Dunder and blixen!" exclaimed Hans Vanderbum, and then resuming the
English language, or rather his version of it, he added:

"Dat gal wanted to marry mit me once."

"Why no marry den?" inquired Oonomoo, also coming back to the more
difficult language.

"She wan't te right kind of a gal--she wan't like my
Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock, dat is de same shape all de way down
from her head to her heels.  So I let dat Ferrington have her."

The Huron, who understood all about that matter, indulged in a broad
smile at this remark.  Whatever his business was, it was manifest he
was in no hurry, else he would not have indulged in this by-play of
words with his friend.

"You doesn't t'ink de baby will dies, does you?"

"No--in de settlement--Shawnee can't git her now--don't live off in de
woods like as dey did afore."

"Dat's lucky for her; don't t'ink dey will get her there, 'cause dey
tried it once--dat time, you remember, when we was all in de HUNTER'S
CABIN in de woods, and you came down de chimney, and I watched and kept
de Shawnee off."

The Huron signified that he remembered the circumstance well.

"Dem was great times," added Hans Vanderbum, calling up the
recollection of them.  "I left de village one hot afternoon, and walked
all de way t'rough de woods to get to de cabin to help dem poor folks.
We had mighty hard times.  I catched a cold and couldn't shtop my
dunderin' nose one night when it wanted to shneeze, and dat's de way de
Shawnee catched me.  Twan't so bad arter all," added Hans Vanderbum,
musingly, "'cause if it wasn't for dat I wouldn't got my
Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock."

"How soon go back?" asked Oonomoo.

"To de village, do you mean?"

"Yeh."

"Any time afore noon will does, so Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock gits
de fish for our dinner."

"One, two hours," said the Huron, looking up at the sky, "den sun git
dere," pointing to the zenith.  "Shawnees know here?"

"Know me here?  Guesses not; don't care if dey does, nor dey doesn't
care neider."

"Shawnees won't come here?"

"No, no, Oonomoo, you needn't be afraid--"

"Afraid who?" demanded the Huron, with quick fierceness.  "Oonomoo
never run afore one--two--t'ree--dozen Shawnees.  He only runs when dey
comes like de leaves in de woods."

"Dey won't come like de leaves.  If dey does, why you can leave too,
and I t'inks you know how to use dem legs dat you've got tacked onto
you.  I t'inks you run as fast as me."

"So I t'inks," replied the Indian, with a grin.

"Dere's no mistake but dem Shawnees would like to get your scalp,
Oonomoo."

"Two--t'ree--hundreds--all Shawnees like to git Oonomoo's scalp--nebber
git him--Oonomee die in his lodge--scalp on his head," said the Huron,
proudly.

"I hopes so; hopes I will, too."

The expression of the Indian's face was changed.  It assumed a dark,
earnest appearance.  He was done trifling, and wished to commence
business.

"See her dis mornin'?" he asked, in short, quick tones.

"See who?" asked Hans Vanderbum, in turn, completely at a loss to
understand him.

"De gal."

"De gal?  Who you talking about--Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock?"

"De gal Shawnees got in de village."

The Dutchman's blank expression showed that he did not comprehend what
the Huron was referring to; so he added, by way of explanation:

"Shawnees kill women and children--deir warriors squaws--don't fight
men--burn houses toder day--run off wid gal--got her now in de
village--she gal of Oonomoo's friend--Oonomoo want to get her."

From these rather disconnected expressions, Hans Vanderbum understood
that a war-party of Shawnees had brought in a prisoner who was a friend
of the Huron's.  It was for the purpose of learning something regarding
her that he had signaled the fisherman to leave his hook and line and
come to him.  The captive having reached the village quite recently, he
had failed to be apprised of it, so that Oonomoo learned no more than
he already knew regarding her.

"When did dey took her?" asked Hans Vanderbum.

"When sun dere, yisterday," replied the Indian, pointing off in the
western horizon.

"Do you want to know 'bout her?"

"Yeh."

"Den I goes find out."

So saying, Hans Vanderbum strode away through the forest in the
direction of the Shawnee village.




CHAPTER II.

OTHER CHARACTERS.


  "He joys to scour the prairies wide,
    Upon the bison's trail;
  To pierce his dark and shaggy hide
    With darts that never fail.

  "His is the lion's strength in war,
    In peace, the lion's rest;
  And the eagle hath not flown so far
    As his fame throughout the West."


Upon leaving the Huron, Hans Vanderbum hurried toward the village, as
rapidly as the peculiar structure of his body would allow.  As has been
remarked, he was well acquainted with Oonomoo, knowing him to be a
faithful ally of his race.  He was anxious, therefore, to show his
friendship to the savage.  Down, too, somewhere in the huge heart of
the plethoric Dutchman, was a kindly feeling for the distress of a
human being, and he felt willing and anxious to befriend any hapless
captive that had fallen into the hands of the relentless Shawnees.

So absorbed was he in meditating, that he took no heed of
his footsteps until he was suddenly confronted by his spouse,
Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock, who, flourishing a sort of hoe over his
head, demanded, or rather screeched:

"Where's your fish?"

Hans Vanderbum winked very rapidly, and putting his hands up over his
head, as if to protect it, "I forgots all about dem.  I goes right back
and gots dem."

He wheeled around as he spoke, receiving a resounding whack from the
hoe, by way of a reminder, and went lumbering through the woods in
search of his basket of fish.  He experienced little difficulty in
finding it, and in a few moments was back again to his affectionate
partner.

"How did you get wet?" she asked, looking at his flapping garments.

"Dem little Dutchmen done it; dey fixed de limb and made it proke and
let me down in de water and almost drownded.  Quanonshet and
Madokawandock will be de death of deir poor dad."

The wife vouchsafed no reply, but jerking the fish from his hand,
entered the wigwam for the purpose of cooking them, while Hans
Vanderbum himself went lounging on through the village, it being his
purpose not to seem too anxious and hurried in his effort to gain his
news regarding the captive.  He was, despite his stupidity, not devoid
of sagacity at times.

He had not long to search.  In the very center of the town, his eyes
fell upon a promiscuous crowd collected around a wigwam, gazing at
something within.

"Vot you got dere?" he demanded, in a tone of great indignation, as he
shoved his way through the bystanders.  Those addressed made no reply,
waiting for him to satisfy his curiosity by seeing the object for
himself.  In the interior, he descried a young woman, or rather a girl,
for she could scarcely have been more than fifteen or sixteen years of
age, seated upon the ground, beside a squaw, with whom it was apparent
she had been endeavoring to hold a conversation; but, finding it
impossible in the ignorance of each other's language, they had ceased
their efforts by common consent and were now sitting motionless.

[Illustration: A girl, fifteen or sixteen years of age, seated upon the
ground, beside a squaw.]

As Hans Vanderbum gazed curiously at her, his big heart filled with
pity.  She was attired in the plain, homespun dress common among the
settlers at that period, her head totally uncovered, and her long, dark
hair falling in luxuriant masses around her shoulders.  Her hands were
clasped and her head bowed with a meek, resigned air that reached more
than one Shawnee heart.  Her complexion was rather light, her features
not dazzlingly beautiful, but prepossessing, the expression which
instantly struck the beholder being that of refinement; speaking a
nature elevated and holy, as much above that of the beings who
surrounded her, as would have been that of an angel had he alighted
amid a group of mortals.

The great exertion made by Hans Vanderbum in reaching the wigwam,
caused him to breathe so heavily as to attract the attention of the
captive.  Catching sight of a white man, she arose quickly, and
approaching him, said, eagerly:

"Oh!  I'm so glad to meet one of my own color and race, for I am sure
you must be a friend."

"Yaw, I's your friend," replied Hans Vanderbum, hardly knowing what he
said; "and I's sorry as nobody to see you here.  How did you got here?"

"They brought me, the Shawnee warriors did.  They attacked the house in
the night, when I was alone with the servants.  They murdered them all
except me.  They have brought myself here to perish in captivity."

"Yaw, de Shawnees ish great on _dat_ business.  'Cause I shneezed dey
cotched me once and brought me here to perish in captivity mit
yourself," said Hans Vanderbum, in a feeling voice.

"Are you a prisoner, also?" asked the captive, in considerable surprise.

"Yaw, but I _likes_ it!  I's got a wife, Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock,
dat is de same shape all de way down, and a little Dutchman,
Madokawandock; so dey hasn't to watch, like I shpose dey will have to
you."

"Can any of these around me understand English?" asked the girl, in a
low tone.

"No; de women don't know notting about it, except my wife, and she
ain't here; and de men know notink.  You needn't be afraid to say
anything you pleases to me."

"You could not betray me," added the girl, turning her dark, soulful
eyes anxiously full upon him.

"No, no," he replied, energetically.  "Voot's your name?"

"Mary Prescott."

"How fur does you live from here--dat is, how fur did you live?"

"It must be over thirty miles, in an eastern direction, I think."

"Does you know Oonomoo?"

Hans Vanderbum asked the question in a lower tone, for the name was
well known to all present.

"A Huron Indian?  Oh, yes; I know him well," replied the captive; her
countenance lighting up.  "He was well remembered in our neighborhood,
and was a true friend to us all.  Do you know him too?  Though I
suppose of course you do, from your asking me the question."

"Yaw, I knows him, and he knows me too, and we both knows each oder, so
dat we are acquainted.  Well, dat shentleman is hid off in de woods
near here, and he has sent me in to l'arn what I cans about you."

The prisoner kept back the joyful exclamation that came to her lips,
and said:

"Tell him that I am unharmed and hopeful, and trust that while he
interests himself in me, he will not run into danger."

"Not run into danger!" repeated Hans Vanderbum; "dat is what Oonomoo
lives on.  He'd die in a week if he wan't into danger, out of grief.
He don't do notting else; it's what he was made for," he added, growing
enthusiastic in speaking of the Huron.

"I know he is a brave and true-hearted Indian, and is greatly esteemed
by the Moravian missionaries.  He hesitates at no risk when his friends
are in danger."

"Ef he does run risk dey don't catch him, 'cause he knows how to run
and fight, and ish shmarter dan de Shawnees.  Where ish your parents?"

"My mother and sister happened to be absent on a visit to Falsington,
which is fifteen or twenty miles distant from our place, while father,
who is a Captain, is doing service somewhere on the frontier, in the
American army.  How thankful indeed I am that dear mother and Helen
were away, for they have escaped this terrible captivity."

"You washn't left all alone?"

"Oh, no; there were several servants, and I saw them tomahawked, and
heard their piercing cries."

The captive covered her face, and her frame shook like an aspen at the
remembrance of the dreadful scenes through which she had so recently
passed.  It was several minutes before she recovered her self-command.
When she did, Hans Vanderbum proceeded with his questions.

"Dey burnt de place, I shpose?"

"Yes, yes; they destroyed everything."

"I shpose your folks will feel bad when dey finds dese Shawnees have
got you, won't dey?"

"Oh, yes, yes; do not speak of it."

At this point Hans Vanderbum began to get a sort of dim, vague idea
that his style of conversation was not exactly calculated to soothe the
feelings of the unfortunate prisoner; so he determined, if possible, to
make amends for it.  Patting her on the head, he said, gently:

"Don't feel bad, my darling; I ish shorry for you, but I wants to ax
you anoder question."

"What is it?" queried the maid, with a wondering look.

"Will you answer it?" asked Hans Vanderbum, endeavoring to put on an
arch, quizzical expression.

"If it is in my power I instantly will.  Pray, do not hesitate to ask
me anything you choose."

"Well, den, gits ready for it.  I would shust like to know if dere
ishn't some feller dat is in love mit you, and you is in love mit, and
dat both ish in love mit each oder, eh?"

The crimson that suffused the cheeks and mounted to the very forehead
of the captive, answered the question of Hans Vanderbum more plainly
than words.  Still, he insisted upon a verbal reply.

"There is no need of concealing the truth from you," she answered.  "I
have a dear young friend--"

"Who ish he?"

"Lieutenant Canfield, who is in service with my father," she replied.

"Oh, den he don't know notting about it?"

"I am not sure of that.  Oonomoo has acted as a runner or bearer of
messages between many of the men in the American army and their
families, upon the frontier, and the last time I saw him he brought me
word that Lieutenant Canfield intended shortly to visit me on furlough.
He may have arrived immediately after the Indians burnt our place."

"A good t'ing; a good t'ing if he only has."

"Why would it be a good thing?"

"Does he know Oonomoo?"

"Certainly; he has known him for several years."

"Well, den, dey will come together, and dey'll fix up fings so dat dey
will got you out of dis place afore long."

"I hope so; I hope so.  Death would not be more terrible than the
suffering I undergo here, especially at night.  Oh! will you not stay
by me?" asked the prisoner, the tears starting to her eyes.

Hans Vanderbum gouged his fists into his own visual organs, and
muttered something about "de dunderin' shmoke," before he could reply.

"Yesh, yesh, I 'tends to you.  You needn't be 'fraid.  Dey won't hurt
you, I doesn't t'ink.  Dey jist keeps you.  May be dey burns you, but
dat ain't sartain.  I must go to Oonomoo now, for I've been away from
him a good long while."

"Tell him I am hopeful."

"Ain't dere notting else to tell him?" asked Hans Vanderbum, still
lingering.

"I know of nothing else.  He certainly needs no advice from me."

"Notting to send to Lieutenant Canfield, eh?" again queried Hans.

"Tell Oonomoo," said the girl, looking down to the earth, "that if he
meets Lieutenant Canfield to say the same thing to him for me, that I
am waiting and hopeful, and have a good friend constantly by me, which
lightens, in a great measure, the gloom of my captivity."

"Who ish dat friend?"

"You."

"Yaw, I tells him.  Good-by; be a good gal till I comes back.  I bees
back burty soon."

So saying, Hans passed out of the wigwam on his way to return to
Oonomoo.  His prolonged conversation with Miss Prescott had attracted
the attention of the Indians who were lingering outside, and several
asked him its purport.  To these he invariably replied, "she didn't
know wheder it was going for to rain or not, but she fought it would do
one or toder."

From his long residence among the Shawnees and his family connection
with them, Hans Vanderbum was not suspected of disaffection.  Indeed,
it could not properly be said that he felt thus toward them.  He would
not willingly do anything to injure them any more than he would have
fought against his own race.  Had he been dwelling among the whites, he
would have befriended any hapless prisoner that might be in their power
as he intended to befriend the poor girl with whom he had just been
conversing.

It was about noon when he reached his own wigwam.  He looked in, and
seeing that the fish had been cooked and was ready, told his wife that
he didn't feel very hungry and he guessed he would take a short walk
