
Harry laughed.

"Well, you think it over, Bertie. If you can suggest anything, I
promise you that Dias and I will do our best to carry it out."

"Very well," Bertie replied gravely, "I will think it over."

"Now," Harry said, "we had better sleep in watches at night; one must
be at the breast-work, and one must listen for noises on the cliffs. It
would be hardly possible for a number of men to crawl down without
exciting suspicion or putting in motion some small stones."

"I do not think, senor," Dias said, "that it will be necessary to keep
that watch, for, as we knew from the noise when you fired last night,
there are numbers of birds and at least one beast--I fancy it is a bear
from the sound of its roar--up there, and it would be strange if a
number of men making their way down did not disturb some of them;
indeed, if one bird gave the alarm, it would put them all in motion;
besides, there are certainly monkeys, for I heard their cries and
chattering when the birds flew up. Still, it is perhaps as well that
one of us should watch. Shall we divide, as we did last night? only, of
course, Jose takes his place with you."

"I quite agree with you, Dias. Bertie, you had better get three hours'
sleep at once, and then after dinner we will sit by the fire here,
smoke, and listen, and Dias will watch the gorge and keep one ear open
in this direction too. It is a comfort to know that if we cannot get
away by going up the stream, the Indians cannot get down to attack us
from that direction."

Two nights and days passed. The Indians were still on the hills, and
once or twice men came down some distance, but a shot from Harry's
rifle sent them speedily back again. The third night Bertie was on
watch; he saw nothing, but suddenly there came three sharp taps. He
discharged one barrel of his gun at random down the ravine, and then
held himself ready to fire the other as soon as he saw anyone
approaching. It was an anxious minute for him before the other three
ran up.

"What is it, Bertie; have you seen anything?"

"No, but three arrows tapped against the wall, so I fired one barrel to
call you up, and have been looking out for someone to take a shot at
with the other; but I have not seen anyone, though, as you may imagine,
I looked out sharply."

"It is probable that after the lesson they got the other night they did
not come so near, and that they merely shot their arrows to see if we
were still on guard. However, we may as well stay here for a bit to see
if anything comes of it."

Nothing happened, however, and they returned to the tents. Next morning
Bertie said to his brother:

"Look here, Harry, I have been thinking over that plan of mine. I
really think there is something to be done with it."

"Well, tell us your plan."

"In the first place, how much powder can you spare?"

"There is that great powder-horn Jose drags about with him to charge
his musket with. It will contain about a couple of pounds, I should
say."

"That ought to do, I think."

"Well, what is your plan, Bertie?"

"In the first place, do you think that burned wood would do for
charcoal?"

"It depends on what purpose you want it for."

"I want it to prevent the powder from going off with a bang."

"Oh, well, I should think that burned wood ground to a powder would be
just as good as charcoal. So you are still thinking of rockets? Your
two pounds of powder won't make many of them--not above two fair-sized
ones, and the betting is they would not go up."

"No, I am not thinking of rockets, but of squibs and crackers. I know
when I was at school I made a lot of these, and they worked very well.
My idea is that if we could crawl up close to where the Indians are
assembled, each carrying a dozen squibs and as many crackers, we could
light a lot of the crackers first and chuck them among them, and then
send the squibs whirling about over their heads, with a good bang at
the end. It would set them off running, and they would never stop till
they were back in their own forests."

"Well, I really do think that that is a fine idea--a splendid idea! The
only drawback is, that in order to carry it out we should want a lot of
strong cartridge-paper, and we have no paper except our note-books."

"I have thought of that, Harry, though it bothered me for a good long
time. You see, the cases are only to hold the powder and to burn
regularly as the powder does. At first I thought we might find some
wood like elder and get the pith out, just as we used to do for
pop-guns, but that unfortunately would not burn. We might, however,
make them of linen."

"But we have no linen."

"No, but our leather bed-bags are lined with that coarse sort of stuff
they cover mattresses with."

"Tick, you mean?"

"Yes, tick. Now, it struck me that this would do for the crackers. We
should have to cut it in strips three or four times the width of the
cracker. Then we could get Maria to make us some stiff paste; starch
would be better, but of course we have none. Then, taking a strip of
the cloth, we would turn over one side of it an inch from the edge to
make a sort of trough, pour in the gunpowder, carefully paste all the
rest of it and fold it over and over, and then, when it begins to dry,
double it up and tie it with string. We should then only have to add
touch-paper, which, of course, we could make out of anything, and put
into the end fold. We could break up a few of the cartridges, soak them
in wetted powder, and then cut them up into small pieces and stick them
into the ends of the crackers. I think that would do first-rate. I have
made dozens of crackers, and feel sure that I could turn out a good lot
of them now. The squibs will be easier; we should only have to paste
one side of the strips and roll them up so as to form suitable cases.
When these are dry we should put a thimbleful of powder into each, and
then fill them up with powder and charcoal. In order to make sure of a
loud bang we could undo a piece of rope and wind the strands round each
case for an inch and a half from the bottom. Of course, when we had
ground down the burned wood we would mix it with powder and try one or
two of the squibs, so as to find the proportions of charcoal to be
used."

"You have evidently thought it all out well, and I think it does you no
end of credit. I authorize you to begin the experiment at once. The
first thing, of course, will be to get some wood and char it. I should
think that you would require at least two pounds of that to two pounds
of powder; but you had better only do a little at first--just enough to
make an experiment. You know it will require ramming down well."

When Dias, who was on watch, returned he found Bertie at work burning
pieces of wood and scraping off the charred surface. Harry explained
the plan to him. As he had frequently seen fireworks at Lima, Dias
quickly grasped the idea.

"It is splendid, senor; those things will frighten them far more than
guns. They will think so many devils have got among them, and we will
heighten the effect by discharging every piece that we can among them.
In their confusion they will think it is the fireworks that are killing
them. That would be necessary, for otherwise when they recovered from
the panic and found that no one had been hurt, they might summon up
courage to return."

At noon the next day Bertie with assistance had four squibs and two
crackers ready for trial. The squibs contained respectively one, two,
three, and four parts of charcoal to one of powder.

"Don't hold them in your hand while you are trying the experiment,
Bertie. Lay them down on that stone one by one and touch them off with
a burning brand from the fire, and take care that you have a good long
one."

All, with the exception of Jose who was on watch, gathered round. The
first squib exploded with a bang, the second did the same, but with
less violence, the third went off in an explosive spurt, the fourth
burned as a squib should do, though a little fiercely, and gave a good
bang at the end.

"They go off rather too rapidly, Bertie," Harry said; "we should want
them to whiz about in a lively way as long as possible. I should put in
five parts of that burned wood next time."

"I will try at once," Bertie said. "I have got lots of cases made, and
enough burned stuff to make eight or ten more."

The mixture was soon made and another case charged, Bertie ramming down
the mixture with a stick which he had cut to fit exactly, and a heavy
stone as a hammer. This was done after each half-spoonful of the
mixture was poured in. Then he inserted a strip of his touch-paper.

"I will take this in my hand," he said, "there is no fear of its
exploding. I want to throw it into the air and see how it burns there."

The touch-paper was lit, and when the mixture started burning Bertie
waved the squib high above his head and threw it into the air. It flew
along some fifteen yards and then exploded.

"I don't think you can better that, Bertie. But you might make the
cases a bit stronger; it burned out a little too quickly. We shall
probably not be able to get very close to them."

The cracker was equally satisfactory, except that they agreed that a
somewhat larger charge of powder should be used to increase the noise
of the explosion.

"Now, Bertie," Harry said, "we will put all hands on to the business.
Donna Maria shall make a good stock of paste, and cut the tick into
strips for both widths. You shall make the cases for the squibs. Dias
and I will take charge of the manufacture of charcoal. That will be a
long job, for as you have two pounds of gunpowder we shall want ten of
this charred wood."

"Not quite as much as that, Harry, because we shall want the powder
alone for the crackers and the bangs of the squibs, and also for making
the touch-paper for all of them."

"Well, we will say ten pounds, anyhow. We have a big stock of
cartridges, and can spare a few of them for so good a purpose."

They were soon at work. By night the cases were all made and drying,
and were left near the fire so as to be ready for filling in the
morning.

Dias then said: "Jose will go down to-night, senor. Of course I shall
go with him. We must find out, in the first place, how near the mouth
of the ravine the savages are gathered, whether they keep any watch,
and what force they have. It will be well not to make ourselves known
to them until at least the greater part are gathered there. If we were
only to scare a small party, the others, when they came down, would
know nothing of the panic, and might take up the pursuit."

"I wish we had some means of driving them off the top of the hill,
Dias."

"I don't see how that can be done, senor. But probably in another day
or two they will all go down of their own accord. They must by this
time have satisfied themselves that there is no getting at us from
above, and that it would be too dangerous to attempt a descent here
under the fire of our guns. They will be very likely, instead, to go
down to-morrow or next day to hold a general council, and in that case
they may decide either to risk climbing down at night, or to make a
grand assault on the breast-work. Or, if they cannot bring themselves
to that, they may decide to leave half a dozen men to watch the
entrance, while the rest scatter themselves over the forests. In that
case the watchers would only have to go off and summon them when we
started again. As they might well imagine that we should not find
another position like this again, I expect that is what they will do.
If there are a hundred of them, they will find it difficult to feed
themselves long. Certainly the men on the hills will get little to eat
up there."

"Well, Dias, be sure you warn Jose to be careful. They may be posting
sentries at the mouth of the ravine, just as they are keeping them at
this end."

"They may be, but I do not think it is likely; they will know that we
could not abandon our animals, and that if we passed through they would
have no difficulty in over-taking us, and would then have us at their
mercy. The last thing they would want is to prevent us from leaving
this position. They certainly would not fear an attack from us, knowing
that there are but four of us and a woman. Therefore, I think it
probable that they will keep at some little distance from the entrance,
so as to tempt us to come out."

"I hope it is so, Dias. Still, Jose will have to be very careful."

"He will be careful, senor. He knows his own life will depend upon his
crawling along as noiselessly as a snake. If he is seen, of course he
will come at all speed back to me; and, unless he is hit by a chance
arrow, he will not run much risk, for by the time they are ready to
shoot he will be out of sight on such dark nights as these, and in the
shade of the mountains and trees. I shall be ready to send four barrels
of buck-shot among them when they come up. That is sure to stop them
long enough to allow us to get under the cover of your rifles before
they can overtake us.

"I don't think that you need be at all uneasy about him, senor. We will
start in an hour's time, so that Jose can get near them before they go
to sleep. They will probably have a fire burning, but if not the only
guide to their position will be the sound of their talking. He will
strip before he leaves me, so that if they catch sight of him, they
will suppose that he is one of themselves."

Bertie now relieved Jose, who came back and had a long talk with Dias.

"We are ready now, senor."

"Here is my fowling-piece. It is already loaded with buck-shot. Bertie
has taken down his rifle and gun, and will give you the latter as you
pass. I suppose Jose will take no weapons?"

"Only a long knife, senor, that may be useful if he comes upon one of
them suddenly."

At the barricade Jose stripped, retaining only a pair of sandals. These
were as noiseless as his bare feet, and would be needed, as in the dark
he might tread upon a thorny creeper, or strike against a projecting
rock.

"Good-bye, Jose!" Harry said. "Now, be careful. It would be a great
grief to us if anything happened to you."

"I will be careful, senor. The Indians won't catch me, never fear."

Harry and Bertie both shook hands with him, and then he and Dias
stepped into the water, and, keeping close along by the wall of rock,
started on their perilous expedition.

"I don't like it, Bert," Harry said as they lost sight of them. "It
seems a cowardly thing to let that lad go into danger while we are
doing nothing."

"That is just what I feel, Harry. I would have volunteered willingly,
but he will do it a great deal better than either you or I could."

"There is no doubt about that," Harry agreed. "Of course when he is out
with the mules he often travels at night, and certainly both he and
Dias can see in the dark a good deal better than we can."

There was suddenly a slight movement behind them, and they turned
sharply round. "It is I, senor. I am anxious about Dias, and I didn't
like staying there by myself. I thought you would not mind if I came up
and sat by you."

"Certainly not," Harry said. "Sit down and make yourself comfortable. I
do not think there is any fear for Dias. He cannot be taken by
surprise, for he will hear by their shouting if they discover Jose, and
you may be quite sure that he will bring them to a stand with the four
shots he will fire among them as they come near, and so will get a good
start. They might run faster than he can in the forest, but will
scarcely be better able to make their way up the torrent."

When Dias had been gone twenty minutes their conversation ceased, and
they sat listening intently. In another ten minutes, which seemed an
hour to them, Harry said, "The savages can keep no watch at their end
of the torrent, and Jose must have got safely away."

Very slowly the time passed.

"They must have been gone an hour," Bertie said at last.

"Quite that, I should think, Bertie. At any rate, we may feel assured
that all has gone well so far. For, though we might not hear the yells
of the savages over the rustle and roar of the torrent, we should
certainly hear gunshots."

Another half-hour passed, and then to their relief they heard Dias call
out, "All is well!" some little distance down. In three or four minutes
they could see the two figures approaching. "Give me your guns, Dias,"
Harry said, "and then I will help you up the rocks. They might go off
if you were to make a slip. Now, while Jose is putting on his clothes,
tell me what he has found out."

"I have not heard much, senor. As soon as he rejoined me we started
off, and, coming up the torrent, we had not much chance of talking. He
told me that there were many of them, and that they were camped at some
little distance from the stream, just as I thought they would be."

"I will stay here, Harry," Bertie said. "You can hear the news and then
come and tell me."

"Very well. I will be back before long."

Dias, his wife, and Harry walked down towards the tent, and Bertie
chatted with Jose while the latter was dressing.

"You must feel horribly cold, Jose," he said.

"I am cold, now I think of it. I did not notice it while I was watching
the savages. When I took to the water again I did feel it. Maria will
make me a cup of hot coffee, and then I shall be all right again. It
was good fun to look at them, and know that they had no idea that I was
so close. If I could have understood their language, I should have
learned something worth telling. I felt inclined to scare them by
giving a tremendous yell, and I know I could have got away all right.
They were sitting round a big fire and would not have been able to see
in the dark. I should have done it, only I thought Dias would have
blamed me for letting them know that one of us had come down the canyon."

"He would have been angry, Jose, and so would my brother, for they
would certainly have set a watch afterwards, which would have spoilt
all our plans. Now run along, your teeth are chattering, and the sooner
you get something warm and wrap yourself up in your blankets the
better."

The fire had burnt low when the others returned, but an armful of
sticks was thrown upon it at once. The kettle had been left in the
embers at its edge by Maria when she started, so that after it had hung
in the blaze for two or three minutes it began to boil, and coffee was
soon ready. At this point Jose ran in, and after he had drunk a large
mugful he told them what he had learned.

"When I left Dias at the mouth of the ravine," he said, "everything
seemed quiet. I walked along the edge of the stream for fifty yards,
keeping my ears open, you may be sure, and I saw a light glow close
under the rocks some distance on the other side of the river. I
followed the stream down till I came to a place where there was a quiet
pool, and there I swam across, then very carefully I made my way to
where I could see the light. It was quite three hundred yards from the
river. As I got near I could hear talking; I crawled along like a cat,
and took good care not to disturb a leaf, or to put a hand or a knee
upon a dried stick, for I could not tell whether they had anyone on
watch near the fire. I perceived no one, and at last came to a point
where I could see the flame. It was in an opening running a hundred
feet into the mountains, and perhaps forty feet across at the mouth.

"In this were sixty or seventy savages sitting or standing round a
fire, which had evidently been made there so that anyone coming down to
the mouth of the ravine should not see it. The fire was not a very
large one, and a good many of the men were gathered outside the little
hollow. Some of them were talking loudly, and it seemed to me that they
were quarrelling over something. Sometimes they pointed up to the top
of the hills, sometimes towards the mouth of our ravine. I would have
got close if I had understood their language. Presently I saw some of
them lying down, so that I could see that the quarrel, whatever it was
about, was coming to an end, and that they were going to lie down for
the night. As I could learn nothing further I crawled away and went
down to the place where I had swum the river before, and then crept
quietly up to Dias, who was on the look-out; for although I had seen no
one as I had passed before, there might still have been some of them on
the watch."

"You have done very well, Jose," Harry said. "We have learned two
things. First, that they are not keeping watch at the mouth of the
ravine, either because they feel sure that we will not try to escape,
or because they wish us to leave and are giving us the opportunity of
doing so. In the second place, you have learned what force they have
got down there, their exact position, and the fact that they were
evidently arguing how they had best attack us. Well, from what you say
there is every chance that we shall be able to come upon them without
being noticed till we are close enough to throw our fireworks among
them. Really the only thing for us to learn is whether many of them are
still at the top of the hill."

"I hardly think there can be many; only a few have shown themselves
to-day. They must know very well that we would not venture to climb up
during the day, and that it would be next to impossible for us to do so
in the dark, even if we made up our minds to abandon the animals and
all our stores."

"Well, I should say, Dias, there is no reason why we should put the
matter off. It will not take us long to load all the squibs to-morrow.
My opinion is that at dusk we had better saddle the mules and pack
everything on them in readiness for a start; then at ten o'clock we can
go down and attack the savages. The best moment for doing so will be
when they are just lying down. When we have sent them flying we will
come up the torrent again, and start with the mules as soon as it is
daylight. It would be next to impossible to get them down in the dark,
as they might very easily break their legs, or by rubbing against the
wall shift their packs and tumble them into the water."

