matter. Now I leave it in your hands. I am glad to see that you are
looking quite yourself again, and have got over your fainting fit of
the other night. I quite expected to be sent for professionally the next
morning."

"Oh, yes, I have quite got over it, Doctor; I can't make out how I was
so silly as to faint. I never did such a thing before, but it was so
strange and mysterious that I felt quite bewildered, and the picture
quite frightened me, but I don't know why. This is the first chance I
have had since of speaking to you alone. What do you think of it, and
why should you be dressed up as a native? and why should?" She stopped
with a heightened color on her cheeks.

"You and Bathurst be dressed up, too? So you noticed your own likeness;
nobody else but Bathurst and myself recognized the two figures that came
out of the wood."

"Oh, you saw it too, Doctor. I thought I might have been mistaken, for,
besides being stained, the face was all obscured somehow. Neither uncle,
nor Mrs. Hunter, nor the girls, nor anyone else I have spoken to seem to
have had an idea it was me, though they all recognized you.. What could
it mean?"

"I. have not the slightest idea in the world," the Doctor said; "very
likely it meant nothing. I certainly should not think any more about it.
These jugglers' tricks are curious and unaccountable; but it is no use
our worrying ourselves about them. Maybe we are all going to get up
private theatricals some day, and perform an Indian drama. I have never
taken any part in tomfooleries of that sort so far, but there is no
saying what I may come to."

"Are you going to dine here, Doctor?"

"No, my dear; the Major asked me to come in, but I declined. I told him
frankly that I did not like Forster, and that the less I saw of him the
better I should be pleased."

The other guests turned out to be Captain and Mrs. Doolan and Mr.
Congreave, one of the civilians at the station. The Doolans arrived
first.

"You have not seen Captain Forster yet, Isobel," Mrs. Doolan said, as
they sat down for a chat together. "I met him at Delhi soon after I came
out. He is quite my beau ideal of a soldier in appearance, but I don't
think he is nice, Isobel. I have heard all sorts of stories about him."

"Is that meant as a warning for me, Mrs. Doolan?" Isobel asked, smiling.

"Well, yes, I think it is, if you don't mind my giving you one. There
are some men one can flirt with as much as one likes, and there are some
men one can't; he is one of that sort. Privately, my dear, I don't mind
telling you that at one time I did flirt with him--I had been accustomed
to flirt in Ireland; we all flirt there, and mean nothing by it; but I
had to give it up very suddenly. It wouldn't do, my dear, at all; his
ideas of flirtation differed utterly from mine. I found I was playing
with fire, and was fortunate in getting off without singeing my wings,
which is more than a good many others would have done."

"He must be a horrid sort of man," Isobel said indignantly.

Mrs. Doolan laughed. "I don't think you will find him so; certainly
that is not the general opinion of women. However, you will see him for
yourself in a very few minutes."

Isobel looked up with some curiosity when Captain Forster was announced,
and at once admitted to herself that the Doctor's report as to his
personal appearance was fully justified. He stood over six feet high,
with a powerful frame, and an easy careless bearing; his hair was cut
rather close, he wore a long tawny mustache, his eyes were dark, his
teeth very white and perfect. A momentary look of surprise came across
his face as his eyes fell on Isobel.

"I had hardly expected," he said, as the Major introduced him to her,
"to find no less than three unmarried ladies at Deennugghur. I had the
pleasure of being introduced to the Miss Hunters this afternoon. How do
you do, Mrs. Doolan? I think it is four years since I had the pleasure
of knowing you in Delhi."

"I believe that is the number, Captain Forster."

"It seems a very long time to me," he said.

"I thought you would say that," she laughed. "It was quite the proper
thing to say, Captain Forster; but I have no doubt it does seem longer
to you than it does to me as you have been home since."

"We are all here," the Major broke in. "Captain Forster, will you take
my niece in?"

"I suppose you find this very dull after Cawnpore, Miss Hannay?" Captain
Forster asked.

"Indeed I do not," Isobel said. "I like it better here; everything is
sociable and pleasant, while at Cawnpore there was much more formality.
Of course, there were lots of dinner parties, but I don't care for large
dinner parties at all; it is so hot, and they last such a time. I think
six is quite large enough. Then there is a general talk, and everyone
can join in just as much as they like, while at a large dinner you
have to rely entirely upon one person, and I think it is very hard work
having to talk for an hour and a half to a stranger of whom you know
nothing. Don't you agree with me?"

"Entirely, Miss Hannay; I am a pretty good hand at talking, but at times
I have found it very hard work, I can assure you, especially when
you take down a stranger to the station, so that you have no mutual
acquaintance to pull to pieces."

The dinner was bright and pleasant, and when the evening was over Isobel
said to her uncle, "I think Captain Forster is very amusing, uncle."

"Yes," the Major agreed, "he is a good talker, a regular society man; he
is no great favorite of mine; I think he will be a little too much for
us in a small station like this."

"How do you mean too much, uncle?"

The Major hesitated.

"Well, he won't have much to do with his troop of horse, and time will
hang heavy on his hands."

"Well, there is shooting, uncle."

"Yes, there is shooting, but I don't think that is much in his line.
Tiffins and calls, and society generally occupy most of his time, I
fancy, and I think he is fonder of billiards and cards than is good for
him or others. Of course, being here by himself, as he is, we must do
our best to be civil to him, and that sort of thing, but if we were
at Cawnpore he is a man I should not care about being intimate in the
house."

"I understand, uncle; but certainly he is pleasant."

"Oh, yes, he is very pleasant," the Major said dryly, in a tone that
seemed to express that Forster's power of making himself pleasant was by
no means a recommendation in his eyes.

But Captain Forster had apparently no idea whatever that his society
could be anything but welcome, and called the next day after luncheon.

"I have been leaving my pasteboard at all the residents," he said; "not
a very large circle. Of course, I knew Mrs. Rintoul at Delhi, as well
as Mrs. Doolan. I did not know any of the others. They seem pleasant
people."

"They are very pleasant," Isobel said.

"I left one for a man named Bathurst. He was out. Is that the Bathurst,
Major Hannay, who was in a line regiment--I forget its number--and left
very suddenly in the middle of the fighting in the Punjaub?"

"Yes; I believe Bathurst was in the army about that time," the Major
said; "but I don't know anything about the circumstances of his
leaving."

Had Captain Forster known the Major better he would have been aware that
what he meant to say was that he did not wish to know, but he did not
detect the inflection of his voice, and went on--"They say he showed
the white feather. If it is the same man, I was at school with him, and
unless he has improved since then, I am sure I have no wish to renew his
acquaintance."

"I like him very much," the Major said shortly; "he is great friends
with Dr. Wade, who has the very highest opinion of him, and I believe he
is generally considered to be one of the most rising young officers of
his grade."

"Oh, I have nothing to say against him," Captain Forster said; "but he
was a poor creature at school, and I do not think that there was any
love lost between us. Did you know him before you came here?"

"I only met him at the last races in Cawnpore," the Major said; "he was
stopping with the Doctor."

"Quite a character, Wade."

Isobel's tongue was untied now.

"I think he is one of the kindest and best gentlemen I ever met," the
girl said hotly; "he took care of me coming out here, and no one could
have been kinder than he was."

"I have no doubt he is all that," Captain Forster said gently; "still he
is a character, Miss Hannay, taking the term character to mean a person
who differs widely from other people. I believe he is very skillful in
his profession, but I take it he is a sort of Abernethy, and tells the
most startling truths to his patients."

"That I can quite imagine," Isobel said; "the Doctor hates humbug of
all sorts, and I don't think I should like to call him in myself for an
imaginary ailment."

"I rather put my foot in it there," Captain Forster said to himself, as
he sauntered back to his tent. "The Major didn't like my saying anything
against Bathurst, and the girl did not like my remark about the Doctor.
I wonder whether she objected also to what I said about that fellow
Bathurst--a sneaking little hound he was, and there is no doubt about
his showing the white feather in the Punjaub. However, I don't think
that young lady is of the sort to care about a coward, and if she asks
any questions, as I dare say she will, after what I have said, she will
find that the story is a true one. What a pretty little thing she is!
I did not see a prettier face all the time I was at home. What with her
and Mrs. Doolan, time is not likely to hang so heavily here as I had
expected."

The Major, afraid that Isobel might ask him some questions about this
story of Bathurst leaving the army, went off hastily as soon as Captain
Forster had left. Isobel sat impatiently tapping the floor with her
foot, awaiting the Doctor, who usually came for half an hour's chat in
the afternoon.

"Well, child, how did your dinner go off yesterday, and what did you
think of your new visitor? I saw him come away from here half an hour
ago. I suppose he has been calling."

"I don't like him at all," Isobel said decidedly.

"No? Well, then, you are an exception to the general rule."

"I thought him pleasant enough last night," Isobel said frankly. "He has
a deferential sort of way about him when he speaks to one that one can
hardly help liking. But he made me angry today. In the first place,
Doctor, he said you were a character."

The Doctor chuckled. "Well, that is true enough, my dear. There was no
harm in that."

"And then he said"--and she broke off--"he said what I feel sure cannot
be true. He said that Mr. Bathurst left the army because he showed the
white feather. It is not true, is it? I am sure it can't be true."

The Doctor did not reply immediately.

"It is an old story," he said presently, "and ought not to have been
brought up again. I don't suppose Forster or anyone else knows the
rights of the case. When a man leaves his regiment and retires when it
is upon active service, there are sure to be spiteful stories getting
about, often without the slightest foundation. But even if it had been
true, it would hardly be to Bathurst's disadvantage now he is no longer
in the army, and courage is not a vital necessity on the part of a
civilian."

"You can't mean that, Doctor; surely every man ought to be brave. Could
anyone possibly respect a man who is a coward? I don't believe it,
Doctor, for a moment."

"Courage, my dear, is not a universal endowment--it is a physical as
much as a moral virtue. Some people are physically brave and
morally cowards; others are exactly the reverse. Some people are
constitutionally cowards all round, while in others cowardice shows
itself only partially. I have known a man who is as brave as a lion in
battle, but is terrified by a rat. I have known a man brave in other
respects lose his nerve altogether in a thunderstorm. In neither of
these cases was it the man's own fault; it was constitutional, and by no
effort could he conquer it. I consider Bathurst to be an exceptionally
noble character. I am sure that he is capable of acts of great bravery
in some directions, but it is possible that he is, like the man I have
spoken of, constitutionally weak in others."

"But the great thing is to be brave in battle, Doctor! You would not
call a man a coward simply because he was afraid of a rat, but you would
call a man a coward who was afraid in battle. To be a coward there seems
to me to be a coward all round. I have always thought the one virtue
in man I really envied was bravery, and that a coward was the most
despicable creature living. It might not be his actual fault, but one
can't help that. It is not anyone's fault if he is fearfully ugly or
born an idiot, for example. But cowardice seems somehow different. Not
to be brave when he is strong seems to put a man below the level of a
woman. I feel sure, Doctor, there must be some mistake, and that this
story cannot be true. I have seen a good deal of Mr. Bathurst since we
have been here, and you have always spoken so well of him, he is the
last man I should have thought would be--would be like that."

"I know the circumstances of the case, child. You can trust me when
I say that there is nothing in Bathurst's conduct that diminishes my
respect for him in the slightest degree, and that in some respects he is
as brave a man as any I know."

"Yes, Doctor, all that may be; but you do not answer my question. Did
Mr. Bathurst leave the army because he showed cowardice? If he did, and
you know it, why did you invite him here? why did you always praise
him? why did you not say, 'In other respects this man may be good and
estimable, but he is that most despicable thing, a coward'?"

There was such a passion of pain in her voice and face that the Doctor
only said quietly, "I did not know it, my dear, or I should have told
you at first that in this one point he was wanting. It is, I consider,
the duty of those who know things to speak out. But he is certainly not
what you say."

Isobel tossed her head impatiently. "We need not discuss it, Doctor. It
is nothing to me whether Mr. Bathurst is brave or not, only it is not
quite pleasant to learn that you have been getting on friendly terms
with a man who--"

"Don't say any more," the Doctor broke in. "You might at least remember
he is a friend of mine. There is no occasion for us to quarrel, my dear,
and to prevent the possibility of such a thing I will be off at once."

After he had left Isobel sat down to think over what had been said. He
had not directly answered her questions, but he had not denied that the
rumor that Bathurst had retired from the army because he was wanting in
courage was well founded. Everything he had said, in fact, was an excuse
rather than a denial. The Doctor was as stanch a friend as he was bitter
an opponent. Could he have denied it he would have done so strongly and
indignantly.

It was clear that, much as he liked Bathurst, he believed him wanting in
physical courage. He had said, indeed, that he believed he was brave in
some respects, and had asserted that he knew of one exceptional act of
courage that he had performed; but what was that if a man had had to
leave the army because he was a coward? To Isobel it seemed that of all
things it was most dreadful that a man should be wanting in courage.
Tales of daring and bravery had always been her special delight, and,
being full of life and spirit herself, it had not seemed even possible
to her that a gentleman could be a coward, and that Bathurst could be so
was to her well nigh incredible.

It might, as the Doctor had urged, be in no way his fault, but this did
not affect the fact. He might be more to be pitied than to be blamed;
but pity of that kind, so far from being akin to love, was destructive
of it.

Unconsciously she had raised Bathurst on a lofty pinnacle. The Doctor
had spoken very highly of him. She had admired the energy with which,
instead of caring, as others did, for pleasure, he devoted himself to
his work. Older men than himself listened to his opinions. His quiet and
somewhat restrained manner was in contrast to the careless fun and good
humor of most of those with whom she came in contact. It had seemed to
her that he was a strong man, one who could be relied upon implicitly at
all times, and she had come in the few weeks she had been at Deennugghur
to rely upon his opinion, and to look forward to his visits, and even to
acknowledge to herself that he approached her ideal of what a man should
be more than anyone else she had met.

And now this was all shattered at a blow. He was wanting in man's first
attribute. He had left the army, if not in disgrace, at least under
a cloud and even his warm friend, the Doctor, could not deny that the
accusation of cowardice was well founded. The pain of the discovery
opened her eyes to the fact which she had not before, even remotely,
admitted to herself, that she was beginning to love him, and the
discovery was a bitter one.

"I may thank Captain Forster for that, at least," she said to herself,
as she angrily wiped a tear from her cheek; "he has opened my eyes in
time. What should I have felt if I had found too late that I had come
to love a man who was a coward--who had left the army because he was
afraid? I should have despised myself as much as I should despise him.
Well, that is my first lesson. I shall not trust in appearances again.
Why, I would rather marry a man like Captain Forster, even if everything
they say about him is true, than a man who is a coward. At least he is
brave, and has shown himself so."

The Doctor had gone away in a state of extreme irritation.

"Confound the meddling scoundrel!" he said to himself, as he surprised
the horse with a sharp cut of the whip. "Just when things were going
on as I wished. I had quite set my mind on it, and though I am sure
Bathurst would never have spoken to her till he had told her himself
about that unfortunate failing of his, it would have been altogether
different coming from his own lips just as he told it to me. Of course,
my lips were sealed and I could not put the case in the right light. I
would give three months' pay for the satisfaction of horsewhipping that
fellow Forster. Still, I can't say he did it maliciously, for he could
not have known Bathurst was intimate there, or that there was anything
between them. The question is, am I to tell Bathurst that she has heard
about it? I suppose I had better. Ah, here is the Major," and he drew up
his horse.

"Anything new, Major? You look put out."

"Yes, there is very bad news, Doctor. A Sowar has just brought a letter
to me from the Colonel saying that the General has got a telegram
that the 19th Native Infantry at Berhampore have refused to use the
cartridges served out to them, and that yesterday a Sepoy of the 34th
at Barrackpore raised seditious cries in front of the lines, and when
Baugh, the adjutant, and the sergeant major attempted to seize him he
wounded them both, while the regiment stood by and refused to aid them.
The 19th are to be disbanded, and no doubt the 34th will be, too."

"That is bad news indeed, Major, and looks as if this talk about general
disaffection were true. Had there been trouble but at one station it
might have been the effect of some local grievance, but happening at
two places, it looks as if it were part of a general plot. Well, we must
hope it will go no farther."

"It is very bad," said the Major, "but at any rate we may hope we shall
have no troubles here; the regiment has always behaved well, and I am
sure they have no reason to complain of their treatment. If the Colonel
has a fault, it is that of over leniency with the men."

"That is so," the Doctor agreed; "but the fact is, Major, we know
really very little about the Hindoo mind. We can say with some sort of
certainty what Europeans will do under given circumstances, but though
I know the natives, I think, pretty nearly as well as most men, I feel
that I really know nothing about them. They appear mild and submissive,
and have certainly proved faithful on a hundred battlefields, but we
don't know whether that is their real character. Their own history,
before we stepped in and altered its current, shows them as faithless,
bloodthirsty and cruel; whether they have changed their nature under our
rule, or simply disguised it, Heaven only knows."

"At any rate," the Major said, "they have always shown themselves
attached to their English officers. There are numberless instances where
they have displayed the utmost devotion for them, and although some
scheming intriguers may have sown the seeds of discontent among them,
and these lies about the cartridges may have excited their religious
prejudices, and may even lead them to mutiny, I cannot believe for an
instant that the Sepoys will lift their hands against their officers."

"I hope not," the Doctor said gravely. "A tiger's cub, when tamed, is
one of the prettiest of playthings, but when it once tastes blood it is
as savage a beast as its mother was before it. Of course, I hope for the
best, but if the Sepoys once break loose I would not answer for anything
they might do. They have been pretty well spoilt, Major, till they have
come to believe that it is they who conquered India and not we."



CHAPTER XI.


That evening, after dining alone, the Doctor went in to Bathurst's.
The latter had already heard the news, and they talked it over for some
time. Then the Doctor said, "Have you seen Forster, Bathurst, since he
arrived?"

"No, I was out when he left his card. I was at school with him.. I heard
when I was in England that he was out here in the native cavalry, but I
have never run across him before, and I own I had no wish to do so. He
was about two years older than I was, and was considered the cock of the
school. He was one of my chief tormentors. I don't know that he was
a bully generally--fellows who are really plucky seldom are; but he
disliked me heartily, and I hated him.

"I had the habit of telling the truth when questioned, and he narrowly
escaped expulsion owing to my refusing to tell a lie about his being
quietly in bed when, in fact, he and two or three other fellows had been
out at a public house. He never forgave me for it, for he himself would
have told a lie without hesitation to screen himself, or, to do him
justice, to screen anyone else; and the mere fact that I myself had
been involved in the matter, having been sent out by one of the bigger
fellows, and, therefore, having got myself a flogging by my admission,
was no mitigation in his eyes of my offense of what he called sneaking.

"So you may imagine I have no particular desire to meet him again.
Unless he has greatly changed, he would do me a bad turn if he had the
chance."

"I don't think he has greatly changed," the Doctor said. "That was
really what I came in here for this evening rather than to talk about
this Sepoy business. I am sorry to say, Bathurst, that when he was in
at the Major's today your name happened to be mentioned, and he said
at once, 'Is that the Bathurst who they say showed the white feather at
Chillianwalla and left the army in consequence?'"

Bathurst's face grew pale and his fingers closed. He remained silent a
minute, and then said, "It does not matter; she would have been sure to
hear it sooner or later, and I should have told her myself if he had not
done so; besides, if, as I am afraid, this Berhampore business is the
beginning of trouble, and of such trouble as we have never had since we
set foot in India, it is likely that everyone will know what she knows
now. Has she spoken to you about it? I suppose she has, or you would not
have known that he mentioned it."

"Yes, she was most indignant about it, and did not believe it."

"And what did you say, Doctor?" he asked indifferently.

"Well, I was sorry I could not tell her exactly what you told me. It
would have been better if I could have done so. I simply said there were
many sorts of courage, and that I was sure that you possessed many sorts
in a very high degree, but I could not, of course, deny; although I did
not admit, the truth of the report he had mentioned."

"I don't think it makes much difference one way or the other," Bathurst
said wearily. "I have known all along that Isobel Hannay would not marry
a coward, only I have gone on living in a fool's paradise. However, it
is over now--the sooner it is all over the better."

"My dear fellow," the Doctor said earnestly, "don't take this thing too
much to heart. I don't wish to try and persuade you that it is not a
grave misfortune, but even suppose this trouble takes the very worst
form possible, I do not think you will come so very badly out of it as
you anticipate. Even assuming that you are unable to do your part in
absolute fighting, there may be other opportunities, and most likely
will, in which you may be able to show that although unable to control
your nerves in the din of battle, you possess in other respects coolness
and courage. That feat of yours of attacking the tiger with the dog whip
shows conclusively that under many circumstances you are capable of most
daring deeds."

Bathurst sat looking down for some minutes. "God grant that it may
be so," he said at last; "but it is no use talking about it any more,
Doctor. I suppose Major Hannay will keep a sharp lookout over the men?"

"Yes; there was a meeting of the officers this afternoon. It was agreed
to make no outward change, and to give the troops no cause whatever to
believe that they are suspected. They all feel confident of the goodwill
of the men; at the same time they will watch them closely, and if the
news comes of further trouble, they will prepare the courthouse as a
place of refuge."

"That is a very good plan; but of course everything depends upon
whether, if the troops do rise in mutiny, the people of Oude should join
them. They are a fighting race, and if they should throw in their lot
against us the position would be a desperate one."

"Well, there is no doubt," the Doctor said, "that the Rajah of Bithoor
would be with us; that will make Cawnpore safe, and will largely
influence all the great Zemindars, though there is no doubt that a
good many of them have been sulky ever since the disarmament order was
issued. I believe there are few of them who have not got cannon hidden
away or buried, and as for the people, the number of arms given up was
as nothing to what we know they possessed. In other parts of India I
believe the bulk of the people will be with us; but here in Oude, our
last annexation, I fear that they will side against us, unless all the
great landowners range themselves on our side."

"As far as I can see," Bathurst said, "the people are contented with the
change. I don't say what I may call the professional fighting class,
the crowd of retainers kept by the great landowners, who were constantly
fighting against each other. Annexation has put a stop to all that, and
the towns are crowded with these fighting men, who hate us bitterly; but
the peasants, the tillers of the soil, have benefited greatly. They
are no longer exposed to raids by their powerful neighbors, and
can cultivate their fields in peace and quiet. Unfortunately their
friendship, such as it is, will not weigh in the slightest degree in
the event of a struggle. At any rate, I am sure they are not behind the
