welcome. All found letters awaiting them, for it had been arranged that
as it would be impossible to give any address, these should be sent to
Maritzburg. Their friends were scarcely ready to credit their stories,
but, on being shown General Yule's letter, saw that at least the
accounts of their early doings were strictly correct.

Troops were coming up fast from Durban, and there was already a strong
brigade there. Chris called upon the brigadier and presented General
Yule's letter, and his own report of the fight with the Boers
subsequently.

"This shows what can be done by young fellows who are good shots and
good riders, and who, I may say, Mr. King, have been admirably
commanded. What are your wishes now? There are two or three troops of
volunteer horse here; would you wish to be attached to one of them? Of
course, if you do so there will be no difficulty about it; but really,
I think that you would be more useful in carrying on your work in your
own way."

It had been known for a long time past that a large proportion of the
cannon, rifles, and ammunition of the Boers had been landed at the
Portuguese port of Lorenzo Marques, and taken up by rail from there to
Komati-poort--a station on the frontier, where there was a bridge
across the Komati river--and thence by rail to Pretoria. Chris heard
that it was generally known that the Portuguese officials, who had long
been influenced by Boer money extracted from the Uitlanders, were still
winking at the practice, although it was a breach of neutrality. So
much indignation was expressed on the subject at Maritzburg that Chris,
one day when the party assembled at the spot where their horses were
tethered, said:

"I want to have a serious talk with you all. You have all heard that
immense quantities of arms and dynamite are passing through Lorenzo
Marques. Now, at present we don't see much for us to do here. My idea
is, that if we could manage to blow up the bridge across the river that
divides Portuguese territory from the Transvaal, we should do an
infinitely greater service than by killing any number of plundering
Boers."

His troop looked at each other in surprise.

"You are not really in earnest, Chris?" Peters said; "it would be a
tremendous business."

"It would be a big business, no doubt, but I was never more earnest in
my life than in proposing it. Now that we know how strong the Boers are
round Ladysmith, and what terribly hard work it will be for an army to
fight its way through all those hills, we can see that the first
calculations as to the time when it can be relieved are a good deal
short of the mark. There must be at least twenty thousand men collected
here to do it, and I think it is more likely to be the end of January
than the end of December before the Boers are driven off. We have in
the one case seven weeks and in the other twelve before the place is
relieved, and we begin to turn the tables on the Boers; and according
to the way we carry my idea out it depends whether we are back here by
the end of the year or by the end of January--that is, I acknowledge,
if we get back at all.

"I have been thinking it over. There are two ways of doing it. We can
go on board a ship touching at Durban and going on to Lorenzo Marques.
I don't say that we could not all do it, but it would be better to
choose only four; a larger number would excite more observation. Those
who go will of course take dynamite with them. We can buy that at
Durban. At Lorenzo Marques we should assume the character of four young
Irish fellows. We know there are lots of them already up there, and
Germans too, fighting in the Boer ranks and I am glad to know that they
got peppered at Elandslaagte, although that is not to the point. We
should go as four Irish lads who have come across from America to fight
for the Boers. We have heard plenty of Irish in the mines and at
Johannesburg, so shall be able to put enough brogue in our talk to
pass. I know from what I have heard that a trip to the Portuguese
officials would be quite sufficient for them to pass anything without
examination; but even if they did open our cases and find dynamite in
them, we could account for it by saying that we had been told before
starting that it would be the handiest thing to take with us, and would
be of more assistance to the Boers than anything we could bring them.

"No doubt some of the passengers would know that we got on board at
Durban, but if any questions were asked we could account for that by
saying that the ship we came over in, was going on to Australia, and
therefore we had been obliged to land and take another on to Lorenzo
Marques. Once landed, we should of course take a train for
Komati-poort, and slip off it after dark at some station a few miles
from there. Then, you know, we could first reconnoitre the bridge, and
when we had settled on the best place for the dynamite, we could put it
there the next night. I know a good deal about the use of dynamite. It
is not like gunpowder, that you have to put in a hole and fasten up
tightly, you only have to lay it upon an iron girder or arch, and light
your fuse and leave it to do its work."

The boys listened with increasing surprise to his proposal.

"And what is your other plan?" Peters asked after a long pause.

"The other plan is that we should all take a passage in some small
craft, which we could hire, to St. Lucia Bay, and then go up through
Zululand and Swaziland, which extends to within a short distance of
Komati-poort. Both tribes are friendly enough with us, and hate the
Boers like poison. Of course in that case we shall take the dynamite
with us, and then must be guided by circumstances as to our course and
what we should do when we got to the bridge."

There was again a long silence, then Brown said: "If anyone but you had
proposed it, Chris, I should have scoffed at it as impossible, but for
myself I have come to have such confidence in you that I believe you
would manage it. There can be no doubt that it would be a grand thing
if we could do it. I have heard my father say that the river is a
terribly bad one, and that sometimes it is altogether impassable for
weeks at a time. Except by the bridge, even in the best times, I should
think, from what he said, it would be quite impossible for them to take
heavy things like cannon across. Anyhow, I am ready to go with you."

"Thank you, Brown," Chris said. "I should certainly not ask anyone to
go. Those who are willing to do so must volunteer. Of course we only
combined for the purpose of acting as scouts, and no one ever
contemplated doing more. So far, we have, as all allow, carried out
that object well; and I have no doubt that those who do not care to
join in what is a sort of forlorn hope, will continue to do well after
we have started on it, and of course I shall, if I get back, rejoin
them. My scheme would, no doubt, be considered a very wild one, but I
can see no reason why, with good luck, it should not succeed. Indeed, I
believe that it will succeed, if, when we arrive there, we do not find
that the Boers are guarding the bridge. Of course, if they do so there
is but little hope of carrying the matter out. They will know the
importance of the bridge to them, and how greatly its destruction would
be desired by the British Government, and may think it possible that
such an attempt as I propose would be made, and take precautions to
prevent its success.

"I do not mean to throw away my life. If, when I get there, I find that
it is next to impossible to carry the matter out, I shall give it up;
but even then the information I should get about matters up there, both
as to the Boers and the Swazis, would be of use. We know that Boer
agents have been doing their utmost to get the Basutos to join them,
and it is likely that they may be trying to induce the Zulus and Swazis
to do the same; and even if we fail in the principal object, I should
say that the time would not be wasted. When I am up there, I can, of
course, get news as to how the war is going on, and if I find that our
forces are pushing up into the Transvaal, I shall make straight across
the country and join them. I have been thinking over the matter a good
deal since we came here, and made up my mind that anyhow I shall try to
carry it out, so I now resign the leadership, and also for the present
my membership. Now, I don't want to influence you in any way. It has
all come suddenly upon you. You had better talk it over together. All I
ask you is that you will not say a word about it to anyone, not even to
your relations.

"Not only because, as I know would be the case, they would be afraid of
having anything to do with what they would consider an absolutely mad
scheme, but because a chance word might prove fatal to success. As
everyone knows, there are a great number of Dutch in the colony, who,
although they may not be openly hostile, are in favour of the Boers,
and will no doubt keep them acquainted with every movement of troops
here, and can have no difficulty in communicating with them by native
runners. Were one of our friends even to mention it casually that we
had gone north, suspicions might be aroused. Therefore I beg that no
one will breathe a word about the matter, but that you will decide for
yourselves without consulting anyone. I shall leave you now, and we
will meet here at the same time to-morrow. You will have had time to
think it over then. I wish to say before I go that I don't consider
that the success of my plan depends upon my having the whole twenty of
you with me. I repeat, that four would be quite sufficient.

"There are advantages as well as disadvantages in having only that
number. We should travel without exciting so much notice; we should
have less difficulty about food; we could conceal ourselves more easily
in case we were pursued. On the other hand, with a stronger party we
could repulse an attack if chased by the Boers. So you see I really do
not want more than three of you to join. I think four is the best
number, and should be glad if only two besides Brown wished to go with
me; but at the same time if more desire it, of course, as we are all
comrades, they would have a right to go."

So saying he turned away, leaving the others to talk the matter over.
They went through their usual drill that afternoon without any allusion
being made to the subject. When they met the next day Chris said
cheerfully, "Well, what have you decided? First, Brown, do you stick to
what you said yesterday, or do you think better of it?"

"Certainly I stick to it," Brown said. "When I say a thing I mean it."

"And how about the others?"

"I have made up my mind to go with you, Chris," Peters said, "and so
has Willesden. Field and Capper and Sankey would all go with you if you
wanted to take more than four, and all would go if you wanted the
troop; but if you would rather only have three of us, it is settled
that Brown, Willesden and I go."

"Very well," Chris said, "that just suits me. I am glad that you would
all go if you were wanted; but really I think that four would be the
best number, so we will consider that as settled. And now there is one
other thing I want to ask you about. You see, we have no right to take
any money out of the common fund, but we shall have some heavy
expenses. In the first place we shall want, I should say, a couple of
hundred pounds of dynamite; then we shall have to take some natives
with us, a couple of Zulus and two or three Swazis. There will be no
difficulty in getting them, as so many have been thrown out of
employment owing to the farmers losing their herds. We may find it
useful to make presents to chiefs as we go along, and, of course, we
shall have to take a certain amount of provisions for the party. Have
you any objection to our each taking half our share out of the bank?
Nothing has been drawn at present, and with a couple of hundred pounds
between us we shall have enough and to spare for however long we may be
away."

There was a chorus of agreement.

"We are all awfully sorry that you are going, Chris," Field said. "It
won't be the same without you at all. We have agreed to ask you to
nominate a leader during your absence."

"I would much rather not do that," Chris said. "Everyone has done
equally well, and it is a question that you should settle among
yourselves."

"We are all against that," Field said positively. "We have talked it
over and agree that we shall never be able to fix on one. Suppose our
votes were divided between four and five I don't think we should feel
more comfortable afterwards. We would rather put all the names in a hat
and draw one out, just leaving it to chance."

"I almost think that it would be better," Chris said, "to do as you
propose. Agree first that, as we have done up till now, all important
matters shall be discussed and decided by vote, then draw all the names
from a hat and let each be leader for a week in the order in which they
come out, with the proviso that if as time goes on you find that you
can have more confidence in one than another, you can by a majority of
three to one elect him as permanent leader."

"That would be a very good plan," Carmichael said, "but, you see, the
difficulty is that, supposing we were going to attack the Boers or the
Boers attack us, the plan the leader fixed on might not seem to us at
all the best. In the two fights we have had there was not that
difficulty, for everyone felt that the plan you adopted was the best,
and indeed much better than any of us would have been likely to think
of. I don't say that that would occur, but it might. It is not everyone
who could fix upon the best thing to be done all at once as you did."

Chris thought for a minute. "I would suggest," he said, "that in such a
case as you mention the leader should tell the next two on the list
what he proposed. If one of the two agreed with him it would be a
majority, and there would be nothing more to be said on the matter. If
both disagreed with him there must be a general vote. I should hope
such a thing would never occur, because the loss of five minutes would
sometimes be disastrous, though in some cases it might not make any
difference. Still, that is the best plan I can think of. There is no
occasion for you to decide that straight off. At any rate, if you
should find that any arrangement you make does not act perfectly well,
I should advise you to join Captain Brookfield's troop and act with
him."

The general opinion was strongly in favour of Chris's suggestion. It
was agreed that at any rate the first leader should be chosen by
chance. Carmichael's name came first out of the hat.

"I shall not have much responsibility," he said, "as we have settled to
remain here until the advance begins. Now, Chris, about the spare
horses."

"I should like to take one of them. We may have to gallop for it, and
it is of no use our being well mounted if we are hampered with a pony
that cannot keep up with us. We have only to lighten its load by
getting rid of most of its burden, and then we should be free to go our
own pace.

"I should like to take one of our Kaffirs. They have both turned out
very well, and have a good idea of cooking, and are accustomed to our
ways. I don't care which I have, but I should certainly like to have
one of them. He would stick to the spare horse, while the other natives
would be all right if they scattered and shifted for themselves."

"Would you not like two spare horses, Chris?"

"No, thank you, one would be enough. He would carry our stores, and I
should get two native ponies to take the dynamite along. We shall not
be travelling at any extraordinary rate of speed, and if they broke
down we could always replace them. Certainly there would be no danger
if we go through Zululand, and, I should think, not until we get north
of the Swazis' country; for though I know there are Boers settled among
them, a good many would of course have joined their army, and it would
be easy to avoid the others. The danger will only lie in the last part
of the journey."

"Then you have settled to go by land?"

"Yes, I have decided to go all the way on horseback. We might find
difficulties with the Portuguese at Lorenzo Marques, and if we manage
to blow up the bridge, should have no horses, and should have a very
bad time indeed in getting back. If I can get dynamite here I shall go
all the way by land, and it would be safer. No doubt the Boers have
spies at Durban, and we might have difficulty in hiring a craft to take
us to St. Lucia, and our starting with horses and five or six natives
would be safe to attract the attention of someone looking out for news
to send to the Boers. I think the best plan will be to keep a little to
the east of the road to Greytown, where no doubt there are some Dutch,
and strike the road that runs from there to Eshowe. A little west of
Krantzkop there must be either a drift or a bridge or a ferry where it
crosses the Tugela. I shall of course avoid Eshowe, and then keep along
inside the Zulu frontier as far as the Maputa, which is its northern
boundary, then we shall cross the Lebombo range into Swaziland. I don't
know how far it would be by the way we should have to go, but as the
crow flies it is about three hundred miles from here. I suppose, what
with the detours and passes and so on, it will be four hundred.
Ordinarily that distance could be done in twenty days, but we must
allow a good bit longer than that; fifteen miles a day is the utmost we
can calculate upon. However, in about a month after we start we ought
to be there or thereabouts. Coming back we should do it more quickly,
as we should have got rid of our weight and need not be bothered with
pack ponies."

"You talk as coolly about it," Field laughed, "as if you were going out
for a few days' picnic."

"It is the same sort of thing," Chris said, "except that it will be
longer, a bit rougher, and a good deal more interesting."

"When will you start?"

"As soon as possible; all I have to see about are the dynamite and
stores for the journey. We know pretty well by this time what we shall
want. We are sure to be able to buy mealies and a bullock when we want
one from the natives. Some tea and coffee, a dozen tins of preserved
milk, and half a hundredweight of biscuits, in case of finding
ourselves at a lonely camp with no native kraals near, and we shall be
all right. Of course we will take a gallon or two of paraffin, a
frying-pan, a small kettle, and so on, and a lantern that will burn
paraffin. We will fill up our pouches with a hundred rounds of rifle
cartridges and fifty for our revolvers, and then I think we shall be
ready. Now mind, the success of our enterprise depends entirely upon
your all keeping the secret absolutely. Neither Willesden, Brown, nor
Peters have friends here to bother themselves about their absence. We
are not likely to be missed, but if any questions are asked, you can
say casually that we are off on a scouting expedition. I shall write
four or five letters, with dates a week or ten days apart, and direct
them from here, and leave them for you to post one by one to my mother.
Be sure you send them in the right order. As she will suppose that we
are stopping here quietly, and out of all harm, she won't be uneasy
about me. Peters' and Willesden's friends have gone to England, so they
are all right, and Brown's are at the Cape. You had better write two or
three letters too, Brown, to be posted a fortnight or three weeks
apart."

When these matters were arranged, Chris saw Jack, and the Kaffir agreed
without hesitation to go with him. He had been so well treated since he
joined them that he had become quite attached to Chris, who generally
gave him his orders. He was only told they were going up on an
expedition to Zululand and Swaziland.

"I want you to find two good Zulu and two Swazis. Do you think that you
could do that?"

"There are plenty of them here, baas. I look about and get good men.
What shall I tell them that they will have to do?"

"To act as guides, to tell the chiefs who we are, and on the march to
look after two or three ponies. We shall only take one of the spare
horses, you will look after him."

"Will they have guns, baas? All men like to have guns."

"Yes, they may as well carry guns, and you too, Jack."

"Much better for men to have guns, baas. They would be thought nothing
of without them."

"All right Jack, there shall be no difficulty about that; the stores
are full of them."

This was the case. Men entering the volunteer corps, or who intended to
do any fighting, sold the rifles they had previously used and obtained
those of Government pattern and carrying the regulation cartridge, so
that for ten pounds Chris got hold of five really good weapons,
carefully selecting those that carried the same-sized cartridge.

"You can take whichever you like," he said to Jack, who had gone with
him to buy them; "and I shall tell the men I engage that if at the end
of the journey I am well satisfied with their behaviour, I shall give
them the guns in addition to their pay."

A few hours afterwards Jack brought up four natives for his inspection.
They were all strong and well-built men, and looked capable of hard
work. Having been thrown out of their employment by the events of the
past fortnight, they were glad of a fresh job, and were highly
satisfied when they were offered wages considerably higher than those
they had before received. All preparations were completed by the
following evening, and the next morning at daybreak, after bidding
their comrades a hearty farewell, the little party started.




CHAPTER IX
