"The only thing that I can do, Ben, will be to write if I get a chance
of sending a messenger, or for my mother to write to you, to the
office."

"That is it. You send a letter to Ben Birket, boatswain of the
Madeira, care of East India Company, Leadenhall Street; and I shall
get it, sooner or later. Of course, I shall not expect a long yarn,
but just two or three words to tell me how you are getting on, and
whether you have got any news of your father. And if you come back to
England, leave your address at the Company's office for me; for it
ain't an easy matter to find anyone out, in London, unless you have
got their bearings right."

Ten days later, Mrs. Holland and Dick embarked on the Madras. Dick had
been warned, by his mother, to say nothing to anyone on board as to
the object of their voyage.

"I shall mention," she said, "that I am going out to make some
inquiries respecting the truth of a report that has reached me, that
some of those on board the Hooghley, of which my husband was captain,
survived the wreck, and were taken up the country. That will be quite
sufficient. Say nothing about my having been born in India, or that my
father was a native rajah. Some of these officials--and still more,
their wives--are very prejudiced, and consider themselves to be quite
different beings to the natives of the country. I found it so on my
voyage to England.

"At any rate, we don't want our affairs talked about. It will be quite
sufficient for people to know that we are, as I said, going out to
make some inquiries about the truth of this rumour."

"All right, Mother. At any rate, the captain has told you that he will
look after you, and make things comfortable for you, so we need not
care about anything else."

"We certainly need not care, Dick; but it is much more agreeable to
get on nicely with everyone. I was very pleased when Captain Barstow
called yesterday and said that, having heard at the office that the
Mrs. Holland on the passenger list was the widow of his old shipmate,
John Holland, he had come round to see if there was anything that he
could do for her, and he promised to do all in his power to make us
comfortable. Of course, I told him that I did not regard myself as
Captain Holland's widow--that all we knew was that he had got safely
ashore, and had been taken up to Mysore; and, as I had a strong
conviction he was still alive, I was going out to endeavour to
ascertain, from native sources, whether he was still living.

"'Well, ma'am, I hope that you will succeed,' he said. 'All this is
new to me. I thought he was drowned, when the Hooghley went ashore.
Anyhow, Mrs. Holland, I honour you for making this journey, just on
the off chance of hearing something of your husband, and you may be
sure I will do all I can to make the voyage a pleasant one for you.'

"So you see, we shall start favourably, Dick; for the captain can do a
great deal towards adding to the comfort of a passenger. When it is
known, by the purser and steward, that a lady is under the special
care of the captain, it ensures her a larger share of civility, and
special attentions, than she might otherwise obtain."

As soon as they went on board, indeed, the captain came up to them.

"Good morning, Mrs. Holland," he said. "You have done quite right to
come on board early. It gives you a chance of being attended to,
before the stewards are being called for by twenty people at once."

He beckoned to a midshipman.

"Mr. Hart, please tell the purser I wish to speak to him.

"So this is your son, Mrs. Holland? A fine, straight-looking young
fellow. Are you going to put him in the Service? You have a strong
claim, you know, which I am sure the Board would acknowledge."

"Do you know, Captain, it is a matter that I have hardly thought
of--in fact, I have, for years, been so determined to go out and try
and obtain some news of my husband, as soon as Dick was old enough to
journey about as my protector, that I have not thought, as I ought to
have done, what profession he should follow. However, he is only
fifteen yet, and there will be time enough when he gets back."

"If he is to go into the service, the sooner the better, ma'am--one
can hardly begin too young. However, I don't say there are not plenty
of good sailors, afloat, who did not enter until a couple of years
older than he is--there is no strict rule as to age.

"Only fifteen, is he? I should have taken him for at least a year
older. However, if you like, Mrs. Holland, I will put him in the way
of learning a good deal, during the voyage. He might as well be doing
that as loafing about the deck all day."

"Much better, Captain. I am very much obliged to you, and I am sure
that he will be, too."

"I should like it immensely, Captain," Dick exclaimed.

At this moment, the purser came up.

"Mr. Stevenson," the captain said, "this is Mrs. Holland. She is the
wife of my old friend, John Holland--we were midshipmen together on
board the Ganges. He commanded the Hooghley, which was lost, you know,
five or six years ago, somewhere near Calicut. There were two or three
survivors, and he was one of them, and it seems that he was taken up
the country; so Mrs. Holland is going out to endeavour to ascertain
whether he may not be still alive, though perhaps detained by one of
those native princes.

"Please do everything you can to make her comfortable, and tell the
head steward that it is my particular wish she shall be well attended
to. Who is she berthed with?"

The purser took the passenger list from his pocket.

"She is with Mrs. Colonel Williamson, and the wife of Commissioner
Larkins."

The captain gave a grunt of dissatisfaction. The purser went on.

"There is a small cabin vacant, Captain. Two ladies who were to have
it--a mother and daughter--have, I hear this morning, been
unexpectedly detained, owing to the sudden illness of one of them.
Their heavy baggage is all in the hold, and must go on, and they will
follow in the next ship. Shall I put Mrs. Holland in there?"

"Certainly. This is most fortunate.

"I don't think that you would have been comfortable, with the other
two, Mrs. Holland. I don't know the colonel's wife, but Mrs. Larkins
has travelled with us before, and I had quite enough of her on that
voyage."

"Thank you very much, Captain. It will indeed be a comfort to have a
cabin to myself."

Dick found that he was berthed with two young cadets, whose names, he
learned from the cards fastened over the bunks, were Latham and
Fellows.

Half an hour after the arrival of the Hollands on board, the
passengers began to pour in rapidly, and the deck of the Madras was
soon crowded with them, their friends, and their luggage. Below, all
was bustle and confusion. Men shouted angrily to stewards; women,
laden with parcels, blocked the gangway, and appealed helplessly to
every one for information and aid; sailors carried down trunks and
portmanteaus; and Mrs. Holland, when she emerged from her cabin,
having stowed away her belongings and made things tidy, congratulated
herself on having been the first on board, and so had not only avoided
all this confusion, but obtained a separate cabin, which she might not
otherwise have been able to do, as the captain would have been too
busy to devote any special attention to her.

After having handed her over to the care of the purser, Captain
Barstow had spoken to the second officer, who happened to be passing.

"Mr. Rawlinson," he said, "this is the son of my old friend, Captain
Holland. He is going out with his mother. I wish you would keep your
eye upon him, and let him join the midshipmen in their studies with
you, in the morning. Possibly he may enter the Service, and it will be
a great advantage to him to have got up navigation, a bit, before he
does so. At any rate, it will occupy his mind and keep him out of
mischief. A lad of his age would be like a fish out of water, among
the passengers on the quarterdeck."

"Ay, ay, sir. I will do what I can for him."

And he hurried away.

Dick saw that, for the present, there was nothing to be done but to
look on, and it was not until the next morning, when the Madras was
making her way south, outside the Goodwins, that the second officer
spoke to him.

"Ah, there you are, lad! I have been too busy to think of you, and it
will be another day or two before we settle down to regular work.
However, I will introduce you to one or two of the midshipmen, and
they will make you free of the ship."

Dick was, indeed, already beginning to feel at home. The long table,
full from end to end, had presented such a contrast to his quiet
dinner with his mother, that, as he sat down beside her and looked
round, he thought he should never get to speak to anyone throughout
the voyage. However, he had scarcely settled himself when a gentleman
in a naval uniform, next to him, made the remark:

"Well, youngster, what do you think of all this? I suppose it is all
new to you?"

"It is, sir. It seems very strange, at first, but I suppose I shall
get accustomed to it."

"Oh, yes. You will find it pleasant enough, by and bye. I am the
ship's doctor. The purser has been telling me about you and your
mother.

"I made one voyage with your father. It was my first, and a kinder
captain I never sailed with. I heard, from the purser, that there
seems to be a chance of his being still alive, and that your mother is
going out to try and find out something about him. I hope, most
sincerely, that she may succeed in doing so; but he has been missing a
long time now. Still, that is no reason why she should not find him.
There have been instances where men have been kept for years by some
of these rascally natives--why, goodness only knows, except, I
suppose, because they fear and hate us; and think that, some time or
other, an English prisoner may be useful to them.

"Your mother looks far from strong," he went on, as he glanced across
Dick to Mrs. Holland, who was talking to a lady on the other side of
her. "Has she been ill?"

"No, sir. I have never known her ill, yet. She has been worrying
herself a great deal. She has waited so long, because she did not like
to go out until she could take me with her. She has no friends in
England with whom she could leave me. She looks a good deal better,
now, than she did a month ago. I think, directly she settled to come
out, and had something to do, she became better."

"That is quite natural," the doctor said. "There is nothing so trying
as inactivity. I have no doubt that the sea air will quite set her up
again. It performs almost miracles on the homeward-bound passengers.
They come on board looking pale, and listless, and washed out; at the
end of a month at sea, they are different creatures altogether."

The purser had taken pains to seat Mrs. Holland, at table, next to a
person who would be a pleasant companion for her; and the lady she was
now talking to was the wife of a chaplain in the army. She had, a year
before, returned from India in the Madras, and he knew her to be a
kind and pleasant woman.

Dick did not care for his cabin mates. They were young fellows of
about eighteen years of age. One was a nephew of a Director of the
Company, the other the son of a high Indian official. They paid but
little attention to him, generally ignoring him altogether, and
conversing about things and people in India, in the tone of men to
whom such matters were quite familiar.

In three or four days, Dick became on good terms with the six
midshipmen the Madras carried. Two of them were younger than himself,
two somewhat older, while the others were nearly out of their time,
and hoped that this would be their last trip in the midshipmen's
berth. The four younger lads studied, two hours every morning, under
the second officer's instruction; and Dick took his place at the table
regularly with them.

Mathematics had been the only subject in which he had at all
distinguished himself at school, and he found himself able to give
satisfaction to Mr. Rawlinson, in his studies of navigation. After
this work was over, they had an hour's practical instruction by the
boatswain's mate, in knotting and splicing ropes, and in other similar
matters.

In a fortnight, he had learned the names and uses of what had, at
first, seemed to him the innumerable ropes; and long before that, had
accompanied one of the midshipmen aloft. On the first occasion that he
did so, two of the topmen followed him, with the intention of carrying
out the usual custom of lashing him to the ratlines, until he paid his
footing. Seeing them coming up, the midshipman laughed, and told Dick
what was in store for him.

The boy had been as awkward as most beginners in climbing the shrouds,
the looseness and give of the ratlines puzzling him; but he had, for
years, practised climbing ropes in the gymnasium at Shadwell, and was
confident in his power to do anything in that way. The consequence was
that, as soon as the sailors gained the top, where he and the
midshipman were standing, Dick seized one of the halliards and, with a
merry laugh, came down hand over hand. A minute later, he stood on the
deck.

"Well done, youngster," said the boatswain's mate, who happened to be
standing by, as Dick's feet touched the deck. "This may be the first
time you have been on board a ship, but it is easy to see that it
isn't the first, by a long way, that you have been on a rope. Could
you go up again?"

"Yes, I should think so," Dick said. "I have never climbed so high as
that, because I have never had the chance; but it ought to be easy
enough."

The man laughed.

"There are not many sailors who can do it," he said. "Well, let us see
how high you will get."

As Dick was accustomed to go up a rope thirty feet high, hand over
hand, without using his legs, he was confident that, with their
assistance, he could get up to the main top, lofty as it was, and he
at once threw off his jacket and started. He found the task harder
than he had anticipated, but he did it without a pause. He was glad,
however, when the two sailors above grasped him by the arms, and
placed him beside them on the main top.

"Well, sir," one said, admiringly, "we thought you was a Johnny
Newcome, by the way you went up the ratlines, but you came up that
rope like a monkey.

"Well, sir, you are free up here, and if you weren't it would not make
much odds to you, for it would take half the ship's company to capture
you."

"I don't want to get off paying my footing," Dick said, pulling five
shillings from his pocket and handing them to the sailors; for his
mother had told him that it was the custom, on first going aloft, to
make a present to them, and had given him the money for the purpose.
"I can climb, but I don't know anything about ropes, and I shall be
very much obliged if you will teach me all you can."



Chapter 2: A Brush With Privateers.


Dick was surprised when, on descending to the deck, he found that what
seemed to him a by no means very difficult feat had attracted general
attention. Not only did half a dozen of the sailors pat him on the
back, with exclamations expressive of their surprise and admiration,
but the other midshipmen spoke quite as warmly, the eldest saying:

"I could have got up the rope, Holland, but I could not have gone up
straight, as you did, without stopping for a bit to take breath. You
don't look so very strong, either."

"I think that it is knack more than strength," Dick replied. "I have
done a lot of practice at climbing, for I have always wanted to get
strong, and I heard that there was no better exercise."

When, presently, Dick went aft to the quarterdeck, Captain Barstow
said to him:

"You have astonished us all, lad. I could hardly believe my eyes, when
I saw you going up that rope. I first caught sight of you when you had
climbed but twenty feet, and wondered how far you would get, at that
pace. I would have wagered a hundred guineas to one that you would not
have kept it up to the top.

"Well, lad, whatever profession you take to, it is certain that you
will be a good sailor spoilt."

They had now been three weeks out, but had made slow progress, for the
winds had been light, and mostly from the southwest.

"This is very dull work," the doctor said to Dick one day, at dinner.
"Here we are, three weeks out, and still hardly beyond the Channel.
There is one consolation. It is not the fault of the ship. She has
been doing well, under the circumstances, but the fates have been
against her, thus far. I have no doubt there are a score of ships
still lying in the Downs, that were there when we passed; and, tedious
as it has been beating down the Channel, with scarce wind enough most
of the time to keep our sails full, it would have been worse lying
there, all the time."

"Still, we have gained a good bit on them, sir."

"If the wind were to change round, say to the northeast, and they
brought it along with them, they would soon make up for lost time, for
it would not take them three days to run here. However, we shall begin
to do better, soon. I heard the captain say that he should change his
course tomorrow. We are somewhere off Cork, and when he makes a few
miles more westing, he will bear away south. If we had had a
favourable wind, we should have taken our departure from the Start,
but with it in this quarter we are obliged to make more westing,
before we lay her head on her course, or we should risk getting in too
close to the French coast; and their privateers are as thick as peas,
there."

"But we should not be afraid of a French privateer, doctor?"

"Well, not altogether afraid of one, but they very often go in
couples; and sometimes three of them will work together. I don't think
one privateer alone would venture to attack us, though she might
harass us a bit, and keep up a distant fire, in hopes that another
might hear it and bear down to her aid. But it is always as well to
keep free of them, if one can. You see, an unlucky shot might knock
one of our sticks out of us, which would mean delay and trouble, if no
worse.

"We had a sharp brush with two of them, on the last voyage, but we
beat them off. We were stronger then than we are now, for we had two
hundred troops on board, and should have astonished them if they had
come close enough to try boarding--in fact, we were slackening our
fire, to tempt them to do so, when they made out that a large craft
coming up astern was an English frigate, and sheered off.

"I don't know what the end of it was, but I rather fancy they were
taken. The frigate followed them, gaining fast; and, later on, we
could hear guns in the distance."

"You did not join in the chase then, doctor?"

"Oh, no. Our business is not fighting. If we are attacked, of course
we defend ourselves; but we don't go a foot out of our way, if we can
help it."

Three weeks at sea had done wonders for Mrs. Holland. Now that she was
fairly embarked upon her quest, the expression of anxiety gradually
died out. The sea air braced up her nerves, and, what was of still
greater benefit to her, she was able to sleep soundly and dreamlessly,
a thing she had not done for years. Dick was delighted at the change
in her.

"You look quite a different woman, Mother," he said. "I don't think
your friends at Shadwell would know you, if they were to see you now."

"I feel a different woman, Dick. I have not felt so well and so bright
since your father sailed on his last voyage. I am more convinced than
ever that we shall succeed. I have been trying very hard, for years,
to be hopeful, but now I feel so without trying. Of course, it is
partly this lovely weather and the sea air, and sleeping so well; and
partly because everyone is so kind and pleasant."

As soon as the Madras had been headed for the south, she began to make
better way. The wind freshened somewhat, but continued in the same
quarter. Grumbling ceased over the bad luck they were having, and
hopeful anticipations that, after all, they would make a quick passage
were freely indulged in.

On the fourth day after changing her course, she was off the coast of
Spain, which was but a hundred and fifty miles distant. At noon that
day the wind dropped suddenly, and, an hour later, it was a dead calm.

"We are going to have a change, Dick," the doctor said, as he stopped
by the lad, who was leaning against the bulwark watching a flock of
seabirds that were following a shoal of fish, dashing down among them
with loud cries, and too intent upon their work to notice the ship,
lying motionless a hundred yards away.

"What sort of a change, doctor?"

"Most likely a strong blow, though from what quarter it is too soon to
say. However, we have no reason to grumble. After nearly a month of
light winds, we must expect a turn of bad weather. I hope it will come
from the north. That will take us down to the latitude of Madeira, and
beyond that we may calculate upon another spell of fine weather, until
we cross the Line."

As the afternoon wore on, the weather became more dull. There were no
clouds in the sky, but the deep blue was dimmed by a sort of haze.
Presently, after a talk between the captain and the first officer, the
latter gave the order, "All hands take in sail."

The order had been expected, and the men at once swarmed up the
rigging. In a quarter of an hour all the upper sails were furled. The
light spars were then sent down to the deck.

"You may as well get the top-gallant sails off her, too, Mr. Green,"
the captain said to the first officer. "It is as well to be prepared
for the worst. It is sure to blow pretty hard, when the change comes."

The top-gallant sails were got in, and when the courses had been
brailed up and secured, the hands were called down. Presently the
captain, after going to his cabin, rejoined Mr. Green.

"The glass has gone up again," Dick heard him say.

"That looks as if it were coming from the north, sir."

"Yes, with some east in it. It could not come from a better quarter."

He turned and gazed steadily in that direction.

"Yes, there is dark water over there."

"So there is, sir. That is all right. I don't mind how hard it blows,
so that it does but come on gradually."

"I agree with you. These hurricane bursts, when one is becalmed, are
always dangerous, even when one is under bare poles."

Gradually the dark line on the horizon crept up towards the ship. As
it reached her the sails bellied out, and she began to move through
the water. The wind increased in strength rapidly, and in half an hour
she was running south at ten or eleven knots an hour. The thermometer
had fallen many degrees, and as the sun set, the passengers were glad
to go below for shelter.

Before going to bed, Dick went up on deck for a few minutes. The
topsails had been reefed down, but the Madras was rushing through the
water at a high rate of speed. The sea was getting up, and the waves
were crested with foam. Above, the stars were shining brilliantly.

"Well, lad, this is a change, is it not?" the captain said, as he came
along in a pea jacket.

"We seem to be going splendidly, Captain."

"Yes, we are walking along grandly, and making up for lost time."

"It is blowing hard, sir."

"It will blow a good deal harder before morning, lad, but I do not
think it will be anything very severe. Things won't be so comfortable
downstairs, for the next day or two, but that is likely to be the
worst of it."

The motion of the ship kept Dick awake for some time, but, wedging
himself tightly in his berth, he presently fell off to sleep, and did
not wake again until morning. His two cabin mates were suffering
terribly from seasickness, but he felt perfectly well, although it
took him a long time to dress, so great was the motion of the ship.

On making his way on deck, he found that overhead the sky was blue and
