"I should like you to get something else, Gregory. It troubles me, to
think that half your time is spent packing up goods in the warehouse,
and work of that sort; and even if we got less I would much rather,
even if we had to stint ourselves, that your work was more suitable to
your past; and such that you could associate again with gentlemen, on
even terms."

"That does not trouble me, dear, except that I wish you had some
society among ladies. However, both for your sake and the boy's, and I
own I should like it myself, I will certainly keep on the lookout for
some better position. I have often regretted, now, that I did not go in
for a commission in the army. I did want to, but my father would not
hear of it. By this time, with luck, I might have got my company; and
though the pay would not have been more than I get here, it would, with
quarters and so on, have been as much, and we should be in a very
different social position.

"However, it is of no use talking about that now; and indeed, it is
difficult to make plans at all. Things are in such an unsettled
condition, here, that there is no saying what will happen.

"You see, Arabi and the military party are practically masters here.
Tewfik has been obliged to make concession after concession to them, to
dismiss ministers at their orders, and to submit to a series of
humiliations. At any moment, Arabi could dethrone him, as he has the
whole army at his back, and certainly the larger portion of the
population. The revolution could be completed without trouble or
bloodshed; but you see, it is complicated by the fact that Tewfik has
the support of the English and French governments; and there can be
little doubt that the populace regard the movement as a national one,
and directed as much against foreign control and interference as
against Tewfik, against whom they have no ground of complaint,
whatever. On the part of the army and its generals, the trouble has
arisen solely on account of the favouritism shown to Circassian
officers.

"But once a revolution has commenced, it is certain to widen out. The
peasantry are, everywhere, fanatically hostile to foreigners. Attacks
have been made upon these in various country districts; and, should
Arabi be triumphant, the position of Christians will become very
precarious. Matters are evidently seen in that light in England; for I
heard today, at the office, that the British and French squadrons are
expected here, in a day or two.

"If there should be a row, our position here will be very unpleasant.
But I should hardly think that Arabi would venture to try his strength
against that of the fleets, and I fancy that trouble will, in the first
place, begin in Cairo; both as being the capital of the country, and
beyond the reach of armed interference by the Powers. Arabi's natural
course would be to consolidate his power throughout the whole of Egypt,
leaving Alexandria severely alone, until he had obtained absolute
authority elsewhere.

"Anyhow, it will be a satisfaction to have the fleet up; as, at the
first rumour of an outbreak, I can get you and baby on board one of the
ships lying in harbour. As a simple measure of precaution, I would
suggest that you should go out with me, this evening, and buy one of
the costumes worn by the native women. It is only a long blue robe,
enveloping you from head to foot; and one of those hideous white cotton
veils, falling from below the eyes. I will get a bottle of iodine, and
you will then only have to darken your forehead and eyelids, and you
could pass, unsuspected, through any crowd."

"But what are you going to do, Gregory?"

"I will get a native dress, too; but you must remember that though, if
possible, I will come to you, I may not be able to do so; and in case
you hear of any tumult going on, you must take Baby, and go down at
once to the port. You know enough of the language, now, to be able to
tell a boatman to take you off to one of the steamers in the port. As
soon as I get away I shall go round the port, and shall find you
without difficulty. Still, I do not anticipate any trouble arising
without our having sufficient warning to allow me to come and see you
settled on board ship; and I can then keep on in the office until it
closes, when I can join you again.

"Of course, all this is very remote, and I trust that the occasion will
never arise. Still, there is no doubt that the situation is critical,
and there is no harm in making our preparations for the worst.

"At any rate, dear, I beg that you will not go out alone, till matters
have settled down. We will do the shopping together, when I come back
from the office.

"There is one thing that I have reason to be grateful for. Even if the
worst comes to the worst, and all Christians have to leave the country,
the object for which I came out here has been attained. I have not
heard you cough, for months; we have laid by fifty pounds; and I have
written some forty stories, long and short, and if we go back I have a
fair hope of making my way, for I am sure that I write better than I
used to do; and as a good many of the stories are laid in Egypt, the
local colouring will give them a distinctive character, and they are
more likely to be accepted than those I wrote before. Editors of
magazines like a succession of tales of that kind.

"For the present, there is no doubt that the arrival of the fleet will
render our position here more comfortable than it is, at present. The
mere mob of the town would hesitate to attack Europeans, when they know
that three or four thousand sailors could land in half an hour. But on
the other hand, Arabi and his generals might see that Alexandria was,
after all, the most important position, and that it was here foreign
interference must be arrested.

"I should not be surprised if, on the arrival of the ships, Tewfik,
Arabi, and all the leaders of the movement come here at once. Tewfik
will come to get the support of the fleet. Arabi will come to oppose a
landing of troops. The war in the beginning of the century was decided
at Alexandria, and it may be so, again. If I were sure that you would
come to no harm, and I think the chances of that are very small, I own
that all this would be immensely interesting, and a break to the
monotony of one's life here.

"One thing is fairly certain. If there is anything like a regular row,
all commercial work will come to an end until matters are settled; in
which case, even if the offices are not altogether closed, and the
whole staff recalled to England, they would be glad enough to allow me
to leave, instead of keeping me to the two years' agreement that I
signed, before starting."

"I should hardly think that there would be a tumult here, Gregory. The
natives all seem very gentle and peaceable, and the army is composed of
the same sort of men."

"They have been kept down for centuries, Annie; but there is a deep,
fanatical feeling in every Mussulman's nature; and, at any rate, the
great proportion of the officers of the army are Mussulmans. As for the
Kopts, there would be no danger of trouble from them; but the cry of
'death to the Christians' would excite every Mahomedan in the land,
almost to madness.

"Unfortunately, too, there is a general belief, whether truly founded
or not, that although the French representative here is apparently
acting in concert with ours, he and all the French officials are
secretly encouraging Arabi, and will take no active steps, whatever. In
that case, it is doubtful whether England would act alone. The jealousy
between the two peoples here is intense. For years, the French have
been thwarting us at every turn; and they may very well think that,
however matters might finally go, our interference would make us so
unpopular, in Egypt, that their influence would become completely
paramount.

"Supremacy in Egypt has always been the dream of the French. Had it not
been for our command of the sea, they would have obtained possession of
the country in Napoleon's time. Their intrigues here have, for years,
been incessant. Their newspapers in Egypt have continually maligned us,
and they believe that the time has come when they will be the real, if
not the nominal, rulers of Egypt. The making of the Suez Canal was
quite as much a political as a commercial move, and it has certainly
added largely to their influence here; though, in this respect, a check
was given to them by the purchase of the Khedive's shares in the canal
by Lord Beaconsfield; a stroke which, however, greatly increased the
enmity of the French here, and heightened their efforts to excite the
animosity of the people against us.

"Well, I hope that whatever comes of all this, the question as to whose
influence is to be paramount in Egypt will be finally settled. Even
French domination would be better than the constant intrigues and
trouble, that keep the land in a state of agitation. However, I fancy
that it will be the other way, if an English fleet comes here and there
is trouble. I don't think we shall back down; and if we begin in
earnest, we are sure to win in the long run. France must see that, and
if she refuses to act, at the last moment, it can only be because Arabi
has it in his power to produce documents showing that he was, all
along, acting in accordance with her secret advice."

A week later, on the 20th of May, the squadrons of England and France
anchored off Alexandria. The British fleet consisted of eight ironclads
and five gunboats, carrying three thousand five hundred and thirty-nine
men and one hundred and two guns, commanded by Sir Frederick Seymour.
Two days before the approach of the fleet was known at Cairo, the
French and English consuls proposed that the Khedive should issue a
decree, declaring a general amnesty, and that the president of the
council, the minister of war, and the three military pashas should quit
the country for a year. This request was complied with.

The ministry resigned, in a body, on the day the fleet arrived; on the
ground that the Khedive acquiesced in foreign interference. A great
meeting was held of the chief personages of state, and the officers and
the representatives of the army at once told the Khedive that they
refused to obey his orders, and only recognized the authority of the
Porte.

At Alexandria all trade ceased at once, when it became known that the
troops were busy strengthening the forts, mounting cannon, and
preparing for a resistance. That this was done by the orders of Arabi,
who was now practically dictator, there could be no question. The
native population became more and more excited, being firmly of belief
that no vessels could resist the fire of the heavy guns; and that any
attempt on the part of the men-of-war to reduce the place would end in
their being sunk, as soon as fighting began.

The office and stores were still kept open, but Gregory's duties were
almost nominal; and he and Mr. Parrot, who was also married, were told
by the manager that they could spend the greater portion of their time
at their homes. Part of Gregory's duties consisted in going off to
vessels that came into the port with goods for the firm, and seeing to
their being brought on shore; and he had no difficulty in making
arrangements, with the captain of one of these ships, for his wife and
child to go on board at once, should there be any trouble in the town.

"If you hear any sounds of tumult, Annie, you must disguise yourself at
once, and go down to the wharf. I have arranged with our boatman,
Allen, whom you know well, as we have often gone out with him for a
sail in the evening, that if he hears of an outbreak, he shall bring
the boat to the steps at the end of this street, and take you off to
the Simoon. Of course, I shall come if I can, but our house is one of
those which have been marked off as being most suitable for defence.
The men from half a dozen other establishments are to gather there and,
as belonging to the house, I must aid in the defence. Of course, if I
get sufficient warning, I shall slip on my disguise, and hurry here,
and see you down to the boat; and then make my way back to our place.
But do not wait for me. If I come here and find that you have gone, I
shall know that you have taken the alarm in time, and shall return at
once to the office.

"Of course, if the outbreak commences near here, and you find that your
way down to the water is blocked, you will simply put on your disguise,
stain your face, and wait till I come to you, or till you see that the
way to the water is clear. Do not attempt to go out into a mob. There
are not likely to be any women among them. However, I do not anticipate
a serious riot. They may attack Europeans in the street, but with some
fourteen or fifteen men-of-war in the port, they are not likely to make
any organized assault. Arabi's agents will hardly precipitate matters
in that way. Hard as they may work, it will take a month to get the
defences into proper order, and any rising will be merely a spasmodic
outbreak of fanaticism. I don't think the danger is likely to be
pressing until, finding that all remonstrances are vain, the admiral
begins to bombard the port."

"I will do exactly as you tell me, Gregory. If I were alone, I could
not bring myself to leave without you, but I must think of the child."

"Quite so, dear. That is the first consideration. Certainly, if it
comes to a fight, I should be much more comfortable with the knowledge
that you and Baby were in safety."

The Egyptian soldiers were quartered, for the most part, outside the
town; and for some days there was danger that they would enter, and
attack the European inhabitants; but Arabi's orders were strict that,
until he gave the command, they were to remain quiet.

The British admiral sent messages to Tewfik, insisting that the work
upon the fortifications should cease, and the latter again issued
orders to that effect, but these were wholly disobeyed. He had, indeed,
no shadow of authority remaining; and the work continued, night and
day. It was, however, as much as possible concealed from observation;
but, search lights being suddenly turned upon the forts, at night,
showed them to be swarming with men.

Things went on with comparative quiet till the 10th of June, although
the attitude of the natives was so threatening that no Europeans left
their houses, except on urgent business. On that day, a sudden uproar
was heard. Pistols were fired, and the merchants closed their stores
and barricaded their doors.

Gregory was in the harbour at the time and, jumping into his boat,
rowed to the stairs and hurried home. He found that his wife had
already disguised herself, and was in readiness to leave.

The street was full of excited people. He slipped on his own disguise,
darkened his face, and then, seizing a moment when the crowd had rushed
up the street at the sound of firearms at the other end, hurried down
to the boat, and rowed off to the Simoon.

"I must return now, dear," he said. "I can get in at the back gate--I
have the key, as the stores are brought in through that way. I do not
think that you need feel any uneasiness. The row is evidently still
going on, but only a few guns are being fired now. Certainly the
rascals cannot be attacking the stores, or you would hear a steady
musketry fire. By the sound, the riot is principally in the foreign
quarter, where the Maltese, Greeks, and Italians congregate. No doubt
the police will soon put it down."

The police, however, made no attempt to do so, and permitted the work
of massacre to take place under their eyes. Nearly two hundred
Europeans were killed. The majority of these dwelt in the foreign
quarter, but several merchants and others were set upon, while making
their way to their offices, and some seamen from the fleet were also
among the victims. The British consul was dragged out of his carriage,
and severely injured. The consulate was attacked, and several Frenchmen
were killed in the streets.

The Khedive hurried from Cairo, on hearing the news. Arabi was now
sending some of his best regiments to Alexandria, while pretending to
be preparing for a raid upon the Suez Canal. He was receiving the
assistance of Dervish Pasha, the Sultan's representative; and had been
recognized by the Sultan, who conferred upon him the highest order of
Medjidie.

In the meantime a conference had been held by the Powers, and it was
decided that the Sultan should be entrusted with the work of putting
down the insurrection, he being nominally lord paramount of Egypt. But
conditions were laid down, as to his army leaving the country
afterwards.

The Sultan sent an evasive reply. The Khedive was too overwhelmed at
the situation to take any decisive course. France hesitated, and
England determined that, with or without allies, she would take the
matter in hand.



Chapter 2: The Rising In Alexandria.


The harbour was full of merchant ships, as there were, at present, no
means of getting their cargoes unloaded. The native boatmen had, for
the most part, struck work; and had they been willing to man their
boats, they must have remained idle as, in view of the situation, the
merchants felt that their goods were much safer on board ship than they
would be in their magazines. It was settled, therefore that, for the
present, Annie and the child should remain on board the Simoon, while
Gregory should take up his residence at the office.

The fleet in the harbour was now an imposing one. Not only were the
English and French squadrons there, but some Italian ships of war had
arrived, and a United States cruiser; and on the 7th of July, Sir
Beauchamp Seymour sent in a decisive message, that he should commence a
bombardment of the fort unless the strengthening of the fortifications
was, at once, abandoned. No heed was taken of the intimation and, three
days later, he sent an ultimatum demanding the cessation of work, and
the immediate surrender of the forts nearest to the entrance to the
harbour; stating that, if these terms were not complied with in
twenty-four hours, the bombardment would commence.

Already the greater part of the European inhabitants had left the town,
and taken up their quarters in the merchant ships that had been engaged
for the purpose. A few, however, of the bankers and merchants
determined to remain. These gathered in the bank, and in Mr. Ferguson's
house, to which the most valuable goods in other establishments were
removed. They had an ample supply of firearms, and believed that they
could hold out for a considerable time. They were convinced that the
Egyptian troops would not, for an hour, resist the fire that would be
opened upon them, but would speedily evacuate the town; and that,
therefore, there would only be the mob to be encountered, and this but
for a short time, as the sailors would land as soon as the Egyptian
troops fled.

The Egyptians, on the other hand, believed absolutely in their ability
to destroy the fleet.

Both parties were wrong. The Europeans greatly undervalued the fighting
powers of the Egyptians, animated as they were by confidence in the
strength of the defences, by their number, and by their fanaticism;
while the Egyptians similarly undervalued the tremendous power of our
ships.

That evening, and the next morning, the port presented an animated
appearance. Boats were putting off with those inhabitants who had
waited on, hoping that the Egyptians would at the last moment give in.
Many of the merchantmen had already cleared out. Others were getting up
sail. Smoke was rising from the funnels of all the men of war.

An express boat had brought, from France, orders that the French fleet
were to take no part in the proceedings, but were to proceed at once to
Port Said. This order excited the bitterest feeling of anger and
humiliation among the French officers and sailors, who had relied
confidently in taking their part in the bombardment; and silently their
ships, one by one, left the port. The Italian and American vessels
remained for a time; and as the British ships followed, in stately
order, their crews manned the rigging and vociferously cheered our
sailors, who replied as heartily.

All, save the British men of war, took up their stations well out at
sea, in a direction where they would be out of the fire of the Egyptian
batteries. It was not until nine o'clock in the evening that the two
last British ships, the Invincible and Monarch, steamed out of port. At
half-past four in the morning the ships got under weigh again, and
moved to the positions marked out for them.

Fort Mex, and the batteries on the sand hills were faced by the
Penelope, the Monarch, and the Invincible; the Alexandra, the Superb,
and the Sultan faced the harbour forts, Ada, Pharos, and Ras-el-Teen;
the Temeraire and Inflexible prepared to aid the Invincible in her
attack on Fort Mex, or to support the three battleships engaged off the
port, as might be required; and the five gunboats moved away towards
Fort Marabout, which lay some distance to the west of the town.

At seven o'clock, the Alexandra began the engagement by firing a single
gun. Then the whole fleet opened fire, the Egyptian artillerymen
replying with great steadiness and resolution. There was scarcely a
breath of wind, and the ships were, in a few instants, shrouded in
their own smoke; and were frequently obliged to cease firing until this
drifted slowly away, to enable them to aim their guns. The rattle of
the machine guns added to the din. Midshipmen were sent aloft, and
these signalled down to the deck the result of each shot, so that the
gunners were enabled to direct their fire, even when they could not see
ten yards beyond the muzzle of the guns.

In a short time, the forts and batteries showed how terrible was the
effect of the great shells. The embrasures were torn and widened, there
were great gaps in the masonry of the buildings, and the hail of
missiles from the machine guns swept every spot near the Egyptian guns;
and yet, Arabi's soldiers did not flinch but, in spite of the number
that fell, worked their guns as fast as ever.

Had they been accustomed to the huge Krupp guns in their batteries, the
combat would have been more equal; and although the end would have been
the same, the ships must have suffered terribly. Fortunately, the
Egyptian artillerymen had little experience in the working of these
heavy pieces, and their shot in almost every case flew high--sometimes
above the masts, sometimes between them, but in only a few instances
striking the hull. With their smaller guns they made good practice, but
though the shot from these pieces frequently struck, they dropped
harmlessly from the iron sides, and only those that entered through the
portholes effected any damage.

The Condor, under Lord Charles Beresford, was the first to engage Fort
Marabout; and, for a time, the little gunboat was the mark of all the
guns of the fort. But the other four gunboats speedily came to her
assistance, and effectually diverted the fire of the fort from the
ships that were engaging Fort Mex.

At eight o'clock the Monarch, having silenced the fort opposite to her,
and dismounted the guns, joined the Inflexible and Penelope in their
duel with Fort Mex; and by nine o'clock all the guns were silenced
except four, two of which were heavy rifled guns, well sheltered. In
spite of the heavy fire from the three great ships, the Egyptian
soldiers maintained their fire, the officers frequently exposing
themselves to the bullets of the machine guns by leaping upon the
parapet, to ascertain the effect of their own shot.

The harbour forts were, by this time, crumbling under the shot of four
warships opposed to them. The Pharos suffered most heavily, and its
guns were absolutely silenced; while the fire from the other two forts
slackened, considerably. At half-past ten, it was seen that the
Ras-el-Teen Palace, which lay behind the fort, was on fire; and, half
an hour later, the fire from that fort and Fort Ada almost died out.

The British Admiral now gave the signal to cease firing, and as the
smoke cleared away, the effects of the five hours' bombardment were
visible. The forts and batteries were mere heaps of ruins. The guns
could be made out, lying dismounted, or standing with their muzzles
pointing upwards.

The ships had not come out scatheless, but their injuries were, for the
most part, immaterial; although rigging had been cut away, bulwarks
smashed, and sides dinted. One gun of the Penelope had been disabled,
and two of the Alexandra. Only five men had been killed, altogether,
and twenty-seven wounded.

No sign was made of surrender, and an occasional fire was kept up on
the forts, to prevent the Egyptians from repairing damages. At one
o'clock, twelve volunteers from the Invincible started to destroy the
guns of Fort Mex. Their fire had ceased, and no men were to be seen in
the fort; but they might have been lying in wait to attack any landing
party.

On nearing the shore, the surf was found to be too heavy for the boat
to pass through it, and Major Tulloch and six men swam ashore and
entered the fort. It was found to be deserted, and all the guns but two
ten-inch pieces dismounted. The charges of gun cotton, that the
swimmers brought ashore with them, were placed in the cannon; and their
muzzles blown off. After performing this very gallant service, the
little party swam back to their boat.

The British admiral's position was now a difficult one. There were no
signs of surrender; for aught he could tell, fifteen thousand Egyptian
troops might be lying round the ruined forts, or in the town hard by,
in readiness to oppose a landing. That these troops were not to be
despised was evident, by the gallantry with which they had fought their
guns. This force would be aided by the mass of the population; and it
would be hazardous, indeed, to risk the loss of fifteen hundred men,
and the reversal of the success already gained.

At the same time, it was painful to think that the Europeans on shore
might be massacred, and the whole city destroyed, by the exasperated
troops and fanatical population. It was known that the number of
Englishmen there was not large, two or three hundred at most; but there
was a much larger number of the lower class of Europeans--port
labourers, fishermen, petty shopkeepers, and others--who had preferred
taking their chance to the certainty of losing all their little
possessions, if they left them.

Anxiously the glasses of those on board the ships were directed towards
the shore, in hopes of seeing the white flag hoisted, or a boat come
out with it flying; but there were no signs of the intentions of the
defenders, and the fleet prepared to resume the action in the morning.
Fort Marabout, and several of the batteries on the shore, were still
unsilenced; and two heavy guns, mounted on the Moncrieff system (by
which the gun rose to a level of the parapet, fired, and instantly sank
again), had continued to fire all day, in spite of the efforts of the
fleet to silence them.

Next morning, however, there was a long heavy swell, and the ironclads
were rolling too heavily for anything like accuracy of aim; but as
parties of men could be seen, at work in the Moncrieff battery, fire
was opened upon them, and they speedily evacuated it.

All night, the Palace of Ras-el-Teen burned fiercely. Another great
fire was raging in the heart of the town, and anxiety for those on
shore, for the time, overpowered the feeling of exultation at the
victory that had been gained.

At half-past ten a white flag was hoisted at the Pharos battery, and
all on board watched, with deep anxiety, what was to follow. Lieutenant
Lambton at once steamed into the fort, in the Bittern, to enquire if
the government were ready to surrender. It was three o'clock before he
steamed out again, with the news that his mission was fruitless; and
that the white flag had only been hoisted, by the officer in command of
the fort, to enable himself and his men to get away unmolested.
