red from running in the fresh air, and quite out of breath
besides.

"What is the matter, James?" we all cried out. "What a red face
you've got!"

"Have I?" said he; "my nose is so cold! I ran here as fast as I
could, there is such a beautiful breeze for a Kite. Come, both
of you, and let us fly the Kite high up in the blue sky; come as
many of you as can, and this day you shall see what a Kite can
do!"

Up we all jumped, the Kite was brought down, and away we all
started into the meadows, running nearly all the way, and James
White never ceasing to talk of the wonderful things he intended
the Kite should this day perform.

We arrived in a large, grassy meadow, sloping down to a low
hedge. Beyond the hedge was a very large field, and beyond that
field another large field, which had some high trees at the
farthest end. In the tops of these trees was a rookery; we knew
these trees very well, because we often used to walk that way,
partly because it was a nice walk, and partly because an old
woman, whom we were all very fond of, kept an apple and
gingerbread-nut stall under the largest tree. However, as I said
before, these trees were a long way off--two whole fields
off--more, two whole fields and all the meadow. At the top of the
meadow, near where we stood, there was also a high tree, and at
the foot of this we laid down the Kite.

"O, James," said my brother, "do you think we shall be able to
make the Kite fly as high as the tree we are under?"

"As high!" said James White, "six times as high, at the very
least."

He now carefully unfolded the tail from the body of the Kite,
being very particular to undo all the tangles near the tassel,
which made quite a bunch; but he brought it out perfectly. One
end of the ball of twine was now attached to the body of the
Kite. He then raised it up with the right hand, holding out the
tail in three great festoons with the left, and in this way
walked to and fro very uprightly and with a stately air, and
turning his head in various quarters, to observe the direction of
the wind. Suddenly he dropped the tail upon the ground, and
lifting up the Kite with his right hand in the air, as high as he
possibly could, off he ran down the meadow slope as fast as his
legs could carry him, shouting all the way, "Up, up, up! rise,
rise, rise! fly, Kite, in the air!" He finished by throwing the
Kite up, continuing to run with the string in his hand, allowing
it to slip through his fingers as the Kite rose. The breeze
caught the Kite, and up it went in fine style. It continued to
rise rapidly, and we ran to and fro underneath, shouting all the
time, "O, well done, James White, and well done, Kite!"

By the excellent management of James, the Kite rose and rose,
till we all said, "O, how high! how wonderful!" And then James
White said he was satisfied.

Now you are all to recollect that this Kite was very large. In
the story I told you in summer, where the making of this Kite was
described, you remember that it was said to be as tall as James
White himself, and of course very much broader. The consequence
was, that this Kite was extremely strong. So we all sat down on
the grass to hold the string, which James White said was
necessary, as the Kite struggled and pulled so hard. It was now
up quite as high as the string would allow it to go. But the wind
seemed to be increasing, and James White said he began to be
rather afraid that he must draw the Kite downwards, for fear it
should have a quarrel with the wind up in the clouds, and then
some accident might happen. We accordingly began to draw down the
Kite slowly, winding the string upon the stick as it gradually
descended. But notwithstanding all this care, an accident did
happen after all.

Before the Kite was half-way down, a strong wind suddenly caught
it sideways, and the Kite made a long sweep downwards, like a
swallow, rising up again at some distance, swinging its tail
about in a most alarming manner. "Bless my heart!" said James
White.

Up we all jumped from the grass. "Help me to hold her!" cried James
White; "how she struggles!" Again came the wind, again the Kite
made a sweep down and rose up again, as if indignant--then shook
her tail and wings as if threatening to do some mischief--then made
a quick motion to the right and a dance to the left--then made a
very graceful courtesy deep down, as though she was very politely
saluting the wind, but suddenly rose up with a sharp jerk, as
though she had spitefully altered her mind--and the next moment
made a dart first to the right and then to the left, and continued
to do this till James White said he was sure something must happen.

We all held the string as fast as we could, and tried to pull
down the Kite; but it was impossible, for instead of bringing
her down, we were all three dragged along down the meadow slope,
crying out, "Somebody come and help us! somebody come and help
us!" But nobody else was near. In this manner the Kite was
pulling us along, the string cutting our hands, and running
through our fingers like fire, till at last I was obliged to let
go, and being unable to get out of the way, was knocked down, and
being also unable to roll myself out of the way, my brother fell
over me. James White was thus left alone with the Kite, and was
dragged struggling and hallooing down the meadow slope.

He was determined, however, not to let go; nothing could make him
loose the string; he was determined not to be conquered; but
before he had got to the bottom of the slope, the string of the
Kite broke about half-way down, and up sprang the Kite again
towards the sky, taking its course over the meadow towards the
