Lightfoot chuckled. "Did you say I couldn't frighten any one?" he
demanded.

"I--I didn't know you could look so terribly fierce," stammered Peter.
"Those antlers look really dangerous when you point them that way.
Why--why--what is that hanging to them? It looks like bits of old fur.
Have you been tearing somebody's coat, Lightfoot?" Peter's eyes were
wide with wonder and suspicion.




CHAPTER II

LIGHTFOOT'S NEW ANTLERS


Peter Rabbit was puzzled. He stared at Lightfoot the Deer a wee bit
suspiciously. "Have you been tearing somebody's coat?" he asked again.
He didn't like to think it of Lightfoot, whom he always had believed
quite as gentle, harmless, and timid as himself. But what else could he
think?

Lightfoot slowly shook his head. "No," said he, "I haven't torn
anybody's coat."

"Then what are those rags hanging on your antlers?" demanded Peter.

Lightfoot chuckled. "They are what is left of the coverings of my new
antlers," he explained.

"What's that? What do you mean by new antlers?" Peter was sitting up
very straight, with his eyes fixed on Lightfoot's antlers as though he
never had seen them before.

"Just what I said," retorted Lightfoot. "What do you think of them? I
think they are the finest antlers I've ever had. When I get the rest of
those rags off, they will be as handsome a set as ever was grown in the
Green Forest."

Lightfoot rubbed his antlers against the trunk of a tree till some of
the rags hanging to them dropped off.

Peter blinked very hard. He was trying to understand and he couldn't.
Finally he said so.

"What kind of a story are you trying to fill me up with?" he demanded
indignantly. "Do you mean to tell me that those are not the antlers that
you have had as long as I've known you? How can anything hard like those
antlers grow? And if those are new ones, where are the old ones? Show me
the old ones, and perhaps I'll believe that these are new ones. The idea
of trying to make me believe that antlers grow just like plants! I've
seen Bossy the Cow all summer and I know she has got the same horns she
had last summer. New antlers indeed!"

"You are quite right, Peter, quite right about Bossy the Cow. She never
has new horns, but that isn't any reason why I shouldn't have new
antlers, is it?" replied Lightfoot patiently. "Her horns are quite
different from my antlers. I have a new pair every year. You haven't
seen me all summer, have you, Peter?"

"No, I don't remember that I have," replied Peter, trying very hard to
remember when he had last seen Lightfoot.

"I _know_ you haven't," retorted Lightfoot. "I know it because I have
been hiding in a place you never visit."

"What have you been hiding for?" demanded Peter.

"For my new antlers to grow," replied Lightfoot. "When my new antlers
are growing, I want to be away by myself. I don't like to be seen
without them or with half grown ones. Besides, I am very uncomfortable
while the new antlers are growing and I want to be alone."

Lightfoot spoke as if he really meant every word he said, but still
Peter couldn't, he just _couldn't_ believe that those wonderful great
antlers had grown out of Lightfoot's head in a single summer. "Where did
you leave your old ones and when did they come off?" he asked, and there
was doubt in the very tone of his voice.

"They dropped off last spring, but I don't remember just where," replied
Lightfoot. "I was too glad to be rid of them to notice where they
dropped. You see they were loose and uncomfortable, and I hadn't any
more use for them because I knew that my new ones would be bigger and
better. I've got one more point on each than I had last year." Lightfoot
began once more to rub his antlers against the tree to get off the queer
rags hanging to them and to polish the points. Peter watched in silence
for a few minutes. Then, all his suspicions returning, he said:

"But you haven't told me anything about those rags hanging to your
antlers."

"And you haven't believed what I have already told you," retorted
Lightfoot. "I don't like telling things to people who won't believe
me."




CHAPTER III

LIGHTFOOT TELLS HOW HIS ANTLERS GREW


It is hard to believe what seems impossible. And yet what seems
impossible to you may be a very commonplace matter to some one else. So
it does not do to say that a thing cannot be possible just because you
cannot understand how it can be. Peter Rabbit wanted to believe what
Lightfoot the Deer had just told him, but somehow he couldn't. If he had
seen those antlers growing, it would have been another matter. But he
hadn't seen Lightfoot since the very last of winter, and then Lightfoot
had worn just such handsome antlers as he now had. So Peter really
couldn't be blamed for not being able to believe that those old ones had
been lost and in their place new ones had grown in just the few months
of spring and summer.

But Peter didn't blame Lightfoot in the least, because he had told Peter
that he didn't like to tell things to people who wouldn't believe what
he told them when Peter had asked him about the rags hanging to his
antlers. "I'm trying to believe it," he said, quite humbly.

"It's all true," broke in another voice.

Peter jumped and turned to find his big cousin, Jumper the Hare. Unseen
and unheard, he had stolen up and had overheard what Peter and Lightfoot
had said.

"How do you know it is true?" snapped Peter a little crossly, for Jumper
had startled him.

"Because I saw Lightfoot's old antlers after they had fallen off, and I
often saw Lightfoot while his new ones were growing," retorted Jumper.

"All right! I'll believe anything that Lightfoot tells me if you say it
is true," declared Peter, who greatly admires his cousin, Jumper. "Now
tell me about those rags, Lightfoot. Please do."

Lightfoot couldn't resist that "please." "Those rags are what is left
of a kind of covering which protected the antlers while they were
growing, as I told you before," said he. "Very soon after my old ones
dropped off the new ones began to grow. They were not hard, not at all
like they are now. They were soft and very tender, and the blood ran
through them just as it does through our bodies. They were covered with
a sort of skin with hairs on it like thin fur. The ends were not sharply
pointed as they now are, but were big and rounded, like knobs. They were
not like antlers at all, and they made my head hot and were very
uncomfortable. That is why I hid away. They grew very fast, so fast that
every day I could see by looking at my reflection in water that they
were a little longer. It seemed to me sometimes as if all my strength
went into those new antlers. And I had to be very careful not to hit
them against anything. In the first place it would have hurt, and in the
second place it might have spoiled the shape of them.

"When they had grown to the length you now see, they began to shrink and
grow hard. The knobs on the ends shrank until they became pointed. As
soon as they stopped growing the blood stopped flowing up in them, and
as they became hard they were no longer tender. The skin which had
covered them grew dry and split, and I rubbed it off on trees and
bushes. The little rags you see are what is left, but I will soon be rid
of those. Then I shall be ready to fight if need be and will fear no one
save man, and will fear him only when he has a terrible gun with him."

Lightfoot tossed his head proudly and rattled his wonderful antlers
against the nearest tree. "Isn't he handsome," whispered Peter to Jumper
the Hare; "and did you ever hear of anything so wonderful as the growing
of those new antlers in such a short time? It is hard to believe, but I
suppose it must be true."

"It is," replied Jumper, "and I tell you, Peter, I would hate to have
Lightfoot try those antlers on me, even though I were big as a man.
You've always thought of Lightfoot as timid and afraid, but you should
see him when he is angry. Few people care to face him then."




CHAPTER IV

THE SPIRIT OF FEAR


    When the days grow cold and the nights are clear,
    There stalks abroad the spirit of fear.

                        _Lightfoot the Deer._


It is sad but true. Autumn is often called the sad time of the year, and
it _is_ the sad time. But it shouldn't be. Old Mother Nature never
intended that it should be. She meant it to be the _glad_ time. It is
the time when all the little people of the Green Forest and the Green
Meadows have got over the cares and worries of bringing up families and
teaching their children how to look out for themselves. It is the
season when food is plentiful, and every one is fat and is, or ought to
be, care free. It is the season when Old Mother Nature intended all her
little people to be happy, to have nothing to worry them for the little
time before the coming of cold weather and the hard times which cold
weather always brings.

But instead of this, a grim, dark figure goes stalking over the Green
Meadows and through the Green Forest, and it is called the Spirit of
Fear. It peers into every hiding-place and wherever it finds one of the
little people it sends little cold chills over him, little chills which
jolly, round, bright Mr. Sun cannot chase away, though he shine his
brightest. All night as well as all day the Spirit of Fear searches out
the little people of the Green Meadows and the Green Forest. It will not
let them sleep. It will not let them eat in peace. It drives them to
seek new hiding-places and then drives them out of those. It keeps them
ever ready to fly or run at the slightest sound.

Peter Rabbit was thinking of this as he sat at the edge of the dear Old
Briar-patch, looking over to the Green Forest. The Green Forest was no
longer just green; it was of many colors, for Old Mother Nature had set
Jack Frost to painting the leaves of the maple-trees and the
beech-trees, and the birch-trees and the poplar-trees and the
chestnut-trees, and he had done his work well. Very, very lovely were
the reds and yellows and browns against the dark green of the pines and
the spruces and the hemlocks. The Purple Hills were more softly purple
than at any other season of the year. It was all very, very beautiful.

But Peter had no thought for the beauty of it all, for the Spirit of
Fear had visited even the dear Old Briar-patch, and Peter was afraid. It
wasn't fear of Reddy Fox, or Redtail the Hawk, or Hooty the Owl, or Old
Man Coyote. They were forever trying to catch him, but they did not
strike terror to his heart because he felt quite smart enough to keep
out of their clutches. To be sure, they gave him sudden frights
sometimes, when they happened to surprise him, but these frights lasted
only until he reached the nearest bramble-tangle or hollow log where
they could not get at him. But the fear that chilled his heart now never
left him even for a moment.

And Peter knew that this same fear was clutching at the hearts of Bob
White, hiding in the brown stubble; of Mrs. Grouse, squatting in the
thickest bramble-tangle in the Green Forest; of Uncle Billy Possum and
Bobby Coon in their hollow trees; of Jerry Muskrat in the Smiling Pool;
of Happy Jack Squirrel, hiding in the tree tops; of Lightfoot the Deer,
lying in the closest thicket he could find. It was even clutching at the
hearts of Granny and Reddy Fox and of great, big Buster Bear. It seemed
to Peter that no one was so big or so small that this terrible Spirit of
Fear had not searched him out.

Far in the distance sounded a sudden bang. Peter jumped and shivered. He
knew that every one else who had heard that bang had jumped and shivered
just as he had. It was the season of hunters with terrible guns. It was
man who had sent this terrible Spirit of Fear to chill the hearts of the
little meadow and forest people at this very time when Old Mother Nature
had made all things so beautiful and had intended that they should be
happiest and most free from care and worry. It was man who had made the
autumn a sad time instead of a glad time, the very saddest time of all
the year, when Old Mother Nature had done her best to make it the most
beautiful.

"I don't understand these men creatures," said Peter to little Mrs.
Peter, as they stared fearfully out from the dear Old Briar-patch. "They
seem to find pleasure, actually find pleasure, in trying to kill us. I
don't understand them at all. They haven't any hearts. That must be the
reason; they haven't any hearts."

[Illustration: "I don't understand these men creatures,"
               said Peter to little Mrs. Peter.]




CHAPTER V

SAMMY JAY BRINGS LIGHTFOOT WORD


Sammy Jay is one of those who believe in the wisdom of the old saying,
"Early to bed and early to rise." Sammy needs no alarm clock to get up
early in the morning. He is awake as soon as it is light enough to see
and wastes no time wishing he could sleep a little longer. His stomach
wouldn't let him if he wanted to. Sammy always wakes up hungry. In this
he is no different from all his feathered neighbors.

So the minute Sammy gets his eyes open he makes his toilet, for Sammy
is very neat, and starts out to hunt for his breakfast. Long ago Sammy
discovered that there is no safer time of day to visit the dooryards of
those two-legged creatures called men than very early in the morning. On
this particular morning he had planned to fly over to Farmer Brown's
dooryard, but at the last minute he changed his mind. Instead, he flew
over to the dooryard of another farm. It was so very early in the
morning that Sammy didn't expect to find anybody stirring, so you can
guess how surprised he was when, just as he came in sight of that
dooryard, he saw the door of the house open and a man step out.

