think this is a capital idea."

"Yours will be capital," I reply, pausing also, and leaning back
against the dresser; "for you have kept your old diaries, and----"

"My dear Margery, what if I have kept my old diaries? I've lived in this
place my whole life. Now, you have had some adventures! I quite look
forward to reading your life, Margery. You have no idea what pleasure it
gives me to think of it. I was thinking just now, if ever we are
separated in life, how I shall enjoy looking over it again and again.
You must give me yours, you know, and I will give you mine. Yes; I am
very glad we thought of it." And Eleanor begins to rock once more, and I
resume my march.

But this quite settles the matter in my mind. To please Eleanor I would
try to do a great deal; much more than this. I will write my
autobiography.

Though it seems rather (to use an expressive Quaker term) a "need-not"
to provide for our being separated in life, when we have so firmly
resolved to be old maids, and to live together all our lives in the
little whitewashed cottage behind the church.




CHAPTER I.

MY PRETTY MOTHER--AYAH--COMPANY.


My name is Margaret Vandaleur. My father was a captain in her Majesty's
202nd Regiment of Foot. The regiment was in India for six years, just
after I was born; indeed, I was not many months old when I made my first
voyage, which I fancy Eleanor is thinking of when she says that I have
had some adventures.

Military ladies are said to be unlucky as to the times when they have to
change stations; the move often chancing at an inconvenient moment. My
mother had to make her first voyage with the cares of a young baby on
her hands; nominally, at any rate, but I think the chief care of me fell
upon our Ayah. My mother hired her in England. The Ayah wished to return
to her country, and was glad to do so as my nurse. I think that at first
she only intended to be with us for the voyage, but she stayed on, and
became fond of me, and so remained my nurse as long as I was in India.

I have heard that my mother was the prettiest woman on board the vessel
she went out in, and the prettiest woman at the station when she got
there. Some people have told me that she was the prettiest woman they
ever saw. She was just eighteen years old when my father married her,
and she was not six-and-twenty when she died.

[I got so far in writing my life, seated at the round, three-legged
pinewood table, with Eleanor scribbling away opposite to me. But I could
get no further just then. I put my hands before my eyes as if to shade
them from the light; but Eleanor is very quick, and she found out that I
was crying. She jumped up and threw herself at my feet.

"Margery, dear Margery! what _is_ the matter?"

I could only sob, "My mother, O my mother!" and add, almost bitterly,
"It is very well for you to write about your childhood, who have had a
mother--and such a mother!--all your life; but for me----"

Eleanor knelt straight up, with her teeth set, and her hands clasped
before her.

"I do think," she said slowly, "that I am, without exception, the most
selfish, inconsiderate, dense, unfeeling brute that ever lived." She
looked so quaintly, vehemently in earnest as she knelt in the firelight,
that I laughed in spite of my tears.

"My dear old thing," I said, "it is I who am selfish, not you. But I am
going on now, and I promise to disturb you no more." And in this I was
resolute, though Eleanor would have burned our papers then and there,
if I had not prevented her.

Indeed she knew as well as I did that it was not merely because I was an
orphan that I wept, as I thought of my early childhood. We could not
speak of it, but she knew enough to guess at what was passing through my
mind. I was only six years old when my mother died, but I can remember
her. I can remember her brief appearances in the room where I played, in
much dirt and contentment, at my Ayah's feet--rustling in silks and
satins, glittering with costly ornaments, beautiful and scented, like a
fairy dream. I would forego all these visions for one--only one--memory
of her praying by my bedside, or teaching me at her knee. But she was so
young, and so pretty! And yet, O Mother, Mother! better than all the
triumphs of your loveliness in its too short prime would it have been to
have left a memory of your beautiful face with some devout or earnest
look upon it--"as it had been the face of an angel"--to your only child.

As I sit thinking thus, I find Eleanor's dark eyes gazing at me from her
place, to which she has gone back; and she says softly, "Margery, dear
Margery, do let us give it up." But I would not give it up now, for
anything whatever.]

The first six years of my life were spent chiefly with my Ayah. I loved
her very dearly. I kissed and fondled her dark cheeks as gladly as if
they had been fair and ruddy, and oftener than I touched my mother's,
which were like the petals of a china rose. My most intimate friends
were of the Ayah's complexion. We had more than one "bearer" during
those years, to whom I was greatly attached. I spoke more Hindostanee
than English. The other day I saw a group of Lascar sailors at the
Southampton Station; they had just come off a ship, and were talking
rapidly and softly together. I have forgotten the language of my early
childhood, but its tones had a familiar sound; those dark bright faces
were like the faces of old friends, and my heart beat for a minute, as
one is moved by some remembrance of an old home.

When my mother went out for her early ride at daybreak, before the heat
of the day came on, Ayah would hold me up at the window to see her
start. Sometimes my father would have me brought out, and take me before
him on his horse for a few minutes. But my nurse never allowed this if a
ready excuse could prevent it. Her care of me was maternal in its
tenderness, but she did not keep me tidy enough for me to be presentable
off-hand to company.

There was always "company" wherever my mother went--gentleman company
especially. The gentlemen, in different places, and at different times,
were not the same, but they had a common likeness. I used to count them
when they rode home with my father and mother, or assembled for any of
the many reasons for which "company" hung about our homes. I remember
that it was an amusement to me to discover, "there are six to-day," or
"five to-day," and to tell my Ayah. I was even more minute. I divided
them into three classes: "the little ones, the middle ones, and the old
ones." The "little ones" were the very young men--smooth-cheeked
ensigns, etc.; the "old ones" were usually colonels, generals, or
elderly civilians. From the youngest to the oldest, officers and
civilians, they were all very good-natured to me, and I approved of them
accordingly.

When callers came, I was often sent into the drawing-room. Great was my
dear Ayah's pride when I was dressed in pink silk, my hair being
arranged in ringlets round my head, to be shown off to the company. I
was proud of myself, and was wont rather to strut than walk into the
room upon my best kid shoes. They were pink, to match my frock, and I
was not a little vain of them. There were usually some ladies in the
room, dressed in rustling finery like my mother, but not like her in
the face--never so pretty. There were always plenty of gentlemen of the
three degrees, and they used to be very polite to me, and to call me
"little Rosebud," and give me sweetmeats. I liked sweetmeats, and I
liked flattery, but I had an affection stronger than my fancy for
either. I used to look sharply over the assembled men for the face I
wanted, and when I had found it I flew to the arms that were stretched
out for me. They were my father's.

I remember my mother, but I remember my father better still. I did not
see very much of him, but when we were together I think we were both
thoroughly happy. I can recall pretty clearly one very happy holiday we
spent together. My father got some leave, and took us for a short time
to the hills. My clearest memory of his face is as it smiled on me, from
under a broad hat, as we made nosegays for Mamma's vases in our
beautiful garden, where the fuchsias and geraniums were "hardy," and the
sweet-scented verbenas and heliotropes were great bushes, loading the
air with perfume.

I have one remembrance of it almost as distinct--the last.




CHAPTER II.

THE CHOLERA SEASON--MY MOTHER GOES AWAY--MY SIXTH BIRTHDAY.


We were living in a bungalow not far from the barracks at X. when the
cholera came. It was when I was within a few weeks of six years old.
First we heard that it was among the natives, and the matter did not
excite much notice. Then it broke out among the men, and the officers
talked a good deal about it. The next news was of the death of the
Colonel commanding our regiment.

One of my early recollections is of our hearing of this. An ensign of
our regiment (one of the "little ones") called upon my mother in the
evening of the day of the Colonel's death. He was very white, very
nervous, very restless. He brought us the news. The Colonel had been ill
barely thirty-six hours. He had suffered agonies with wonderful
firmness. He was to be buried the next day.

"He never was afraid of cholera," said Mr. Gordon; "he didn't believe it
was infectious; he thought keeping up the men's spirits was everything.
But, you see, it isn't nervousness, after all, that does it."

"It goes a long way, Gordon," said my father. "You're young; you've
never been through one of these seasons. Don't get fanciful, my good
fellow. Come here, and play with Margery."

Mr. Gordon laughed.

"I am a fool, certainly," he said. "Ever since I heard of it, I have
fancied a strange, faint kind of smell everywhere, which is absurd
enough."

"I will make you a camphor-bag," said my mother, "that ought to
overpower any faint smell, and it is a charm against infection."

I believe Mr. Gordon was beginning to thank her, but his words ended in
a sort of inarticulate groan. He stood on his feet, though not upright,
and at last said feebly, "I beg your pardon, I don't feel quite well."

"You're upset, old fellow; it's quite natural," said my father. "Come
and get some brandy, and you shall come back for the camphor."

My father led him away, but he did not come back. My father took him to
his quarters, and sent the surgeon to him; and my mother took me on her
knee, and sat silent for a long time, with the unfinished camphor-bag
beside her.

The next day I went to the end of our compound with Ayah, to see the
Colonel's funeral pass. The procession seemed endless. The horse he had
ridden two days before by my mother's side tossed its head fretfully,
as the "Dead March" wailed, and the slow tramp of feet poured endlessly
on. My mother was looking out from the verandah. As Ayah and I joined
her, a native servant, who was bringing something in, said abruptly,
"Gordon Sahib--he dead too."

When my father returned from the funeral he found my mother in a panic.
Some friends had lately invited her to stay with them, and she was now
resolved to go. "I am sure I shall die if I stay here!" she cried, and
it ended in her going away at once. There was some difficulty as to
accommodating me and Ayah, and it was decided that, if necessary, we
should follow my mother later.

For my own part, I begged to remain. I had no fear of cholera, and I was
anxious to dine with my father on my birthday, as he had promised that I
should.

It was on the day before my birthday that one of the surgeons was
buried. The man next in rank to the poor Colonel was on leave, and the
regiment was commanded by our friend Major Buller, whose little
daughters were invited to spend the following evening with me. The
Major, my father, and two other officers had been pall-bearers at the
funeral. My father came to me on his return. He was slightly chilled,
and said he should remain indoors; so I had him all to myself, and we
were very happy, though he complained of fatigue, and fell asleep once
on the floor with his head in my lap. He was still lying on the floor
when Ayah took me to bed. I believe he had been unwell all the day,
though I did not know it, and had been taking some of the many specifics
against cholera, of which everybody had one or more at that time.

Half-an-hour later he sent for a surgeon, who happened to be dining with
Major Buller. The Doctor and the Major came together to our bungalow,
and with them two other officers who happened to be of the party, and
who were friends of my father. One of them was a particular friend of my
own. He was an ensign, a reckless, kind-hearted lad "in his teens," a
Mr. Abercrombie, who had good reason to count my father as a friend.

Mr. Abercrombie mingled in some way with my dreams that night, or rather
early morning, and when I fairly woke, it was to the end of a discussion
betwixt my Ayah, who was crying, and Mr. Abercrombie, in evening dress,
whose face bore traces of what looked to me like crying also. I was
hastily clothed, and he took me in his arms.

"Papa wants you, Margery dear," he said; and he carried me quickly down
the passages in the dim light of the early summer dawn.

Two or three officers, amongst whom I recognized Major Buller, fell
back, as we came in, from the bed to which Mr. Abercrombie carried me.
My father turned his face eagerly towards me, but I shrank away. That
one night of suffering and collapse had changed him so that I did not
know him again. At last I was persuaded to go to him, and by his voice
and manner recognized him as his feeble fingers played tenderly with
mine. And when he said, "Kiss me, Margery dear," I crept up and kissed
his forehead, and started to feel it so cold and damp.

"Be a good girl, Margery dear," he whispered; "be very good to Mamma."
There was a short silence. Then he said, "Is the sun rising yet,
Buller?"

"Just rising, old fellow. Does the light bother you?"

"No, thank you; I can't see it. The fact is, I can't see you now. I
suppose it's nearly over. GOD'S will be done. You've got the papers,
Buller? Arkwright will be kind about it, I'm sure. You'll break it to my
wife as well as you can?"

After another pause he said, "It's time you fellows went to bed and got
some sleep."

But no one moved, and there was another silence, which my father broke
by saying, "Buller, where are you? It's quite dark now. Would you say
the Lord's Prayer for me, old fellow? Margery dear, put your hands with
poor Papa's."

"I've not said my prayers yet," said I; "and you know I ought to say my
prayers, for I've been dressed a long time."

The Major knelt simply by the bed. The other men, standing, bent their
heads, and Mr. Abercrombie, kneeling, buried his face on the end of the
bed and sobbed aloud.

Major Buller said the Lord's Prayer. I, believing it to be my duty, said
it also, and my father said it with us to the clause "For Thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory," when his voice failed, and I,
thinking he had forgotten (for I sometimes forgot in the middle of my
most familiar prayers and hymns), helped him--"Papa dear! _for ever and
ever_."

Still he was silent, and as I bent over him I heard one long-drawn
breath, and then his hands, which were enfolded with mine, fell apart.
The sunshine was now beginning to catch objects in the room, and a ray
lighted up my father's face, and showed a change that even I could see.
An officer standing at the head of the bed saw it also, and said
abruptly, "He's dead, Buller." And the Major, starting up, took me in
his arms, and carried me away.

I cried and struggled. I had a dim sense of what had happened, mixed
with an idea that these men were separating me from my father. I could
not be pacified till Mr. Abercrombie held out his arms for me. He was
more like a woman, and he was crying as well as I. I went to him and
buried my sobs on his shoulder. Mr. George (as I had long called him,
from finding his surname hard to utter) carried me into the passage and
walked up and down, comforting me.

"Is Papa really dead?" I at length found voice to ask.

"Yes, Margery dear. I'm so sorry."

"Will he go to Abraham's bosom, Mr. George?"

"Will he go _where_, Margery?"

"To Abraham's bosom, you know, where the poor beggar went that's lying
on the steps in my Sunday picture-book, playing with those dear old
dogs."

Mr. Abercrombie's knowledge of Holy Scripture was, I fear, limited.
Possibly my remarks recalled some childish remembrance similar to my
own. He said, "Oh yes, to be sure. Yes, dear."

"Do you think the dogs went with the poor beggar?" I asked. "Do you
think the angels took them too?"

"I don't know," said Mr. George. "I hope they did."

There was a pause, and then I asked, in awe-struck tones, "Will the
angels fetch Papa, do you think?"

Mr. George had evidently decided to follow my theological lead, and he
replied, "Yes, Margery dear."

"Shall you see them?" I asked.

"No, no, Margery. I'm not good enough to see angels."

"_I_ think you're very good," said I. "And please be good, Mr. George,
and then the angels will fetch you, and perhaps me, and Mamma, and
perhaps Ayah, and perhaps Bustle, and perhaps Clive." Bustle was Mr.
Abercrombie's dog, and Clive was a mastiff, the dog of the regiment, and
a personal friend of mine.

"Very well, Margery dear. And now you must be good too, and you must let
me take you to bed, for it's morning now, and I have had no sleep at
all."

"Is it to-morrow now?" I asked; "because, if it's to-morrow, it's my
birthday." And I began to cry afresh, because Papa had promised that I
should dine with him, and had promised me a present also.

"I'll give you a birthday present," said my long-suffering friend; and
he began to unfasten a locket that hung at his watch-chain. It was of
Indian gold, with forget-me-nots in turquoise stones upon it. He opened
it and pulled out a photograph, which he tore to bits, and then trampled
underfoot.

"There, Margery, there's a locket for you; you can throw it into the
fire, or do anything you like with it. And I wish you many happy returns
of the day." And he finally fastened it round my neck with his
Trichinopoli watch-chain, leaving his watch loose in his
waistcoat-pocket. The locket and chain pleased me, and I suffered him to
carry me to bed. Then, as he was parting from me, I thought of my father
again, and asked:

"Do you think the angels have fetched Papa _now_, Mr. George?"

"I think they have, Margery."

Whereupon I cried myself to sleep. And this was my sixth birthday.



