With swift, stern reapers; once again
  The evening splendor floods the plain,
    The crickets' chime
    Makes pauseless rhyme,
    And toward the sun,
    The colors run
    Before the wind's feet
    In the wheat!

    _Hamlin Garland._




The Broken Pinion


I walked through the woodland meadows,
  Where sweet the thrushes sing;
And I found on a bed of mosses
  A bird with a broken wing.
I healed its wound, and each morning
  It sang its old sweet strain,
But the bird with a broken pinion
  Never soared as high again.

I found a young life broken
  By sin's seductive art;
And touched with a Christlike pity,
  I took him to my heart.
He lived with a noble purpose
  And struggled not in vain;
But the life that sin had stricken
  Never soared as high again.

But the bird with a broken pinion
  Kept another from the snare;
And the life that sin had stricken
  Raised another from despair.
Each loss has its compensation,
  There is healing for every pain;
But the bird with a broken pinion
  Never soars as high again.

    _Hezekiah Butterworth._




Jamie Douglas


It was in the days when Claverhouse
  Was scouring moor and glen,
To change, with fire and bloody sword,
  The faith of Scottish men.

They had made a covenant with the Lord
  Firm in their faith to bide,
Nor break to Him their plighted word,
  Whatever might betide.

The sun was well-nigh setting,
  When o'er the heather wild,
And up the narrow mountain-path,
  Alone there walked a child.

He was a bonny, blithesome lad,
  Sturdy and strong of limb--
A father's pride, a mother's love,
  Were fast bound up in him.

His bright blue eyes glanced fearless round,
  His step was firm and light;
What was it underneath his plaid
  His little hands grasped tight?

It was bannocks which, that very morn,
  His mother made with care.
From out her scanty store of meal;
  And now, with many a prayer,

Had sent by Jamie her ane boy,
  A trusty lad and brave,
To good old Pastor Tammons Roy,
  Now hid in yonder cave,

And for whom the bloody Claverhouse
  Had hunted long in vain,
And swore they would not leave that glen
  Till old Tam Roy was slain.

So Jamie Douglas went his way
  With heart that knew no fear;
He turned the great curve in the rock,
  Nor dreamed that death was near.

And there were bloody Claverhouse men,
  Who laughed aloud with glee,
When trembling now within their power,
  The frightened child they see.

He turns to flee, but all in vain,
  They drag him back apace
To where their cruel leader stands,
  And set them face to face.

The cakes concealed beneath his plaid
  Soon tell the story plain--
"It is old Tam Roy the cakes are for,"
  Exclaimed the angry man.

"Now guide me to his hiding place
  And I will let you go."
But Jamie shook his yellow curls,
  And stoutly answered--"No!"

"I'll drop you down the mountain-side,
  And there upon the stones
The old gaunt wolf and carrion crow
  Shall battle for your bones."

And in his brawny, strong right hand
  He lifted up the child,
And held him where the clefted rocks
  Formed a chasm deep and wild

So deep it was, the trees below
  Like stunted bushes seemed.
Poor Jamie looked in frightened maze,
  It seemed some horrid dream.

He looked up at the blue sky above
  Then at the men near by;
Had _they_ no little boys at home,
  That they could let him die?

But no one spoke and no one stirred,
  Or lifted hand to save
From such a fearful, frightful death,
  The little lad so brave.

"It is woeful deep," he shuddering cried,
  "But oh! I canna tell,
So drop me down then, if you will--
  It is nae so deep as hell!"

A childish scream, a faint, dull sound,
  Oh! Jamie Douglas true,
Long, long within that lonely cave
  Shall Tam Roy wait for you.

Long for your welcome coming
  Waits the mother on the moor,
And watches and calls, "Come, Jamie, lad,"
  Through the half-open door.

No more adown the rocky path
  You come with fearless tread,
Or, on moor or mountain, take
  The good man's daily bread.

But up in heaven the shining ones
  A wondrous story tell,
Of a child snatched up from a rocky gulf
  That is nae so deep as hell.

And there before the great white throne,
  Forever blessed and glad,
His mother dear and old Tam Roy
  Shall meet their bonny lad.




The Ensign Bearer


Never mind me, Uncle Jared, never mind my bleeding breast!
They are charging in the valley and you're needed with the rest.
All the day long from its dawning till you saw your kinsman fall,
You have answered fresh and fearless to our brave commander's call;
And I would not rob my country of your gallant aid to-night,
Though your presence and your pity stay my spirit in its flight.

All along that quivering column see the death steed trampling down
Men whose deeds this day are worthy of a kingdom and a crown.
Prithee hasten, Uncle Jared, what's the bullet in my breast
To that murderous storm of fire raining tortures on the rest?
See! the bayonets flash and falter--look! the foe begins to win;
See! oh, see our falling comrades! God! the ranks are closing in.

Hark! there's quickening in the distance and a thundering in the air,
Like the roaring of a lion just emerging from his lair.
There's a cloud of something yonder fast unrolling like a scroll--
Quick! oh, quick! if it be succor that can save the cause a soul!
Look! a thousand thirsty bayonets are flashing down the vale,
And a thousand thirsty riders dashing onward like a gale!

Raise me higher, Uncle Jared, place the ensign in my hand!
I am strong enough to float it while you cheer that flying band;
Louder! louder! shout for Freedom with prolonged and vigorous breath--
Shout for Liberty and Union, and the victory over death!--
See! they catch the stirring numbers and they swell them to the breeze--
Cap and plume and starry banner waving proudly through the trees.

Mark our fainting comrades rally, see that drooping column rise!
I can almost see the fire newly kindled in their eyes.
Fresh for conflict, nerved to conquer, see them charging on the foe--
Face to face with deadly meaning--shot and shell and trusty blow.
See the thinned ranks wildly breaking--see them scatter to the sun--
I can die, Uncle Jared, for the glorious day is won!

But there's something, something pressing with a numbness on my heart,
And my lips with mortal dumbness fail the burden to impart.
Oh I tell you, Uncle Jared, there is something back of all
That a soldier cannot part with when he heeds his country's call!
Ask the mother what, in dying, sends her yearning spirit back
Over life's rough, broken marches, where she's pointed out the track.

Ask the dear ones gathered nightly round the shining household hearth,
What to them is dearer, better, than the brightest things of earth,
Ask that dearer one whose loving, like a ceaseless vestal flame,
Sets my very soul a-glowing at the mention of her name;
Ask her why the loved in dying feels her spirit linked with his
In a union death but strengthens, she will tell you what it is.

And there's something, Uncle Jared, you may tell her if you will--
That the precious flag she gave me, I have kept unsullied still.
And--this touch of pride forgive me--where death sought our gallant host--
Where our stricken lines were weakest, there it ever waved the most.
Bear it back and tell her fondly, brighter, purer, steadier far,
'Mid the crimson tide of battle, shone my life's fast setting star.

But forbear, dear Uncle Jared, when there's something more to tell,
When her lips with rapid blanching bid you answer how I fell;
Teach your tongue the trick of slighting, though 'tis faithful to the rest,
Lest it say her brother's bullet is the bullet in my breast;
But if it must be that she learn it despite your tenderest care,
'Twill soothe her bleeding heart to know my bayonet pricked the air.

Life is ebbing, Uncle Jared, my enlistment endeth here;
Death, the Conqueror, has drafted--I can no more volunteer,--
But I hear the roll call yonder and I go with willing feet--
Through the shadows of the valley where victorious armies meet,
Raise the ensign, Uncle Jared, let its dear folds o'er me fall--
Strength and Union for my country--and God's banner over all.




The Real Riches


Every coin of earthly treasure
  We have lavished upon earth
For our simple worldly pleasure
  May be reckoned something worth;
For the spending was not losing,
  Tho' the purchase were but small;
It has perished with the using.
  We have had it,--that is all!

All the gold we leave behind us,
  When we turn to dust again,
Tho' our avarice may blind us,
  We have gathered quite in vain;
Since we neither can direct it,
  By the winds of fortune tost,
Nor in other worlds expect it;
  What we hoarded we have lost.

But each merciful oblation--
  Seed of pity wisely sown,
What we gave in self-negation,
  We may safely call our own;
For the treasure freely given
  Is the treasure that we hoard,
Since the angels keep in heaven,
  What is lent unto the Lord.

    _John G. Saxe._




The Polish Boy


Whence come those shrieks so wild and shrill,
  That cut, like blades of steel, the air,
Causing the creeping blood to chill
  With the sharp cadence of despair?

Again they come, as if a heart
  Were cleft in twain by one quick blow,
And every string had voice apart
  To utter its peculiar woe.

Whence came they? From yon temple, where
An altar, raised for private prayer,
Now forms the warrior's marble bed
Who Warsaw's gallant armies led.

The dim funereal tapers throw
A holy luster o'er his brow,
And burnish with their rays of light
The mass of curls that gather bright
Above the haughty brow and eye
Of a young boy that's kneeling by.

What hand is that, whose icy press
  Clings to the dead with death's own grasp,
But meets no answering caress?
  No thrilling fingers seek its clasp.
It is the hand of her whose cry
  Rang wildly, late, upon the air,
When the dead warrior met her eye
  Outstretched upon the altar there.

With pallid lip and stony brow
She murmurs forth her anguish now.
But hark! the tramp of heavy feet
Is heard along the bloody street;
Nearer and nearer yet they come,
With clanking arms and noiseless drum.
Now whispered curses, low and deep,
Around the holy temple creep;
The gate is burst; a ruffian band
Rush in, and savagely demand,
With brutal voice and oath profane,
The startled boy for exile's chain.

The mother sprang with gesture wild,
And to her bosom clasped her child;
Then, with pale cheek and flashing eye,
Shouted with fearful energy,
"Back, ruffians, back! nor dare to tread
Too near the body of my dead;
Nor touch the living boy; I stand
Between him and your lawless band.
Take _me_, and bind these arms--these hands,--
With Russia's heaviest iron bands,
And drag me to Siberia's wild
To perish, if 'twill save my child!"

"Peace, woman, peace!" the leader cried,
Tearing the pale boy from her side,
And in his ruffian grasp he bore
His victim to the temple door.
"One moment!" shrieked the mother; "one!
Will land or gold redeem my son?
Take heritage, take name, take all,
But leave him free from Russian thrall!
Take these!" and her white arms and hands
She stripped of rings and diamond bands,
And tore from braids of long black hair
The gems that gleamed like starlight there;
Her cross of blazing rubies, last,
Down at the Russian's feet she cast.
He stooped to seize the glittering store;--
Up springing from the marble floor,
The mother, with a cry of joy,
Snatched to her leaping heart the boy.
But no! the Russian's iron grasp
Again undid the mother's clasp.
Forward she fell, with one long cry
Of more than mortal agony.

But the brave child is roused at length,
  And, breaking from the Russian's hold,
He stands, a giant in the strength
  Of his young spirit, fierce and bold.
Proudly he towers; his flashing eye,
  So blue, and yet so bright,
Seems kindled from the eternal sky,
  So brilliant is its light.

His curling lips and crimson cheeks
Foretell the thought before he speaks;
With a full voice of proud command
He turned upon the wondering band.

"Ye hold me not! no! no, nor can;
This hour has made the boy a man.
I knelt before my slaughtered sire,
Nor felt one throb of vengeful ire.
I wept upon his marble brow,
Yes, wept! I was a child; but now
My noble mother, on her knee,
Hath done the work of years for me!"

He drew aside his broidered vest,
And there, like slumbering serpent's crest,
The jeweled haft of poniard bright
Glittered a moment on the sight.
"Ha! start ye back? Fool! coward! knave!
Think ye my noble father's glaive
Would drink the life-blood of a slave?
The pearls that on the handle flame
Would blush to rubies in their shame;
The blade would quiver in thy breast
Ashamed of such ignoble rest.
No! thus I rend the tyrant's chain,
And fling him back a boy's disdain!"

A moment, and the funeral light
Flashed on the jeweled weapon bright;
Another, and his young heart's blood
Leaped to the floor, a crimson flood.
Quick to his mother's side he sprang,
And on the air his clear voice rang:
"Up, mother, up! I'm free! I'm free!
The choice was death or slavery.
Up, mother, up! Look on thy son!
His freedom is forever won;
And now he waits one holy kiss
To bear his father home in bliss;
One last embrace, one blessing,--one!
To prove thou knowest, approvest thy son.
What! silent yet? Canst thou not feel
My warm blood o'er thy heart congeal?
Speak, mother, speak! lift up thy head!
What! silent still? Then art thou dead:
--Great God, I thank thee! Mother, I
Rejoice with thee,--and thus--to die."
One long, deep breath, and his pale head
Lay on his mother's bosom,--dead.

    _Ann S. Stephens._




The Height of the Ridiculous


I wrote some lines once on a time
  In wondrous merry mood,
And thought, as usual, men would say
  They were exceeding good.

They were so queer, so very queer,
  I laughed as I would die;
Albeit, in the general way,
  A sober man am I.

I called my servant, and he came;
  How kind it was of him
To mind a slender man like me,
  He of the mighty limb!

"These to the printer," I exclaimed,
  And, in my humorous way,
I added (as a trifling jest),
  "There'll be the devil to pay."

He took the paper, and I watched,
  And saw him peep within;
At the first line he read, his face
  Was all upon the grin.

He read the next; the grin grew broad,
  And shot from ear to ear;
He read the third; a chuckling noise
  I now began to hear.

The fourth; he broke into a roar;
  The fifth; his waistband split;
The sixth; he burst five buttons off,
  And tumbled in a fit.

Ten days and nights, with sleepless eye,
  I watched that wretched man,
And since, I never dare to write
  As funny as I can.

    _Oliver Wendell Holmes._




Excelsior


The shades of night were falling fast,
As through an Alpine village passed
A youth, who bore, 'mid snow and ice,
A banner with the strange device,
      Excelsior!

His brow was sad his eye beneath
Flashed like a falchion from its sheath,
And like a silver clarion rung
The accents of that unknown tongue,
      Excelsior!

In happy homes he saw the light
Of household fires gleam warm and bright;
Above, the spectral glaciers shone,
And from his lips escaped a groan,
      Excelsior!

"Try not the Pass!" the old man said;
"Dark lowers the tempest overhead,
The roaring torrent is deep and wide!"
And loud the clarion voice replied,
      Excelsior!

"O stay," the maiden said, "and rest
Thy weary head upon this breast!"
A tear stood in his bright blue eye,
But still he answered, with a sigh,
      Excelsior!

"Beware the pine-tree's withered branch!
Beware the awful avalanche!"
This was the peasant's last Good-night,
A voice replied, far up the height,
      Excelsior!

At break of day, as heavenward
The pious monks of Saint Bernard
Uttered the oft-repeated prayer,
A voice cried through the startled air,
      Excelsior!

A traveller, by the faithful hound,
Half-buried in the snow was found,
Still grasping in his hand of ice
That banner with the strange device,
      Excelsior!

There in the twilight cold and gray,
Lifeless, but beautiful, he lay,
And from the sky, serene and far,
A voice fell, like a falling star,
      Excelsior!

    _Henry W. Longfellow._



