more thoughtless than wicked, but that did not alter the fact that he
had committed a fault. At first he had felt sorrow and remorse, but the
more he thought about the unjust treatment he had received--unjust
merely because he considered it so--the more he resented his arrest,
blaming Ozma for making foolish laws and then punishing folks who broke
them. Only a six-leaved clover! A tiny green plant growing neglected
and trampled under foot. What harm could there be in picking it? Ojo
began to think Ozma must be a very bad and oppressive Ruler for such a
lovely fairyland as Oz. The Shaggy Man said the people loved her; but
how could they?

The little Munchkin boy was so busy thinking these things--which many
guilty prisoners have thought before him--that he scarcely noticed all
the splendor of the city streets through which they passed. Whenever
they met any of the happy, smiling people, the boy turned his head away
in shame, although none knew who was beneath the robe.

By and by they reached a house built just beside the great city wall,
but in a quiet, retired place. It was a pretty house, neatly painted
and with many windows. Before it was a garden filled with blooming
flowers. The Soldier with the Green Whiskers led Ojo up the gravel path
to the front door, on which he knocked.

A woman opened the door and, seeing Ojo in his white robe, exclaimed:

"Goodness me! A prisoner at last. But what a small one, Soldier."

"The size doesn't matter, Tollydiggle, my dear. The fact remains that
he is a prisoner," said the soldier. "And, this being the prison, and
you the jailer, it is my duty to place the prisoner in your charge."

"True. Come in, then, and I'll give you a receipt for him."

They entered the house and passed through a hall to a large circular
room, where the woman pulled the robe off from Ojo and looked at him
with kindly interest. The boy, on his part, was gazing around him in
amazement, for never had he dreamed of such a magnificent apartment as
this in which he stood. The roof of the dome was of colored glass,
worked into beautiful designs. The walls were paneled with plates of
gold decorated with gems of great size and many colors, and upon the
tiled floor were soft rugs delightful to walk upon. The furniture was
framed in gold and upholstered in satin brocade and it consisted of
easy chairs, divans and stools in great variety. Also there were
several tables with mirror tops and cabinets filled with rare and
curious things. In one place a case filled with books stood against the
wall, and elsewhere Ojo saw a cupboard containing all sorts of games.

"May I stay here a little while before I go to prison?" asked the boy,
pleadingly.

"Why, this is your prison," replied Tollydiggle, "and in me behold your
jailor. Take off those handcuffs, Soldier, for it is impossible for
anyone to escape from this house."

"I know that very well," replied the soldier and at once unlocked the
handcuffs and released the prisoner.

The woman touched a button on the wall and lighted a big chandelier
that hung suspended from the ceiling, for it was growing dark outside.
Then she seated herself at a desk and asked:

"What name?"

"Ojo the Unlucky," answered the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.

"Unlucky? Ah, that accounts for it," said she. "What crime?"

"Breaking a Law of Oz."

"All right. There's your receipt, Soldier; and now I'm responsible for
the prisoner. I'm glad of it, for this is the first time I've ever had
anything to do, in my official capacity," remarked the jailer, in a
pleased tone.

"It's the same with me, Tollydiggle," laughed the soldier. "But my task
is finished and I must go and report to Ozma that I've done my duty
like a faithful Police Force, a loyal Army and an honest Body-Guard--as
I hope I am."

Saying this, he nodded farewell to Tollydiggle and Ojo and went away.

"Now, then," said the woman briskly, "I must get you some supper, for
you are doubtless hungry. What would you prefer: planked whitefish,
omelet with jelly or mutton-chops with gravy?"

Ojo thought about it. Then he said: "I'll take the chops, if you
please."

"Very well; amuse yourself while I'm gone; I won't be long," and then
she went out by a door and left the prisoner alone.

Ojo was much astonished, for not only was this unlike any prison he had
ever heard of, but he was being treated more as a guest than a
criminal. There were many windows and they had no locks. There were
three doors to the room and none were bolted. He cautiously opened one
of the doors and found it led into a hallway. But he had no intention
of trying to escape. If his jailor was willing to trust him in this way
he would not betray her trust, and moreover a hot supper was being
prepared for him and his prison was very pleasant and comfortable. So
he took a book from the case and sat down in a big chair to look at the
pictures.

This amused him until the woman came in with a large tray and spread a
cloth on one of the tables. Then she arranged his supper, which proved
the most varied and delicious meal Ojo had ever eaten in his life.

Tollydiggle sat near him while he ate, sewing on some fancy work she
held in her lap. When he had finished she cleared the table and then
read to him a story from one of the books.

"Is this really a prison?" he asked, when she had finished reading.

"Indeed it is," she replied. "It is the only prison in the Land of Oz."

"And am I a prisoner?"

"Bless the child! Of course."

"Then why is the prison so fine, and why are you so kind to me?" he
earnestly asked.

Tollydiggle seemed surprised by the question, but she presently
answered:

"We consider a prisoner unfortunate. He is unfortunate in two
ways--because he has done something wrong and because he is deprived of
his liberty. Therefore we should treat him kindly, because of his
misfortune, for otherwise he would become hard and bitter and would not
be sorry he had done wrong. Ozma thinks that one who has committed a
fault did so because he was not strong and brave; therefore she puts
him in prison to make him strong and brave. When that is accomplished
he is no longer a prisoner, but a good and loyal citizen and everyone
is glad that he is now strong enough to resist doing wrong. You see, it
is kindness that makes one strong and brave; and so we are kind to our
prisoners."

Ojo thought this over very carefully. "I had an idea," said he, "that
prisoners were always treated harshly, to punish them."

"That would be dreadful!" cried Tollydiggle. "Isn't one punished enough
in knowing he has done wrong? Don't you wish, Ojo, with all your heart,
that you had not been disobedient and broken a Law of Oz?"

"I--I hate to be different from other people," he admitted.

"Yes; one likes to be respected as highly as his neighbors are," said
the woman. "When you are tried and found guilty, you will be obliged to
make amends, in some way. I don't know just what Ozma will do to you,
because this is the first time one of us has broken a Law; but you may
be sure she will be just and merciful. Here in the Emerald City people
are too happy and contented ever to do wrong; but perhaps you came from
some faraway corner of our land, and having no love for Ozma carelessly
broke one of her Laws."

"Yes," said Ojo, "I've lived all my life in the heart of a lonely
forest, where I saw no one but dear Unc Nunkie."

"I thought so," said Tollydiggle. "But now we have talked enough, so
let us play a game until bedtime."




Chapter Sixteen

Princess Dorothy


Dorothy Gale was sitting in one of her rooms in the royal palace, while
curled up at her feet was a little black dog with a shaggy coat and
very bright eyes. She wore a plain white frock, without any jewels or
other ornaments except an emerald-green hair-ribbon, for Dorothy was a
simple little girl and had not been in the least spoiled by the
magnificence surrounding her. Once the child had lived on the Kansas
prairies, but she seemed marked for adventure, for she had made several
trips to the Land of Oz before she came to live there for good. Her
very best friend was the beautiful Ozma of Oz, who loved Dorothy so
well that she kept her in her own palace, so as to be near her. The
girl's Uncle Henry and Aunt Em--the only relatives she had in the
world--had also been brought here by Ozma and given a pleasant home.
Dorothy knew almost everybody in Oz, and it was she who had discovered
the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and the Cowardly Lion, as well as
Tik-Tok the Clockwork Man. Her life was very pleasant now, and although
she had been made a Princess of Oz by her friend Ozma she did not care
much to be a Princess and remained as sweet as when she had been plain
Dorothy Gale of Kansas.

Dorothy was reading in a book this evening when Jellia Jamb, the
favorite servant-maid of the palace, came to say that the Shaggy Man
wanted to see her.

"All right," said Dorothy; "tell him to come right up."

"But he has some queer creatures with him--some of the queerest I've
ever laid eyes on," reported Jellia.

"Never mind; let 'em all come up," replied Dorothy.

But when the door opened to admit not only the Shaggy Man, but Scraps,
the Woozy and the Glass Cat, Dorothy jumped up and looked at her
strange visitors in amazement. The Patchwork Girl was the most curious
of all and Dorothy was uncertain at first whether Scraps was really
alive or only a dream or a nightmare. Toto, her dog, slowly uncurled
himself and going to the Patchwork Girl sniffed at her inquiringly; but
soon he lay down again, as if to say he had no interest in such an
irregular creation.

"You're a new one to me," Dorothy said reflectively, addressing the
Patchwork Girl. "I can't imagine where you've come from."

"Who, me?" asked Scraps, looking around the pretty room instead of at
the girl. "Oh, I came from a bed-quilt, I guess. That's what they say,
anyhow. Some call it a crazy-quilt and some a patchwork quilt. But my
name is Scraps--and now you know all about me."

"Not quite all," returned Dorothy with a smile. "I wish you'd tell me
how you came to be alive."

"That's an easy job," said Scraps, sitting upon a big upholstered chair
and making the springs bounce her up and down. "Margolotte wanted a
slave, so she made me out of an old bed-quilt she didn't use. Cotton
stuffing, suspender-button eyes, red velvet tongue, pearl beads for
teeth. The Crooked Magician made a Powder of Life, sprinkled me with it
and--here I am. Perhaps you've noticed my different colors. A very
refined and educated gentleman named the Scarecrow, whom I met, told me
I am the most beautiful creature in all Oz, and I believe it."

"Oh! Have you met our Scarecrow, then?" asked Dorothy, a little puzzled
to understand the brief history related.

"Yes; isn't he jolly?"

"The Scarecrow has many good qualities," replied Dorothy. "But I'm
sorry to hear all this 'bout the Crooked Magician. Ozma'll be mad as
hops when she hears he's been doing magic again. She told him not to."

"He only practices magic for the benefit of his own family," explained
Bungle, who was keeping at a respectful distance from the little black
dog.

"Dear me," said Dorothy; "I hadn't noticed you before. Are you glass,
or what?"

"I'm glass, and transparent, too, which is more than can be said of
some folks," answered the cat. "Also I have some lovely pink brains;
you can see 'em work."

"Oh; is that so? Come over here and let me see."

The Glass Cat hesitated, eyeing the dog.

"Send that beast away and I will," she said.

"Beast! Why, that's my dog Toto, an' he's the kindest dog in all the
world. Toto knows a good many things, too; 'most as much as I do, I
guess."

"Why doesn't he say anything?" asked Bungle.

"He can't talk, not being a fairy dog," explained Dorothy. "He's just a
common United States dog; but that's a good deal; and I understand him,
and he understands me, just as well as if he could talk."

Toto, at this, got up and rubbed his head softly against Dorothy's
hand, which she held out to him, and he looked up into her face as if
he had understood every word she had said.

"This cat, Toto," she said to him, "is made of glass, so you mustn't
bother it, or chase it, any more than you do my Pink Kitten. It's
prob'ly brittle and might break if it bumped against anything."

"Woof!" said Toto, and that meant he understood.

The Glass Cat was so proud of her pink brains that she ventured to come
close to Dorothy, in order that the girl might "see 'em work." This was
really interesting, but when Dorothy patted the cat she found the glass
cold and hard and unresponsive, so she decided at once that Bungle
would never do for a pet.

"What do you know about the Crooked Magician who lives on the
mountain?" asked Dorothy.

"He made me," replied the cat; "so I know all about him. The Patchwork
Girl is new--three or four days old--but I've lived with Dr. Pipt for
years; and, though I don't much care for him, I will say that he has
always refused to work magic for any of the people who come to his
house. He thinks there's no harm in doing magic things for his own
family, and he made me out of glass because the meat cats drink too
much milk. He also made Scraps come to life so she could do the
housework for his wife Margolotte."

"Then why did you both leave him?" asked Dorothy.

"I think you'd better let me explain that," interrupted the Shaggy Man,
and then he told Dorothy all of Ojo's story and how Unc Nunkie and
Margolotte had accidentally been turned to marble by the Liquid of
Petrifaction. Then he related how the boy had started out in search of
the things needed to make the magic charm, which would restore the
unfortunates to life, and how he had found the Woozy and taken him
along because he could not pull the three hairs out of its tail.
Dorothy listened to all this with much interest, and thought that so
far Ojo had acted very well. But when the Shaggy Man told her of the
Munchkin boy's arrest by the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, because
he was accused of wilfully breaking a Law of Oz, the little girl was
greatly shocked.

"What do you s'pose he's done?" she asked.

"I fear he has picked a six-leaved clover," answered the Shaggy Man,
sadly. "I did not see him do it, and I warned him that to do so was
against the Law; but perhaps that is what he did, nevertheless."

"I'm sorry 'bout that," said Dorothy gravely, "for now there will be no
one to help his poor uncle and Margolotte 'cept this Patchwork Girl,
the Woozy and the Glass Cat."

"Don't mention it," said Scraps. "That's no affair of mine. Margolotte
and Unc Nunkie are perfect strangers to me, for the moment I came to
life they came to marble."

"I see," remarked Dorothy with a sigh of regret; "the woman forgot to
give you a heart."

"I'm glad she did," retorted the Patchwork Girl. "A heart must be a
great annoyance to one. It makes a person feel sad or sorry or devoted
or sympathetic--all of which sensations interfere with one's happiness."

"I have a heart," murmured the Glass Cat. "It's made of a ruby; but I
don't imagine I shall let it bother me about helping Unc Nunkie and
Margolotte."

"That's a pretty hard heart of yours," said Dorothy. "And the Woozy, of
course--"

"Why, as for me," observed the Woozy, who was reclining on the floor
with his legs doubled under him, so that he looked much like a square
box, "I have never seen those unfortunate people you are speaking of,
and yet I am sorry for them, having at times been unfortunate myself.
When I was shut up in that forest I longed for some one to help me, and
by and by Ojo came and did help me. So I'm willing to help his uncle.
I'm only a stupid beast, Dorothy, but I can't help that, and if you'll
tell me what to do to help Ojo and his uncle, I'll gladly do it."

Dorothy walked over and patted the Woozy on his square head.

"You're not pretty," she said, "but I like you. What are you able to
do; anything 'special?"

"I can make my eyes flash fire--real fire--when I'm angry. When anyone
says: 'Krizzle-Kroo' to me I get angry, and then my eyes flash fire."

"I don't see as fireworks could help Ojo's uncle," remarked Dorothy.
"Can you do anything else?"

"I--I thought I had a very terrifying growl," said the Woozy, with
hesitation; "but perhaps I was mistaken."

"Yes," said the Shaggy Man, "you were certainly wrong about that." Then
he turned to Dorothy and added: "What will become of the Munchkin boy?"

"I don't know," she said, shaking her head thoughtfully. "Ozma will see
him 'bout it, of course, and then she'll punish him. But how, I don't
know, 'cause no one ever has been punished in Oz since I knew anything
about the place. Too bad, Shaggy Man, isn't it?"

While they were talking Scraps had been roaming around the room and
looking at all the pretty things it contained. She had carried Ojo's
basket in her hand, until now, when she decided to see what was inside
it. She found the bread and cheese, which she had no use for, and the
bundle of charms, which were curious but quite a mystery to her. Then,
turning these over, she came upon the six-leaved clover which the boy
had plucked.

Scraps was quick-witted, and although she had no heart she recognized
the fact that Ojo was her first friend. She knew at once that because
the boy had taken the clover he had been imprisoned, and she understood
that Ojo had given her the basket so they would not find the clover in
his possession and have proof of his crime. So, turning her head to see
that no one noticed her, she took the clover from the basket and
dropped it into a golden vase that stood on Dorothy's table. Then she
came forward and said to Dorothy:

"I wouldn't care to help Ojo's uncle, but I will help Ojo. He did not
break the Law--no one can prove he did--and that green-whiskered
soldier had no right to arrest him."

"Ozma ordered the boy's arrest," said Dorothy, "and of course she knew
what she was doing. But if you can prove Ojo is innocent they will set
him free at once."
