
"What, mother, do you know him?" demanded Thorne, surprised in turn.

"Yea, I know him. What do you think of him?"

"Think of him? I hate him!" said Thorne, fiercely.

"Why?"

"He tries to bully me."

"And you permit it? Why, you are larger than he."

"Yes, but he knows how to fight."

"How do you know?"

"I had a fight with him this morning," said Nicholas.

"Did he come off best?" asked the lady.

"No," answered Nicholas, with hesitation. "That is, we were only half
through the fight when a boy ran up and said you had come. So we had to
stop."

"Humph! That is strange," said the lady, in a low voice, more to herself
than to her son, "this sudden antagonism."

"What do you know about Kent?" demanded Nicholas, his curiosity aroused.

"Perhaps I may as well tell you," said his mother, thoughtfully, "but I
wish you to keep the matter secret from him."

"You won't catch me telling him anything, except that he is a
scoundrel!" muttered Nicholas.

"Then sit down by me, and I will tell you much that you do not know, but
ought now to hear. Is the door shut?"

"Yes."

"Go and see. It is important that no one should overhear us."

Nicholas complied with her request.

"It's shut fast enough," he said. "Now what have you got to tell me?"

"To begin with, do you know where I get the money I pay for your
schooling and clothes?"

"My father left you some money, didn't he?"

"He left me a small property which rents for two hundred dollars a
year."

"You pay three hundred a year for me, don't you?"

"For your school bills, yes. Besides, I give you an allowance and buy
your clothes."

"How do you do it?" asked Nicholas, in surprise. "Have you sold the
house?"

"No. If I should do that, there would soon be nothing left. That was the
problem I had to solve three years ago, when your father died."

"What did you do?"

"I felt that the property must not be touched, save the income. I saw
that it was necessary for me to exert myself, or I should be unable to
educate you as I desired. I had a good education, and I determined to
avail myself of it. I therefore went to a teacher's agency in New York
and set forth my desire to obtain the position of governess in some
family in the country."

"You a governess!"

"Why not? It was the only way I could think of that would yield me an
income. After waiting a few weeks I succeeded. A wealthy gentleman,
living in a country town of moderate size, saw my testimonials, was
pleased with them, and engaged me to superintend the education of an
orphan niece resident in his family. He offered me a fair
salary--enough, added to the rent which I received from the property
left me by your father, to justify me in putting you at this
boarding-school. That was three years ago."

"Why didn't you tell me all this before, mother?"

"It would have done no good. I preferred that you should think of me as
possessing an independent property. I felt that it would enable you the
better to hold up your head among your school-fellows, as they could
know nothing of your antecedents."

"Does Dr. Benton know this?" asked Nicholas, quickly.

"No; he only knows that I am a widow, He supposes that I have sufficient
means."

"I am glad of that."

"Would it make any difference with him?"

"I don't know. Any way, I'd rather he wouldn't know it."

Nicholas Thorne sat by his mother's side thoughtful. He was disappointed
to think that his mother's means were so limited, since it curtailed his
future expectations. The thought of that mother working patiently to
defray his expenses at school made comparatively little impression. He
was essentially selfish, and, so long as his wants were provided for, he
cared little who labored for him.

"You don't ask the name of the man who employs me," said his mother.

Nicholas looked up.

"I suppose it is nobody I ever heard of," he said.

"No, you never heard of him, but you know some one connected with him."

"What do you mean?" asked the boy, his curiosity aroused.

"The gentleman who employs me is father of one of your schoolmates."

"Father of one of my school-mates?"

"Yes."

"Who is it? Why don't you tell me, mother?"

"You have spoken of him to me this morning. It is Jasper Kent."

"You work for Jasper Kent's father!" exclaimed Nicholas in unbounded
astonishment. "Does he know it?"

"Yes, he knows that I am, or have been, governess in his father's
family. But he knows nothing of my connection with you."

"If he knew, he'd taunt me with my mother's being obliged to work for a
living," said Thorne.

"I don't think he would. At any rate, the time is coming very soon when
he will have no advantage over you."

"How do you make that out, mother?"

"Listen, and keep secret what I tell you. Next week I become his
father's wife."

"You marry Jasper Kent's father!"

"Yes; I shall be Jasper's step-mother."

"Is old Kent rich?" asked Nicholas, eagerly.

His mother nodded.

"Yes, he is rich; that is, for the country. He is in poor health, too,"
she added, significantly.

"Good!" said Nicholas, with satisfaction. "You know how to play your
cards, mother."

The mother smiled.

"My days of dependence are drawing to an end," she said. "Some time I
can do better for you than I am doing now."




CHAPTER III.

JASPER RECOGNIZES THE VISITOR.


"Will the old man do anything for me after he marries you, mother?"
asked Nicholas, who never failed to look out for his own interests.

"He doesn't know you are in existence, Nicholas."

"Did you never speak to him of me?"

"No; I didn't dare to tell him."

"Why not?"

"It might prevent his marrying me."

"It seems to me," grumbled Nicholas, "you only thought of yourself. You
didn't care what became of me."

"That is unjust, Nicholas. You must see that it is. Once we are married
I shall have more control of money, and if Mr. Kent dies I shall be
entitled to a third of his property."

"I wish he'd leave you the whole, and cut off that upstart Jasper," said
Nicholas, frowning.

"There is not much chance of that. He thinks everything of Jasper.
However, I don't think he'll live long, and I shall induce him, if
possible, to name me as Jasper's guardian."

"That would be a good job for you, mother--not so good for Jasper, I'm
thinking."

"You are right, Nicholas. Did you say you disliked him?"

"Yes, I hate him."

"So do I," said his mother in a low tone, but one of intense energy.

"Why?" asked Thorne, in some curiosity.

"I'll tell you. From my entrance into his father's family he has never
treated me with any cordiality. Evidently he didn't like me. I think,
indeed, he mistrusted me, though I never gave occasion for any
suspicions. If he should learn now that I am to marry his father, he
would move heaven and earth to prevent the marriage."

"Has he been home much since you were in the house?"

"No; he was at school elsewhere, and was only at home during his
vacations."

"How did he come to be sent here to this school? Did you advise it?"

"No; I was opposed to it, but Mr. Kent was recommended by a friend to
send his son here. I did not venture to say much, lest I should be asked
how I came to know anything of the school. I was afraid you and he would
meet, and he would learn the connections between us."

"I suppose you'll own up after the wedding, won't you?"

"I think not at once, Nicholas."

"Why not?"

"Remember what I told you, that Mr. Kent is in poor health. He may not
live six months. We can keep the matter secret for that time, can't we,
Nicholas?"

"If you were only sure he would die in that time."

"He has heart disease, and is liable to die at any time."

"You want him to make his will first, and leave you guardian?"

"Of course."

"After that you wouldn't mourn very much for his loss?"

"No; I don't pretend to care for him."

"He thinks you do, eh, mother?"

"Of course."

"Oh, you're a deep one, you are," said Nicholas, winking in a way to
indicate his shrewd insight into his mother's motives.

"I have to be, Nicholas. There's no getting on in this world without it.
But I think I shall have to leave you now."

"Then you don't mean to invite me to the wedding, mother?"

"It will be a private ceremony."

"Will Jasper be invited?"

"His father was anxious to have him at home. Indeed, I have had a great
deal of trouble to prevent his sending for him, but at length I have
succeeded. I know too well the danger. The boy has a great influence
over his father, whose mind is weakened with his body, and I should be
afraid that the match would be broken off even at the last moment if the
boy got wind of our plan."

"How mad Jasper will be when he hears of it!" said Thorne, laughing with
malicious enjoyment. "I wish I could tell him."

"Don't breathe a word of it, Nicholas," said his mother, in evident
alarm.

"Oh, I'll keep the secret. But it won't do any harm when it's all over,
will it?"

"Say nothing till I authorize it."

"Well, I won't, then, if I can help it. But I say, mother, the old
gentleman will come down handsomely when you're married. You ought to
raise my allowance to two dollars a week."

"I will if I can afford it," said his mother. "But I must leave you now,
Nicholas. I shall have about time to go to the station and meet the next
train."

"Shan't I go with you?"

"I should like your company, my dear boy, but we must be prudent. We
might meet Jasper Kent."

"That's so. Well, good-bye."

"Good-bye, Nicholas," and his mother pressed her lips upon the cheek of
her son.

He tolerated the kiss, but did not return it. His heart was not very
impressible, and he cared for no one except himself.

"I won't stop to see Dr. Benton," she said, at parting. "You may tell
him that I was in haste."

"All right."

Mrs. Thorne emerged from the parlor and from the house. She was tall and
erect in figure, and walked rapidly. Her face was concealed by a thick
veil, but, for the information of the reader it may be described as
narrow and long, with small eyes, like those of Nicholas, and thin,
tightly-compressed lips. She was not a woman to yield to misfortune or
give way to sentimental sorrow. She looked rather like one who knew how
to face fortune and defy it. It was not a pleasant face, but it was
decidedly a strong one.

The grounds of the school were extensive, and the house stood back two
or three hundred yards from the street. A long avenue led from the house
to the main thoroughfare.

Mrs. Thorne looked hurriedly about her as she went out on her way.

"I shouldn't like to meet Jasper Kent," she said to herself. "It might
lead to unpleasant questions and suspicions on his part, and I don't
want anything to happen before I am married."

It seemed likely that she would escape the encounter which she dreaded.
Had there been no interruption or delay she would have done so; but it
was not so to be. She met Dr. Benton in front of the house, and was
compelled to stop and speak to him.

"You find Nicholas well?" he said, politely.

"Oh, yes, doctor," she answered, softly. "I have no anxiety on that
subject, as long as he is under your care. I know that he cannot fail to
do well."

We all like flattery, and the learned principal was not proof against
it.

"Ahem! Mrs. Thorne," he said, pompously, "we try to do our duty by the
young people intrusted to our charge. We do not limit our endeavors to
their mental culture, but strive to promote their physical well-being
also."

"And you succeed remarkably well, Dr. Benton. But you must excuse my
leaving you abruptly. I wish to catch the next train."

"I hope we shall see you again soon, madam," said the doctor, politely.

"I shall endeavor to call again before many weeks, Dr. Benton.
Good-morning."

"Good-morning, madam."

Mrs. Thorne adjusted her veil and swiftly resumed her course. Her heart
gave a bound when, just outside the gate, she espied the well-known
figure of Jasper Kent.

"I hope he won't recognize me," she thought

But she forgot her peculiar gait, and the quick, rapid step, which were
likely to identify her in the eyes of anyone who had seen her often.
Jasper Kent's attention was drawn to her, and he observed these
peculiarities.

"By Jove!" he said to himself, "she walks just like the governess."

Still, having no reason to suspect the presence of Miss Thorne, as he
called her, at the school, he would have thought the resemblance only
accidental, but for a whiff of wind which blew the veil aside from her
face. That face there was no mistaking.

"Miss Thorne!" he exclaimed, in surprise, advancing to meet her.

She was exceedingly vexed, but it would not do to betray it.

"Jasper!" she said, with a smile. "You didn't expect to see me here?"

"No; did you come to see me? Is my father unwell?" he asked, anxiously.

"Your father is quite well."

"Then--"

"Why have I come? I see that is what you wish to ask. I have not come on
your account at all. I came to see a nephew of my own."

"At this school?"

"Yes."

"You must mean Nicholas Thorne."

"Yes; do you know him?"

"A little," said Jasper, with reserve.

"Poor fellow! He has neither father nor mother to look after him, only
myself. I am his only relative living."

"I never heard you speak of him before."

"No; I have not cared to intrude my private concerns upon your father or
yourself. But I must hurry, or I shall be late at the station. Have you
any message to send to your father?"

"Give him my love, and tell him to take care of his health for my sake."

"I hope he will do that for all our sakes," said the lady, with affected
warmth. "Good-bye."

"Good-bye."

Jasper Kent looked after her as she walked rapidly away.

"Why is it that I distrust her so much?" he thought to himself. "So she
is Thorne's aunt. Well, he is not a relation to be proud of."

"How vexatious that I should meet him," thought Mrs. Thorne. "I ought
not to have run the risk of coming. If he tells Nicholas that I have
admitted a relationship it may do harm. Once the wedding is over I shall
feel more secure."




CHAPTER IV.

THORNE'S REVENGE.


The unexpected communication which Thorne had received from his mother
influenced his treatment of Jasper. Under ordinary circumstances he
would have resented bitterly the humiliating defeat he had received at
the hands of the "new boy." Now, however, he felt sure of ultimate
revenge, and was willing to "bide his time."
