and, indeed, it must be confessed, that Reginald was not an inviting
figure for an embrace; for, independently of a rough head, and
dust-bedecked garments, his malicious adversary had decorated his
face with multitudinous ink-spots, a spectacle which greatly provoked
the mirth of his laughter-loving school-fellows.

Dr. Wilkinson made some remark on the singularity of his pupil's
appearance, and then, commending Louis to the kind offices of
the assembled party, left the room.

He had scarcely closed the door behind him, when several loiterers
from the lower part of the room came up; and Reginald and his brother
were immediately assailed with a number of questions, aimed with such
rapidity as to be unanswerable.

"When did you come?" "Who's that, Mortimer?" "Is that your brother?"
"What's his name?" "Shall you be in our class?" "Why didn't you stay
longer in Bristol?--If I had been you I would!"

Louis was amused though puzzled, and turned first one way, and then
another, in his futile attempts to see and reply to his interrogators.

"Make way!" at last exclaimed Frank Digby; "you are quite embarrassing
to her ladyship. Will the lady Louisa take my arm? Allow me, madam, to
interpose my powerful authority." And he offered his arm to Louis with
a smirk and low bow, which set all the spectators off laughing; for
Frank was one of those privileged persons, who, having attained a
celebrity for being _very funny_, can excite a laugh with very little
trouble.

"Don't, Frank!" said Reginald.

"_Don't!_ really, Mr. Mortimer, if you have no respect for your
sister's feelings, it is time that I interposed. Here you allow this
herd of _I don't know what to call them_, to incommode her with their
senseless clamor. I protest, she is nearly fainting; she has been
gasping for breath the last five minutes. Be off, ye fussy, curious,
prying, peeping, pressing-round fellows; or, I promise you, you shall
be visited with his majesty's heaviest displeasure."

"How do you do, lady Louisa? I hope your ladyship's in good health!"
"Don't press on her!" was now echoed mischievously in various tones
around Louis, whose color was considerably heightened by this
unexpected attack.

"Now do allow me," persisted Frank, dragging Louis' hand in his arm,
in spite of all the victim's efforts to prevent it, and leading him
forcibly through the throng, which made way on every side, to Edward
Hamilton, the grave youth before mentioned:--"His majesty is anxious
to make the acquaintance of his fair subject. Permit me to present to
your majesty the lovely, gentle, blushing lady Louisa Mortimer, lately
arrived in your majesty's kingdom; your majesty will perceive that she
bears loyalty in her--hey! what! excited!--hysterics!"

The last exclamations were elicited by a violent effort of Louis to
extricate himself.

"Frank, leave him alone!"

"What is the will of royalty?" said Frank, struggling with his
refractory cousin.

"That you leave Louis Mortimer alone," said Hamilton. "You will like us
better presently, Louis," added he, shaking hands with him: "my subjects
appear to consider themselves privileged to be rude to a new-comer; but
my royal example will have its weight in due time."

"Your majesty's faithful trumpeter, grand vizier, and factotum is alive
and hearty," said Frank.

"But as he had a selfish fit upon him just now," returned Hamilton,
"we were under the necessity of doing our own business."

"I crave your majesty's pardon," said Frank, stroking his sovereign
tenderly on the shoulder; for which affectionate demonstration he was
rewarded by a violent push that laid him prostrate.

"I am a martyr to my own benevolence," said Frank, getting up and
approaching Louis, "still I am unchanged in devotion to your ladyship.
Tell me what I can do,"--and whichever way Louis turned, Frank with
his smirking face presented himself;--"Will you not give your poor
slave one command?"

"Only that you will stand out of my sunshine," said Louis good-temperedly.

"Very good," exclaimed Hamilton.

"Out of your sunshine! What, behind you? that is cruel, but most
obsequiously I obey."

Louis underwent the ordeal of a new scholar's introduction with
unruffled temper, though his cousin took care there should be little
cessation until afternoon school, when Louis was liberated from his
tormentors to his great satisfaction--Frank's business carrying him
to a part of the school-room away from that where Louis was desired to
await further orders. In the course of the afternoon, he was summoned
to the presence of Dr. Wilkinson, who was holding a magisterial levee
in one of two class-rooms or studies adjoining the school-room. The
doctor appeared in one of his sternest humors. Besides the fourteen
members of the first class, whose names Louis knew already, there
was in this room a boy about Louis' age, who seemed in some little
trepidation. Doctor Wilkinson closed the book he held, and laying it
down, dismissed his pupils; then turning to the frightened-looking boy,
he took a new book off the table, saying, "Do you know this, Harrison?"

"Yes, sir," faintly replied the boy.

"Where did you get it?"

"I bought it."

"To assist you in winning prizes from your more honorable class-fellows,
I suppose," said the doctor, with the most marked contempt. "Since you
find Kenrick too difficult for you, you may go into the third class,
where there may be, perhaps, something better suited to your capacity;
and beware a second offence: you may go, sir."

Louis felt great pity for the boy, who turned whiter still, and then
flushed up, as if ready to burst into tears.

"Well, Louis, I wish to see what rank you will be able to take,"
said the doctor, and he proceeded with his examination.

"Humph!" he ejaculated at length, "pretty well--you may try in the
second class. I can tell you that you must put your shoulder to
the wheel, and make the most of your powers, or you will soon be
obliged to leave it for a less honorable post; but let me see what
you can do--and now put these books away on that shelf." As he spoke,
the doctor pointed to a vacant place on one of the shelves that lined
two sides of the study, and left the room. Louis put the books away,
and then returned to the school-room, where he sought his brother, and
communicated his news just before the general uproar attendant on the
close of afternoon school commenced.

Reginald was one of the most noisy and eager in his preparations for
play; and, dragging Louis along with him, bounded into the fresh air,
with that keen feeling of enjoyment which the steady industrious
school-boy knows by experience.

"What a nice play-ground this is!" said Louis.

"Capital!" said Reginald. "What's the fun, Frank?" he cried to his
cousin, who bounded past him at this moment, towards a spot already
tolerably crowded.

"Maister Dunn," shouted Frank.

"Oh, the old cake-man, Louis," said Reginald; "I must go and get rid
of a few surplus pence."

"Do you like to spend your money in cakes?" asked Louis; "I have plenty,
Mrs. Colthrop took care of that."

"In that case I'll save for next time," said Reginald, "but let's go
and see what's going on."

Accordingly Reginald ran off in the cake-man's direction. Louis followed,
and presently found himself standing in the outer circle of a group of
his school-fellows, who formed a thick wall round a white-haired old
man and a boy, both of whom carried a basket on each arm, filled with
dainties always acceptable to a school-boy's palate.

[Illustration: Maister Dunn.]

Were I inclined to moralize, I might here make a few remarks on waste of
money, &c., but my business being merely to relate incidents at present,
I shall only say that there they stood, the old man and his assistant,
with the boys in constant motion and murmur around them.

Frank Digby and Hamilton were in the outer circle, the latter having
_walked_ from a direction opposite to that from which Frank and Reginald
came, but whose dignity did not prevent a certain desire to purchase if
he saw fit, and if not, to amuse himself with those who did so. He stood
watching the old man with an imperturbable air of gravity, and, hanging
on his arm in a state of listless apathy, stood Trevannion, another
member of the first class.

Frank Digby took too active a share in most things in the establishment
to remain a passive spectator of the actions of others, and began pushing
right and left. "Get along, get away ye vagabonds!" he politely cried:
"you little shrimps! what business have you to stop the way?--Alfred, you
ignoramus! Alfred, why don't you move?"

"Because I'm buying something," said the little boy addressed, looking
up very quietly at the imperious intruder.

"_Da locum melioribus_, Alfred, as the poet has it. Do you know where
to find that, my boy?--the first line of the thirteenth book of the
Aeneid, being a speech of the son of Anchises to the Queen of Carthage.
You'll find a copy of Virgil's works in my desk."

"I don't mean to look," said Alfred, "I know it's in the Delectus."

"Wonderful memory!--I admire that delectable book of yours," cried Frank,
who talked on without stopping, while forcing himself to the first rank.
"How now, Maister Dunn!" he said, addressing the old man, "I hope you
b'aint a going to treat us as e did last time. You must be reasonable;
the money market is in a sadly unflourishing condition at present."

"You always talk of the _money market_, Frank," said little Alfred:
"what do you mean by the money market?"

"It's a place, my dear--I'll explain it in a moment. Here, Maister
Dunn;--It's a place where the old women sell sovereigns a penny
a measure, Alfred."

"Oh, Frank!" exclaimed Alfred.

"Oh! and why not?" said Frank; "do you mean to say you don't believe me?
That's it,--isn't it, maister?"

"Ah, Maister Digby! ye're at yer jokes," said the old man.

"Jokes!" said Frank, with a serious air. "Pray, Mr. Dunn, did you ever
happen to notice certain brass, or copper, or bronze tables, four in
number, in front of the Bristol Exchange!"

"Ay sure, maister!"

"Well, I'll insense you into the meaning of that, presently. That, my
good sir, is where the old women stood in the good old times, crying
out, 'Here you are! sovereigns a penny a measure!' And that's the reason
people used to be so rich!"

"Oh, Frank! now I know that's only your nonsense," said Alfred.

"Well, I can't give you a comprehension, and if I could buy you one, I
couldn't afford it," answered Frank. "Now here's my place for any one;
Louis, I'll make you a present of it, as I don't want it."

"I don't want to buy any thing," said Louis.

"Rubbish!" cried Frank. "Every one does. Don't be stingy." And so
Louis allowed himself to be pushed and pulled into the crowd, and
bought something he would much rather have been without, because
he found it inconvenient to say _no_.

The two upper classes were privileged to use the largest of the
class-rooms as their sitting-room in the evenings; and here Reginald
introduced his brother after tea; and, when he had shown him his
lessons, began to prepare his own. Most of the assembled youths were
soon quietly busy, though some of the more idly disposed kept up a fire
of words, while turning over leaves, and cutting pens to pieces. Among
the latter class was Frank Digby, who was seldom known to be silent
for a quarter of an hour, and who possessed the singular power of
distracting every one's attention but his own; for, though he scarcely
ever appeared to give his lessons a moment's attention, he was generally
sufficiently prepared with them to enable him to keep his place in his
class, which was usually two from the bottom.

Louis saw that he must give his whole mind to his work; but being
unused to study in a noise, it was some time before he was well able
to comprehend what he wanted to do; and found himself continually
looking up and laughing at something around him, or replying to some
of Frank's jokes, which were often directed to him. When, by a great
exertion, he had at last forced himself to attend to Reginald's repeated
warnings, and had begun to learn in earnest, the door softly opened,
and the little boy he had noticed in the crowd that afternoon came in.

"Halloa! what do you want?" cried one of the seniors; "you have no
business here."

"Is Edward here, Mr. Salisbury?"

"No."

"Do you know where he is, please?"

"With the doctor," replied the young gentleman.

"Oh dear!" sighed the little boy, venturing to approach the table a
little nearer.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Reginald.

"I can't do this," said the child: "I wanted Edward to help me with
my exercise."

"My little dear, you have just heard that sapient Fred Salisbury declare,
in the most civil terms chooseable, that your fraternal preceptor,
Edwardus magnus, _non est inventus_," said Frank, pompously, with a
most condescending flourish of his person in the direction of the
little boy.

"And, consequently," said the afore-mentioned Mr. Salisbury, "you
have free leave to migrate to York, Bath, Jericho, or any other
equally convenient resort for bores in general, and you in particular."

"Please, Mr. Digby," said the little boy, "will you just show me this?"

"Indeed I can't," said Frank; "I can't do my own, so in all reason
you could not expect me to find brains for two exercises."

"Oh! please somebody show me--Dr. Wilkinson will be so angry if
Mr. Norton sends me up again to-morrow."

"Will you go?" shouted Salisbury, with such deliberate energy of
enunciation that Alfred shrunk back: "what's the use of your exercises,
if you're shown how to do them?"

"Come here, Alfred," said Louis, softly. Alfred readily obeyed;
and Louis, taking his book, began to show him what to do.

"Louis, you must not tell him word for word," said Reginald:
"Hamilton wouldn't like it--he never does himself."

"But I may help him to do it for himself, may I not?" said Louis.

"Yes; but, Louis, you have not time--and he is so stupid,"
replied Reginald; "you won't have time to do your own."

But Louis thought he should have time for both, and, putting his arm
round Alfred, he kindly and patiently set him in the way of doing his
lesson properly, and then resumed his own disturbed studies.

Hardly, however, was he settled than he found himself listening to Frank,
who remarked, as Alfred left the room, "We shall be sure to have 'Oars'
in soon!"

"Who do you mean by Oars?" asked Louis.

"Churchill," said Reginald, laughing.

"What an extraordinary name!" said Louis.

"I say, Digby," cried a boy from the opposite side of the table,
"they give you the credit of that cognomen--but we are all in the
dark as to its origin."

"Like the origin of all truly great," answered Frank, "it was very
simple: Churchill came one day to me with his usual 'Do tell us a bit,
that's a good fellow,' and after he had badgered me some minutes,
I asked him if he had not the smallest idea of his lesson--so, after
looking at it another minute, he begins thus, '_Omnes_, all.' 'Bravo!'
replied I. '_Conticuere_--What's that, Frank?' 'Were silent,' I answered:
'Go on.' After deep cogitation, and sundry hints, he discovered that
_tenebant_ must have some remote relationship to a verb signifying
to hold fast, and forthwith a bright thought strikes him, and on we go:
'_Intentique ora tenebant_--and intently they hold their oars,' he said,
exultingly. 'Very well,' quoth I, approvingly, and continued for him,
'_Inde toro pater_--the waters flowed glibly farther on, _ab alto_--to
the music of the spheres; the inseparable Castor and Pollux looking
down benignantly on their namesake below.' Here I was stopped by the
innocent youth's remark, that I certainly was quizzing, for he knew
that Castor and Pollux were the same in Latin as in English. Whereupon,
I demanded, with profound gravity, whether _gemini_ did not mean
twins, and if the twins were not Castor and Pollux--and if he knew
(who knew so much better than I) whether or no there might not be some
word in the Latin language, besides _gemini_, signifying twins; and
that if it was his opinion that I was quizzing, he had better do his
lesson himself. He looked hard, and, thinking I was offended, begged
pardon; and believing that _jubes_ was Castor and Pollux, we
got on quite famously--and he was quite reassured when we turned
from the descriptive to the historical, beginning with _Aeneas sic
orsus infandum_--Aeneas was such a horrid bear."

"Didn't you tell him of his mistake?" asked Louis, who could not
help laughing.

"What! spoil the fun and the lesson I meant to give him?--not I."

"Well, what then, Frank?" said Reginald.

"Why, imagine old Whitworth's surprise, when, confident in the free
translation of a first-class man, Oars flowed on as glibly as the
waters; Whitworth heard him to the end in his old dry way, and then
asked him where he got that farrago of nonsense;--I think he was
promoted to the society of dunces instanter, and learns either
Delectus or Eutropius now. Of course, he never applied again to me."

Louis did not express his opinion that Frank was ill-natured, though
he thought so, in spite of the hearty laugh with which his story was
greeted. When he turned again to his lesson, he found his book had
been abstracted.

"I tell you what," cried Reginald, fiercely, "I won't have Louis
tormented--who has taken his book? It's you, Ferrers, I am sure."

"I! did you ever!" replied that young gentleman. "I appeal to you,
Digby--did you see me touch his book?"

"I did not, certainly," said Frank.

"Give me the book," exclaimed Reginald, jumping upon the table, "give
me the book, and let's have no more such foolery."

"Get down, Mortimer, you're not transparent," cried several voices.

Reginald, however, paid no attention to the command, but pouncing upon
Ferrers at a vantage, threw him backwards off the form, tumbling over
his prostrate foe, and in his descent bringing down books, inkstand,
papers, and one of the candles, in glorious confusion.
