much more strongly than most of the other girls in Middleton School? Use
your beauty for Him, dear; use your attractive manner for Him."

"You make me feel very solemn," said Kitty. She rose. "I will try and
think about it," she said. "I wish I was not quite such a giddypate; but
I'll try and think about it."

Miss Sherrard kissed her.

"And now I want you to do something more," she said. "You won't be able
to be a better girl than you were in the past if you don't pray to God
to help you; and when you pray, Kitty, ask Him to teach you to restrain
your feelings a little, not to let them all rush to the surface, to keep
a little back. Thus you will gain strength of character, and--and be all
the better for it, my child."

"You are very good to me," said Kitty. "I don't mind what I do for those
I love. I suppose now you would wish me to learn my lessons perfectly
every day?"

"I certainly should."

"And to--to turn poor little Agnes Moore from the head of her class?"

"Well, Kitty, I cannot say anything about that. II you do better work
than Agnes Moore you will get to the head of the class and she will go
down; but I doubt your being able to do so, for Agnes is a very clever
and a very diligent little pupil. But I want you, dear, soon to get out
of that class, for it is a great deal too young for you. I want you to
be with girls of your own age. We are yet one month to the end of the
term. By the end of term I want to be able to tell you that you have got
a remove. And now, dear, good-by. Remember, I shall watch you, and--yes,
I shall pray for you."

"You are very good to me," repeated Kitty; and she walked out of Miss
Sherrard's presence with her head lowered, and a mist before her eyes.

For the next few days Kitty was strangely thoughtful. She did not speak
nearly so much as usual, she felt inclined to go away by herself, and
she was much puzzled about her talents. Miss Sherrard's words had made
quite a deep impression. She learned her lessons with care, and had
every chance, so her teachers told her, of a remove at the end of term.
Even Alice found less to say against her. Kitty began to look on her
school life as something roseate and delightful; but all these things
were to come to a speedy end.

On a certain afternoon she got home to find Alice out and Mrs. Denvers
seated in the drawing-room with a great basket of mending before her.

"Oh, what a lot of work! Would you like me to help you?" said Kitty.

"Very much, dear; but what kept you so late? Oh, here is a letter for
you."

"A letter!" cried Kitty eagerly. "Oh, it is from Laurie. Hurrah!
hurrah!"

She forgot all about her offer to help Mrs. Denvers with her darning,
tossed the letter in the air two or three times, and then sank down on
the nearest ottoman to read it. These were the words on which her eyes
rested:

"DEAR OLD KITTERKINS: I have got into the greatest bother of a mess that
ever assailed a poor gossoon, and if you can't help me, old girleen,
well, I shall be done brown, as the saying is. The whole matter concerns
Paddy Wheel-about. The poor creature has been getting queerer and
queerer lately, and father has been ever so much worried about him. I
didn't know a word of this, mind you, at the time, but learnt it
afterwards; and it makes my bit of a frolic all the blacker, I can tell
you. Father got Dr. Milligan to go and see Paddy in his cabin at the top
of Sleeve Nohr, and the doctor said that the poor old boy was going off
his head as fast as he could, and we must be careful not to give him any
shock. Well, but to come to my part of it. You know that coat of his,
and what diversion we have had out of it from time to time? You made one
of the patches yourself, don't you remember, Kitty? We always told him
that in each patch he had concealed a sovereign. Well, hot as the days
are, he has been wearing that coat, and a figure of fun he did look. The
Mahoney boys and Pat and I thought we would take a rise out of him; so
one night when he was asleep we stole up to his lair and got hold of the
precious coat. We bundled it up and were off with it. We had to cross
the lake, in the old boat with a hole in the bottom, in order to get
home in time, and what do you think happened? Up came a squall, the boat
was upset, and Paddy's coat sank to the bottom of the lake. We swam to
the shore and thought it would be an easy matter to fish up the old coat
on the following morning; but although we dragged and dragged, and Pat
and I both dived down to the bottom a good dozen of times, the coat had
sunk in the deep mud and we could not find it, no nor a sign of it.
Well, of course, our one hope was that no one should know; but what was
our horror to be confronted by no less a person than Wheel-about
himself. You know that craze he has about never speaking. Well, he spoke
to us and pretty sharp too, and told us he knew we had taken the coat,
and didn't he look thunders and daggers at us, and we funked it so
awfully--yes, I will confess it, Kits, your brave Laurie funked it like
anything--for Wheel-about did really look like a roadman; at last there
was no help for it--we had to out with the truth. Oh, didn't he raise a
yell louder than anything you ever heard, and then I told him that if I
could not get back the coat I would give him ten pounds for certain by
Saturday next. He said if I did he would lie quiet for a bit and not
tell the governor, so I want you like a blessed girleen to lend me the
money. Send it off the very instant you read this; for if you don't the
saints alone know what will happen. We are certain to be sent to a
school in England, at least I am. From what you tell me, Kitterkins, of
that place, I should think it would break our hearts to smithereens. Now
look sharp and send the money. Your loving brother,

"LAURIE."

"Oh, dear!" exclaimed Kitty starting to her feet. "Do you mind my going
out at once, Mrs. Denvers?"

"Certainly not, my love. Tea will be ready at five o'clock. Are you
going far?"

"Only to Elma Lewis' house. I want to see her; it is awfully important."

"But Elma lives quite two miles from here."

"Oh, that does not matter. I am sure to find my way. It is most urgent,"
said Kitty.

She rushed out of the room, pinned on her hat, and a moment later was
walking down the street as fast as she could go. She crossed a field
and a common, and after a time got into that part of the town where Elma
lived. By dint of asking half a dozen children and three or four
policemen she at last reached Constantine Road, and presently found the
right house. She ran up the steps and sounded a rattling rat-tat on the
knocker. The moment she did so a girl with a mop of untidy red hair
peeped up at her from the area below.

"Come and open the door at once," called Kitty. "Why do you keep a lady
waiting?"

The girl soon appeared, tying on her cap and apron as she did so.

"I thought as they was all out for the day," she began, "--Oh, miss, I
beg your pardon."

Kitty, notwithstanding her rather rude words, presented a very charming
spectacle as she stood on the steps. She was dressed not only in the
height of the fashion, but wore such a perfectly captivating little
toque at the back of her head as to fire the fancy and take the little
wit which she possessed out of Mrs. Lewis' maid-of-all-work.

Maggie had never seen anything so captivating nor so ravishing. A wild
desire to make a toque like it to put on her own towzled locks on the
following Sunday caused her to stare so hard at Kitty with her mouth
wide open that she did not hear a word that young lady was saying.

"Are you in a dream?" asked Kitty Malone. "I want to see Miss Elma
Lewis. Is she at home?"

"Miss Helma? No, miss, that she ain't," replied Maggie. "Oh, I beg your
pardon, miss; but it's it's the bonnet at the top of your head."

"My bonnet?" said Kitty.

"Yes, miss. Oh, I do beg your pardon, miss--I was took all of a heap.
Yes, miss, I'm attending now. But oh, if you would just turn your head a
little."

"You must be mad," said Kitty. But her eyes began to sparkle.

"Do listen to me," she continued; "it's most important. Is Miss Elma not
at home?"

"No, miss; she's out for the day, and so is the missus and Miss Carrie.
They're all out a-pleasuring in their different ways, and they has left
me at home to drudge. I'm the household drudge, miss, and no wonder I'm
took with anything so pretty. Do you mind telling me, miss, if them
wiolets is real?"

"Oh, the violets in my toque--are those what you are staring at?" said
Kitty. "Well, now, I'll tell you what I'll do--I'll give you the whole
bunch if you'll let me come into the house and write a letter to Elma,
and if you'll further faithfully promise that you will give it to her
the instant she comes home."

"To be sure I will, miss. Come right along in. Oh, what a beautiful
young lady you is!"

"Every one tells me I am beautiful," thought Kitty. "It really is very
pleasant. I am more flattered here than I was in Ireland. People told me
there I had a face like cream and roses, or cream and strawberries, and
father used to say that I had washed it in the fairies' dew, and Laurie
would tell me that I was a bouncing girl and no mistake; but then Aunt
Honora was always saying: 'Kitty dear, beauty is only skin deep, and
don't be set up by it, child. Handsome is that handsome does, Kitty.'
Oh, how she would deave me with that old proverb. But here they seem to
think beauty is a talent, and I ought to be desperately proud of it. Oh,
faith, but why do I think of these things when my precious duck of a
Laurie is in the mess he has got into. He go to England to break his
heart, the darling! Not a bit of it; not while his Kitty has her wits
about her."

Meanwhile Maggie conducted this ravishing and welcome visitor into the
tiny sitting-room, furnished her with pen, ink, and paper, and then
began to hover about near the door in order to get another view of the
lovely cap.

Kitty bent her head over the sheet of paper and indited a letter in hot
and furious haste:

"DEAR ELMA: I am so sorry, but I must ask you to return that eight
pounds to me immediately. I want it for Laurie. He has got into trouble
and requires it; so don't keep me waiting a single minute if you can
help it. I am so sorry you are out; but will you bring it to me the
instant you return home? It is of the most vital importance. I am in
dreadful trouble, and nothing else will save Laurie. Yours in great
haste, KITTY MALONE."

Having written the letter, Kitty looked round for an envelope; Maggie
also searched to right and left, but could not find one.

"But it will be all right, miss," she said. "I'll lay it just as it is
flat out on the table, and Miss Helma will see it the moment she comes
in."

"Thank you," answered Kitty. "And now I must go. Be sure you give it to
her her the instant she returns, and tell her to come straight to me
with the money, for I must send it off to-night whatever happens. It is
a money transaction; and you understand, don't you? What is your name?"

"Maggie, miss."

"Well, you understand, Maggie, that any transaction connected with money
is very important."

"Like the Bank of England, miss?"

"Yes, to be sure, and--"

"Oh, miss, forgive me; but you promised me them wiolets."

"To be sure I did."

Kitty snatched them from her toque, flung them to Maggie, who caught
them in an ecstacy, and a moment later was running home as fast as she
could.




CHAPTER XI.

IN CARRIE'S BEDROOM.


Of the Lewis family the first who came home that special evening was
Carrie. She walked straight into the little sitting-room, where Kitty
Malone's letter lying on top of the blotter immediately attracted her
attention. It need not be said that she instantly read it, and not only
once but twice.

"Ha! ha! Elma, I have got you into my power at last," she said to
herself. "So that accounts for the money. Now, what did you borrow it
from that queer Irish girl for? But now that I know a thing or two. I
may be able to draw on you to a considerable extent. Return it! not
you--you are not likely to; but I think I'll be able to frighten you. I
shall certainly do my utmost."

It will be seen from these remarks that Carrie was by no means an
amiable girl. She ran up to her room, took off her hat, and surveyed
herself in the pale blue dress which had been purchased with some of
poor Kitty's money. She then returned to the sitting-room, and folding
up the letter, deliberately put it into her pocket. As she was doing so
Maggie came in to lay the tea.

"Oh lor! Miss Carrie," cried the maid-of-all-work as she spread the
not-too-clean cloth upon the table, "whatever 'as become of that bit of
writin' that was lyin' atop of the blotter here?"

"What bit of writing?" asked Carrie, turning calmly round and surveying
her.

"Oh, a letter miss; I don't know what was in it, but it was a money
transaction, as important as the Bank of England, and it was to be give
to Miss Helma the very instant she come 'ome. Didn't you see it, miss,
when you come in?"

"No, I didn't," said Carrie promptly. "I saw no letter of any kind.
Here's the blotter, there is nothing on it. It may have got between the
folds, however." She took up the thick pad of blotting-paper and shook
it, but no letter dropped out.

"There," she said. "I have not the least doubt that Fido jumped on the
table and took it up and ate it."

"Oh lor! miss, you don't think so?"

"I should not be surprised. Fido can never resist paper; he is always
pulling it about and chewing it."

Maggie looked frantically under the table for even stray pieces of the
letter, but she could not find any.

"If he had ate it," she said at last, fixing Carrie with a very
determined stare--"if he had ate it he would have left some bits about.
I don't believe it; I believe you 'as took it Miss Carrie. Oh, miss, for
shame; and it was as important as the Bank of England--a money
transaction, miss, what ought not to be trifled with. I can't read
writin', though I can read books fair enough; but the young lady was
awful put about."

"What young lady?" asked Carrie. "You had better tell me everything."

"Oh, it was that Irish young lady, Miss Malone. She come here with the
most beautiful 'at on (no, it was wot they calls a talk), and the
wiolets in it they might 'av growed, I could a'most smell 'em; and she
come in distracted like, and writ the letter, and told me I was to give
it to Miss Helma the very moment she returned, and that Miss Helma was
to take her the money to-night--what money is more than I can tell, for
I didn't think Miss Helma ever had any. And she said it was an important
transaction. And I said, 'Is it like the Bank of England, miss?' and she
said, 'Yes, to be sure.' Why, Miss Carrie, you have not gone and hid the
letter, 'ave you? That would be real mean of you."

"Look here," said Carrie; "what did you say about those violets?"

"Why, she gave 'em to me, miss; she took 'em out of her cap, and she
give 'em to me, and I was to give the letter to Miss Helma. It was a
fair and honest bargain, and I must keep my part of it miss."

"Would you like some roses to put with the violets?" said Carrie, making
a careful calculation.

"Roses, miss? That would be prime, and very seasonable, wouldn't they
miss?"

"Yes, violets and roses look very pretty together, and I'll pin them
into your hat and furbish it up. And, look here, Maggie, you can go out
with your young man on Sunday. I'll manage it--I can. I will stay at
home."

"Oh, Miss Carrie, you don't mean it?"

"Yes, I do. I'll manage it; but I'll do it only on a condition."

"What is that miss?"

"That you don't every ask me another question with regard to that
letter, and that you never, never on any account breathe a word of it to
Elma. If you do, why----"

"Oh, Miss, it don't seem fair."

Poor honest Maggie walked to the window and struggled for a few minutes
with her temptation. The thought, however, of roses to add to the
violets, the thought also of Joe, whom she dearly loved, to walk with
her on the following Sunday, proved far too seductive. She struggled
with her enemy for a few minutes, and then she fell once and for all.

"I'll have the roses, Miss Carrie. I can't resist them and the thought
of Joe on Sunday. Joe is so passionate loving, miss, I can't resist
'im." And then Maggie rushed out of the room.

