
The owner of the limbs in question was Ranger, a prefect of his house
and more or less of a grandee at Fellsgarth.  As he was unaware of the
cause of the excitement around him, this sudden assault from below took
him aback, and he started up from his chair in something as near a panic
as a Fellsgarth prefect could be capable of.  Naturally his parasite
followed him.

To Ranger's credit, he took in the situation rapidly, and did not abuse
his opportunities.

"What's this?" he demanded, lifting up Fisher minor, with his hair all
on end and the pocket-comb still in his hand, by the coat-collar.  "Who
does this belong to?"

No one in particular owned the object in question.

"What are you?" asked the prefect.

"I'm Fisher minor; I got under the table, somehow."

"So I should suppose.  Afraid of the draughts, I suppose."

"It was Wally and his brother put me there.  I didn't mean--"

"Oh--Wally, was it?  Here, young Wheatfield, you shouldn't leave your
property about like this.  It's against rules.  Here, hook on, and don't
go chucking it about any more."

"All serene," said the twin.  "Come along, kid.  Done with my comb?  You
look ever so much better form now; doesn't he, you chaps?  How came you
to lose your way downstairs?"

Fisher minor owned himself utterly unable to account for the
misadventure, and discreetly remained silent until the signal was given
to return thanks and separate every boy to his own house.

As he was wandering across the court, very dismal and apprehensive of
what more was in store for him, a lean youth with a pale face and very
showily attired accosted him.

"Hullo, kid, are you a new chap?"

"Yes," replied Fisher minor, eyeing the stranger suspiciously.

"What side are you on?"

Fisher stared interrogatively.

"Well, then, are you Modern or Classic?"

"I don't know, really," said Fisher minor, wishing he knew which he
ought to proclaim himself.  Then making a bold venture, he said, "I
believe Modern."

"Good job for you," said the youth; "saves me the trouble of kicking
you.  Can you lend me a bob?  I'll give it you back to-morrow as soon as
I've unpacked."

It did strike Fisher minor as queer that any one should pack shillings
up in a trunk, but he was too pleased to oblige this important and
fashionable-looking personage to raise any question.

"Yes.  Can you give me change out of a half-crown?  Or you can pay me
the lot back to-morrow, I shan't be wanting it till then," said he.

"All serene, kid; I'm glad you are our side.  I shall be able to give
you a leg-up with the fellows.  Whose house are you in?"

"Wakefield's, the same as my brother."

"What--then you must be a Classic!  They're all Classics at Wakefield's.
Why can't you tell the truth when you're asked, instead of a howling
pack of lies?"

"I didn't know, really, I thought--"

"Come, that's a good one.  Any idiot knows what side he's on at
Fellsgarth."

Fisher minor was greatly confused to stand convicted thus of greenness.

"You see," said he, putting on a little "side" to cover his shame, "I
was bound to be stuck on the same side as my brother, you know."

"Nice for you.  Not a gentleman among them.  All paupers and prigs,"
said this young Modern, waxing eloquent.  "You'll suit them down to the
ground."  Considering that Fisher minor had just lent the speaker half a
crown, these taunts struck him as not exactly grateful.  At the same
time he writhed under the reproach, and felt convinced that Classics
were not at all the "form" at Fellsgarth.

"Why," pursued the other, pocketing his coin in order to release his
hands for a little elocution, "we could boy 'em up twice over.  The
workhouse isn't in it with Wakefield's.  There's not a day but they come
cadging to us, wanting to borrow our tin, or our grub, or something.
There, look at that chap going across there!  He's one of 'em.  Regular
casual-ward form about him.  He's the meanest, stingiest lout in all
Fellsgarth."

"Why," exclaimed Fisher minor, looking in alarm towards this prodigy of
baseness, "why, that's--that's Fisher, my brother!"

The Modern youth's jaw fell with a snap, and his cheeks lost what little
colour they had.

"What?  Why didn't you tell me!  Look here, you needn't tell him what I
said.  It was quite between ourselves, you know.  I must be cutting, I
say.  See you again some day."

And he vanished, leaving Fisher minor considerably more bewildered, and
poorer by a cool half-crown, than he had been five minutes ago.



CHAPTER TWO.

LAMB'S SINGING.

Wakefield's house, as Fisher minor entered it under his brother's wing,
hardly seemed to the new boy as disreputable a haunt as his recent
Modern friend had led him to expect.  Nor did the sixty or seventy
fellows who clustered in the common room strike him as exactly the
lowest stratum of Fellsgarth society.  Yorke, the captain, for instance,
with his serene, well-cut face, his broad shoulders and impressive voice
hardly answered to the description of a lout.  Nor did Ranger, of the
long legs, with speed written in every inch of his athletic figure, and
gentleman in every line of his face, look the sort of fellow to be
mistaken for a cad.  Even Fisher major, about whom the younger brother
had been made to feel decided qualms, could hardly have been the hail-
fellow-well-met he was with everybody, had he been all the new boy's
informant had recently described him.

Indeed, Fisher minor, when presently he gathered himself together
sufficiently to look round him, was surprised to see so few traces of
the "casual-ward" in his new house.  True, most of the fellows might be
poor--which, of course, was highly reprehensible; and some of them might
not be connected with the nobility, which showed a great lack of proper
feeling on their part.  But as a rule they held up their heads and
seemed to think very well of themselves and one another; while their
dress, if it was not in every case as fashionable as that of the
temporary owner of Fisher minor's half-crown, was at least passably well
fitting.

Fisher minor, for all his doubts about the company he was in, could not
help half envying these fellows, as he saw with what glee and self-
satisfaction they entered into their own at Wakefield's.  They were all
so glad to be back, to see again the picture of Cain and Abel on the
wall, to scramble for the corner seat in the ingle-bench, to hear the
well-known creak on the middle landing, to catch the imperturbable tick
of the dormitory clock, to see the top of Hawk's Pike looming out, down
the valley, clear and sharp in the falling light.

Fisher minor and Ashby, as they sat dismally and watched all the fun,
wondered if the time would ever come when they would feel as much at
home as all this.  It was a stretch of imagination beyond their present
capacity.

To their alarm, Master Wally Wheatfield presently recognised them from
across the room, and came over patronisingly to where they sat.

"Hullo, new kids! thinking of your mas, and the rocking-horses, and
Nurse Jane, and all that?  Never mind, have a good blub, it'll do you
good."

Considering how near, in strict secrecy, both the young gentlemen
addressed were to the condition indicated by the genial twin, this
exhortation was not exactly kind.

They tried to look as if they did not mind it, and Fisher minor
naturally did his best to appear knowing.

"I don't mind," said he, with a snigger; "they're all milksops at home.
I'd sooner be here."

"I wouldn't," put in the sturdy Ashby.  "I think it's horrid not to see
a face you know."

"There you are; what did I say!  Screaming for his mammy," gibed Wally.

"And if I was," retorted Master Ashby, warming up, "she's a lot better
worth it than yours, so now!"

Master Wally naturally fired up at this.  Such language was hardly
respectful from a new junior to an old.

"I'll pull your nose, new kid, if you cheek me."

"And I'll pull yours, if you cheek my mother."

"Booh, booh, poor baby!  Who's cheeking your mother?  I wouldn't cheek
her with a pair of tongs.  Something better to do.  I say, are both you
kids Classics?"

"Yes," they replied.

"I thought you must be Moderns, you're both so precious green.  All
right, there'll be lamb's singing directly, then you'll have to sit up."

"What's lamb's singing?" said Ashby.

"Don't you know?" replied Wally, glad to have recovered the whip hand.
"It's this way.  Every new kid has to sing in his house the first-night.
You'll have to."

"Oh," faltered Ashby, "I can't; I don't know anything."

"Can't get out of it; you must," said the twin, charmed to see the
torture he was inflicting.  "So must you, Hair-parting."

Fisher minor was too knowing a hand to be caught napping.  He had had
the tip about lamb's singing from his brother last term, and was
prepared.  He joined in, therefore, against Ashby.

"What, didn't you know that, kid?  You must be green.  _I_ knew it all
along."

"That's all right," said Wheatfield.  "Now I'm going.  I can't fool away
all my evening with you.  By the way, mind you don't get taking up with
any Modern kids.  It's not allowed, and you'll get it hot if you do.  My
young brother," (each twin was particularly addicted to casting
reflections on his brother's age) "is a Modern.  Don't you have anything
to do with him.  And whatever you do, don't lend any of them money, or
there'll be a most awful row.  That's why we always call up
subscriptions for the house clubs on first-night.  It cleans the fellows
out, and then they can't lend any to the Moderns.  You'll have to shell
out pretty soon, as soon as Lamb's singing is over.  Ta, ta."

This last communication put Fisher minor in a terrible panic.  He had
evidently committed a gross breach of etiquette in lending that Modern
boy (whose name he did not even know) a half-crown; and now, when the
subscriptions were called for, he would have to declare himself before
all Wakefield's a pauper.

"I say," said he to Ashby, dropping the patronising for the pathetic,
"could you ever lend me half-a-crown?  I've--I've lost mine--I'll pay it
you back next week faithfully."

"I've only got five bob," said Ashby; "to last all the term, and half a
crown of that will go in the clubs to-night."

"But you'll get it back in a week--really you will," pleaded Fisher
minor, "and I'll--"

But here there was a sudden interruption.  Every one, from the captain
down, looked towards the new boys, and a shout of "lamb's singing,"
headed by Wally Wheatfield, left little doubt as to what it all meant.

"Pass up the new kids down there," called one of the prefects.
Whereupon Fisher minor and Ashby, rather pale and very nervous, were
hustled up to the top of the room, where sat the grandees in a row round
the table on which the sacrifice was to take place.

For the benefit of the curious it may be explained that "lamb's
singing," the name applied to the musical performances of new boys at
Fellsgarth on first-night, is supposed to have derived its title from
the frequency with which these young gentlemen fell back upon "Mary had
a little lamb" as their theme on such occasions.

"Isn't one of them your minor?" asked Yorke of Fisher senior.

"Yes," said the latter rather apologetically; "the one with the light
hair.  He's not much to look at.  The fact is, I only know him slightly.
They say at home he's a nice boy."

"Does he spend much of his time under tables, as a rule?" asked Ranger,
recognising the lost property which had hung on to his legs at dinner-
time.  "If so, I'll take the other one for my fag."

"He's bagged already," said Denton.  "Fisher and I put our names down
for him an hour ago."

"Well, that's cool.  If Fisher wanted a fag he might as well have taken
his own minor."

"Fisher major knew better," said the gentleman in question.  "It might
raise awkward family questions if I had him."

"Wouldn't it be fairer to toss up?" suggested the captain.  "Or I don't
mind swopping Wally Wheatfield for him; if you really--"

Ranger laughed.

"No, thank you, I draw the line at Wally.  I wouldn't deprive you of him
for the world.  I suppose I must have this youngster.  Let's hear him
sing first."

"Yes, lamb's singing.  Now, you two, one at a time.  Who's first?
Alphabetical order."

Ashby, with an inward groan, mounted the rostrum.  If anything could
have been more cruel than the noise which greeted his appearance, it was
the dead silence which followed it.  Fellows sat round, staring him out
of countenance with critical faces, and rejoicing in his embarrassment.

"What's the title!" demanded some one.

"I don't know any songs," said Ashby presently, "and I can't sing."

"Ho, ho! we've heard that before.  Come, forge ahead."

"I only know the words of one that my con--somebody I know--sings,
called the _Vigil_.  I don't know the tune."

"That doesn't matter--out with it."

So Ashby, pulling himself desperately together, plunged recklessly into
the following appropriate ditty; which, failing its proper tune, he
manfully set at the top of his voice, and with all the energy he was
capable of, to the air of the _Vicar of Bray_--

  The stealthy night creeps o'er the lea,
  My darling, haste away with me.
  Beloved, come I see where I stand,
  With arms outstretched upon the strand.

  The night creeps on; my love is late,
  O love, my love, I wait, I wait;
  The soft wind sighs mid crag and pine;
  Haste, O my sweet; be mine, be mine!

This spirited song, the last two lines of which were aught up as a
chorus, fairly brought down the house; and Ashby, much to his surprise,
found himself famous.  He had no idea he could sing so well, or that the
fellows would like the words as much as they seemed to do.  Yet they
cheered him and encored him, and yelled the chorus till the roof almost
fell in.

"Bravo," shouted every one, the captain himself included, as he
descended from the table; "that's a ripping song."

"That sends up the price of our fag, I fancy," said Denton to his chum.
"Your young brother won't beat that."

"Next man in," shouted Wheatfield, hustling forward Fisher minor.  "Now,
kid, lamm it on and show them what you can do."

"Title! title!" cried the meeting.

Now, if truth must be told, Fisher minor had come to Fellsgarth
determined that whatever else he failed in, he would make a hit at
"lamb's singing."  He had made a careful calculation as to what sort of
song would go down with the company and at the same time redeem his
reputation from all suspicion of greenness; and he flattered himself he
had hit upon the exact article.

"Oh," said he, with an attempt at offhand swagger, in response to the
demand.  "It's a comic song, called _Oh no_."

It disconcerted him a little to see how seriously everybody settled down
to listen, and how red his brother's face turned as he took a back seat
among the seniors.  Never mind.  Wait till they heard his song.  That
would fetch them!

He had carefully studied not only the song but the appropriate action.
As he knew perfectly well, there is one invariable attitude for a comic
song.  The head must be tilted a little to one side.  One eyebrow must
be raised and the opposite corner of the mouth turned down.  One knee
should be slightly bent; the first finger and thumb of one hand should
rest gracefully in the waistcoat pocket, and the other hand should be
free for gesture.

All these points Fisher minor attended to now as carefully as his
nervousness would permit, and felt half amused at the thought of how
comic the fellows must think him.

"Do you--" he began.

But at this point Ranger unfeelingly interrupted, and put the vocalist
completely out.

"Did you say `Oh no' or `How now'?"

"Oh no," repeated the singer.

"You mean h-o-w n-o-w?"

"Oh no; it's o-h n-o."

"Thanks--sorry to interrupt.  Fire away."  Fisher tried to get himself
back into attitude, and began again in a thin treble voice;--

Do you think I'm just as green as grass!  Oh no!

Do you take me for a silly ass!  Oh no!  Do you think I don't know A
from B!  Do you think I can't tell he from she!  Do you think I swallow
all I see?

Oh no--not me!  He was bewildered by the unearthly silence of his
audience.  No one stirred a muscle except Wheatfield, who was apparently
wiping away a tear.  Was the song too deep for them, or perhaps he did
not sing the words distinctly, or perhaps they _had_ laughed and he had
