"About what time was this?"

"A little after nine in the evening."

"And where was the gambling house situated?"

"On Thirty-first Street."

A peculiar look came over Mrs. Hamilton's face.

"And Conrad reported this to you?"

"The same evening."

"That was Tuesday?"

"Yes; I could not make up my mind to tell you immediately, because I
did not want to injure the boy."

"You are more considerate than I should have expected."

"I hope I am.  I don't pretend to like the boy.  He seems to have
something sly and underhand about him.  Still, he needs to be
employed, and that made me pause."

"Till your sense of duty to me overcame your reluctance?"

"Exactly so, Cousin Hamilton.  I am glad you understand so well how I
feel about the matter."

Mrs. Hill was quite incapable of understanding the irony of her
cousin's last remark, and was inclined to be well pleased with the
reception her news had met with.

"Where is Conrad?"

"He is not in the house.  He didn't want me to tell you."

"That speaks well for him.  I must speak to Ben on the subject."

She rang the bell, and a servant appeared.

"See if Master Ben is in his room," said the lady.  "If so ask him to
come here for five minutes."

Ben was in the house and in less than two minutes he entered the room.
He glanced from one lady to the other in some surprise.  Mrs. Hamilton
wore her ordinary manner, but Mrs. Hill's mouth was more pursed up
than ever.  She looked straight before her, and did not look at Ben at
all.

"Ben," said Mrs. Hamilton, coming to the point at once, "did you visit
a gambling house in Thirty-first Street on Tuesday evening?"

"I did," answered Ben promptly.

Mrs. Hill moved her hands slightly, and looked horror-stricken.

"You must have had some good reason for doing so.  I take it for
granted you did not go there to gamble?"

"No," answered Ben, with a smile.  "That is not in my line."

"What other purpose could he have had, Cousin Hamilton?" put in Mrs.
Hill maliciously.

Ben eyed her curiously.

"Did Mrs. Hill tell you I went there?" he asked.

"I felt it my duty to do so," said that lady, with acerbity.  "I
dislike to see my cousin so deceived and imposed upon by one she had
befriended."

"How did you know I went there, Mrs. Hill?"

"Conrad saw you coming out of the gambling house."

"I didn't see him.  It was curious he happened be in that neighborhood
just at that time," said Ben significantly.

"If you mean to insinuate that Conrad goes to such places, you are
quite mistaken," said Mrs. Hill sharply.

"It was not that I meant to insinuate at all."

"You have not yet told me why you went there, Ben?" said Mrs. Hamilton
mildly."

"Because I received a mysterious letter, signed James Barnes, asking
me to come to that address about nine o'clock in the evening.  I was
told I would hear something of advantage to myself."

"Did you meet any such man there?" asked Mrs. Hill.

"No."

"Have you got the letter you speak of?" asked Mrs. Hamilton.

"No," answered Ben.  "I must have dropped it somewhere.  I felt in my
pocket for it when I reached the gambling house, but it was gone."

Mrs. Hill looked fairly triumphant.

"A very queer story!" she said, nodding her head.  "I don't believe
you received any such letter.  I presume you had often been to the
same place to misspend your evenings."

"Do you think so, Mrs. Hamilton?" inquired Ben anxiously.

"It is a pity you lost that letter, Ben."

"Yes, it is," answered Ben regretfully.

"Mrs. Hill," said Mrs. Hamilton, "if you will withdraw, I would like
to say a few words to Ben in private."

"Certainly, Cousin Hamilton," returned the poor cousin, with alacrity.
"I think his race is about run," she said to herself, in a tone of
congratulation.




CHAPTER XXV
CONRAD TAKES A BOLD STEP


"I hope, Mrs. Hamilton, you don't suspect me of frequenting gambling
houses?" said Ben, after his enemy had left the room.

"No," answered Mrs. Hamilton promptly.  "I think I know you too well
for that."

"I did go on Tuesday evening, I admit," continued Ben.  "I saw that
Mrs. Hill did not believe it, but it's true.  I wish I hadn't lost the
letter inviting me there.  You might think I had invented the story."

"But I don't, Ben; and, for the best of all reasons, because I found
the note on the carpet, and have it in my possession now."

"Have you?" exclaimed Ben gladly.

"Here it is," said the lady, as she produced the note from the desk
before her.  "It is singular such a note should have been sent you,"
she added thoughtfully.

"I think so, too.  I had no suspicion when I received it, but I think
now that it was written to get to into a scrape."

"Then it must have been written by an enemy.  Do you know of anyone
who would feel like doing you a bad turn?"

"No," answered Ben, shaking his head.

"Do you recognize the handwriting?"

"No; it may have been written by some person I know, but I have no
suspicion and no clew as to who it is."

"I think we will let the matter rest for a short time.  If we say
nothing about it, the guilty person may betray himself."

"You are very kind to keep your confidence in me, Mrs. Hamilton," said
Ben gratefully.

"I trust you as much as ever, Ben, but I shall appear not to--for a
time."

Ben looked puzzled.

"I won't explain myself," said Mrs. Hamilton, with a smile, "but I
intend to treat you coolly for a time, as if you had incurred my
displeasure.  You need not feel sensitive, however, but may consider
that I am acting."

"Then it may be as well for me to act, too," suggested Ben.

"A good suggestion!  You will do well to look sober and uneasy."

"I will do my best," answered Ben brightly.

The programme was carried out.  To the great delight of Mrs. Hill and
Conrad, Mrs. Hamilton scarcely addressed a word to Ben at the supper
table.  When she did speak, it was with an abruptness and coldness
quite unusual for the warm-hearted woman.  Ben looked depressed, fixed
his eyes on his plate, and took very little part in the conversation.
Mrs. Hill and Conrad, on the other hand, seemed in very good spirits.
They chatted cheerfully, and addressed an occasional word to Ben.
They could afford to be magnanimous, feeling that he had forfeited
their rich cousin's favor.

After supper, Conrad went into his mother's room.

"Our plan's working well, mother," he said, rubbing his hands.

"Yes, Conrad, it is.  Cousin Hamilton is very angry with the boy.  She
scarcely spoke a word to him."

"He won't stay long, I'll be bound.  Can't you suggest, mother, that
he had better be dismissed at once?"

"No, Conrad; we have done all that is needed.  We can trust Cousin
Hamilton to deal with him.  She will probably keep him for a short
time, till she can get along without his services."

"It's lucky he lost the letter.  Cousin Hamilton will think he never
received any."

So the precious pair conferred together.  It was clear that Ben had
two dangerous and unscrupulous enemies in the house.

It was all very well to anticipate revenge upon Ben, and his summary
dismissal, but this did not relieve Conrad from his pecuniary
embarrassments.  As a general thing, his weekly allowance was spent by
the middle of the week.  Ben had refused to lend money, and there was
no one else he could call upon.  Even if our hero was dismissed, there
seemed likely to be no improvement in this respect.

At this juncture, Conrad was, unfortunately, subjected to a temptation
which proved too strong for him.

Mrs. Hamilton was the possessor of an elegant opera glass, which she
had bought some years previous in Paris at a cost of fifty dollars.
Generally, when not in use, she kept it locked up in a bureau drawer.
It so happened, however, that it had been left out on a return from a
matinee, and lay upon her desk, where it attracted the attention of
Conrad.

It was an unlucky moment, for he felt very hard up.  He wished to go
to the theater in the evening with a friend, but had no money.

It flashed upon him that he could raise a considerable sum on the
opera glass at Simpson's, a well-known pawnbroker on the Bowery, and
he could, without much loss of time, stop there on his way down to
business.

Scarcely giving himself time to think, he seized the glass and thrust
it into the pocket of his overcoat.  Then, putting on his coat, he
hurried from the house.

Arrived at the pawnbroker's, he produced the glass, and asked:

"How much will you give me on this?"

The attendant looked at the glass, and then at Conrad.

"This is a very valuable glass," he said.  "Is it yours?"

"No," answered Conrad glibly.  "It belongs to a lady in reduced
circumstances, who needs to raise money.  She will be able to redeem
it soon."

"Did she send you here?"

"Yes."

"We will loan you twenty dollars on it.  Will that be satisfactory?"

"Quite so," answered Conrad, quite elated at the sum, which exceeded
his anticipations.

"Shall we make out the ticket to you or the lady?"

"To me.  The lady does not like to have her name appear in the
matter."

This is so frequently the case that the statement created no surprise.

"What is your name?" inquired the attendant.

"Ben Barclay," answered Conrad readily.

The ticket was made out, the money paid over, and Conrad left the
establishment.

"Now I am in funds!" he said to himself, "and there is no danger of
detection.  If anything is ever found out, it will be Ben who will be
in trouble, not I."

It was not long before Mrs. Hamilton discovered her loss.  She valued
the missing opera glass, for reasons which need not be mentioned, far
beyond its intrinsic value, and though she could readily have supplied
its place, so far as money was concerned, she would not have been as
well pleased with any new glass, though precisely similar, as with the
one she had used for years.  She remembered that she had not replaced
the glass in the drawer, and, therefore, searched for it wherever she
thought it likely to have been left.  But in vain.

"Ben," she said, "have you seen my glass anywhere about?"

"I think," answered Ben, "that I saw it on your desk."

"It is not there now, but it must be somewhere in the house."

She next asked Mrs. Hill.  The housekeeper was entirely ignorant of
Conrad's theft, and answered that she had not seen it.

"I ought not to have left it about," said Mrs. Hamilton.  "It may have
proved too strong a temptation to some one of the servants."

"Or someone else," suggested Mrs. Hill significantly.

"That means Ben," thought Mrs. Hamilton, but she did not say so.

"I would ferret out the matter if I were you," continued Mrs. Hill.

"I intend to," answered Mrs. Hamilton quietly.  "I valued the glass
far beyond its cost, and I will leave no means untried to recover it."

"You are quite right, too."

When Conrad was told that the opera glass had been lost, he said:

"Probably Ben stole it."

"So I think," assented his mother.  "But it will be found out.  Cousin
Hamilton has put the matter into the hands of a detective."

For the moment, Conrad felt disturbed.  But he quickly recovered
himself.

"Pshaw!  they can't trace it to me," he thought.  "They will put it on
Ben."




CHAPTER XXVI
MR. LYNX, THE DETECTIVE


The detective who presented himself to Mrs. Hamilton was a
quiet-looking man, clad in a brown suit.  Except that his eyes were
keen and searching, his appearance was disappointing.  Conrad met him
as he was going out of the house, and said to himself contemptuously:
"He looks like a muff."

"I have sent for you, Mr. Lynx," said Mrs. Hamilton, "to see if you
can help me in a matter I will explain to you," and then she gave him
all the information she possessed about the loss of the opera glass.

"How valuable was the glass?" inquired Mr. Lynx.

"It cost fifty dollars in Paris," said Mrs. Hamilton.

"But you set a higher value upon it for other reasons?  Just so."

"You are right."

"Will you favor me with an exact description of the article?" said the
detective, producing his notebook.

Mrs. Hamilton did so, and the detective made an entry.

"Have you ever had anything taken out of your house by outside
parties?" he asked.

"On one occasion, when my brother was visiting me, his overcoat was
taken from the hatstand in the hall."

"A sneak thief, of course.  The glass, however, was not so exposed?"

"No; it was not on the lower floor at all."

"It looks, then, as if it was taken by someone in the house."

"It looks so," said Mrs. Hamilton gravely.

"Have you confidence in your servants?  Or, rather, have you reason to
suspect any of them?"

"I believe they are honest.  I don't believe they would be tempted by
such an article."

"Not, perhaps, for their own use, but a glass like this may be pawned
for a considerable sum.  Being of peculiar appearance, the thief would
be hardly likely to use it himself or herself.  Detection would be too
sure."

"No doubt you are right."

"How long has the glass been missing?" resumed the detective.

"Three days."

"No doubt it has been pawned by this time.  Your course is clear."

