"Yes, that's it," continued Mr. Vance, laughing.  "The old man's away
from home just now; he was suffering from rheumatism very badly, and the
doctor ordered him to a course of treatment at some baths."

The conversation turned on other topics, and when at length they rose
from the table, Jack proposed a stroll round the garden.

There were many things to see--some pet rabbits, a swing, and an old
summer-house, which Jack, being, we should say, of a decidedly nautical
turn of mind, had turned into a sort of miniature shipbuilding yard
for the construction of model vessels; though at present the chief use
to which the place seemed to have been put was the production of a great
amount of chips and shavings.

"I say," exclaimed the owner, after he and his friends had amused
themselves for some time boring holes in the door with a brace, "I know
what we'll do: let's go over and explore The Hermitage!"

Anything with a spice of excitement in it was meat and drink to Diggory.
He immediately seconded the proposition, and Mugford, after a moment's
hesitation, agreed to join his companions in the enterprise.

They strolled off down the path, and soon reached a long stretch of
brick wall, the top of which was thickly covered with fragments of
broken bottles.

"There's a place down at the other end where we can get over," said
Jack.  "I smashed the glass with a hammer, because I lost a ball and had
to climb over and get it, one day last holidays."

The Hermitage was surrounded on all sides by a thick mass of shrubs and
trees, through which a moment later the Triple Alliance were cautiously
threading their way.  Emerging from the bushes, they found themselves
standing on a gravel path, green with moss and weeds, which ran round
the house--a queer, dilapidated-looking building, which seemed sadly in
want of repair: the plaster was cracked and discoloured, while the doors
and windows had long stood in need of a fresh coating of paint.

"I say," whispered Mugford, "hadn't we better go back? what if the old
chap's at home!"

"Oh, it's all right; there's nobody about," answered Jack.  "Let's go on
and see what the place is really like."

They tip-toed round the building.  It was evidently unoccupied, though
the delightful sense of uncertainty that at any moment some one might
pounce out upon them or walk down the drive made the questionable
adventure very charming.

"Have you ever been inside?" asked Diggory.

"No, rather not; I don't think any one has except the doctor, and an old
woman who comes in to do the house-work."

"Well, then, I'm going in," answered Diggory, with a twinkle in his eye.

"Go on!  Why, you might be had up for house-breaking!"

"Rubbish! I'm not going to steal anything.--Here, Mug, lend me your
knife a minute."

"I don't believe this one's fastened," he continued, walking up to one
of the windows.  "No, it isn't.  Bother!  I'm awfully sorry, Mugford."

Using the big blade of the clasp-knife as a lever, Diggory had just
succeeded in raising the sash the fraction of an inch, when the steel
suddenly snapped off short at the handle.

"Oh, never mind," said the owner; "let's go back now.  What if we're
seen!"

"Oh, there's no fear of that," answered Jack, who was always infected
with the adventurous spirit of his chum.--"Go on, Diggy; I'll come
too."

By inserting their fingers in the aperture, the boys soon raised the
sash, and a few seconds later Diggory mounted the ledge and scrambled
through the window "Come on," he said; "the coast's all clear."

Jack Vance joined him immediately, and Mugford, not wishing to be left
alone outside, was not long in making up his mind to follow his
companions.

The room in which the three boys found themselves was evidently a
library or study.  Book-shelves, and cupboards with glass doors,
containing geological and other specimens, occupied much of the wall
space; while in the centre of the floor stood a large writing-table,
covered with a miscellaneous collection of pens, ink-pots, bundles of
papers, and a polished mahogany box which could easily be recognized as
a microscope-case.

The intruders stood for a few moments gazing round in silence.
The place did not look very interesting, and smelt rather damp and
mouldy.

"I say," exclaimed Jack Vance, "look there: he don't seem very careful
how he leaves his things when he goes away."

As he spoke he pointed across to the opposite side of the room, where,
between two bookcases, an iron safe had been let into the wall.
The heavy door was standing half open, while the floor beneath was
strewn with a quantity of shallow wooden trays lined with green baize.

"Old bachelors are always untidy," remarked Diggory.  "Let's see where
this door leads to."  He turned the handle as he spoke, and walked out
into a gloomy little hall paved with cold, bare flagstones, which caused
their footsteps to waken mournful echoes in the empty house.

"I say, you fellows, don't let's go any further," murmured Mugford;"
we've seen enough now.  Suppose the old chap came back and--"

He never reached the end of the sentence, for Diggory suddenly raised
his hand, exclaiming in a whisper, "Hark! what was that?"

The loud ticking of Mugford's old turnip of a watch was distinctly
audible in the silence which followed.

"What is it, Diggy? what--"

"Hark! there it is again; listen."

The suspense became awful.  At length Diggory dropped his hand.
"Didn't you hear footsteps?" he asked.  "I'm certain there's some one
walking about on the gravel path."

"We shall be caught," whimpered Mugford; "I knew we should.  What can we
do?"

"Bolt!" answered Diggory, and began tip-toeing back towards the library
door.  "Stay here half a 'jiffy,'" he added; "I'll go and reconnoitre."

Ages seemed to pass while Jack Vance and Mugford stood in the dark
passage awaiting their companion's return.  At length the door was
pushed softly open.

"It's all right; there's no one there.  I must have been mistaken.
Come along."

In a very short time the Triple Alliance were once more outside The
Hermitage.  Diggory lingered for a moment to close the window, and then
followed his companions through the shrubs and over the wall.

"You are a great ass, Diggy, to go giving us a start like that," said
Jack, as they paused for a moment to take breath before returning to the
house.

"Well, I could have sworn I heard the gravel crunch as if some one was
walking on it," returned the other.  "I should think the place must be
haunted."

A good tea, with all kinds of nice things on the table, soon revived the
boys from the trifling shock which their nerves had sustained, and by
the end of the evening their adventure was wellnigh forgotten.
They were destined, however, to remember it for many a long day to come,
and before many hours had passed they were heartily wishing that they
had never set foot inside The Hermitage, but kept on their own side of
the wall.

The party were seated at supper on Sunday evening, when a servant
entered the room, and addressing her master said, "If you please, sir,
there's a policeman called to see you."

Jack's father rose from his chair, remarking, in a jocular manner,
"I expect it's one of you young gentlemen he's come after."

The meal was nearly over when Mr. Vance returned and reseated himself at
the table.

"Did either of you hear the dog bark last night?" he asked.

"No; why?"

"Why, because old Fossberry's house has been broken into, and they think
the thieves must have come through our garden; there were some footmarks
in the shrubbery just on the other side of the wall."

The hearts of the Triple Alliance seemed to jump into their throats, and
their mouths grew dry and parched.  Jack stared at Mugford, and Mugford
stared at Diggory, but none of them spoke.

"It seems," continued Mr. Vance, not noticing the effect which his first
announcement had produced on at least three of his hearers, "that the
old woman who looks after the house went there this morning, and found
that the iron safe in which the old chap keeps his coins had been opened
and the whole collection removed.  The only trace of the thieves that
the police have been able to discover is the broken blade of a
clasp-knife, which was on a flower-bed near the window."

"What will they get if they are caught?" asked Jack faintly.

"Oh, penal servitude, I suppose; it's a serious business housebreaking."

"How quiet you boys are!" said Mrs. Vance a short time later.
"I think you must be tired.  Wouldn't you like to go to bed?"

The three friends were only too glad to avail themselves of this excuse
for getting away into some place where they could indulge in a little
private conversation.  Diggory and Mugford slept together in the same
room; Jack followed them in and closed the door.

"Well," he exclaimed, "we're in a nice mess."

"But we didn't steal the coins," said Mugford.

"Of course we didn't--the safe had been robbed before we went there--but
it looks as if we'd done it; and if they find out we got into the house,
I don't see how we're going to prove that we're innocent."

There was a short silence; then Diggory spoke.

"Look here, Jack: I was the one who proposed going inside the place;
shall I tell your guv'nor?"

"Well, I was thinking of doing that myself, only I don't see what good
it can do.  If we tell him, he'll be bound to tell the police, to
explain about those footmarks; and when it comes out that we got into
the house, I should think we are pretty certain to be charged with
having stolen the coins.  I think the best thing will be to keep it
dark: we didn't crib the things, and the thieves are sure to be caught
in time."

Even after Jack had retired to his own room, Diggory and Mugford lay
awake for hours discussing the situation; and when at length they did
fall asleep, it was only to dream of being chased by "The Hermit"
and a swarm of long-legged policemen, who forced their way into the
Third Form classroom at Ronleigh, and handcuffed the unfortunate trio in
the very bosom of "The Happy Family."

The following morning was spent in visiting such parts of the town of
Todderton as were worth seeing.

"Upon my word," said Jack, "I feel funky to show my nose outside our
gate, just as if I really had prigged those wretched coins.  I shan't be
at all sorry this evening to get back to Ronleigh.  It's all in the
paper this morning; it mentions the footmarks and the knife-blade, and
says that as yet the police have not been able to discover any further
traces of the robbers."

The conditions on which the half-term holiday was granted required every
boy to return to school on the Monday evening, and accordingly, about
seven o'clock, the Triple Alliance found themselves once more on their
way to the railway station.  They took their seats, and had hardly done
so when young Noaks entered the compartment.

"Hullo, you fellows!" he exclaimed; "didn't you hear me whistle?
I was standing over there by the book-stall."

Regarding this as an overture of friendship after their recent
encounter, Jack Vance replied in an equally amicable manner, and after a
few common-place remarks the party relapsed into silence.  At Chatton,
the station before Ronleigh, a man who had so far travelled with them
got out, and the four boys were left alone.  Hardly had the train
started again when Noaks put down his paper, and turning to his
companions said,--

"That's a rum business about that old chap's house being robbed, isn't
it?"

Something in the speaker's look and in the tone of his voice caused the
three listeners to experience an unpleasant quickening of their pulses.

"Yes," answered Diggory, with a well-assumed air of indifference.
"I suppose they'll catch the thieves in time."

"I suppose so," returned the other, "especially if they find the chap
who owns that knife with the broken blade."

The malignant look with which these words was accompanied showed at once
that the speaker meant mischief.  The three friends looked at one
another in horrified amazement.  Could it be possible that their visit
to The Hermitage had already been discovered?

Noaks watched their faces for a moment, evidently well pleased with the
effect which his remark had produced; then he burst out laughing.

"Look here," he continued, producing from his pocket a buck-handled
clasp-knife: "I wonder if that's anything like it; I see the big blade's
broken."

The Triple Alliance recognized it in a moment as one of the articles
that had been rescued from Mugford's sale at The Birches; in fact, the
owner's name appeared plainly engraved on the small brass plate.

Diggory was the first to find his tongue.

"What d'you mean?  We didn't steal the coins!"

"My dear fellow, I never said you did.  I only know that on Saturday I
was looking over our wall, through an opening there happens to be in the
shrubs, and saw you fellows climbing out of the old chap's window; and
after you'd gone I noticed something lying in the path, and I hopped
over, and picked up this knife."

"Give it here; it's mine," said Mugford, holding out his hand.

"No fear," answered the other, calmly returning the piece of lost
property to his own pocket.  "In this case finding's keeping; besides,
I'm not sure if I couldn't get a reward for this if I sent it to the
right place."

The train began to slacken speed as it approached Ronleigh station.

