comfortably into the pillow.  "What do you mean by a second or two?"

"It's only seven past," says Parson, in an injured tone.

"Very well; go and see if Game's up."

Parson skulks off to rouse Game, knowing perfectly well that Bloomfield
will be sound asleep again before he is out of the door, which turns out
to be the case.  After super-human efforts to extract from Game an
assurance that he's getting up that moment, and Parson needn't wait, the
luckless fag returns to find his master snoring like one of the seven
sleepers.  The same process has to be repeated.  Shouts and shakes, and
an occasional sly pinch, have no effect.  Parson is tempted to leave his
graceless lord to his fate, and betake himself to his French verbs; but
a dim surmise as to the consequences prevents him.  At last he braces
himself up for one desperate effort.  With a mighty tug he snatches the
clothes off the bed, and, dragging with all his might at the arm of the
obstinate hero, yells out, "I say, Bloomfield, it's half-past six, and
you wanted to be up at six.  Get up!"

The effect of these combined efforts is that Bloomfield sits up in bed,
rubbing his eyes, and demands, "Half-past six!  Why didn't you call me
at six, you young cad, eh?"

"So I did."

"Don't tell crams.  If you'd called me at six I should have been up,
shouldn't I?" exclaimed Bloomfield.  "I tell you I did call you,"
retorts the fag.

"Look here," says Bloomfield, becoming alarmingly wide-awake, "I don't
want any of your cheek.  Go and see if Game's up, and then see if the
boat's ready.  The tub-pair, mind; look sharp!"

"Please, Bloomfield," says Parson, meekly, "do you mind if I get Parks
to cox you?  I've not looked at my Caesar yet, and I've got eight French
verbs to do besides for Coates."

"Do you hear me?  Go and see if Game's up," replies Bloomfield.  "If you
choose not to do your work overnight, and get impositions for breaking
rules into the bargain, it's not my lookout, is it?"

"But I only went--" begins the unfortunate Parson.

"I'll went you with the flat of a bat if you don't cut," shouts
Bloomfield.  Whereat his fag vanishes.

Game, of course, is fast asleep, but on him Parson has no notion of
bestowing the pains he had devoted to Bloomfield.  Finding the sleeper
deaf to all his calls, he adopts the simple expedient of dipping the end
of a towel in water and laying it neatly across the victim's face,
shouting in his ear at the same time, "Game, I say, Bloomfield's waiting
for you down at the boats."  Having delivered himself of which, he
retreats rather hastily, and only just in time.

The row up the river that morning was rather pleasant than otherwise.
When once they were awake the morning had its effect on the spirits of
all three boys.  Even Parson, sitting lazily in the stern, listening to
the Sixth Form gossip of the two rowers, forgot about his Caesar and
French verbs, and felt rather glad he had turned out after all.

The chief object of the present expedition was not pleasure by any means
as far as Bloomfield and Game were concerned.  It was one of a series of
training practices in anticipation of the school regatta, which was to
come off on the second of June, in which the rival four-oars of the
three houses were to compete for the championship of the river.  The
second of June was far enough ahead at present, but an old hand like
Bloomfield knew well that the time was all too short to lick his crew
into shape.  Parrett's boat, by all ordinary calculation, ought to win,
for they had a specially good lot of men this year; and now Wyndham had
left, the schoolhouse boat would be quite an orphan.  Bloomfield himself
was far away the best oar left in Willoughby, and if he could only get
Game to work off a little of his extra fat, and bully Tipper into
reaching better forward, and break Ashley of his trick of feathering
under water, he had a crew at his back which it would be hard indeed to
beat.  This morning he was taking Game in hand, and that substantial
athlete was beginning to find out that "working off one's extra fat" in
a tub-pair on a warm summer morning is not all sport.

"I wonder if Tipper and Ashley will show, up," said Bloomfield, who was
rowing bow for the sake of keeping a better watch on his pupil.  "They
promised they would.  Ashley, you know--(do keep it up, Game, you're
surely not blowed yet)--Ashley's about as much too light as you are too
fat--(try a little burst round the corner now; keep us well out, young
'un)--but if he'll only keep his blade square till he's out of the
water--(there you go again!  Of course you're hot; that's what I brought
you out for.  How do you suppose you're to boil down to the proper
weight unless you do perspire a bit?)--he'll make a very decent bow.
Ah, there are Porter and Fairbairn in the schoolhouse tub--(you needn't
stop rowing, Game; keep it up, man; show them how you can spurt).  I
never thought they'd try Porter in their boat.  They might as well try
Riddell.  Just shows how hard-up they must be for men.  How are you?" he
cried, as the schoolhouse tub went clumsily past, both rowers looking
decidedly nervous under the critical eye of the captain of Parrett's.

Poor Game, who had been kept hard at it for nearly a mile, now fairly
struck, and declared he couldn't keep it up any longer, and as he had
really done a very good spell of work, Bloomfield consented to land at
the Willows and bathe; after which he and Game would run back, and young
Parson might scull home the tub.

Which delightful plan Master Parson by no means jumped at.  He had
calculated on getting at least a quarter of an hour for his Caesar
before morning chapel if they returned as they had come.  But now, if he
was expected to lug that great heavy boat back by himself, not only
would he not get that, but the chances were he would get locked out for
chapel altogether, and it would be no excuse that he had had to act as
galley-slave for Bloomfield or anybody else.

"Look alive!" cries Bloomfield from the bank, where he is already
stripped for his header.  "And, by the way, on your way up go round to
Chalker's and tell him only to stick up one set of cricket nets in our
court; don't forget, now.  Be quick; you've not too much time before
chapel."

Saying which, he takes a running dive from the bank and leaves the
luckless Parson to boil over inwardly as he digs his sculls spitefully
into the water and begins his homeward journey.

Was life worth living at this rate?  If he didn't tell Chalker about the
nets that imbecile old groundsman would be certain to stick up half a
dozen sets, and there'd be no end of a row.  That was 7:30 striking now,
and he had to be in the chapel at five minutes to eight, and Chalker's
hut was a long five minutes from the boat-house.  And then those eight
French verbs and that Caesar--

It was no use thinking about them, and Parson lashed out with his
sculls, caring little if that hulking tub went to the bottom.  He'd
rather like it, in fact, for he wanted a swim.  He hadn't even had time
to tub that morning, and it was certain there'd be no time now till
goodness knew when--not till after second school, and then probably he'd
be spending a pleasant half-hour in the doctor's study.

At this point he became aware of another boat making down on him, manned
by three juniors, who were making up in noise and splashing what they
lacked in style and oarsmanship.

Parson knew them yards away.  They were rowdies of Welch's house, and he
groaned inwardly at the prospect before him.  The boy steering was our
old acquaintance Pilbury, and as his boat approached he shouted out
cheerily, "Hullo, there, Parson! mind your eye!  We'll race you in--give
you ten yards and bump you in twenty!  Pull away, you fellows!  One,
two, three, gun!  Off you go!  Oh, well rowed, my boat!  Now you've got
him!  Wire in, now!  Smash him up! scrunch him into the bank!  Hooroo!
two to one on us!  Lay on to it, you fellows; he can't go straight!  Six
more strokes and you're into him!  One, two, three--ha, ha! he's funking
it!--four, five--now a good one for the last--six!  Hooroo! bump to us!
Welch's for ever!"

So saying, the hostile boat came full tilt on to the stern of the
Parrett's tub, and the outraged Parson found himself next moment
sprawling on his back, with the nose of his boat firmly wedged into the
clay bank of the river, while his insulting adversaries sped gaily away
down stream, making the morning hideous with their shouts and laughter.

This little incident, as may be supposed, did not tend to compose the
fluttered spirits of the unhappy Frederick.  To say nothing of the
indignity of being deliberately run down and screwed into the bank by a
crew of young "Welchers," the loss of time involved in extricating his
boat from the muddy obstacle which held her by the nose, put all chance
of getting in in time to go round to Chalker's before chapel out of the
question.  Indeed, it looked very like a shut-out from chapel too, and
that meant no end of a row.

By a super-human effort he got his boat clear, and sculled down hard
all, reaching the boat-house at seven minutes to eight.  He had just
presence of mind enough to shout the message for Chalker to the boat-
boy, with a promise of twopence if he delivered it at once; and then
with a desperate rush he just succeeded in reaching the chapel and
squeezing himself in at the door as the bell ceased ringing.

Chapel was not, under the circumstances, a very edifying service to
Parson that morning.  His frame of mind was not devotional, and his
feelings of bottled-up wrath at what was past, and dejected anticipation
of what was to come, left between them no room for interest in or
meaning for the words in which his schoolfellows were joining.  The only
satisfaction morning prayers brought to him was that, for ten minutes at
least, no one could harry him; and that at least was something to be
grateful for.

Morning chapel at Willoughby was supposed to be at 7:15, and was at 7:15
all the months of the year except May, June, and July, when, in
consideration of the early-morning rowing and bathing, it was postponed
for three-quarters of an hour--a concession made up for by the sacrifice
of the usual half-hour's interval between breakfast and first lesson.

This arrangement was all against Parson, who, if the half-hour had been
still available, could at least have skimmed through his Caesar, and
perhaps have begged a friend to help him with the French verbs, and
possibly even have had it out with Pilbury for his morning's diversion.
As it was, there was no opportunity for the performance of any one of
these duties, and at the sound of the pitiless bell he slunk into first
lesson, feeling himself a doomed man.

His one hope was Telson.  Telson sat next him in class, and, he knew
well, would help him if he could.

"Telson," he groaned, directly he found himself beside his faithful
ally, "I've not looked at it!"

Telson whistled.  "There'll be a row," he muttered, consolingly; "it's a
jolly hard bit."

"Haven't you got the crib?"

Telson looked uncomfortable.  "Riddell caught me with it and made me
give it up."

"What on earth business has Riddell with your cribs, I'd like to know?"
exclaimed Parson, indignant, not at all on the question of morality, but
because the last straw on which he had relied for scrambling through his
Caesar had failed him.

"He didn't take it, but he advised me to give it up."

"And you were fool enough to give in to him?"

"Well, he made out it wasn't honourable to use cribs," said Telson.

"Grandmother!" snarled Parson.  "Why, Telson, I didn't think you'd have
been such a soft!"

"No more did I, but somehow--oh!  I'm awfully sorry, old man; I'll try
and get it back."

"Doesn't much matter," said Parson, resignedly.  "I'm in for it hot to-
day."

"I'll prompt you all I can," said the repentant Telson.

"Thanks; I'd do the same to you if I could," replied Parson.

"It is a long lane that has no turning," as the proverb says, and
Parson, after all, was destined to enjoy one brief glimpse of the smiles
of fortune that day.  The first boy put up to translate stumbled over a
somewhat intricate point of syntax.  Now Mr Warton, the master--as the
manner of many masters is--was writing a little book on Latin Syntax,
and this particular passage happened to be a superb example of a certain
style of construction which till this moment had escaped his notice.
Delighted with the discovery, he launched out into a short lecture on
the subject generally, citing all the examples he had already got in his
book, and comparing them with other forms of construction to be found
scattered through the entire range of Latin classical literature.

How Parson and Telson enjoyed that lecture!  They listened to it with
rapt attention with hearts full of gratitude and faces full of sympathy.
They did not understand a word of it, but a chapter out of "Midshipman
Easy" could not have delighted them more; and when they saw that the
clock had slowly worked round from nine to ten they would not have
interrupted it for the world.

"Ah!" said Mr Warton, taking out his watch, "I see time's up.  We've
had more Syntax than Caesar to-day.  Never mind, it's a point worth
remarking, and sure to be useful as you get on in Latin.  The class is
dismissed."

Little he knew the joy his words carried to two small hearts in his
audience.

"Jolly good luck that!" said Parson, as he strolled out into the passage
arm-in-arm with his friend.  "Now if I can only get those beastly verbs
done before Coates asks for them!  I say, Telson, do you know the dodge
for sticking three nibs on one pen and writing three lines all at one
time?"

"Tried it once," said Telson, "but it didn't pay.  It took longer to
keep sticking them in when they fell out, and measuring them to write on
the lines, than to write the thing twice over the ordinary way.  I'll
write out part, old man."

"Thanks, Telson, you're an awful brick.  I suppose Riddell wouldn't
think it wicked of you to write another fellow's impot, would he?"

"I half fancy he would; but I won't tell him.  Hullo! though, here comes
Coates."

A monitor wearing his "mortar-board" approached.

"Where's your imposition, Parson?" he asked.

"I'm awfully sorry," said Parson, "but it's not quite done yet, Coates."

"How much is done?" demanded Coates.

"Not any yet," said Parson, with some confusion.  "I was just going to
begin.  Wasn't I, Telson?"

"Won't do," said Coates; "you were up the river this morning, I saw you.
If you can go up the river you can do your impositions.  Better come
with me to the captain."

Coming with a monitor to the captain meant something unpleasant.  The
discipline of Willoughby, particularly in outside matters, was left
almost entirely in the hands of the monitors, who with the captain,
their head, were responsible as a body to the head master for the order
of the school.  It was very rarely that a case had to go beyond the
monitors, whose authority was usually sufficient to enable them to deal
summarily with all ordinary offenders.

It was by no means the first time that Parson, who was reputed by almost
every one but himself and Telson to be an incorrigible scamp, had been
haled away to this awful tribunal, and he was half regretting that he
had not met his fate over the Caesar after all, and so escaped his
present position, when another monitor appeared down the passage and met
them.  It was Ashley.

"Hullo!  Coates," said he, "I wish you'd come to my study and help me
choose half a dozen trout-flies, there's a good fellow.  I've had a book
up from the town, and I don't know which are the best to use."

"All serene," said Coates, "I'll be there directly.  I'm just going to
take this youngster to the captain."

"Who is the captain?" said Ashley.  "Wyndham's gone, and no one's been
named yet that I know of.  I suppose it's Bloomfield."

"Eh?  I never thought of that.  No, I expect it'll be a schoolhouse
fellow.  Always is, isn't it.  Parson, you can go.  Bring me twelve
French verbs written out to my study before chapel to-morrow.  Come on,
Ashley."

And Parson departed, consoled in spirit, to announce to Telson and the
lower school generally that Willoughby was at present without a captain.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE VACANT CAPTAINCY.

Who was to be the new captain of Willoughby?  This was a question it had
occurred to only a very few to ask until Wyndham had finally quitted the
school.  Fellows had grown so used to the old order of things, which had
continued now for two years, that the possibility of their bowing to any
other chief than "Old Wynd" had scarcely crossed their minds.  But the
question being once asked, it became very interesting indeed.

The captains of Willoughby had been by long tradition what is known as
"all-round men."  There was something in the air of the place that
seemed specially favourable to the development of muscle and classical
proficiency at the same time, and the consequence was that the last
three heads of the school had combined in one person the senior classic
and the captains of the clubs.  Wyndham had been the best of these;
indeed he was as much ahead of his fellows in the classical school as he
was in the cricket-field and on the river, which was saying not a
little.  His predecessors had both also been head boys in classics; and
although neither of them actually the best men of their time in
athletics, they had been sufficiently near the best to entitle them to
the place of honour, which made the Willoughby captain supreme, not only
in school, but out of it.  So that in the memory of the present
"generation"--a school generation being reckoned as five years--the
Willoughby captain had always been cock of the school in every sense in
which such a distinction was possible.

But now all of a sudden the school woke up to the fact that this
delightful state of things was not everlasting.  Wyndham had left and
his mantle had fallen from him in two pieces.

The new head classic was Riddell, a comparatively unknown boy in the
school, who had come there a couple of years ago from a private school,
and about whom the most that was known was that he was physically weak
and timid, rarely taking part in any athletic exercises, having very few
chums, interfering very little with anybody else, and reputed "pi."--as
the more irreverent among the Willoughbites were wont to stigmatise any
fellow who made a profession of goodness.  Such was the boy on whom,
according to strict rule, the captaincy of Willoughby would devolve, and
it need hardly be said that the discovery spread consternation wherever
it travelled.

Among the seniors the idea was hardly taken seriously.

"The doctor would never be so ridiculous," said Ashley to Coates, as
they talked the matter over in the study of the former.  "We might as
well shut up the school."

"The worst of it is, I don't see how he can help it," replied Coates.

"Help it!  Of course he can help it if he likes.  There's no written law
that head classics are to be captains, if they can't hold a bat or run a
hundred yards, is there?"

"I don't suppose there is.  But who else is there?"

"Why, Bloomfield, of course.  He's just the fellow for it, and the
fellows all look up to him."

"But Bloomfield's low down in the sixth," said Coates.

"What's that to do with it?  Felton was a muff at rowing, but he was
made captain of the boats all the same while he was cock of the school."

At this point another monitor entered.

"Ah, Tipper," said Ashley, "what do you think Coates here is saying?  He
says Riddell is to be the new captain."

Tipper burst into a loud laugh.

"That would be a joke!  Think of Riddell stroking the school eight at
Henley, eh! or kicking off for us against Rockshire!  I suppose Coates
thinks because Riddell's a schoolhouse boy he's bound to be the man.
Never fear.  You'll see Parrett's come to the front at last, my boy!"

"Why, are _you_ to be the new captain?" asked Coates, with a slight
sneer.

Tipper was not pleased with this little piece of sarcasm.  He was a good
cricketer and a fine runner, but in school everybody knew him to be as
poor a scholar as a fellow could be to be in the sixth at all.

"I dare say even I would be as good as any schoolhouse fellow you could
pick out," said he.  "But if you want to know, Bloomfield's the man."

"Just what I was saying," said Ashley.  "But Coates says he's not far
enough up in the school."

"All bosh," said Tipper.  "What difference does it make if a fellow's
first or twentieth in the school, as long as he's cock of everything
outside!  I don't see how the doctor can hesitate a moment between the
two."

This was the conclusion come to at almost all the conclaves which met
together during the day to discuss the burning question.  It was the
conclusion moreover to which Bloomfield himself came as he talked the
matter over with a few of his friends after third school.

"You see," said he, "it's not that I care about the thing for its own
sake.  It would be a precious grind, I know, to have to be responsible
for everything that goes on, and to have to lick all the kids that want
a hiding.  But for all that, I'd sooner do it than let the school run
down."

"What I hope," said some one, "is that even if Paddy doesn't see it
himself, Riddell will, and will have the sense to back out of it.  I
fancy he wouldn't be sorry."

"Not he," said Bloomfield.  "I heard him say once he pitied Wyndham all
the bother he had, especially when he was wanting to stew for the
exams."

"Has any one seen Riddell lately?" asked Game.  "It wouldn't be a bad
thing for some of us to see him, and put it to him, that the school
would go to the dogs to a dead certainty if he was captain."

"Rather a blunt way of putting it," said Porter, laughing.  "I'd break
it to him rather more gently than that."

"Well, you know what I mean," replied Game, who was of the downright
order.

"You see," said Bloomfield, who, despite his protestations, was
evidently not displeased at the notion of his possible honours, "I don't
profess to be much of a swell in school; but--I don't know--I fancy I
could keep order rather better than he could.  The fellows know me."

"They ought to, if they don't," said Wibberly, who was a toady.

"Fancy Riddell having to lick a junior," said Game.  "Why he'd faint at
the very idea."

"Probably take him off to his study and have a prayer-meeting with
Fairbairn and a few more of that lot upon the top of him," said Gilks, a
schoolhouse monitor, and not a nice-looking fellow.

"I guess I'd sooner get a hiding from old Bloomfield than that," laughed
Wibberly.

"I hope," said Game, "snivelling's not going to be the order of the day.
I can't stand it."

"I don't think you've any right to call Riddell a sniveller," said
Porter.  "He may be a muff at sports, but I don't fancy he's a sneak.
And I don't see that it's against him, either, if he does go in for
being what he professes to be."

"Hear! hear!--quite a sermon from Porter," cried Wibberly.

"Porter's right," said Bloomfield.  "No one says it was against him.
All I say is that I don't expect the fellows will mind him as much as
they would a fellow who--well, who's better known, you know."

"Rather," said Game, "I know it would seem precious rum being a monitor
under him."

"Well," said Bloomfield, "I suppose it will be settled soon.  Meanwhile,
Game, what do you say to another grind in the tub?  You didn't half work
this morning, you beggar."

Game groaned resignedly, and said "All right;" and hue and cry was
forthwith made for Master Parson's services at the helm.

But Master Parson, as it happened, was not to be found.  He was neither
in the school nor in his house, and a search through the grounds failed
to unearth him.  He had not been seen since his escape from the
monitorial fangs after morning school.  The natural thing, of course, on
not finding him at home in his own quarters, was to look for him in
Telson's.  But he was not there, nor, strange to say, was Telson
himself.  And, what was still more odd, when search came to be made,
Bosher, another fag of Parrett's house, was missing, and so was Lawkins,
and Pringle, and King, and Wakefield, and one or two others of the same
glorious company.  After a fruitless search, the oarsmen had finally to
go down to the river without a fag at all, and impound the boat-boy to
steer for them.

The fact was, Parson's miraculous release from the hands of the law that
morning, and the reason which led to it, had suggested both to himself
and the faithful Telson that the present was rather a rare opportunity
for them in the annals of Willoughby.  If there was no captain, there
was no one to give them a licking (for the worst an ordinary monitor
could do was to give an imposition), and that being so, it would surely
be a waste of precious opportunity if they failed to signalise the event
by some little celebration.  And, as it happened, there was a little
celebration which badly wanted celebrating, and for which only a chance
like the present could have been considered favourable.  In other words,
there was a rather long score which the juniors of Parrett's were
anxious to settle up with the juniors of Welch's.  The debt was of long
standing, having begun as far back as the middle of the Lent term, when
the Welchers had played upon some of Parrett's with a hose from behind
their own door, and culminating in the unprovoked outrage upon the
luckless Parson on the river that very morning.

Now if there was one thing more than another the young Parretts prided
themselves in, it was their punctuality in matters of business; and it
had troubled them sorely that circumstances over which they had no
control (in other words, the fear of Wyndham) should have prevented
their settling scores with the Welchers at an earlier date.

Now, however, an opportunity was come, and, like all honest men, they
determined at once to avail themselves of it.

So the reason why Bloomfield and Game could find no fags in Parrett's
house to steer for them was because all the fags of Parrett's house,
aided by Telson of the schoolhouse, were at that moment paying a
business call at Welch's, and having on the whole rather a lively time
of it.

The juniors of Welch's were, take them altogether, a rather more rowdy
lot than the juniors of either of the two other houses, or, indeed, than
those of both the other houses put together.  Somehow Welch's was always
the rowdy house of Willoughby.  The honours of the school, whether in
class or in field, always seemed to go in any direction but their own,
and as, for five or six years at any rate, they had been unable to claim
any one distinguished Willoughbite as a member of their house, they had
come to regard themselves somewhat in the light of Ishmaelites.
