He has as good a sense of humor as we have, and he is more careful
about minding his own business, and letting alone that of other
people."

"Dagaeoga is not without wisdom. We will even learn from the bear.
A hundred miles to the north of us there is a vast rocky region
containing many caves, where the bears go in great numbers to sleep
the long winters through. It is not much disturbed, because it is
a dangerous country, lying between the Hodenosaunee and the Indian
nations to the north, with which we have been at war for centuries.
There we will go."

"And hole up until our peril passes! Your plan appeals to me, Tayoga!
I will imitate the bear! I will even be a bear!"

"We will take the home of one of them before he comes for it himself,
and we will do him no injustice, because the wise bear can always find
another somewhere else."

"They're fine caves, of course!" exclaimed Robert, buoyantly, his
imagination, which was such a powerful asset with him, flaming up as
usual. "Dry and clean, with plenty of leaves for beds, and with nice
little natural shelves for food, and a pleasant little brook just
outside the door. It will be pleasant to lie in our own cave, the best
one of course, and hear the snow and sleet storms whistle by, while
we're warm and comfortable. If we only had complete assurance that
Dave was through with the letter I'd be willing to stay there until
spring."

Tayoga smiled indulgently.

"Dagaeoga is always dreaming," he said, "but bright dreams hurt
nobody."

When night came, they were many more miles on their way, but it was
a very cold darkness that fell upon them and they shivered in their
blankets. Robert made no complaint, but he longed for the caves, of
which he was making such splendid pictures. Shortly before morning, a
light snow fell and the dawn was chill and discouraging, so much so
that Tayoga risked a fire for the sake of brightness and warmth.

"Langlade's men will come upon the coals we leave," he said, "but
since we have not shaken them off it will make no difference. How much
food have we left, Dagaeoga?"

"Not more than enough for three days."

"Then it is for us to find more soon. It is another risk that we must
take. I wish I had with me now my bow and arrows which I left at the
lake, instead of Garay's rifle. But Areskoui will provide."

The day turned much colder, and the streams to which they came were
frozen over. By night, the ice was thick enough to sustain their
weight and they traveled on it for a long time, their thick moosehide
moccasins keeping their feet warm, and saving them from falling.
Before they returned to the land it began to snow again, and Tayoga
rejoiced openly.

"Now a white blanket will lie over the trail we have left on the ice,"
he said, "hiding it from the keenest eyes that ever were in a man's
head."

Then they crossed a ridge and came upon a lake, by the side of which
they saw through the snow and darkness a large fire burning. Creeping
nearer, they discerned dusky forms before the flames and made out a
band of at least twenty warriors, many of them sound asleep, wrapped
to the eyes in their blankets.

"Have they passed ahead of us and are they here meaning to guard the
way against us?" whispered Robert.

"No, it is not one of the bands that has been following us," replied
the Onondaga. "This is a war party going south, and not much stained
as yet by time and travel. They are Montagnais, come from Montreal.
They seek scalps, but not ours, because they do not know of us."

Robert shuddered. These savages, like as not, would fall at midnight
upon some lone settlement, and his intense imagination depicted the
hideous scenes to follow.

"Come away," he whispered. "Since they don't know anything about us
we'll keep them in ignorance. I'm longing more than ever for my warm
bear cave."

They disappeared in the falling snow, which would soon hide their
trail here, as it had hidden it elsewhere, and left the lake behind
them, not stopping until they came to a deep and narrow gorge in the
mountains, so well sheltered by overhanging bushes that no snow fell
there. They raked up great quantities of dry leaves, after the usual
fashion, and spread their blankets upon them, poor enough quarters
save for the hardiest, but made endurable for them by custom and
intense weariness. Both fell asleep almost at once, and both awoke
about the same time far after dawn.

Robert moved his stiff fingers in his blanket and sat up, feeling cold
and dismal. Tayoga was sitting up also, and the two looked at each
other.

"In very truth those bear caves never seemed more inviting to me,"
said young Lennox, solemnly, "and yet I only see them from afar."

"Dagaeoga has fallen in love with bear caves," said the Onondaga, in
a whimsical tone. "The time is not so far back when he never talked
about them at all, and now words in their praise fall from his lips in
a stream."

"It's because I've experienced enlightenment, Tayoga. It is only in
the last two or three days that I've learned the vast superiority of a
cave to any other form of human habitation. Our remote ancestors lived
in them two or three hundred thousand years, and we've been living in
houses of wood or brick or stone only six or seven thousand years, I
suppose, and so the cave, if you judge by the length of time, is our
true home. Hence I'm filled with a just enthusiasm at the thought of
going back speedily to the good old ways and the good old days. It's
possible, Tayoga, that our remote grandfathers knew best."

"When Dagaeoga comes to his death bed, seventy or eighty years from
now, and the medicine man tells him but little more breath is left in
his body, what then do you think he will do?"

"What will I do, Tayoga?"

"You will say to the medicine man, 'Tell me exactly how long I have
to live,' and the medicine man will reply: 'Ten minutes, O Dagaeoga,
venerable chief and great orator.' Then you will say: 'Let all the
people be summoned and let them crowd into the wigwam in which I lie,'
and when they have all come and stand thick about your bed, you will
say, 'Now raise me into a sitting position and put the pillows thick
behind my back and head that I may lean against them.' Then you
will speak to the people. The words will flow from your lips in a
continuous and golden stream. It will be the finest speech of your
life. It will be filled with magnificent words, many of them, eight or
ten syllables long. It will be mellow like the call of a trumpet. It
will be armed with force, and it will be beautiful with imagery; it
will be suffused and charged with color, it will be the very essence
of poetry and power, and as the aged Dagaeoga draws his very last
breath so he will speak his very last word, and thus, in a golden
cloud, his soul will go away into infinite space, to dwell forever
in the bosom of Manitou, with the immortal sachems, Tododaho and
Hayowentha!"

"Do you know, Tayoga, I think that would be a happy death," said
Robert earnestly.

The Onondaga laughed heartily.

"Thus does Dagaeoga show his true nature," he said. "He was born with
the spirit and soul of the orator, and the fact is disclosed often. It
is well. The orator, be he white or red, will lose himself sometimes
in his own words, but he is a gift from the gods, sent to lift up the
souls, and cheer the rest of us. He is the bugle that calls us to the
chase and we must not forget that his value is great."

"And having said a whole cargo of words yourself Tayoga, now what do
you propose that we do?"

"Push on with all our strength for the caves. I know now we are on the
right path, because I recall the country through which we are passing.
At noon we will reach a small lake, in which the fish are so numerous
that there is not room for them all at the same time in the water.
They have to take turns in getting the air above the surface on top of
the others. For that reason the fish of this lake are different from
all other fish. They will live a full hour on the bank after they are
caught."

"Tayoga, in very truth, you've learned our ways well. You've become a
prince of romancers yourself."

At the appointed time they reached the lake. There were no fish above
its surface, but the Onondaga claimed it was due to the fact that the
lake was covered with ice which of course kept them down, and which
crowded them excessively, and very uncomfortably. They broke two big
holes in the ice, let down the lines which they always carried, the
hooks baited with fragments of meat, and were soon rewarded with
splendid fish, as much as they needed.

Tayoga with his usual skill lighted a fire, despite the driving snow,
and they had a banquet, taking with them afterward a supply of the
cooked fish, though they knew they could not rely upon fish alone in
the winter days that were coming. But fortune was with them. Before
dark, Robert shot a deer, a great buck, fine and fat. They had so
little fear of pursuit now that they cut up the body, saving the skin
whole for tanning, and hung the pieces in the trees, there to
freeze. Although it would make quite a burden they intended to carry
practically all of it with them.

Many mountain wolves were drawn that night by the odor of the spoils,
but they lay between twin fires and had no fear of an attack. Yet the
time might come when they would be assailed by fierce wild animals,
and now they were glad that Tayoga had kept Garay's rifle, and also
his ammunition, a good supply of powder and bullets. It was possible
that the question of ammunition might become vital with them, but they
did not yet talk of it.

On the second day thereafter, bearing their burdens of what had been
the deer, they reached the stony valley Tayoga had in mind, and Robert
saw at once that its formation indicated many caves.

"Now, I wonder if the bears have come," he said, putting down his pack
and resting. "The cold has been premature and perhaps they're still
roaming through the forest. I shouldn't want to put an interloper out
of my own particular cave, but, if I have to do it, I will."

"The bears haven't arrived yet," said Tayoga, "and we can choose. I do
not know, but I do not think a bear always occupies the same winter
home, so we will not have to fight over our place."

It was a really wonderful valley, where the decaying stone had made a
rich assortment of small caves, many of them showing signs of former
occupancy by large wild animals, and, after long searching, they found
one that they could make habitable for themselves. Its entrance was
several feet above the floor of the valley, so that neither storm nor
winter flood could send water into it, and its own floor was fairly
smooth, with a roof eight or ten feet high. It could be easily
defended with their three rifles, the aperture being narrow, and they
expected, with skins and pelts, to make it warm.

It was but a cold and bleak refuge for all save the hardiest, and
for a little while Robert had to use his last ounce of will to save
himself from discouragement. But vigorous exertion and keen interest
in the future brought back his optimism. The hide of the deer they had
slain was spread at once upon the cave floor and made a serviceable
rug. They spoke hopefully of soon adding to it.

A brook flowed less than a hundred yards away, and they would have
no trouble about their water supply, while the country about seemed
highly favorable for game. But on their first day there they did not
do any hunting. They rolled several large stones before the door of
their new home, making it secure against any prying wild animals, and
then, after a hearty meal, they wrapped themselves in their blankets
and slept prodigiously.

Tayoga went into the forest the next day and set traps and snares,
while Robert worked in the valley, breaking up fallen wood to be used
for fires, and doing other chores. The Onondaga in the next three or
four days shot a large panther, a little bear, and caught in the traps
and snares a quantity of small game. The big pelts and the little
pelts, after proper treatment, were spread upon the floor or hung
against the walls of the cave, which now began to assume a much more
inviting aspect, and the flesh of the animals that were eatable, cured
after the primitive but effective processes, was stored there also.

Providence granted them a period of good weather, days and nights
alike being clear and cold. The game, evidently not molested for a
long time, fairly walked into their traps, and they were compelled to
draw but little upon their precious supply of ammunition. Food for the
future accumulated rapidly, and the floor and walls of the cave were
soon covered entirely with furs.

Not one of the numerous caves and hollows about them contained an
occupant and Robert wondered if their presence would frighten away the
wild animals, so many of which had hibernated there so often. Yet he
had a belief that the bears would come. His present mode of life and
his isolation from the world gave him a feeling almost of kinship with
them, and in some strange way, and through some medium unknown to him,
they might reciprocate. He and Tayoga had killed several bears, it was
true, but far from the cave, and they made up their minds to molest
nothing in the valley or just about it.

It was a land of many waters and they caught with ease numerous fish,
drying all the surplus and storing it with the other food in the cave.
They also made soft beds for themselves of the little branches of the
evergreen, over which they spread their blankets, and when they rolled
the stone before the doorway at night they never failed to sleep
soundly.

They did their cooking in front of the cave door, but it was always
a smothered fire. While they felt safe from wandering bands in that
lofty and remote region, they took no unnecessary risks. The valley
itself, though deep, was much broken up into separate little valleys,
and most of the caves were hidden from their own. It was this fact
that made Robert still think the bears would come, despite coals and
flame. In the evenings they would talk of Willet, and both were firm
in the opinion that the hunter had got through to Lake George and that
Johnson and Albany had been warned in time. Each was confirmed in his
opinion by the other and in a few days it became certainty.

"I think Tododaho on his star whispered in my ear while I slept that
Great Bear has passed the hostile lines," said Tayoga with conviction,
"because I know it, just as if the Great Bear himself had told it to
me, though I do not know how I know it."

"It's some sort of mysterious information," said Robert in the same
tone of absolute belief, "and I don't worry any more about Dave and
the letter. The men of the Hodenosaunee seem to have a special gift.
You know the old chief, Hendrik, foretold that he would die on the
shores of Andiatarocte, and it came to pass just as he had said."

"It was a glorious death, Dagaeoga, and it was, perhaps, he who saved
our army, and made the victory possible."

"So it was. There's not a doubt of it, but, here, I don't feel much
like taking part in a war. The great struggle seems to have passed
around us for a while, at least. I appear to myself as a man of peace,
occupied wholly with the struggle for existence and with preparations
for a hard winter. I don't want to harm anything."

"Perhaps it's because nothing we know of wants to harm us. But,
Dagaeoga, if the bears come at all they will come quickly, because in
a few days winter will be roaring down upon us."

"Then, Tayoga, we must hurry our labors, and since the mysterious
message brought in some manner through the air has told us that Dave
has reached the lake, I'm rather anxious for it to rush down. While it
keeps us here it will also hold back the forces of St. Luc."

"That's true, Dagaeoga. It's a poor snow that doesn't help somebody.
Now, I will make a bow and arrow to take the place of my great bow and
quiver, which await me elsewhere, because we must draw but little upon
our powder and bullets."

The Onondaga had hatchet and knife and he worked with great rapidity
and skill, cutting and bending a bow in two or three days, and making
a string of strong sinews, after which he fashioned many arrows and
tipped them with sharp bone. Then he contemplated his handiwork with
pride.
