of which his horse was capable.

But Monteith Sterry had noted a fact which escaped the captain, though
he was an observant man. The horseman was not approaching the camp at
the moment the couple reached the crest of the elevation and began
scrutinizing the surrounding country; he was going at right angles to
it, but (as it afterward proved) he carried a glass, with which, at
that moment, he was also scanning the horizon for something he was
very anxious to find.

Fortunately he caught sight of the couple, and though he could not be
assured of their identity at so great a distance, the suspicion of
the truth as to Capt. Asbury caused him to put his animal to his best
speed.

In a brief time he rode up. While some rods away he recognized the
captain and saluted him. A little nearer approach and he identified
Sterry, who was astonished beyond measure to discover that he was his
old friend, Dick Hawkridge, toward whose ranch he had ridden on the
preceding evening.

"You're out early, Dick," was the salutation of Sterry, as his old
friend reined up beside him and extended his hand.

"And are riding hard," added Capt. Asbury, who liked the young man.

"I ride hard," replied Hawkridge, gravely, "because there is need of
it; I was looking for you."

"And why looking for me?" inquired the captain.

"Because you and your men are in great peril."

"Ah. What might be its nature?"

"From the rustlers."

"I was trying to persuade myself that it was they who were in peril
from us, but you put it differently."

"It might be as you wish if you had twenty-five or fifty men; but with
less than a dozen, and more than twice that number looking for you,
discretion is the better part of valor."

"Tell me, Hawkridge, how all this interesting information came to
you," continued Capt. Asbury.

"My ranch is not far to the northward, my cattle are ranging among the
foothills of the Big Horn Mountains, and all my hands are with them. I
sat up late last night, going over my accounts and trying to get them
into shape, and it was past midnight when two rustlers rode up. I
supposed they meant to stay all night and invited them in. I have
never had any trouble with them, and they had two purposes in
calling. One was to give me a little advice, and the other to secure
information."

"Their advice, I suppose, was that you cast in your fortunes with
them, and take up the business of branding mavericks and altering
other brands."

"Hardly that, but it was that I should keep out of the trouble, for
there are going to be ugly times. Now you know that, however much I
may wish to let things proceed smoothly, I will never identify myself
with the law-breakers. I gave my callers to understand that, and I
think they respect my position.

"It seems to me," added Hawkridge, thoughtfully, "that there have been
some woeful mistakes made. The Cattle Association have organized
an expedition to rid Johnson, Natroma and Converse Counties of
cattle-thieves, as they call them. They have imported twenty-five
picked men from Texas, every one of whom is a fighter and dead shot,
with Capt. Smith, an ex-U.S. marshal, as their leader. One of the
party may be taken as a type of the rest. He is Scott Davis, once a
guard on the Deadwood coach, and he carries a gun with twenty notches
on the stock, each representing the death of a road-agent or other
outlaw.

"The expedition left Cheyenne some days ago and is somewhere in this
section. Strong as it is, it is doomed to defeat, for I don't care
how brave and skilful those fellows are, they are no more so than the
rustlers, who far outnumber them.

"However, it isn't that which concerns you and me just now, though it
may do so later. The rustlers have learned that you are out with a
small party, and they are after you."

Capt. Asbury was a brave man, and he did not start on hearing this
announcement, for he had been expecting it from the first; but he
was prudent as well as daring, and he knew his young friend did not
underestimate the danger of himself and companions.

"Have they learned anything about last night's doings?" asked Sterry.

"That's what started me off after you in such a hurry. My callers
stayed more than two hours, and were about leaving when who should
ride up but Duke Vesey, with his story of the killing of his comrade,
Jack Perkins, by you and your men."

"I suppose he called it a murder," remarked Capt. Asbury,
sarcastically.

"Yes, the worst kind, too. I knew he was drawing a long bow, but he
will tell it to others, and it will spread like wildfire. He was
looking for Ira Inman, Larch Cadmus and his party. There are more of
them than you and others are aware of, riding up and down the country,
ripe for any mischief. From what I know, Inman and a dozen of the most
desperate rustlers are in the neighborhood, and as the two fellows who
were at my ranch volunteered to help Vesey find them they will do it
pretty soon, if they have not already done so. Vesey declared it as
his belief that you would be discovered not far from his burned home,
so as soon as they left I mounted my best horse and started to give
you warning."

"I appreciate your kindness, Hawkridge; how did you know the right
direction?"

"I knew the course to Vesey's ranch, and was speeding that way when
I caught sight of you and Sterry on the top of this hill. I took a
squint through my glass, was pretty sure who it was, and then came
like mad. I didn't suspect it was you though, Mont, until I almost ran
against you."

"Did Vesey say anything about me?" asked Sterry, with a meaning glance
at the captain.

"He said you had acted like a white man in some dispute, but he didn't
give the particulars and I didn't question him. He is intensely bitter
against the captain and his party, and declares that not one of them
shall get out of the country alive; and, captain, Duke Vesey is a man
of his word."

"Then I suppose I may consider myself disposed of," replied Asbury,
with a laugh.

"Not as bad as that, but it depends upon yourself."

"What do you advise?"

"Start southward at once with your men; if you meet the Texans and
their friends, join them if you choose; it will make their strength so
much the greater, and they need it all. If you fail to meet them,
keep on till you cross the Platte and strike Fort Fetterman. In other
words, captain, you have no business to be where you are."




CHAPTER XXIII.

AT BAY.


Capt. Asbury drew a cigar from his pocket and lit it, first offering
one to each of his companions. He puffed in silence for a minute or
two, evidently absorbed in thought. He was a veteran of the civil war,
and had learned to be cool in dangerous crises.

"Hawkridge," he remarked, removing his cigar, "you are right in the
main, although not wholly so."

"I await correction."

"Doubtless it is all true what you say about the festive rustlers
roaming up and down the land seeking whom they may devour, but you
forget that, leaving out the quarter of a hundred from the Lone Star
State, there are also other bands of stockmen abroad. Now, if we could
effect a junction with one or two of those companies, why, you'll
admit, the aspect of affairs will be changed."

"Unquestionably; but consider how slight the chance--"

"On the contrary, I think the prospect is good. Now, if you'll be kind
enough to level your glass to the eastward, possibly you will observe
something interesting."

Both young men quickly turned their heads in the direction indicated,
and there, sure enough, was descried a body of horsemen, probably a
mile distant, approaching on a gallop.

Hawkridge levelled his glass. While thus engaged, Capt. Asbury
signalled to his men to mount and be ready to move on a moment's call.

It was well to be ready for any emergency.

Dick Hawkridge studied the horsemen closely for some minutes without
speaking. Then, with his eye still at the glass, he repeated slowly,
as if to himself:

"There are thirteen of them, and the spotted horse at the head I am
sure belongs to Ira Inman; the whole party are rustlers."

He lowered the binocular and looked at the captain, adding:

"I suspected it; their party is but a little stronger than yours, for
Mont and I will stand with you, but it seems to me it would be foolish
to risk a fight in the open."

"I am willing to retreat, but I don't intend to be run out of Wyoming
by all the rustlers between Sheridan and Cheyenne. I am willing,
however," he added, with a smile, "to make a strategical movement to
the rear until we strike some place where there's a show for defence;
do you know of any such place?"

"My house is well fitted for that, and is not far off."

"All right; lead on."

By this time the rest of the party had ridden to the top of the hill,
where the situation was quickly made clear to them. They looked off at
the party of rustlers, and several expressed the wish that the captain
would stay and fight them; but he replied that they were quite certain
to get enough of fighting before they were many days older, and he
followed Hawkridge.

At sight of the flight, the rustlers uttered tantalizing shouts
and discharged their Winchesters in the air. At the same time they
increased the speed of their animals; but, as they were no better
mounted than the stockmen, there was little chance of overtaking them.

The surface was undulating, the ground being well covered with verdure
even thus early in the spring. Sometimes pursuers and fugitives were
out of sight of each other for a minute or two, but not long enough to
affect the situation.

The course was northwest, and Hawkridge was hopeful that they would
reach his ranch in an hour or a little more. And this they probably
would have done had they not been interrupted, or rather checked,
by the unexpected appearance of a third company of horsemen, almost
directly in front of the stockmen.

"It may be they are friends," said Capt. Asbury, instantly bringing
his horse down to a walk, as did the others.

But the hope was delusive. A brief scrutiny of the strangers through
the glass by Dick Hawkridge left no doubt that they, too, were
rustlers, probably engaged on the same errand as Inman and his men.

This, of course, overthrew the plan of taking refuge at the ranch of
Hawkridge, with a view of defending themselves, for to push on insured
a collision with the party in front. They seemed to be about as
numerous as Inman's company, and as the latter were sure to arrive
before anything could be accomplished by the most spirited attack on
the rustlers, it would have been folly to incur such a risk.

The most obvious course was to turn to the left, with no special
object except to reach some place that could be used as a means of
defence. In a country with such a varied surface it ought not to take
long to find a refuge.

Dick Hawkridge, when leading the way to his home, acted as guide, and
now that the change was made he continued to do so because of his
familiarity with the country. Beside him rode his friend, Mont Sterry,
with Capt. Asbury and the rest following in loose order.

It was an interesting question as to how Inman and the others would
act upon meeting, and the stockmen watched for the junction.

At the moment the abrupt turn was made in the course of the fugitives
the two parties of rustlers did not see each other, a precipitous
ridge preventing. They must have been puzzled, therefore, to
understand the cause of the sudden change in the line of flight.

The mystery, however, was speedily cleared up, and the rustlers
greeted each other with ringing cheers, adding a few derisive shouts
to the fleeing stockmen. They were seen to mingle for a short time
only, while they discussed the situation. Then the company, increased
to more than a score, galloped after the cattlemen.

A fight was inevitable, for the flight and pursuit could not continue
indefinitely. Brave and confident, the rustlers were ardent for the
opportunity, while Capt. Asbury and his men were equally eager to
come upon some place which would do something toward equalizing the
strength of the combatants.

It was humiliating thus to flee before the very men whom he had set
out to arrest, but what veteran has not been obliged to do humiliating
things in the course of his career?

"This flight can't continue much longer," quietly remarked Monteith
Sterry to Hawkridge, at his side.

"Why not?"

"The men are dissatisfied and are unwilling to keep it up. We have let
those fellows approach so near that their bullets come uncomfortably
close.

"Capt. Asbury is growing impatient; I shouldn't wonder if he gives the
order to stop and have it out with them. It will be warm work if we
do, but over that next ridge I think we shall gain sight of a good
place for making a stand."

Something in the appearance of the surroundings was familiar to
Sterry, but he could not identify them.

Just then two of the rustlers fired their guns, and the pinge of one
of the bullets was plainly heard. Sterry looked around and saw Capt.
Asbury compress his lips and shake his head; he did not like the way
things were going. A crisis was at hand.

The top of the ridge being attained, all saw a large structure below,
and not far off.

"Do you recognize it?" asked Hawkridge, with a smile.

"No--why, yes; is it possible?"

"You ought to know it, for, if I am not mistaken, you are considerably
interested in one member of the family."

"I never supposed we were so near Fred Whitney's home," was the amazed
comment of Sterry, who was in doubt whether, under the circumstances,
he ought to be pleased or not.

"There's where we'll make a stand," called out Capt. Asbury, "and let
the music begin."




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE PRIMITIVE FORT.


"Move a little lively, boys," added the captain, spurring his horse
to a faster gait; "there'll be some shooting, and they're closer than
they ought to be."

By a providential coincidence, the whole party of rustlers halted
before ascending the ridge, which would give them a view of the
building in which the stockmen were about to make a stand. They
probably saw the impossibility of overtaking the fugitives by a direct
pursuit, and paused to decide upon some different course of action.

This was proven by what they did a few minutes later, for they
separated into two divisions, one turning to the right and the other
to the left. They seemed to think that the course of their enemies
must change soon, in which case there was a chance of heading them off
and bringing them between two fires. The rustlers were more familiar
with the country than the stockmen, and, had the chase continued, it
is likely it would have resulted as they expected.

But, strangely enough, these people forgot the Whitney home, upon
which it may be said the horsemen stumbled the next moment.

Down the ridge rode the dozen or more, Hawkridge, Sterry and Capt.
Asbury at the head, with the others almost upon their heels. In the
brisk morning air the frightened Jennie Whitney hastened to the door
and gazed wonderingly upon the party.

She recognized the handsome youth, who doffed his hat, a courtesy
instantly imitated by Hawkridge, the captain, and then the rest of the
men, as they halted in front of the door, where stood the pale and
startled mother, at a loss to understand the meaning of the strange
sight.

"Good-morning!" called Sterry. "Where's Fred?"

"He's on the range with the men, looking after the cattle."

"And are you and your mother alone?"

"We are the only ones in the house. What is the meaning of all this?"
she asked, looking with astonishment at the horsemen.

"We are pursued by a company of rustlers," replied Hawkridge; "they
are directly behind us; I started to lead our friends to my ranch, but
they headed us off, and we were compelled to apply here for shelter."

"You are welcome," Mrs. Whitney hastened to say; "dismount and come in
as soon as you can."

Sterry, Hawkridge and Capt. Asbury thanked her simultaneously. Time
was beyond value. They expected every instant to hear the crack of the
rifles and the shouts of their enemies on the crest of the ridge, and
could not comprehend why they were delayed.
