"No, I'm right and it must help us to have the good wishes of little
children go with us. If they and Tododaho watch over us we can't come
to much harm."

"It is a good omen," said Tayoga soberly. "When I lie down to sleep
tonight I shall hear their voices in my ear."

Black Rifle now left them, going on one of his solitary expeditions
into the wilderness and the others traveled diligently all the day,
but owing to the condition of the earth did not make their usual
progress. Most of the snow had melted and everything was dripping
with water. It fell from every bough and twig, and in every ravine and
gully a rivulet was running, while ponds stood in every
depression. Many swollen brooks and creeks had to be forded, and when
night came they were wet and soaked to the waist.

But Tayoga then achieved a great triumph. In the face of difficulties
that seemed insuperable, he coaxed a fire in the lee of a hill, and
the three fed it, until it threw out a great circle of heat in which
they warmed and dried themselves. When they had eaten and rested a
long time they put out the fire, waited for the coals and ashes to
cool, and then spread over them their blankets, thus securing a dry
base upon which to sleep. They were so thoroughly exhausted, and they
were so sure that the forest contained no hostile presence that all
three went to sleep at the same time and remained buried in slumber
throughout the night.

Tayoga was the first to awake, and he saw the dawn of a new winter
day, the earth reeking with cold damp and the thawing snow. He
unrolled himself from his blankets and arose a little stiffly, but
with a few movements of the limbs all his flexibility returned. The
air was chill and the scene in the black forest of winter was
desolate, but Tayoga was happy. Tododaho on his great shining star had
watched over him and showered him with favors, and he had no doubt
that he would remain under the protection of the mighty chief who had
gone away so long ago.

Tayoga looked down at his comrades, who still slept soundly, and
smiled. The three were bound together by powerful ties, and the events
of recent months had made them stronger than ever. In the school at
Albany he had absorbed much of the white man's education, and, while
his Indian nature remained unchanged, he understood also the white
point of view. He could meet both Robert and Willet on common ground,
and theirs was a friendship that could not be severed.

Now he made a circle about their camp, and, being assured that no
enemy was near, came back to the point where Robert and Willet yet
slept. Then he took his flint and steel, and, withdrawing a little,
kindled a fire, doing so as quietly as he could, in order that the two
awaking might have a pleasant surprise. When the little flames were
licking the wood, and the sparks began to fly upwards, he shook Robert
by the shoulder.

"Arise, sluggard," he said. "Did not our teacher in Albany tell us it
was proof of a lazy nature to sleep while the sun was rising? The fire
even has grown impatient and has lighted itself while you abode with
Tarenyawagon (the sender of dreams). Get up and cook our breakfast,
Oh, Heavy Head!"

Robert sat up and so did Willet. Then Robert drew his blankets about
his body and lay down again.

"You've done so well with the fire, Tayoga, and you've shown such a
spirit," he said, "that it would be a pity to interfere with your
activity. Go ahead, and awake me again when breakfast is ready."

Tayoga made a rush, seized the edge of his blanket and unrolled it,
depositing Robert in the ashes. Then he darted away among the bushes,
avoiding the white youth's pursuit. Willet meanwhile warmed himself by
the fire and laughed.

"Come back, you two," he said. "You think you're little lads again at
your school in Albany, but you're not. You're here in the wilderness,
confronted by many difficulties, all of which you can overcome, and
subject to many perils, all of which you know how to avoid."

"I'll come," said Robert, "if you promise to protect me from this
fierce Onondaga chief who is trying to secure my scalp."

"Tayoga, return to the fire and cook these strips of venison. Here is
the sharp stick left from last night. Robert, take our canteens, find
a spring and fill them with fresh water. By right of seniority I'm in
command this morning, and I intend to subject my army to extremely
severe discipline, because it's good for it. Obey at once!"

Tayoga obediently took the sharpened stick and began to fry strips of
venison. Robert, the canteens over his shoulder, found a spring near
by and refilled them. Like Tayoga, the raw chill of the morning and
the desolate forest of winter had no effect upon him. He too, was
happy, uplifted, and he sang to himself the song he had heard De
Galissonniere sing:

     "Hier sur le pont d'Avignon
      J'ai oui chanter la belle,
           Lon, la,
  J'ai oui chanter la belle,
  Elle chantait d'un ton si doux
      Comme une demoiselle,
         Lon, la,
      Comme une demoiselle."

All that seemed far away now, yet the words of the song brought it
back, and his extraordinary imagination made the scenes at Bigot's
ball pass before his eyes again, almost as vivid as reality. Once more
he saw the Intendant, his portly figure swaying in the dance, his red
face beaming, and once more he beheld the fiery duel in the garden
when the hunter dealt with Boucher, the bully and bravo.

Quebec was far away. He had been glad to go to it, and he had been
glad to come away, too. He would be glad to go to it again, and he
felt that he would do so some day, though the torrent of battle now
rolled between. He was still humming the air when he came back to the
fire, and saluting Willet politely, tendered a canteen each to him and
Tayoga.

"Sir David Willet, baronet and general," he said, "I have the honor to
report to you that in accordance with your command I have found the
water, spring water, fine, fresh, pure, as good as any the northern
wilderness can furnish, and that is the best in the world. Shall I
tender it to you, sir, on my bended knee!"

"No, Mr. Lennox, we can dispense with the bended knee, but I am glad,
young sir, to note in your voice the tone of deep respect for your
elders which sometimes and sadly is lacking."

"If Dagaeoga works well, and always does as he is bidden," said
Tayoga, "perhaps I'll let him look on at the ceremonies when I take my
place as one of the fifteen sachems of the Onondaga nation."

While they ate their venison and some bread they had also brought with
them, they discussed the next stage of their journey, and Tayoga made
a suggestion. Traveling would remain difficult for several days, and
instead of going directly to Albany, their original purpose, they
might take a canoe, and visit Mount Johnson, the seat of Colonel
William Johnson, who was such a power with the Hodenosaunee, and who
was in his person a center of important affairs in North America. For
a while, Mount Johnson might, in truth, suit their purpose better than
Albany.

The idea appealed at once to both Robert and Willet. Colonel Johnson,
more than any one else could tell them what to do, and owing to his
strong alliance, marital and otherwise, with the Mohawks, they were
likely to find chiefs of the Ganeagaono at his house or in the
neighborhood.

"It is agreed," said Willet, after a brief discussion. "If my
calculations be correct we can reach Mount Johnson in four days, and I
don't think we're likely to cross the trail of an enemy, unless
St. Luc is making some daring expedition."

"In any event, he's a nobler foe than De Courcelles or Jumonville,"
said Robert.

"I grant you that, readily," said the hunter. "Still, I don't think
we're likely to encounter him on our way to Mount Johnson."

But on the second day they did cross a trail which they attributed to
a hostile force. It contained, however, no white footsteps, and not
pausing to investigate, they continued their course toward their
destination. As all the snow was now gone, and the earth was drying
fast, they were able almost to double their speed and they pressed
forward, eager to see the celebrated Colonel William Johnson, who was
now filling and who was destined to fill for so long a time so large a
place in the affairs of North America.




CHAPTER VIII

WARAIYAGEH


Now, a few pleasant days of winter came. The ground dried under
comparatively warm winds, and the forest awoke. They heard everywhere
the ripple of running water, and wild animals came out of their
dens. Tayoga shot a young bear which made a welcome addition to their
supplies.

"I hold that there's nothing better in the woods than young bear,"
said Willet, as he ate a juicy steak Robert had broiled over the
coals. "Venison is mighty good, especially so when you're hungry, but
you can get tired of it. What say you, Tayoga?"

"It is true," replied the Onondaga. "Fat young bear is very fine. None
of us wants one thing all the time, and we want something besides
meat, too. The nations of the Hodenosaunee are great and civilized,
much ahead of the other red people, because they plant gardens and
orchards and fields, and have grain and vegetables, corn, beans,
squash and many other things good for the table."

"And the Iroquois, while they grow more particular about the table,
remain the most valiant of all the forest people. I see your point,
Tayoga. Civilization doesn't take anything from a man's courage and
tenacity. Rather it adds to them. There are our enemies, the French,
who are as brave and enduring as anybody, and yet they're the best
cooks in the world, and more particular about their food than any
other nation."

"You always speak of the French with a kind of affection, Dave," said
Robert.

"I suppose I do," said the hunter. "I have reasons."

"As I know now, Dave, you've been in Paris, can't you tell us
something about the city?"

"It's the finest town in the world, Robert, and they've the brightest,
gayest life there, at least a part of 'em have, but things are not
going right at home with the French. They say a whole nation's fortune
has been sunk in the palace at Versailles, and the people are growing
poorer all the time, but the government hopes to dazzle 'em by waging
a successful and brilliant war over here. I repeat, though, Robert,
that I like the French. A great nation, sound at the core, splendid
soldiers as we're seeing, and as we're likely to see for a long time
to come."

They pushed on with all speed toward Mount Johnson, the weather still
favoring them, making their last camp in a fine oak grove, and
reckoning that they would achieve their journey's end before noon the
next day. They did not build any fire that night, but when they rose
at dawn they saw the smoke of somebody else's fire on the eastern
horizon.

"It couldn't be the enemy," said Willet. "He wouldn't let his smoke go
up here for all the world to see, so near to the home of Colonel
William Johnson and within the range of the Mohawks."

"That is so," said Tayoga. "It is likely to be some force of Colonel
Johnson himself, and we can advance with certainty."

Looking well to their arms in the possible contingency of a foe, they
pushed forward through the woodland, the smoke growing meanwhile as if
those who had built the fire either felt sure of friendly territory,
or were ready to challenge the world. The Onondaga presently held up a
hand and the three stopped.

"What is it, Tayoga?" asked the hunter.

"I wish to sing a song."

"Then sing it, Tayoga."

A bird suddenly gave forth a long, musical, thrilling note. It rose in
a series of trills, singularly penetrating, and died away in a
haunting echo. A few moments of silence and then from a point in the
forest in front of them another bird sang a like song.

"They are friends," said Tayoga, who was the first bird, "and it may
be, since we are within the range of the Mohawks, that it is our
friend, the great young chief Daganoweda, who replied. I do not think
any one else could sing a song so like my own."

"I'm wagering that it's Daganoweda and nobody else," said Willet
confidently, and scorning cover now they advanced at increased speed
toward the fire.

A splendid figure, tall, heroic, the nose lofty and beaked like that
of an ancient Roman, the feather headdress brilliant and defiant like
that of Tayoga, came forward to meet them, and Robert saw with intense
pleasure that it was none other than Daganoweda himself. Nor was the
delight of the young Mohawk chieftain any less--the taciturnity and
blank faces of Indians disappeared among their friends--and he came
forward, smiling and uttering words of welcome.

"Daganoweda," said Willet, "the sight of you is balm to the eyes. Your
name means in our language, 'The Inexhaustible' and you're an
inexhaustible friend. You're always appearing when we need you most,
and that's the very finest kind of a friend."

"Great Bear, Tayoga and Dagaeoga come out of the great wilderness,"
said Daganoweda, smiling.

"So we do, Daganoweda. We've been there a long time, but we were not
so idle."

"I have heard of the fort that was built in the forest and how the
young white soldiers with the help of Great Bear, Tayoga and Dagaeoga
beat off the French and the savage tribes."

"I supposed that runners of the Hodenosaunee would keep you
informed. Well, the fort is there and our people still hold it, and we
are here, anxious to get back into the main stream of big events. Who
are at the fire, Daganoweda?"

"Waraiyageh (Colonel William Johnson) himself is there. He was fishing
yesterday, it being an idle time for a few days, and with ten of my
warriors I joined him last night. He will be glad to see you, Great
Bear, whom he knows. And he will be glad to meet Tayoga and Dagaeoga
who are to bear great names."

"Easy, Daganoweda, easy!" laughed Willet.

"These are fine lads, but don't flatter 'em too much just yet. They've
done brave deeds, but before this war is over they'll have to do a lot
more. We'll go with you and meet Colonel Johnson."

As they walked toward the fire a tall, strongly built man, of middle
years, dressed in the uniform of an English officer, came forward to
meet them. His face, with a distinct Irish cast, was frank, open and
resolute.

"Ah, Willet, my friend," he said, extending his hand. "So you and I
meet again, and glad I am to hold your fingers in mine once more. A
faithful report has come to us of what you did in Quebec, and it seems
the Willet of old has not changed much."

The hunter reddened under his tan.

"It was forced upon me, colonel," he said.

Colonel William Johnson laughed heartily.

"And he who forced it did not live to regret it," he said. "I've heard
that French officers themselves did not blame you, but as for me,
knowing you as I do, I'd have expected no less of David Willet."

He laughed again, and his laugh was deep and hearty. Robert, looking
closely at him, thought him a fine, strong man, and he was quite sure
he would like him. The colonel glanced at him and Tayoga, and the
hunter said:

"Colonel Johnson, I wish to present Tayoga, who is of the most ancient
blood of the Onondagas, a member of the Clan of the Bear, and destined
to be a great chief. A most valiant and noble youth, too, I assure
you, and the white lad is Robert Lennox, to whom I stand in the place
of a father."

"I have heard of Tayoga," said Colonel Johnson, "and his people and
mine are friends."

"It is true," said Tayoga, "Waraiyageh has been the best friend among
the white people that the nations of the Hodenosaunee have ever
had. He has never tricked us. He has never lied to us, and often he
has incurred great hardship and danger to help us."

"It is pleasant in my ears to hear you say so, Tayoga," said Colonel
Johnson, "and as for Mr. Lennox, who, my eyes tell me is also a noble
and gallant youth, it seems to me I've heard some report of him
too. You carried the private letters from the Governor of New York to
the Marquis Duquesne, Governor General of Canada?"

"I did, sir," replied Robert.

"And of course you were there with Willet. Your mission, I believe,
was kept as secret as possible, but I learned at Albany that you bore
yourself well, and that you also gave an exhibition with the sword."

It was Robert's turn to flush.

"I'm a poor swordsman, sir," he said, "by the side of Mr. Willet."

"Good enough though, for the occasion. But come, I'll make an end to
badinage. You must be on your way to Mount Johnson."

"That was our destination," said Willet.

"Then right welcome guests you'll be. I have a little camp but a short
distance away. Molly is there, and so is that young eagle, her
brother, Joseph Brant. Molly will see that you're well served with
food, and after that you shall stay at Mount Johnson as long as you
like, and the longer you'll stay the better it will please Molly and
me. You shall tell us of your adventures, Mr. Lennox, and about that
Quebec in which you and Mr. Willet seem to have cut so wide a swath
with your rapiers."

"We did but meet the difficulties that were forced upon us," protested
Willet.

Colonel Johnson laughed once more, and most heartily.

"If all people met in like fashion the difficulties that were forced
upon them," he said, "it would be a wondrous efficient world, so much
superior to the world that now is that one would never dream they had
been the same. But just beyond the hill is our little camp which, for
want of a better name, I'll call a bower. Here is Joseph, now, coming
