braces and supplied with electric current carried through wires to
the swing by an ingenious device attached to the under side of the
cast-iron ring or hub of the wheel. A ring of fiber on which two
brass rings are attached is fastened to the hub and connections
are made to the two rings through two brushes fastened to the post
with a bracket. The wires run under the surface of the ground
outside and connected to the source of electricity. The wires from
the brass rings run through the center pipe to the top and are
connected to the lamp sockets.



** Old-Time Magic-Part V [193]



** The Disappearing Coin [193]

This is an uncommon trick, entirely home-made and yet the results
are as startling as in many of the professional tricks. A small
baking-powder can is employed to vanish the coin, which should be
marked by one of the audience for identification. Cut a slot in
the bottom on the side of the can, as shown in Fig. 1. This slot
should be just large enough for the coin that is used to pass
through freely, and to have its lower edge on a level with the
bottom of the can.

The nest or series of boxes in which the coin is afterwards found
should consist of four small sized flat pasteboard boxes square or
rectangular shaped and furnished with hinged covers. The smallest
need be no larger than necessary to hold the coin and each
succeeding box should be just large enough to hold the next
smaller one which in turn contains the others.

A strip of tin about 1 by 1-3/4 in. is bent in the shape as shown
in Fig. 2 to serve as a guide for the coin through the various
boxes. This guide is inserted about 1/8 in. in the smallest box
between the cover and the box and three rubber bands wrapped
around the box as indicated. This box is then enclosed in the next
larger box, the guide being allowed to project between the box and
the cover, and the necessary tension is secured by three rubber
bands around the box as before. In like manner the remaining boxes
are

[Illustration: Appliances for the Disappearing Coin]

adjusted so that finally the prepared nest of boxes appears as in
Fig. 3.

The coin can easily be passed into the inner box through the tin
guide, then the guide can be withdrawn which permits the
respective boxes to close and the rubber bands hold each one in a
closed position.

The performer comes forward with the tin can in his right hand,
the bottom of the can in his palm with the slot at the right side.
He removes the cover with the left hand and passes his wand around
the inner part of the can which is then turned upside down to
prove that it contains nothing. The marked coin is dropped into
the can by some one in the audience. The cover is replaced and the
can shaken so the coin will rattle within. The shaking of the can
is continued until the coin has slipped through the slot into his
palm. The can is then placed on the table with his left hand. Then
apparently he looks for something to cover the can. This is found
to be a handkerchief which was previously prepared on another
table concealing the nest of boxes. The coin in the right hand is
quickly slipped into the guide of the nest of boxes, which was
placed in an upright position, and the guide withdrawn, and
dropped on the table. The performer, while doing this, is
explaining that he is looking for a suitable cover for the can,
but as he cannot find one he takes the handkerchief instead. The
handkerchief is spread over the can and then he brings the nest of
boxes. He explains how he will transfer the coin and passes his
wand from the can to the boxes. The can is then shown to be empty
and the boxes given to one in the audience to be opened. They will
be greatly surprised to find the marked coin within the innermost
box.



** How to Keep Film Negatives [194]

There are many devices for taking care of film negatives to keep
them from curling and in a place easily accessible. Herewith is
illustrated a method by which anyone can make a place for the
negatives produced by his or her special film camera. The device
is made up similar to a post card album with places cut through
each leaf to admit each corner of the negatives. The leaves are
made from white paper and when the negatives are in place the
pictures made on them can

[Illustration: Negatives on White Paper Background]

easily be seen through to the white paper background. These leaves
can be made up in regular book form, or tied together similar to a
loose-leaf book, thus adding only such pages as the negatives on
hand will require.
--Contributed by H. D. Harkins, St. Louis, Mo.



** Home-Made Match Safe [194]

[Illustration: Details of the Match Safe]

Cut a piece of tin in the shape and with the dimensions shown in
Fig. 1. Bend the saw-toothed edges at right angles to the piece on
the dotted lines. Bend the part that is marked 5-1/2 in. in a half
circle. Make a circle 3-1/2 in. in diameter on another piece of
tin, cut out the circle and cut the disk in two as shown in Fig.
2. These half circle pieces are soldered to the sides of the teeth
of the half circle made in the long piece of tin. Remove one end
from the inside box containing matches and slip the back of the
match safe through between the bottom of the inside box and the
open end box that forms the cover. The matches will fall into the
half circle tray at the lower end of the box which will be kept
full of matches until they are all used from the box.
--Contributed by C. F. White, Denver, Colo.



** An Electric Post Card Projector [195]

A post card projector is an instrument for projecting on a screen
in a darkened room picture post cards or any other pictures of a
similar size. The lantern differs from the ordinary magic lantern
in two features; first, it requires no expensive condensing lens,
and second, the objects to be projected have no need of being
transparent.

Two electric globes are made to cast the strongest possible light
on the picture card set between them and in front of which a lens
is placed to project the view on the screen, the whole being
enclosed in a light-tight box. The box can be made of selected oak
or mahogany. The lens to be used as a projector will determine the
size of the box to some extent. The measurements given in these
instructions are for a lens of about 5 in. focal length. The box
should be constructed of well seasoned wood and all joints made
with care so they will be light-tight.

The portion shown carrying the lens in Fig. 1 is made to slide in
the main body of the lantern for focusing. A box should first be
made 5-1/2 in. wide, 5-1/2 in. high and 11 in. long. A hole is cut
in the back of the box 4 by 6 in. represented by the dotted line
in Fig. 2. This will be 3/4 in. from the top and bottom and 2-1/2
in. from each end of the outside of the box. Two strips of wood
1/2 in. wide and 6-1/2 in. long are fastened along the top and
bottom of the back. The door covering this hole in the back, and,
which is also used as a carrier for the post cards, is made from a
board 4-1/2 in. wide and 6-1/2 in. long. The door is hinged to the
lower strip and held in position by a turn button on the upper
strip. The slides for the picture cards are made from strips of
tin bent as shown, and tacked to the inside surface of the door.

The runners to hold the part carrying the lens are two pieces
2-1/4 in. wide by 5 in. long and should be placed

[Illustration: Details of the Post Card Lantern]

vertically, AA, as shown in Fig. 1, 3-1/2 in. from each end. An
open space 4 in. wide and 5 in. high in the center is for the part
carrying the lens to slide for focusing. The part carrying the
lens is a shallow box 4 by 5 in. and 2 in. deep in the center of
which a hole is cut to admit the lens. If a camera lens is used,
the flange should be fastened with screws to the front part of
this shallow box. The sides of this box should be made quite
smooth and a good, but not tight, fit into the runners. Plumbago
can be rubbed on to prevent sticking and to dull any rays of
light.

Two keyless receptacles for electric globes are fastened to the
under side of the top in the position shown and connected with
wires from the outside. Two or three holes about 1 in. in diameter
should be bored in the top between and in a line with the lights.
These will provide ventilation to keep the pictures from being
scorched or becoming buckled from the excessive heat. The holes
must be covered over on the top with a piece of metal or wood to
prevent the light from showing on the ceiling. This piece should
not be more than 1/2 in. high and must

[Illustration: Post Card Lantern Complete]

be colored dead black inside to cause no reflection.

The reflectors are made of sheet tin or nickel-plated metal bent
to a curve as shown, and extending the whole height of the
lantern. The length of these reflectors can be determined by the
angle of the lens when covering the picture. This is clearly shown
by the dotted lines in Fig. 1. The reflectors must not interfere
with the light between the picture and the lens, but they must be
sufficiently large to prevent any direct light reaching the lens
from the lamps. In operation place the post card upside down in
the slides and close the door. Sliding the shallow box carrying
the lens will focus the picture on the screen.



** A Handy Calendar [196]

[Illustration: The Knuckles Designate the 31 Day Months]

"Thirty days hath September, April, June and November," etc., and
many other rhymes and devices are used to aid the memory to decide
how many days are in each month of the year. Herewith is
illustrated a very simple method to determine the number of days
in any month. Place the first finger of your right hand on the
first knuckle of your left hand, calling that knuckle January;
then drop your finger into the depression between the first and
second knuckles, calling this February; then the second knuckle
will be March, and so on, until you reach July on the knuckle of
the little finger, then begin over again with August on the first
knuckle and continue until December is reached. Each month as it
falls upon a knuckle will have 31 days and those down between the
knuckles 30 days with the exception of February which has only 28
days.
--Contributed by Chas. C. Bradley, West Toledo, Ohio.



** The Fuming of Oak [196]

Darkened oak always has a better appearance when fumed with
ammonia. This process is rather a difficult one, as it requires an
airtight case, but the description herewith given may be entered
into with as large a case as the builder cares to construct.

Oak articles can be treated in a case made from a tin biscuit box,
or any other metal receptacle of good proportions, provided it is
airtight. The oak to be fumed is arranged in the box so the fumes
will entirely surround the piece; the article may be propped up
with small sticks, or suspended by a string. The chief point is to
see that no part of the wood is covered up and that all surfaces
are exposed to the fumes. A saucer of ammonia is placed in the
bottom of the box, the lid or cover closed, and all joints sealed
up by pasting heavy brown paper over them. Any leakage will be
detected if the nose is placed near the tin and farther
application of the paper will stop the holes. A hole may be cut in
the cover and a piece of glass fitted in, taking care to have all
the edges closed. The process may be watched through the glass and
the article removed when the oak is fumed to the desired shade.
Wood stained in this manner should not be French polished or
varnished, but waxed.

The process of waxing is simple: Cut some beeswax into fine shreds
and place them in a small pot or jar. Pour in a little turpentine,
and set aside for half a day, giving it an occasional stir. The
wax must be thoroughly dissolved and then more turpentine added
until the preparation has the consistency of a thick cream. This
can be applied to the wood with a rag and afterward brushed up
with a stiff brush.



** How to Make an Electrolytic Rectifier [197]

[Illustration: Electrolytic Rectifier and Connections]

Many devices which will change alternating current to a direct
current have been put on the market, but probably there is not one
of them which suits the amateur's needs and pocketbook better than
the electrolytic rectifier.

For the construction of such a rectifier four 2-qt. fruit jars are
required. In each place two electrodes, one of lead and one of
aluminum. The immersed surface of the aluminum should be about 15
sq. in. and the lead 24 sq. in. The immersed surface of the lead
being greater than that of the aluminum, the lead will have to be
crimped as shown in Fig, 1. In both Fig. 1 and 2, the lead is
indicated by L and the aluminum by A.

The solution with which each jar is to be filled consists of the
following:

    Water             2 qt.
    Sodium Carbonate  2 tablespoonfuls
    Alum              3 tablespoonfuls

Care should be taken to leave the connections made as shown in
Fig. 2. The alternating current comes in on the wires as shown,
and the direct current is taken from the point indicated.

The capacity of this rectifier is from 3 to 5 amperes, which is
sufficient for charging small storage batteries, running small
motors and lighting small lamps.
--Contributed by J. H. Crawford, Schenectady, N. Y.



** The Rolling Marble [197]

Take a marble and place it on a smooth surface, The top of a table
will do. Ask someone to cross their first and second fingers and
place them on the marble as shown in the illustration. Then have
the person roll the marble about and at the same time close the
eyes or look in another direction. The person will imagine that
there are two marbles instead of one.

[Illustration: Rooling Marble]



** A Gas Cannon [197]

If you have a small cannon with a bore of 1 or 1-1/2 in., bore out
the fuse hole large enough to tap and fit in a small sized spark
plug such as used on a gasoline engine. Fill the cannon with gas
from a gas jet and then push a

[Illustration: Gas Cannon Loaded]

cork in the bore close up to the spark plug. Connect one of the
wires from a battery to a spark coil and then to the spark plug.
Attach the other wire to the cannon near the spark plug. Turn the
switch to make a spark and a loud report will follow.
--Contributed by Cyril Tegner, Cleveland, O.



** Old-Time Magic-Part VI [198]



** A Handkerchief Mended after Being Cut and Torn

Two persons are requested to come forward from the audience to
hold the four corners of a handkerchief. Then beg several other
handkerchiefs from the audience and place them on the one held by
the two persons. When several handkerchiefs have been accumulated,
have some one person draw out one from the bunch and examine for
any marks that will determine that this handkerchief is the one to
be mended after being mutilated. He, as well as others, are to cut
off pieces from this handkerchief and to finally tear it to
pieces.

The pieces are then all collected and some magic spirits thrown
over the torn and cut parts; tie them in a small package with a
ribbon and put them under a glass, which you warm with your hands.
After a few seconds' time, you remove the glass, as you have held
it all the time, and take the handkerchief and unfold it; everyone
will recognize the mark and be amazed not to find a cut or tear in
the texture.

This trick is very simple. You have an understanding with some one
in the company, who has two handkerchiefs exactly alike and has
given one of them to a person behind the curtain; he throws the
other, at the time of request for handkerchiefs, on the
handkerchiefs held for use in the performance of the trick. You
manage to keep this handkerchief where it will be picked out in
preference to the others, although pretending to thoroughly mix
them up. The person selected to pick out a handkerchief naturally
will take the handiest one. Be sure that this is the right one.

When the handkerchief has been torn and folded, put it under the
glass, on a table, near a partition or curtain. The table should
be made with a hole cut through the top and a small trap door
fitted snugly in the hole, so it will appear to be a part of the
table top. This trap door is hinged on the under side and opens
into the drawer of the table and can be operated by the person
behind the curtain who will remove the torn handkerchief and
replace it with the good one and then close the trap door by
reaching through the drawer of the table.



** The Magic Knot [198]

This is a very amusing trick which consists of tying one knot with
two ends of a handkerchief, and pulling the

[Illustration: Tying and Untying a Knot]

ends only to untie them again. Take the two diagonal corners of a
handkerchief, one in each hand and throw the main part of the
handkerchief over the wrist of the left hand and tie the knot as
shown in the illustration. Pull the ends quickly, allowing the
loop over the left hand to slip freely, and you will have the
handkerchief without any knot.



** A Good Mouse Trap [198]

When opening a tomato or other small can, cut the cover crossways
from side to side making four triangular pieces in the top. Bend
the four ends outward and remove the contents, wash clean and dry
and then bend the four ends inward, leaving a hole about 3/4 in.
in diameter in the center. Drop in a piece of bread and lay the
can down upon its side and the trap is ready for use. The mouse
can get in but he cannot get out.
--Contributed by E. J. Crocker, Victor, Colo.



** Finishing Aluminum [198]

Rubbing the surface of an aluminum plate with a steel brush will
produce a satin finish.



** How to Make a Sailing Canoe [199]

A canvas canoe is easily made and light to handle, but in making
one, it must be remembered that the cloth will tear, if any snags
are encountered. Therefore such a craft cannot be used in all
waters, but by being careful at shores, it can be used as safely
as an ordinary sailing canoe. Be sure to select the best materials
and when complete cover the seams well with paint.

[Illustration: Completed Sailing Canoe]

The materials necessary for the construction of a sailing canoe,
as illustrated in the engraving, are as follows:

    1 keelson, 1 in. by 8 in. by 15 ft., selected pine.
    14 rib bands, 1 in. square by 16 ft., clear pine.
    2 gunwales, 1 in. by 2 in. by 16 ft.
    1 piece for forms and bow pieces, 1 in. by 12 in. by 10 ft.
    4 outwales, 1/4 in. by 2 in. by 16 ft.
    1 piece, 3 in. wide and 12 ft. long, for cockpit frame.
    1 piece, 2 in. wide and 12 ft. long, for center deck braces.
    11 yd. of 1-1/2-yd. wide 12-oz. ducking.
    8 yd. of 1-yd. wide unbleached muslin.
    50 ft. of rope.
    1 mast, 9 ft. long.
    Paint, screws and cleats.

The keelson, Fig. 1, is 14 ft. long, 8 in. wide in the center and
tapered down from a point 4 ft. from each end to 1 in. at the
ends. Both ends are mortised, one 6 in. for the stern piece, and
the other 12 in. for the bow. Be sure to get the bow and stern
pieces directly in the middle of the keelson and at right angles
with the top edge. The stern and bow pieces are cut as shown in
Fig. 2 and braced with an iron band, 1/8 in. thick and 3/4 in.
wide, drilled and fastened with screws.

Study the sketches showing the details well before starting to cut
out the pieces. Then there will be no trouble experienced later in
putting the parts together. See that all the pieces fit their
places as the work proceeds and apply the canvas with care.

Two forms are made as shown in Figs. 3 and 4; the smaller is
placed 3 ft. from the bow and the large one, 7 ft. 3 in. from the
stern. The larger mould is used temporarily while making the boat,
and is removed after the ribs are in place. The gunwales are now
placed over the forms and in the notches shown, and fastened with
screws, and, after cutting the ends to fit the bow and stern
pieces, they are fastened with bolts put through the three pieces.
The sharp edges on one side of each rib-band are removed and seven
of them fastened with screws to each side of the moulds, spacing
them on the large mould 4 in. apart. The ribs are made of 28 good
barrel hoops

[Illustration: Details of a Home-Made Sailing Canoe]

which should be well soaked in water for several hours before
bending them in shape. These are put in 6 in. apart and are
fastened to the rib-bands with 7/8-in. wood screws. The ribs
should be put in straight and true to keep them from pulling the
rib-bands out of shape. After the ribs are in place and fastened
to the rib-bands, gunwales and keelson, put on the outwale strips
and fasten them to the gunwales between every rib with 1-1/2-in.
screws.

Before making the deck, a block for the mast to rest in must be
made and fastened to the keelson. This block, Fig. 5, is a cube
having sides 6 in. square and is kept from splitting by an iron
band tightly fitted around the outside. The block is fastened to
the keelson, 3-1/2 ft. from the bow, with bolts through
countersunk holes from the under side.

There are three deck braces made as shown in Figs. 6, 7 and 8.
Braces, Figs. 6 and 7, form the ends of the cockpit which is 20
in. wide. A 6-in. board is fitted into the mortises shown in these
pieces; a center piece is fitted in the other mortises. The other
deck braces slope down from the center piece and are placed 6 in.
apart. They are 1 in. square and are mortised into the center
piece and fastened to the gunwales with screws. The main deck
braces are fastened to the gunwales with 4-in. corner braces and
to the center piece with 2-in. corner braces. The mast hole on the
deck is made as follows: Secure a piece of pine 1 in. thick, 6 in.
wide and 3 ft. long. Cut this in halves and mortise for the center
piece in the two halves and fasten to the gunwales. A block of
pine, 4 in. thick and 12 in. long, is cut to fit under the top
boards, Fig. 9, and fastened to them with bolts. With an expansive
bit bore a hole 3 in. in diameter through the block. Be sure to
get the block and hole directly over the block that is fastened to
the keelson. Put on a coat of boiled linseed oil all over the
frame before proceeding farther.

Putting on the canvas may be a difficult piece of work to do, yet
if the following simple directions are followed out no trouble
will be encountered. The 11-yd. length of canvas is cut in the
center, doubled, and a seam made joining the two pieces together.
Fill the seam with thick paint and tack it down with copper tacks
along the center of the keelson. When this is well tacked commence
stretching and pulling the canvas in the middle of the gunwales so
as to make it as even and tight as possible and work toward each
end, tacking the canvas as it is stretched to the outside of the
gunwale. Seam the canvas along the stern and bow pieces as was
done on the keelson. The deck is not so hard to do, but be careful
to get the canvas tight and even. A seam should be made along the
center piece. The trimming is wood, 1/4 in. thick and 1/2 in.
wide. A strip of this is nailed along the center piece over the
canvas. The outwales are nailed on over the canvas. A piece of
oak, 1 in. thick 1-1/2 in. wide and 14 in. long, is fastened with
screws over the canvas on the stern piece; also, a piece 1/4 in.
thick, 1 in. wide and 24 in. long is well soaked in water, bent to
the right shape and fastened over the canvas on the bow.

The rudder is made as shown in Fig. 10 with a movable handle. A
strip 1 in. thick by 2 in. wide, is bolted to the keelson over the
canvas for the outer keel. The keel, Fig. 11, is 6 in. wide at one
end and 12 in. at the other, which is fastened to the outer keel
with bolts having thumb nuts. The mast can be made of a young
spruce tree having a diameter of 3 in. at the base with sufficient
height to make it 9 ft. long. The canoe is driven by a lanteen
sail and two curtain poles, each 1 in. in diameter and 10 ft.
long, are used for the boom and gaff, which are held together with
two pieces of iron bent as shown in Fig. 12. The sail is a
triangle, 9-3/4 by 9-3/4 by 8-1/2 ft. which is held to the boom
and gaff by cord lacings run through eyelets inserted in the
muslin. The eyelets are of brass placed 4 in. apart in the muslin.
The mast has two side and one front stay, each fitted with a
turnbuckle for tightening. A pulley is placed at the top and
bottom of the mast for the lift rope. The sail is held to the mast
by an iron ring and the lift rope at the top of the mast. The boom
rope is held in the hand and several cleats should be placed in
the cockpit for convenience. A chock is placed at the bow for
tying up to piers. Several coats of good paint complete the boat.
--Contributed by O. E. Tronnes, Wilmette, Ill.



** A Home-Made Hand Vise [201]

A very useful little hand vise can easily be made from a hinge and
a bolt carrying a wing nut. Get a fast

[Illustration: Hand Vise Made from a Hinge]

joint hinge about 2 in. or more long and a bolt about 1/2 in. long
that will fit the holes in the hinge. Put the bolt through the
middle hole of the hinge and replace the nut as shown in the
drawing. With this device any small object may be firmly held by
simply placing it between the sides of the hinge and tightening
the nut.



** Proper Design for a Bird House [201]

This bird house was designed and built to make a home for the
American martin. The house will accommodate 20 families. All the
holes are arranged so they will not be open to the cold winds from
the north which often kill the birds which come in the early
spring. Around each opening is an extra ring of wood to make a
longer passage which assists the martin inside in fighting off the
English

[Illustration: Bird House]

sparrow who tries to drive him out. The holes are made oval to
allow all the little ones to get their heads out for fresh air.
The long overhanging eaves protect the little birds from the hot
summer sun. The rooms are made up with partitions on the inside so
each opening will have a room. The inside of the rooms should be
stained black.



** Boomerangs and How to Make Them [202]

A boomerang is a weapon invented and used by the native
Australians, who seemed to have the least intelligence of any race
of mankind. The

[Illustration: Details of Three Boomerangs]

boomerang is a curved stick of hardwood, Fig. 1, about 5/16 in.
thick, 2-1/2 in. wide and 2 ft. long, flat on one side, with the
ends and the other side rounding. One end of the stick is grasped
in one hand with the convex edge forward and the flat side up and
thrown upward. After going some distance and ascending slowly to a
great height in the air with a quick rotary motion, it suddenly
returns in an elliptical orbit to a spot near the starting point.
If thrown down on the ground the boomerang rebounds in a straight
line, pursuing a ricochet motion until the object is struck at
which it was thrown.

Two other types of boomerangs are illustrated herewith and they
can be made as described. The materials necessary for the T-shaped
boomerang are: One piece of hard maple 5/16 in. thick, 2-1/2 in.
wide, and 3 ft. long; five 1/2-in. flat-headed screws. Cut the
piece of hard maple into two pieces, one 11-1/2 in. and the other
18 in. long. The corners are cut from these pieces as shown in
Fig. 2, taking care to cut exactly the same amount from each
corner. Bevel both sides of the pieces, making the edges very thin
so they will cut the air better. Find the exact center of the long
piece and make a line 1-1/4 in. on each side of the center and
fasten the short length between the lines with the screws as shown
in Fig. 3. The short piece should be fastened perfectly square and
at right angles to the long one.

The materials necessary for the cross-shaped boomerang are one
piece hard maple 5/16 in. thick, 2 in. wide and 30 in. long and
five 1/2-in. flat headed screws. Cut the maple- into two 14-in.
pieces and plane the edges of these pieces so the ends will be
1-1/2 in. wide, as shown in Fig. 4. Bevel these pieces the same as
the ones for the T-shaped boomerang. The two pieces are fastened
together as shown in Fig. 5. All of the boomerangs when completed
should be given several coats of linseed oil and thoroughly dried.
This will keep the wood from absorbing water and becoming heavy.
The last two boomerangs are thrown in a similar way to the first
one, except that one of the pieces is grasped in the hand and the
throw given with a quick underhand motion. A little practice is
all that is necessary for one to become skillful in throwing them.
--Contributed by O. E. Tronnes, Wilmette, Ill.



** How to Make Water Wings [202]

Purchase a piece of unbleached muslin, 1 yd. square. Take this and
fold it over once, forming a double piece 1-1/2 ft. wide and 3 ft.
long. Make a double stitch all around the edge, leaving a small
opening at one corner. Insert a piece of tape at this corner to be
used for tying around the opening when the bag is blown up. The
bag is then turned inside out, soaked with water and blown up. An
occasional wetting all over will prevent it from leaking. As these
wings are very large they will prevent the swimmer from sinking.
--Contributed by W. C. Bliss, St. Louis, Mo.



** How to Make an Ammeter [203]

The outside case of this instrument is made of wood taken from old
cigar boxes with the exception of the back. If carefully and
neatly made, the finished instrument will be very satisfactory.
The measurements here given need not be strictly followed out, but
can be governed by circumstances. The case should first be made
and varnished and while this is drying, the mechanical parts can
be put together.

[Illustration: Details of an Ammeter]

The back is a board 3/8 in. thick, 6-1/2 in. wide and 6-3/4 in.
long. The outer edges of this board are chamfered. The other parts
of the case are made from the cigar box wood which should be well
sandpapered to remove the labels. The sides are 3-1/4 in. wide and
5 in. long; the top and bottom, 3-1/4 in. wide and 4-1/2 in. long.
Glue a three cornered piece, A, Fig. 1, at each end on the surface
that is to be the inside of the top and bottom pieces. After the
glue, is set, fasten the sides to the pieces with glue, and take
care that the pieces are all square. When the glue is set, this
square box is well sandpapered, then centered, and fastened to the
back with small screws turned into each three-cornered piece.

The front, which is a piece 5-1/4 in. wide and 6-1/2 in. long, has
a circular opening cut near the top through which the graduated
scale may be seen. This front is centered and fastened the same as
the back, and the four outside edges, as well as the edges around
the opening, are rounded. The whole case can now be cleaned and
stained with a light mahogany stain and varnished. Cut another
piece of board, B, Figs. 2 and 3, to just fit inside the case and
rest on the ends of the three-cornered pieces, A, and glue to this
board two smaller pieces, C, 3 in. square, with the grain of the
wood in alternate directions to prevent warping. All of these
pieces are made of the cigar box wood. Another piece, D, 3/8 in.
thick and 3 in. square, is placed on the other pieces and a
U-shaped opening 1-3/4 in. wide and 2-1/2 in. high sawed out from
all of the pieces as shown. The piece D is attached to the pieces
C with four 1/2-in. pieces 2-5/8 in. long.

A magnet is made from a soft piece of iron, E, about 3/8 in.
thick, 1-1/4 in. wide and 2-3/4 in. long. Solder across each end
of the iron a piece of brass wire, F, and make a turn in each end
of the wires, forming an eye for a screw. These wires are about
2-1/2 in. long. Wind three layers of about No. 14 double
cotton-covered copper wire on the soft iron and leave about 5 or 6
in. of each end unwound for connections.

The pointer is made as shown in Fig. 5 from 1/16-in. brass wire
filed to make a point at both ends for a spindle. About 1/2 in.
from each end of this wire are soldered two smaller brass wires
which in turn are soldered to a strip of light tin 1/4 in. wide
and 2-5/8 in. long. The lower edge of this tin should be about 1/2
in. from the spindle. The pointer is soldered to the spindle 1/4
in. from one end. All of these parts should be brass with the
exception of the strip of tin. Another strip of tin, the same size
as the first, is soldered to two brass wires as shown in Fig. 4.
These wires should be about 1 in. long.

The spindle of the pointer swings freely between two bars of
brass, G, 1/16 in. thick, 1/4 in. wide and 2-1/2 in. long. A small
hole is countersunk in one of the bars to receive one end of the
spindle and a hole 1/8 in. in diameter is drilled in the other and
a thumb nut taken from the binding-post of an old battery soldered
over the hole so the screw will pass through when turned into the
nut. The end of the screw is countersunk to receive the other end
of the spindle. A lock nut is necessary to fasten the screw when
proper adjustment is secured. A hole is drilled in both ends of
the bars for screws to fasten them in place. The bar with the
adjusting screw is fastened on the back so it can be readily
adjusted through the hole H, bored in the back. The pointer is
bent so it will pass through the U-shaped cut-out and up back of
the board B. A brass pin is driven in the board B to hold the
pointer from dropping down too far to the left. Place the tin,
Fig. 4, so it will just clear the tin, Fig. 5, and fasten in
place. The magnet is next placed with the ends of the coil to the
back and the top just clearing the tin strips. Two binding screws
are fitted to the bottom of the back and connected to the
extending wires from the coil.

The instrument is now ready for calibrating. This is done by
connecting it in series with another standard ammeter which has
the scale marked in known quantities. In this series is also
connected a variable resistance and a battery or some other source
of current supply. The resistance is now adjusted to show .5
ampere on the standard ammeter and the position of the pointer
marked on the scale. Change your resistance to all points and make
the numbers until the entire scale is complete.

When the current flows through the coil, the two tinned strips of
metal are magnetized, and being magnetized by the same lines of
force they are both of the same polarity. Like poles repel each
other, and as the part Fig. 4 is not movable, the part carrying
the pointer moves away. The stronger the current, the greater the
magnetism of the metal strips, and the farther apart they will be
forced, showing a greater defection of the pointer. --Contributed
by George Heimroth, Richmond Hill, L. I.



** How to Make an Equatorial [204] Condensed from article
contributed by J. R. Chapman, F.R.A.S. Austwick Hall. W.
Yorkshire. England

This star finder can easily be made by anyone who can use a few
tools as the parts are all wood and the only lathe work necessary
is the turned shoulder on the polar axis and this could be dressed
and sandpapered true enough for the purpose. The base is a board 5
in. wide and 9 in. long which is fitted with an ordinary wood
screw in each corner for leveling. Two side pieces cut with an
angle equal to the colatitude of the place are nailed to the base
and on top of them is fastened another board on which is marked
the hour circle as shown. The end of the polar axis B, that has
the end turned with a shoulder, is fitted in a hole bored in the
center of the hour circle. The polar axis B is secured to the
board with a wooden collar and a pin underneath. The upper end of
the polar axis is fitted with a 1/4-in. board, C, 5-1/2 in. in
diameter. A thin compass card divided into degrees is fitted on
the edge of this disk for the declination circle.

The hour circle A is half of a similar card with the hour marks
divided into 20 minutes. An index pointer is fastened to the base
of the polar axis. A pointer 12 in. long is fastened with a small
bolt to the center of the declination circle. A small opening is
made in the pointer into which an ordinary needle is inserted.
This needle is adjusted to the degree to set the pointer in
declination and when set, the pointer is clamped with the bolt at
the center. A brass tube having a 1/4-in. hole is fastened to the
pointer.

The first thing to do is to get a true N and S meridian mark. This
can be approximately obtained by a good compass, and allowance
made for the magnetic declination at your own place. Secure a slab
of stone or some other solid flat surface, level this and have it
firmly fixed facing due south with a line drawn through the center
and put the equatorial on the surface with XII on the south end of
the line. Then set the pointer D to the declination of the object,
say Venus at the date of observation. You now want to know if this
planet is east or west of your meridian at the time of
observation. The following formula will show how this may be
found. To find a celestial object by equatorial: Find the planet
Venus May 21, 1881, at 9 hr. 10 min. A. M. Subtract right
ascension of planet from the time shown by the clock, thus:


                                     hour   minute  second
  9 hr. 10 min. shows mean siderial.   1      0       0
  Add 12 hrs                          12
                                      ---    ---     ---
                                      13


  Right ascension of Venus             2      10
                                      ---    ---     ---
  Set hour circle to before meridian  10      50      0
  Again------------------
  At 1 hr. 30 min. mean clock shows    5      20      0
  Right ascension of Venus             2      10      0
                                      ---     ---    ---
  Set hour circle to                   3      10      0

Books may be found in libraries that will give the right ascension
and declination of most of the heavenly bodies.

The foregoing tables assume that you have a clock rated to
siderial time,

[Illustration: Home-Made Equatorial]

but this is not absolutely necessary. If you can obtain the
planet's declination on the day of observation and ascertain when
it is due south, all you have to do is to set the pointer D by the
needle point and note whether Venus has passed your meridian or
not and set your hour index. There will be no difficulty in
picking up Venus even in bright sunlight when the plant is visible
to the naked eye.



** Electric Light Turned On and Off from Different Places [205]

How nice it would be to have an electric light at the turn in a
stairway, or at the top that could be turned on before starting up
the stair and on reaching the top turned out, and vice

[Illustration: The Wiring Diagram]

versa when coming down. The wiring diagram as shown in the
illustration will make this a pleasant reality. This wiring may be
applied in numerous like instances. The electric globe may be
located at any desired place and the two point switches are
connected in series with the source of current as shown in the
sketch. The light may be turned on or off at either one of the
switches.
--Contributed by Robert W. Hall, New Haven, Conn.



** How to Make a Bunsen Cell [206]

This kind of a cell produces a high e.m.f. owing to the low
internal resistance. Procure a glass jar such as used for a
gravity battery, or, if one of these cannot be had, get a glazed
vessel of similar construction. Take a piece of sheet zinc large
enough so that when it is rolled up in the shape of a cylinder it
will clear the edge of the jar by about 1/2 in. Solder a wire or
binding-post to the edge of the cylinder for a connection.

[Illustration: Cross Section and Completed Cell]

Secure a small unglazed vessel to fit inside of the zinc, or such
a receptacle as used in a sal ammoniac cell, and fill it with a
strong solution of nitric acid. Fill the outer jar with a solution
of 16 parts water and 5 parts sulphuric acid. The connections are
made from the zinc and carbon.



** Optical Illusion [206]

Can you tell which of these three figures is the tallest? Make a
guess, and then verify its correctness by measurement.

[Illustration: Who is tallest?]



** One Way to Cook Fish [206]

One of the best and easiest ways of cooking fish while out camping
is told by a correspondent of Forest and Stream. A fire is built
the size for the amount of food to be cooked and the wood allowed
to burn down to a glowing mass of coals and ashes. Wash and season
your fish well and then wrap them up in clean, fresh grass, leaves
or bark. Then, after scraping away the greater part of the coals,
put the fish among the ashes, cover up with the same, and heap the
glowing coals on top. The fish cooks quickly--15 or 20
minutes--according to their size.

If you eat fish or game cooked after this fashion you will agree
that it cannot be beaten by any method known to camp culinary
savants. Clay also answers the purpose of protecting. the fish or
game from the fire if no other material is at hand, and for
anything that requires more time for cooking it makes the best
covering. Wet paper will answer, especially for cooking fish.



** Hardening Copper [206]

A successful method of hardening copper is to add 1 lb. of alum
and 4 oz. arsenic to every 20 lb. of melted copper and stir for 10
minutes.



** Packing Cut from Felt Hats [206]

Felt from an old hat makes good packing for automobile
water-circulating pumps. Strips should be cut to fit snugly in the
stuffing box. When the follower is screwed down, it will expand
the felt and make a watertight joint.



** Homemade Gasoline Engine [206]

The material used in the construction of the gasoline engine, as
shown in the accompanying picture, was pieces found in a scrap
pile that usually occupies a fence corner on almost every farm.
The cylinder consists of

[Illustration: Complete Homemade Gasoline Engine]

an old pump cylinder, 3/8 in. thick, 1-3/4 in. inside diameter and
about 5 in. long. This was fastened between some wooden blocks
which were bolted on the tool carriage of a lathe and then bored
out to a diameter of about 2 in. The boring bar, Fig. 1, consisted
of an old shaft with a hole bored through the center and a tool
inserted and held for each cut by a setscrew. A wood mandrel with
a metal shaft to turn in the centers of a lathe was made to fit
the bored-out cylinder. The cylinder was then placed on the
mandrel, fastened with a pin, and threaded on both ends. Flanges
were next made from couplings discarded from an old horsepower
tumbling rod, to fit on the threaded ends of the cylinder casting.
When these flanges were tightly screwed on the casting and faced
off smooth the whole presented the appearance of a large spool.

The back cylinder head was made from a piece of cast iron, about
1/2 in. thick, turned to the same diameter as the flanges, and
with a small projection to fit snugly inside the cylinder bore.
Two holes were then drilled in this head and tapped for 3/4-in.
pipe. Two pieces of 3/4 -in. pipe were fitted to these holes so
that, when they were turned in, a small part of the end of each
pipe projected on the inside of the cylinder head. These pieces of
pipe serve as valve cages and are reamed out on the inside ends to
form a valve seat. The outlet for the exhaust and the inlet for
the gas and air are through holes drilled in the side of each pipe
respectively and tapped for 1/2-in. pipe. Two heads were then made
to fit over the outer ends of the valve cages. These heads looked
similar to a thread spool with one flange cut off, the remaining
flange fitting on the

[Illustration: Steps in Making the Home-Made Gasoline Engine]

end of the valve cage and the center extending down inside to make
a long guide for the valve stems. These heads are held in place by
a wrought-iron plate and two bolts, one of which is plainly shown
in the picture. This plate also supports the rocker arms, Fig. 2,
and the guides for the rods that operate the valves. Both valves
are mechanically operated by one cam attached to a shaft running
one turn to two of the crankshaft. The gears to run this shaft
were cut from solid pieces on a small home-made gear-cutting
attachment for the lathe as shown in Fig. 3. The gear on the
crankshaft has 20 teeth meshing into a 40-tooth gear on the cam
shaft.

The main part of the frame consists of a piece of 1/2-in. square
iron, 30 in. long, bent in the shape of a U, and on the outside of
this piece is riveted a bent piece of sheet metal 1/8 in. thick
and 3 in. wide. The U-shaped iron is placed near one edge of the
sheet metal. Two pieces of 2-1/2-in. angle iron are riveted
vertically on the ends of the U-shaped iron and a plate riveted on
them to close the open end and to form a face on which to attach
the cylinder with bolts or cap screws. A hole was cut through the
angle irons and plate the same size as the bore of the cylinder so
the piston could be taken out without removing the cylinder. A
1-in. angle iron was riveted to one side of the finished frame to
make a support for the crankshaft bearing. The rough frame, Fig.
4, was then finished on an emery wheel. This long frame had to be
made to accommodate the crosshead which was necessary for such a
short cylinder.

The piston and rod were screwed together and turned in one
operation on a lathe. The three rings were made from an old
cast-iron pulley. The cap screws were made from steel pump rods. A
piece of this rod was centered in a lathe and turned so as to
shape six or more screws, Fig. 5, then removed and the first one
threaded and cut off, then the second and so on until all of them
were made into screws. The rod was held in a vise for this last
operation. Studs were made by threading both ends of a proper
length rod. Make-and-break ignition is used on the engine;
however, a jump spark would be much better. The flywheel and
mixing valve were purchased from a house dealing in these parts.
The water jacket on the cylinder is a sheet of copper formed and
soldered in place, and brass bands put on to co v e r the soldered
joints.
--Contributed by Peter Johnson, Clermont, Iowa.



** Dripping Carburetor [208]

If gasoline drips from the carburetor when the engine is not
running, the needle valve connected with the float should be
investigated. If the dripping stops when the valve is pressed
down, the float is too high. If the valve keeps dripping, then it
should be ground to a fit.



** A Merry-Go-Round Thriller [209]

[Illustration: Swinging on the Merry-Go-Round]

As a home mechanic with a fondness for amusing the children I have
seen many descriptions of merry-go-rounds, but never one which
required so little material, labor and time, and which gave such
satisfactory results, as the one illustrated herewith. It was
erected in our back yard one afternoon, the materials being
furnished by an accommodating lumber pile, and a little junk, and
it has provided unlimited pleasure for "joy-riders," little and
big, from all over the neighborhood. It looks like a toy, but once
