
From the Department of Public Instruction of Pennsylvania this
encouraging letter was received:--

HARRISBURG, April 27, 1894.

SUPERINTENDENT C. A. BABCOCK.

     _Dear Sir_,--In your plan to inaugurate a "Bird Day" you
     have struck a capital idea. When in the name of agriculture
     a scalp act can be passed resulting in a year and a half in
     the payment of $75,000 by the county treasuries of
     Pennsylvania for the destruction of birds that were
     subsequently proved to belong to the feathered friends of
     the farmer, it is high time to make our pupils acquainted
     with the habits and ways of the feathered tribes. Some birds
     remain with us the whole year, others are summer sojourners,
     still others are only transient visitors. How much of the
     beauty of our environment is lost by those who never listen
     to the music of the birds and never see the richness of
     their plumage!

     May success attend you in carrying out your new idea of a
     "Bird Day."

Very truly yours,

NATHAN C. SCHAEFFER,

_Superintendent of Public Instruction_.

Bradford Torrey gives an additional title to the day, showing his
appreciation of it:--

WELLESLEY HILLS, MASS., April 21, 1894.

     _Dear Mr. Babcock_,--Your young people are to be
     congratulated. "Bird Day" is something new to me--a new
     saints' day in my calendar, so to speak. The thought is so
     pleasing to me that I wish you had given me its date, so
     that in spirit I might observe it with you. Tell your pupils
     that to cultivate an acquaintance with things out of
     doors--flowers, trees, rocks, but especially animate
     creatures, and best of all, birds--is one of the surest ways
     of laying up happiness for themselves; and laying up
     happiness is even better than laying up money, though I am
     so old-fashioned a body and so true a Yankee as to believe
     in that also.

     All the naturalists I have known have been men of sunny
     temper. Let your boys and girls cultivate their eyes and
     ears, and their hearts and minds as well, by the study of
     living birds, their comings and goings, their songs and
     their ways; let them learn to find out things for
     themselves; to know the difference between guess-work and
     knowledge; and they will thank you as long as they live for
     having encouraged them in so good a cause. With all good
     wishes for the success of your first "Bird Day"--and many to
     come after it,

Very truly yours,

BRADFORD TORREY.

The first observance of "Bird Day," May 4, 1894, is briefly set forth
in the following paragraph from the _New England Journal of
Education_:--

     The day was observed in the Oil City schools with a degree
     of enthusiasm which was good to see. The amount of
     information about birds that was collected by the children
     was simply amazing. Original compositions were read,
     informal discussions were held, talks by teachers were
     given, and the birds in literature were not forgotten or
     overlooked. The interest was not confined to the children,
     one gentleman surprising the classes in which his children
     celebrated the day by presenting to them artistic programs
     of the exercises.

     It seems to those interested that the idea simply needs to
     be made known to meet with a warm welcome, akin to that with
     which we greet our first robin or song sparrow in the
     spring.




II

THE VALUE OF BIRDS


Probably few people understand the value of birds or comprehend how
closely and yet how extensively their lives are interwoven with other
forms of life. The general sentiment in regard to them, at the best,
has been that they are harmless, even interesting and beautiful
creatures; but the idea that they are one of the most important
classes of creation, a class upon which the existence of many other
classes depends, has never been widely prevalent. Suppose we were
asked which is of more use to man, the fishes of our waters or the
birds of our forests and fields? Many of us would unhesitatingly
answer in favor of the fishes.

If all of these denizens of the rivers, lakes, and seas should be
destroyed, it would be a stupendous calamity. Mankind would
universally deplore it; and if the nations of the world should, at any
time, become convinced that such a thing might occur, how quickly they
would take all possible means to prevent it! All civilized people now
have laws to preserve this food supply and are making expensive and
laborious efforts to increase it. Any one who should destroy thousands
of tons of these edible swimmers, simply for their heads and tails, or
fins and scales, would be regarded as a dangerous person. But if our
supposition were realized, if every fin and gill were to disappear
from the waters of the globe, what would be the result? A misfortune,
truly, for the fins represent a large part of the world's supply of
food, and this loss would be felt more deeply as time went on, because
the ocean will not raise its rent, however crowded may be the
population of its shores. The effort to secure the fish might be
applied, however, in other directions and be equally remunerative.
Harvest would still follow seedtime; the gold of autumn still reward
the shallow mines of spring.

But suppose we were forced to the dreadful alternative of choosing
between the birds and the quadrupeds, again, the most of us would
probably decide against the birds. If the four-footed beasts should
disappear from the earth, it would be a much greater disaster than the
destruction of the fishes. A much larger fraction of the food supply
would be lost; while many of these animals contribute to man's comfort
and necessities in almost innumerable ways. Most nations have learned
to cherish their friends with hoofs and horns, and even some of those
with claws. Cruelty to animals is now generally forbidden by law; and
their wanton destruction would be regarded with horror. No one would
be permitted to slaughter large numbers of them because he might wish
to sell their horns or ears or the tips of their tails.

By the departure of the quadrupeds the life of man would be rendered
much more difficult, but would still be possible. From fish and fowl
he could obtain a supply of meat limited in variety, yet sufficient
for his needs. The treasures of the vegetable world would still be
his, though he would miss the help of his animal allies in securing
them; but his ingenuity would help him to supply this loss, in part,
at least.

Consider now what would be the effect of the total destruction of
birds. Birds are nature's check to the amazing power of insects to
increase. If insect life were allowed free course, it would soon
overpower vegetation; and plant life--and, therefore, animal life,
including that of man--would be impossible upon this globe. This is an
astounding conclusion, but it is sustained by the judgment of every
man of science who has investigated the subject. How long could the
ravages of insects be stayed were the birds gone? We should have to
depend upon a few predaceous beetles, the bats, and upon the sprayers
and squirtguns which throw insecticides. Think of the aesthetic loss in
substituting these agencies for the "sweet spirits" of the wood and
field! Besides not being musical or charming in action, they would
not prove efficient. Birds are therefore essential to the life of man.

Their preservation is not merely a matter of sentiment, or of
education in that high and fine feeling, kindness to all living
things. It has a utilitarian side of vast extent, as broad as our
boundless fields and our orchards' sweep. The birds are nature's
guarantee that the reign of the crawlers and spinners shall not become
universal. The "plague of locusts" shall be upon those who sin against
them.




III

THE DESTRUCTION OF BIRDS


From almost all sections of the country comes the plaint that the song
birds are fast disappearing. Less and less numerous are the yearly
visitations of the thrushes, warblers, song sparrows, orioles, and the
others whose habits have been so delightful and whose music has been
so cheering to their open-eyed and open-hearted friends. Many, who
when listening to the hymn-like cadences of the wood thrush have felt
that the place was holy ground, are now keenly regretting that this
vesper song is so rare; the honest sweetness of the song sparrow
mingles with the coarser sounds less often in the accustomed places.
Not many now find "the meadows spattered all over with music" by the
bobolink, as Thoreau did.

John Burroughs says that the bluebird is almost extinct in his section
of country. The writer, though a frequent visitor to the fields and
woods, has succeeded in seeing only one pair of these beautiful birds
in two seasons, where they were abundant a few years ago, when almost
every orchard bore a good crop of them. A friend who is a good
observer has had the same experience. A careful exploration of the
country within a radius of five miles resulted in the discovery of
only two pairs of bobolinks, having their nests luckily in the same
field. The males sang together in friendly rivalry. The sparkling,
tinkling notes seemed to come in a rippling tumble, two or three at a
time, from each throat. Each started his song with his feet barely
touching his perch, his body quivering, his wings half extended, as if
he were almost supported by the upward flow of his melody. After
circular flights he alighted first upon one frail, swinging perch,
then upon another, the wonderful sounds not ceasing, as if he were
tracing magic rings of song round his home, and making them thick in
places. It was a musical embodiment of the love of life and of its
joyousness.

The brown thrush is also absent from places where once there were
many. A farmer in this neighborhood states that a few years ago the
treetops near his house seemed to be filled with these fine singers.
Now he hears only one or two during the season. Last May the writer
found three nests at least a mile apart, but they were destroyed
before the time of hatching, and the birds went about silent as if
brooding upon their trouble. It is doubtful if they will build next
season in that vicinity. No doubt the clearing away of the forests and
the settling up of the country are responsible for the scarcity of the
birds in part, but only in part. If they were let alone, many of the
most interesting and useful birds would build near even our city
homes, and our gardens and fields would again become populous with
them.

The wearing of feathers and the skins of birds for ornament is the
chief cause of the final flight of many of our songsters. It is stated
that a London dealer received at one time more than thirty thousand
dead humming birds. Not only brightly colored birds, but any small
birds, by means of dyes, may come at last to such base uses. It is
estimated by some of the Audubon societies that ten million birds were
used in this country in one season. All these bodies, which are used
to make "beauty much more beauteous seem," are steeped in arsenical
solutions to prevent their becoming as offensive to the nostrils of
their wearers as they are to the eyes of bird lovers.

The use of dead birds for adornment is a constant object lesson in
cruelty, a declaration louder than any words that a bird's life is not
to be respected. It is currently reported that a million bobolinks
were destroyed in Pennsylvania alone last year to satisfy the demand
of the milliners. If this "garniture of death" is in good taste, then
our North American Indian in his war paint and feathers was far ahead
of his time.

Let us hope that some oracle of fashion will decree that if the
remains of animals must be used for adornment, the skins of mice and
rats shall be offered up. Their office seems to be principally that of
scavengers, and their gradual but certain extinction would not matter
if the Christian nations should become, _pari passu_, more cleanly.
The squirrel could also be used effectively, mounted as if half
flying, with his hind feet fastened to the velvet pedestal, or sitting
upon his haunches with a nut between his fore paws. The squirrel's
main concern seems to be to prevent the undue extension of the
nut-bearing trees--an office man has already well taken upon
himself--and besides, he destroys fruit, injures trees, and is a great
enemy of birds. His gradual extinction would be tolerated by a
civilized nation.

All these things may take the hues of the rainbow and are capable of
infinite variety of arrangement. There certainly seems to be no good
reason why in a few years some combination of them may not be
considered as effective as a row of dead humming birds. The world may
be saved in this way from presenting a spectacle that should excite
the pity of gods and men--the spectacle of the destruction of one of
the most beautiful, the most harmless, and the most useful classes of
creation, at the command of the senseless whims of fashion.

Then, too, the sportsmen's guns and the small boys' slings and
shooters of various sorts are constantly bringing down numbers of the
feathered songsters. In many parts of our country men and boys roam
the fields, shooting at every bird they see, and their action is
tacitly approved by the community. This survival of the barbarous
instinct to kill is condoned as "sport." If these people were to spend
this time in following the birds with opera glass and notebook to
study them, they might not be so readily understood--they might even
be taken for mild lunatics, so utterly is public sentiment perverted
on this subject.

A little consideration shows this destruction to be more disastrous
than at first appears. According to the latest biological science,
every species of animals must have long ago reached the limit beyond
which it could not greatly increase its numbers. However great its
tendency to increase might be, its natural obstacles and enemies
would increase in like proportions till at last the two would balance
each other, and there could be no further increase in the number of
individuals of that species. All classes of animals in a state of
nature must have reached this balanced condition generations ago. This
is true of the birds. Their natural enemies are capable of preventing
their increase; that is, they can and do destroy every year as many as
are hatched that year. Now if man be added as a new destructive
agency, the old enemies, being still able to destroy as many as
before, will soon sweep them out of existence. Warnings have been sent
out by the United States Department of Biology that several species of
birds are already close to extinction. We know that this is true of
the passenger pigeon. This bird used to come North in flocks so
extensive as sometimes to obscure the sun, like a large, thick cloud.
Now they come no more. Italy is practically songless, we are told.

If man would right the wrong that he has done, he must not only stop
destroying the birds, but he must take all possible means to preserve
them and to protect them from their natural foes.

Laws for bird protection have been passed in many of our states; but
these have been found effective only where they were not needed. They
are, however, right, and will help in the development of correct
sentiment. What is most needed is knowledge of the birds themselves,
their modes of life, their curious ways, and their relations to the
scheme of things. To know a bird is to love him. Birds are beautiful
and interesting objects of study, and make appeals to children that
are responded to with delight.

