their talk their voices seemed to melt into the sound of the wind
sweeping mournfully among the autumn leaves; and when the lady lifted
her eyes, there was she kneeling in the hollow between three hills.

"A weary and lonesome time yonder old couple have of it," remarked the
old woman, smiling in the lady's face.

"And did you also hear them?" exclaimed she, a sense of intolerable
humiliation triumphing over her agony and fear.

"Yea, and we have yet more to hear," replied the old woman, "wherefore
cover thy face quickly."

Again the withered hag poured forth the monotonous words of a prayer
that was not meant to be acceptable in heaven, and soon in the pauses
of her breath strange murmurings began to thicken, gradually
increasing, so as to drown and overpower the charm by which they grew.
Shrieks pierced through the obscurity of sound and were succeeded by
the singing of sweet female voices, which in their turn gave way to a
wild roar of laughter broken suddenly by groanings and sobs, forming
altogether a ghastly confusion of terror and mourning and mirth.
Chains were rattling, fierce and stern voices uttered threats and the
scourge resounded at their command. All these noises deepened and
became substantial to the listener's ear, till she could distinguish
every soft and dreamy accent of the love-songs that died causelessly
into funeral-hymns. She shuddered at the unprovoked wrath which blazed
up like the spontaneous kindling of flume, and she grew faint at the
fearful merriment raging miserably around her. In the midst of this
wild scene, where unbound passions jostled each other in a drunken
career, there was one solemn voice of a man, and a manly and melodious
voice it might once have been. He went to and fro continually, and his
feet sounded upon the floor. In each member of that frenzied company
whose own burning thoughts had become their exclusive world he sought
an auditor for the story of his individual wrong, and interpreted
their laughter and tears as his reward of scorn or pity. He spoke of
woman's perfidy, of a wife who had broken her holiest vows, of a home
and heart made desolate. Even as he went on, the shout, the laugh, the
shriek, the sob, rose up in unison, till they changed into the hollow,
fitful and uneven sound of the wind as it fought among the pine trees
on those three lonely hills.

The lady looked up, and there was the withered woman smiling in her
face.

"Couldst thou have thought there were such merry times in a
mad-house?" inquired the latter.

"True, true!" said the lady to herself; "there is mirth within its
walls, but misery, misery without."

"Wouldst thou hear more?" demanded the old woman.

"There is one other voice I would fain listen to again," replied the
lady, faintly.

"Then lay down thy head speedily upon my knees, that thou mayst get
thee hence before the hour be past."

The golden skirts of day were yet lingering upon the hills, but deep
shades obscured the hollow and the pool, as if sombre night wore
rising thence to overspread the world. Again that evil woman began to
weave her spell. Long did it proceed unanswered, till the knolling of
a bell stole in among the intervals of her words like a clang that had
travelled far over valley and rising ground and was just ready to die
in the air. The lady shook upon her companion's knees as she heard
that boding sound. Stronger it grew, and sadder, and deepened into the
tone of a death-bell, knolling dolefully from some ivy-mantled tower
and bearing tidings of mortality and woe to the cottage, to the hall
and to the solitary wayfarer, that all might weep for the doom
appointed in turn to them. Then came a measured tread, passing slowly,
slowly on, as of mourners with a coffin, their garments trailing on
the ground, so that the ear could measure the length of their
melancholy array. Before them went the priest, reading the
burial-service, while the leaves of his book were rustling in the
breeze. And though no voice but his was heard to speak aloud, still
there were revilings and anathemas, whispered but distinct, from women
and from men, breathed against the daughter who had wrung the aged
hearts of her parents, the wife who had betrayed the trusting fondness
of her husband, the mother who had sinned against natural affection
and left her child to die. The sweeping sound of the funeral train
faded away like a thin vapor, and the wind, that just before had
seemed to shake the coffin-pall, moaned sadly round the verge of the
hollow between three hills. But when the old woman stirred the
kneeling lady, she lifted not her head.

"Here has been a sweet hour's sport!" said the withered crone,
chuckling to herself.




THE TOLL-GATHERER'S DAY.

A SKETCH OF TRANSITORY LIFE.


Methinks, for a person whose instinct bids him rather to pore over the
current of life than to plunge into its tumultuous waves, no
undesirable retreat were a toll-house beside some thronged
thoroughfare of the land. In youth, perhaps, it is good for the
observer to run about the earth, to leave the track of his footsteps
far and wide, to mingle himself with the action of numberless
vicissitudes, and, finally, in some calm solitude to feed a musing
spirit on all that he has seen and felt. But there are natures too
indolent or too sensitive to endure the dust, the sunshine or the
rain, the turmoil of moral and physical elements, to which all the
wayfarers of the world expose themselves. For such a man how pleasant
a miracle could life be made to roll its variegated length by the
threshold of his own hermitage, and the great globe, as it were,
perform its revolutions and shift its thousand scenes before his eyes
without whirling him onward in its course! If any mortal be favored
with a lot analogous to this, it is the toll-gatherer. So, at least,
have I often fancied while lounging on a bench at the door of a small
square edifice which stands between shore and shore in the midst of a
long bridge. Beneath the timbers ebbs and flows an arm of the sea,
while above, like the life-blood through a great artery, the travel of
the north and east is continually throbbing. Sitting on the aforesaid
bench, I amuse myself with a conception, illustrated by numerous
pencil-sketches in the air, of the toll-gatherer's day.

In the morning--dim, gray, dewy summer's morn--the distant roll of
ponderous wheels begins to mingle with my old friend's slumbers,
creaking more and more harshly through the midst of his dream and
gradually replacing it with realities. Hardly conscious of the change
from sleep to wakefulness, he finds himself partly clad and throwing
wide the toll-gates for the passage of a fragrant load of hay. The
timbers groan beneath the slow-revolving wheels; one sturdy yeoman
stalks beside the oxen, and, peering from the summit of the hay, by
the glimmer of the half-extinguished lantern over the toll-house is
seen the drowsy visage of his comrade, who has enjoyed a nap some ten
miles long. The toll is paid; creak, creak, again go the wheels, and
the huge hay-mow vanishes into the morning mist. As yet nature is but
half awake, and familiar objects appear visionary. But yonder, dashing
from the shore with a rattling thunder of the wheels and a confused
clatter of hoofs, comes the never-tiring mail, which has hurried
onward at the same headlong, restless rate all through the quiet
night. The bridge resounds in one continued peal as the coach rolls on
without a pause, merely affording the toll-gatherer a glimpse at the
sleepy passengers, who now bestir their torpid limbs and snuff a
cordial in the briny air. The morn breathes upon them and blushes, and
they forget how wearily the darkness toiled away. And behold now the
fervid day in his bright chariot, glittering aslant over the waves,
nor scorning to throw a tribute of his golden beams on the
toll-gatherer's little hermitage. The old man looks eastward, and (for
he is a moralizer) frames a simile of the stage-coach and the sun.

While the world is rousing itself we may glance slightly at the scene
of our sketch. It sits above the bosom of the broad flood--a spot not
of earth, but in the midst of waters which rush with a murmuring sound
among the massive beams beneath. Over the door is a weatherbeaten
board inscribed with the rates of toll in letters so nearly effaced
that the gilding of the sunshine can hardly make them legible. Beneath
the window is a wooden bench on which a long succession of weary
wayfarers have reposed themselves. Peeping within-doors, we perceive
the whitewashed walls bedecked with sundry lithographic prints and
advertisements of various import and the immense show-bill of a
wandering caravan. And there sits our good old toll-gatherer,
glorified by the early sunbeams. He is a man, as his aspect may
announce, of quiet soul and thoughtful, shrewd, yet simple mind, who
of the wisdom which the passing world scatters along the wayside has
gathered a reasonable store.

Now the sun smiles upon the landscape and earth smiles back again upon
the sky. Frequent now are the travellers. The toll-gatherer's
practised ear can distinguish the weight of every vehicle, the number
of its wheels and how many horses beat the resounding timbers with
their iron tramp. Here, in a substantial family chaise, setting forth
betimes to take advantage of the dewy road, come a gentleman and his
wife with their rosy-cheeked little girl sitting gladsomely between
them. The bottom of the chaise is heaped with multifarious bandboxes
and carpet-bags, and beneath the axle swings a leathern trunk dusty
with yesterday's journey. Next appears a four-wheeled carryall peopled
with a round half dozen of pretty girls, all drawn by a single horse
and driven by a single gentleman. Luckless wight doomed through a
whole summer day to be the butt of mirth and mischief among the
frolicsome maidens! Bolt upright in a sulky rides a thin, sour-visaged
man who as he pays his toll hands the toll-gatherer a printed card to
stick upon the wall. The vinegar-faced traveller proves to be a
manufacturer of pickles. Now paces slowly from timber to timber a
horseman clad in black, with a meditative brow, as of one who,
whithersoever his steed might bear him, would still journey through a
mist of brooding thought. He is a country preacher going to labor at a
protracted meeting. The next object passing townward is a butcher's
cart canopied with its arch of snow-white cotton. Behind comes a
"sauceman" driving a wagon full of new potatoes, green ears of corn,
beets, carrots, turnips and summer squashes, and next two wrinkled,
withered witch-looking old gossips in an antediluvian chaise drawn by
a horse of former generations and going to peddle out a lot of
huckleberries. See, there, a man trundling a wheelbarrow-load of
lobsters. And now a milk-cart rattles briskly onward, covered with
green canvas and conveying the contributions of a whole herd of cows,
in large tin canisters.

But let all these pay their toll and pass. Here comes a spectacle that
causes the old toll-gatherer to smile benignantly, as if the
travellers brought sunshine with them and lavished its gladsome
influence all along the road. It is a barouche of the newest style,
the varnished panels of which reflect the whole moving panorama of the
landscape, and show a picture, likewise, of our friend with his visage
broadened, so that his meditative smile is transformed to grotesque
merriment. Within sits a youth fresh as the summer morn, and beside
him a young lady in white with white gloves upon her slender hands and
a white veil flowing down over her face. But methinks her blushing
cheek burns through the snowy veil. Another white-robed virgin sits in
front. And who are these on whom, and on all that appertains to them,
the dust of earth seems never to have settled? Two lovers whom the
priest has blessed this blessed morn and sent them forth, with one of
the bride-maids, on the matrimonial tour.--Take my blessing too, ye
happy ones! May the sky not frown upon you nor clouds bedew you with
their chill and sullen rain! May the hot sun kindle no fever in your
hearts! May your whole life's pilgrimage be as blissful as this first
day's journey, and its close be gladdened with even brighter
anticipations than those which hallow your bridal-night! They pass,
and ere the reflection of their joy has faded from his face another
spectacle throws a melancholy shadow over the spirit of the observing
man. In a close carriage sits a fragile figure muffled carefully and
shrinking even from the mild breath of summer. She leans against a
manly form, and his arm enfolds her as if to guard his treasure from
some enemy. Let but a few weeks pass, and when he shall strive to
embrace that loved one, he will press only desolation to his heart.

And now has Morning gathered up her dewy pearls and fled away. The sun
rolls blazing through the sky, and cannot find a cloud to cool his
face with. The horses toil sluggishly along the bridge, and heave
their glistening sides in short quick pantings when the reins are
tightened at the toll-house. Glisten, too, the faces of the
travellers. Their garments are thickly bestrewn with dust; their
whiskers and hair look hoary; their throats are choked with the dusty
atmosphere which they have left behind them. No air is stirring on the
road. Nature dares draw no breath lest she should inhale a stifling
cloud of dust. "A hot and dusty day!" cry the poor pilgrims as they
wipe their begrimed foreheads and woo the doubtful breeze which the
river bears along with it.--"Awful hot! Dreadful dusty!" answers the
sympathetic toll-gatherer. They start again to pass through the fiery
furnace, while he re-enters his cool hermitage and besprinkles it with
a pail of briny water from the stream beneath. He thinks within
himself that the sun is not so fierce here as elsewhere, and that the
gentle air doth not forget him in these sultry days. Yes, old friend,
and a quiet heart will make a dog-day temperate. He hears a weary
footstep, and perceives a traveller with pack and staff, who sits down
upon the hospitable bench and removes the hat from his wet brow. The
toll-gatherer administers a cup of cold water, and, discovering his
guest to be a man of homely sense, he engages him in profitable talk,
uttering the maxims of a philosophy which he has found in his own
soul, but knows not how it came there. And as the wayfarer makes ready
to resume his journey he tells him a sovereign remedy for blistered
feet.

Now comes the noontide hour--of all the hours, nearest akin to
midnight, for each has its own calmness and repose. Soon, however, the
world begins to turn again upon its axis, and it seems the busiest
epoch of the day, when an accident impedes the march of sublunary
things. The draw being lifted to permit the passage of a schooner
laden with wood from the Eastern forests, she sticks immovably right
athwart the bridge. Meanwhile, on both sides of the chasm a throng of
impatient travellers fret and fume. Here are two sailors in a gig with
the top thrown back, both puffing cigars and swearing all sorts of
forecastle oaths; there, in a smart chaise, a dashingly-dressed
gentleman and lady, he from a tailor's shop-board and she from a
milliner's back room--the aristocrats of a summer afternoon. And what
are the haughtiest of us but the ephemeral aristocrats of a summer's
day? Here is a tin-pedler whose glittering ware bedazzles all
beholders like a travelling meteor or opposition sun, and on the other
side a seller of spruce beer, which brisk liquor is confined in
several dozen of stone bottles. Here conic a party of ladies on
horseback, in green ridings habits, and gentlemen attendant, and there
a flock of sheep for the market, pattering over the bridge with a
multitude nous clatter of their little hoofs; here a Frenchman with a
hand-organ on his shoulder, and there an itinerant Swiss jeweller. On
this side, heralded by a blast of clarions and bugles, appears a train
of wagons conveying all the wild beasts of a caravan; and on that a
company of summer soldiers marching from village to village on a
festival campaign, attended by the "brass band." Now look at the
scene, and it presents an emblem of the mysterious confusion, the
apparently insolvable riddle, in which individuals, or the great world
itself, seem often to be involved. What miracle shall set all things
right again?

But see! the schooner has thrust her bulky carcase through the chasm;
the draw descends; horse and foot pass onward and leave the bridge
vacant from end to end. "And thus," muses the toll-gatherer, "have I
found it with all stoppages, even though the universe seemed to be at
a stand." The sage old man!

Far westward now the reddening sun throws a broad sheet of splendor
across the flood, and to the eyes of distant boatmen gleams brightly
among the timbers of the bridge. Strollers come from the town to quaff
the freshening breeze. One or two let down long lines and haul up
flapping flounders or cunners or small cod, or perhaps an eel. Others,
and fair girls among them, with the flush of the hot day still on
their cheeks, bend over the railing and watch the heaps of seaweed
floating upward with the flowing tide. The horses now tramp heavily
along the bridge and wistfully bethink them of their stables.--Rest,
rest, thou weary world! for to-morrow's round of toil and pleasure
will be as wearisome as to-day's has been, yet both shall bear thee
onward a day's march of eternity.--Now the old toll-gatherer looks
seaward and discerns the lighthouse kindling on a far island, and the
stars, too, kindling in the sky, as if but a little way beyond; and,
mingling reveries of heaven with remembrances of earth, the whole
procession of mortal travellers, all the dusty pilgrimage which he has
witnessed, seems like a flitting show of phantoms for his thoughtful
soul to muse upon.




THE VISION OF THE FOUNTAIN.


At fifteen I became a resident in a country village more than a
hundred miles from home. The morning after my arrival--a September
morning, but warm and bright as any in July--I rambled into a wood of
oaks with a few walnut trees intermixed, forming the closest shade
above my head. The ground was rocky, uneven, overgrown with bushes and
clumps of young saplings and traversed only by cattle-paths. The track
which I chanced to follow led me to a crystal spring with a border of
grass as freshly green as on May morning, and overshadowed by the limb
of a great oak. One solitary sunbeam found its way down and played
like a goldfish in the water.

From my childhood I have loved to gaze into a spring. The water filled
a circular basin, small but deep and set round with stones, some of
which were covered with slimy moss, the others naked and of variegated
hue--reddish, white and brown. The bottom was covered with coarse
sand, which sparkled in the lonely sunbeam and seemed to illuminate
the spring with an unborrowed light. In one spot the gush of the water
violently agitated the sand, but without obscuring the fountain or
breaking the glassiness of its surface. It appeared as if some living
creature were about to emerge--the naiad of the spring, perhaps, in
the shape of a beautiful young woman with a gown of filmy water-moss,
a belt of rainbow-drops and a cold, pure, passionless countenance. How
would the beholder shiver, pleasantly yet fearfully, to see her
sitting on one of the stones, paddling her white feet in the ripples
and throwing up water to sparkle in the sun! Wherever she laid her
hands on grass and flowers, they would immediately be moist, as with
morning dew. Then would she set about her labors, like a careful
housewife, to clear the fountain of withered leaves, and bits of slimy
wood, and old acorns from the oaks above, and grains of corn left by
cattle in drinking, till the bright sand in the bright water were like
a treasury of diamonds. But, should the intruder approach too near, he
would find only the drops of a summer shower glistening about the spot
where he had seen her.

Reclining on the border of grass where the dewy goddess should have
been, I bent forward, and a pair of eyes met mine within the watery
mirror. They were the reflection of my own. I looked again, and, lo!
another face, deeper in the fountain than my own image, more distinct
in all the features, yet faint as thought. The vision had the aspect
of a fair young girl with locks of paly gold. A mirthful expression
laughed in the eyes and dimpled over the whole shadowy countenance,
till it seemed just what a fountain would be if, while dancing merrily
into the sunshine, it should assume the shape of woman. Through the
dim rosiness of the cheeks I could see the brown leaves, the slimy
twigs, the acorns and the sparkling sand. The solitary sunbeam was
diffused among the golden hair, which melted into its faint brightness
and became a glory round that head so beautiful.

My description can give no idea how suddenly the fountain was thus
tenanted and how soon it was left desolate. I breathed, and there was
the face; I held my breath, and it was gone. Had it passed away or
faded into nothing? I doubted whether it had ever been.

My sweet readers, what a dreamy and delicious hour did I spend where
that vision found and left me! For a long time I sat perfectly still,
waiting till it should reappear, and fearful that the slightest
motion, or even the flutter of my breath, might frighten it away. Thus
have I often started from a pleasant dream, and then kept quiet in
hopes to wile it back. Deep were my musings as to the race and
attributes of that ethereal being. Had I created her? Was she the
daughter of my fancy, akin to those strange shapes which peep under
the lids of children's eyes? And did her beauty gladden me for that
one moment and then die? Or was she a water-nymph within the fountain,
or fairy or woodland goddess peeping over my shoulder, or the ghost of
some forsaken maid who had drowned herself for love? Or, in good
truth, had a lovely girl with a warm heart and lips that would bear
pressure stolen softly behind me and thrown her image into the spring?

I watched and waited, but no vision came again. I departed, but with a
spell upon me which drew me back that same afternoon to the haunted
spring. There was the water gushing, the sand sparkling and the
sunbeam glimmering. There the vision was not, but only a great frog,
the hermit of that solitude, who immediately withdrew his speckled
snout and made himself invisible--all except a pair of long
legs--beneath a stone. Methought he had a devilish look. I could have
slain him as an enchanter who kept the mysterious beauty imprisoned in
the fountain.

Sad and heavy, I was returning to the village. Between me and the
church-spire rose a little hill, and on its summit a group of trees
insulated from all the rest of the wood, with their own share of
radiance hovering on them from the west and their own solitary shadow
falling to the east. The afternoon being far declined, the sunshine
was almost pensive and the shade almost cheerful; glory and gloom were
mingled in the placid light, as if the spirits of the Day and Evening
had met in friendship under those trees and found themselves akin. I
was admiring the picture when the shape of a young girl emerged from
behind the clump of oaks. My heart knew her: it was the vision, but so
distant and ethereal did she seem, so unmixed with earth, so imbued
with the pensive glory of the spot where she was standing, that my
spirit sunk within me, sadder than before. How could I ever reach her?

While I gazed a sudden shower came pattering down upon the leaves. In
a moment the air was full of brightness, each raindrop catching a
portion of sunlight as it fell, and the whole gentle shower appearing
like a mist, just substantial enough to bear the burden of radiance. A
rainbow vivid as Niagara's was painted in the air. Its southern limb
came down before the group of trees and enveloped the fair vision as
if the hues of heaven were the only garment for her beauty. When the
rainbow vanished, she who had seemed a part of it was no longer there.
Was her existence absorbed in nature's loveliest phenomenon, and did
her pure frame dissolve away in the varied light? Yet I would not
despair of her return, for, robed in the rainbow, she was the emblem
of Hope.

Thus did the vision leave me, and many a doleful day succeeded to the
parting moment. By the spring and in the wood and on the hill and
through the village, at dewy sunrise, burning noon, and at that magic
hour of sunset, when she had vanished from my sight, I sought her, but
in vain. Weeks came and went, months rolled away, and she appeared not
in them. I imparted my mystery to none, but wandered to and fro or sat
in solitude like one that had caught a glimpse of heaven and could
take no more joy on earth. I withdrew into an inner world where my
thoughts lived and breathed, and the vision in the midst of them.
Without intending it, I became at once the author and hero of a
romance, conjuring up rivals, imagining events, the actions of others
and my own, and experiencing every change of passion, till jealousy
and despair had their end in bliss. Oh, had I the burning fancy of my
early youth with manhood's colder gift, the power of expression, your
hearts, sweet ladies, should flutter at my tale.

In the middle of January I was summoned home. The day before my
departure, visiting the spots which had been hallowed by the vision, I
found that the spring had a frozen bosom, and nothing but the snow and
a glare of winter sunshine on the hill of the rainbow. "Let me hope,"
thought I, "or my heart will be as icy as the fountain and the whole
world as desolate as this snowy hill." Most of the day was spent in
preparing for the journey, which was to commence at four o'clock the
next morning. About an hour after supper, when all was in readiness, I
descended from my chamber to the sitting-room to take leave of the old
clergyman and his family with whom I had been an inmate. A gust of
wind blew out my lamp as I passed through the entry.

According to their invariable custom--so pleasant a one when the fire
blazes cheerfully--the family were sitting in the parlor with no other
light than what came from the hearth. As the good clergyman's scanty
stipend compelled him to use all sorts of economy, the foundation of
his fires was always a large heap of tan, or ground bark, which would
smoulder away from morning till night with a dull warmth and no flame.
This evening the heap of tan was newly put on and surmounted with
three sticks of red oak full of moisture, and a few pieces of dry pine
that had not yet kindled. There was no light except the little that
came sullenly from two half-burnt brands, without even glimmering on
the andirons. But I knew the position of the old minister's arm-chair,
and also where his wife sat with her knitting-work, and how to avoid
his two daughters--one a stout country lass, and the other a
consumptive girl. Groping through the gloom, I found my own place next
to that of the son, a learned collegian who had come home to keep
school in the village during the winter vacation. I noticed that there
was less room than usual to-night between the collegian's chair and
mine.

As people are always taciturn in the dark, not a word was said for
some time after my entrance. Nothing broke the stillness but the
regular click of the matron's knitting-needles. At times the fire
threw out a brief and dusky gleam which twinkled on the old man's
glasses and hovered doubtfully round our circle, but was far too faint
to portray the individuals who composed it. Were we not like ghosts?
Dreamy as the scene was, might it not be a type of the mode in which
departed people who had known and loved each other here would hold
communion in eternity? We were aware of each other's presence, not by
sight nor sound nor touch, but by an inward consciousness. Would it
not be so among the dead?

The silence was interrupted by the consumptive daughter addressing a
remark to some one in the circle whom she called Rachel. Her tremulous
and decayed accents were answered by a single word, but in a voice
that made me start and bend toward the spot whence it had proceeded.
Had I ever heard that sweet, low tone? If not, why did it rouse up so
many old recollections, or mockeries of such, the shadows of things
familiar yet unknown, and fill my mind with confused images of her
features who had spoken, though buried in the gloom of the parlor?
Whom had my heart recognized, that it throbbed so? I listened to catch
her gentle breathing, and strove by the intensity of my gaze to
picture forth a shape where none was visible.

Suddenly the dry pine caught; the fire blazed up with a ruddy glow,
and where the darkness had been, there was she--the vision of the
fountain. A spirit of radiance only, she had vanished with the rainbow
and appeared again in the firelight, perhaps to flicker with the blaze
and be gone. Vet her cheek was rosy and lifelike, and her features, in
the bright warmth of the room, were even sweeter and tenderer than my
recollection of them. She knew me. The mirthful expression that had
laughed in her eyes and dimpled over her countenance when I beheld her
faint beauty in the fountain was laughing and dimpling there now. One
moment our glance mingled; the next, down rolled the heap of tan upon
the kindled wood, and darkness snatched away that daughter of the
light, and gave her back to me no more!

Fair ladies, there is nothing more to tell. Must the simple mystery be
revealed, then, that Rachel was the daughter of the village squire and
