therefore set out together; and on coming to a Road the man said: "O
Road, Road, is it lawful to requite evil for good, or good for good
only?"  The Road replied: "I do good to mankind, but they requite me
with evil, defiling my surface as they go."  Then they came to a Tree,
of which the man asked the same question.  The Tree replied: "I do good
to mankind, but they requite me with evil, lopping off my branches and
cutting me down."  At last they came to the Mouse-deer and the man made
the same inquiry as before.  The Mouse-deer replied: "I must really go
into the question thoroughly before I answer it; let us go back
together to the trap."  On reaching the trap, he requested the Tiger to
"Step inside," and the Tiger entering the trap, the Mouse-deer let down
the door of the trap, and exclaimed, "Accursed Brute, you have returned
evil for good and now you shall die for it."  He then called in the
neighbours and had the Tiger killed.



The Tune That Makes the Tiger Drowsy

There is a tune which when played upon the "Kerotong" (a two-stringed
bamboo harp) makes Rimau the Tiger drowsy, but only a few old people
know it.  One evening two men were sitting together and playing in a
hut in the jungle when two tigers overheard them.

The Tigers took counsel together, and one of them said to the other,
"You shall be the first to go into the house.  Whatever you seize shall
therefore be your portion, but Whatever plunges down the steps to
escape shall be mine."

At this the second Tiger ascended the house-ladder and was just
crouching upon the topmost rung when one of the men to amuse himself
commenced to play the Tune that makes the Tiger drowsy.  As soon as the
Tiger heard it he began to grow sleepy, and presently fell plump down
the steps to the ground, where he was seized by his companion.  When he
objected his companion exclaimed, "Did we not agree that Whatever
plunged down the steps was to be my portion?" and, so saying, he
proceeded to devour him at his leisure.



The Tiger and the Shadow

There was a "salt-lick" in the jungle to which all the beasts of the
forest resorted, but they were greatly afraid by reason of an old Tiger
which killed one of them every day.  At length, therefore, P'lando' the
Mouse-deer said to the Tiger, "Why not permit me to bring you a beast
every day, to save you from hunting for your food?"  The Tiger
consented and P'lando' went off to make arrangement with the beasts.
But he could not persuade any of them to go, and after three days he
set off, taking nobody with him but Kuwis the smallest of the Flying
Squirrels.

On their arrival P'lando' said to the Tiger: "I could not bring you any
of the other beasts because the way was blocked by a fat old Tiger with
a Flying Squirrel sitting astride its muzzle."  On hearing this the
Tiger exclaimed, "Let us go and find it and drive it away."  The three
therefore set out, the Flying Squirrel perched upon the Tiger's muzzle
and the Mouse-deer sitting astride upon its hind quarters.  On reaching
the river, the Mouse-deer pointed to the Tiger's likeness in the water
and exclaimed, "Look there!  That is the fat old Tiger that I saw."  On
hearing this, the Tiger sprang into the river to attack his own shadow,
and was drowned immediately.



The King-crow and the Water-snail

A Water-snail was coming up-stream from the lower reaches, when a
King-crow heard it.  Said the King-crow to himself: "Who can it be
coming up-stream that exclaims so loudly at the rapids?  One might say
it was a man, but that there is nothing to be seen."  So the King-crow
settled on a tree to watch, but as he could see nothing from his perch
on the tree he flew down to the ground, and walked along by the
water-side.  And when he thought to see some man exclaiming, he caught
sight of the Water-snail.

"Hullo, you there," said he, "where do you come from?"  "I come from
the eddy below the rapids," said the Water-snail, "and I only want to
get as far as the head-waters of this river."  Said the King-crow:
"Wait a bit.  Suppose you go down to the river-mouth as quickly as you
can and we will have a wager on it."  (Now rivers are the Water-snail's
domain, in which he has many comrades.)

"What is to be the stake?" asked the Water-snail.  "If I am beaten I
will be your slave, and look after your aroids and wild caladiums on
which all Water-snails feed."  Then the King-crow asked: "And what will
you stake?"  The Water-snail replied, "If I am beaten, the river shall
be handed over to you and you shall be King of the River."  But the
Water-snail begged for a delay of twice seven days, saying that he felt
knocked up after ascending the rapids, and the delay was granted
accordingly.

Meanwhile, however, the Water-snail hunted up a great number of his
friends and instructed them to conceal themselves in each of the higher
reaches of the river, and to reply immediately when the King-crow
challenged them.

The day arrived, and the King-crow flew off, and in each of the higher
reaches the Water-snail's friends replied to the challenge, while at
the river-mouth the Water-snail replied in person.  So the King-crow
was defeated and has ever since remained the slave of the Water-snail.



The Elephant Has a Bet with the Tiger

In the beginning Gajah the Elephant and Rimau the Tiger were sworn
friends.  But one day they came to a clearing and presently encountered
Lotong, the long-tailed Spectacle-monkey.  And when he saw the Monkey,
the Elephant said, "Mr. Lotong yonder is far too noisy; let us try and
shake him off; if he falls to me I am to eat you; and if he falls to
you, you are to eat me--we will make a wager of it."  The Tiger said,
"Agreed"; and the Elephant replied, "Agreed."  "Very well!" said the
Tiger; "you shall try and menace him first."  So the Elephant tried to
menace the Monkey.  "AU! AU! AU!" he trumpeted, and each time he
trumpeted the Monkey was scared.  But the Monkey went jumping head
foremost through the branches and never fell to the ground at all.

Presently, therefore, the Tiger asked the Elephant, "Well, Friend
Elephant, would you like to try your luck again?"  But the Elephant
said, "No, thank you.  It shall be your turn now; and if he falls to
you, you shall eat me--if you really can make him fall!"  Then the
Tiger went and roared his longest and loudest, and shortened his body
as for a spring and growled and menaced the Monkey thrice.  And the
Monkey leaped and fell at the Tiger's feet, for his feet and hands were
paralyzed and would not grip the branches any more.  Then the Tiger
said: "Well, Friend Elephant, I suppose I may eat you now."  But the
Elephant said: "You have, I admit, won the wager; but I beg you to
grant me just seven days' respite, to enable me to visit my wife and
children and to make my will."  The Tiger granted the request, and the
Elephant went home, bellowing and sobbing every foot of the way.

Now the Elephant's wife heard the sound of her husband's voice, and
said to her children, "What can be the matter with your Father that he
keeps sobbing so?"  And the children listened to make sure, and said,
"Yes, it really is Father's voice, the sobbing, and not that of anybody
else."  Presently Father Elephant arrived, and Mother Elephant asked:
"What were you sobbing for, Father?  What have you done to yourself?"
Father Elephant replied: "I made a wager with Friend Tiger about
shaking down a Monkey, and Friend Tiger beat me; I menaced the Monkey,
but he did not fall; if he had fallen to me, I was to have eaten Friend
Tiger, but if he fell to Friend Tiger, Friend Tiger was to eat me.  I
was beaten, and now Friend Tiger says he is going to eat me.  So I
begged leave to come home and see you, and he has given me just seven
days' respite."

Now for the seven days Father Elephant kept sobbing aloud, and neither
ate nor slept.  And the thing came to the hearing of Friend Mouse-deer.
"What can be the matter with Friend Elephant that he keeps bellowing
and bellowing; neither does he sleep, so that night is turned into day,
and day into night?  What on earth is the matter with him?  Suppose I
go and see," said the Mouse-deer.  Then the Mouse-deer went to see what
was wrong, and asked: "What is the matter with you, Friend Elephant,
that we hear you bellowing and bellowing every single day and every
single night, just now, too, when the Rains are upon us? You are far
too noisy."

But the Elephant said: "It is no mere empty noise, Friend Mouse-deer; I
have got into a dreadful scrape."  "What sort of a scrape?" inquired
the Mouse-deer.  "I made a wager with Friend Tiger about shaking down a
Monkey, and he beat me."  "What was the stake?" asked the Mouse-deer.
"The stake was that Friend Tiger might eat me if Friend Tiger
frightened it down; and if I frightened it down, I might eat Friend
Tiger.  It fell to Friend Tiger, and now Friend Tiger wants to eat me.
And my reason for not eating or sleeping any more is that I have got
only just seven days' respite to go home and visit my wife and children
and to make my will."  Then the Mouse-deer said: "If it came to Friend
Tiger's eating you, I should feel exceedingly sorrowful, exceedingly
distressed; but things being only as you say, I feel neither."  "If you
will assist me," said the Elephant, "I will become your slave, and my
descendants shall be your slaves forever."  "Very well, it that is the
case, I will assist you," said the Mouse-deer.  "Go and look for a jar
full of molasses."  Friend Elephant promised to do so, and went to look
for it at the house of a maker of palm-wine.  The owner of the house
fled for his life, and the jar fell into Friend Elephant's possession,
who bore it back to the Mouse-deer.

Then Friend Mouse-deer said, "When does your promise expire?" and
Friend Elephant replied, "To-morrow."  So when next morning arrived
they started, and the Mouse-deer said, "Now pour the molasses over your
back and let it spread and spread and run down your legs."  Friend
Elephant did as he was ordered.  Friend Mouse-deer then instructed the
Elephant as follows: "As soon as I begin to lick up the molasses on
your back, bellow as loud as you can and make believe to be hurt, and
writhe and wriggle this way and that."

And presently Friend Mouse-deer commenced to lick hard, and Friend
Elephant writhed and wriggled and made believe to be hurt, and made a
prodigious noise of trumpeting.  In this way they proceeded and Friend
Mouse-deer got up and sat astride upon Friend Elephant's back.  And the
Elephant trumpeted and trumpeted all the way till they met with Friend
Tiger.  At this Friend Mouse-deer exclaimed, "A single Elephant is very
short commons; if I could only catch that big and fat old Tiger there,
it would be just enough to satisfy my hunger."

Now when Friend Tiger heard these words of the Mouse-deer, he said to
himself, "So I suppose if you catch me, you'll eat me into the bargain,
will you?"  And Friend Tiger stayed not a moment longer, but fled for
his life, fetching very lofty bounds.

And soon he met with the Black Ape, and Friend Ape asked, "Why running
so hard, Friend Tiger?  Why so much noise, and why, just when the Rains
are upon us, too, do you go fetching such lofty bounds?"  Friend Tiger
replied, "What do you mean by 'so much noise'?  What was the Thing that
was got upon Friend Elephant's back, that had caught Friend Elephant
and was devouring him so that he went writhing and wriggling for the
pain of it, and the blood went streaming down in floods?  Moreover the
Thing that was got on Friend Elephant's back said, to my hearing, that
a single Elephant was very short commons: but if It could catch a fat
old Tiger like myself that would be just enough to satisfy Its hunger."
Friend Ape said, "What was that Thing, Friend Tiger?" "I don't know,"
said the Tiger.  "Ah," mused the Ape, "I wonder if it _could_ be Friend
Mouse-deer!"  "Certainly not," said the Tiger; "why, how in the world
could Friend Mouse-deer swallow _Me_?  To say nothing of his not being
used to meat food."  "Come and let us go back again," said the Ape.

Then they went back again to find the Elephant, and first the Ape went
the faster, and then the Tiger went the faster, and then the Ape got in
front again.  But Friend Mouse-deer sitting on Friend Elephant's back
saw them coming and shouted.  "Hullo, Father Ape," said he, "this is a
dog's trick indeed; you promised to bring me two tigers and you only
bring me one.  I refuse to accept it, Father Ape."

Now when Friend Tiger heard this, he ran off at first as fast as he
could, but presently he slackened his pace and said, "It is too bad of
you, Friend Ape, to try to cozen me in order to pay your own debts.
For shame, Father Ape!  It was only through good luck that he refused
to accept me; if he had accepted, I should have been dead and done
with.  So now, if you come down to the ground, you shall die the death
yourself, just for your trying to cheat me."

Thus the Tiger and the Ape were set at enmity, and to this day the
Tiger is very wroth with the Ape for trying to cheat him.  And here the
story ends.




MOORISH FABLES

  "While watching man in all his phases,
  And seeing that, in many cases,
    He acts just like the brute creation--
  I've thought the lord of all these races
  Of no less failings showed the traces
    Than do his lieges in relation."


MOORISH FABLES

The Wagtail and the Jackal

At a time when the animals spoke, a Wagtail laid her eggs on the
ground.  The little ones grew up.  A Jackal and a Fox came to them.
The Jackal said to the Fox:

"Swear to me that the Wagtail owes me a pound of butter."

The Fox swore to it.  The Bird began to weep.  A Greyhound came to her
and asked her what was the matter.  She answered him:

"The Fox has calumniated me."

"Well," said the Hound, "put me in this sack of skin."

She put him in the sack.  "Tie up the top well," said the Hound.  When
the Jackal returned she said to him,

"Come and measure out the butter."

The Jackal advanced and unfastened the sack.  He saw the Hound, who
stretched out his paws and said to the Fox,

"I am ill; come and measure, Fox."

The Fox approached.  The Hound seized him.  The Jackal said:

"Remember your false testimony."



The Wren

A Wren had built its nest on the side of a road.  When the eggs were
hatched, a Camel passed that way.  The little Wrens saw it and said to
their father when he returned from the fields:

"O papa, a gigantic animal passed by."

The Wren stretched out his foot.  "As big as this, my children?"

"O papa, much bigger."

He stretched out his foot and his wing.  "As big as this?"

"O papa, much bigger."

Finally he stretched out fully his feet and legs.

"As big as this then?"

"Much bigger."

"That is a lie; there is no animal bigger than I am."

"Well, wait," said the little ones, "and you will see."

The Camel came back while browsing the grass of the roadside.

The Wren stretched himself out near the nest.  The Camel seized the
bird, which passed through its teeth safe and sound.

"Truly," he said to them, "the Camel is a gigantic animal, but I am not
ashamed of myself."

On the earth it generally happens that the vain are as if they did not
exist; but sooner or later a rock falls and crushes them.



Mule, Jackal, and Lion

The Mule, the Jackal, and the Lion went in company.

"We will eat the one whose race is bad," they said to each other.

"Lion, who is your father?"

"My father is a lion, and my mother is a lioness."

"And you, Jackal, what is your father?"

"My father is a jackal, and my mother too."

"And you, Mule, what is your father?"

"My father is an ass, and my mother is a mare."

"Your race is bad; we will eat you."

He answered them: "I will consult an old man.  If he says that my race
is bad, you may devour me."

He went to a farrier, and said to him, "Shoe my hind feet, and make the
nails stick out well."

He went back home.  He called the Camel and showed him his feet,
