that, and it means to hurry up."

It was rather a feeble warning that he sounded and the cow fed
on peacefully. The little fellow looked up at the minister's wife
confidingly, and then glanced back at the farm to see if Cassius Came
were watching the progress of events.

"What shall we do next?" he asked.

Mrs. Baxter delighted in that warm, cosy little 'WE;' it took her into
the firm so pleasantly. She was a weak prop indeed when it came to cows,
but all the courage in her soul rose to arms when Elisha said, "What
shall WE do next?" She became alert, ingenious, strong, on the instant.

"What is the cow's name?" she asked, sitting up straight in the
swing-chair.

"Buttercup; but she don't seem to know it very well. She ain't a mite
like a buttercup."

"Never mind; you must shout 'Buttercup!' at the top of your voice, and
twitch the rope HARD; then I'll call, 'Hurrap!' with all my might at
the same moment. And if she starts quickly we mustn't run nor seem
frightened!"

They did this; it worked to a charm, and Mrs. Baxter looked
affectionately after her Little Prophet as the cow pulled him down Tory
Hill.

The lovely August days wore on. Rebecca was often at the parsonage
and saw Elisha frequently, but Buttercup was seldom present at their
interviews, as the boy now drove her to the pasture very early in the
morning, the journey thither being one of considerable length and her
method of reaching the goal being exceedingly roundabout.

Mr. Came had pointed out the necessity of getting her into the pasture
at least a few minutes before she had to be taken out again at night,
and though Rebecca didn't like Mr. Came, she saw the common sense of
this remark. Sometimes Mrs. Baxter and Rebecca caught a glimpse of
the two at sundown, as they returned from the pasture to the twilight
milking, Buttercup chewing her peaceful cud, her soft white bag of milk
hanging full, her surprised eye rolling in its accustomed "fine frenzy."
The frenzied roll did not mean anything, they used to assure Elisha; but
if it didn't, it was an awful pity she had to do it, Rebecca thought;
and Mrs. Baxter agreed. To have an expression of eye that meant murder,
and yet to be a perfectly virtuous and well-meaning animal, this was a
calamity indeed.

Mrs. Baxter was looking at the sun one evening as it dropped like a ball
of red fire into Wilkins's woods, when the Little Prophet passed.

"It's the twenty-ninth night," he called joyously.

"I am so glad," she answered, for she had often feared some accident
might prevent his claiming the promised reward. "Then tomorrow Buttercup
will be your own cow?"

"I guess so. That's what Mr. Came said. He's off to Acreville now, but
he'll be home tonight, and father's going to send my new hat by him.
When Buttercup's my own cow I wish I could change her name and call her
Red Rover, but p'r'aps her mother wouldn't like it. When she b'longs to
me, mebbe I won't be so fraid of gettin' hooked and scrunched, because
she'll know she's mine, and she'll go better. I haven't let her get
snarled up in the rope one single time, and I don't show I'm afraid, do
I?"

"I should never suspect it for an instant," said Mrs. Baxter
encouragingly. "I've often envied you your bold, brave look!"

Elisha appeared distinctly pleased. "I haven't cried, either, when she's
dragged me over the pasture bars and peeled my legs. Bill Petes's little
brother Charlie says he ain't afraid of anything, not even bears. He
says he would walk right up close and cuff em if they dared to yip;
but I ain't like that! He ain't scared of elephants or tigers or lions
either; he says they're all the same as frogs or chickens to him!"

Rebecca told her Aunt Miranda that evening that it was the Prophet's
twenty-ninth night, and that the big red cow was to be his on the
morrow.

"Well, I hope it'll turn out that way," she said. "But I ain't a mite
sure that Cassius Came will give up that cow when it comes to the point.
It won't be the first time he's tried to crawl out of a bargain with
folks a good deal bigger than Lisha, for he's terrible close, Cassius
is. To be sure he's stiff in his joints and he's glad enough to have
a boy to take the cow to the pasture in summer time, but he always has
hired help when it comes harvestin'. So Lisha'll be no use from this
on; and I dare say the cow is Abner Simpson's anyway. If you want a walk
tonight, I wish you'd go up there and ask Mis' Came if she'll lend me
an' your Aunt Jane half her yeast-cake. Tell her we'll pay it back when
we get ours a Saturday. Don't you want to take Thirza Meserve with you?
She's alone as usual while Huldy's entertainin' beaux on the side porch.
Don't stay too long at the parsonage!"

III

Rebecca was used to this sort of errand, for the whole village of
Riverboro would sometimes be rocked to the very centre of its being by
simultaneous desire for a yeast-cake. As the nearest repository was a
mile and a half distant, as the yeast-cake was valued at two cents and
wouldn't keep, as the demand was uncertain, being dependent entirely on
a fluctuating desire for "riz bread," the storekeeper refused to order
more than three yeast-cakes a day at his own risk. Sometimes they
remained on his hands a dead loss; sometimes eight or ten persons would
"hitch up" and drive from distant farms for the coveted article, only to
be met with the flat, "No, I'm all out o' yeast-cake; Mis' Simmons
took the last; mebbe you can borry half o' hern, she hain't much of a
bread-eater."

So Rebecca climbed the hills to Mrs. Came's, knowing that her daily
bread depended on the successful issue of the call.

Thirza was barefooted, and tough as her little feet were, the long walk
over the stubble fields tired her. When they came within sight of the
Came barn, she coaxed Rebecca to take a short cut through the turnips
growing in long, beautifully weeded rows.

"You know Mr. Came is awfully cross, Thirza, and can't bear anybody to
tread on his crops or touch a tree or a bush that belongs to him. I'm
kind of afraid, but come along and mind you step softly in between the
rows and hold up your petticoat, so you can't possibly touch the turnip
plants. I'll do the same. Skip along fast, because then we won't leave
any deep footprints."

The children passed safely and noiselessly along, their pleasure a
trifle enhanced by the felt dangers of their progress. Rebecca knew that
they were doing no harm, but that did not prevent her hoping to escape
the gimlet eye of Mr. Came.

As they neared the outer edge of the turnip patch they paused suddenly,
petticoats in air.

A great clump of elderberry bushes hid them from the barn, but from the
other side of the clump came the sound of conversation: the timid voice
of the Little Prophet and the gruff tones of Cassius Came.

Rebecca was afraid to interrupt, and too honest to wish to overhear. She
could only hope the man and the boy would pass on to the house as they
talked, so she motioned to the paralyzed Thirza to take two more steps
and stand with her behind the elderberry bushes. But no! In a moment
they heard Mr. Came drag a stool over beside the grindstone as he said:

"Well, now Elisha Jeremiah, we'll talk about the red cow. You say you've
drove her a month, do ye? And the trade between us was that if you
could drive her a month, without her getting the rope over her foot and
without bein' afraid, you was to have her. That's straight, ain't it?"

The Prophet's face burned with excitement, his gingham shirt rose and
fell as if he were breathing hard, but he only nodded assent and said
nothing.

"Now," continued Mr. Came, "have you made out to keep the rope from
under her feet?"

"She ain't got t-t-tangled up one s-single time," said Elisha,
stuttering in his excitement, but looking up with some courage from his
bare toes, with which he was assiduously threading the grass.

"So far, so good. Now bout bein' afraid. As you seem so certain of
gettin' the cow, I suppose you hain't been a speck scared, hev you?
Honor bright, now!"

"I--I--not but just a little mite. I"--

"Hold up a minute. Of course you didn't SAY you was afraid, and didn't
SHOW you was afraid, and nobody knew you WAS afraid, but that ain't the
way we fixed it up. You was to call the cow your'n if you could drive
her to the pasture for a month without BEIN' afraid. Own up square now,
hev you be'n afraid?"

A long pause, then a faint, "Yes."

"Where's your manners?"

"I mean yes, sir."

"How often? If it hain't be'n too many times mebbe I'll let ye off,
though you're a reg'lar girl-boy, and'll be runnin' away from the cat
bimeby. Has it be'n--twice?"

"Yes," and the Little Prophet's voice was very faint now, and had a
decided tear in it.

"Yes what?"

"Yes, sir."

"Has it be'n four times?"

"Y-es, sir." More heaving of the gingham shirt.

"Well, you AIR a thunderin' coward! How many times? Speak up now."

More digging of the bare toes in the earth, and one premonitory tear
drop stealing from under the downcast lids, then,--

"A little, most every day, and you can keep the cow," wailed the
Prophet, as he turned abruptly and fled behind the shed, where he flung
himself into the green depths of a tansy bed, and gave himself up to
unmanly sobs.

Cassius Came gave a sort of shamefaced guffaw at the abrupt departure
of the boy, and went on into the house, while Rebecca and Thirza made
a stealthy circuit of the barn and a polite and circumspect entrance
through the parsonage front gate.

Rebecca told the minister's wife what she could remember of the
interview between Cassius Came and Elisha Simpson, and tender-hearted
Mrs. Baxter longed to seek and comfort her Little Prophet sobbing in the
tansy bed, the brand of coward on his forehead, and what was much worse,
the fear in his heart that he deserved it.

Rebecca could hardly be prevented from bearding Mr. Came and openly
espousing the cause of Elisha, for she was an impetuous, reckless,
valiant creature when a weaker vessel was attacked or threatened
unjustly.

Mrs. Baxter acknowledged that Mr. Came had been true, in a way, to his
word and bargain, but she confessed that she had never heard of so cruel
and hard a bargain since the days of Shylock, and it was all the worse
for being made with a child.

Rebecca hurried home, her visit quite spoiled and her errand quite
forgotten till she reached the brick house door, where she told her
aunts, with her customary picturesqueness of speech, that she would
rather eat buttermilk bread till she died than partake of food mixed
with one of Mr. Came's yeast-cakes; that it would choke her, even in the
shape of good raised bread.

"That's all very fine, Rebecky," said her Aunt Miranda, who had a
pin-prick for almost every bubble; "but don't forget there's two other
mouths to feed in this house, and you might at least give your aunt and
me the privilege of chokin' if we feel to want to!"

IV

Mrs. Baxter finally heard from Mrs. Came, through whom all information
was sure to filter if you gave it time, that her husband despised a
coward, that he considered Elisha a regular mother's-apron-string boy,
and that he was "learnin'" him to be brave.

Bill Peters, the hired man, now drove Buttercup to pasture, though
whenever Mr. Came went to Moderation or Bonnie Eagle, as he often did,
Mrs. Baxter noticed that Elisha took the hired man's place. She often
joined him on these anxious expeditions, and, a like terror in both
their souls, they attempted to train the red cow and give her some idea
of obedience.

"If she only wouldn't look at us that way we would get along real nicely
with her, wouldn't we?" prattled the Prophet, straggling along by her
side; "and she is a splendid cow; she gives twenty-one quarts a day, and
Mr. Came says it's more'n half cream."

The minister's wife assented to all this, thinking that if Buttercup
would give up her habit of turning completely round in the road to roll
her eyes and elevate her white-tipped eyebrow, she might indeed be an
enjoyable companion; but in her present state of development her society
was not agreeable, even did she give sixty-one quarts of milk a day.
Furthermore, when Mrs. Baxter discovered that she never did any of these
reprehensible things with Bill Peters, she began to believe cows more
intelligent creatures than she had supposed them to be, and she was
indignant to think Buttercup could count so confidently on the weakness
of a small boy and a timid woman.

One evening, when Buttercup was more than usually exasperating, Mrs.
Baxter said to the Prophet, who was bracing himself to keep from being
pulled into a wayside brook where Buttercup loved to dabble, "Elisha, do
you know anything about the superiority of mind over matter?"

No, he didn't, though it was not a fair time to ask the question, for he
had sat down in the road to get a better purchase on the rope.

"Well, it doesn't signify. What I mean is that we can die but once, and
it is a glorious thing to die for a great principle. Give me that rope.
I can pull like an ox in my present frame of mind. You run down on the
opposite side of the brook, take that big stick wade right in--you
are barefooted,--brandish the stick, and, if necessary, do more than
brandish. I would go myself, but it is better she should recognize you
as her master, and I am in as much danger as you are, anyway. She may
try to hook you, of course, but you must keep waving the stick,--die
brandishing, Prophet, that's the idea! She may turn and run for me, in
which case I shall run too; but I shall die running, and the minister
can bury us under our favorite sweet-apple tree!"

The Prophet's soul was fired by the lovely lady's eloquence. Their
spirits mounted simultaneously, and they were flushed with a splendid
courage in which death looked a mean and paltry thing compared with
vanquishing that cow. She had already stepped into the pool, but the
Prophet waded in towards her, moving the alder branch menacingly. She
looked up with the familiar roll of the eye that had done her such good
service all summer, but she quailed beneath the stern justice and the
new valor of the Prophet's gaze.

In that moment perhaps she felt ashamed of the misery she had caused the
helpless mite. At any rate, actuated by fear, surprise, or remorse,
she turned and walked back into the road without a sign of passion or
indignation, leaving the boy and the lady rather disappointed at their
easy victory. To be prepared for a violent death and receive not even a
scratch made them fear that they might possibly have overestimated the
danger.

They were better friends than ever after that, the young minister's wife
and the forlorn little boy from Acreville, sent away from home he
knew not why, unless it were that there was little to eat there and
considerably more at the Cash Cames', as they were called in Edgewood.
Cassius was familiarly known as Uncle Cash, partly because there was a
disposition in Edgewood to abbreviate all Christian names, and partly
because the old man paid cash, and expected to be paid cash, for
everything.

The late summer grew into autumn, and the minister's great maple flung
a flaming bough of scarlet over Mrs. Baxter's swing-chair. Uncle Cash
found Elisha very useful at picking up potatoes and apples, but the boy
was going back to his family as soon as the harvesting was over.

One Friday evening Mrs. Baxter and Rebecca, wrapped in shawls and
"fascinators," were sitting on Mrs. Came's front steps enjoying the
sunset. Rebecca was in a tremulous state of happiness, for she had
come directly from the Seminary at Wareham to the parsonage, and as the
minister was absent at a church conference, she was to stay the night
with Mrs. Baxter and go with her to Portland next day.

They were to go to the Islands, have ice cream for luncheon, ride on
a horse-car, and walk by the Longfellow house, a programme that so
unsettled Rebecca's never very steady mind that she radiated flashes
and sparkles of joy, making Mrs. Baxter wonder if flesh could be
translucent, enabling the spirit-fires within to shine through?

Buttercup was being milked on the grassy slope near the shed door. As
she walked to the barn, after giving up her pailfuls of yellow milk,
she bent her neck and snatched a hasty bite from a pile of turnips lying
temptingly near. In her haste she took more of a mouthful than would be
considered good manners even among cows, and as she disappeared in the
barn door they could see a forest of green tops hanging from her mouth,
while she painfully attempted to grind up the mass of stolen material
without allowing a single turnip to escape.

It grew dark soon afterward and they went into the house to see Mrs.
Came's new lamp lighted for the first time, to examine her last drawn-in
rug (a wonderful achievement produced entirely from dyed flannel
petticoats), and to hear the doctor's wife play "Oft in the Still
Night," on the dulcimer.

As they closed the sitting-room door opening on the piazza facing
the barn, the women heard the cow coughing and said to one another:
"Buttercup was too greedy, and now she has indigestion."

Elisha always went to bed at sundown, and Uncle Cash had gone to the
doctor's to have his hand dressed, for he had hurt it is some way in
the threshing-machine. Bill Peters, the hired man, came in presently and
asked for him, saying that the cow coughed more and more, and it must
be that something was wrong, but he could not get her to open her mouth
wide enough for him to see anything. "She'd up an' die ruther 'n obleege
anybody, that tarnal, ugly cow would!" he said.

When Uncle Cash had driven into the yard, he came in for a lantern, and
went directly out to the barn. After a half-hour or so, in which the
little party had forgotten the whole occurrence, he came in again.
