them up and laughing at them in lesson, and getting kicked by them for
so doing in play-hours. There were no less than three unhappy fellows in
tail coats, with incipient down on their chins, whom the Doctor and
the master of the form were always endeavouring to hoist into the upper
school, but whose parsing and construing resisted the most well-meant
shoves. Then came the mass of the form, boys of eleven and twelve, the
most mischievous and reckless age of British youth, of whom East and Tom
Brown were fair specimens. As full of tricks as monkeys, and of excuses
as Irishwomen, making fun of their master, one another, and their
lessons, Argus himself would have been puzzled to keep an eye on them;
and as for making them steady or serious for half an hour together,
it was simply hopeless. The remainder of the form consisted of young
prodigies of nine and ten, who were going up the school at the rate of
a form a half-year, all boys' hands and wits being against them in their
progress. It would have been one man's work to see that the precocious
youngsters had fair play; and as the master had a good deal besides
to do, they hadn't, and were for ever being shoved down three or four
places, their verses stolen, their books inked, their jackets whitened,
and their lives otherwise made a burden to them.

The lower-fourth, and all the forms below it, were heard in the great
school, and were not trusted to prepare their lessons before coming in,
but were whipped into school three-quarters of an hour before the lesson
began by their respective masters, and there, scattered about on the
benches, with dictionary and grammar, hammered out their twenty lines
of Virgil and Euripides in the midst of babel. The masters of the
lower school walked up and down the great school together during this
three-quarters of an hour, or sat in their desks reading or looking over
copies, and keeping such order as was possible. But the lower-fourth
was just now an overgrown form, too large for any one man to attend
to properly, and consequently the elysium or ideal form of the young
scapegraces who formed the staple of it.

Tom, as has been said, had come up from the third with a good character,
but the temptations of the lower-fourth soon proved too strong for him,
and he rapidly fell away, and became as unmanageable as the rest.
For some weeks, indeed, he succeeded in maintaining the appearance of
steadiness, and was looked upon favourably by his new master, whose eyes
were first opened by the following little incident.

Besides the desk which the master himself occupied, there was another
large unoccupied desk in the corner of the great school, which was
untenanted. To rush and seize upon this desk, which was ascended by
three steps and held four boys, was the great object of ambition of the
lower-fourthers; and the contentions for the occupation of it bred such
disorder that at last the master forbade its use altogether. This, of
course, was a challenge to the more adventurous spirits to occupy it;
and as it was capacious enough for two boys to lie hid there completely,
it was seldom that it remained empty, notwithstanding the veto. Small
holes were cut in the front, through which the occupants watched the
masters as they walked up and down; and as lesson time approached, one
boy at a time stole out and down the steps, as the masters' backs were
turned, and mingled with the general crowd on the forms below. Tom and
East had successfully occupied the desk some half-dozen times, and were
grown so reckless that they were in the habit of playing small games
with fives balls inside when the masters were at the other end of the
big school. One day, as ill-luck would have it, the game became more
exciting than usual, and the ball slipped through East's fingers, and
rolled slowly down the steps and out into the middle of the school, just
as the masters turned in their walk and faced round upon the desk. The
young delinquents watched their master, through the lookout holes, march
slowly down the school straight upon their retreat, while all the boys
in the neighbourhood, of course, stopped their work to look on; and not
only were they ignominiously drawn out, and caned over the hand then
and there, but their characters for steadiness were gone from that time.
However, as they only shared the fate of some three-fourths of the rest
of the form, this did not weigh heavily upon them.

In fact, the only occasions on which they cared about the matter were
the monthly examinations, when the Doctor came round to examine their
form, for one long, awful hour, in the work which they had done in the
preceding month. The second monthly examination came round soon after
Tom's fall, and it was with anything but lively anticipations that he
and the other lower-fourth boys came in to prayers on the morning of the
examination day.

Prayers and calling-over seemed twice as short as usual, and before they
could get construes of a tithe of the hard passages marked in the margin
of their books, they were all seated round, and the Doctor was standing
in the middle, talking in whispers to the master. Tom couldn't hear a
word which passed, and never lifted his eyes from his book; but he knew
by a sort of magnetic instinct that the Doctor's under-lip was coming
out, and his eye beginning to burn, and his gown getting gathered up
more and more tightly in his left hand. The suspense was agonizing, and
Tom knew that he was sure on such occasions to make an example of the
School-house boys. "If he would only begin," thought Tom, "I shouldn't
mind."

At last the whispering ceased, and the name which was called out was not
Brown. He looked up for a moment, but the Doctor's face was too awful;
Tom wouldn't have met his eye for all he was worth, and buried himself
in his book again.

The boy who was called up first was a clever, merry School-house boy,
one of their set; he was some connection of the Doctor's, and a great
favourite, and ran in and out of his house as he liked, and so was
selected for the first victim.

"Triste lupus stabulis," began the luckless youngster, and stammered
through some eight or ten lines.

"There, that will do," said the Doctor; "now construe."

On common occasions the boy could have construed the passage well enough
probably, but now his head was gone.

"Triste lupus, the sorrowful wolf," he began.

A shudder ran through the whole form, and the Doctor's wrath fairly
boiled over. He made three steps up to the construer, and gave him a
good box on the ear. The blow was not a hard one, but the boy was so
taken by surprise that he started back; the form caught the back of his
knees, and over he went on to the floor behind. There was a dead silence
over the whole school. Never before and never again while Tom was at
school did the Doctor strike a boy in lesson. The provocation must have
been great. However, the victim had saved his form for that occasion,
for the Doctor turned to the top bench, and put on the best boys for the
rest of the hour and though, at the end of the lesson, he gave them all
such a rating as they did not forget, this terrible field-day passed
over without any severe visitations in the shape of punishments or
floggings. Forty young scapegraces expressed their thanks to the
"sorrowful wolf" in their different ways before second lesson.

But a character for steadiness once gone is not easily recovered, as Tom
found; and for years afterwards he went up the school without it,
and the masters' hands were against him, and his against them. And he
regarded them, as a matter of course, as his natural enemies.

Matters were not so comfortable, either, in the house as they had
been; for old Brooke left at Christmas, and one or two others of the
sixth-form boys at the following Easter. Their rule had been rough, but
strong and just in the main, and a higher standard was beginning to be
set up; in fact, there had been a short foretaste of the good time which
followed some years later. Just now, however, all threatened to return
into darkness and chaos again. For the new prepostors were either small
young boys, whose cleverness had carried them up to the top of the
school, while in strength of body and character they were not yet
fit for a share in the government; or else big fellows of the wrong
sort--boys whose friendships and tastes had a downward tendency, who had
not caught the meaning of their position and work, and felt none of its
responsibilities. So under this no-government the School-house began to
see bad times. The big fifth-form boys, who were a sporting and drinking
set, soon began to usurp power, and to fag the little boys as if they
were prepostors, and to bully and oppress any who showed signs of
resistance. The bigger sort of sixth-form boys just described soon made
common cause with the fifth, while the smaller sort, hampered by their
colleagues' desertion to the enemy, could not make head against them.
So the fags were without their lawful masters and protectors, and ridden
over rough-shod by a set of boys whom they were not bound to obey, and
whose only right over them stood in their bodily powers; and, as old
Brooke had prophesied, the house by degrees broke up into small sets and
parties, and lost the strong feeling of fellowship which he set so much
store by, and with it much of the prowess in games and the lead in all
school matters which he had done so much to keep up.

In no place in the world has individual character more weight than at
a public school. Remember this, I beseech you, all you boys who are
getting into the upper forms. Now is the time in all your lives,
probably, when you may have more wide influence for good or evil on the
society you live in than you ever can have again. Quit yourselves like
men, then; speak up, and strike out if necessary, for whatsoever
is true, and manly, and lovely, and of good report; never try to be
popular, but only to do your duty and help others to do theirs, and you
may leave the tone of feeling in the school higher than you found it,
and so be doing good which no living soul can measure to generations of
your countrymen yet unborn. For boys follow one another in herds like
sheep, for good or evil; they hate thinking, and have rarely any settled
principles. Every school, indeed, has its own traditionary standard of
right and wrong, which cannot be transgressed with impunity, marking
certain things as low and blackguard, and certain others as lawful and
right. This standard is ever varying, though it changes only slowly and
little by little; and, subject only to such standard, it is the leading
boys for the time being who give the tone to all the rest, and make
the School either a noble institution for the training of Christian
Englishmen, or a place where a young boy will get more evil than he
would if he were turned out to make his way in London streets, or
anything between these two extremes.

The change for the worse in the School-house, however, didn't press very
heavily on our youngsters for some time. They were in a good bedroom,
where slept the only prepostor left who was able to keep thorough order,
and their study was in his passage. So, though they were fagged more or
less, and occasionally kicked or cuffed by the bullies, they were, on
the whole, well off; and the fresh, brave school-life, so full of games,
adventures, and good-fellowship, so ready at forgetting, so capacious
at enjoying, so bright at forecasting, outweighed a thousand-fold their
troubles with the master of their form, and the occasional ill-usage
of the big boys in the house. It wasn't till some year or so after the
events recorded above that the prepostor of their room and passage left.
None of the other sixth-form boys would move into their passage, and, to
the disgust and indignation of Tom and East, one morning after breakfast
they were seized upon by Flashman, and made to carry down his books and
furniture into the unoccupied study, which he had taken. From this
time they began to feel the weight of the tyranny of Flashman and his
friends, and, now that trouble had come home to their own doors, began
to look out for sympathizers and partners amongst the rest of the fags;
and meetings of the oppressed began to be held, and murmurs to arise,
and plots to be laid as to how they should free themselves and be
avenged on their enemies.

While matters were in this state, East and Tom were one evening sitting
in their study. They had done their work for first lesson, and Tom was
in a brown study, brooding, like a young William Tell, upon the wrongs
of fags in general, and his own in particular.

"I say, Scud," said he at last, rousing himself to snuff the candle,
"what right have the fifth-form boys to fag us as they do?"

"No more right than you have to fag them," answered East, without
looking up from an early number of "Pickwick," which was just coming
out, and which he was luxuriously devouring, stretched on his back on
the sofa.

Tom relapsed into his brown study, and East went on reading and
chuckling. The contrast of the boys' faces would have given infinite
amusement to a looker-on--the one so solemn and big with mighty purpose,
the other radiant and bubbling over with fun.

"Do you know, old fellow, I've been thinking it over a good deal," began
Tom again.

"Oh yes, I know--fagging you are thinking of. Hang it all! But listen
here, Tom--here's fun. Mr. Winkle's horse--"

"And I've made up my mind," broke in Tom, "that I won't fag except for
the sixth."

"Quite right too, my boy," cried East, putting his finger on the place
and looking up; "but a pretty peck of troubles you'll get into, if
you're going to play that game. However, I'm all for a strike myself, if
we can get others to join. It's getting too bad."

"Can't we get some sixth-form fellow to take it up?" asked Tom.

"Well, perhaps we might. Morgan would interfere, I think. Only," added
East, after a moment's pause, "you see, we should have to tell him about
it, and that's against School principles. Don't you remember what old
Brooke said about learning to take our own parts?"

"Ah, I wish old Brooke were back again. It was all right in his time."

"Why, yes, you see, then the strongest and best fellows were in the
sixth, and the fifth-form fellows were afraid of them, and they kept
good order; but now our sixth-form fellows are too small, and the fifth
don't care for them, and do what they like in the house."

"And so we get a double set of masters," cried Tom indignantly--"the
lawful ones, who are responsible to the Doctor at any rate, and the
unlawful, the tyrants, who are responsible to nobody."

"Down with the tyrants!" cried East; "I'm all for law and order, and
hurrah for a revolution."

"I shouldn't mind if it were only for young Brooke now," said Tom; "he's
such a good-hearted, gentlemanly fellow, and ought to be in the sixth.
I'd do anything for him. But that blackguard Flashman, who never speaks
to one without a kick or an oath--"

"The cowardly brute," broke in East--"how I hate him! And he knows it
too; he knows that you and I think him a coward. What a bore that he's
got a study in this passage! Don't you hear them now at supper in his
den? Brandy-punch going, I'll bet. I wish the Doctor would come out and
catch him. We must change our study as soon as we can."

"Change or no change, I'll never fag for him again," said Tom, thumping
the table.

"Fa-a-a-ag!" sounded along the passage from Flashman's study. The
two boys looked at one another in silence. It had struck nine, so the
regular night-fags had left duty, and they were the nearest to the
supper-party. East sat up, and began to look comical, as he always did
under difficulties.

"Fa-a-a-ag!" again. No answer.

"Here, Brown! East! you cursed young skulks," roared out Flashman,
coming to his open door; "I know you're in; no shirking."

Tom stole to their door, and drew the bolts as noiselessly as he could;
East blew out the candle.

"Barricade the first," whispered he. "Now, Tom, mind, no surrender."

"Trust me for that," said Tom between his teeth.

In another minute they heard the supper-party turn out and come down the
passage to their door. They held their breaths, and heard whispering, of
which they only made out Flashman's words, "I know the young brutes are
in."

Then came summonses to open, which being unanswered, the assault
commenced. Luckily the door was a good strong oak one, and resisted the
united weight of Flashman's party. A pause followed, and they heard a
besieger remark, "They're in safe enough. Don't you see how the door
holds at top and bottom? So the bolts must be drawn. We should have
forced the lock long ago." East gave Tom a nudge, to call attention to
this scientific remark.

Then came attacks on particular panels, one of which at last gave way
to the repeated kicks; but it broke inwards, and the broken pieces got
jammed across (the door being lined with green baize), and couldn't
easily be removed from outside: and the besieged, scorning further
concealment, strengthened their defences by pressing the end of their
sofa against the door. So, after one or two more ineffectual efforts,
Flashman and Company retired, vowing vengeance in no mild terms.

The first danger over, it only remained for the besieged to effect a
safe retreat, as it was now near bed-time. They listened intently, and
heard the supper-party resettle themselves, and then gently drew back
first one bolt and then the other. Presently the convivial noises began
again steadily. "Now then, stand by for a run," said East, throwing the
door wide open and rushing into the passage, closely followed by Tom.
They were too quick to be caught; but Flashman was on the lookout, and
sent an empty pickle-jar whizzing after them, which narrowly missed
Tom's head, and broke into twenty pieces at the end of the passage.
"He wouldn't mind killing one, if he wasn't caught," said East, as they
turned the corner.

There was no pursuit, so the two turned into the hall, where they found
a knot of small boys round the fire. Their story was told. The war of
independence had broken out. Who would join the revolutionary forces?
Several others present bound themselves not to fag for the fifth form
at once. One or two only edged off, and left the rebels. What else could
they do? "I've a good mind to go to the Doctor straight," said Tom.

"That'll never do. Don't you remember the levy of the school last half?"
put in another.

In fact, the solemn assembly, a levy of the School, had been held, at
which the captain of the School had got up, and after premising that
several instances had occurred of matters having been reported to the
masters; that this was against public morality and School tradition;
that a levy of the sixth had been held on the subject, and they had
resolved that the practice must be stopped at once; and given out that
any boy, in whatever form, who should thenceforth appeal to a master,
without having first gone to some prepostor and laid the case before
him, should be thrashed publicly, and sent to Coventry.

"Well, then, let's try the sixth. Try Morgan," suggested another. "No
use"--"Blabbing won't do," was the general feeling.

"I'll give you fellows a piece of advice," said a voice from the end
of the hall. They all turned round with a start, and the speaker got up
from a bench on which he had been lying unobserved, and gave himself a
shake. He was a big, loose-made fellow, with huge limbs which had grown
too far through his jacket and trousers. "Don't you go to anybody at
all--you just stand out; say you won't fag. They'll soon get tired of
licking you. I've tried it on years ago with their forerunners."

"No! Did you? Tell us how it was?" cried a chorus of voices, as they
clustered round him.

"Well, just as it is with you. The fifth form would fag us, and I and
some more struck, and we beat 'em. The good fellows left off directly,
and the bullies who kept on soon got afraid."

"Was Flashman here then?"
