   "I see what you have read, but furthermore,
   In smaller letters, toward the temple door,
   Quite plain, 'This tablet is erected here
   By those to whom the great Goh-Bang was dear.'"

5. "My sharp-eyed friend, there are no such words!" said Ching.
   "They're there," said Chang, "if I see anything,
   As clear as daylight." "Patent eyes, indeed,
   You have!" cried Ching; "do you think I can not read?"
   "Not at this distance as I can," Chang said,
   "If what you say you saw is all you read."

6. In fine, they quarreled, and their wrath increased,
   Till Chang said, "Let us leave it to the priest;
   Lo! here he comes to meet us," "It is well,"
   Said honest Ching; "no falsehood he will tell."

7. The good man heard their artless story through,
   And said, "I think, dear sirs, there must be few
   Blest with such wondrous eyes as those you wear:
   There's no such tablet or inscription there!
   There was one, it is true; 't was moved away
   And placed within the temple yesterday."


DEFINITIONS.--1. Near-sight'ed, seeing at a short distance only.
Chop'sticks, small sticks of wood, ivory, etc., used in pairs by Chinese
to carry food to the mouth. Tab'let, a small, flat piece of anything on
which to write or engrave.  In-scrip'tion, something written or engraved
on a solid substance. Op'tics, eyes. Palm, the reward of victory, prize.
2. A. M., an abbreviation for the Latin ante meridian, meaning before
noon. 3. Man-da-rin', a Chinese public officer. 5. Pat'ent, secured from
general use, peculiar to one person.



LXX. THE WAY TO BE HAPPY. (159)

1. Every child must observe how much more happy and beloved some children
are than others. There are some children you always love to be with. They
are happy themselves, and they make you happy.

2. There are others whom you always avoid. They seem to have no friends.
No person can be happy without friends. The heart is formed for love, and
can not be happy without it.

        3. "'Tis not in titles nor in rank,
           'Tis not in wealth like London bank,
             To make us truly blest.
           If happiness have not her seat
             And center in the breast,
           We may be wise, or rich, or great,
             But never can be blest."

4. But you can not receive affection unless you will also give it. You can
not find others to love you unless you will also love them. Love is only
to be obtained by giving love in return. Hence the importance of
cultivating a good disposition. You can not be happy without it.

5. I have sometimes heard a girl say, "I know that I am very unpopular at
school." Now, this plainly shows that she is not amiable.

6. If your companions do not love you, it is your own fault. They can not
help loving you if you will be kind and friendly. If you are not loved, it
is a good proof that you do not deserve to be loved. It is true that a
sense of duty may, at times, render it necessary for you to do that which
will displease your companions.

7. But if it is seen that you have a noble spirit, that you are above
selfishness, that you are willing to make sacrifices to promote the
happiness of others, you will never be in want of friends.

8. You must not regard it as your misfortune that others do not love you,
but your fault. It is not beauty, it is not wealth, that will give you
friends. Your heart must glow with kindness, if you would attract to
yourself the esteem and affection of those around you.

9. You are little aware how much the happiness of your whole life depends
upon the cultivation of a good disposition. If you will adopt the
resolution that you will confer favors whenever you can, you will
certainly be surrounded by ardent friends. Begin upon this principle in
childhood, and act upon it through life, and you will make yourself happy,
and promote the happiness of all within your influence.

10. You go to school on a cold winter morning. A bright fire is blazing in
the stove, surrounded with boys struggling to get near it to warm
themselves. After you are slightly warmed, a schoolmate comes in suffering
with cold. "Here, James," you pleasantly call out to him, "I am almost
warm; you may have my place."

11. As you slip aside to allow him to take your place at the fire, will he
not feel that you are kind? The worst boy in the world can not help
admiring such generosity; and, even though he be so ungrateful as not to
return the favor, you may depend upon it that he will be your friend as
far as he is capable of friendship. If you will always act upon this
principle, you will never want for friends.

12. Suppose, some day, you are out with your companions playing ball.
After you have been playing for some time, another boy comes along. He can
not be chosen upon either side, for there is no one to match him. "Henry,"
you say, "you may take my place a little while, and I will rest."

13. You throw yourself down upon the grass, while Henry, fresh and
vigorous, takes your bat and engages in the game. He knows that you give
up to oblige him, and how can he help liking you for it? The fact is, that
neither man nor child can cultivate such a spirit of generosity and
kindness without attracting affection and esteem.

14. Look and see which of your companions have the most friends, and you
will find that they are those who have this noble spirit; who are willing
to deny themselves, that they may make others happy. There is but one way
to make friends; and that is, by being friendly to others.

15. Perhaps some child who reads this feels conscious of being disliked,
and yet desires to have the affection of his companions. You ask me what
you shall do. I will tell you. I will give you an infallible rule: Do all
in your power to make others happy. Be willing to make sacrifices, that
you may promote the happiness of others.

16. This is the way to make friends, and the only way. When you are
playing with your brothers and sisters at home, be always ready to give
them more than their share of privileges. Manifest an obliging
disposition, and they can not but regard you with affection. In all your
intercourse with others, at home or abroad, let these feelings influence
you, and you will receive a rich reward.


DEFINITIONS.--4. Cul'ti-vat-ing, cherishing,  encouraging. 5.
Un-pop'u-lar, not pleasing others. 6. Com-pan'ions, those who keep company
with anyone. 7. Sac'ri-fic-es, things given up to oblige others.
Pro-mote', advance, forward. 10. Suf'fer-ing, undergoing pain. 11.
Gen-er-os'i-ty, kindness, nobleness of soul. 15. In-fal'li-ble, certain,
that can not fail. 16. Man'i-fest, to show plainly. In'ter-course,
communication, mutual dealings.


EXERCISES.--What is this lesson about? Can we be happy without friends?
How can we win the love of those about us? Whose fault is it if we are not
loved? What rule will surely gain us love and friendship if we always
follow it?



LX. THE GIRAFFE, OR CAMELOPARD. (162)

1. The giraffe is a native of Africa. It is of singular shape and size,
and bears some resemblance both to the camel and the deer. The mouth is
small; the eyes are full and brilliant; the tongue is rough, very long,
and ending in a point. The neck is long and slender, and, from the
shoulder to the top of the head, it measures between seven and eight feet;
from the ground to the top of the shoulder, it is commonly ten or eleven
feet; so that the height of a full-grown giraffe is seventeen or eighteen
feet.

2. The hair is of a deep brown color in the male, and of a light or
yellowish brown in the female. The skin is beautifully diversified with
white spots. They have short, blunt horns, and hoofs like those of the ox.
In their wild state, they feed on the leaves of a gum-bearing tree
peculiar to warm climates.

3. The giraffe, like the horse and other hoofed animals, defends itself by
kicking; and its hinder limbs are so light, and its blows so rapid, that
the eye can not follow them. They are sufficient for its defense against
the lion. It never employs its horns in resisting the attack of an enemy.
Its disposition is gentle, and it flees to its native forest upon the
least alarm.

4. Le Vaillant (the celebrated French traveler and naturalist) was the
first who gave us any exact account of the form and habits of the giraffe.
While he was traveling in South Africa, he happened one day to discover a
hut covered with the skin of one of those animals; and learned to his
surprise that he was now in a part of the country where the creature was
found. He could not rest contented until he had seen the animal alive, and
had secured a specimen.

5. Having on several days obtained sight of some of them, he, with his
attendants, on horseback and accompanied with dogs, gave chase; but they
baffled all pursuit. After a chase of a whole day, which effected nothing
but the fatigue of the party, he began to despair of success.

6. "The next day," says he, "by sunrise, I was in pursuit of game, in the
hope of obtaining some provisions for my men. After several hours'
fatigue, we saw, at the turn of a hill, seven giraffes, which my pack of
dogs instantly pursued. Six of them went off together; but the seventh,
cut off by my dogs, took another way.

7. "I followed the single one at full speed, but, in spite of the efforts
of my horse, she got so much ahead of me, that, in turning a little hill,
I lost sight of her altogether, and I gave up the pursuit. My dogs,
however, were not so easily exhausted. They were soon so close upon her
that she was obliged to stop and defend herself. From the noise they made,
I conjectured that they had got the animal into a corner, and I again
pushed forward.

8. "I had scarcely got round the hill, when I perceived her surrounded by
the dogs, and endeavoring to drive them away by heavy kicks. In a moment I
was on my feet, and a shot from my carbine brought her to the earth. I was
delighted with my victory, which enabled me to add to the riches of
natural history. I was now able, also, to destroy the romance which
attached to this animal, and to establish the truth of its existence."


DEFINITIONS.--l. Bril'liant, sparkling, shining. 2. Di-ver'si-fied, made
various. Pe-cul'iar, especially belonging to. 4. Le Vaillant (pro. leh va
yon'). Nat'u-ral-ist, one who is acquainted with objects of nature.
Spec'i-men, a sample. 5. Baf 'fled, defeated, escaped from. Fa-tigue',
weariness. 7. Con-jec'tured, guessed. 8. Car'bine, a short gun. Ro-mance',
a story without truth.


EXERCISES.--Of what country is the giraffe a native? To what height does
it attain when full grown? On what does it live? How does it defend
itself? Relate the story of Le Vaillant's giraffe hunt.



LXI. THE LOST CHILD. (165)

1. A few years since, a child was lost in the woods. He was out with his
brothers and sisters gathering berries, and was accidentally separated
from them, and lost. The children, after looking in vain for some time in
search of the little wanderer, returned, just in the dusk of the evening,
to inform their parents that their brother was lost and could not be
found.

2. The woods, at that time, were full of bears. The darkness of a cloudy
night was rapidly coming on, and the alarmed father, gathering a few of
his neighbors, hastened in search of the lost child. The mother remained
at home, almost distracted with suspense.

3. As the clouds gathered, and the darkness increased, the father and the
neighbors, with highly excited fears, traversed the woods in all
directions, and raised loud shouts to attract the attention of the child.
But their search was in vain. They could find no trace of the wanderer;
and, as they stood under the boughs of the lofty trees, and listened, that
if possible they might hear his feeble voice, no sound was borne to their
ears but the melancholy moaning of the wind as it swept through the thick
branches of the forest.

4. The gathering clouds threatened an approaching storm, and the deep
darkness of the night had already enveloped them. It is difficult to
conceive what were the feelings of that father. And who could imagine how
deep the distress which filled the bosom of that mother, as she heard the
wind, and beheld the darkness in which her child was wandering!

5. The search was continued in vain till nine o'clock in the evening.
Then, one of the party was sent back to the village, to collect the
inhabitants for a more extensive search. The bell rung the alarm, and the
cry of fire resounded through the streets. It was ascertained, however,
that it was not fire which caused the alarm, but that the bell tolled the
more solemn tidings of a lost child.

6. Every heart sympathized in the sorrows of the distracted parents. Soon,
multitudes of the people were seen ascending the hill, upon the declivity
of which the village stood, to aid in the search. Ere long, the rain began
to fall, but no tidings came back to the village of the lost child. Hardly
an eye was that night closed in sleep, and there was not a mother who did
not feel for the parents.

7. The night passed away, and the morning dawned, and yet no tidings came.
At last, those engaged in the search met together and held a consultation.
They made arrangements for a more minute search, and agreed that, in case
the child was found, a gun should be fired, to give a signal to the rest
of the party.

8. As the sun arose, the clouds were scattered, and the whole landscape
glittered in the rays of the bright morning. But that village was deserted
and still. The stores were closed, and business was hushed. Mothers were
walking the streets, with sympathizing countenances and anxious hearts.
There was but one thought in every mind: "What has become of the lost
child?"

9. All the affections and interest of the neighborhood were flowing in one
deep and broad channel toward the little wanderer. About nine in the
morning, the signal gun was fired, which announced that the child was
found; and, for a moment, how dreadful was the suspense! Was it found a
mangled corpse? or was it alive and well?

10. Soon, a joyful shout proclaimed the safety of the child. The shout was
borne from tongue to tongue, till the whole forest rang again with the
joyful sound. A messenger rapidly bore the tidings to the distracted
mother. A procession was immediately formed by those engaged in the
search. The child was placed upon a platform, hastily formed from the
boughs of trees, and borne in triumph at the head of the procession. When
they arrived at the brow of the hill, they rested for a moment, and
proclaimed their success with three loud and animated cheers.

11. The procession then moved on till they arrived in front of the
dwelling where the parents of the child resided. The mother, who stood at
the door, with streaming eyes and throbbing heart, could no longer
restrain herself or her feelings.

12. She rushed into the street, clasped her child to her bosom, and wept
aloud. Every eye was filled with tears, and, for a moment, all were
silent. But suddenly some one gave a signal for a shout. One loud, and
long, and happy note of joy rose from the assembled multitude, and they
went to their business and their homes.

13. There was more joy over the one child that was found than over the
ninety and nine that went not astray. Likewise, there is joy in the
presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth. But still,
this is a feeble representation of the love of our Father in heaven for
us, and of the joy with which the angels welcome the returning wanderer.

14. The mother can not feel for her child that is lost as God feels for
the unhappy wanderer in the paths of sin. If a mother can feel so much,
what must be the feelings of our Father in heaven for those who have
strayed from his love? If man can feel so deep a sympathy, what must be
the emotions which glow in the bosom of angels?


DEFINITIONS.--l. Sep'a-rat-ed, parted. 2. Dis-tract'ed, made crazy.
Sus-pense', doubt, uncertainty. 3. Trav'ersed, passed over and examined.
5. As-cer-tained', made certain. 6. Sym'pa-thized, felt for.
De-cliv'i-ty, descent of land. 7. Con-sul-ta'tion, a meeting of persons to
advise together. 8. Land'scape, a portion of territory which the eye can
see in a single view. 10. Pro-claimed', made known publicly. 11.
Pro-ces'sion, a train of persons walking or riding. l3.
Rep-re-sen-ta'tion, the act of describing or showing.



LXII. WHICH?  (168)
By MRS. E. L. BEERS.

1. Which shall it be? Which shall it be?
   I looked at John--John looked at me;
   Dear, patient John, who loves me yet
   As well as though my locks were jet.
   And when I found that I must speak,
   My voice seemed strangely low and weak:
   "Tell me again what Robert said!"
   And then I, listening, bent my head.
   "This is his letter:"

2.                         "'I will give
   A house and land while you shall live,
   If, in return, from out your seven,
   One child to me for aye is given.'"
   I looked at John's old garments worn,
   I thought of all that John had borne
   Of poverty, and work, and care,
   Which I, though willing, could not share;
   I thought of seven mouths to feed,
   Of seven little children's need,
   And then of this.

3.                 "Come, John," said I,
   "We'll choose among them as they lie
   Asleep;" so, walking hand in hand,
   Dear John and I surveyed our band.
   First to the cradle light we stepped,
   Where Lilian the baby slept,
   A glory 'gainst the pillow white.
   Softly the father stooped to lay
   His rough hand down in loving way,
   When dream or whisper made her stir,
   And huskily he said: "Not her!"

4. We stooped beside the trundle-bed,
   And one long ray of lamplight shed
   Athwart the boyish faces there,
   In sleep so pitiful and fair;
   I saw on Jamie's rough, red cheek,
   A tear undried. Ere John could speak,
   "He's but a baby, too," said I,
   And kissed him as we hurried by.

5. Pale, patient Robbie's angel face
   Still in his sleep bore suffering's trace:
   "No, for a thousand crowns, not him,"
   He whispered, while our eyes were dim.

6. Poor Dick! bad Dick! our wayward son,
   Turbulent, reckless, idle one--
   Could he be spared? "Nay, He who gave,
   Bade us befriend him to the grave;
   Only a mother's heart can be
   Patient enough for such as he;
   And so," said John, "I would not dare
   To send him from her bedside prayer."

7. Then stole we softly up above
   And knelt by Mary, child of love.
   "Perhaps for her 't would better be,"
   I said to John. Quite silently
   He lifted up a curl that lay
   Across her cheek in willful way,
   And shook his head. "Nay, love, not thee,"
   The while my heart beat audibly.

8. Only one more, our eldest lad,
   Trusty and truthful, good and glad
   So like his father. "No, John, no--
   I can not, will not let him go."

9. And so we wrote in courteous way,
   We could not drive one child away.
   And afterward, toil lighter seemed,
   Thinking of that of which we dreamed;
   Happy, in truth, that not one face
   We missed from its accustomed place;
   Thankful to work for all the seven,
   Trusting the rest to One in heaven!


DEFINITIONS.--2. Aye, always, 3. Sur-veyed', took a view of. 5. Crown, an
English silver coin worth about $1.20. 6. Way-ward, willful. Tur'bu-lent,
disposed to disorder. 9. Cour'te-ous, polite. Ac-cus'tomed, usual.



LXIII. THE PET FAWN. (172)

1. A pretty little fawn had been brought in from the woods, when very
young, and nursed and petted by a lady in the village until it had become
as tame as possible. It was graceful, as those little creatures always
are, and so gentle and playful that it became a great favorite, following
the different members of the family about, being caressed by the
neighbors, and welcome everywhere.

2. One morning, after playing about as usual until weary, it lay down in
the sunshine, at the feet of one of its friends, upon the steps of a
store. There came along a countryman, who for several years had been a
hunter by pursuit, and who still kept several hounds, one of which was now
with him.

3. The dog, as it approached the spot where the fawn lay, suddenly
stopped. The little animal saw him, and started to its feet. It had lived
more than half its life among the dogs of the village, and had apparently
