HOW TO QUALIFY.
 1 Swimming not less than 100 yards and 25 yards on back. 10 points
 2 Diving, plunging, floating, fetching. 10 points
 3 Rescue drill on land and water.  10 points
 4 Release drill on land and in water. 10 points
 5 Resuscitation.  10 points
 6 Names of parts of a row boat. 5 points
 7 Rowing and boat handling. 10 points
 8 Use of life saving appliances.  10 points
 9 First aid work and remedies.  10 points
10 Written examination on work in water. 5 points
11 Written examination on work in boats. 5 points
12 Written examination on work on land. 5 points

Organization

To organize at camps, officials will proceed by conducting the
above-mentioned examinations. Should there be five or more successful
competitors, crews can be organized as follows, the regular form of
enrollment being employed and no enlistments required:

Five men constitute a crew entitling one of the five to the rank of acting
third lieutenant.

Ten men constitute two crews with acting second and third lieutenants.

Fifteen men constitute three crews with acting first, second, and third
lieutenants.

Twenty men constitute four crews (or a division) with acting captain,
first, second, and third lieutenants, lieutenant surgeon, quartermaster,
boatswain, and one coxswain for each crew or three coxswains.

Auxiliary members over eighteen years of age may become active members
after leaving camps and receive active membership commissions, provided
they affiliate with some active permanent crew in their home district.

Auxiliary members holding our certificates shall be entitled to auxiliary
membership buttons, but active members only are entitled to wear the
official badge of membership of the corps.

Summer camps will be equipped, at the discretion of headquarters, on the
following conditions:

That they shall pay all express on supplies to and from camps.

That they shall report at the end of each season the exact condition of
the supplies and make provision for the safekeeping of same for future
seasons, or return same.

Medicine chests must be returned.

Instructors will be sent to the various camps, at the discretion of
headquarters, whenever possible. All expenses, traveling, board, etc., but
not services, must be covered by the camps.

Examination questions will be found in our book, "Instruction on Subjects
for Examination for Membership." If desired, camp officials can make
examinations more rigid than outlined by us.

Examination papers furnished on request.

The above information was furnished by K. F. Mehrtens, Assistant
Secretary, United States Volunteer Life Saving Corps, 63-65 Park Row, New
York City.

Training Course

Efficient life saving comes from thorough experience and training, not
from a theory. These subjects for instruction may be taught preparatory to
the summer camp, as well as during the camping season.

Swimming to include straight-away, swimming with clothes on, floating,
diving, fetching: strokes--perfect breast stroke, side stroke, overhead
stroke, crawl stroke.

Rescue Methods to include rescuing a supposedly drowning person. Use of
life saving apparatus.

Methods of Release to include grasping by the wrist, clutch around the
neck and grasp around the body.

Resuscitation of the apparently drowned, including the Sylvester method
described on page 194, and the simple "first aid" rules.

Boat Handling to include rowing a boat, taking a person into a boat from
the water, clinging to a boat without capsizing it, etc.

Knot Tying to include all kinds of knots and their value in connection
with life-saving work, and the use of them on life-saving appliances.

Wig-wagging to include the committing to memory of the U. S. Naval Wig-Wag
Signal Code. The following is used at Camp Wawayanda, New Jersey Boys.

WIG-WAG CODE

Signalling by wig-wag is carried on by waving a flag in certain ways,
represented by the figures 1, 2 and 3, and thus letters are made and words
spelled.

Two wig-wag flags are used, one a square white flag with a red square in
the center, and the other a square red flag with white square in the
center.

Only one flag is used in signalling, and that one is selected which can
best be seen against the boy's background.

[Illustration: Interval;    Signal 1;    Signal 2;    Signal 3]

U. S. NAVAL WIG-WAG SIGNAL CODE.

ALPHABET.
A 22
B 2112
C 121
D 222
F 2221
G 2211
H 122
I 1
J 1122
K 2121
L 221
M 1221
N 11
O 21
P 121
Q 1211
R 211
S 212
T 2
U 112
V 1222
W 1121
X 2122
Y 111
Z 2222
Tion 1112

ALPHABET CLASSIFIED.
I 1
N 11
Y 111

E 12
H 122
V 1222
U 112
J 1122

C 121
Q 1211
M 1221
P 1212
W 1121

T 2
A 22
D 222
Z 2222

O 21
R 211
L 221
G 2211
F 2221

S 212
X 2122
B 2112
K 2121

Numerals
1 1111
2 2222
3 1112
4 2221
5 1122
6 2211
7 1222
8 2111
9 1221
0 2112

Conventional signals

End of word, 3
End of sentence, 33
End of message, 333
I understand, A.A. 3
Cease signalling, A.A.A. 333
Repeat last word, C.C. 3
Repeat last message, C.C.C. 3
I have made an error, E.E. 3

WIG-WAG RULES

1. The boy should face the person to whom he is signalling, and should
hold the flag-staff vertically in front of the centre of his body, with
the butt at the height of his waist.

2. The motion represented by the Figure 1 is made by waving the flag down
to the right; 2, by waving it down to the left; and 3, by waving it down
in front of the sender. (Page 188)

3. Each motion should embrace an arc of ninety degrees, starting from and
returning to the vertical without a pause.

4. When two or more motions are required to make a letter, there should be
no pause between the motions.

5. At the end of each letter there should be a slight pause at the
vertical.

6. At the end of each word, one front motion (3) should be made; at the
end of a sentence, two fronts (33); and at the end of a message, three
fronts (333).

7. To call a boat, signal the initial letter of her name until answered.
To answer a call, signal A.A. 3 (I understand).

8. If the sender makes an error he should immediately signal E.E. 3 (I
have made an error), and resume the message, beginning with the last word
sent correctly.

9. If the receiver does not understand a signal he should signal C.C. 3
(Repeat last word); the sender should then repeat the last word and
proceed with the message.

EXAMINATIONS USED BY THE U. S. V. L. S. C., CAMP BECKET Y. Y. C. A.
AUXILIARY CORPS, AUGUST 24, 1910

A-Boat Work--10 Points
1. With what knot should you tie a boat?
2. Define amidships, thole-pin[1], painter[2].
3. Define port, starboard, aft.
4. Explain briefly a rescue from the bow.
5. Explain briefly a rescue from the stern.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: thole-pin: Pairs of wooden pegs set in the
gunwales as an oarlock.]

[Transcriber's Footnote 2: painter: Rope attached to the bow for tying up
when docking or towing.]

B-Water Work--10 Points
1. Describe breakaway Number 3.
2. "Before jumping into water for rescue, be sure to do-" what?
3. Give two ways to locate a body.
4. If you are seized and cannot break away, what should you do?
5. "If in a strong outsetting tide, it is advisable when rescuing
to-" do what?

C--General First Aid--10 Points
1. How and where do you apply a tourniquet?
2. Give the treatment for fainting.
3. Give the treatment for sun-stroke.
4. Give the treatment for wounds.
5. Give the treatment for and symptoms of shock.

D-Wig-Wag--10 points
Translate into code "Go send them help quick."
Translate into English
  "1121-12-3-1121-22-11-2-3-22-3-2112-21-22-2-333."


E-Write an essay on general methods, precautions, etc., for rescuing.
-- 20 Points

F-Write an essay on how you would restore an apparently drowned man to
consciousness.--20 Points

G-Practical First Aid  (Make appointment with the doctor.)

GENERAL HINTS

Kick!

If you work your hands like paddles and kick your feet, you can stay above
water for several hours, even with your clothes on. It requires a little
courage and enough strength of mind not to lose your head.

Cramps

Many boy swimmers make the mistake of going into the water too soon after
eating. The stomach and digestive organs are busy preparing the food for
the blood and body. Suddenly they are called upon to care for the work of
the swimmer. The change is too quick for the organs, the process of
digestion stops. Congestion is apt to follow, and then the paralyzing
cramps.

Indian Method

The Indians have a method of protecting themselves from cramps. Coming to
a bathing pool, an Indian swimmer, after stripping off and before entering
the water, vigorously rubs the pit of his stomach with the dry palms of
his hands. This rubbing probably takes a minute; then he dashes cold water
all over his stomach and continues the rubbing for another minute, and
after that he is ready for his plunge. If the water in which you are going
to swim is cold, try this Indian method of getting ready before plunging
into the water.

Rule

The rule for entering the water, in most camps, is as follows: "No one of
the party shall enter the water for swimming or bathing except at time and
place designated." Laxity in the observance of this rule will result
disastrously.

RESCUE FROM DROWNING

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

Rescue

To rescue a drowning person from the water, always try to pull him out
with an oar, a rope, a coat (holding the end of one sleeve and throwing
him the other), or some other convenient object. If you are obliged to
jump in after him, approach him with great caution, throw your left arm
around his neck with his back to your side (Figure 1), in which position
he can't grapple you, and swim with your legs and right arm. If he should
succeed in grasping you, take a long breath, sink with him, place your
feet or knees against his body, and push yourself free.

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

Although life may seem extinct, make every effort at resuscitation.
Various procedures are advocated. The Sylvester method is one of the best.

Hold the boy for it few seconds as in Figure 2, to get rid of water which
may have been taken in. Do this several times. Tear off clothing. Rub
briskly the legs and arms toward the body. Draw the tongue forward every
three seconds for a minute. If these methods fail to restore breathing,
then perform artificial respiration, first sending for a physician.

[Illustration: Respiration]

Lay the boy on his back with a folded coat or sweater under his shoulders,
and grasp his wrists or his arms straight up over his head as in Figure 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. RESPIRATION]

[Illustration: FIG. 4. EXPIRATION]

Pull steadily and firmly in that position while you count 1, 2, 3. This
causes air to enter the lungs. Then quickly bring his arms down on his
chest and press them firmly on his ribs (Figure 4) while you again count
1, 2, 3. This forces the air out of the lungs. Then quickly carry his arms
over his head and down again, and repeat the same routine fast enough to
make him breathe from twelve to sixteen times a minute. The tendency is to
work too fast. If the work is done properly the air can be heard
distinctly as it passes in and out of the air passages. Sometimes the
tongue drops back in the throat, stopping it up so no air can enter. If
you suspect this, have an assistant grasp the tongue with a handkerchief
and keep it pulled forward.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Expiration.]

Cuts used by courtesy of Health-Education League.

Don't Give Up

It will make it much easier if you have another person push on the ribs
for you when you relax the arms, as shown in Figure 5. Have him place the
hands as shown in the figure with the thumbs toward the medium line in
front, the fingers farther away, the palms just below the breasts; this
will make the boy's nipples come just midway between the ends of the
thumbs and the middle joint of the forefinger. Press firmly downward and
inward toward the backbone.

Continue these motions about fifteen times per minute. Keep this up until
the boy begins to breathe, himself. When done properly, the work is hard
for the operator, and he should be relieved by some one else as soon as he
gets tired.

Warmth and Quiet

As soon as the boy begins to breathe himself--but not before--his limbs
should be well rubbed toward the heart. This will  help to restore the
circulation. He should afterward be put to bed, well covered with warm
blankets, hot stones being placed at his feet, and warm drinks
administered. Fresh air and quiet will do the rest.

Books

"Boys' Drill Regulation," published by the National First Aid Association
of America, and "Boys' Life Brigade Manual of Drill," published by the
Boys' Life Brigade, London, England, are two small books containing a
number of practical drills which may be used in training the boys in camp
for emergency work.

Instruction

Every camp for boys, no matter how small or how large, should plan for
instruction  in First Aid. This may be done by the camp physician, the
director, the physical director, or some physician invited to spend
several days in the camp.

Drills

The illustration on page 174 shows how one hundred boys were trained in
Camp Couchiching. The "litter" drill was especially attractive to the boys
of Camp Becket. The boys were sent out in the woods in brigades of five
each, one of whom was the leader. Only a small hatchet was taken by each
squad. One of the boys was supposed to have broken his leg. An improvised
"litter," or, stretcher, was made of saplings or boughs, strapped together
with handkerchiefs and belts, so that in ten minutes after they left the
camp the first squad returned with the boy on the litter and in a fairly
comfortable condition.

[Illustration: Litter Drill]

Health Talks

A course of health talks given in popular form by those who are well
versed upon the subject, cannot help but be instructive and productive of
a greater ambition on the part of the boy to take good care of his body.
The following list of subjects is suggestive:

The Human Body and How to Keep It in Health
1 The Skeleton.
2 The Muscular System.
3 The Vascular System.
4 The Nervous System.
5 The Digestive System.
6 The Lungs, Skin and Kidneys.

Personal Hygiene
1  The Eye, its use and abuse.
2  How to care for the Teeth.
3  Breathing and pure air.
4  Microbes and keeping clean.
7  The health of the Skin.
8  Some facts about the Nose.
9  Our Lungs.
10 Eating.
11 Alcohol.
12 Tobacco and the Human Body.
13 The Use and Care of Finger Nails.
14 Cause of Colds.
