      You will not be my NELL!"

11. Now when he went from Nelly Gray,
      His heart so heavy got,
    And life was such a burden grown,
      It made him take a knot!

12. So round his melancholy neck,
      A rope he did entwine,
    And for the second time in life.
      Enlisted in the Line!

13. One end he tied around a beam,
      And then removed his pegs,
    And, as his legs were off, of course
      He soon was off his legs.

14. And there he hung till he was dead
      As any nail in town:
    For, though distress had cut him up,
      It could not cut him down!


DEFINITIONS.--4. De-voirs' (French, pro, de-vwor'), respects: compliments.
5. Scoff, an object of ridicule. 6, U'ni-form (adj.), consistent, (noun)
military dress. 7. Blithe, merry, gay.


NOTES.--2. Forty-second Foot. Infantry in the army is spoken of as "the
foot," and the "Forty-second Foot" means the Forty-second Regiment of
Infantry.

3. Members. Persons elected to Parliament in Great Britain are called
"Members," and are said to represent those who elect them.

12. The Line is another name for the regular infantry.



XLIII. THE GENEROUS RUSSIAN PEASANT.

1. Let Vergil sing the praises of Augustus, genius celebrate merit, and
flattery extol the talents of the great. "The short and simple annals of
the poor" engross my pen; and while I record the history of Flor Silin's
virtues, though I speak of a poor peasant, I shall describe a noble man. I
ask no eloquence to assist me in the task; modest worth rejects the aid of
ornament to set it off.

2. It is impossible, even at this distant period, to reflect without
horror on the miseries of that year known in Lower Volga by the name of
the "Famine Year." I remember the summer, whose scorching heats had dried
up all the fields, and the drought had no relief but from the tears of the
ruined farmer.

3. I remember the cold, comfortless autumn, and the despairing rustics,
crowding round their empty barns, with folded arms and sorrowful
countenances, pondering on their misery, instead of rejoicing, as usual,
at the golden harvest. I remember the winter which succeeded, and I
reflect with agony on the miseries it brought with it. Whole families left
their homes to become beggars on the highway.

4. At night the canopy of heaven served them as their only shelter from
the piercing winds and bitter frost. To describe these scenes would be to
harm the feelings of my readers; therefore, to my tale. In those days I
lived on an estate not far from Simbirsk; and, though but a child, I have
not forgotten the impression made on my mind by the general calamity.

5. In a village adjoining lived Flor Silin, a poor, laboring peasant,--a
man remarkable for his assiduity and the skill and judgment with which he
cultivated his lands. He was blessed with abundant crops; and his means
being larger than his wants, his granaries, even at this time, were full
of corn. The dry year coming on had beggared all the village except
himself. Here was an opportunity to grow rich. Mark how Flor Silin acted.
Having called the poorest of his neighbors about him, he addressed them in
the following manner:

6. "My friends, you want corn for your subsistence. God has blessed me
with abundance. Assist in thrashing out a quantity, and each of you take
what he wants for his family." The peasants were amazed at this unexampled
generosity; for sordid propensities exist in the village as well as in the
populous city.

7. The fame of Flor Silin's benevolence having reached other villages, the
famished inhabitants presented themselves before him, and begged for corn.
This good creature received them as brothers; and, while his store
remained, afforded all relief. At length, his wife, seeing no end to the
generosity of his noble spirit, reminded him how necessary it would be to
think of their own wants, and hold his lavish hand before it was too late.
"It is written in the Scripture," said he, "Give, and it shall be given
unto you.'"

8. The following year Providence listened to the prayers of the poor, and
the harvest was abundant. The peasants who had been saved from starving by
Flor Silin now gathered around him.

9. "Behold," said they, "the corn you lent us. You saved our wives and
children. We should have been famished but for you; may God reward you; he
only can; all we have to give is our corn and grateful thanks." "I want no
corn at present, my good neighbors," said he; "my harvest has exceeded all
my expectations; for the rest, thank heaven: I have been but an humble
instrument."

10. They urged him in vain. "No," said he, "I shall not accept your corn.
If you have superfluities, share them among your poor neighbors, who,
being unable to sow their fields last autumn, are still in want; let us
assist them, my dear friends; the Almighty will bless us for it." "Yes,"
replied the grateful peasants, "our poor neighbors shall have this corn.
They shall know it is to you that they owe this timely succor, and join to
teach their children the debt of gratitude due to your benevolent heart."
Silin raised his tearful eyes to heaven. An angel might have envied him
his feelings.
                                                       --Nikolai Karamzin.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Ex-tol', to elevate by praise. An'nals, history of
events. En-gross', to occupy wholly. El'o-quence, the power of speaking
well. 2. Drought (pro. drout), want of rain or water. 4. Es-tate',
property in land. 5. Gran'a-ry, a storehouse far grain. 6. Sub-sist'ence,
means of support. Pro-pen'si-ties, bent of mind, inclination. 10.
Su-per-flu'i-ties, greater quantities than are wanted. Suc'cor, aid, help.


NOTES.--l. Vergil was the greatest of Roman poets. He was born in the year
70 B.C., and died 19 B.C.

Augustus Caesar was emperor of Rome in the latter portion of Vergil's
life, and received many compliments in the verses of his friend the poet.

2. Lower Volga is a district in eastern Russia, bordering on the Caspian
Sea, and takes its name from the river Volga.

4. Simbirsk is a town of eastern Russia, on the Volga.



XLIV. FORTY YEARS AGO.

1. I've wandered to the village, Tom,
      I've sat beneath the tree,
   Upon the schoolhouse playground,
     That sheltered you and me;
   But none were left to greet me, Tom,
     And few were left to know,
   Who played with me upon the green,
     Just forty years ago.

2. The grass was just as green, Tom,
     Barefooted boys at play
   Were sporting, just as we did then,
     With spirits just as gay.
   But the master sleeps upon the hill,
     Which, coated o'er with snow,
   Afforded us a sliding place,
     Some forty years ago.

3. The old schoolhouse is altered some;
     The benches are replaced
   By new ones very like the same
     Our jackknives had defaced.
   But the same old bricks are in the wall,
     The bell swings to and fro;
   Its music's just the same, dear Tom,
     'T was forty years ago.

4. The spring that bubbled 'neath the hill,
     Close by the spreading beech,
   Is very low; 't was once so high
     That we could almost reach;
   And kneeling down to take a drink,
     Dear Tom, I started so,
   To think how very much I've changed
     Since forty years ago.

5. Near by that spring, upon an elm,
     You know, I cut your name,
   Your sweetheart's just beneath it, Tom;
     And you did mine the same.
   Some heartless wretch has peeled the bark;
     'T was dying sure, but slow,
   Just as that one whose name you cut
     Died forty years ago.

6. My lids have long been dry, Tom,
     But tears came in my eyes:
   I thought of her I loved so well,
     Those early broken ties.
   I visited the old churchyard,
     And took some flowers to strew
   Upon the graves of those we loved
     Just forty years ago.

7. Some are in the churchyard laid,
     Some sleep beneath the sea;
   And none are left of our old class
     Excepting you and me.
   And when our time shall come, Tom,
     And we are called to go,
   I hope we'll meet with those we loved
     Some forty years ago.



XLV. MRS. CAUDLE'S LECTURE.

Douglas Jerrold (b. 1803, d. 1857) was born in London. A midshipman's
appointment was obtained for him, but he quit the naval service in a few
years. He was then apprenticed to a printer. By improving his leisure
hours he made himself master of several languages, and formed the habit of
expressing his thoughts in writing An essay on the opera of Der Freischutz
was his first published literary production. Before he was twenty-one
years of age, he wrote "Black-eyed Susan," one of the most popular dramas
of modern times. Several other popular plays followed this. He was a
regular contributor to the London "Punch," from the second number, and
edited, at different times, several papers and magazines. As a humorist,
he occupies the first rank. The most noted of his works are his plays, and
"Mrs Caudle's Curtain Lectures," "Saint Giles and Saint James," "Bubbles
of a Day," and "Chronicles of Clovernook."

1. Well, Mr. Caudle, I hope you're in a little better temper than you were
this morning. There, you need n't begin to whistle: people don't come to
bed to whistle. But it's like you; I can't speak that you don't try to
insult me. Once, I used to say you were the best creature living: now, you
get quite a fiend. Do let you rest? No, I won't let you rest. It's the
only time I have to talk to you, and you shall hear me. I'm put upon all
day long: it's very hard if I can't speak a word at night; besides, it is
n't often I open my mouth, goodness knows!

2. Because once in your lifetime your shirt wanted a button, you must
almost swear the roof off the house. You did n't swear? Ha, Mr. Caudle!
you don't know what you do when you're in a passion. You were not in a
passion, wer'n't you? Well, then, I don't know what a passion is; and I
think I ought by this time. I've lived long enough with you, Mr. Caudle,
to know that.

3. It's a pity you hav'n't something worse to complain of than a button
off your shirt. If you'd some wives, you would, I know. I'm sure I'm never
without a needle and thread in my hand; what with you and the children,
I'm made a perfect slave of. And what's my thanks? Why, if once in your
life a button's off your shirt--what do you cry "oh" at? I say once, Mr.
Caudle; or twice, or three times, at most. I'm sure, Caudle, no man's
buttons in the world are better looked after than yours. I only wish I'd
kept the shirts you had when you were first married! I should like to know
where were your buttons then?

4. Yes, it is worth talking of! But that's how you always try to put me
down. You fly into a rage, and then if I only try to speak, you won't hear
me. That's how you men always will have all the talk to yourselves: a poor
woman is n't allowed to get a word in. A nice notion you have of a wife,
to suppose she's nothing to think of but her husband's buttons. A pretty
notion, indeed, you have of marriage. Ha! if poor women only knew what
they had to go through!--what with buttons, and one thing and
another,--they'd never tie themselves up,--no, not to the best man in the
world, I'm sure. What would they do, Mr. Caudle?--Why, do much better
without you, I'm certain.

5. And it's my belief, after all, that the button was n't off the shirt;
it's my belief that you pulled it off that you might have something to
talk about. Oh, you're aggravating enough, when you like, for anything!
All I know is, it's very odd that the button should be off the shirt; for
I'm sure no woman's a greater slave to her husband's buttons than I am. I
only say it's very odd.

6. However, there's one comfort; it can't last long. I'm worn to death
with your temper, and sha'n't trouble you a great while. Ha! you may
laugh! And I dare say you would laugh! I've no doubt of it! That's your
love; that's your feeling! I know that I'm sinking every day, though I say
nothing about it. And when I'm gone we shall see how your second wife will
look after your buttons! You'll find out the difference then. Yes, Caudle,
you'll think of me then; for then, I hope, you'll never have a blessed
button to your back.

7. No, I'm not a vindictive woman, Mr. Caudle: nobody ever called me that
but you. What do you say? Nobody ever knew so much of me? That's nothing
at all to do with it. Ha! I would n't have your aggravating temper,
Caudle, for mines of gold. It's a good thing I'm not as worrying as you
are, or a nice house there'd be between us. I only wish you'd had a wife
that would have talked to you! Then you'd have known the difference. But
you impose upon me because, like a poor fool, I say nothing. I should be
ashamed of myself, Caudle.

8. And a pretty example you set as a father! You'll make your boys as bad
as yourself. Talking as you did all breakfast time about your buttons! and
of a Sunday morning, too! And you call yourself a Christian! I should like
to know what your boys will say of you when they grow up! And all about a
paltry button off one of your wristbands! A decent man would n't have
mentioned it. Why don't I hold my tongue? Because I won't hold my tongue.
I'm to have my peace of mind destroyed--I 'm to be worried into my grave
for a miserable shirt button, and I'm to hold my tongue! Oh!  but that's
just like you men!

9. But I know what I'll do for the future. Every button you have may drop
off, and I won't so much as put a thread to 'em. And I should like to know
what you'll do then! Oh, you must get somebody else to sew 'em, must you?
That's a pretty threat for a husband to hold out to his wife! And to such
a wife as I've been, too: such a slave to your buttons, as I may say.
Somebody else to sew 'em'! No, Caudle, no; not while I'm alive! When I'm
dead--and, with what I have to bear, there's no knowing how soon that may
be--when I 'm dead, I say--oh! what a brute you must be to snore so!

10. You're not snoring? Ha! that's what you always say; but that's nothing
to do with it. You must get somebody else to sew 'em, must you? Ha! I
should n't wonder. Oh, no! I should be surprised at nothing now! Nothing
at all! It's what people have always told me it would come to; and now the
buttons have opened my eyes! But the whole world shall know of your
cruelty, Mr. Caudle. After the wife I've been to you. Caudle, you've a
heart like a hearthstone, you have!


DEFINITIONS.--5. Ag'gra-vat-ing, provoking, irritating. 6. Sink'ing,
failing in strength. 7. Vin-dic'tive, revengeful. 8. Pal'try, mean,
contemptible.



XLVI. THE VILLAGE BLACKSMITH.

1. Under a spreading chestnut tree
     The village smithy stands;
   The smith, a mighty man is he,
     With large and sinewy hands;
   And the muscles of his brawny arms
     Are strong as iron bands.

2. His hair is crisp, and black, and long,
     His face is like the tan;
   His brow is wet with honest sweat,
     He earns whate'er he can,
   And looks the whole world in the face,
     For he owes not any man.

3. Week in, week out, from morn till night,
     You can hear his bellows blow;
   You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,
     With measured beat and slow,
   Like a sexton ringing the village bell,
     When the evening sun is low.

4. And children coming home from school
     Look in at the open door;
   They love to see the flaming forge,
     And hear the bellows roar,
   And catch the burning sparks that fly
     Like chaff from a threshing floor.

5. He goes on Sunday to the church,
     And sits among his boys;
   He hears the parson pray and preach,
     He hears his daughter's voice
   Singing in the village choir,
     And it makes his heart rejoice.

6. It sounds to him like her mother's voice
     Singing in Paradise!
   He needs must think of her once more,
     How in the grave she lies;
   And with his hard, rough hand he wipes
     A tear out of his eyes.

7. Toiling, rejoicing, sorrowing,
     Onward through life he goes;
   Each morning sees some task begin,
     Each evening sees its close;
   Something attempted, something done,
     Has earned a night's repose.

8. Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,
     For the lesson thou hast taught!
   Thus at the flaming forge of life
     Our fortunes must be wrought;
   Thus on its sounding anvil shaped
     Each burning deed and thought!
                                      --Longfellow.



XLVII. THE RELIEF OF LUCKNOW.

[From a letter to the "London Times," by a lady, the wife of an officer at
Lucknow.]

1. On every side death stared us in the face; no human skill could avert
it any longer. We saw the moment approach when we must bid farewell to
earth, yet without feeling that unutterable horror which must have been
experienced by the unhappy victims at Cawnpore. We were resolved rather to
die than to yield, and were fully persuaded that in twenty-four hours all
would be over. The engineer had said so, and all knew the worst. We women
strove to encourage each other, and to perform the light duties which had
been assigned to us, such as conveying orders to the batteries, and
supplying the men with provisions, especially cups of coffee, which we
prepared day and night.

2. I had gone out to try to make myself useful, in company with Jessie
Brown, the wife of a corporal in my husband's regiment. Poor Jessie had
been in a state of restless excitement all through the siege, and had
fallen away visibly within the last few days. A constant fever consumed
her, and her mind wandered occasionally, especially that day, when the
recollections of home seemed powerfully present to her. At last, overcome
with fatigue, she lay down on the ground, wrapped up in her plaid. I sat
beside her, promising to awaken her when, as she said, her "father should
return from the plowing."

3. She fell at length into a profound slumber, motionless and apparently
breathless, her head resting in my lap. I myself could no longer resist
the inclination to sleep, in spite of the continual roar of the cannon.
Suddenly I was aroused by a wild, unearthly scream close to my ear; my
companion stood upright beside me, her arms raised, and her head bent
forward in the attitude of listening.

4. A look of intense delight broke over her countenance; she grasped my
hand, drew me toward her, and exclaimed: "Dinna ye hear it? dinna ye hear
it? Ay. I'm no dreaming: it's the slogan o' the Highlanders! We're saved!
we're saved!" Then flinging herself on her knees, she thanked God with
passionate fervor. I felt utterly bewildered; my English ears heard only
the roar of artillery, and I thought my poor Jessie was still raving; but
she darted to the batteries, and I heard her cry incessantly to the men,
"Courage! courage! Hark to the slogan--to the Macgregor, the grandest of
them a'! Here's help at last!"

5. To describe the effect of these words upon the soldiers would be
impossible. For a moment they ceased firing, and every soul listened with
intense anxiety. Gradually, however, there arose a murmur of bitter
disappointment, and the wailing of the women, who had flocked to the spot,
burst out anew as the colonel shook his head. Our dull Lowland ears heard
only the battle of the musketry. A few moments more of this deathlike
suspense, of this agonizing hope, and Jessie, who had again sunk on the
ground, sprang to her feet, and cried in a voice so clear and piercing
that it was heard along the whole line, "Will ye no believe it noo? The
slogan has ceased, indeed, but the Campbells are comin'! D' ye hear? d' ye
hear?"

6. At that moment all seemed indeed to hear the voice of God in the
distance, when the pibroch of the Highlanders brought us tidings of
deliverance; for now there was no longer any doubt of the fact. That
shrill, penetrating, ceaseless sound, which rose above all other sounds,
could come neither from the advance of the enemy nor from the work of the
sappers. No, it was indeed the blast of the Scottish bagpipes, now shrill
and harsh, as threatening vengeance on the foe, then in softer tones,
seeming to promise succor to their friends in need.

7. Never, surely, was there such a scene as that which followed. Not a
heart in the residency of Lucknow but bowed itself before God. All, by one
simultaneous impulse, fell upon their knees, and nothing was heard but
bursting sobs and the murmured voice of prayer. Then all arose, and there
rang out from a thousand lips a great shout of joy, which resounded far
