the hunted, now he wanted to become the hunter. Obed and he had beaten
off the first attack. There were plenty more bullets where the other two
had come from, and he was eager to use them. He peered out of the
bushes, his face red, his eyes alight, his rifle ready for instant use.
But Obed placed one hand on his shoulder:

"Gently, Ned, gently!" he said. "We can't fight an entire Mexican army,
but if we slip away to some good position we can beat off any little
band that may find us."

It was evident that the Mexicans had lost the trail, for the time being.
They were still seeking the quarry but with much noise and confusion. A
trumpet was blown as if more help were needed. Officers shouted orders
to men, and men shouted to one another. Several shots were fired,
apparently at imaginary objects in the bushes.

"While they're running about and bumping into one another we'll regain a
little of our lost breath which we'll need badly later," said Obed. "We
can watch from here, and when they begin to approach then it's up and
away again."

Those were precious minutes. The ground was not good for the lancers who
usually advanced in mass, and, after the fall of one man and the
wounding of another, the soldiers on foot were not very zealous in
searching the thickets. The breathing of the two fugitives became easy
and regular once more. The roofs of their mouths were no longer hot and
dry, and their limbs did not tremble from excessive exertion. Ned had
turned his eyes from the Mexicans and was examining the country in the
other direction.

"Obed," he said, "there's a low mountain about a mile back of us, and
it's covered with forest. If we ever reach it we can get away."

"Yes--if we reach it," said Obed, "and, Ned, we'll surely try for it.
Ah, there they come in this direction now!"

A squad of about twenty men was approaching the thicket rapidly. Ned and
Obed sprang up and made at top speed for the mountain. The soldiers
uttered a shout and began to fire. But they had only muskets and the
bullets did not reach. Ned and Obed, having rested a full ten minutes,
ran fast. They were now descending the far side of the hill and meant to
cross a slight valley that lay between it and the mountain. When they
were near the center of this valley they heard the hoofs of horsemen,
and again saw lancers galloping toward them. These horsemen had gone
around the hill, and now the hunt was in full cry again.

Ned and Obed would have been lost had not the valley been intersected a
little further on by an arroyo seven or eight feet deep and at least
fifteen feet wide. They scrambled down it, then up it and continued
their flight among the bushes, while the horsemen, compelled to stop on
the bank, uttered angry and baffled cries.

"The good luck is coming with the bad," said Obed. "The foot soldiers
will still follow. They know that we're Texans and they want us. Do you
see anybody following us now, Ned?"

"I can see the heads of about a dozen men above the bushes."

"Perhaps they are delegated to finish the work. The whole army of Cos
can't stop to hunt down two Texans, and when we get on that mountain,
Ned, we may be able to settle with these fellows on something like fair
terms."

"Let's spurt a little," said Ned.

They put on extra steam, but the Mexicans seemed to have done the same,
as presently, appearing a little nearer, they began to shout or fire.
Ned heard the bullets pattering on the bushes behind him.

"A hint to the wise is a stitch in time," said Obed White. "Those
fellows are getting too noisy. I object to raucous voices making loud
outcries, nor does the sound of bullets dropping near please me. I shall
give them a hint."

Wheeling about he fired at the nearest Mexican. His rifle was a long
range weapon and the man fell with a cry. The others hesitated and the
fugitives increased their speed. Now they were at the base of the
mountain. Now they were up the slope which was densely clothed with
trees and bushes.

Then they came to a great hollow in the stone side of the ridge, an
indentation eight or ten feet deep and as many across, while above them
the stone arched over their heads at a height of seventy or eighty feet.

"We'll just stay here," said Obed White. "You can run and you can run,
but the time comes when you can run no more. They can't get at us from
overhead, and they can't get at us from the sides. As for the front, I
think that you and I, Ned, can hold it against as many Mexicans as may
come."

"At least we'll make a mighty big try," said Ned, whose courage rose
high at the sight of their natural fort. They had their backs to the
wall, but this wall was of solid stone, and it also curved around on
either side of them. Moreover, he had a chance to regain his breath
which was once more coming in hot and painful gasps from his chest.

"Let's lie down, Ned," said Obed, "and pull up that log in front of
this."

Near them lay the stem of an oak that had fallen years before. All the
boughs had decayed and were gone, so it was not a very difficult task to
drag the log in front of them, forming a kind of bar across the alcove.
As it was fully a foot in diameter it formed an excellent fortification
behind which they lay with their rifles ready. It was indeed a miniature
fort, the best that a wilderness could furnish at a moment's notice, and
the fighting spirit of the two rose fast. If the enemy came on they were
ready to give him a welcome.

But the two heard nothing in the dense forest in front of them. The
pursuers evidently were aware of the place, in which they had taken
refuge, and knew the need of cautious approach. Mexicans do not lack
bravery, but both Obed and Ned were sure there would be a long delay.

"I think that all we've got to do for the present," said Obed, "is to
watch the woods in front of us, and see that none of them sneaks up near
enough for a good shot."

Nearly an hour passed, and they neither saw nor heard anything in the
forest. Then there was a rushing sound, a tremendous impact in front of
them and something huge bounded and bounded again among the bushes. It
was a great rock that had been rolled over the cliff above, in the hope
that it would fall upon them, but the arch of stone over their heads was
too deep. It struck fully five feet in front of them. Both were
startled, although they knew that they were safe, and involuntarily they
drew back.

"More will come," said Obed. "Just as one swallow does not make a
summer, one stone does not make a flight. Ah, there it is now!"

They heard that same rushing sound through the air, and a bowlder
weighing at least half a ton struck in front of their log. It did not
bound away like the first, but being so much heavier buried half its
weight in the earth and lay there. Obed chuckled and regarded the big
stone with an approving look.

"It's an ill stone that doesn't fall to somebody's good," he said. "That
big fellow is squarely in the path of anybody who advances to attack us,
and adds materially to our breastwork. If they'll only drop a few more
they'll make an impregnable fortification for us."

The third came as he spoke, but being a light one rolled away. The
fourth was also light, and alighting on the big one bounded back into
the alcove, striking just between Ned and Obed. It made both jump and
shiver, but they knew that it was a chance not likely to happen again in
a hundred times. The bombardment continued for a quarter of an hour
without any harm to either of the two, and then the silence came again.
Ned and Obed pushed the rock out of the alcove, leaving it in front of
them and now their niche had a formidable stone reinforcement.

"They'll be slipping up soon to look at our dead bodies," whispered
Obed, "and between you and me, Ned, I think there will be a great
surprise in Mexico to-day."

They lay almost flat and put the muzzles of their rifles across the log.
Both, used to life on the border, where the rifle was a necessity, were
fine shots and they were also keen of eye and ear. They waited for a
while which seemed interminably long to Ned, but which was not more
than a quarter of an hour, and then he heard a slight movement among the
trees somewhat to their left. He called Obed's attention to it and the
man nodded:

"I hear it, too," he whispered. "Those investigators are cautious, but
they'll have to come up in front before they can get at us, and then we
can get at them, too. We'll just be patient."

Ned was at least quiet and contained, although it was impossible to be
patient. They heard the rustling at intervals on their right, then it
changed to their front, and he saw a black head, covered with a
sombrero, peep from behind a tree. The head came a little farther,
disclosing a shoulder, and Obed White fired. They heard a yell of pain,
and a thrashing among the bushes, but the sound rapidly moved farther
and farther away.

"That fellow was stung badly," said Obed White with satisfaction, "and
he won't come back. I'm glad to see, Ned, that you held your fire,
keeping ready for any other who might come."

Ned glowed at the compliment. He had cocked his rifle, and was ready but
he remained cool, wasting no shot.

"I fancy that they now know we are here," said Obed, who loved to talk,
"and that we have not been demolished by the several tons of rock that
they have sent down from above. A shot to the wise is sufficient. Keep
down, Ned! Keep down!"

From a point sixty or seventy yards away Mexicans, lying among the trees
or in the undergrowth, suddenly opened a heavy fire upon the rocky fort.
The Mexicans were invisible but jets of smoke arose in the brush.
Bullets thudded on the log or stones, or upon the stone wall above the
two, but both Ned and Obed were sheltered well and they were not
touched. Nevertheless it was uncomfortable. The impact of the bullets
made an unpleasant sound, and there was always a chance that one of them
might angle off from the stone and strike a human target. Obed however
was cheerful.

"They're wasting good ammunition," he said. "They'll need that later on
when they attack the Texans. After all, Ned, we're serving a good
purpose when we induce the Mexicans to shoot good powder and lead here,
and not against our people."

Encouraged by the failure of the besieged to reply to their fire the
Mexicans came closer and grew somewhat incautious. Ned saw one of them
sheltered but partially by a bush and he fired. The man uttered a cry
and fell. Ned saw the bush moving and he hoped the man was not slain,
but he never knew.

The volleys from the Mexicans ceased, and silence came again in the
woods. Wisps of smoke floated here and there among the trees, but a
light wind soon caught them and carried them away. Ned and Obed, rolling
into easier positions, talked cheerfully.

"I don't think they'll try to rush us," said Obed. "The Mexicans are not
afraid to charge breastworks, but they'll hardly think we two are worth
the price they would have to pay. Perhaps they'll try to starve us out."

"And that they can't do because we have provisions for several days."

"But they don't know it. Nor do we want to stay here for several days,
Ned. Texas is calling to us, and we should be traveling northward
instead of lying under a rock besieged by Mexicans."

But they were compelled anew to make heavy drafts upon their patience.
The Mexicans kept quiet a long time. Finally a shot fired from some high
point grazed Ned's cap, and flattened against the rock behind him. The
boy involuntarily ducked against the earth. Obed also lay lower.

"Some Mexican must have climbed a tree," said the Maine man. "He's where
he can look over our fortifications and that gives him an advantage. It
also gives him a disadvantage because it will be harder for him to come
down out of that tree unaided than it was for him to go up in it. We'll
stick as close as we can under the log, until he sends in the second
shot."

They waited about ten minutes until the Mexican fired again. He was in
the boughs of a great oak about fifty yards away, and following the
flash of his weapon they saw his chest and shoulders as he leaned
forward to take aim and pull the trigger. Obed fired and the soldier
dropped to the ground. There was a noise in the underbrush, as if his
comrades were dragging him away and then the great silence came again.
As Obed reloaded he said grimly:

"I think we're done with the tree-climbers. Evil to him who evil does.
They're cured of that habit."

It was now mid-afternoon and the sun was blazing down over the cliffs
and forest. It grew very hot in the alcove. No breath of wind reached
them there, and they began to pant for air.

"I hope night will come soon," said Ned.

"It will be here before long," said Obed, "but something else will
arrive first."

"What is that?"

"Look, there to the right over the trees. See the dark spot in the sky.
Ned, my boy, a storm is coming and it is for you and me to say 'let it
come.'"

"What will it do for us?"

"Break up the siege, or at least I think so. Unless it drives directly
in our faces we will be sheltered out here, but the Mexicans will have
no such protection. And, Ned, if you will listen to one who knows, you
will understand that storms down here can be terrific."

"Then the more terrific it is the better for us."

"Just so. See, Ned, how that black spot grows! It is a cloud of quite
respectable size. Before long it will cover all the skies, and you
notice too that there is absolutely no wind."

"It is so. The stillness is so great that I feel it. It oppresses me. It
is hard for me to draw my breath."

"Exactly. I feel just the same way. The storm is coming fast and it is
going to be a big one. The sun is entirely hidden already, and the air
is growing dark. We'll crouch against the wall, Ned, and keep our
rifles, powder and ourselves as dry as possible. There goes the thunder,
growling away, and here's the lightning! Whew, but that made me jump!"

An intense flash of lightning burned across the sky, and showed the
forest and hills for one blazing moment. Then the darkness closed in,
thick and black. The two, wrapped closely in their serapes, crouched
against the stone wall and watched the storm gather in its full majesty
and terror.




CHAPTER XI

THE LONG CHASE


Ned, despite his brave heart and strong will, felt a deep awe. Storms on
the great uplands of North America often present aspects which are
sublime and menacing to the last degree. The thunder which had been
growling before now crashed continually like batteries of great guns,
and the lightning flashed so fast that there was a rapid alternation of
dazzling glare and impervious blackness. Once, the lightning struck in
the forest near them with a terrible, rending crash, and trees went
down. Far down in the gorges they heard the fierce howl of the wind.

Ned shrank closer and closer against the rocky wall, and, now and then,
he veiled his eyes with one hand. If one were to judge by eye and ear
alone it would seem that the world was coming to an end. Cast away in
the wilderness, he was truly thankful for the human companionship of the
man, Obed White, and it is likely that the man, Obed White, was just as
thankful for the companionship of the boy, Edward Fulton.

All thought of another attack by the Mexicans passed for the present.
They knew that the besiegers themselves would be awed, and would flee
for refuge, particularly from the trees falling before the strokes of
lightning. It was at least two miles to any such point of safety, and
Ned and Obed saw a coming opportunity. Both lightning and thunder ceased
so abruptly that it was uncanny. The sudden stillness was heavy and
oppressive, and after the continued flare of the lightning, the darkness
was so nearly impenetrable that they could not see ten yards in front of
them.

Then the rain came in a tremendous cataract, but it came from the south,
while they faced the north. Hence it drove over and past their alcove
and they remained dry. But it poured so hard and with such a sweep and
roar that Obed was forced to shout when he said to Ned:

"I've never been to Niagara and of course I've never been behind the
falls there but this must be like it. The luck has certainly turned in
our favor, Ned. The Mexicans could never stand it out there without
shelter."

"I don't see how it can last long," shouted Ned in reply.

"It can't. It's too violent. But it's the way down here, rushing from
one extreme to another. As soon as it begins to ease up, we'll move."

The darkness presently began to thin rapidly, and the heavy drumming of
the rain on the rocks and forest turned to a patter.

"I think it's a good time to go, Ned," said Obed. "In fifteen minutes it
will stop raining entirely and the Mexicans, if they are not drowned,
may come back for us. We can't keep ourselves dry, but we'll protect our
rifles and ammunition. We've got a good chance to escape now, especially
since night will soon be here."

They left the overhanging cliff which had guarded them so well in more
ways than one, and entered the forest, veering off to the left, and
picking their way carefully through the underbrush. Ned suddenly sprang
aside, shuddering. A Mexican, slain in the battle, lay upon his side.
But Obed was practical.

"I know it's unpleasant to touch him," he said, "but he may have what
we need. Ah, here is a pistol and bullets for it, and a flask of powder
which his own body has helped to keep dry. It's likely that we'll have
use for these before we get through, and so I'll take 'em."

He quickly secured the pistol and ammunition, and they went on,
traveling rapidly westward. The rain ceased entirely in twenty minutes,
and all the clouds passed away, but night came in their place, covering
their flight with its friendly mantle. They were wet to the waist and
the water dripped from the trees upon them, but these things did not
trouble them. They felt all the joy of escape. Ned knew that neither of
them, if taken, could expect much mercy from the brutal Cos.

They came after a while to a gorge, through which a torrent rushed,
cutting off their way. It was midnight now. They saw that the stream was
very muddy and that it bore on its current much debris.

"We'll just sit down here and rest," said Obed. "This is nothing more
than a brook raised to a river by the storm, and, in another hour or
two, it will be a brook again. Rise fast, fall fast holds true."

They sat on a log near the stream and watched it go down. As their
muscles relaxed they began to feel cold, and had it not been for the
serapes they would have been chilled. In two hours the muddy little
river was a muddy little brook and they walked across. All the while
now, a warm, drying wind was blowing, but they kept on for some time
longer in order that the vigorous circulation of the blood might warm
their bodies. Then, seeking the best place they could find, they lay
down among the bushes, despite the damp, and slept.

Ned was the first to awake the next day, and he saw, by a high sun, that
they were on a slope, leading to a pretty valley well grown in grass.
He took a few steps and also stretched both arms. He found that his
muscles were neither stiff nor sore and his delight was great. Obed
still slumbered peacefully, his head upon his arm.

Ned walked a little further down the slope. Then he jumped back and hid
behind a bush. He had caught a glimpse of a horse saddled and bridled in
the Mexican manner, and it was his first thought that a detachment from
the army of Cos was riding straight toward them. But as he stood behind
the bush, heart beating, eyes gazing through the leaves, he saw that it
was only a single horse. Nor was it coming toward him. It seemed to be
moving about slowly in a circle of very limited area. Then, leaving the
bush, he saw that the horse was riderless. He watched a long time to see
if the owner would appear, and as none came he went back and awakened
Obed White.

"What! What!" said Obed, opening his eyes slowly and yawning mightily.
"Has the day come? Verily, it is a long night that has no ending. And so
you have seen a horse, Ned, a horse saddled and bridled and with no
owner! It can't be the one that King Richard offered his kingdom for,
and since it isn't we'll just see why this caparisoned animal is there
grazing in our valley."

The two went down the slope. The horse was still there, grazing in his
grassy circle, and as the two approached he drew away a little but did
not seem to be frightened. Then Ned understood, or at least his belief
was so strong that it amounted to conviction.

"It's the horse of the soldier whom you shot yesterday," he said. "You
