snorted.  Rooney turned his face aside to avoid the blast, but otherwise
lay quite still, knowing well that whatever animal his visitor might be,
his only hope lay in absolute inaction.  Venturing in a few seconds to
turn his face round and peep through the opening, he found that the
animal was in very deed a large white bear, which, having found and
abstracted the remains of the blubber he had been chewing, was at that
moment licking its lips after swallowing it.  Of course, finding the
morsel satisfactory, the bear returned to the hole for more.

It is easier to conceive than to describe the poor man's feelings at
that moment, therefore we leave the reader to conceive them.  The
natural and desperate tendency to spring up and defend himself had to be
combated by the certain knowledge that, encased as he was, he could not
spring up, and had nothing wherewith to defend himself except his
fingers, which were no match for the claws of a Polar bear.

The blood which a moment before had begun apparently to curdle, now
seemed turned into liquid fire; and when the snout again entered and
touched his own, he could contain himself no longer, but gave vent to a
yell, which caused the startled bear to draw sharply back in alarm.
Probably it had never heard a yell through the medium of its nose
before, and every one must know how strong is the influence of a new
sensation.  For some minutes the monster stood in silent contemplation
of the mysterious hole.  Rooney of course lay perfectly still.  The
success of his involuntary explosion encouraged hope.

What the bear might have done next we cannot tell, for at that moment a
shout was heard.  It was followed by what seemed a succession of pistol
shots and the howling of dogs.  It was the arrival of Okiok on the scene
with his sledge and team.

Never was an arrival more opportune.  The bear looked round with a
distinct expression of indignation on his countenance.  Possibly the
voice of Okiok was familiar to him.  It may be that relations or friends
of that bear had mysteriously disappeared after the sounding of that
voice.  Perhaps the animal in whose skin Rooney was encased had been a
brother.  At all events, the increasing hullabaloo of the approaching
Eskimo had the effect of intimidating the animal, for it retired
quickly, though with evident sulkiness, from the scene.

A few seconds more, and Okiok dashed up, leaped from his vehicle, left
the panting team to the control of Norrak, and ran eagerly to the
prostrate figure.  Unwrapping the head so as to set it free, the Eskimo
saw with intense satisfaction that the Kablunet was still alive.  He
called at once to Norrak, who fetched from the sledge a platter made of
a seal's shoulder-blade, on which was a mass of cooked food.  This he
presented to the starving man, who, with a look of intense gratitude,
but with no words, eagerly ate it up.  The Eskimo and his son meanwhile
stood looking at him with an expression of mingled interest, awe, and
surprise on their round faces.

When the meal was ended, Red Rooney, heaving a deep sigh of
satisfaction, said, "Thank God, and thank _you_, my friends!"

There was reason for the increase of surprise with which this was
received by the two natives, for this time the foreigner spoke to them
in their own language.

"Is the Kablunet a messenger from heaven," asked Okiok, with increased
solemnity, "that he speaks with the tongue of the Innuit?"

"No, my friend," replied Rooney, with a faint smile; "I bring no message
either from heaven or anywhere else.  I'm only a wrecked seaman.  But,
after a fashion, you are messengers from heaven to _me_, and the message
you bring is that I'm not to die just yet.  If it had not been for you,
my friends, it strikes me I should have been dead by this time.  As to
my speaking your lingo, it's no mystery.  I've learned it by livin' a
long time wi' the traders in the south of Greenland, and I suppose I've
got a sort o' talent that way; d'ye see?"

Red Rooney delivered these remarks fluently in a curious sort of Eskimo
language; but we have rendered it into that kind of English which the
wrecked seaman was in the habit of using--chiefly because by so doing we
shall give the reader a more correct idea of the character of the man.

"We are very glad to see you," returned Okiok.  "We have heard of you
for many moons.  We have wished for you very hard.  Now you have come,
we will treat you well."

"Are your huts far off?" asked the seaman anxiously.

"Not far.  They are close to the ice-mountain--on the land."

"Take me to them, then, like a good fellow, for I'm dead-beat, and stand
much in need of rest."

The poor man was so helpless that he could not walk to the sledge when
they unrolled him.  It seemed as if his power of will and energy had
collapsed at the very moment of his rescue.  Up to that time the fear of
death had urged him on, but now, feeling that he was, comparatively
speaking, safe, he gave way to the languor which had so long oppressed
him, and thus, the impulse of the will being removed, he suddenly became
as helpless as an infant.

Seeing his condition, the father and son lifted him on the sledge,
wrapped him in skins, and drove back to the huts at full speed.

Nuna was awaiting them outside, with eager eyes and beating heart, for
the discovery of a real live Kablunet was to her an object of as solemn
and anxious curiosity as the finding of a veritable living ghost might
be to a civilised man.  But Nuna was not alone.  There were two other
members of the household present, who had been absent when Okiok first
arrived, and whom we will now introduce to the reader.

One was Nuna's only daughter, an exceedingly pretty girl--according to
Eskimo notions of female beauty.  She was seventeen years of age,
black-eyed, healthily-complexioned, round-faced, sweet-expressioned,
comfortably stout, and unusually graceful--for an Eskimo.  Among her
other charms, modesty and good-nature shone conspicuous.  She was in all
respects a superior counterpart of her mother, and her name was Nunaga.
Nuna was small, Nunaga was smaller.  Nuna was comparatively young,
Nunaga was necessarily younger.  The former was kind, the latter was
kinder.  The mother was graceful and pretty, the daughter was more
graceful and prettier.  Nuna wore her hair gathered on the top of her
head into a high top-knot, Nunaga wore a higher top-knot.  In regard to
costume, Nuna wore sealskin boots the whole length of her legs--which
were not long--and a frock or skirt reaching nearly to her knees, with a
short tail in front and a long tail behind; Nunaga, being similarly
clothed, had a shorter tail in front and a longer tail behind.

It may be interesting to note here that Eskimos are sometimes named
because of qualities possessed, or appearance, or peculiar circumstances
connected with them.  The word Nuna signifies "land" in Eskimo.  We
cannot tell why this particular lady was named Land, unless it were that
she was born on the land, and not on the ice; or perhaps because she was
so nice that when any man came into her company he might have thought
that he had reached the land of his hopes, and was disposed to settle
down there and remain.  Certainly many of the Eskimo young men seemed to
be of that mind until Okiok carried her off in triumph.  And let us tell
you, reader, that a good and pretty woman is as much esteemed among the
Eskimos as among ourselves.  We do not say that she is better treated;
neither do we hint that she is sometimes treated worse.

The Eskimo word Nunaga signifies "_my_ land," and was bestowed by Okiok
on his eldest-born in a flood of tenderness at her birth.

Apologising for this philological digression, we proceed.  Besides Nuna
and Nunaga there was a baby boy--a fat, oily, contented boy--without a
name at that time, and without a particle of clothing of any sort, his
proper condition of heat being maintained when out of doors chiefly by
being carried between his mother's dress and her shoulders; also by
being stuffed to repletion with blubber.

The whole family cried out vigorously with delight, in various keys,
when the team came yelping home with the Kablunet.  Even the baby gave a
joyous crow--in Eskimo.

But the exclamations were changed to pity when the Kablunet was assisted
to rise, and staggered feebly towards the hut, even when supported by
Okiok and his sons.  The sailor was not ignorant of Eskimo ways.  His
residence in South Greenland had taught him many things.  He dropped,
therefore, quite naturally--indeed gladly--on his hands and knees on
coming to the mouth of the tunnel, and crept slowly into the hut,
followed by the whole family, except Ermigit, who was left to unfasten
the dogs.

The weather at the time was by no means cold, for spring was rapidly
advancing; nevertheless, to one who had been so reduced in strength, the
warmth of the Eskimo hut was inexpressibly grateful.  With a great sigh
of relief the rescued man flung himself on the raised part of the floor
on which Eskimos are wont to sit and sleep.

"Thank God, and again I thank _you_, my friends!" he said, repeating the
phrase which he had already used, for the sudden change from despair to
hope, from all but death to restored life, had filled his heart with
gratitude.

"You are weary?" said Okiok.

"Ay, ay--very weary; well-nigh to death," he replied.

"Will the Kablunet sleep?" asked Nuna, pointing to a couch of skins
close behind the seaman.

Rooney looked round.

"Thankee; yes, I will."

He crept to the couch, and dropped upon it, with his head resting on an
eider-down pillow.  Like a tired infant, his eyes closed, and he was
asleep almost instantaneously.

Seeing this, the Eskimos began to move about with care, and to speak in
whispers, though it was needless caution, for in his condition the man
would probably have continued to sleep through the wildest thunderstorm.
Even when baby, tumbling headlong off the elevated floor, narrowly
missed spiking himself on a walrus spear, and set up a yell that might
have startled the stone deaf, the wearied Kablunet did not move.  Okiok
did, however.  He moved smartly towards the infant, caught him by the
throat, and almost strangled him in a fierce attempt to keep him quiet.

"Stupid tumbler!" he growled--referring to the child's general and
awkward habit of falling--"Can't you shut your mouth?"

Curious similarity between the thoughts and words of civilised and
savage man in similar circumstances!  And it is interesting to note the
truth of what the song says:--

"We little know what great things from little things may rise."

From that slight incident the Eskimo child derived his future name of
"Tumbler"!  We forget what the precise Eskimo term is, but the English
equivalent will do as well.

When supper-time arrived that night, Okiok and Nuna consulted as to
whether they should waken their guest, or let him lie still--for, from
the instant he lay down, he had remained without the slightest motion,
save the slow, regular heaving of his broad chest.

"Let him sleep.  He is tired," said Okiok.

"But he must be hungry, and he is weak," said Nuna.

"He can feed when he wakens," returned the man, admiring his guest as a
collector might admire a foreign curiosity which he had just found.

"Kablunets sleep sounder than Eskimos," remarked the woman.

"Stupid one!  Your head is thick, like the skull of the walrus," said
the man.  "Don't you see that it is because he is worn-out?"

Eskimos are singularly simple and straightforward in their speech.  They
express their opinions with the utmost candour, and without the
slightest intention of hurting each other's feelings.  Nuna took no
offence at her husband's plain speaking, but continued to gaze with a
gratified expression at the stranger.

And sooth to say Reginald Rooney was a pleasant object for
contemplation, as well as a striking contrast to the men with whom Nuna
had been hitherto associated.  His brow was broad; the nose, which had
been compared to the eagle's beak, was in reality a fine aquiline; the
mouth, although partially concealed by a brown drooping moustache, was
well formed, large, and firm; the beard bushy, and the hair voluminous
as well as curly.  Altogether, this poor castaway was as fine a specimen
of a British tar as one could wish to see, despite his wasted condition
and his un-British garb.

It was finally decided to leave him undisturbed, and the Eskimo family
took care while supping to eat their food in comparative silence.
Usually the evening meal was a noisy, hilarious festival, at which Okiok
and Norrak and Ermigit were wont to relate the various incidents of the
day's hunt, with more or less of exaggeration, not unmingled with fun,
and only a little of that shameless boasting which is too strong a
characteristic of the North American Indian.  The women of the household
were excellent listeners; also splendid laughers, and Tumbler was
unrivalled in the matter of crowing, so that noise as well as feasting
was usually the order of the night.  But on this great occasion that was
all changed.  The feasting was done in dead silence; and another very
striking peculiarity of the occasion was that, while the six pairs of
jaws kept moving with unflagging pertinacity, the twelve wide-open eyes
kept glaring with unwinking intensity at the sleeping man.

Indeed this unwavering glare continued long after supper was over, for
each member of the family lay down to rest with his or her face towards
the stranger, and kept up the glare until irresistible Nature closed the
lids and thus put out the eyes, like the stars of morning, one by one;
perhaps it would be more strictly correct to say two by two.

Okiok and his wife were the last to succumb.  Long after the others were
buried in slumber, these two sat up by the lamp-light, solacing
themselves with little scraps and tit-bits of walrus during the
intervals of whispered conversation.

"What shall we do with him?" asked Okiok, after a brief silence.

"Keep him," replied Nuna, with decision.

"But we cannot force him to stay."

"He cannot travel alone," said Nuna, "and we will not help him to go."

"We are not the only Innuits in all the land.  Others will help him if
we refuse."

This was so obvious that the woman could not reply, but gazed for some
time in perplexity at the lamp-smoke.  And really there was much
inspiration to be derived from the lamp-smoke, for the wick being a mass
of moss steeped in an open cup of seal-oil, the smoke of it rose in
varied convolutions that afforded almost as much scope for suggestive
contemplation as our familiar coal-fires.

Suddenly the little woman glanced at her slumbering household, cast a
meaning look at her husband, and laughed--silently of course.

"Has Nuna become a fool that she laughs at nothing?" demanded Okiok
simply.

Instead of replying to the well-meant though impolite question, Nuna
laughed again, and looked into the dark corner where the pretty little
round face of Nunaga was dimly visible, with the eyes shut, and the
little mouth wide-open.

"We will marry him to Nunaga," she said, suddenly becoming grave.

"Pooh!" exclaimed Okiok--or some expression equivalent to that--"Marry
Nunaga to a Kablunet?  Never!  Do you not know that Angut wants her?"

It was evident from the look of surprise with which Nuna received this
piece of information that she was _not_ aware of Angut's aspirations,
and it was equally evident from the perplexed expression that followed
that her hastily-conceived little matrimonial speculation had been
knocked on the head.

After this their thoughts either strayed into other channels, or became
too deep for utterance, for they conversed no more, but soon joined the
rest of the family in the realms of oblivion.



CHAPTER THREE.

OUR HERO AND HIS FRIENDS BECOME FAMILIAR.

It was a fine balmy brilliant morning when Red Rooney awoke from the
most refreshing sleep he had enjoyed for many a day, gazed thoughtfully
up at the blackened roof of the Eskimo hut, and wondered where he was.

There was nothing that met his eyes to recall his scattered senses, for
all the members of the family had gone out to their various avocations,
and one of them having thrust a sealskin into the hole in the wall which
served for a window the sun found admittance only through crevices, and
but faintly illumined the interior.

The poor man felt intensely weak, yet delightfully restful--so much so
that mere curiosity seemed to have died within him, and he was content
to lie still and think of whatever his wayward mind chose to fasten on,
or not to think at all, if his mind saw fit to adopt that course in its
vagaries.  In short, he felt as if he had no more control over his
thoughts than a man in a dream, and was quite satisfied that it should
be so.

As his eyes became accustomed to the dim light, however, he began slowly
to perceive that the walls around him were made of rough unhewn stone,
that the rafters were of drift timber, and the roof of moss, or
something like it; but the whole was so thickly coated with soot as to
present a uniform appearance of blackness.  He also saw, from the
position in which he lay, a stone vessel, like a primitive classical
lamp, with a wick projecting from its lip, but no flame.  Several skulls
of large animals lay on the floor within the range of his vision, and
some sealskin and other garments hung on pegs of bone driven into the
wall.  Just opposite to him was the entrance to the tunnel, which formed
the passage or corridor of the mansion, and within it gleamed a subdued
light which entered from the outer end.

Rooney knew that he saw these things, and took note of them, yet if you
had asked him what he had seen it is probable that he would have been
unable to tell--so near had he approached to the confines of that land
from which no traveller returns.

Heaving a deep sigh, the man uttered the words, "Thank God!" for the
third time within the last four-and-twenty hours.  It was an appropriate
prelude to his sinking into that mysterious region of oblivion in which
the mind of worn-out man finds rest, and out of which it can be so
familiarly yet mysteriously summoned--sometimes by his own
pre-determination, but more frequently by a fellow-mortal.

He had not lain long thus when the tunnel was suddenly darkened by an
advancing body, which proved to be the mistress of the mansion.

Nuna, on thrusting her head into the interior, looked inquiringly up
before venturing to rise.  After a good stare at the slumbering
Kablunet, she went cautiously towards the window and removed the
obstruction.  A flood of light was let in, which illumined, but did not
awaken, the sleeper.

Cautiously and on tip-toe the considerate little woman went about her
household duties, but with her eyes fixed, as if in fascination, on her
interesting guest.

It is at all times an awkward as well as a dangerous mode of proceeding,
to walk in one direction and look in another.  In crossing the hut, Nuna
fell over a walrus skull, upset the lamp, and sent several other
articles of furniture against the opposite wall with a startling crash.
The poor creature did not rise.  She was too much overwhelmed with
shame.  She merely turned her head as she lay, and cast a horrified gaze
at the sleeper.

To her great joy she saw that Red Rooney had not been disturbed.  He
slept through it all with the placidity of an infant.  Much relieved,
the little woman got up, and moved about more freely.  She replenished
the lamp with oil, and kindled it.  Then she proceeded to roast and fry
and grill bear ribs, seal chops, and walrus steaks with a dexterity that
was quite marvellous, considering the rude culinary implements with
which she had to deal.  In a short time breakfast was prepared, and Nuna
