and the steps up to Wallace's Cave. They are called, 'kittle nine stanes;'
The hunt's up. We'll all be in at the death. Halloo! my boys, halloo!"

The soldiers dashed down a less precipitous part of the wooded banks, a
little below the "craigs," and hurried up the channel. But when they
reached the altar where the old, gray-haired minister had been seen
standing, and the rocks that had been covered with people, all was silent
and solitary; not a creature to be seen. "Here is a Bible, dropped by some
of them," cried a soldier, and, with his foot, he spun it away into the
pool. "A bonnet, a bonnet," cried another; "now for the pretty, sanctified
face, that rolled its demure eyes below it." But after a few jests and
oaths, the soldiers stood still, eying with a kind of mysterious dread the
black and silent walls of the rocks that hemmed them in, and hearing only
the small voice of the stream that sent a profounder stillness through the
heart of that majestic solitude. "What if these cowardly Covenanters
should tumble down upon our heads pieces of rock, from their hiding
places! Advance, or retreat?"

There was no reply; for a slight fear was upon every man. Musket or
bayonet could be of little use to men obliged to clamber up rocks, along
slender paths, leading they know not where. And they were aware that armed
men nowadays worshiped God; men of iron hearts, who feared not the glitter
of the soldier's arms, neither barrel nor bayonet; men of long stride,
firm step, and broad breast, who, on the open field, would have overthrown
the marshaled line, and gone first and foremost, if a city had to be taken
by storm.

As the soldiers were standing together irresolute, a noise came upon their
ears like distant thunder, but even more appalling; and a slight current
of air, as if propelled by it, passed whispering along the sweetbriers,
and the broom, and the tresses of the birch trees. It came deepening, and
rolling, and roaring on; and the very Cartland Craigs shook to their
foundation, as if in an earthquake. "The Lord have mercy upon us! What is
this?" And down fell many of the miserable wretches on their knees, and
some on their faces, upon the sharp-pointed rocks. Now, it was like the
sound of many myriads of chariots rolling on their iron axles down the
strong channel of the torrent. The old, gray-haired minister issued from
the mouth of Wallace's Cave, and said, in a loud voice, "The Lord God
terrible reigneth!"

A waterspout had burst up among the moorlands, and the river, in its
power, was at hand. There it came, tumbling along into that long reach of
cliffs, and, in a moment, filled it with one mass of waves. Huge, agitated
clouds of foam rode on the surface of a blood-red torrent. An army must
have been swept off by that flood. The soldiers perished in a moment; but
high up in the cliffs, above the sweep of destruction, were the
Covenanters, men, women, and children, uttering prayers to God, unheard by
themselves, in the raging thunder.


NOTES.--Lanark is a small town in the valley of the Clyde, in Scotland. It
is thirty miles southwest from Edinburgh.

Mouse River flows to the Clyde from the hills north of Larmrk.
Covenanter.--Under Charles I., the Scotch were so oppressed that they
organized in resistance. The covenant was a famous paper, largely signed,
in which they agreed to continue in the profession of their faith, and
resist all errors.

Wallace's Cave.--William Wallace (b. 1270, d. 1305) was the foremost Scot
of his times. He was declared, in the absence of the king, guardian of the
kingdom. More than once was he outlawed and obliged to seek safety by
concealment in the woods and caves.


XLIV. SPARROWS. (185)

Adeline D. Train Whitney, 1824--, was born in Boston, and was educated in
the school of Dr. George B. Emerson. Her father was Enoch Train, a
well-known merchant of that city. At the age of nineteen, she became the
wife of Mr. Seth D. Whitney. Her literary career began about 1856, since
which time she has written several novels and poems; a number of them
first appeared in the "Atlantic Monthly." Her writings are marked by grace
and sprightliness.
###


Little birds sit on the telegraph wires,
  And chitter, and flitter, and fold their wings;
Maybe they think that, for them and their sires,
  Stretched always, on purpose, those wonderful strings:
And, perhaps, the Thought that the world inspires,
  Did plan for the birds, among other things.

Little birds sit on the slender lines,
  And the news of the world runs under their feet,--
How value rises, and how declines,
  How kings with their armies in battle meet,--
And, all the while, 'mid the soundless signs,
  They chirp their small gossipings, foolish sweet.

Little things light on the lines of our lives,--
  Hopes, and joys, and acts of to-day,--
And we think that for these the Lord contrives,
  Nor catch what the hidden lightnings say.
Yet, from end to end, His meaning arrives,
  And His word runs underneath, all the way.

Is life only wires and lightning, then,
  Apart from that which about it clings?
Are the thoughts, and the works, and the prayers of men
  Only sparrows that light on God's telegraph strings,
Holding a moment, and gone again?
  Nay; He planned for the birds, with the larger things.


XLV. OBSERVANCE OF THE SABBATH. (186)

Gardiner Spring, 1785-1873, was the son of Samuel Spring, D.D., who was
pastor of a Congregational church in Newburyport, Massachusetts, for more
than forty years. The son entered Yale College, and was valedictorian of
his class in 1805. He studied law for a time; then went to Bermuda, where
he taught nearly two years. On his return he completed his law studies,
and practiced his profession for more than a year. In 1810, having studied
theology at Andover, he was ordained as pastor of the "Brick Church" in
New York City. Here he remained till his death. He was elected president
of Dartmouth College, and also of Hamilton, but declined both positions.
His works, embracing about twenty octavo volumes, have passed through
several editions; some have been translated into foreign languages, and
reprinted in Europe. As a preacher, Dr. Spring was eloquent and energetic.
###


The Sabbath lies at the foundation of all true morality. Morality flows
from principle. Let the principles of moral obligation become relaxed, and
the practice of morality will not long survive the overthrow. No man can
preserve his own morals, no parent can preserve the morals of his
children, without the impressions of religious obligation.

If you can induce a community to doubt the genuineness and authenticity of
the Scriptures; to question the reality and obligations of religion; to
hesitate, undeciding, whether there be any such thing as virtue or vice;
whether there be an eternal state of retribution beyond the grave; or
whether there exists any such being as God, you have broken down the
barriers of moral virtue, and hoisted the flood gates of immorality and
crime. I need not say that when a people have once done this, they can no
longer exist as a tranquil and happy people. Every bond that holds society
together would be ruptured; fraud and treachery would take the place of
confidence between man and man; the tribunals of justice would be scenes
of bribery and injustice; avarice, perjury, ambition, and revenge would
walk through the land, and render it more like the dwelling of savage
beasts than the tranquil abode of civilized and Christianized men.

If there is an institution which opposes itself to this progress of human
degeneracy, and throws a shield before the interests of moral virtue in
our thoughtless and wayward world, it is the Sabbath. In the fearful
struggle between virtue and vice, notwithstanding the powerful auxiliaries
which wickedness finds in the bosoms of men, and in the seductions and
influence of popular example, wherever the Sabbath has been suffered to
live, the trembling interests of moral virtue have always been revered and
sustained. One of the principal occupations of this day is to illustrate
and enforce the great principles of sound morality. Where this sacred
trust is preserved inviolate, you behold a nation convened one day in
seven for the purpose of acquainting themselves with the best moral
principles and precepts; and it can not be otherwise than that the
authority of moral virtue, under such auspices, should be acknowledged and
felt.

We may not, at once, perceive the effects which this weekly observance
produces. Like most moral causes, it operates slowly; but it operates
surely, and gradually weakens the power and breaks the yoke of profligacy
and sin. No villain regards the Sabbath. No vicious family regards the
Sabbath. No immoral community regards the Sabbath. The holy rest of this
ever-memorable day is a barrier which is always broken down before men
become giants in sin. Blackstone, in his Commentaries on the Laws of
England, remarks that "a corruption of morals usually follows a
profanation of the Sabbath." It is an observation of Lord Chief Justice
Hale, that "of all the persons who were convicted of capital crimes, while
he was on the bench, he found a few only who would not confess that they
began their career of wickedness by a neglect of the duties of the Sabbath
and vicious conduct on that day."

The prisons in our own land could probably tell us that they have scarcely
a solitary tenant who had not broken over the restraints of the Sabbath
before he was abandoned to crime. You may enact laws for the suppression
of immorality, but the secret and silent power of the Sabbath constitutes
a stronger shield to the vital interest of the community than any code of
penal statutes that ever was enacted. The Sabbath is the keystone of the
arch which sustains the temple of virtue, which, however defaced, will
survive many a rude shock so long as the foundation remains firm.

The observance of the Sabbath is also most influential in securing
national prosperity. The God of Heaven has said, "Them that honor me I
will honor," You will not often find a notorious Sabbath breaker a
permanently prosperous man; and a Sabbath-breaking community is never a
happy or prosperous community. There is a multitude of unobserved
influences which the Sabbath exerts upon the temporal welfare of men. It
promotes the spirit of good order and harmony; it elevates the poor from
want; it transforms squalid wretchedness; it imparts self-respect and
elevation of character; it promotes softness and civility of manners; it
brings together the rich and the poor upon one common level in the house
of prayer; it purifies and strengthens the social affections, and makes
the family circle the center of allurement and the source of instruction,
comfort, and happiness. Like its own divine religion, "it has the promise
of the life that now is and that which is to come," for men can not put
themselves beyond the reach of hope and heaven so long as they treasure up
this one command, "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy."


NOTES.--Sir William Blackstone (b. 1723, d. 1780) was the son of a London
silk mercer. He is celebrated as the author of the "Commentaries on the
Laws of England," now universally used by law students both in England and
America. He once retired from the law through failure to secure a
practice, but afterwards attained the highest honors in his profession.
See biographical notice on page 410.

Sir Matthew Hale (b. 1609, d. 1676), was Lord Chief Justice of England
from 1671 to 1676.



XLVI. GOD'S GOODNESS TO SUCH AS FEAR HIM. (189)

Fret not thyself because of evil doers,
Neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity;
For they shall soon be cut down like the grass,
And wither as the green herb.
Trust in the Lord, and do good;
So shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.
Delight thyself also in the Lord,
And he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
Commit thy way unto the Lord;
Trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light,
And thy judgment as the noonday.
Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him.

Fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way,
Because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass.
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath:
Fret not thyself in any wise to do evil,
For evil doers shall be cut off:
But those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth.
For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be;
Yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.
But the meek shall inherit the earth,
And shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.

A little that a righteous man hath
Is better than the riches of many wicked;
For the arms of the wicked shall be broken,
But the Lord upholdeth the righteous.
The Lord knoweth the days of the upright,
And their inheritance shall be forever;
They shall not be ashamed in the evil time,
And in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.

But the wicked shall perish,
And the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs;
They shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away.
The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again;
But the righteous sheweth mercy and giveth.
For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth.

The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord,
And he delighteth in his way;
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down;
For the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.

I have been young, and now am old,
Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
Nor his seed begging bread.
He is ever merciful, and lendeth,
And his seed is blessed.

Depart from evil, and do good,
And dwell for evermore;
For the Lord loveth judgment,
And forsaketh not his saints;
They are preserved forever:
But the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
The righteous shall inherit the land,
And dwell therein forever.
The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom,
And his tongue talketh of judgment;
The law of his God is in his heart;
None of his steps shall slide.
The wicked watcheth the righteous,
And seeketh to slay him.
The Lord will not leave him in his hand,
Nor condemn him when he is judged.

Wait on the Lord, and keep his way,
And he shall exalt thee to inherit the land;
When the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it.
I have seen the wicked in great power,
And spreading himself like a green bay tree;
Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not;
Yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.
                                   --From the Thirty-seventh Psalm.



XLVII. CHARACTER OF COLUMBUS. (192)

Washington Irving, 1783-1859. Among those whose works have enriched
American literature, and have given it a place in the estimation of
foreigners, no name stands higher than that of Washington Irving. He was
born in the city of New York; his father was a native of Scotland, and his
mother was English. He had an ordinary school education, and at the age of
sixteen began the study of law. Two of his older brothers were interested
in literary pursuits; and in his youth he studied the old English authors.
He was also passionately fond of books of travel. At the age of nineteen,
he began his literary career by writing for a paper published by his
brother. In 1804 be made a voyage to the south of Europe. On his return he
completed his studies in law, but never practiced his profession.
"Salmagundi," his first book (partly written by others), was published in
1807. This was followed, two years later, by "Knickerbocker's History of
New York." Soon after, he entered into mercantile pursuits in company with
two brothers. At the close at the war with England he sailed again for
Europe, and remained abroad seventeen years. During his absence he formed
the acquaintance of the most eminent literary men of his time, and wrote
several of his works; among them were: "The Sketch Book," "Bracebridge
Hall," "Tales of a Traveler," "Life and Voyages of Columbus," and the
"Conquest of Granada." On his return he made a journey west of the
Mississippi, and gathered materials for several other books. From 1842 to
1846 he was Minister to Spain. On his return to America he established his
residence at "Sunnyside," near Tarrytown, on the Hudson, where he passed
the last years of his life. A young lady to whom he was attached having
died in early life, Mr. Irving never married.

His works are marked by humor, just sentiment, and elegance and
correctness of expression. They were popular both at home and abroad from
the first, and their sale brought him a handsome fortune. The "Life of
Washington," his last work, was completed in the same year in which he
died.
###

[Transcriber's Note: See "The Life of Columbus" by Sir Arthur Helps,]


Columbus was a man of great and inventive genius. The operations of his
mind were energetic, but irregular; bursting forth, at times, with that
irresistible force which characterizes intellect of such an order. His
ambition was lofty and noble, inspiring him with high thoughts and an
anxiety to distinguish himself by great achievements. He aimed at dignity
and wealth in the same elevated spirit with which he sought renown; they
were to rise from the territories he should discover, and be commensurate
in importance.

His conduct was characterized by the grandeur of his views and the
magnanimity of his spirit. Instead of ravaging the newly-found countries,
like many of his cotemporary discoverers, who were intent only on
immediate gain, he regarded them with the eyes of a legislator; he sought
to colonize and cultivate them, to civilize the natives, to build cities,
introduce the useful arts, subject everything to the control of law,
order, and religion, and thus to found regular and prosperous empires.
That he failed in this was the fault of the dissolute rabble which it was
his misfortune to command, with whom all law was tyranny and all order
oppression.

He was naturally irascible and impetuous, and keenly sensible to injury
and injustice; yet the quickness of his temper was counteracted by the
generosity and benevolence of his heart. The magnanimity of his nature
shone forth through all the troubles of his stormy career. Though
continually outraged in his dignity, braved in his authority, foiled in
his plans, and endangered in his person by the seditions of turbulent and
worthless men, and that, too, at times when suffering under anguish of
body and anxiety of mind enough to exasperate the most patient, yet he
restrained his valiant and indignant spirit, and brought himself to
forbear, and reason, and even to supplicate. Nor can the reader of the
story of his eventful life fail to notice how free he was from all feeling
of revenge, how ready to forgive and forget on the least sign of
repentance and atonement. He has been exalted for his skill in controlling
others, but far greater praise is due to him for the firmness he displayed
in governing himself.

His piety was genuine and fervent. Religion mingled with the whole course
of his thoughts and actions, and shone forth in his most private and
unstudied writings. Whenever he made any great discovery he devoutly
returned thanks to God. The voice of prayer and the melody of praise rose
from his ships on discovering the new world, and his first action on
landing was to prostrate himself upon the earth and offer up thanksgiving.
All his great enterprises were undertaken in the name of the Holy Trinity,
and he partook of the holy sacrament previous to embarkation. He observed
the festivals of the church in the wildest situations. The Sabbath was to
him a day of sacred rest, on which he would never sail from a port unless
in case of extreme necessity. The religion thus deeply seated in his soul
diffused a sober dignity and a benign composure over his whole deportment;
his very language was pure and guarded, and free from all gross or
irreverent expressions.

A peculiar trait in his rich and varied character remains to be noticed;
namely, that ardent and enthusiastic imagination which threw a
magnificence over his whole course of thought. A poetical temperament is
discernible throughout all his writings and in all his actions. We see it
in all his descriptions of the beauties of the wild land he was
discovering, in the enthusiasm with which he extolled the blandness of the
temperature, the purity of the atmosphere, the fragrance of the air, "full
of dew and sweetness," the verdure of the forests, the grandeur of the
mountains, and the crystal purity of the running streams. It spread a
glorious and golden world around him, and tinged everything with its own
gorgeous colors.

With all the visionary fervor of his imagination, its fondest dreams fell
short of the reality. He died in ignorance of the real grandeur of his
discovery. Until his last breath, he entertained the idea that he had
merely opened a new way to the old resorts of opulent commerce, and had
discovered some of the wild regions of the East. What visions of glory
would have broken upon his mind could he have known that he had indeed
discovered a new continent equal to the old world in magnitude, and
separated by two vast oceans from all the earth hitherto known by
civilized man! How would his magnanimous spirit have been consoled amid
the afflictions of age and the cares of penury, the neglect of a fickle
public and the injustice of an ungrateful king, could he have anticipated
the splendid empires which would arise in the beautiful world he had
discovered, and the nations, and tongues, and languages which were to fill
its land with his renown, and to revere and bless his name to the latest
posterity!


NOTE.--Christopher Columbus (b. 1436, d. 1506) was the son of a wool
comber of Genoa. At the age of fifteen he became a sailor, and in his
voyages visited England, Iceland, the Guinea coast, and the Greek Isles.
He was an earnest student of navigation, of cosmography, and of books of
travel; thus he thoroughly prepared himself for the great undertaking
which led to the discovery of America. He struggled against every
discouragement for almost ten years before he could persuade a sovereign
to authorize and equip his expedition.



XLVIII. "HE GIVETH HIS BELOVED SLEEP." (195)

Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 1809-1861, was born in London, married
the poet Robert Browning in 1846, and afterwards resided in Italy most of
the time till her death, which occurred at Florence. She was thoroughly
educated in severe and masculine studies, and began to write at a very
early age. Her "Essay on Mind," a metaphysical and reflective poem, was
written at the age of sixteen. She wrote very rapidly, and her friend, Miss
Mitford, tells us that "Lady Geraldine's Courtship," containing ninety-
three stanzas, was composed in twelve hours! She published several other
long poems, "Aurora Leigh" being one of the most highly finished. Mrs.
Browning is regarded as one of the most able female poets of modern
times; but her writings are often obscure, and some have doubted whether
she always clearly conceived what she meant to express. She had a warm
sympathy with all forms of suffering and distress. "He Giveth his Beloved
Sleep" is one of the most beautiful of her minor poems. The thought is an
amplification of verse 2d of Psalm cxxvii.
###


Of all the thoughts of God that are
Borne inward unto souls afar,
  Along the Psalmist's music deep,
Now tell me if that any is,
For gift or grace, surpassing this,--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep!"

What would we give to our beloved?
The hero's heart to be unmoved,
  The poet's star-tuned harp, to sweep,
The patriot's voice, to teach and rouse,
The monarch's crown, to light the brows?--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

What do we give to our beloved?
A little faith all undisproved,
  A little dust to overweep,
And bitter memories to make
The whole earth blasted for our sake,--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

"Sleep soft, beloved!" we sometimes say,
But have no tune to charm away
  Sad dreams that through the eyelids creep.
But never doleful dream again
Shall break his happy slumber when
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

O earth, so full of dreary noises!
O men, with wailing in your voices!
  O delve'd gold, the wailers heap!
O strife, O curse, that o'er it fall!
God strikes a silence through you all,
  And "giveth his beloved, sleep."

His dews drop mutely on the hill;
His cloud above it saileth still,
  Though on its slope men sow and reap.
More softly than the dew is shed,
Or cloud is floated overhead,
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

Ay, men may wonder while they scan
A living, thinking, feeing man,
  Confirmed in such a rest to keep;
But angels say--and through the word
I think their happy smile is heard--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

For me my heart, that erst did go
Most like a tired child at a show,
  That sees through tears the mummers leap,
Would now its wearied vision close,
Would childlike on his love repose
  Who "giveth his beloved, sleep."

And friends, dear friends,--when it shall be
That this low breath is gone from me,
  And round my bier ye come to weep,
Let one most loving of you all
Say, "Not a tear must o'er her fall;
  'He giveth his beloved, sleep.' "



XLIX. DESCRIPTION OF A SIEGE. (197)

"The skirts of the wood seem lined with archers, although only a few are
advanced from its dark shadow." "Under what banner?" asked Ivanhoe. "Under
no ensign which I can observe," answered Rebecca. "A singular novelty,"
muttered the knight, "to advance to storm such a castle without pennon or
banner displayed. Seest thou who they be that act as leaders?" "A knight
clad in sable armor is the most conspicuous," said the Jewess: "he alone
is armed from head to heel, and seems to assume the direction of all
around him."

"Seem there no other leaders?" exclaimed the anxious inquirer. "None of
mark and distinction that I can behold from this station," said Rebecca,
"but doubtless the other side of the castle is also assailed. They seem,
even now, preparing to advance. God of Zion protect us! What a dreadful
sight! Those who advance first bear huge shields and defenses made of
plank: the others follow, bending their bows as they come on. They raise
their bows! God of Moses, forgive the creatures thou hast made!"

Her description was here suddenly interrupted by the signal for assault,
which was given by the blast of a shrill bugle, and at once answered by a
flourish of the Norman trumpets from the battlements, which, mingled with
the deep and hollow clang of the kettledrums, retorted in notes of
defiance the challenge of the enemy. The shouts of both parties augmented
the fearful din, the assailants crying, "Saint George, for merry England!"
and the Normans answering them with loud cries of "Onward, De Bracy! Front
de Boeuf, to the rescue!"

"And I must lie here like a bedridden monk," exclaimed Ivanhoe, "while the
game that gives me freedom or death is played out by the hand of others!
Look from the window once again, kind maiden, and tell me if they yet
advance to the storm." With patient courage, strengthened by the interval
which she had employed in mental devotion, Rebecca again took post at the
lattice, sheltering herself, however, so as not to be exposed to the
arrows of the archers. "What dost thou see, Rebecca?" again demanded the
wounded knight. "Nothing but the cloud of arrows flying so thick as to
dazzle mine eyes, and to hide the bowmen who shoot them." "That can not
endure," said Ivanhoe. "If they press not right on, to carry the castle by
force of arms, the archery may avail but little against stone walls and
bulwarks. Look for the knight in dark armor, fair Rebecca, and see how he
bears himself; for as the leader is, so will his followers be."

"I see him not," said Rebecca. "Foul craven!" exclaimed Ivanhoe; "does he
blench from the helm when the wind blows highest?" "He blenches not! he
blenches not!" said Rebecca; "I see him now: he leads a body of men close
under the outer barrier of the barbacan. They pull down the piles and
palisades; they hew down the barriers with axes. His high black plume
floats abroad over the throng like a raven over the field of the slain.
They have made a breach in the barriers, they rush in, they are thrust
back! Front de Boeuf heads the defenders. I see his gigantic form above
the press. They throng again to the breach, and the pass is disputed, hand
to hand, and man to man. God of Jacob! it is the meeting of two fierce
tides, the conflict of two oceans moved by adverse winds;" and she turned
her head from the window as if unable longer to endure a sight so
terrible.

Speedily recovering her self-control, Rebecca again looked forth, and
almost immediately exclaimed, "Holy prophets of the law! Front de Boeuf
and the Black Knight fight hand to hand on the breach, amid the roar of
their followers, who watch the progress of the strife. Heaven strike with
the cause of the oppressed and of the captive!" She then uttered a loud
shriek, and exclaimed, "He is down! he is down!" "Who is down!" cried
Ivanhoe; "for our dear Lady's sake, tell me which has fallen!" "The Black
Knight," answered Rebecca, faintly; then instantly again shouted with
joyful eagerness--"But no! but no! the name of the Lord of Hosts be
blessed! he is on foot again, and fights as if there were twenty men's
strength in his single arm--his sword is broken--he snatches an ax from a
yeoman--he presses Front de Boeuf, blow on blow--the giant stoops and
totters like an oak under the steel of the woodman--he falls-he falls!"
"Front de Boeuf?" exclaimed Ivanhoe. "Front de Boeuf," answered the
Jewess; "his men rush to the rescue, headed by the haughty Templar,
--their united force compels the champion to pause--they drag Front de
Boeuf within the walls."

"The assailants have won the barriers, have they not?" said Ivanhoe. "They
have--they have--and they press the besieged hard upon the outer wall;
some plant ladders, some swarm like bees, and endeavor to ascend upon the
shoulders of each other; down go stones, beams, and trunks of trees upon
