at that time, to an abrupt close.



CHAPTER TWO.

TERRIBLE DISCOVERIES AND ALTERED PLANS.

"Ho!" ejaculated Swiftarrow.

"Smoke!" exclaimed Reuben Guff.

Both men spoke at the same moment,--their discovery having been
simultaneous.  At the same time Lawrence pointed with the blade of his
paddle to a thin line of smoke which rose above the tree-tops into the
blue sky, and was faithfully mirrored in the lake on which they floated.

"Injins!" said Reuben, resting his steering paddle across the canoe for
a few seconds.

Swiftarrow assented with another "Ho," and Lawrence moved his gun into a
handy position to be ready for an emergency; but there was no other sign
of man's presence than the wreath of smoke.  All was perfectly silent.
The air too was quite still, and the surface of the lake resembled a
sheet of glass.

"Strange," observed Reuben, "red-skins ain't usually so shy.  If they
mean mischief they don't ever let smoke be seen, an' when they don't
mean mischief they generally show themselves.  Come, push on, lads;
we'll go see what's i' the wind."

"I'll show them the muzzle, father," said Lawrence, laying down his
paddle and taking up his gun: "it may be well to let 'em see that we
have arms."

"No need for that, boy.  If they know anything at all, they know that
white men don't go about in the wilderness empty-handed.  Put down the
piece, and use your paddle."

Thus reproved, Lawrence flushed slightly, but obeyed the order and
resumed paddling.

In a few minutes they were on shore.  Still all was silent as the grave.
Hauling the bow of the canoe on the beach to keep it fast, the three
men took their weapons, and, entering the woods in single file, walked
cautiously but swiftly in the direction of the smoke.  They soon reached
the spot, and the scene which met their eyes was one which, while it
accounted for the silence that reigned around, filled their minds with
sadness and horror.

In an open space, where a number of trees had been cut down, stood about
a dozen skin tents or Indian lodges, some with the curtain-doors closed,
others open, exposing the interiors, on the floors of which the dead
bodies of Indian men, women, and children, lay in every attitude and in
all stages of decomposition.  Outside of the tents other corpses lay
strewn on the ground, and most of these bore evidence of having been
more or less torn by wolves.  The travellers knew at a glance that these
unfortunate people had fallen before that terrible disease, small-pox,
which had recently attacked and almost depopulated several districts of
the Indian country.

How the disease was introduced among the Indians at the time of which we
write, it is impossible to say and useless to conjecture.  The fact of
its desolating effects is unquestionable.  One who dwelt in the country
at the time writes: [See Sir Alexander Mackenzie's _Voyages_, page 14.]
"The fatal infection spread around with a baneful rapidity which no
flight could escape, and with a fatal effect that nothing could resist.
It destroyed with its pestilential breath whole families and tribes; and
the horrid scene presented, to those who had the melancholy opportunity
of beholding it, a combination of the dead, the dying, and such as, to
avoid the fate of their friends around them, prepared to disappoint the
plague of its prey by terminating their own existence.  To aggravate the
picture, if aggravation were possible, the carcases were dragged forth
from the huts by the wolves, or were mangled within them by the dogs,
which thus sought to satisfy their hunger with the putrid remains of
their masters.  It was not uncommon at this time for the father of a
family, whom the infection had not reached, to call his household around
him, represent the terrible sufferings and fate that awaited them, which
he believed was owing to the influence of an evil spirit who desired to
extirpate the race, and incited them to baffle death with all its
horrors by at once killing themselves--at the same time offering to
perform the deed of mercy with his own hand if their hearts should fail
them."

That some of the dead before our pioneers had acted in this way was
evident, for while most of the corpses bore marks of having been smitten
with the disease, others were there which showed nothing to account for
death save a knife wound over the region of the heart.

It was a sad and sickening sight, and drew forth one or two low-toned
sorrowful remarks from Reuben, as he moved slowly towards the tent from
which smoke still issued.

The three men paused before it because a sound came from within, and
they felt reluctant to disturb the awful silence.  The pause, however,
was but momentary.  Reuben lifted the covering and opened it wide.  A
small fire still burned on the hearth in the centre of the lodge; around
it lay the bodies of dead men, women, and children.  Only one figure,
that of an old woman, remained in a half-reclining position, but she was
motionless, and they thought her dead also.  This, however, was not the
case.  The flood of light which streamed in on her appeared to rouse
her, for she raised her grey head, and, gazing anxiously at the figures
which darkened the entrance of the lodge, asked in a tremulous voice:
"Is that you, my son?"

"No, mother, but it is a friend," said Swiftarrow, who understood her
language.

"A friend," repeated the old woman, shaking her head slowly, "I don't
want a friend.  The Master of Life is my friend.  My people said that an
evil spirit was slaying them; but I know better.  It was the Great
Spirit who came to us.  We have been very wicked.  We needed punishment.
But why has He spared me?  I was the worst of them all."

There was something terrible in the tone and manner in which this was
uttered, as if the breast of the speaker were torn with conflicting
feelings.

"She must have met wi' the missionaries some time or other," whispered
Reuben.

"Is the old woman the only one of all the tribe left alive?" asked
Swiftarrow.

"Ay, the only one--no, not the _only_ one; my son is yet alive.  He went
to set a bear-trap not _very_ long since; but he should have come back
before now.  He will be back soon."

The deep sigh which followed proved that the poor old woman was hoping
against hope.

"How long is't since he left you, mother?" asked Lawrence eagerly.

"Two suns have risen and set since he left, and he had not far to go."

"Father, I'll go seek for this man," said Lawrence; "something may have
befallen him."

Reuben made no objection, and the youth set off immediately in a
direction which was pointed out by the old woman.

After he was gone his father and the Indian shifted one of the cleanest
looking of the empty tents to a considerable distance from the spot
where the terrible work of death had been done, and removing the old
woman from the neighbourhood of the pestilential atmosphere, placed her
therein, kindled a fire and cooked her a little food, of which she
evidently stood much in need.

Meanwhile Lawrence sped through the pathless forest with the light step
of a strong youth and the precision of a practised hunter.  About four
miles from the Indian camp he came upon the track of a bear, the
footprints of which proved that it was an unusually large one.  He
followed it up closely, and was led by it to a spot where some trees had
been cut down, and not far from which he saw what appeared to him to be
the remains of a trap.  Almost at the same moment of his making this
discovery he heard a growl, and saw the bear itself--a monster of the
brown species, which differs from the ordinary black bear of America in
being more carnivorous and much larger, as well as more savage and bold.
No sooner did it see the youth than it rushed upon him with great fury.
A piece of broken line was drawn tight round its neck, and another
piece round its fore-leg, while four arrows stuck in its shoulder and
side, showing plainly that it had broken loose from a snare and had been
attacked by man.  But Lawrence had no time to think on these things.  He
had barely time to throw forward and cock his gun when the bear was upon
him.  It rose on its hind-legs, and in doing so towered high above the
youth, who, whatever his feelings might have been, looked undismayed.
With an unflinching eye he took aim at the monster's heart, and shot it
dead.  So close was it to him that he singed the hair on its breast and
had to leap to one side to avoid being struck as it fell.

Reloading quickly, the young hunter advanced towards the trap, where his
worst fears were realised, for near to it he found the body of an Indian
torn limb from limb, and mostly eaten, except the head, which remained
entire.  It was evident that the poor man, having set several snares for
bears, had gone to visit them, and found this brown bear caught by the
head and leg.  He seemed to have tried to kill it with arrows, but must
have been afraid to go near enough to use his weapons with effect, and
the enraged animal, having broken the snare, flew upon him and tore him
to pieces.

Brown bears of this kind are very powerful.  One traveller in these
regions saw the footprints of a large one, which, having seized a
moose-deer in a river, dragged it for a quarter of a mile along the
sandy banks, and afterwards devoured it all except part of the
hind-quarters; and the moose which had been treated in this
unceremonious way, judging from the size and hardness of the bones, must
have been upwards of a year old, when it would weigh as much as an ox of
the same age.

Collecting the scattered remnants of the unfortunate Indian, who was no
other than the old woman's son, Lawrence covered them over with leaves
and sticks.  He then skinned the bear and cut off its claws, which he
carried away as trophies, along with one or two choice steaks cut from
the creature's flank.  He also collected the weapons and part of the
dress of the Indian, with which he returned to the camp.

"Heyday!  Lawrence, what have you got there, lad?" said Reuben, as his
son came up and threw the bundle on the ground.

"A brown bear, father."

"Well done!" exclaimed Reuben, with a look of pride, for although his
son had shot many a black bear in the forest, he had never before stood
face to face with such a monster as that whose skin and claws now lay at
his feet.

"It would have been well, father," said Lawrence gravely, "if the man
who first saw this had owned a gun.  His arrows were no better than
needles in such a hide.  See here!"

He drew from his breast the bloody portions of dress which had belonged
to the slaughtered Indian.

"The son of the old woman has gone to the happy hunting-grounds," said
Swiftarrow, referring to the heaven of the Indian, as he lifted and
examined the dress.

"Ay, ay," said Reuben sadly, "'tis the chances of the wilderness.  You'd
better tell the poor old creetur', Swiftarrow; you understand her ways
and lingo better than me."

Silently the Indian went to the old woman, and laid the bloody garments
before her.  At first she did not understand what had happened.
Suddenly the truth flashed upon her, and she looked quickly up into the
grave countenance of the Indian, but death and sorrow appeared to have
already done their worst on her, for she neither spoke nor wept for some
time.  She took up the shreds of cloth and turned them over tenderly;
but neither sign nor groan escaped her.  Evidently she had been already
so stunned by the horrors which had surrounded her for some time, that
this additional blow did not tell--at least, not at first--but Reuben
observed, while trying to comfort her some time afterwards, that a few
tears were coursing slowly down her withered cheeks.

That night, round the camp-fire, the pioneers held earnest counsel, and
resolved, sadly but firmly, that their projected journey must be given
up for that season.

"It's a hard thing to do," said Reuben, as he lay at full length before
the fire after supper, "to give up our plans after comin' so far; but it
ain't possible to carry that old 'ooman along with us an' it's not to be
thought of to leave her behind to starve, so there's nothin' for it but
to go back an' take her wi' us to the settlements.  I would feel like a
murderer if I was to leave one o' God's creeturs to perish in the
wilderness.  What think you, Lawrence?"

"I think you are right, father," replied the youth, with a deep sigh.

"An' what says Swiftarrow?"

"Go back," was the Indian's prompt and laconic answer.

"Well, then, we're all agreed, so we'll turn back on our trail
to-morrow; but I shall try again next year if I'm above ground.  I once
know'd a Yankee who had what he called a motto, an' it was this, `Never
give in, 'xcept w'en yer wrong.'  I think I'll take to that motto.  It
seems to me a good 'un."

In proof, we presume, of his sincerity, Reuben Guff rolled himself in
his blanket, stretched his feet towards the fire, pillowed his head on a
bundle of moss, and at once _gave in_ to the seductive influences of
sleep; an example which was so irresistible that his companions followed
it without delay.



CHAPTER THREE.

INTRODUCES THE KING OF PIONEERS.

Discarding space and ignoring time, we seize you by the hand, reader,
and bound away with you still deeper into the northern wilderness, away
into that remote region which, at the time we write of, was the _ultima
thule_ of the fur-traders of Canada,--beyond which lay the great unknown
world, stretching to the pole.  Here, amid the grand scenery of the
Rocky Mountains, lies the Athabasca Lake, also styled the Lake of the
Hills.  We prefer the latter name, as being more romantic.

This is no pretty pond such as we in England are wont to visit and
delight in during our summer holidays.  It is a great sheet of water; a
grand fresh-water sea, 200 miles long and 15 miles broad--a fitting gem
for the bosom of the mighty region on which it glitters.

A year has fled since the period of our last chapter, and here, in a
birch-bark canoe on the waters of the Lake of the Hills, we find our
pioneers--Reuben Guff, his son Lawrence, and his Indian friend
Swiftarrow.  There is also a young Indian woman in the canoe--
Swiftarrow's wife.

The kind-hearted red man adopted the old woman who had been rescued on
their previous trip, but, not finding her a good substitute for his own
mother, he bethought him of adding a young squaw to his establishment.
While he meditated on this step, the old woman died.  About the same
time Reuben Guff made proposals to him to join him on a second "v'yage
of diskivery."  The Indian agreed; got married off-hand, and took his
bride along with him.  We now find them all four at the Lake of the
Hills.

It may be as well to observe, in passing, that Indian brides are usually
more robust than those of civilised communities.  They are quite
competent to follow their lords on the most arduous canoe voyages, and,
besides being able to wield the paddle with great dexterity, are
exceedingly useful in managing what may be styled the domestic matters
of the camp.  They also keep up a constant supply of the Indian's
indispensable foot-gear--moccasins--which are so slender in their nature
that a pair may be completely worn-out in a single day of hard hunting.

The brown bride, therefore, was not a hindrance to the party, but a
useful member of it, as well as a pleasant companion.  True, her
companionship consisted chiefly in answering "yes" and "no" when spoken
