
"When the country-folk got to the house, they found nothing in it but a
small heap of corn; so they fell upon the gipsy and half killed him for
having brought them on a fool's errand. Then they divided what little
corn there was left, and went away.

"As to the mice they were left to whistle for their food.

"So ends the tale of the Hens of Hencastle."

"And a very fine tale too," said one of the stranger-hens who had been
asleep all the time, and woke up with a jump. "It was deeply
interesting." The threshers happened to have stopped to rest for a
moment, or she would never have woke at all.

"Of course it was!" said the cock, full of dignity; and he shook his
feathers straight.

"But what became of the fowls afterwards?" asked one of the common hens.

"I never tell a hen a secret," said the cock; and he strutted off to
hunt for worms.




FLAPS.

A SEQUEL TO "THE HENS OF HENCASTLE."



And what became of Flaps after they all left Hencastle? Well, he led his
company on and on, but they could find no suitable place to settle in;
and when the fowls recovered from their fright, they began to think that
they had abandoned the castle too hastily, and to lay the blame on
Flaps.

Mark himself said that he might have overestimated the number of the
invaders. There might not have been twenty-three, but really Flaps was
in such a hurry for the news, and one must say something when it was
one's duty to make a report.

The three wise cocks objected to speak of themselves or their services,
but they had had some experience on behalf of the community in times of
danger, and in their opinion there had been a panic, and the hasty
action taken by Flaps was injudicious and regrettable.

The oldest hen of Hencastle shook her feathers to show how much Flaps
was in the wrong, and then puffed them out to show how much she was in
the right; and after clearing her throat almost as if she were going to
crow, she observed very shrilly that she "didn't care who contradicted
her when she said that the common sense of the Mother of a Family was
enough to tell _her_ that an old dog, who had lost an eye and an ear and
a leg, was no fit protector for the feminine and the young and the
inexperienced."

The chief cock was not so free of his opinions as the chief hen, but he
grumbled and scolded about everything, by which one may make matters
amply unpleasant without committing oneself or incurring responsibility.

Another of the hens made a point of having no opinion. She said that was
her way, she trusted everybody alike and bore her share of suffering,
which was seldom small, without a murmur. But her good wishes were
always at any one's service, and she would say that she sincerely hoped
that a sad injustice had not been done to the red-haired gentleman with
the singularly agreeable manners, who would have been gatekeeper of
Hencastle at this moment if it had not been for Flaps.

Poor Flaps! Well might he say, "One ear is enough to listen to you with,
you pack of ungrateful fools!"

He was beginning to find out that, as a rule, the Helpless have a nice
way with them of flinging all their cares upon the Helpful, and
reserving their own energies to pick holes in what is done on their
behalf; and that they are apt to flourish, in good health and poor
spirits, long after such friends as Flaps have been worn out, bit by
bit, in their service.

"First an eye, then an ear, then a leg," the old dog growled to himself;
"and there's not a fowl with a feather out of him. But I've done my
duty, and that's enough."

Matters went from bad to worse. The hens had no corn, and Flaps got no
eggs, and the prospect of either home or food seemed very remote. One
evening it was very rainy, the fowls roosted in a walnut-tree for
shelter, and Flaps fell asleep at the foot of it.

"Could anything be more aggravating than that creature's indifference?"
said Hen No. 2. "Here we sit, wet to the skin, and there he lies asleep!
Dear me! I remember one of my neck feathers got awry once, at dear old
Hencastle (the pencilling has been a good deal admired in my time,
though I say it that shouldn't), and the Red-haired Gentleman noticed it
in a moment. I remember he put his face as close to mine as I am to you,
but in the most gentlemanly manner, and murmured so softly,

"'Excuse me--there's just one of those lovely little feathers the least
bit in the world--'

"I believe it was actually between his lips, when we were interrupted,
and I had to put it tidy myself. But we might all be plucked as bare as
poor young Scratchfoot before Flaps would think of smoothing us down.
Just hear how he snores! Ah! it's a trying world, but I never complain."

"I do, though," said the chief hen. "I'm not one to put up with neglect.
Hi, there! are you asleep?" And scratching a bit of the rough bark off
the walnut-tree, she let it drop on to Flaps' nose.

"I'm awake," said Flaps; "what's the matter?"

"I never knew any one snore when he was awake before," said the hen; and
all the young cockerels chuckled.

"Well, I believe I was napping," said Flaps. "Damp weather always makes
me sleepy, and I was dreaming of the old farmyard."

"Poor old farm!" sighed Hen No. 2. "We had board and lodging there, at
any rate."

"And now we've neither," said Hen No. 1. "Mr. Flaps, do you know that
we're wet to the skin, and dying of starvation, whilst you put your nose
into your great-coat pocket and go to sleep?"

"You're right," said Flaps. "Something must be done this evening. But I
see no use in taking the whole community about in the rain. We will send
out another expedition."

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" screamed the three wise ones; "that means that
we're to face the storm whilst you have another nap, eh?"

"It seems an odd thing," said the chief cock, scratching his comb with
his claw, "that Flaps never thinks of going himself on these
expeditions."

"You're right," said Flaps. "It is an odd thing, for times out of mind
I've heard our old friend, the farmer, say, 'If you want a thing
done--Go; if not--Send.' This time I shall go. Cuddle close to each
other, and keep up your spirits. I'll find us a good home yet."

The fowls were much affected by Flaps' magnanimity, and with one voice
they cried: "Thank you, dear Flaps. Whatever you decide upon will do for
us."

And Mark added, "I will continue to act as watchman." And he went up to
the top of the tree as Flaps trotted off down the muddy road.

All that evening and far into the night it rained and rained, and the
fowls cuddled close to each other to keep warm, and Flaps did not
return. In the small hours of the morning the rain ceased, and the
rain-clouds drifted away, and the night-sky faded and faded till it was
dawn.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" said Mark, and all the fowls woke up.

"What do you see and hear from the tree-top, dear Mark?" said they. "Is
Flaps coming?"

    "Not a thing can I see
    From the top of the tree,
    But a long, winding lane
    That is sloppy with rain;"

replied Mark. And the fowls huddled together again, and put their heads
back under their wings.

Paler and paler grew the grey sky, and at last it was broken with golden
bars, and at the first red streak that caught fire behind them, Mark
crowed louder than before, and all the hens of Hencastle roused up for
good.

"What do you see and hear from the tree-top, dear Mark?" they inquired.
"Is Flaps coming?"

    "Not a sound do I hear,
    And I very much fear
    That Flaps, out of spite,
    Has deserted us quite;"

replied Mark. And the fowls said nothing, for they were by no means at
ease in their consciences.

Their delight was proportionably great when, a few minutes later, the
sentinel sang out from his post,

    "Here comes Flaps, like the mail!
    And he's waving his tail."

"Well, dear, dear Flaps!" they all cackled as he came trotting up,
"where is our new home, and what is it like?"

"Will there be plenty to eat?" asked the cocks with one crow.

"Plenty," replied Flaps.

"Shall we be safe from mice, owls, wild beasts, and wild men?" cried the
hens.

"You will," answered Flaps.

"Is it far, dear Flaps?"

"It is very near," said Flaps; "but I may as well tell you the truth at
once--it's a farmyard."

"Oh!--" said all the fowls.

"We may be roasted, or have our heads chopped off," whimpered the young
cockerels.

"Well, Scratchfoot was roasted at Hencastle," said Flaps; "and he wasn't
our only loss. One can't have everything in this world; and I assure
you, if you could see the poultry-yard--so dry under foot, nicely wired
in from marauders; the most charming nests, with fresh hay in them;
drinking-troughs; and then at regular intervals, such abundance of corn,
mashed potatoes, and bones, that my own mouth watered at--are served
out--"

"That sounds good," said the young cockerels.

"Ahem! ahem!" said the chief cock. "Did you see anything very
remarkable--were the specimens of my race much superior in strength and
good looks?----"

"My dear cock!" said Flaps; "there's not a tail or a comb or a hackle to
touch you. You'll be cock of the walk in no time."

"Ahem! ahem!" said the chief cock modestly. "I have always had a sort of
fatality that way. Pray, my dears, don't look so foolish and deplorable,
but get the young people together, and let us make a start. Mr. Flaps is
a person of strong common sense, a quality for which I myself have
always been remarkable, and I thoroughly endorse and support his
excellent advice, of which I am the best judge. I have very much
regretted of late to observe a tendency in this family (I say a
tendency, for I hope it goes no further) to undervalue Mr. Flaps, and
even (I hardly like to allude to such reprehensible and disgusting
absurdity) to recall the memory of a vulgar red-haired impostor, who
gained a brief entrance into our family circle. I am not consulted as I
should be in these fluctuations of opinion, but there are occasions when
it is necessary that the head of a family should exercise his discretion
and his authority, and, so to speak, put down his claw. I put down my
claw. We are going to Mr. Flaps' farmyard. Cock-a-doodle-doo
Cock-a-doodle-doo!"

Now, when the head of a family says "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" there is
nothing more to be said. So to the farmyard the whole lot of them went,
and were there before the sun got one golden hair of his head over the
roof of the big barn.

And only Mark, as they all crowded into their new home, turned his head
round over his back to say: "And you, Flaps; what shall you do?"

"Oh, I shall be all right," said Flaps. "Good-bye and good luck to you."

It cannot be said that Flaps was positively in high spirits when he had
settled his proteges in their new home in the farmyard, and was left
alone; but there are some good folk who contrive to make duty do the
work of pleasure in this life, and then a piece of business fairly
finished is as good as a treat.

It is not bread and bones, however, and Flaps was very hungry--so hungry
that he could not resist the temptation to make his way towards the
farmhouse, on the chance of picking up some scraps outside. And that was
how it came about, that when the farmer's little daughter Daisy, with a
face like the rosy side of a white-heart cherry set deep in a lilac
print hood, came back from going with the dairy lass to fetch up the
cows, she found Flaps snuffing at the back door, and she put her arms
round his neck (they reached right round with a little squeezing) and
said:

"Oh, I never knew you'd be here so early! You nice thing!"

And Flaps' nose went right into the print hood, and he put out his
tongue and licked Daisy's face from the point of her chin up her right
cheek to her forehead, and then from her forehead down her left cheek
back to her chin, and he found that she was a very nice thing too.

But the dairymaid screamed, "Good gracious! where did that nasty strange
dog come from? Leave him alone, Miss Daisy, or he'll bite your nose
off."

"He won't!" said Daisy indignantly. "He's the dog Daddy promised me;"
and the farmer coming out at that minute, she ran up to him crying,
"Daddy! Isn't this my dog?"

"Bless the child, no!" said the farmer; "it's a nice little pup I'm
going to give thee. Where did that dirty old brute come from?"

"He would wash," said little Daisy, holding very fast to Flaps' coat.

"Fine washing too!" said the dairymaid, "And his hair's all lugs."

"I could comb them," said Daisy.

"He's no but got one eye," said the swineherd. "Haw! haw! haw!"

"He sees me with the other," said Daisy. "He's looking up at me now."

"And one of his ears gone!" cried the dairy lass. "He! he! he!"

"Perhaps I could make him a cap," said Daisy, "as I did when my doll
lost her wig. It had pink ribbons and looked very nice."

