The local tornado that so frequently plays havoc with property and life
in the West is, like the cyclone, a revolving force, but it carries
with it a variety of phenomena wholly distinct from those that
accompany the larger storm.  Many of the effects of one tornado are
wholly absent in others, and the indications that in one case have been
followed by a terrible disaster are not infrequently found at other
times to presage merely a heavy thunder shower.

The freaks of a tornado are wholly unaccountable.  In some cases not an
object in its track will fail to feel its power for long distances; in
other instances it will seem to act like a cannon-ball that plows up
the earth on striking, then rises and strikes again, leaving the space
between untouched.  Sometimes it will go through a forest leveling the
trees as though a gang of axemen had plied their tools on lines laid
out by surveyors, nothing outside the track being touched; but again in
similar windfalls there will be found occasional pockets scored in the
forest growth jutting off the right line, like small lagoons opening
into a flowing stream.  These seem to have been caused by a sort of
attendant whirlwind--a baby offspring from the main monster, which,
having sprung away from the chief disturbance, scoops a hole in the
woods and then expires or rejoins the original movement.

I have seen one of the most violent and, so to speak, compressed of
these storms, cut a road through thick woods so that at a distance the
edges stood out clear and sharp against the sky as would those of a
railway cutting through earth.  Trees standing at the edge of the track
had their branches clean swept one side while on the other there was no
perceptible disturbance of the foliage.

Sometimes the tornado acts like an enormous scoop, catching up every
movable thing and sweeping it miles away: and again it becomes a
depositor, as if, tired of carrying so much dead weight, it dumped it
upon the earth preparatory to grabbing up a new cargo.  These effects
are particularly noticeable in the tornado that goes by jumps.  When it
strikes and absorbs a mass of debris it seems to spring up again like a
projectile that grazes the surface.  For a space there will be a very
high wind and some damage, but no such disaster as the tornado has
previously wrought.  Out of the clouds will come occasional heavy
missiles and deluges of water.  Then down goes the tornado again
crashing and scattering by its own force and adding to its destructive
power by a battery of timbers and other objects brought along from the
previous impact.  Relieved of these masses, it again gathers up
miscellaneous movables and repeats its previous operation.

The force with which these objects strike is best seen when they fall
outside of the tornado's path, since the work done by the missile is
not then disturbed by the general destructive force of the storm.
Thus, near Racine, Wis., I have known an ordinary fence rail, slightly
sharpened on one end, to be driven against a young tree like a spear
and pierce it several feet.  The velocity of the rail must have been
something enormous, or otherwise the rail would have glanced from such
a round and elastic object.

Many of the settlers in the tornado districts of Southern Minnesota,
Iowa, Kansas, and Nebraska excavate a deep cellar beneath their houses
and cover it with heavy timbers as a place of refuge for their families
when a tornado threatens to strike them.  While these dugouts are
usually effective, they are not always so.  There have been instances
where families having only time to descend and not time enough to close
the trap door have been exposed to the storm's full fury by the tornado
getting into the opening and lifting off the whole roof after having
first swept away the house above.  Another pathetic case resulted in
the death of a whole family by an extraordinary freak of the tornado.
The storm first struck a large pond and swept up all the water in it.
Its next plunge deposited this water on one of these dugouts, and the
family were drowned like chipmunks in a hole.

Some of the western tornadoes are accompanied by electrical
manifestations to an extent that has originated a belief in electricity
as their cause.  These disturbances are very marked in some cases,
while in others they have not been noticed.  In one tornado in Central
Illinois electricity played very peculiar antics not only in the
tornado's track, but also at some distance from it.  In the ruined
houses all the iron work was found to have been strongly magnetized, so
that pokers, flatirons and other metal objects were found adhering to
each other.  Just off the tornado's track the same effects were
noticed, and several persons experienced sharp electric shocks during
the passage of the storm.  Afterward it was found that the magnetic
influence was so strong that clocks and watches were stopped and
rendered wholly useless.

The scooping action of the tornado sometimes makes considerable changes
in the topography of the country, as when it gathers up the water of a
large pond or water course and makes a new pond or opens a new channel.
At Wallingford the water in a pond of very large size was taken bodily
from its bed, carried up a hill and dropped nearly in one mass, so that
gullies and ravines were cut in every direction.

There is a divide in Northeastern Illinois between streams flowing into
Lake Michigan and those running to the Mississippi.  So level is a
portion of the land on the summit, and so slight the elevation above
the lake, that in wet seasons the surface-water seems almost as willing
to go one way as the other; and on one occasion the upper streams of
the Desplaines River were nearly permanently diverted toward the lake
by a tornado that gathered up the water and scored the surface in its
track toward the east.

Many are the stories told of the way in which objects are carried away
by the wind and left in strange places.  In one Illinois tornado two
children and an infant were caught up.  The dead bodies of the children
were found only a few hundred feet distant, but the infant was picked
up alive more than a mile away from the spot where the tornado swept
the children up.  An accordion that must have come a long distance--for
it was never claimed--was found so entangled in the branches of a tree
that it was alternately pulled apart and pressed together by the wind,
thus creating such weird and uncanny music during a whole night that an
already sufficiently scared settlement of negroes were kept in a state
of frantic dismay until daylight revealed the cause.

In another case a farmer who followed the tornado's track in search of
missing cattle was astonished to discover one of his cows lodged about
twenty feet above the ground in the branches of a half-stripped maple.

"I allers knew that was an active heifer," he remarked, as he came in
sight of her hanging over the slanting limb, "but I never allowed she
could climb a tree."




LOST IN A BLIZZARD.

If I were given my choice between a visit from a cyclone or a blizzard,
I would unhesitatingly choose the former.  True, there is no resisting
its terrific power, and a man caught in its embrace is as helpless as a
child when seized by a Bengal tiger; but there is a chance of escape,
and the whole thing is over in a few minutes.  You may be lifted into
the air and dropped with only a few broken bones, or, by plunging into
a "cyclone pit," the fury of the sky may glide harmlessly over your
head; but in the case of a blizzard, however, let me tell you the one
woeful experience of my life.

The snow fell steadily for two days and nights, and looking out from my
home in western Kansas I saw that it lay fully three feet on a level.
By a strange providence my wife, who had been my brave and faithful
helper for several years, was away on a visit to her friends in Topeka,
and my only companion was my servant Jack, a middle-aged African, who
in his youth was a slave in Kentucky.

Things had not gone well with us of late.  The grasshoppers and drought
played the mischief with out crops, and it was a question with me for
months whether the wisest course to take was not to throw up my hands,
let everything go to the bow-wows and, in the dry-goods firm, that I
knew was returning to St. Louis, resume my situation still open for me.
A man hates to confess himself beaten, and I decided to remain where I
was one more year.  Then, if there was no improvement, I would turn my
back on Kansas forever.

"Master Thomas," said Jack, as the dismal December afternoon drew to a
close, "thar isn't a pound ob flour in de house.  Shall I go to de
village and get some?"

"No; I will go myself."

It was the sudden realization of the unutterable loneliness I would
feel without any companion that led me to this rash declaration.  The
town was only a mile distant, but it would require hours to make the
journey there and back, and I could not bear the thought of being
without the society of any one for that time.  I had read everything in
the house; the single horse and cow I owned had been looked after, and
there was absolutely nothing to do but to sit down before the scant
fire, listen to the sifting of the snow against the window panes, and
give way to gloomy reverie.

Anything was preferable to this, and it was with a feeling akin to
relief that I added:

"I might do so had I not noticed this afternoon that he had gone lame."

"Better let de flour go, den, for de snow am too deep and de storm to
heavy for you to tramp all de way to town and back again."

"No; while I haven't much fear of our starving, yet, if the snow-fall
continues, we shall be in a bad way.  I can carry twenty-five pounds
without trouble, and will be back in a few hours; then the storm may
rage as hard as it pleases, for all we care."

The preparations were quickly made, and, to shorten my story, I may say
that, after a laborious tramp, I reached the village without mishap,
bought my quarter of a hundred of flour, slung it over my shoulder, and
started on my return.

By this time I had made several disquieting discoveries.  The snow was
falling faster than ever, the cold was increasing, a gale was blowing,
and, under the circumstances, of course there was not a glimmer of
light in the sky.  My course was directly across the prairie, and in
the event of my tracks being obliterated by the snow--as was almost
certain to be the case--it was almost impossible for me to prevent
myself from going astray.

My hope lay in Jack's promise that he would keep a bright light burning
in the upper story to guide me on my course.  On a clear night this
light was visible from the village, but somehow or other I failed to
take into account the state of the weather.  The air was full of
eddying flakes, which would render the headlight of a locomotive
invisible a hundred yards distant.  Strange that this important fact
never occurred to me until I was fully a fourth of a mile from the
village.  Then, after looking in vain for the beacon light, the danger
of my situation struck me, and I halted.

"I am certain to go wrong," I said to myself.

"It is out of my power to follow a direct course without something to
serve as a compass.  I will go back to the village and wait till
morning."

Wheeling about in my tracks, I resumed my wearisome tramp through the
heavy snow, and kept it up until I was certain I had travelled fully a
fourth of a mile.  Then when I paused a moment and gazed ahead and
around, I was confronted by blank darkness on every hand.  What a proof
of a man's tendency to go wrong, that in aiming at a village of fifty
dwellings, and only a fourth of a mile away, I had missed it altogether!

This discovery gave me my first thrill of real alarm.  I shouted, but
my voice fell dead in the snowy air.  The gale was blowing more
furiously than ever, and the cold was so intense that it penetrated my
thick clothing and caused my teeth to rattle together!

"You can be of no use to me," I exclaimed, flinging away the small bag
of flour.  "The village can't be far off, and I will find it."

Determined to retain my self-possession, I made a careful calculation
of the proper course to follow, and plunged into my work with more
vigor than ever.  I continually glanced up in quest of the flickering
lights, and listened, in the hope of hearing some sound that could
guide me, but nothing of the kind was seen or heard, and it was not
long before the terrible truth burst upon me that I was lost.

Aye, and lost in a blizzard!  The wind had risen almost to a hurricane;
the cold cut through the thickest clothing, and  the snow struck my
face like the prick of millions of needles.  I shouted again, but,
convinced that it was a useless waste of strength, I soon ceased.

It was certain death to remain motionless, and almost equally fatal to
push on; but there _was_ a possibility that I might strike the right
direction, and anything was preferable to remaining idle.  And so, with
a desperation akin to despair, I threw all the vigor at my command into
my benumbed limbs, and bent every possible energy to the life and death
task before me.

The sleet drove against my cheeks with such spiteful and penetrating
fierceness that I could make no use of my eyes, I could only bend my
head to the blast and labor through the snow, praying that Providence
would guide my footsteps in the right direction.

I was plodding forward in this heavy, aimless fashion when I noticed
that the violence of the gale was drifting the snow.  Sometimes I would
strike a space of several yards where it did not reach to my ankles.
Then I would suddenly lurch into a wall that reached to my shoulders.
After wallowing through this, I might strike a shallow portion again,
where, while walking quite briskly, a windrow of snow would be hurled
against my breast and face with such fury as to force me backward and
off my feet.

Bracing myself, I waited until there was a sufficient lull in the
blizzard for me to make some use of my eyes.  I blinked and peered
toward the different points of the compass, but without catching the
first twinkle of light.

"I am lost--lost--" I moaned; "there is no help for me!"

An extraordinary collapse must have come over me, for my senses seemed
to forsake me on the instant.  I went down in the eddying, blinding
snow, and knew no more.

At the moment of giving way I was less than a hundred yards from the
easternmost house of the village.  My despairing cry was heard, and
hospitable hands carried me into the dwelling within a quarter of an
hour after losing my consciousness.  Intelligent and prompt treatment
prevented any serious consequences, but the remembrance of that brief
time exposed to the fury of the blizzard will remain with me to my
dying day.




THROWING THE RIATA.

The skill shown by cattlemen in throwing the riata or lasso often
approaches the marvelous.  What is more wonderful than the duel
described in the _San Francisco Examiner_, between Mexican vaqueros, in
which the only weapons used were their riatas?  The victor overcame the
other by throwing his noose, so that his enemy's noose passed right
through it, and the conqueror lassoed the other man's arms against his
side and jerked him from his steed.

The despatch then went on to tell of the skill of the victorious riata
man, and mentioned among other wonderful feats, his lassoing an
antelope running at high speed 100 feet away.  To make the test more
extraordinary, the correspondent wrote that he would pick out one of
the animal's feet and get the noose around that alone.

An _Examiner_ reporter called on Louis Ohnimus, Superintendent of
Woodward's Gardens, who wielded a riata for many years, and probably
knows as much about throwing the lasso as any man on the coast, and
asked him if the feats referred to were possible.

"The Mexican may have won the duel by lassoing his adversary, riata and
all," was the answer.  "It is not an uncommon thing for them to settle
their differences by such a fight, and I have heard of the trick of
ringing the other man's rope, but if that man can catch an antelope one
hundred feet away, by the foot or any other way, he is a better riata
man than I ever encountered.  In the first place mighty few men are
strong enough to throw a rope such a distance.  Then an ordinary riata
is only fourteen or sixteen yards long--twenty yards is a very long
one.  So, you see, a forty-foot throw is a pretty good one."

He was asked to explain how to throw a lasso, and consented to do so.

"The first thing about this business," said Mr. Ohnimus, "is to have a
perfect riata.  If you have one perfectly stretched, oiled, and in a
thoroughly good condition, you can throw well; if your rope is kinky or
uneven, you will find it impossible to do accurate work."

"What do you consider a good riata?"

"Well, I can only tell you how a good one is made.  First, the rawhide
is cut in thin strips, as long as possible, and half tanned with the
hair on.  Then these strips are soaked and stretched over a block.
Then they are braided into a rope, care being taken, of course, to pull
the strands as tight as possible.  When the riata is made it should be
buried for a week, ten days, or even a fortnight, in the sand.  It
takes up moisture from the ground, without getting hard.  Soaking it in
water won't do, nor will anything else that I know of except, as I say,
burying it.  When the riata is resurrected it should again be left for
a time stretched over a block, with a weight to hold it taut.  Then the
hair should be sandpapered off the outside, and when the riata is
greased with mutton tallow and properly noosed it is ready for use.
Every vaquero that pretends to take care of his apparatus will bury his
riata and stretch it every six or eight months.

"A hair rope does not make a good riata.  It is useful to stretch
around camp at night to keep snakes away.  For some reason snakes will
not cross a hair rope.

"Now, as to throwing it:

"The riata, say, is hanging from the horn of the saddle--not tied, but
ready for use.  No vaquero who understands his trade ties his rope to
his saddle.  He knows that his life may depend on his ability to let go
of his rope in an instant, and he isn't going to chance killing himself
or his horse.  You see, the vaquero might be on a side hill, and a bull
or steer he wishes to catch be on a trail below him, and the ground
between them to be too steep to admit of his riding down to it.  Now,
suppose the noose, instead of catching around the horns of the steer,
should circle his neck and draw down to his shoulders?  Accidents are,
of course, as likely to happen in catching cattle as in anything else,
and give a bull such a hold and he could pull a house, let alone a
mustang.  That would be one case where it would be very handy to let go
quickly.  Then a man is likely to get his hand caught, and if he can't
let his rope go free he is likely to lose a finger or two.

"Our vaquero is trotting along with his rope hanging at his saddle bow
or fastened behind him.  He sees a deer or whatever else he wants to
catch, and grabs his rope with the left hand if he is a right-handed
man, though a man to really excel in this business should be
ambi-dextrous.  A right-handed man can, under ordinary circumstances,
rope a steer; but he has frequently to turn his horse to gain a good
position.  Now it sometimes happens that your horse is in a position
where you can't turn; then it would be awkward, unless you could throw
with either hand.  I usually throw with my left hand, though I can use
either.

"I take up the rope from the saddle bow, so."

He lifted his riata in his right hand.  His little finger held the
standing end of the rope, the third and middle finders supported the
coil, and the noose dangled from his first finger, while his thumb
steadied the whole rope and held it from slipping.  The coils were not
more than a foot or a foot and a half in diameter.  The noose was the
same size.

"That's a smaller noose than you would use on the range, is it not?"

"No," answered Mr. Ohnimus, "the vaquero never carries his noose long.
If he did, it would be constantly getting tangled up in the horse's
legs.  He makes it larger when he swings it.  But to get back to the
process of lassoing.  As our cowboy gets close to his quarry, he takes
the noose in his lasso hand.  I will use my left, as it is a trifle
handier for me.  He grips the rope, not too firmly, holding the
standing part and the side of the noose about half the length of the
loop away from the knot.  That is to enable him to swing the noose so
that it will fall open.  If he holds it at the knot he will throw a
long, narrow noose that is very likely to cross and kink.

"Meanwhile I, representing our cowboy, hold the remaining coils in my
other hand, only changing the position of my forefinger so as to secure
better control of the coils.  Then comes the third maneuver--enlarging
the noose.  Of course, you have to have a larger noose than one a foot
in diameter to drop over a steer's horns forty feet away.  The noose is
enlarged by swinging the noose in your lasso hand until the centrifugal
force pulls it out the size you wish (this is the reason you do not
grasp it too firmly), letting go with the other hand, of course, as
many coils as are necessary to make the noose the right size.  Now you
have the noose in the air you do not cease making it circle around your
head until you let it go.  When the noose has been let out to the right
size the next trouble is to keep it open and to avoid entangling it in
the brush or other surrounding obstructions.  You keep it open, as I
said, by holding the noose from quarter to half its length from the
knot, and by a peculiar twist of the wrist that is only attainable by
practice.  To keep it clear of the brush is often a more difficult job,
for the cowboy is not always in a clear place when he wants to throw
his rope.  Then it is that his judgment comes into play and determines
whether his cast is a lost one or not.  I have seen vaqueros swing a
lasso swiftly almost in the midst of a thicket, and keep it clear
without losing speed, and then let it drive straight as an arrow
between two close trees and rope an object that could not pass where
the noose had gone.  Such skill, to be sure, comes only after long
practice.

"Well, now we have got the noose circling about the vaquero's head, and
the next thing is to let it fly.  There is not much to describe about
this part of throwing a riata, important though it may be.  It is only
incessant practice that will enable a man to make a certain cast.  The
main thing is to swing the rope just long enough--neither so long as to
give it a side-wise motion when you throw it, nor short enough to
prevent its getting all the force you require.  Then the riata man must
throw at a particular limb or projection.  This thing of tossing
blindly at an object and trusting to luck that the animal will get into
the rope somehow will not do.  You must pick out your mark as carefully
as if you were shooting at it, and then time it.  A steer jumping along
changes his position constantly as regards you.  If you throw at his
head high up the chances are that it will be away down when your rope
reaches him, and you will overthrow.  Now, if you pick out a foot you
must reckon so that that foot will be off the ground when your rope
reaches him.  The noose does not travel like a bullet, and this element
of time is most important.

"Of even more importance is it that the distances are gauged correctly.
You remember I spoke about holding the coils lightly in two or three
fingers.  Well, that is done in order that as many coils as may be
considered necessary may be let go.  If you are wielding a riata you
