
It seemed like a stern refusal of the prayer, and was regarded as such
by some of the despairing ones, when a sudden cheer was heard and a
light resembling a great star was seen to burst from the darkness to
windward.

"The lifeboat!" shouted the captain, and they cheered with as much
hearty joy as if they were already safe.

A few minutes more and the familiar blue and white boat of mercy leaped
out of darkness into the midst of the foaming waters like a living
creature.

It was the boat from the neighbouring port of Brentley.  Either the
storm-drift had not been so thick in that direction as in the
neighbourhood of Greyton, or the Brentley men had kept a better
look-out.  She had run down to the wreck under sail.  On reaching it--a
short distant to windward--the sail was lowered, the anchor dropped, the
cable payed out, and the boat eased down until it was under the lee of
the wreck.  But the first joy at her appearance quickly died out of the
hearts of some, who were ignorant of the powers of lifeboats and
lifeboat men, when the little craft was seen at one moment tossed on the
leaping foam till on a level with the ship's bulwarks, at the next
moment far down in the swirling waters under the mizzen chains; now
sheering off as if about to forsake them altogether; anon rushing at
their sides with a violence that threatened swift destruction to the
boat; never for one instant still; always tugging and plunging like a
mad thing.  "How can we ever get into that?" was the thought that
naturally sprang into the minds of some, with chilling power.

Those, however, who understood the situation better, had more legitimate
ground for anxiety, for they knew that the lifeboat, if loaded to its
utmost capacity, could not carry more than half the souls that had to be
saved.  On becoming aware of this the men soon began to reveal their
true characters.  The unselfish and gentle made way for the women and
children.  The coarse and brutal, casting shame and every manly feeling
aside, struggled to the front with oaths and curses, some of them even
using that false familiar motto, "Every man for himself, and God for us
all!"

But these received a check at the gangway, for there stood the captain,
revolver in hand.  He spoke but one word--"back," and the cravens slunk
away.  The mild man who had offered prayer sat on the ship's bulwarks
calmly looking on.  He understood the limited capacity of the boat, and
had made up his mind to die.

"Now, madam, make haste," cried the mate, pushing his way towards the
widow.

"Come, father," she said, holding out her hand; but the old man did not
move.

"There are more women and little ones," he said, "than the boat can
hold.  Good-bye, darling.  We shall meet again--up yonder.  Go."

"Never!" exclaimed the widow, springing to his side.  "I will die with
you, father!  But here, boatman, save, oh, save my child!"

No one attended to her.  At such terrible moments men cannot afford to
wait on indecision.  Other women were ready and only too glad to go.
With a sense almost of relief at the thought that separation was now
impossible, the widow strained the child to her bosom and clung to her
old father.

At that moment the report of a pistol was heard, and a man fell dead
upon the deck.  At the last moment he had resolved to risk all and
rushed to the side, intending to jump into the boat.

"Shove off," was shouted.  The boat shot from the vessel's side.  The
bowman hauled on the cable.  In a few seconds the oars were shipped, the
anchor was got in, and the overloaded but insubmergible craft
disappeared into the darkness out of which it had come.

The wretched people thus left on the wreck knew well that the boat could
not make her port, land the rescued party, and return for them under
some hours.  They also knew that the waves were increasing in power and
volume with the rising water, and that their vessel could not survive
another tide.  Can we wonder that most of them again gave way to
despair--forgetting that with God "all things are possible?"

They were not yet forsaken, however.  On the pier-head at Greyton their
signals had indeed been observed, but while the Brentley boat, owing to
its position, could run down to the wreck with all sail set, it was
impossible for that of Greyton to reach it, except by pulling slowly
against wind and tide.

The instant that Bob Massey saw the flare of the first tar-barrel he had
called out his men.  One after another they came leaping over the
rocks--eager for the God-like work of saving life.

It is one of the grand characteristics of our lifeboatmen that on being
summoned to the fight there are often far more volunteers than are
required.  Joe Slag, as in duty bound, was first to answer the call.
Then several of the younger men came running down.  Last of all--almost
too late--Tom Riley appeared, buckling on his lifebelt as he ran.  His
gait was not quite steady, and his face was flushed.  The coxswain was
quick to note these facts.

"Take that lifebelt off!" he said, sternly, when Riley came up.

No need to ask why.  The tippler knew the reason why only too well, and
he also knew that it was useless, as well as dangerous, to disobey the
coxswain.  He took off the belt at once, flung it down, and staggered
away back to his grog-shop.

A powerful young fisherman--who had felt almost heart-broken by being
refused permission to go for want of room--gladly put on the belt and
took Riley's place.  Another minute and they were out of the harbour,
battling with the billows and fighting their way inch by inch against
the howling blast.  At last they got out so far that they could hoist
sail and run with a slant for the wreck.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 2.

It was daylight by the time the Greyton lifeboat arrived at the scene of
action, but the thick, spray-charged atmosphere was almost as bad to see
through as the blackness of night.

"I'm afeared she's gone," shouted Slag to the coxswain, putting his hand
to his mouth to prevent the words being blown bodily away.

"No--I see her bearing sou'-west," was the brief reply, as Bob Massey
plied his steering oar.

A few minutes later, and the despairing people on the wreck, catching
sight of the boat, greeted her with a long, wild cheer of reviving hope.

"What is it?" asked the widow, faintly, for she had been growing
gradually weaker from prolonged exposure.

"The lifeboat, darling," said her father.  "Did I not say that He would
not forsake us?"

"Thank God!" murmured the poor woman, fervently.  "Look up, Lizzie; the
lifeboat is coming to save us!"

The child, who had been comparatively warm and sheltered, at the expense
of her mother, looked up and smiled.

Soon the boat was alongside, and much the same scene that we have
already described was re-enacted; but there were no rebels this time.
By the captain's resolute bearing at first many lives had probably been
saved.

When most of the people had been lowered into the boat--not without
great risk and many bruises--the widow, who, cowering with her father
and child under the forecastle, had been overlooked, was led to the side
with her child.

"Not together, ma'am," said the captain.  "You'd likely drop her.  Let
me lower the child down first; or come first yourself--that will be
better."

"Give Lizzie to me," said the grandfather.  "I'll hold her till you are
safe, and ready to receive her."

"Look alive, ma'am," urged one of the lifeboat men, who had scrambled on
deck to render assistance.

The widow was soon in the boat, and held out her arms for little Lizzie.
Somehow--no one could tell how--the men made a bungle of it.  Perhaps
the very fear of doing so was the cause.  Instead of being caught by the
boatmen, Lizzie slipped between the boat and the vessel into the boiling
sea.  Giving one agonised cry, the grandfather leaped after her, but the
surging boat swept in at the moment, and the old man fortunately fell
into that instead of the sea.  He was not hurt, for strong arms had been
upraised to receive him.  The little child rose above the foam as she
was whirled past the stern of the boat by a swift current.  Bob Massey
saw her little out-stretched arms.  There was no time for thought or
consideration.  With one bound the coxswain was overboard.  Next moment
the crew saw him far astern with the child in his arms.

"Get 'em all aboard _first_!" came back, even against the wind, in Bob's
powerful, deep-toned voice.

Another moment, and he was lost to sight in the boiling waste of waters.
Slag knew well what he meant.  If they should cast off the rope before
rescuing all, for the purpose of picking up the coxswain, there would be
no possibility of getting back again to the schooner, for she was fast
breaking up.  Every current and eddy about these sands was well known to
Joe Slag, also the set of the tides--besides, had not Bob got on his
lifebelt?  He felt, nevertheless, that it was a tremendous risk to let
him go.  But what could poor Slag do?  To cast off at once would have
been to sacrifice about a dozen lives for the sake of saving two.  It
was a fearful trial.  Joe loved Bob as a brother.  His heart well nigh
burst, but it stood the trial.  He did his duty, and held on to the
wreck!

Duty, on that occasion, however, was done with a promptitude, and in a
fashion, that was not usual in one of his sedate nature.  Fortunately,
none but men remained on the wreck by that time.

"Tumble 'em in--sharp!" cried Slag.

The lifeboat men obeyed literally, and tumbled them in with a celerity
that might almost have awakened surprise in a sack of potatoes!

To haul up the anchor would have been slow work.  Slag--economical by
nature--became extravagant for once.  An axe made short work of cable
and anchor.

"Let 'em go!" he growled, as the boat drifted away.

The sail was set with miraculous speed, for now the wind was in their
favour, and the gay lifeboat bounded off in the direction where Bob had
disappeared, as though it felt a lively interest in the recovery of its
coxswain.  It seemed as if the very elements sympathised with their
anxiety, for just then the gale sensibly abated, and the rising sun
broke through a rift in the grey clouds.

"There he is--I see him!" shouted the man in the bow--pointing eagerly
ahead.

"It's on'y a bit o' wreck, boy," cried a comrade.

"Right you are," returned the bowman.

"There he is, though, an' no mistake, this time.  Port!--port!
hard-a-port!"

As he spoke, the boat swept round into a sort of cross-current among the
waves, where an object resembling a man was observed spinning slowly
round like a lazy teetotum.  They were soon alongside.  A dozen
claw-like hands made a simultaneous grasp, and hauled the object on
board with a mighty cheer, for it was, indeed, the coxswain--alive,
though much exhausted--with his precious little curly-haired burden in
his arms.

The burden was also alive, and not much exhausted, for the weather was
comparatively warm at the time, and Bob had thrust her little head into
the luxuriant thicket of his beard and whiskers; and, spreading his
great hands and arms all over her little body, had also kept her well
out of the water--all which the great buoyancy of his lifebelt enabled
him easily to do.

Shall we describe the joy of the widow and the grandfather?  No; there
are some sacred matters in life which are best left to the imagination.
The sunshine which had begun to scatter the clouds, and flood both land
and sea, was typical of the joy which could find no better means than
sobs wherewith to express gratitude to the God of mercy.

We have said that the gale had begun to abate.  When the lifeboat
escaped from the turmoil of cross-seas that raged over the sands and got
into deep water, all difficulties and dangers were past, and she was
able to lay her course for Greyton harbour.

"Let's have another swig o' that cold tea," said Bob Massey, resuming
his rightful post at the helm.  "It has done me a power o' good.  I had
no notion that cold tea was so good for warmin' the cockles o' one's
heart."

Ah!  Bob Massey, it was not the cold tea, but the saving of that little
girl that sent the life's blood careering so warmly through your veins!
However, there's no harm done in putting it down to the credit of the
cold tea.  Had the tea been hot, there might have been some truth in
your fancy.

"What's the time?" asked Bob, with a sudden look of anxiety.

"Just gone ten," said Slag, consulting a chronometer that bore some
resemblance to an antique warming-pan.

The look of anxiety on the coxswain's countenance deepened.

"Ease off the sheet a bit," he said, looking sternly over the weather
quarter, and whistling for a fresher breeze, though most men would have
thought the breeze fresh enough already.

As if to accommodate him, and confirm the crew in the whistling
superstition, the breeze did increase at the moment, and sent the
lifeboat, as one of the men said, "snorin'" over the wild sea towards
the harbour of Greyton.

It was a grand sight to behold the pier of the little port on that
stormy morning.  Of course, it had soon become known that the lifeboat
was out.  Although at starting it had been seen by only a few of the old
salts--whose delight it was to recall the memory of grand stormy times
long past, by facing the gales at all hours in oiled coats and
sou'-westers--the greater part of the fishing village only became aware
of the fact on turning out to work in the morning.  We have said that
the gale had moderated, and the sun had come out, so that the pier was
crowded, not only with fisher-folk, but with visitors to the port, and
other landsmen.

Great was the hope, and sanguine the expectation of the crowd, when,
after long and anxious waiting, the lifeboat was at last descried far
out at sea, making straight for the harbour.

"All right, Bill," exclaimed an old fisherman, who had been for some
time past sweeping the horizon with his glass, "the flag's a-flyin'."

"What does that mean?" asked a smart young lady, who had braved the
blast and run the risk of a salt-wash from the sprays at the pier-end in
her eager desire to see the boat arrive.

"It means, Miss, that they've managed to save somebody--how many, in
course, we can't tell till they come."

There was a strong disposition on the part of the crowd to cheer when
this was said.

