removing his spectacles from a pair of eyes that usually twinkled with a
sort of grave humour, but in which there was now an expression of
perplexity; "set to work and get the edge off your appetite, and then
I'll read Moxton's letter."

When Mr Shirley had finished breakfast, Ned was about half done, having
just commenced his third slice of toast.  So the old gentleman
complimented his nephew on the strength of his appetite, put on his
spectacles, drew a letter from his pocket, and leaned back in his chair.

"Now, lad, open your ears and consider what I am about to read."

"Go on, uncle, I'm all attention," said Ned, attacking slice number
four.

"This is Moxton's letter.  It runs thus--

"`Dear Sir,--I beg to acknowledge receipt of yours of the 5th inst.  I
shall be happy to take your nephew on trial, and, if I find him steady,
shall enter into an engagement with him, I need not add that unremitting
application to business is the only road to distinction in the
profession he is desirous of adopting.  Let him call at my office
to-morrow between ten and twelve.--Yours very truly, Daniel Moxton.'"

"Is that all?" inquired Ned, drawing his chair towards the fire, into
which he gazed contemplatively.

Mr Shirley looked at his nephew over the top of his spectacles, and
said--

"That's all."

"It's very short," remarked Ned.

"But to the point," rejoined his uncle.  "Now, boy, I see that you don't
relish the idea, and I must say that I would rather that you became an
engineer than a lawyer; but then, lad, situations are difficult to get
now-a-days, and, after all, you might do worse than become a lawyer.  To
be sure, I have no great love for the cloth, Ned; but the ladder reaches
very high.  The foot is crowded with a struggling mass of aspirants,
many of whom are of very questionable character, but the top reaches to
one of the highest positions in the empire.  You might become the Lord
High Chancellor at last, who knows!  But seriously, I think you should
accept this offer.  Moxton is a grave, stern man, but a sterling fellow
for all that, and in good practice.  Now, what do you think!"

"Well, uncle," replied Ned, "I've never concealed my thoughts from you
since the day you took me by the hand, eleven years ago, and brought me
to live under your roof; and I'll not begin to dissemble now.  The plain
truth is, that I don't like it at all."

"Stop, now," cried Mr Shirley, with a grieved expression of
countenance; "don't be hasty in forming your opinion.  Besides, my boy,
you ought to be more ready to take my advice, even although it be not
altogether palatable."

"My dear uncle, you quite misunderstand me.  I only tell you what I
_think_ about the proposal.  As to taking your advice, I fully intend to
do that whether I like it or not; but I think, if you will listen to me
for a few minutes, you will change your mind in regard to this matter.
You know that I am very fond of travelling, and that I dislike the idea
of taking up my abode on the top of a three-legged stool, either as a
lawyer's or a merchant's clerk.  Well, unless a man likes his
profession, and goes at it with a will, he cannot hope to succeed, so
that I have no prospect of getting on, I fear, in the line you wish me
to adopt.  Besides, there are plenty of poor fellows out of work, who
love sitting still from nine a.m. to ten p.m., and whose bread I would
be taking out of their mouths by devoting myself to the legal
profession, and--"

At this point Ned hesitated for a moment, and his uncle broke in with--

"Tell me, now, if every one thought about business as you do, how would
the world get on, think you?"

"Badly, I fear," replied the youth, with a smile; "but everybody doesn't
think of it as I do; and, tell me, uncle, if everybody thought of
business as you would wish me to do, what would come of the soldiers and
sailors who defend our empire, and extend our foreign trade, and achieve
the grand geographical discoveries that have of late added so much
lustre to the British name?"

Ned flushed and became quite eloquent at this point.  "Now, look at
California," he continued; "there's a magnificent region, full of gold;
not a mere myth, or an exaggeration, but a veritable fact, attested by
the arrival of letters and gold-dust every month.  Surely that land was
made to be peopled; and the poor savages who dwell there need to be
converted to Christianity, and delivered from their degraded condition;
and the country must be worked, and its resources be developed; and
who's to do it, if enterprising clergymen, and schoolmasters, and miners
do not go to live there, and push their fortunes?"

"And which of the three callings do you propose adopting?" inquired Mr
Shirley, with a peculiar smile.

"Well uncle, I--a--the fact is, I have not thought much about that as
yet.  Of course, I never thought of the first.  I do not forget your own
remark, that the calling of a minister of the gospel of Christ is not,
like other professions, to be adopted merely as a means of livelihood.
Then, as to the second, I might perhaps manage that; but I don't think
it would suit me."

"Do you think, then, that you would make a good digger?"

"Well, perhaps I would," replied Ned, modestly.

Mr Shirley gravely regarded the powerful frame that reclined in the
easy-chair before him, and was compelled to admit that the supposition
was by no means outrageous.

"Besides," continued the youth, "I might turn my hand to many things in
a new country.  You know I have studied surveying, and I can sketch a
little, and know something of architecture.  I suppose that Latin and
Greek would not be of much use, but the little I have picked up of
medicine and surgery among the medical students would be useful.  Then I
could take notes, and sketch the scenery, and bring back a mass of
material that might interest the public, and do good to the country."

"Oh," said the old gentleman, shortly; "come back and turn author, in
fact, and write a book that nobody would publish, or which, in the event
of its being published, nobody would read!"

"Come, now, my dear uncle, don't laugh at me.  I assure you it seems
very reasonable to me to think that what others have done, and are doing
every day, I am able to do."

"Well, I won't laugh at you; but, to be serious, you are wise enough to
know that an old man's experience is worth more than a youth's fancies.
Much of what you have said is true, I admit, but I assure you that the
bright prospects you have cut out for yourself are very delusive.  They
will never be realised, at least in the shape in which you have depicted
them on your imagination.  They will dissolve, my boy, on a nearer
approach, and, as Shakespeare has it, `like the baseless fabric of a
vision, leave not a wrack behind,' or, at least, not much more than a
wrack."

Ned reverted to the golden dream, and felt uneasy under his uncle's kind
but earnest gaze.

"Most men," continued Mr Shirley, "enjoy themselves at first, when they
go to wild countries in search of adventure, but they generally regret
the loss of their best years afterwards.  In my opinion men should never
emigrate unless they purpose making the foreign land they go to their
_home_.  But I won't oppose you, if you are determined to go; I will do
all I can to help you, and give you my blessing; but before you make up
your mind, I would recommend you to call on Mr Moxton, and hear what
prospects he holds out to you.  Then take a week to think seriously over
it; and if at the end of that time, you are as anxious to go as ever,
I'll not stand in your way."

"You are kind to me, uncle; more so than I deserve," said Ned earnestly.
"I'll do as you desire, and you may depend upon it that the generous
way in which you have left me to make my own choice will influence me
against going abroad more than anything else."

Ned sighed as he rose to quit the room, for he felt that his hopes at
that moment were sinking.

"And before you take a step in the matter, my boy," said old Mr
Shirley, "go to your room and ask counsel of Him who alone has the power
to direct your steps in this life."

Ned replied briefly, "I will, uncle," and hastily left the room.  Mr
Shirley poked the fire, put on his spectacles, smoothed out the wrinkles
on his bald forehead with his hand, took up the _Times_, and settled
himself down in his easy-chair to read; but his nephew's prospects could
not be banished from his mind.  He went over the whole argument again,
mentally, with copious additions, ere he became aware of the fact, that
for three-quarters of an hour he had been, (apparently), reading the
newspaper upside down.



CHAPTER THREE.

HOPES AND FEARS--MR. SHIRLEY RECEIVES A VISIT AND A WILD PROPOSAL.

When Edward Sinton left his chamber, an hour after the conversation
related in the last chapter, his brow was unruffled and his step light.
He had made up his mind that, come what might, he would not resist the
wishes of his only near relative and his best friend.

There was a day in the period of early boyhood that remained as fresh on
the memory of young Sinton as if it had been yesterday--the day on which
his mother died.  The desolation of his early home on that day was like
the rising of a dark thunder-cloud on a bright sky.  His young heart was
crushed, his mind stunned, and the first ray of light that broke upon
him--the first gush of relief--was when his uncle arrived and took him
on his knee, and, seated beside the bed where that cold, still form lay,
wept upon the child's neck as if his heart would break.  Mr Shirley
buried the sister whom he had been too late to see alive.  Then he and
his little nephew left the quiet country village and went to dwell in
the great city of London.  From that time forward Mr Shirley was a
father to Ned, who loved him more than any one else on earth, and
through his influence he was early led to love and reverence his
heavenly Father and his blessed Redeemer.

The subject of going abroad was the first in regard to which Ned and his
uncle had seriously disagreed, and the effect on the feelings of both
was very strong.

Ned's mind wandered as he put on his hat, and buttoned his great-coat up
to the chin, and drew on his gloves slowly.  He was not vain of his
personal appearance; neither was he reckless of it.  He always struck
you as being a particularly well-dressed man, and he had naturally a
dashing look about him.  Poor fellow! he felt anything but dashing or
reckless as he hurried through the crowded streets in the direction of
the city that day.

Moxton's door was a green one, with a brass knocker and a brass plate,
both of which ornaments, owing to verdigris, were anything but
ornamental.  The plate was almost useless, being nearly illegible, but
the knocker was still fit for duty.  The street was narrow--as Ned
observed with a feeling of deep depression--and the house to which the
green door belonged, besides being dirty, retreated a little, as if it
were ashamed of itself.

On the knocker being applied, the green door was opened by a
disagreeable-looking old woman, who answered to the question, "Is Mr
Moxton in?" with a short "Yes," and, without farther remark, ushered our
hero into a very dingy and particularly small office, which, owing to
the insufficient quantity of daylight that struggled through the dirty
little windows, required to be lighted with gas.  Ned felt, so to speak,
like a thermometer which was falling rapidly.

"Can I see Mr Moxton?" he inquired of a small dishevelled clerk, who
sat on a tall stool behind a high desk, engaged in writing his name in
every imaginable form on a sheet of note paper.

The dishevelled clerk pointed to a door which opened into an inner
apartment, and resumed his occupation.

Ned tapped at the door indicated.

"Come in," cried a stern voice.

Ned, (as a thermometer), fell considerably lower.  On entering, he
beheld a tall, gaunt man, with a sour cast of countenance, standing with
his back to the fire.

Ned advanced with a cheerful expression of face.  Thermometrically
speaking, he fell to the freezing-point.

"You are young Sinton, I suppose.  You've come later than I expected."

Ned apologised, and explained that he had had some difficulty in finding
the house.

"Umph!  Your uncle tells me that you're a sharp fellow, and write a good
hand.  Have you ever been in an office before?"

"No, sir.  Up till now I have been at college.  My uncle is rather
partial, I fear, and may have spoken too highly of me.  I think,
however, that my hand is not a bad one.  At least it is legible."

"At least!" said Mr Moxton, with a sarcastic expression that was meant
for smile, perhaps for a grin.  "Why, that's the _most_ you could say of
it.  No hand is good, sir, if it is not legible, and no hand can
possibly be bad that _is_ legible.  Have you studied law?"

"No, sir, I have not."

"Umph! you're too old to begin.  Have you been used to sit at the desk?"

"Yes; I have been accustomed to study the greater part of the day."

"Well, you may come here on Monday, and I'll speak to you again, and see
what you can do.  I'm too busy just now.  Good-morning."

Ned turned to go, but paused on the threshold, and stood holding the
door-handle.

"Excuse me, sir," he said, hesitatingly, "may I ask what room I shall
occupy, if--if--I come to work here?"

Mr Moxton looked a little surprised at the question, but pointed to the
outer office where the dishevelled clerk sat, and said, "There."  Ned
fell to twenty below the freezing-point.

"And pray, sir," he continued, "may I ask what are office-hours?"

"From nine a.m. till nine p.m., with an interval for meals," said Mr
Moxton, sharply; "but we usually continue at work till eleven at night,
sometimes later.  Good-morning."

Ned fell to zero, and found himself in the street, with an indistinct
impression of having heard the dishevelled clerk chuckling vociferously
as he passed through the office.

It was a hard struggle, a very hard struggle, but he recalled to mind
all that his uncle had ever done for him, and the love he bore him, and
manfully resolved to cast California behind his back for ever, and
become a lawyer.

Meanwhile Mr Shirley received a visit from a very peculiar personage.
He was still seated in his arm-chair pondering his nephew's prospects
when this personage entered the room, hat in hand--the hat was a round
straw one--and cried heartily, "Good day, kinsman."

"Ha!  Captain Bunting, how are ye?  Glad to see you, old fellow,"
exclaimed Mr Shirley, rising and seizing the sailor by the hand.  "Sit
down, sit down, and let's hear your news.  Why, I believe it's six
months since I saw you."

"Longer, Shirley, longer than that," replied the captain, seating
himself in the chair which Ned Sinton had vacated a short time before.
"I hope your memory is not giving way.  I have been half round the
world, and it's a year and six months to-day since I sat here last."

"Is it?" cried Mr Shirley, in surprise.  "Now, that is very remarkable.
But do you know, captain, I have often thought upon that subject, and
wondered why it is that, as we get older, time seems to fly faster, and
events which happened a month ago seem as if they only occurred
yesterday.  But let me hear all about it.  Where have you been, and
where are you going next?"

"I've been," replied the captain, who was a big, broad man with a rough
over-all coat, rough pilot-cloth trousers, rough red whiskers, a shaggy
head of hair, and a rough-skinned face; the only part of him, in fact,
which wasn't rough was his heart; that was soft and warm--

"I've been, as I remarked before, half round the world, and I'm goin'
next to America.  That's a short but comprehensive answer to your
question.  If you have time and patience, kinsman, I'll open the
log-book of my memory and give you some details of my doings since we
last met.  But first tell me, how is my young friend, Ned?"

"Oh, he's well--excellently well--besides being tall and strong.  You
would hardly know him, captain.  He's full six feet high, I believe, and
the scamp has something like a white wreath of smoke over his upper lip
already!  I wish him to become an engineer or a lawyer, but the boy is
in love with California just now, and dreams about nothing but wild
adventures and gold-dust."

The captain gave a grunt, and a peculiar smile crossed his rugged visage
as he gazed earnestly and contemplatively into the fire.

Captain Bunting was a philosopher, and was deeply impressed with the
belief that the smallest possible hint upon any subject whatever was
sufficient to enable him to dive into the marrow of it, and
prognosticate the probable issue of it, with much greater certainty than
any one else.  On the present occasion, however, the grunt above
referred to was all he said.

It is not necessary to trouble the reader with the lengthened discourse
that the captain delivered to his kinsman.  When he concluded, Mr
Shirley pushed his spectacles up on his bald head, gazed at the fire,
and said, "Odd, very odd; and interesting too--very interesting."  After
a short pause, he pulled his spectacles down on his nose, and looking
over them at the captain, said, "And what part of America are you bound
for now?"

"California," answered the captain, slowly.

Mr Shirley started, as if some prophetic vision had been called up by
the word and the tone, in which it was uttered.

"And that," continued the captain, "brings me to the point.  I came here
chiefly for the purpose of asking you to let your nephew go with me, as
I am in want of a youth to assist me, as a sort of supercargo and
Jack-of-all-trades.  In fact, I like your nephew much, and have long had
my eye on him.  I think him the very man for my purpose.  I want a
companion, too, in my business--one who is good at the pen and can turn
his hand to anything.  In short, it would be difficult to explain all
the outs and ins of why I want him.  But he's a tight, clever fellow, as
I know, and I _do_ want him, and if you'll let him go, I promise to
bring him safe back again in the course of two years--if we are all
spared.  From what you've told me, I've no doubt the lad will be
delighted to go.  And, believe me, his golden dreams will be all washed
out by the time he comes back.  Now, what say you!"

For the space of five minutes Mr Shirley gazed at the captain over his
spectacles in amazement, and said nothing.  Then he threw himself back
on his chair, pushed his spectacles up on his forehead, and gazed at him
from underneath these assistants to vision.  The alteration did not seem
to improve matters, for he still continued to gaze in silent surprise.
At last his lips moved, and he said, slowly but emphatically--
