deal of blood.

"Come, come, Ralph," said Jack, pressing me gently backward, "lie down,
my boy; you're not right yet.  Wet your lips with this water; it's cool
and clear as crystal.  I got it from a spring close at hand.  There,
now, don't say a word--hold your tongue," he said, seeing me about to
speak.  "I'll tell you all about it, but you must not utter a syllable
till you have rested well."

"Oh, don't stop him from speaking, Jack!" said Peterkin, who, now that
his fears for my safety were removed, busied himself in erecting a
shelter of broken branches in order to protect me from the wind--which,
however, was almost unnecessary, for the rock beside which I had been
laid completely broke the force of the gale.  "Let him speak, Jack; it's
a comfort to hear that he's alive after lying there stiff and white and
sulky for a whole hour, just like an Egyptian mummy.--Never saw such a
fellow as you are, Ralph--always up to mischief.  You've almost knocked
out all my teeth and more than half-choked me, and now you go shamming
dead!  It's very wicked of you, indeed it is."

While Peterkin ran on in this style my faculties became quite clear
again, and I began to understand my position.  "What do you mean by
saying I half-choked you, Peterkin?" said I.

"What do I mean?  Is English not your mother-tongue? or do you want me
to repeat it in French by way of making it clearer?  Don't you
remember?"

"I remember nothing," said I, interrupting him, "after we were thrown
into the sea."

"Hush, Peterkin!" said Jack; "you're exciting Ralph with your
nonsense.--I'll explain it to you.  You recollect that, after the ship
struck, we three sprang over the bow into the sea?  Well, I noticed that
the oar struck your head and gave you that cut on the brow which nearly
stunned you, so that you grasped Peterkin round the neck without knowing
apparently what you were about.  In doing so, you pushed the telescope--
which you clung to as if it had been your life--against Peterkin's
mouth--"

"Pushed it against his mouth!" interrupted Peterkin; "say crammed it
down his throat!  Why, there's a distinct mark of the brass rim on the
back of my gullet at this moment!"

"Well, well, be that as it may," continued Jack, "you clung to him,
Ralph, till I feared you really would choke him.  But I saw that he had
a good hold of the oar; so I exerted myself to the utmost to push you
towards the shore, which we luckily reached without much trouble, for
the water inside the reef is quite calm."

"But the captain and crew, what of them?"  I inquired anxiously.

Jack shook his head.

"Are they lost?"

"No, they are not lost, I hope; but, I fear, there is not much chance of
their being saved.  The ship struck at the very tail of the island on
which we are cast.  When the boat was tossed into the sea it fortunately
did not upset, although it shipped a good deal of water, and all the men
managed to scramble into it; but before they could get the oars out, the
gale carried them past the point and away to leeward of the island.
After we landed I saw them endeavouring to pull towards us; but as they
had only one pair of oars out of the eight that belonged to the boat,
and as the wind was blowing right in their teeth, they gradually lost
ground.  Then I saw them put about and hoist some sort of sail--a
blanket, I fancy, for it was too small for the boat--and in half-an-hour
they were out of sight."

"Poor fellows!"  I murmured sorrowfully.

"But the more I think about it I've better hope of them," continued Jack
in a more cheerful tone.  "You see, Ralph, I've read a great deal about
these South Sea Islands, and I know that in many places they are
scattered about in thousands over the sea, so they're almost sure to
fall in with one of them before long."

"I'm sure I hope so," said Peterkin earnestly.  "But what has become of
the wreck, Jack?  I saw you clambering up the rocks there while I was
watching Ralph.  Did you say she had gone to pieces?"

"No, she has not gone to pieces; but she has gone to the bottom,"
replied Jack.  "As I said before, she struck on the tail of the island
and stove in her bow; but the next breaker swung her clear, and she
floated away to leeward.  The poor fellows in the boat made a hard
struggle to reach her, but long before they came near her she filled and
went down.  It was after she had foundered that I saw them trying to
pull to the island."

There was a long silence after Jack had ceased speaking, and I have no
doubt that each was revolving in his mind our extraordinary position.
For my part, I cannot say that my reflections were very agreeable.  I
knew that we were on an island, for Jack had said so; but whether it was
inhabited or not, I did not know.  If it should be inhabited, I felt
certain, from all I had heard of South Sea Islanders, that we should be
roasted alive and eaten.  If it should turn out to be uninhabited, I
fancied that we should be starved to death.  "Oh," thought I, "if the
ship had only struck on the rocks we might have done pretty well, for we
could have obtained provisions from her, and tools to enable us to build
a shelter; but now--alas! alas! we are lost!"  These last words I
uttered aloud in my distress.

"Lost, Ralph!" exclaimed Jack, while a smile overspread his hearty
countenance.  "Saved, you should have said.  Your cogitations seem to
have taken a wrong road, and led you to a wrong conclusion."

"Do you know what conclusion I have come to?" said Peterkin.  "I have
made up my mind that it's capital--first-rate--the best thing that ever
happened to us, and the most splendid prospect that ever lay before
three jolly young tars.  We've got an island all to ourselves.  We'll
take possession in the name of the king.  We'll go and enter the service
of its black inhabitants.  Of course we'll rise, naturally, to the top
of affairs: white men always do in savage countries.  You shall be king,
Jack; Ralph, prime minister; and I shall be--"

"The court-jester," interrupted Jack.

"No," retorted Peterkin; "I'll have no title at all.  I shall merely
accept a highly responsible situation under government; for you see,
Jack, I'm fond of having an enormous salary and nothing to do."

"But suppose there are no natives?"

"Then we'll build a charming villa, and plant a lovely garden round it,
stuck all full of the most splendiferous tropical flowers; and we'll
farm the land, plant, sow, reap, eat, sleep, and be merry."

"But to be serious," said Jack, assuming a grave expression of
countenance--which, I observed, always had the effect of checking
Peterkin's disposition to make fun of everything--"we are really in
rather an uncomfortable position.  If this is a desert island, we shall
have to live very much like the wild beasts; for we have not a tool of
any kind--not even a knife."

"Yes, we have _that_," said Peterkin, fumbling in his trousers pocket,
from which he drew forth a small penknife with only one blade, and that
was broken.

"Well, that's better than nothing.--But come," said Jack, rising; "we
are wasting our time in _talking_ instead of _doing_.--You seem well
enough to walk now, Ralph.--Let us see what we have got in our pockets;
and then let us climb some hill and ascertain what sort of island we
have been cast upon, for, whether good or bad, it seems likely to be our
home for some time to come."



CHAPTER FOUR.

WE EXAMINE INTO OUR PERSONAL PROPERTY, AND MAKE A HAPPY DISCOVERY--OUR
ISLAND DESCRIBED--JACK PROVES HIMSELF TO BE LEARNED AND SAGACIOUS ABOVE
HIS FELLOWS--CURIOUS DISCOVERIES--NATURAL LEMONADE!

We now seated ourselves upon a rock, and began to examine into our
personal property.  When we reached the shore after being wrecked, my
companions had taken off part of their clothes and spread them out in
the sun to dry; for although the gale was raging fiercely, there was not
a single cloud in the bright sky.  They had also stripped off most part
of my wet clothes and spread them also on the rocks.  Having resumed our
garments, we now searched all our pockets with the utmost care, and laid
their contents out on a flat stone before us; and now that our minds
were fully alive to our condition, it was with no little anxiety that we
turned our several pockets inside out in order that nothing might escape
us.  When all was collected together, we found that our worldly goods
consisted of the following articles:

First, a small penknife with a single blade, broken off about the middle
and very rusty, besides having two or three notches on its edge.
(Peterkin said of this, with his usual pleasantry, that it would do for
a saw as well as a knife, which was a great advantage.)  Second, an old
German-silver pencil-case without any lead in it.  Third, a piece of
whip-cord about six yards long.  Fourth, a sailmaker's needle of a small
size.  Fifth, a ship's telescope, which I happened to have in my hand at
the time the ship struck, and which I had clung to firmly all the time I
was in the water; indeed, it was with difficulty that Jack got it out of
my grasp when I was lying insensible on the shore.  I cannot understand
why I kept such a firm hold of this telescope.  They say that a drowning
man will clutch at a straw.  Perhaps it may have been some such feeling
in me, for I did not know that it was in my hand at the time we were
wrecked.  However, we felt some pleasure in having it with us now--
although we did not see that it could be of much use to us, as the glass
at the small end was broken to pieces.  Our sixth article was a brass
ring which Jack always wore on his little finger.  I never understood
why he wore it; for Jack was not vain of his appearance, and did not
seem to care for ornaments of any kind.  Peterkin said, "it was in
memory of the girl he left behind him!"  But as he never spoke of this
girl to either of us, I am inclined to think that Peterkin was either
jesting or mistaken.  In addition to these articles, we had a little bit
of tinder and the clothes on our backs.  These last were as follows:

Each of us had on a pair of stout canvas trousers and a pair of sailors'
thick shoes.  Jack wore a red flannel shirt, a blue jacket, and a red
Kilmarnock bonnet or nightcap, besides a pair of worsted socks, and a
cotton pocket-handkerchief with sixteen portraits of Lord Nelson printed
on it and a union-jack in the middle.  Peterkin had on a striped flannel
shirt--which he wore outside his trousers and belted round his waist,
after the manner of a tunic--and a round black straw hat.  He had no
jacket, having thrown it off just before we were cast into the sea; but
this was not of much consequence, as the climate of the island proved to
be extremely mild--so much so, indeed, that Jack and I often preferred
to go about without our jackets.  Peterkin had also a pair of white
cotton socks and a blue handkerchief with white spots all over it.  My
own costume consisted of a blue flannel shirt, a blue jacket, a black
cap, and a pair of worsted socks, besides the shoes and canvas trousers
already mentioned.  This was all we had, and besides these things we had
nothing else; but when we thought of the danger from which we had
escaped, and how much worse off we might have been had the ship struck
on the reef during the night, we felt very thankful that we were
possessed of so much, although, I must confess, we sometimes wished that
we had had a little more.

While we were examining these things and talking about them, Jack
suddenly started and exclaimed:

"The oar!  We have forgotten the oar!"

"What good will that do us?" said Peterkin.  "There's wood enough on the
island to make a thousand oars."

"Ay, lad," replied Jack; "but there's a bit of hoop-iron at the end of
it, and that may be of much use to us."

"Very true," said I; "let us go fetch it."  And with that we all three
rose and hastened down to the beach.  I still felt a little weak from
loss of blood, so that my companions soon began to leave me behind; but
Jack perceived this, and, with his usual considerate good-nature, turned
back to help me.  This was now the first time that I had looked well
about me since landing, as the spot where I had been laid was covered
with thick bushes, which almost hid the country from our view.  As we
now emerged from among these and walked down the sandy beach together, I
cast my eyes about, and truly my heart glowed within me and my spirits
rose at the beautiful prospect which I beheld on every side.  The gale
had suddenly died away, just as if it had blown furiously till it dashed
our ship upon the rocks, and had nothing more to do after accomplishing
that.  The island on which we stood was hilly, and covered almost
everywhere with the most beautiful and richly coloured trees, bushes,
and shrubs, none of which I knew the names of at that time--except,
indeed, the cocoa-nut palms, which I recognised at once from the many
pictures that I had seen of them before I left home.  A sandy beach of
dazzling whiteness lined this bright-green shore, and upon it there fell
a gentle ripple of the sea.  This last astonished me much, for I
recollected that at home the sea used to fall in huge billows on the
shore long after a storm had subsided.  But on casting my glance out to
sea the cause became apparent.  About a mile distant from the shore I
saw the great billows of the ocean rolling like a green wall, and
falling with a long, loud roar upon a low coral reef, where they were
dashed into white foam and flung up in clouds of spray.  This spray
sometimes flew exceedingly high, and every here and there a beautiful
rainbow was formed for a moment among the falling drops.  We afterwards
found that this coral reef extended quite round the island, and formed a
natural breakwater to it.  Beyond this, the sea rose and tossed
violently from the effects of the storm; but between the reef and the
shore it was as calm and as smooth as a pond.

My heart was filled with more delight than I can express at sight of so
many glorious objects, and my thoughts turned suddenly to the
contemplation of the Creator of them all.  I mention this the more
gladly, because at that time, I am ashamed to say, I very seldom thought
of my Creator, although I was constantly surrounded by the most
beautiful and wonderful of His works.  I observed, from the expression
of my companion's countenance, that he too derived much joy from the
splendid scenery, which was all the more agreeable to us after our long
voyage on the salt sea.  There the breeze was fresh and cold; but here
it was delightfully mild, and when a puff blew off the land it came
laden with the most exquisite perfume that can be imagined.  While we
thus gazed we were startled by a loud "Huzza!" from Peterkin, and on
looking towards the edge of the sea we saw him capering and jumping
about like a monkey, and ever and anon tugging with all his might at
something that lay upon the shore.

"What an odd fellow he is, to be sure!" said Jack, taking me by the arm
and hurrying forward.  "Come, let us hasten to see what it is."

"Here it is, boys--hurrah!  Come along!  Just what we want!" cried
Peterkin as we drew near, still tugging with all his power.
"First-rate; just the very ticket!"

I need scarcely say to my readers that my companion Peterkin was in the
habit of using very remarkable and peculiar phrases.  And I am free to
confess that I did not well understand the meaning of some of them--
such, for instance, as "the very ticket;" but I think it my duty to
recount everything relating to my adventures with a strict regard to
truthfulness in as far as my memory serves me, so I write, as nearly as
possible, the exact words that my companions spoke.  I often asked
Peterkin to explain what he meant by "ticket," but he always answered me
by going into fits of laughter.  However, by observing the occasions on
which he used it, I came to understand that it meant to show that
something was remarkably good or fortunate.

On coming up we found that Peterkin was vainly endeavouring to pull the
axe out of the oar into which, it will be remembered, Jack struck it
while endeavouring to cut away the cordage among which it had become
entangled at the bow of the ship.  Fortunately for us, the axe had
remained fast in the oar, and even now all Peterkin's strength could not
draw it out of the cut.

"Ah, that is capital indeed!" cried Jack, at the same time giving the
axe a wrench that plucked it out of the tough wood.  "How fortunate this
is!  It will be of more value to us than a hundred knives, and the edge
is quite new and sharp."

"I'll answer for the toughness of the handle, at any rate!" cried
Peterkin; "my arms are nearly pulled out of the sockets.  But see here,
our luck is great.  There is iron on the blade."  He pointed to a piece
of hoop-iron as he spoke, which had been nailed round the blade of the
oar to prevent it from splitting.

This also was a fortunate discovery.  Jack went down on his knees, and
with the edge of the axe began carefully to force out the nails.  But as
they were firmly fixed in, and the operation blunted our axe, we carried
the oar up with us to the place where we had left the rest of our
things, intending to burn the wood away from the iron at a more
convenient time.

"Now, lads," said Jack after we had laid it on the stone which contained
our little all, "I propose that we should go to the tail of the island,
where the ship struck, which is only a quarter of a mile off; and see if
anything else has been thrown ashore.  I don't expect anything, but it
is well to see.  When we get back here it will be time to have our
supper and prepare our beds."

"Agreed!" cried Peterkin and I together, as, indeed, we would have
agreed to any proposal that Jack made; for, besides his being older and
much stronger and taller than either of us, he was a very clever fellow,
and, I think, would have induced people much older than himself to
choose him for their leader, especially if they required to be led on a
bold enterprise.

Now as we hastened along the white beach, which shone so brightly in the
rays of the setting sun that our eyes were quite dazzled by its glare,
it suddenly came into Peterkin's head that we had nothing to eat except
the wild berries which grew in profusion at our feet.

"What shall we do, Jack?" said he with a rueful look.  "Perhaps they may
be poisonous!"

"No fear," replied Jack confidently.  "I have observed that a few of
