dog knows me, an' so, in course, I must know _him_?  An' ven I called
'im Punch didn't he answer?--hey?"

I was obliged to admit the truth of these remarks.  After the first
ebullition of joy at the meeting was over, we went along the street
together.

"Then the dog is yours?" said I as we went along.

"No, he ain't mine.  He was mine once--ven he was a pup, but I sold 'im
to a young lady for--a _wery_ small sum."

"For how much?"  I asked.

"For five bob.  Yes--on'y five bob!  I axed vun pound, but the young
lady was so pleasant an' pritty that I come down to ten bob.  Then she
said she was poor--and to tell 'ee the plain truth she looked like it--
an' she wanted the pup so bad that I come down to five."

"And who was this young lady?"

"Blow'd if I knows.  She went off wi' my Punch, an' I never saw'd 'em
more."

"Then you don't know what induced her to sell Punch to a low fellow--but
of course you know nothing about that," said I, in a musing tone, as I
thought of the strange manner in which this portion of my doggie's
history had come to light, but I was recalled from my reverie by the
contemptuous tones of my little companion's voice, as he said--

"But I _do_ know something about that."

"Oh, indeed!  I thought you said you never saw the young lady again."

"No more I did.  Neither did I ever see Punch again till to-day, but I
know for certain that my young lady never sold no dog wotsomedever to no
_low_ feller as ever walked in shoe leather or out of it!"

"Ah, I see," said I slowly, "you mean--"

"Yes, out with it, that's just wot I do mean--that the low feller
prigged the pup from her, an' I on'y vish as I 'ad a grip of his ugly
nose, and I'd draw it out from his uglier face, I would, like the small
end of a telescope, and then shut it up flat again--so flat that you'd
never know he'd had no nose at all!"

My little sharp-witted companion then willingly gave me an account of
all he knew about the early history of my doggie.

The story was not long, but it began, so to speak, at the beginning.

Punch, or Dumps, as I continued to call him, had been born in a dry
water-butt which stood in a back yard near the Thames.  This yard was,
or had been, used for putting away lumber.

"It was a queer place," said my little companion, looking up in my face
with a droll expression--"a sort o' place that, when once you had gone
into it, you was sure to wish you hadn't.  Talk o' the blues, sir; I do
assure _you_ that w'en I used to go into that yard of a night it gave me
the black-an'-blues, it did.  There was a mouldiness an' a soppiness
about it that beat the katticombs all to sticks.  It looked like a place
that some rubbish had bin flung into in the days before Adam an' Eve was
born, an' 'ad been forgotten tee-totally from that time to this.  Oh, it
was awful!  Used to make my marrow screw up into lumps w'en I was used
to go there."

"But why did you go there at all if you disliked it so much?"  I asked.

"Vy? because I 'adn't got no better place to go to.  I was used to sleep
there.  I slep' in the self-same water-butt where Punch was born.
That's 'ow I come to scrape acquaintance with 'im.  I'd bin away from
'ome in the country for a week's slidin'."

"A week's what?"

"Slidin'.  Don't you know what sliding on the ice is?"

"Oh!--yes.  Are you very fund of that?"

"I should think I was--w'en my boots are good enough to stick on, but
they ain't always that, and then I've got to slide under difficulties.
Sometimes I'm out o' boots an' shoes altogether, in vich case slidin's
impossible; but I can look on and slide in spirit, vich is better than
nuffin'.  But, as I was sayin' w'en you 'ad the bad manners to interrupt
me, I 'ad bin away from 'ome for a week--"

"Excuse my interrupting you again, but where is your home, may I ask?"

"You may ask, but it 'ud puzzle me to answer for I ain't got no 'ome,
unless I may say that London is my 'ome.  I come an' go where I pleases,
so long's I don't worrit nobody.  I sleep where I like, if the bobbies
don't get their eyes on me w'en I'm agoin' to bed, an' I heat wotever
comes in my way if it ain't too tough.  In winter I sleeps in a lodgin'
'ouse w'en I can but as it costs thrippence a night, I finds it too
expensive, an' usually prefers a railway arch, or a corner in Covent
Garden Market, under a cart or a barrow, or inside of a empty
sugar-barrel--anywhere so long's I'm let alone; but what with the rain,
the wind, the cold, and the bobbies, I may be said to sleep under
difficulties.  Vell, as I was agoin' to say w'en--"

"Excuse me once more--what is your name?" said I.

"Hain't got no name."

"No name!  Come, you are joking.  What is your father's name?"

"Hain't got no father--never 'ad, as I knows on, nor mother neither, nor
brother, nor sister, nor aunt, nor wife--not even a mother-in-law.  I'm
a unit in creation, I is--as I once heerd a school-board buffer say w'en
he was luggin' me along to school; but he was too green, that buffer
was, for a school-boarder.  I gave 'im the slip at the corner of Watling
Street, an' they've never bin able to cotch me since."

"But you must be known by some name," said I.  "What do your companions
call you?"

"They call me bad names, as a rule.  Some o' the least offensive among
'em are Monkey-face, Screwnose, Cheeks, Squeaker, Roundeyes, and
Slidder.  I prefers the last myself, an' ginerally answers to it.  But,
as I was agoin' to say, I'd bin away for a veek, an' w'en I comed
'ome--"

"To which part of home? for London is a wide word, you know," I said.

"Now, sir, if you go for to interrupt me like that I'll 'ave to charge a
bob for this here valk; I couldn't stand it for sixpence."

"Come, Slidder, don't be greedy."

"Vell, sir, if you got as many kicks as I do, and as few ha'pence,
p'r'aps you'd be greedy too."

"Perhaps I should, my boy," said I, in a gentle tone.  "But come, I will
give you an extra sixpence if we get along well.  Let's have the rest of
your story; I won't interrupt again."

"It ain't my story, it's Punch's story," returned the waif, as he
stooped to pat the gratified doggie.  "Vell, w'en I com'd 'ome it was
lateish and I was tired, besides bein' 'ungry; so I goes right off to my
water-butt, intendin' to go to bed as usual, but no sooner did I put my
head in, than out came a most awful growl.  The butt lay on its side,
and I backed out double quick just in time, for a most 'orrible-lookin'
terrier dog rushed at me.  Bein' used to dogs, I wasn't took by
surprise, but fetched it a clip with one o' my feet in its ribs that
sent it staggerin' to the palin' o' the yard.  It found a hole, bolted
through, scurried up the lane yellin', and I never saw'd it more!  This
was Punch's mother.  On goin' into the butt afterwards I found three
dead pups and one alive, so I pitched the dead ones away an' shoved the
live one into the breast of my coat, where he slep' till mornin'.  At
first I 'ad a mind to drown the pup, but it looked so comfortable an'
playful, an' was such a queer critter, that I called him Punch, an'
became a father to 'im.  I got him bones an' other bits o' grub, an'
kep' 'im in the water-butt for three veeks.  Then he began to make a
noise v'en I left him; so, bein' sure the bobbies would rout 'im out at
last, I took 'im an' sold 'im to the first pleasant lady that seemed to
fancy 'im."

"Well, Slidder," said I, as we turned down into the mean-looking alley
where Mrs Willis, my little old woman, dwelt, "I am greatly interested
in what you have told me about my little dog, and I am interested still
more in what you have told me about yourself.  Now, I want you to do me
a favour.  I wish you to go with me to visit an old woman, and, after
that, to walk home with me--part of the way, at least."

The boy, whose pinched, hunger-smitten face had an expression of almost
supernatural intelligence on it, bestowed on me a quick, earnest glance.

"No dodges?  Honour bright?  You ain't a school-board buffer?" he asked.

"No dodges.  Honour bright," I replied, with a smile.

"Vell, then, heave ahead, an' I'll foller."

We passed quickly down to the lower end of the alley, which seemed to
lose itself in a wretched court that appeared as if it intended to slip
into the river--an intention which, if carried out, would have vastly
improved its sanitary condition.  Here, in a somewhat dark corner of the
court, I entered an open door, ascended a flight of stairs, and gained a
second landing.  At the farthest extremity of the passage I stopped at a
door and knocked.  Several of the other doors of the passage opened, and
various heads were thrust out, while inquisitive eyes surveyed me and my
companion.  A short survey seemed to suffice, for the doors were soon
shut, one after another, with a bang, but the door at which I knocked
did not open.

Lifting the latch, I entered, and observed that Mrs Willis was seated
by the window, looking wistfully out.  Being rather deaf, she had not
heard my knock.

"Come in," I whispered to little Slidder, "sit down on this stool near
the door, and keep quiet until I speak to you."

So saying, I advanced to the window.  The view was not interesting.  It
consisted of the side of a house; about three feet distant, down which
ran a water-spout, or drain-pipe, which slightly relieved the dead look
of the bricks.  From one pane of the window it was possible, by
squeezing your cheek against it, to obtain a perspective view of
chimney-pots.  By a stretch of the neck upwards you could see more
chimney pots.  By a stretch of imagination you could see cats
quarrelling around them,--or anything else you pleased!

Sitting down on a rickety chair beside the little old woman, I touched
her gently on the shoulder.  She had come to know my touch by that time,
I think, for she looked round with a bright little smile.



CHAPTER THREE.

TREATS OF AN OLD HEROINE.

It was pleasant yet sad to observe the smile with which old Mrs Willis
greeted me--pleasant, because it proved that she was rejoiced to see me;
sad, because it was not quite in keeping with the careworn old face
whose set wrinkles it deranged.

"I knew you would come.  You never miss the day," she said, both words
and tone showing that she had fallen from a much higher position in the
social scale.

"It costs me little to visit you once a week, dear Mrs Willis," I
replied, "and it gives me great pleasure; besides, I am bound by the
laws of the Society which grants your annuity to call personally and pay
it.  I only wish it were a larger sum."

"Large enough; more than I deserve," said the old woman in a low tone,
as she gazed somewhat vacantly at the dead wall opposite, and let her
eyes slowly descend the spout.

The view was not calculated to distract or dissipate the mind.  The
bricks were so much alike that the eye naturally sought and reposed on
or followed the salient feature.  Having descended the spout as far as
the window-sill permitted, the eyes of Mrs Willis slowly reascended as
far as possible, and then turned with a meek expression to my face.
"More than I deserve," she repeated, "and _almost_ as much as I require.
It is very kind of the Society to give it, and of you to bring it.  May
God bless you both!  Ah, doctor!  I'm often puzzled by--eh!  What's
that?"

The sudden question, anxiously asked, was accompanied by a feeble
attempt to gather her poor garments close round her feet as Dumps
sniffed at her skirts and agitated his ridiculous tail.

"It's only my dog, granny,"--I had of late adopted this term of
endearment; "a very quiet well-behaved creature, I assure you, that
seems too amiable to bite.  Why, he appears to have a tendency to claim
acquaintance with everybody.  I do believe he knows _you_!"

"No, no, he doesn't.  Put him out; pray put him out," said the old
woman, in alarm.

Grieved that I had unintentionally roused her fear, I opened the door
and called Dumps.  My doggie rose, with his three indicators erect and
expectant.

"Go out, sir, and lie down!"

The indicators slowly drooped, and Dumps crawled past in abject
humility.  Shutting the door, I returned.

"I hope you don't dislike little boys as well as little dogs, granny,
because I have brought one to wait for me here.  You won't mind his
sitting at the door until I go?"

"No, no!" said Mrs Willis quickly; "I like little boys--when--when
they're good," she added, after a pause.

"Say I'm one o' the good sort, sir," suggested Slidder, in a hoarse
whisper.  "Of course, it ain't true, but wot o' that, if it relieves her
mind?"

Taking no notice of this remark, I again sat down beside my old woman.

"What were you going to say about being puzzled, granny?"

"Puzzled, doctor! did I say I was puzzled?"

"Yes, but pray don't call me doctor.  I'm not quite fledged yet, you
know.  Call me Mellon, or John.  Well, you were saying--"

"Oh, I remember.  I was only going to say that I've been puzzled a good
deal of late by that text in which David says, `I have never seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.'  Now, my father and
mother were both good Christians, and, although I cannot claim to be a
_good_ one myself, I do claim to be a poor follower of Jesus.  Yet here
am I--"

She paused.

"Well, granny," said I, "are you forsaken?"

"Nay, John, God forbid that I should say so; but am I not a beggar?  Ah
pride, pride, you are hard to kill!"

"_Are_ you a beggar?"  I asked in a tone of surprise.  "When did you beg
last, granny?"

"Is not a recipient of charity a beggar?"

"No," I replied stoutly, "he is not.  A solicitor of charity is a
beggar, but a recipient thereof is not.  In your case it was I who was
the beggar.  Do you not remember when I found you first, without a crust
in the house, how I had to beg and entreat you to allow me to put your
name on this charity, and how you persistently refused, until at last I
did it without your consent; and how, eventually, you gave in only when
I charged you with pride?  You are not forsaken, granny, and you are not
a beggar."

"Brayvo, doctor! you have 'er there!" came in a soft whisper from the
door.

For a moment I felt tempted to turn the boy out, as I had turned out the
dog; but, seeing that my old woman had not overheard the remark, I took
no notice of it.

"You have put the matter in a new light John," said Mrs Willis slowly,
as her eyes once more sought the spout.  "You often put things in new
lights, and there does seem some truth in what you say.  It did hurt my
pride at first, but I'm gettin' used to it now.  Besides," continued the
old lady, with a deep sigh, "that trouble and everything else is
swallowed up in the great sorrow of my life."

"Ah! you refer to your granddaughter, I suppose," said I in a tone of
profound sympathy.  "You have never told me about her, dear granny.  If
it is not too painful a subject to speak of, I should like to hear about
her.  When did she die?"

"Die!" exclaimed Mrs Willis with a burst of energy that surprised
me--"she did not die!  She left me many, many months ago, it seems like
years now.  My Edie went out one afternoon to walk, like a beautiful
sunbeam as she always was, and--and--she never came back!"

"Never came back!"  I echoed, in surprise.

"No--never.  I was not able to walk then, any more than now, else I
would have ranged London all round, day and night, for my darling.  As
it was, a kind city missionary made inquiries at all the police-offices,
and everywhere else he could think of, but no clew could be gained as to
what had become of her.  At last he got wearied out and gave it up.  No
wonder; he had never seen Edie, and could not love her as I did.  Once
he thought he had discovered her.  The body of a poor girl had been
found in the river, which he thought answered to her description.  I
thought so too when he told me what she was like, and at once concluded
she had tumbled in by accident and been drowned--for, you see, my Edie
was good and pure and true.  She could not have committed suicide unless
her mind had become deranged, and there was nothing that I knew of to
bring about that.  They got me with much trouble into a cab, and drove
me to the place.  Ah! the poor thing--she was fair and sweet to look
upon, with her curling brown hair and a smile still on the parted lips,
as if she had welcomed Death; but she was not my Edie.  For months and
months after that I waited and waited, feeling sure that she would come.
Then I was forced to leave my lodging.  The landlord wanted it himself.
I begged that he would let me remain, but he would not.  He was a
hard-hearted, dissipated man.  I took another lodging, but it was a long
way off, and left my name and new address at the old one.  My heart sank
after that, and--and I've no hope now--no hope.  My darling must have
met with an accident in this terrible city.  She must have been killed,
and will never come back to me."

The poor creature uttered a low wail, and put a handkerchief to her old
eyes.

"But, bless the Lord!" she added in a more cheerful tone, "I will go to
her--soon."

For some minutes I knew not what to say in reply, by way of comforting
my poor old friend.  The case seemed indeed so hopeless.  I could only
press her hand.  But my nature is naturally buoyant, and ready to hope
against hope, even when distress assails myself.

"Do not say there is no hope, granny," said I at last, making an effort
to be cheerful.  "You know that with God all things are possible.  It
may be that this missionary did not go the right way to work in his
search, however good his intentions might have been.  I confess I cannot
imagine how it is possible that any girl should disappear in this way,
unless she had deliberately gone off with some one."

"No, John, my Edie would not have left me thus of her own free will,"
said the old woman, with a look of assurance which showed that her mind
was immovably fixed as to that point.

"Well, then," I continued, "loving you as you say she did, and being
incapable of leaving you deliberately and without a word of explanation,
it follows that--that--"

I stopped, for at this point no plausible reason for the girl's
disappearance suggested itself.

"It follows that she must have been killed," said the old woman in a low
broken tone.

"No, granny, I will not admit that.--Come, cheer up; I will do my best
to make inquiries about her, and as I have had considerable experience
in making investigations among the poor of London, perhaps I may fall on
some clew.  She would be sure to have made inquiries, would she not, at
your old lodging, if she had felt disposed to return?"

"Felt disposed!" repeated Mrs Willis, with a strange laugh.  "If she
_could_ return, you mean."

"Well--if she could," said I.

"No doubt she would; but soon after I left my old lodging the landlord
fled the country, and other people came to the house, who were troubled
by my sending so often to inquire.  Then my money was all expended, and
I had to quit my second lodging, and came here, which is far, far from
the old lodging, and now I have no one to send."

"Have you any friends in London?"  I asked.

"No.  We had come from York to try to find teaching for my darling, for
we could get none in our native town, and we had not been long enough in
London to make new friends when--when--she went away.  My dear Ann and
Willie, her mother and father, died last year, and now we have no near
relations in the world."

"Shall I read to you, granny?" said I, feeling that no words of mine
could do much to comfort one in so sad a case.

She readily assented.  I was in the habit of reading and praying with
her during these visits.  I turned, without any definite intention of
doing so, to the words, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest."  I cannot tell why, but I paused here
instead of reading on, or commenting on the words.

The old woman looked earnestly at me.

"These words," she said, "have been in my mind all yesterday and the day
before.  I have been greatly comforted by them, because `He is faithful
who has promised.'  Pray over them, John; don't read any more."

I knelt by the poor woman's chair; she could not kneel with me in body,
though she did in spirit, I doubt not.  I had quite forgotten Slidder,
but, on rising, observed that he had followed my example and gone down
on his knees.

"Were you praying with us, Slidder?"  I asked, after we left Mrs
Willis, and were walking up the alley, followed by Dumps.

"Dun know, sir; I've never heard nor seen nuffin' o' this sort before.
In coorse I've heard the missionaries sometimes, a-hollerin' about the
streets, but I never worrited myself about _them_.  I say, doctor,
that's a rum go about that gal Edie--ain't it?  I've quite took a fancy
to that gal, now, though I ain't seen her.  D'ye think she's bin
drownded?"

"I scarce know what to think.  Her disappearance so suddenly does seem
very strange.  I fear, I fear much that--however, it's of no use
guessing.  I shall at once set about making inquiries."

"Ha! so shall I," said the little waif, with a look of determination on
his small face that amused me greatly, "for she's a good gal is Edie--if
she ain't drownded."

"Why, boy, how can you know whether the girl is good or bad?"

"How can I know?" he echoed, with a glance of almost superhuman wisdom.
"In coorse I know by the powers of obserwation.  That old gal, Mrs
Willis, is a good old thing--as good as gold.  Vell, a good mother is
always cocksure to 'ave a good darter--specially ven she's a only
darter--so the mother o' Edie bein' good, Edie herself _must_ be good,
don't you see?  Anythink as belonged to Mrs Willis can't help bein'
good.  I'm glad you took me to see her, doctor, for I've made up my mind
to take that old 'ooman up, as the bobbies say w'en they're wexed with
avin' nuffin' to do 'xcept strut about the streets like turkey-cocks.
I'll take 'er up and do for 'er, I will."

On questioning him further I found that this ragged and homeless little
waif had indeed been touched by Mrs Willis's sad story, and drawn
towards her by her soft, gentle nature--so different from what he had
hitherto met with in his wanderings,--and that he was resolved to offer
her his gratuitous services as a message-boy and general servant,
without requiring either food or lodging in return.

"But Mrs Willis may object to such a dirty ragged fellow coming about
her," said I.

"Ain't there no pumps in London, stoopid?" said Slidder, with a look of
pity, "no soap?"

"True," I replied, with a laugh, "but you'd require needles and thread
and cloth, in addition, to make yourself respectable."

"Nothink of the sort; I can beg or borrer or steal coats and pants, you
know."

"Ah, Slidder!" said I, in a kind but serious tone, "doubtless you can,
but begging or borrowing are not likely to succeed, and stealing is
wrong."

"D'you think so?" returned the boy, with a look of innocent surprise.
"Don't you think, now, that in a good cause a cove might:--

  "`Take wot isn't his'n,
  An' risk his bein' sent to pris'n?'"

I replied emphatically that I did not think so, that _wrong_ could never
be made _right_ by any means, and that the commencement of a course of
even disinterested kindness on such principles would be sure to end ill.

"Vell, then, I'll reconsider my decision, as the maginstrates ought to
say, but never do."

"That's right.  And now we must part, Slidder," I said, stopping.  "Here
is the second sixpence I promised you, also my card and address.  Will
you come and see me at my own house the day after to-morrow, at eight in
the morning?"

