
THE LOVERS AND THE PRESS-GANG.

About a mile to the eastward of the ancient town of Arbroath the shore
abruptly changes its character, from a flat beach to a range of,
perhaps, the wildest and most picturesque cliffs on the east coast of
Scotland.  Inland the country is rather flat, but elevated several
hundred feet above the level of the sea, towards which it slopes gently
until it reaches the shore, where it terminates in abrupt, perpendicular
precipices, varying from a hundred to two hundred feet in height.  In
many places the cliffs overhang the water, and all along the coast they
have been perforated and torn up by the waves, so as to present
singularly bold and picturesque outlines, with caverns, inlets, and
sequestered "coves" of every form and size.

To the top of these cliffs, in the afternoon of the day on which our
tale opens, a young girl wended her way,--slowly, as if she had no other
object in view than a stroll, and sadly, as if her mind were more
engaged with the thoughts within than with the magnificent prospect of
land and sea without.  The girl was:

  "Fair, fair, with golden hair,"

and apparently about twenty years of age.  She sought out a quiet nook
among the rocks at the top of the cliffs; near to a circular chasm, with
the name of which (at that time) we are not acquainted, but which was
destined ere long to acquire a new name and celebrity from an incident
which shall be related in another part of this story.

Curiously enough, just about the same hour, a young man was seen to wend
his way to the same cliffs, and, from no reason whatever with which we
happened to be acquainted, sought out the same nook!  We say "he was
seen," advisedly, for the maid with the golden hair saw him.  Any
ordinary observer would have said that she had scarcely raised her eyes
from the ground since sitting down on a niece of flower-studded turf
near the edge of the cliff, and that she certainly had not turned her
head in the direction of the town.  Yet she saw him,--however absurd the
statement may appear, we affirm it confidently,--and knew that he was
coming.  Other eyes there were that also saw youth--eyes that would have
caused him some degree of annoyance had he known they were upon him--
eyes that he would have rejoiced to tinge with the colours black and
blue!  There were thirteen pair of them, belonging to twelve men and a
lieutenant of the navy.

In those days the barbarous custom of impressment into the Royal Navy
was in full operation.  England was at war with France.  Men were wanted
to fight our battles, and when there was any difficulty in getting men,
press-gangs were sent out to force them into the service.  The youth
whom we now introduce to the reader was a sailor, a strapping, handsome
one, too; not, indeed, remarkable for height, being only a little above
the average--five feet, ten inches or thereabouts--but noted for great
depth of chest, breadth of shoulder, and development of muscle;
conspicuous also for the quantity of close, clustering, light-brown
curls down his head, and for the laughing glance of his dark-blue eye.
Not a hero of romance, by any means.  No, he was very matter of fact,
and rather given to meditation than mischief.

The officer in charge of the press-gang had set his heart on this youth
(so had another individual, of whom more anon!) but the youth, whose
name was Ruby Brand, happened to have an old mother who was at that time
in very bad health, and she had also set her heart, poor body, on the
youth, and entreated him to stay at home just for one half-year.  Ruby
willingly consented, and from that time forward led the life of a dog in
consequence of the press-gang.

Now, as we have said, he had been seen leaving the town by the
lieutenant, who summoned his men and went after him--cautiously,
however, in order to take him by surprise for Ruby, besides being strong
and active as a lion, was slippery as an eel.

Going straight as an arrow to the spot where she of the golden hair was
seated, the youth presented himself suddenly to her, sat down beside
her, and exclaiming "Minnie", put his arm round her waist.

"Oh, Ruby, don't," said Minnie, blushing.

Now, reader, the "don't" and the blush had no reference to the arm round
the waist, but to the relative position of their noses, mouths, and
chins, a position which would have been highly improper and altogether
unjustifiable but for the fact that Ruby was Minnie's accepted lover.

"Don't, darling, why not?" said Ruby in surprise.

"You're _so_ rough," said Minnie, turning her head away.

"True, dear, I forgot to shave this morning."

"I don't mean that," interrupted the girl quickly, "I mean rude and--
and--is that a sea-gull?"

"No, sweetest of your sex, it's a butterfly; but it's all the same, as
my metaphysical Uncle Ogilvy would undertake to prove to you, thus, a
butterfly is white and a gull is white,--therefore, a gull is a
butterfly."

"Don't talk nonsense, Ruby."

"No more I will, darling, if you will listen to me while I talk sense."

"What is it?" said the girl, looking earnestly and somewhat anxiously
into her lover's face, for she knew at once by his expression that he
had some unpleasant communication to make.  "You're not going away?"

"Well, no--not exactly; you know I promised to stay with mother; but the
fact is that I'm so pestered and hunted down by that rascally
press-gang, that I don't know what to do.  They're sure to nab me at
last, too, and then I shall have to go away whether I will or no, so
I've made up my mind as a last resource, to--" Ruby paused.

"Well?" said Minnie.

"Well, in fact to do what will take me away for a short time, but--"
Ruby stopped short, and, turning his head on one side, while a look of
fierce anger overspread his face, seemed to listen intently.

Minnie did not observe this action for a few seconds, but, wondering why
he paused, she looked up, and in surprise exclaimed--"Ruby! what do
you--"

"Hush!  Minnie, and don't look round," said he in a low tone of intense
anxiety, yet remaining immovably in the position which he had assumed on
first sitting down by the girl's side, although the swelled veins of his
neck and his flushed forehead told of a fierce conflict of feeling
within.  "It's the press-gang after me again.  I got a glance of one o'
them out of the tail of my eye, creeping round the rocks.  They think I
haven't seen them.  Darling Minnie--one kiss.  Take care of mother if I
don't turn up soon."

"But how will you escape?"

"Hush, dearest girl!  I want to have as much of you as I can before I
go.  Don't be afraid.  They're honest British tars after all, and won't
hurt _you_, Minnie."

Still seated at the girl's side, as if perfectly at his ease, yet
speaking in quick earnest tones, and drawing her closely to him, Ruby
waited until he heard a stealthy tread behind him.  Then he sprang up
with the speed of thought, uttered a laugh of defiance as the sailors
rushed towards him, and leaping wildly off the cliff, fell a height of
about fifty feet into the sea.

Minnie uttered a scream of horror, and fell fainting into the arms of
the bewildered lieutenant.

"Down the cliffs--quick! he can't escape if you look alive.  Stay, one
of you, and look after this girl.  She'll roll over the edge on
recovering, perhaps."

It was easy to order the men down the cliffs, but not so easy for them
to obey, for the rocks were almost perpendicular at the place, and
descended sheer into the water.

"Surround the spot," shouted the lieutenant.  "Scatter yourselves--away!
there's no beach here."

The lieutenant was right.  The men extended themselves along the top of
the cliffs so as to prevent Ruby's escape, in the event of his trying to
ascend them, and two sailors stationed themselves in ambush in the
narrow pass at the spot where the cliffs terminate in the direction of
the town.

The leap taken by Ruby was a bold one.  Few men could have ventured it;
indeed, the youth himself would have hesitated had he not been driven
almost to desperation.  But he was a practised swimmer and diver, and
knew well the risk he ran.  He struck the water with tremendous force
and sent up a great mass of foam, but he had entered it perpendicularly,
feet foremost, and in a few seconds returned to the surface so close to
the cliffs that they overhung him, and thus effectually concealed him
from his pursuers.

Swimming cautiously along for a short distance close to the rocks, he
came to the entrance of a cavern which was filled by the sea.  The inner
end of this cave opened into a small hollow or hole among the cliffs, up
the sides of which Ruby knew that he could climb, and thus reach the top
unperceived, but, after gaining the summit, there still lay before him
the difficulty of eluding those who watched there.  He felt, however,
that nothing could be gained by delay, so he struck at once into the
cave, swam to the inner end, and landed.  Wringing the water out of his
clothes, he threw off his jacket and vest in order to be as unencumbered
as possible, and then began to climb cautiously.

Just above the spot where Ruby ascended there chanced to be stationed a
seaman named Dalls.  This man had lain down flat on his breast, with his
head close to the edge of the cliff, so as to observe narrowly all that
went on below, but, being a stout, lethargic man, he soon fell fast
asleep!  It was just at the spot where this man lay that Ruby reached
the summit.  The ascent was very difficult.  At each step the hunted
youth had to reach his hand as high above his head as possible, and
grasp the edge of a rock or a mass of turf with great care before
venturing on another step.  Had one of these points of rock, or one of
these tufts of grass, given way, he would infallibly have fallen down
the precipice and been killed.  Accustomed to this style of climbing
from infancy, however, he advanced without a sensation of fear.

On reaching the top he peeped over, and, seeing that no one was near,
prepared for a rush.  There was a mass of brown turf on the bank above
him.  He grasped it with all his force, and swung himself over the edge
of the cliff.  In doing so he nearly scalped poor Dalls, whose hair was
the "turf" which he had seized, and who, uttering a hideous yell, leaped
upon Ruby and tried to overthrow him.  But Dalls had met his match.  He
received a blow on the nose that all but felled him, and instantly after
a blow on each eye, that raised a very constellation of stars in his
brain, and laid him prone upon the grass.

His yell, however, and the noise of the scuffle, were heard by those of
the press-gang who were nearest to the scene of conflict.  They rushed
to the rescue, and reached the spot just as Ruby leaped over his
prostrate foe and fled towards Arbroath.  They followed with a cheer,
which warned the two men in ambush to be ready.  Ruby was lithe as a
greyhound.  He left his pursuers far behind him, and dashed down the
gorge leading from the cliffs to the low ground beyond.

Here he was met by the two sailors, and by the lieutenant, who had
joined them.  Minnie was also there, having been conducted thither by
the said lieutenant, who gallantly undertook to see her safe into the
town, in order to prevent any risk of her being insulted by his men.  On
hearing the shout of those who pursued Ruby, Minnie hurried away,
intending to get free from the gang, not feeling that the lieutenant's
protection was either desirable or necessary.

When Ruby reached the middle of the gorge, which we have dignified with
the name of "pass", and saw three men ready to dispute his passage, he
increased his speed.  When he was almost up to them he turned aside and
sprang nimbly up the almost perpendicular wall of earth on his right.
This act disconcerted the men, who had prepared to receive his charge
and seize him, but Ruby jumped down on the shoulders of the one nearest,
and crushed him to the ground with his weight.  His clenched fist caught
the lieutenant between the eyes and stretched him on his back--the third
man wisely drew aside to let this human thunderbolt pass by!

He did pass, and, as the impetuous and quite irresistible locomotive is
brought to a sudden pause when the appropriate brakes are applied, so
was he brought to a sudden halt by Minnie a hundred yards or so farther
on.

"Oh! don't stop," she cried eagerly, and hastily thrusting him away.
"They'll catch you!"

Panting though he was, vehemently, Ruby could not restrain a laugh.

"Catch me! no, darling; but don't be afraid of them.  They won't hurt
you, Minnie, and they can't hurt me--except in the way of cutting short
our interview.  Ha! here they come.  Goodbye, dearest; I'll see you soon
again."

At that moment five or six of the men came rushing down the pass with a
wild cheer.  Ruby made no haste to run.  He stood in an easy attitude
beside Minnie; leisurely kissed her little hand, and gently smoothed
down her golden hair.  Just as the foremost pursuer came within fifteen
yards or so of them, he said, "Farewell, my lassie, I leave you in good
hands"; and then, waving his cap in the air, with a cheer of more than
half-jocular defiance, he turned and fled towards Arbroath as if one of
the nor'-east gales, in its wildest fury, were sweeping him over the
land.



CHAPTER THREE.

OUR HERO OBLIGED TO GO TO SEA.

When Ruby Brand reached the outskirts of Arbroath, he checked his speed
and walked into his native town whistling gently, and with his hands in
his pockets, as though he had just returned from an evening walk.  He
directed his steps to one of the streets near the harbour, in which his
mother's cottage was situated.

Mrs Brand was a delicate, little old woman--so little and so old that
people sometimes wondered how it was possible that she could be the
mother of such a stalwart son.  She was one of those kind, gentle,
uncomplaining, and unselfish beings, who do not secure much popularity
or admiration in this world, but who secure obedient children, also
steadfast and loving friends.  Her favourite book was the Bible; her
favourite hope in regard to earthly matters, that men should give up
fighting and drinking, and live in peace; her favourite theory that the
study of _truth_ was the object for which man was created, and her
favourite meal--tea.

Ruby was her only child.  Minnie was the daughter of a distant relation,
and, having been left an orphan, she was adopted by her.  Mrs Brand's
husband was a sailor.  He commanded a small coasting sloop, of which
Ruby had been the mate for several years.  As we have said, Ruby had
been prevailed on to remain at home for some months in order to please
his mother, whose delicacy of health was such that his refusal would
have injured her seriously; at least the doctor said so, therefore Ruby
agreed to stay.

The sloop _Penguin_, commanded by Ruby's father, was on a voyage to
Newcastle at that time, and was expected in Arbroath every day.  But it
was fated never more to cast anchor in that port.  The great storm, to
which reference has been made in a previous chapter, caused many wrecks
on the shores of Britain.  The _Penguin_, was one of the many.

In those days telegraphs, railroads, and penny papers did not exist.
Murders were committed then, as now, but little was said, and less was
known about them.  Wrecks occurred then, as now, but few, except the
persons immediately concerned, heard of them.  "Destructive fires",
"terrible accidents", and the familiar round of "appalling catastrophes"
occurred then, as now, but their influence was limited, and their
occurrence soon forgotten.

We would not be understood to mean that "now" (as compared with "then"),
all is right and well; that telegraphs and railways and daily papers are
all-potent and perfect.  By no means.  We have still much to learn and
to do in these improved times; and, especially, there is wanting to a
large extent among us a sympathetic telegraphy, so to speak, between the
interior of our land and the sea-coast, which, if it existed in full and
vigorous play, would go far to improve our condition, and raise us in
the esteem of Christian nations.  Nevertheless, as compared with now,
the state of things then was lamentably imperfect.

The great storm came and went, having swept thousands of souls into
eternity, and hundreds of thousands of pounds into nonentity.  Lifeboats
had not been invented.  Harbours of refuge were almost unknown, and
although our coasts bristled with dangerous reefs and headlands,
lighthouses were few and far between.  The consequence was, that wrecks
were numerous; and so also were wreckers,--a class of men, who, in the
absence of an efficient coastguard, subsisted to a large extent on what
they picked up from the wrecks that were cast in their way, and who did
not scruple, sometimes, to _cause_ wrecks, by showing false lights in
order to decoy vessels to destruction.

We do not say that all wreckers were guilty of such crimes, but many of
them were so, and their style of life, at the best, had naturally a
demoralising influence upon all of them.

The famous Bell Rock, lying twelve miles off the coast of Forfarshire,
was a prolific source of destruction to shipping.  Not only did numbers
of vessels get upon it, but many others ran upon the neighbouring coasts
in attempting to avoid it.

Ruby's father knew the navigation well, but, in the confusion and
darkness of the furious storm, he miscalculated his position and ran
upon the rock, where, as we have seen, his body was afterwards found by
the two fishermen.  It was conveyed by them to the cottage of Mrs
Brand, and when Ruby entered he found his mother on her knees by the
bedside, pressing the cold hand of his father to her breast, and gazing
with wild, tearless eyes into the dead face.

We will not dwell upon the sad scenes that followed.

Ruby was now under the necessity of leaving home, because his mother
being deprived of her husband's support naturally turned in distress to
her son.  But Ruby had no employment, and work could not be easily
obtained at that time in the town, so there was no other resource left
him but to go to sea.  This he did in a small coasting sloop belonging
to an old friend, who gave him part of his wages in advance to enable
him to leave his mother a small provision, at least for a short time.

This, however, was not all that the widow had to depend on.  Minnie Gray
was expert with her needle, and for some years past had contributed not
a little to the comforts of the household into which she had been
adopted.  She now set herself to work with redoubled zeal and energy.
Besides this, Mrs Brand had a brother, a retired skipper, who obtained
