there not something like a line of white close to the wreck?"

"Ay, there is," replied Dominick, his countenance again becoming grave;
"it is a line of breakers, through which it will be very difficult to
steer our little boat."

"Steer, Dom," exclaimed Otto, with a look of surprise; "how can you talk
of steering at all, without oar or helm?"

"I must make one of the floor-planks do for both," returned Dominick.

"I say," continued the boy, "I'm horribly hungry.  Mayn't I have just a
bite or two more?"

"Stay, I'm thinking," replied the other.

"Think fast then, please, for the wolf inside of me is howling."

The result of Dominick's thinking was that he resolved to consume as
much of their stock of provisions as possible in one meal, in order to
secure all the strength that was available by such means, and thus fit
them for the coming struggle with the surf.  "For," said he, "if we get
capsized far from the shore, we have no chance of reaching it by
swimming in our present weak condition.  Our only plan is to get up all
the strength we can by means of food.  So here goes!"

He untied the bundle as he spoke, and spread the contents on his knees.
Otto--who was, indeed, a plucky little fellow, and either did not
realise or did not fear the danger that lay before him--commenced to eat
with almost jovial avidity.  Indeed, all three showed that they had
benefited greatly by what they had already eaten, and now, for the first
time during many days, consumed what they considered a full and
satisfactory meal, while they drifted slowly, but steadily, towards the
land.

As they neared it, the heavy mass on the horizon, which they had taken
for a bank of clouds, became more distinct.  A light haze cleared away
and showed it to be an island, to which the sandbank formed a barrier
reef; but any interest that might have been aroused by this discovery
was absorbed by present anxiety, for the white and gleaming surf warned
them that a serious and critical moment in their lives was fast
approaching.  Pauline was awed into silence, and even Otto's countenance
became gradually solemnised.



CHAPTER TWO.

WRECKED ON A REEF.

The coral reefs, which in various shapes and sizes stud the Southern
seas, are sometimes rendered almost unapproachable by the immense waves
which fall upon them.  Even in the calmest weather these huge breakers
may be seen falling with prolonged roar on the beach.  The lightest
undulation on the sea, which might almost escape observation away from
land, takes the form of a grand, quiet billow as it draws near to an
islet or reef, and finally, coming majestically on, like a wall of
rolling crystal, breaks the silence suddenly by its thunderous fall, and
gives to the sands a temporary fringe of pure white foam.

To ride in on the crest of one such roller on a piece of board and leap
upon the shore, is a feat peculiar to South Sea islanders, who are
trained to the water from earliest infancy.  To do the same thing in a
small boat, without oars, without strength, without experience, almost
without courage, is a feat that no South Sea islander would attempt, and
the necessity for performing which might cause the hair of any
islander's head to stand on end.

That Dominick Rigonda's hair did not stand on end, as he sat there with
pale cheeks and compressed lips, was probably due to the fact that he
had thrust his straw hat tightly down on his brows.

As the boat drew nearer to the reef, both Pauline and Otto had risen, in
the strength of their hearty meal, and were now seated on the thwarts of
the boat.  Their brother had selected the thickest floor-plank, and cut
it roughly into the form of an oar with a clasp-knife.  He now sat with
it over the stern, sculling gently--very gently, however, for he
reserved the little strength that remained to him for the critical
moment.

The undulations of the sea, which had rocked them hitherto so softly,
had by that time assumed a decided form and force, so that the boat rose
on the oily back of each billow that passed under it, and slid back into
a watery hollow, to be relifted by each successive wave.

"You look very anxious," said Pauline, clasping her hands on her knee,
and gazing earnestly in her brother's face.

"I cannot help it," returned Dominick, curtly.

"Is our danger then so great?"

Dominick only half admitted that it was.  He did not wish to alarm her,
and tried to smile as he said that the struggle would be brief--it would
soon be over.

"But tell me, where lies the danger?" persisted Pauline.  "I do not
quite see it."

"`Where ignorance is bliss,' dear, `'tis folly to be wise,'" returned
Dominick, with an unsuccessful effort to look more at ease.

"Nay, brother, but I am not ignorant that danger exists--only ignorant
as to the amount and nature of it.  Surely there cannot be much risk in
pushing our boat through that white foam that lines the shore with so
soft a fringe."

"I should think not," broke in the pert and inexperienced Otto; "why,
Pina," (thus he abridged his sister's name), "there's as much danger, I
should think, in pushing through a tub of soap-suds."

"Come, Dom," returned the girl, "explain it to me; for if you don't
point out where the danger really lies, if you leave me in this state of
partial ignorance, I shall be filled with alarm instead of bliss from
this moment till we reach the shore."

"Well, well, sister," said Dominick, when thus urged; "if you must have
it, I will explain."

He went on to show that when the boat came near the shore the waves
would grasp it, instead of letting it slip back; would carry it swiftly
in on their crests, so that the great difficulty in such a case would be
to keep the boat's head pointing to the land, and if he failed to do so,
they would infallibly be overturned and have to swim ashore.

"Well, that would be unpleasant, Dom," said the ignorant, as well as
innocent, Pauline, "but it would not matter much, for we can all swim--
thanks to you for insisting on teaching us long ago."

"We will try our best," said Dominick, who thereupon relapsed into
silence, wisely resolving to let his sister retain all the "bliss" of
"ignorance" that was possible under the circumstances.

Indeed, there was not much more time for conversation, for the power of
the waves was beginning to be felt by the little craft, and the clumsy
oar did not act with as much precision or force as was desirable, while
Dominick's weakness rendered the steering difficult.  Pauline now began
to realise the danger somewhat more clearly from experience, and even
Otto showed symptoms of surprise that amounted very nearly to alarm, as
the boat at one point made a sudden rush on a wave-top as if it meant to
try a race with it, and then as suddenly slipped back into the hollow
behind, as if it had been disheartened, feeling that there was no
chance.

At last they reached the point of greatest danger.  The huge waves, as
we have said, commenced out at sea in long, gentle undulations.  Nearer
the shore they advanced in the shape of glassy walls, one after another,
like successive lines of indomitable infantry in time of war.  Further
in, the tops of these waves began to gurgle and foam, and gather real,
instead of seeming, motion, as they rushed towards their fall.  It was
here that the boat showed symptoms of becoming unmanageable.

"Why, the water's beginning to boil!" exclaimed Otto, in some anxiety.

"Hold on, boy, and keep quiet," said his brother.

As he spoke, the water gurgled up, so that it seemed as if about to pour
inboard all round.  At the same time the boat made a rush shoreward as
if suddenly endowed with life.  Dominick struggled manfully to keep the
stern to the sea.  He succeeded, but in another moment the boat slipped
back.  It had not been fairly caught, and the wave passed on to fall
with a roar like thunder a hundred yards or so ahead.

"The next will do it," said Dominick, with an anxious glance behind,
where a crystal wall was coming grandly on--unnaturally high, it seemed
to them, owing to their position in the hollow.

No need to tell Otto now to hold on!  No need to explain difficulty or
danger to Pauline!  As her brother stood at the oar, quivering as much
from weakness as exertion, she understood it all.  But she was brave,
and she could swim.  This latter fact lent her additional confidence.
Best of all, she had faith in God, and her spirit was calmed, for,
whether life or death lay before her, she knew that her soul was "safe."

As Dominick had prophesied, the next wave took them fairly in its grasp.
For a few moments the water hissed and gurgled round them.  The
steersman seemed to lose control for a second or two, but quickly
recovered.  Then there was a bound, as if the boat had been shot from a
catapult, and the billow fell.  A tremendous roar, tumultuous foam all
round, increasing speed!  The land appeared to be rushing at them, when
Dominick's oar snapped suddenly, and he went overboard.  A shriek from
Pauline and a shout from Otto rose high above the din of raging water,
as the boat broached-to and hurled its remaining occupants into the sea.

Even in that trying moment Dominick did not lose presence of mind.  He
could swim and dive like a water-rat.  Pushing towards his brother and
sister, who were heading bravely for the shore, he shouted, "Dig your
fingers and toes deep into the sand, and hold on for life, if--" (he
corrected himself) "_when_ you gain the beach."

It was well they were forewarned, and that they were constitutionally
obedient.  A few minutes later, and they were all swept up high on the
beach in a wilderness of foam.  The return of that wilderness was like
the rushing of a millrace.  Sand, stones, sticks, and seaweed went back
with it in dire confusion.  Prone on their knees, with fingers and toes
fixed, and heads down, the brothers and sister met the rush.  It was
almost too much for them.  A moment more, and strength as well as breath
would have failed; but the danger passed, and Dominick sprang to his
feet.

"Up, up! and run!" he shouted, as he caught Pauline round the waist and
dragged her on.  Otto needed no help.  They were barely in time.  The
succeeding wave roared after them as if maddened at having lost its
prey, and the foaming water was up with them, and almost round their
knees, ere its fury was quite spent.

"Safe!" exclaimed Dominick.

"Thank God!" murmured Pauline, as she sank exhausted on the sand.

Otto, who had never seen his sister in such a state before, ran to her,
and, kneeling down, anxiously seized one of her hands.

"Never fear, lad," said his brother in reassuring tones, "she'll soon
come round.  Lend a hand to lift her."

They bore the fainting girl up the beach, and laid her on a grassy spot
under a bush.  And now Dominick was glad to find that he had been
mistaken in supposing that the coral reef was a mere sandbank, destitute
of vegetation.  Indeed, before landing, he had observed that there were
a few trees on the highest part of it.  He now perceived that there was
quite a little grove of cocoa-nut palms, with a thicket of underwood
around them, which, if not extensive, was at all events comparatively
dense.  He pointed out the fact to Otto, who was chafing his sister's
hands.

"Ay," responded Otto, "and the island on the other side must be a
goodish big one, for I got a glimpse of it through the trees as we came
rushing in on that monstrous wave."

In a short time Pauline recovered, and Dominick returned to the water's
edge with Otto.

"Our first care must be," he said, "to save our little boat if we can,
for it is the only means we have of escaping from this island."

"Escaping!" repeated Otto, in surprise.  "I don't want to escape from
it, Dom."

"Indeed! why not?"

"Why, because I've dreamed about being cast on a desolate island
hundreds of times, and I've read about Robinson Crusoe, and all the
other Crusoes, and I've longed to be cast on one, and now I am cast on
one, so I don't want to escape.  It'll be the greatest fun in the world.
I only hope I won't wake up, as usual, to find that it's all a dream!"

Dominick laughed (not scornfully, by any means) at the boy's enthusiasm;
nevertheless he had strong sympathy with him, for the period had not
passed so long ago when he himself entertained a very vivid impression
of the romance of such a situation, and he did not trouble his mind
about the stern realities.

"I sincerely hope it may come up to your expectations, Otto, my boy;
nevertheless we must secure the boat for fishing purposes, even though
we don't try to escape in it."

"For fishing! why, we have neither hooks nor lines."

"True, lad; but we have got fingers and brains.  It strikes me that we
shall have occasion to use all our powers and possessions if we are not
to starve here, for the reef seems to have very little vegetation on it,
and there is sure to be a lagoon of water on the other side, separating
it from the island beyond."

"I wonder if there is fresh water on the reef," said Otto, with a very
sudden look of solemnity and pursing of the mouth.

"You may well ask that.  I hope there is.  We will go and settle the
point the moment we have secured the boat, if--"

He stopped, for he saw at that moment that the sea had taken good care
to secure the boat to itself as a plaything.  Having dashed it into
small pieces, it was by that time busily engaged in tossing these about
among the foam, now hurling the splinters high upon the shore, anon
sending up long watery tongues to lick them back, and then casting them
under the incoming rollers, to be further reduced into what is usually
styled matchwood.

There was a small bay close at hand, where the sandy beach was strewn
with rocks, in which the sea appeared to play this game with unusual
vigour.  It was a sort of hospital for marine incurables, into which the
sea cast its broken toys when tired of smashing them up, and left them
there to rot.

Regarding this spot with a thoughtful look, Dominick remarked that the
wreck which lay on the rocks off the tail of the island was by no means
the first that had taken place there.

"And won't be the last, I fancy," said Otto.

"Probably not.  Indeed, from the appearance of this bay, and the fact
that an ocean current drifted us towards the spot, I should think that
the island is a particularly dangerous one for vessels.  But come, we'll
go see how Pina gets on, and then proceed to examine our new home."

Returning to the place where Pauline had been left, they found the poor
girl wringing the water out of her dress.  The news of the fate of the
little boat did not seem to affect her much, she did not fully
appreciate the loss, and was more taken up with the idea of thankfulness
for deliverance from death.

"May I not go with you?" she asked, on hearing that her brothers were
going to search for water.

"Certainly.  I thought you might perhaps prefer to rest, and dry your
clothes in the sun," replied Dominick.

"Walking will dry them better," said Pina.  "Besides, I have quite
recovered."

"You're a plucky little woman," said Otto, as they set off.  "Isn't it
nice to be here all by ourselves, on a real uninhabited island, quite
fit for Robinson himself?  Who knows but we may find Friday in the
bushes!"

"Wouldn't that spoil it as an uninhabited isle?"

"A little, but not much."

"The thicket is too small to contain anything with life, I fear," said
Dominick, whose anxiety as to food and drink prevented his sympathising
much with the small-talk of the other two.  "Luckily the weather is
warm," he added, "and we won't require better shelter at present than
the bushes afford, unless a storm comes.--Ho what have we here?--a
path!"

They had reached the entrance to the thicket, and discovered what
appeared to be an opening into it, made apparently by the hand of man.

"Nothing more likely," said Pauline.  "If so many wrecks have taken
place here--as you seem to think--some of the crews must have landed,
and perhaps lived here."

"Ay, and died here," returned Dominick, in a grave, low tone, as he
pointed to a skeleton lying on a spot which had once been cleared of
bushes, but so long ago that the vegetation had partially grown up
again.  The man whose bleached bones lay before them had evidently
perished many years before.  On examination, nothing was found to afford
any information about him, but when they had advanced a dozen yards
further they came upon six little mounds, which showed that a party--
probably a wrecked crew--had sojourned there for a time, and finally
perished: so far their story was clear enough.  One by one they must
have sunk, until the last man had lain down to die and remain unburied.

