fastened together with strong plaiting.  Each side consisted of one
entire plank, sixty-three feet long, ten or twelve inches broad, and
about one inch and a quarter thick; and these were fitted and lashed to
the bottom part with great dexterity and strength.

"A considerable number of thwarts were laid from gunwale to gunwale, to
which they were securely lashed on each side, as a strengthening to the
boat.  The ornament at the head projected five or six feet beyond the
body, and was about four and a half feet high.  The ornament at the
stern was fixed upon that end as the stern-post of a ship is upon her
keel, and was about fourteen feet high, two broad, and one inch and a
half thick.  They both consisted of boards of carved work, of which the
design was much better than the execution.  All their canoes, except a
few at Opoorage or Mercury Bay, which were of one piece, and hollowed by
fire, are built after this plan, and few are less than twenty feet long.
Some of the smaller sort have outriggers; and sometimes two are joined
together, but this is not common.

"The carving upon the stern and head ornaments of the inferior boats,
which seemed to be intended wholly for fishing, consists of the figure
of a man, with the face as ugly as can be conceived, and a monstrous
tongue thrust out of the mouth, with the white shells of sea-ears stuck
in for eyes.  But the canoes of the superior kind, which seem to be
their men-of-war, are magnificently adorned with openwork, and covered
with loose fringes of black feathers, which had a most elegant
appearance.  The gunwale boards were also frequently carved in a
grotesque taste, and adorned with tufts of white feathers placed upon
black ground.  The paddles are small and neatly made.  The blade is of
an oval shape, or rather of a shape resembling a large leaf, pointed at
the bottom, broadest in the middle, and gradually losing itself in the
shaft, the whole length being about six feet.  By the help of these oars
they push on their boats with amazing velocity."

Mr Ellis, to whose book reference has already been made, and who
visited the South Sea Islands nearly half a century later than Cook,
tells us that the _single canoes_ used by some of the islanders are far
safer than the _double canoes_ for long voyages, as the latter are apt
to be torn asunder during a storm, and then they cannot be prevented
from constantly upsetting.

Single canoes are not so easily separated from their outrigger.
Nevertheless they are sometimes upset in rough seas; but the natives
don't much mind this.  When a canoe is upset and fills, the natives, who
learn to swim like ducks almost as soon as they can walk, seize hold of
one end of the canoe, which they press down so as to elevate the other
end above the sea, by which means a great part of the water runs out;
they then suddenly loose their hold, and the canoe falls back on the
water, emptied in some degree of its contents.  Swimming along by the
side of it, they bale out the rest, and climbing into it, pursue their
voyage.

Europeans, however, are not so indifferent to being overturned as are
the savages.  On one occasion Mr Ellis, accompanied by three ladies,
Mrs Orsmond, Mrs Barff, and his wife, with her two children and one or
two natives, were crossing a harbour in the island of Huahine.  A female
servant was sitting in the forepart of the canoe with Mr Ellis's little
girl in her arms.  His infant boy was at its mother's breast; and a
native, with a long light pole, was paddling or pushing the canoe along,
when a small buhoe, with a native youth sitting in it, darted out from
behind a bush that hung over the water, and before they could turn or
the youth could stop his canoe, it ran across the outrigger.  This in an
instant went down, the canoe was turned bottom upwards, and the whole
party precipitated into the sea.

The sun had set soon after they started from the opposite side, and the
twilight being very short, the shades of evening had already thickened
round them, which prevented the natives on shore from seeing their
situation.  The native woman, being quite at home in the water, held the
little girl up with one hand, and swam with the other towards the shore,
aiding at the same time Mrs Orsmond, who had caught hold of her long
hair, which floated on the water behind her.  Mrs Barff, on rising to
the surface, caught hold of the outrigger of the canoe that had
occasioned the disaster, and calling out loudly for help, informed the
people on shore of their danger, and speedily brought them to their
assistance.  Mrs Orsmond's husband, happening to be at hand at the
time, rushed down to the beach and plunged at once into the water.  His
wife, on seeing him, quitted her, hold of the native woman, and grasping
her husband, would certainly have drowned both him and herself had not
the natives sprung in and rescued them.

Mahinevahine, the queen of the island, leaped into the sea and rescued
Mrs Barff; Mr Ellis caught hold of the canoe, and supported his wife
and their infant until assistance came.  Thus they were all saved.

The South Sea islanders, of whose canoes we have been writing, are--some
of them at least--the fiercest savages on the face of the earth.  They
wear little or no clothing, and practise cannibalism--that is,
_man-eating_--from choice.  They actually prefer human flesh to any
other.  Of this we are informed on most unquestionable authority.

Doubtless the canoes which we have described are much the same now as
they were a thousand years ago; so that, by visiting those parts of the
earth where the natives are still savage, we may, as it were, leap
backward into ancient times, and behold with our own eyes the state of
marine architecture as it existed when our own forefathers were savages,
and paddled about the Thames and the Clyde on logs, and rafts, and
wicker-work canoes.



CHAPTER FOUR.

ANCIENT SHIPS AND NAVIGATORS.

Everything must have a beginning, and, however right and proper things
may appear to those who begin them, they generally wear a strange,
sometimes absurd, aspect to those who behold them after the lapse of
many centuries.

When we think of the trim-built ships and yachts that now cover the
ocean far and wide, we can scarce believe it possible that men really
began the practice of navigation, and first put to sea, in such
grotesque vessels as that represented on page 55.

In a former chapter reference has been made to the rise of commerce and
maritime enterprise, to the fleets and feats of the Phoenicians,
Egyptians, and Hebrews in the Mediterranean, where commerce and
navigation first began to grow vigorous.  We shall now consider the
peculiar structure of the ships and boats in which their maritime
operations were carried on.

_Boats_, as we have said, must have succeeded rafts and canoes, and big
boats soon followed in the wake of little ones.  Gradually, as men's
wants increased, the magnitude of their boats also increased, until they
came to deserve the title of little ships.  These enormous boats, or
little ships, were propelled by means of oars of immense size; and, in
order to advance with anything like speed, the oars and rowers had to be
multiplied, until they became very numerous.

In our own day we seldom see a boat requiring more than eight or ten
oars.  In ancient times boats and ships required sometimes as many as
four hundred oars to propel them.

The forms of the ancient ships were curious and exceedingly picturesque,
owing to the ornamentation with which their outlines were broken, and
the high elevation of their bows and sterns.

We have no very authentic details of the minutiae of the form or size of
ancient ships, but antiquarians have collected a vast amount of
desultory information, which, when put together, enables us to form a
pretty good idea of the manner of working them, while ancient coins and
sculptures have given us a notion of their general aspect.  No doubt
many of these records are grotesque enough, nevertheless they must be
correct in the main particulars.

Homer, who lived 1000 B.C., gives, in his "Odyssey," an account of
ship-building in his time, to which antiquarians attach much importance,
as showing the ideas then prevalent in reference to geography, and the
point at which the art of ship-building had then arrived.  Of course due
allowance must be made for Homer's tendency to indulge in hyperbole.

Ulysses, king of Ithaca, and deemed on of the wisest Greeks who went to
Troy, having been wrecked upon an island, is furnished by the nymph
Calypso with the means of building a ship,--that hero being determined
to seek again his native shore and return to his home and his faithful
spouse Penelope.

  "Forth issuing thus, she gave him first to wield
  A weighty axe, with truest temper steeled,
  And double-edged; the handle smooth and plain,
  Wrought of the clouded olive's easy grain;
  And next, a wedge to drive with sweepy sway;
  Then to the neighbouring forest led the way.
  On the lone island's utmost verge there stood
  Of poplars, pines, and firs, a lofty wood,
  Whose leafless summits to the skies aspire,
  Scorched by the sun, or seared by heavenly fire
  (Already dried).  These pointing out to view,
  The nymph just showed him, and with tears withdrew.

  "Now toils the hero; trees on trees o'erthrown
  Fall crackling round, and the forests groan;
  Sudden, full twenty on the plain are strewed,
  And lopped and lightened of their branchy load.
  At equal angles these disposed to join,
  He smoothed and squared them by the rule and line.
  (The wimbles for the work Calypso found),
  With those he pierced them and with clinchers bound.
  Long and capacious as a shipwright forms
  Some bark's broad bottom to outride the storms,
  So large he built the raft; then ribbed it strong
  From space to space, and nailed the planks along.
  These formed the sides; the deck he fashioned last;
  Then o'er the vessel raised the taper mast,
  With crossing sail-yards dancing in the wind:
  And to the helm the guiding rudder joined
  (With yielding osiers fenced to break the force
  Of surging waves, and steer the steady course).
  Thy loom, Calypso, for the future sails
  Supplied the cloth, capacious of the gales.
  With stays and cordage last he rigged the ship,
  And, rolled on levers, launched her on the deep."

The ships of the ancient Greeks and Romans were divided into various
classes, according to the number of "ranks" or "banks," that is, _rows_,
of oars.  _Monoremes_ contained one bank of oars; _biremes_, two banks;
_triremes_, three; _quadriremes_, four; _quinqueremes_, five; and so on.
But the two latter were seldom used, being unwieldy, and the oars in
the upper rank almost unmanageable from their great length and weight.

Ptolemy Philopator of Egypt is said to have built a gigantic ship with
no less than forty tiers of oars, one above the other!  She was managed
by 4000 men, besides whom there were 2850 combatants; she had four
rudders and a double prow.  Her stern was decorated with splendid
paintings of ferocious and fantastic animals; her oars protruded through
masses of foliage; and her hold was filled with grain!

That this account is exaggerated and fanciful is abundantly evident; but
it is highly probable that Ptolemy did construct one ship, if not more,
of uncommon size.

The sails used in these ships were usually square; and when there was
more than one mast, that nearest the stern was the largest.  The rigging
was of the simplest description, consisting sometimes of only two ropes
from the mast to the bow and stern.  There was usually a deck at the bow
and stern, but never in the centre of the vessel.  Steering was managed
by means of a huge broad oar, sometimes a couple, at the stern.  A
formidable "beak" was affixed to the fore-part of the ships of war, with
which the crew charged the enemy.  The vessels were painted black, with
red ornaments on the bows; to which latter Homer is supposed to refer
when he writes of red-cheeked ships.

Ships built by the Greeks and Romans for war were sharper and more
elegant than those used in commerce; the latter being round bottomed,
and broad, in order to contain cargo.

The Corinthians were the first to introduce _triremes_ into their navy
(about 700 years B.C.), and they were also the first who had any navy of
importance.  The Athenians soon began to emulate them, and ere long
constructed a large fleet of vessels both for war and commerce.  That
these ancient ships were light compared with ours, is proved by the fact
that when the Greeks landed to commence the siege of Troy they _drew up
their ships on the shore_.  We are also told that ancient mariners, when
they came to a long narrow promontory of land, were sometimes wont to
land, draw their ships bodily across the narrowest part of the isthmus,
and launch them on the other side.

Moreover, they had a salutary dread of what sailors term "blue water"--
that is, the deep, distant sea--and never ventured out of sight of land.
They had no compass to direct them, and in their coasting voyages of
discovery they were guided, if blown out to sea, by the stars.

The sails were made of linen in Homer's time; subsequently sail-cloth
was made of hemp, rushes, and leather.  Sails were sometimes dyed of
various colours and with curious patterns.  Huge ropes were fastened
round the ships to bind them more firmly together, and the bulwarks were
elevated beyond the frame of the vessels by wicker-work covered with
skins.

Stones were used for anchors, and sometimes crates of small stones or
sand; but these were not long of being superseded by iron anchors with
teeth or flukes.

The Romans were not at first so strong in naval power as their
neighbours, but in order to keep pace with them they were ultimately
compelled to devote more attention to their navies.  About 260 B.C. they
raised a large fleet to carry on the war with Carthage.  A Carthaginian
quinquereme which happened to be wrecked on their coast was taken
possession of by the Romans, used as a model, and one hundred and thirty
ships constructed from it.  These ships were all built, it is said, in
six days; but this appears almost incredible.  We must not, however,
judge the power of the ancients by the standard of present times.  It is
well known that labour was cheap then, and we have recorded in history
the completion of great works in marvellously short time, by the mere
force of myriads of workmen.

The Romans not only succeeded in raising a considerable navy, but they
proved themselves ingenious in the contrivance of novelties in their
war-galleys.  They erected towers on the decks, from the top of which
their warriors fought as from the walls of a fortress.  They also placed
small cages or baskets on the top of their masts, in which a few men
were placed to throw javelins down on the decks of the enemy; a practice
which is still carried out in principle at the present day, men being
placed in the "tops" of the masts of our men-of-war, whence they fire
down on the enemy.  It was a bullet from the "top" of one of the masts
of the enemy that laid low our greatest naval hero, Lord Nelson.

From this time the Romans maintained a powerful navy.  They crippled the
maritime power of their African foes, and built a number of ships with
six and even ten ranks of oars.  The Romans became exceedingly fond of
representations of sea-fights, and Julius Caesar dug a lake in the
Campus Martius specially for these exhibitions.  They were not by any
means sham fights.  The unfortunates who manned the ships on these
occasions were captives or criminals, who fought as the gladiators did--
to the death--until one side was exterminated or spared by imperial
clemency.  In one of these battles no fewer than a hundred ships and
nineteen thousand combatants were engaged!

Such were the people who invaded Britain in the year 55 B.C. under
Julius Caesar, and such the vessels from which they landed upon our
shores to give battle to the then savage natives of our country.

It is a curious fact that the crusades of the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries were the chief cause of the advancement of navigation after
the opening of the Christian era.  During the first five hundred years
after the birth of our Lord, nothing worthy of notice in the way of
maritime enterprise or discovery occurred.

But about this time an event took place which caused the foundation of
one of the most remarkable maritime cities in the world.  In the year
476 Italy was invaded by the barbarians.  One tribe, the Veneti, who
dwelt upon the north-eastern shores of the Adriatic, escaped the
invaders by fleeing for shelter to the marshes and sandy islets at the
head of the gulf, whither their enemies could not follow by land, owing
to the swampy nature of the ground, nor by sea, on account of the
shallowness of the waters.  The Veneti took to fishing, then to making
salt, and finally to mercantile enterprises.  They began to build, too,
on those sandy isles, and soon their cities covered ninety islands, many
of which were connected by bridges.  And thus arose the far-famed city
of the waters--"Beautiful Venice, the bride of the sea."

Soon the Venetians, and their neighbours the Genoese, monopolised the
commerce of the Mediterranean.

The crusades now began, and for two centuries the Christian warred
against the Turk in the name of Him who, they seem to have forgotten, if
indeed the mass of them ever knew, is styled the Prince of Peace.  One
of the results of these crusades was that the Europeans engaged acquired
a taste for Eastern luxuries, and the fleets of Venice and Genoa, Pisa
and Florence, ere long crowded the Mediterranean, laden with jewels,
silks, perfumes, spices, and such costly merchandise.  The Normans, the
Danes, and the Dutch also began to take active part in the naval
enterprise thus fostered, and the navy of France was created under the
auspices of Philip Augustus.

The result of all this was that there was a great moving, and, to some
extent, commingling of the nations.  The knowledge of arts and
manufactures was interchanged, and of necessity the knowledge of various
languages spread.  The West began constantly to demand the products of
the East, wealth began to increase, and the sum of human knowledge to
extend.

Shortly after this era of opening commercial prosperity in the
Mediterranean, the hardy Northmen performed deeds on the deep which
outrival those of the great Columbus himself, and were undertaken many
centuries before his day.

The Angles, the Saxons, and the Northmen inhabited the borders of the
Baltic, the shores of the German Ocean, and the coasts of Norway.  Like
the nations on the shores of the Mediterranean, they too became famous
navigators; but, unlike them, war and piracy were their chief objects of
pursuit.  Commerce was secondary.

In vessels resembling that of which the above is a representation, those
nations went forth to plunder the dwellers in more favoured climes, and
to establish the Anglo-Saxon dominion in England; and their celebrated
King Alfred became the founder of the naval power of Britain, which was
destined in future ages to rule the seas.

It was the Northmen who, in huge open boats, pushed off without chart or
compass (for neither existed at that time) into the tempestuous northern
seas, and, in the year 863, discovered the island of Iceland; in 983,
the coast of Greenland; and, a few years later, those parts of the
American coast now called Long Island, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Nova
Scotia, and Newfoundland.  It is true they did not go forth with the
scientific and commercial views of Columbus; neither did they give to
the civilised world the benefit of their knowledge of those lands.  But
although their purpose was simply selfish, we cannot withhold our
admiration of the bold, daring spirit displayed by those early
navigators, under circumstances of the greatest possible disadvantage--
with undecked or half-decked boats, meagre supplies, no scientific
knowledge or appliances, and the stars their only guide over the
trackless waste of waters.

In the course of time, one or two adventurous travellers pushed into
Asia, and men began to ascertain that the world was not the
insignificant disc, or cylinder, or ball they had deemed it.  Perhaps
one of the chief among those adventurous travellers was Marco Polo, a
Venetian, who lived in the latter part of the thirteenth century.  He
made known the central and eastern portions of Asia, Japan, the islands
of the Indian Archipelago, part of the continent of Africa, and the
island of Madagascar, and is considered the founder of the modern
geography of Asia.

The adventures of this wonderful man were truly surprising, and although
he undoubtedly exaggerated to some extent in his account of what he had
seen, his narrations are for the most part truthful.  He and his
companions were absent on their voyages and travels twenty-one years.

Marco Polo died; but the knowledge of the East opened up by him, his
adventures and his wealth, remained behind to stir up the energies of
European nations.  Yet there is no saying how long the world would have
groped on in this twilight of knowledge, and mariners would have
continued to "hug the shore" as in days gone by, had not an event
occurred which at once revolutionised the science of navigation, and
formed a new era in the history of mankind.  This was the invention of
the mariner's compass.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE MARINER'S COMPASS--PORTUGUESE DISCOVERIES.

"What _is_ the compass?" every philosophical youth of inquiring
disposition will naturally ask.  We do not say that all youths will make
this inquiry.  Many there are who will at once say, "Oh, I know!  It's a
needle with a card on the top of it--sometimes a needle with a card
under it--which always points to the north, and shows sailors how to
steer their ships."

Very well explained indeed, my self-sufficient friend; but you have not
answered the question.  You have told us what a compass is like, and one
of the uses to which it is applied; but you have not yet told what it
_is_.  A man who had never heard of a compass might exclaim, "What! a
needle!  Is it a darning needle, or a knitting needle, or a
drawing-through needle?  And which end points to the north--the eye or
the point?  And if you lay it on the table the wrong end to the north,
will it turn round of its own accord?"

You laugh, perhaps, and explain; but it would have been better to have
explained correctly at first.  Thus:--

The mariner's compass is a small, flat bar of magnetised steel, which,
when balanced on a pivot, turns one of its ends persistently towards the
north pole--the other, of course, towards the south pole; and it does
this in consequence of its being magnetised.  A card is fixed above,
sometimes below, this bar of steel (which is called the needle), whereon
are marked the cardinal points--north, south, east, and west--with their
subdivisions or intermediate points, by means of which the true
direction of any point can be ascertained.

"Aha!" you exclaim, "Mr Author, but you yourself have omitted part of
the explanation.  _Why_ is it that the magnetising of the needle causes
it to turn to the north?"

I answer humbly, "I cannot tell;" but, further, I assert confidently,
"Neither can anybody else."  The fact is known, and we see its result;
but the reason why magnetised steel or iron should have this tendency,
this polarity, is one of the mysteries which man has not yet been able
to penetrate, and probably never will.

Having explained the nature of the compass, as far as explanation is
possible, we present our reader with a picture of one.

It will be seen that there are four large points--N, S, E, and W--the
cardinal points above referred to, and that these are subdivided by
twelve smaller points, with one little black triangular point between
each, and a multitude of smaller points round the outer circle.  To give
these points their correct names is called "boxing the compass,"--a
lesson which all seamen can trip off their tongues like A, B, C, and
which most boys could learn in a few hours.

For the sake of those who are anxious to acquire the knowledge, we give
the following explanation: Let us begin with north.  The large point
midway between N and E (to the right) is _north-east_.  The
corresponding point midway between N and W (to the left) is
_north-west_.  A glance will show that the corresponding points towards
the south are respectively _south-east_ and _south-west_ (usually
written S.E. and S.W., as the two former points are written N.E. and
N.W.).  Now, to read off the compass with this amount of knowledge is
very simple.  Thus: _North_, _north-east_, _east_, _south-east_,
_south_, _south-west_, _west_, _north-west_, _north_.  But be it
observed that, in the language of the sea, the _th_ is thrown overboard,
except when the words north and south occur alone.  When conjoined with
other points they are pronounced thus: nor'-east, sou'-east; and so on.

To come now to the smaller subdivisions, it will suffice to take a
quarter of the circle.  The point midway between N.E. and N. is
"nor'-nor'-east" (N.N.E.), and the corresponding one between N.E. and E.
is "east nor'-east" (E.N.E.).  These points are again subdivided by
little black points which are thus named:--The first, next the N., is
"north by east" (N. by E.); the corresponding one next the E. is "east
by north" (E. by N.).  The second _black_ point from N. is "nor'-east by
north" (N.E. by N.), and the corresponding one--namely, the second black
point from east--is "nor'-east by east" (N.E. by E.).  Thus, in reading
off the compass, we say--beginning at north and proceeding to east--
North: north by east; nor'-nor'-east; nor'-east by north; nor'-east;
nor'-east by east; east nor'-east; east by north; east;--and so on with
the other quarters of the circle.

So much for "boxing the compass."  The manner in which it is used on
board ship, and the various instruments employed in connection with it
in the working of a vessel at sea, will be explained shortly; but first
let us glance at the history of the compass.

It is a matter of great uncertainty when, where, and by whom the
mariner's compass was invented.  Flavio Gioia, a Neapolitan captain or
pilot, who lived about the beginning of the fourteenth century, was
generally recognised throughout Europe as the inventor of this useful
instrument; but time and research have thrown new light on this subject.
Probably the Neapolitan pilot was the first who brought the compass
into general notice in Europe; but long before 1303 (the year in which
it was said to have been invented) the use of the magnetic needle was
known to the Chinese.

_Loadstone_, that mineral which has the mysterious power of attracting
iron, and also of imparting to iron its own attractive power, was known
to the Chinese before the year 121, in which year a famous Chinese
dictionary was completed, wherein the word _magnet_ is defined as "the
name of a stone which gives direction to a needle."  This proves not
only that they knew the attractive properties of the loadstone, and its
power of imparting these properties to metal, but also that they were
aware of the polarity of a magnetised needle.  Another Chinese
dictionary, published between the third and fourth centuries, speaks of
ships being guided in their course to the south by means of the magnet;
and in a medical work published in China in 1112, mention is made of the
_variation_ of the needle, showing that the Chinese had not only used
the needle as a guide at sea, but had observed this one of its
well-known peculiarities--namely, the tendency of the needle to point in
a _very slight degree_ away from the true north.

In the thirteenth century, too, we find mention made of the needle by a
poet and by two other writers; so that whatever Flavio Gioia may have
done (and it is probable he did much) in the way of pushing the compass
into notice in Europe, he cannot be said to be the inventor of it.  That
honour doubtless belongs to the Chinese.  Be this as it may, the compass
was invented; and in the fourteenth century it began that revolution in
maritime affairs to which we have alluded.

The first compasses were curiously formed.  The Chinese used a
magnetised needle, which they placed in a bit of rush or pith, which was
floated in a basin of water, and thus allowed to move freely and turn
towards the poles.  They also made needles in the form of iron fish.  An
Arabian author of the thirteenth century thus writes:--"I heard it said
that the captains in the Indian seas substitute for the needle and reed
a hollow iron fish magnetised, so that, when placed in the water, it
points to the north with its head and to the south with its tail.  The
reason that the iron fish does not sink, is that metallic bodies, even
the heaviest, float when hollow and when they displace a quantity of
water greater than their own weight."

The use of the compass at sea is so simple, that, after what has been
said, it scarcely requires explanation.  When a ship sets sail for any
port, she knows, first of all, the position of the port from which she
sets sail, as well as that to which she is bound.  A straight line drawn
from the one to the other is her true course, supposing that there is
deep, unobstructed water all the way; and if the compass be placed upon
that line, the point of the compass through which it passes is the point
by which she ought to steer.  Suppose that her course ran through the
east point of the compass: the ship's head would at once be turned in
that direction, and she would continue her voyage with the needle of the
compass pointing straight _across_ the deck, and the east and west
points straight _along_ it.

But various causes arise in the actual practice of navigation to prevent
a ship keeping her true course.  Winds may be contrary, and currents may
drive her either to the one side or the other of it; while land--
promontories, islands, and shallows--compel her to deviate from the
direct line.  A vessel also makes what is called "leeway;" which means
that, when the wind blows on her side, she not only advances forward,
but also slides through the water sidewise.  Thus, in the course of a
day, she may get a considerable distance off her true course--in sea
parlance, "make a good deal of leeway."

To perform the voyage correctly and safely in the face of these
obstacles and hindrances is the aim and end of navigation; and the
manner of proceeding is as follows:--

The hour is carefully noted on setting sail, and from that moment, night
and day, to the end of the voyage, certain observations are made and
entered in the ship's journal, called the log.  Every hour the rate at
which the ship is going is ascertained and carefully noted.  The point
of the compass towards which the ship is to be steered is given by the
captain or officer in command to the steersman, who stands at the wheel
with a compass always before him in a box called the "_binnacle_."  The
course is never changed except by distinct orders from those in command;
and when it is changed, the hour when the change is made and the new
course to be steered are carefully noted down.  Thus, at the end of the
day, or at any other time if desired, the position of the ship can be
ascertained by her course being drawn upon a chart of the ocean over
which she is sailing,--correct charts, or maps, being provided by the
