forgotten me, and no wonder, for I've suffered much from bad air and
sea-sickness of late.  My name is Walter, more familiarly Watty
Wilkins."

"Little Wilkins!" exclaimed Jack, in surprise, "well, you _are_ changed;
you don't mean to say that you've run away from home?"

"That's just what I've done," said the poor lad in a tone of
despondency; "but you've no occasion to shake your head at me so
solemnly, for, to all appearance, you have run away too."

"No, Wilkins, you are wrong, I have walked away, being my own master,
and I have done it openly, though I admit somewhat hastily--"

Jack was interrupted at that moment by Ben Trench laying a hand on his
shoulder.

"It strikes me," he said, in some surprise, "that I recognise the voice
of a townsman--Mister Jack, if I mistake not?"

"No, sir," replied the philosopher, "not _Mister_, only Edwin Jack,
seaman aboard the _Lively Poll_.  You are right, however, in styling me
townsman.  Allow me to introduce you to another townsman, Mr Watty
Wilkins, stowaway on board of the same vessel!"

Trench had not, in the darkness, recognised his friend.  He now seized
him by both shoulders, and peering into his face, said--

"O Watty, Watty, have you really done it?  I had thought better of you."

"I _said_ I would do it, and I've _done_ it," returned the little youth
somewhat testily; "and now I want to know what is to be done next."

"Report yourself and take the consequences," said Jack, promptly.

This advice being seconded by Ben Trench, Watty Wilkins went aft to the
captain, who had just come on deck, touched his cap, and confessed
himself.

For some moments the captain spoke not a word, but looked at the young
culprit with a portentous frown.  Then, uttering something like a deep
bass growl, he ordered the lad to follow him into his private cabin.
When there, Captain Samson seated himself on a locker, and with a hand
on each knee, glared at his prisoner so long and so fiercely from under
his shaggy brows, that Watty, in spite of his recklessness, began to
feel uneasy.

"So, youngster, you've run away?" he said at length, in deep solemnity.

"Yes, sir," replied Wilkins.

"And you think yourself a fine clever fellow, no doubt?"

"No, sir, I don't," said Watty, with much humility.

"I knew your father, boy," continued the captain, assuming a softer and
more serious tone, "and I think he is a good man."

"He is, sir," returned the boy promptly.

"Ay, and he is a kind man; he has been kind to _you_, I think."

Watty hung his head.

"He has fed you, clothed you, educated you since you was a babby; nursed
you, maybe, in sickness, and prayed for you, no doubt that God would
make you a good, obedient and loving son."

The boy's head drooped still lower.

"And for all this," continued the captain, "you have repaid him by
running away.  Now, my lad, as you have made your bed you shall lie on
it.  I'll clap your nose to the grindstone, and keep it there.
Steward!"

A smart little man answered to the call.

"Take this boy for'ed, and teach him to clean up.  Don't spare him."

In obedience to this order the steward took little Wilkins forward and
introduced him to the cook, who introduced him to the coppers and
scrubbing brushes.  From that day forward Master Watty became deeply
versed in the dirty work and hard work of the ship, so that all the
romance of a sea life was driven out of him, and its stern realities
were implanted.  In less than three weeks there was not a cup, saucer,
or plate in the ship that Watty had not washed; not a "brass" that he
had not polished and re-polished; not a copper that he had not scraped;
not an inch of the deck that he had not swabbed.  But it must not be
supposed that he groaned under this labour.  Although reckless, hasty,
and inconsiderate, he was not mean-spirited.  Making up his mind to do
his best in the circumstances, he went cheerfully to his dirty work, and
did it well.

"You see," said he to Philosopher Jack, as they chanced one dark night
to have a few minutes' talk together near the weather gangway, where
Watty paused on his way to the caboose with a soup-tureen, "as the
captain says, I've made the bed myself, so I must lie on it and I'm
resolved to lie straight, and not kick."

"Right, Watty, right," said Jack, with a sigh; "we have both been fools,
so must grin and bear it."

Watty greeted this remark, to Jack's surprise, with a sudden and
unexpected yell, as he received a cut from a rope's-end over the back.

"What, idling, eh?" cried the steward, flourishing the rope's-end again.

In a burst of rage the poor boy raised the soup-tureen, and would
infallibly have shattered it on the man's head if Jack had not caught
his arm.

"Come, Wilkins, mind what you're about," he said, pushing him towards
the forepart of the ship to prevent a scuffle.

A moment's reflection sufficed to convince Wilkins of the folly, as well
as uselessness, of rebellion.  Pocketing his pride and burning with
indignation, he walked forward, while the tyrannical steward went
grumbling to his own private den.

It chanced that night that the captain, ignorant of what had occurred,
sent for the unfortunate stowaway, for the mitigation of whose sorrows
his friend Ben Trench had, more than once, pleaded earnestly, but in
vain.  The captain invariably replied that Watty had acted ungratefully
and rebelliously to a kind father, and it was his duty to let him bear
the full punishment of his conduct.

Watty was still smarting from the rope's-end when he entered the cabin.

"Youngster," said the captain, sternly, "I sent for you to tell you of a
fact that came to my knowledge just before we left port.  Your father
told me that, being unwilling to disappoint you in your desires, he had
managed to get a situation of some sort for you on board a well-known
line of ocean steamers, and he only waited to get the thing fairly
settled before letting you know about it.  There, you may go for'ed and
think what you have lost by running away."

Without a word of reply Watty left the cabin.  His day's work had just
been completed.  He turned into his hammock, and, laying his head on his
pillow, quietly wept himself to sleep.

"Ain't you rather hard on the poor boy, father?" said Polly, who had
witnessed the interview.

"Not so hard as you think, little woman," answered the captain, stroking
the child's head with his great hand; "that little rascal has committed
a great sin.  He has set out on the tracks of the prodigal son you've
often read about, an' he's not sufficiently impressed with his guilt.
When I get him into a proper frame o' mind I'll not be so hard on him.
Now, Polly, go putt your doll to bed, and don't criticise your father."

Polly seized the huge whiskers of her sire, and giving him an
unsolicited "nor'-wester," which was duly returned, went off to her
little cot.

We do not mean to trouble the reader with all the incidents of a
prolonged voyage to southern latitudes, during which Philosopher Jack
formed a strong friendship with Ben Trench and Watty Wilkins; continued
his instruction of the amiable and unfathomable Baldwin Burr, and became
a general favourite with the crew of the _Lively Poll_.  Suffice it to
say that all went well, and the good ship sailed along under favouring
breezes without mishap of any kind until she reached that great ocean
whose unknown waters circle round the Southern Pole.

Here, however, good fortune forsook them, and contrary-gales baffling
the _Lively Poll_ drove her out of her course, while tumbling billows
buffeted her severely.

One night a dead calm prevailed.  The air became hot, clouds rose
rapidly over the sky, and the barometer--that faithful friend of the
mariner--fell unusually low.

"How dreadfully dark it is getting," said Polly, in a low,
half-frightened tone to Baldwin Burr, who was at the wheel.

"We're going to have a night of it, my dear," replied the seaman.

If he had said that the winds and waves were going to "have a night of
it" Baldwin Burr would have been more strictly correct.  He had scarcely
uttered the words when the captain gave orders to close-reef the
top-sails.  Our philosopher, springing aloft with his comrades, was out
on the top-sail yard in a few seconds.  Scarcely had the sails been
reefed when the gale burst upon the ship, and almost laid her flat upon
the foaming sea.  At first the very violence of the wind kept the waves
down, but they gradually rose until the ship was tossed on their crests
and engulfed in their hollows like a cork.  As the force of the gale
increased sail was further reduced, until nothing but a mere rag was
left and even this at last was split and blown to ribbons.  Inky clouds
soon obscured the sky, and, as night descended on the wild scene, the
darkness became so intense that nothing could be seen except the pale
gleam of foaming billows as they flashed past over the bulwarks.  In the
midst of the turmoil there came a blinding flash of lightning, followed
instantly by a terrible crash of thunder.  This was succeeded by a sound
of rending which was not the result of elemental strife.

"Foremast gone, sir," cried one of the men, staggering aft.

Seizing an axe, the captain sprang forward.  Edwin Jack followed.  They
found the ship's-carpenter already at work cutting the shrouds and other
ropes that held the wreck of the mast.  As flashes of lightning followed
in quick succession they revealed a scene of ruin on the forepart of the
vessel, with the tall figure of Edwin as he stood on the bulwarks
wielding an axe.  At last the wreck was cleared, but the seas were now
bursting over the decks and sweeping away everything not made fast.
Among other things the long-boat was carried away, and ere long all the
other boats were torn from their fastenings or destroyed.  It was a
fearful night.  Even the most reckless among the sailors were overawed
by such a display of the terrors of God.  At such times scoffers are
wont to become tremblers, and those who "trust in God" find Him "a very
present help in trouble."

The gale was as short-lived as it was fierce.  By the dawn of the
following day it had abated considerably, and it was found that less
damage had been done to the ship than might have been expected.

"We're all right, Polly, thank God!" said the captain, earnestly, when
he ventured to open the companion hatch and go below.  "You prayed for
us, dear, didn't you?"

"Yes, father, I did; I prayed that our lives might be spared, if He
pleased."

"Well, Polly, our prayers have been answered," said the captain; "our
lives are spared and the ship is safe, though we've lost the foremast
and the boats.  However, that can be putt to rights; we'll rig up a
jury-mast and get on famously, so keep up your heart, old girl, and give
us a nor'--.  There, you'd better stay below yet awhile; it's dirty on
deck."

The weather was not long of improving.  A profound calm followed the
storm.  Bright sunshine banished the thunder-clouds.  The contrast
between the dangers just past and the peaceful condition that prevailed
had the effect of raising the spirits of all on board the _Lively Poll_
to an unusual height, so that snatches of song, whistling, and cheery
remarks, were heard on all sides among the busy crew as they rigged up a
new mast, bent on new sails, and repaired the various damages.  When
night put a stop to their labours, and every one sought repose, except
the watch and the captain and the man at the wheel, the same peaceful
calm continued.  Only the long undulating swell of ocean remained to
tell of the recent storm, while the glassy surface reflected a universe
of stars.

It was at this time of profound repose and fancied security that the
death-knell of the _Lively Poll_ was sounded.  In the southern seas
there is a little creature, named the coral insect (of which we shall
have more to say hereafter), which is ever at work building walls and
ramparts on the bottom of the sea.  These rise by degrees to the
surface,--rise above it--and finally become some of the fairest isles of
the Pacific.  Charts tell of the isles, but no charts can tell the
locality of coral reefs which have just, or barely, reached the surface.
The _Lively Poll_ was forging slowly ahead under a puff of air that
only bulged her top-sails as she rose and sank on the majestic swell.
Presently she rose high, and was then let down on a coral reef with such
violence that the jury-mast with the main-topmast and all the connected
rigging, went over the side.  Another swell lifted her off, and flung
her on the ocean's breast a total wreck.

The scene that followed may be imagined.  Whatever could be done by an
able and active seaman in such an emergency was done by Captain Samson.
Water was rushing in through the shattered hull.  To pass a sail under
the ship's bottom and check this was the first act.  Then the pumps were
rigged and worked by all on board.  Besides Ben Trench there were three
gentlemen passengers.  These took their turn with the rest, but all was
of no avail.  The ship was sinking.  The utmost efforts of those whose
lives seemed dependent on her only delayed the final catastrophe.

"There is no hope," said the captain in a low tone to his chief mate, to
whom he gave some rapid orders, and went below.

It was daybreak, and the first gleam of light that leaped over the
glassy sea tinged the golden curls of Polly Samson as she lay sleeping
on one of the cabin sofas.  She awoke and started up.

"Lie still, darling, and rest as long as you may," said the captain in a
low tender voice, "and pray, Polly, pray for us again.  God is able to
save to the uttermost, my pet."

He said this without pausing, as he went to his berth and brought out a
sextant, with which he returned on deck.

Standing near the foot of the companion-ladder, Watty Wilkins had heard
the words, "There is no hope," and the few sentences addressed to the
child.  His impressionable spirit leapt to the conclusion that the fate
of all on board was sealed.  He knew that the boats had all been swept
away, and a feeling of profound despair seized him.  This was quickly
followed by contrition for his past conduct and pity for his father,
under the impulse of which he sat down in a corner of the steward's
pantry and groaned aloud.  Then he wrote a few lines in pencil on a
piece of paper, bidding farewell to his father.  Often had he read of
such messages from the sea being wafted ashore in bottles, but little
did he expect ever to have occasion to write one.  He had just put the
paper in a bottle, corked it up, and dropped it out of one of the cabin
windows, when he was summoned on deck, and found that a raft was being
hastily prepared alongside.  Already some casks of biscuits and water
had been lowered on it, while the carpenter and several men were busily
at work increasing its size and binding it together with iron clamps,
hawsers, and chains.

There was urgent need for haste, as the ship was fast settling down.

"Now then, my lads, look alive!" cried the captain, as he lifted his
little daughter over the side.  "The ship can't float much longer.
Here, Jack, catch hold."

Edwin sprang to the side of the raft, and, standing up, received Polly
in his arms.

"Take care of her!  Hold her tight!" cried the anxious father.

"Trust me," said Philosopher Jack.

The child was placed on the highest part of the raft with the
passengers, and partially covered with a shawl.  The crew were then
ordered to leave the ship.  Having seen every one out of it Captain
Samson descended and gave the order to shove off.  This was quickly
done, and the distance was slowly increased by means of two large oars.
The huge mass of spars and planks moved gradually away from the doomed
vessel, whose deck was by that time little above the level of the sea.
They had not got more than a few hundred yards off, when Baldwin Burr,
who pulled one of the oars, uttered an exclamation.  Edwin Jack and Ben
Trench, who knelt close to him fastening a rope, looked up and saw the
captain standing on the high part of the raft near Polly and little
Wilkins, waving his right hand.  He was bidding farewell to the old
ship, which suddenly went down with a heavy roll.  Another moment, and
only a few ripples remained to mark the spot where the _Lively Poll_ had
found an ocean tomb.



CHAPTER THREE.

ADRIFT ON THE GREAT OCEAN.

Sunshine gladdens the heart of man and causes him more or less to forget
his sorrows.  The day on which the _Lively Poll_ went down was bright
and warm, as well as calm, so that some of those who were cast away on
the raft--after the first shock had passed, and while busily employed in
binding the spars and making other needful arrangements--began to feel
sensations approaching almost to hilarity.

Polly Samson, in particular, being of a romantic turn of mind, soon
dried her eyes, and when called on to assist in the construction of a
little place of shelter for herself on the centre of the raft, by means
of boxes and sails, she began to think that the life of a castaway might
not be so disagreeable after all.  When this shelter or hut was
completed, and she sat in it with her father taking luncheon, she told
him in confidence that she thought rafting was "very nice."

"Glad you find it so, Polly," replied the captain with a sad smile.

"Of course, you know," she continued, with great seriousness of look and
tone, "I don't think it's nice that our ship is lost.  I'm very very
sorry--oh, you can't think how sorry!--for that, but this is such a
funny little cabin, you know, and so snug, and the weather is _so_ fine;
do you think it will last long, father?"

"I hope it may; God grant that it may, darling, but we can't be sure.
If it does last, I daresay we shall manage to reach one of the islands,
of which there are plenty in the Southern Seas, but--"

A roar of laughter from the men arrested and surprised the captain.  He
raised the flap of sail which served as a door to the hut--Polly's
bower, as the men styled it--and saw one of the passengers dragged from
a hole or space between the spars of the raft, into which he had slipped
up to the waist.  Mr Luke, the passenger referred to, was considered a
weak man, mind and body,--a sort of human nonentity, a harmless
creature, with long legs and narrow shoulders.  He took his cold bath
with philosophic coolness, and acknowledged the laughter of the men with
a bland smile.  Regardless of his drenched condition, he sat down on a
small keg and joined the crew at the meal of cold provisions which
served that day for dinner.

"Lucky for us," said one of the sailors, making play with his
clasp-knife on a junk of salt pork, "that we've got such a fine day to
begin with."

"That's true, Bob," said another; "a raft ain't much of a sea-goin'
craft.  If it had blowed hard when we shoved off from the ship we might
ha' bin tore to bits before we was well fixed together, but we've had
time to make all taut now, and can stand a stiffish breeze.  Shove along
the breadbasket, mate."

"You've had your allowance, Bob; mind, we're on short commons now," said
Baldwin Burr, who superintended the distribution of provisions, and
served out a measured quantity to every man.  "There's your grog for
you."

Bob Corkey growled a little as he wiped his knife on his leg, and
accepted the allowance of "grog," which, however, was only pure water.

"Are you sure the raft can stand a storm?" inquired Watty Wilkins of
Philosopher Jack, who sat eating his poor meal beside him.

"Sure?" responded Jack, "we can be sure of nothing in this life."

"Except trouble," growled Corkey.

"Oh yes, you can be sure of more than that," said Baldwin Burr; "you can
always be sure of folly coming out of a fool's mouth."

"Come, come, Baldwin, be civil," said Philosopher Jack; "it's cowardly,
you know, to insult a man when you can't fight him."

"Can't fight him?" repeated Burr with a grin; "who said I couldn't fight
him, eh?  Why, I'm ready to fight him now, right off."

"Nevertheless, you can't," persisted the philosopher; "how could two men
fight on a raft where there's not room for a fair stand-up scrimmage
between two rats?  Come now, don't argue, Burr, but answer little
Wilkins's question if you can."

"Stowaways don't desarve to have their questions answered," said Corkey;
"in fact, they don't desarve to live.  If I had my way, I'd kill little
Wilkins and salt him down to be ready for us when the pork and biscuit
fail."

"Well, now, as to the safety of this here raft in a gale, small
Wilkins," said Baldwin, regardless of Corkey's interruption, "that
depends summat on the natur' o' the gale.  If it was only a half-gale
we'd weather it all right, I make no doubt; but, if it should come to
blow hard, d'ee see, we have no occasion to kill and eat you, as we'd
all be killed together and eaten by the sharks."

"Sharks!" exclaimed Mr Luke, whose damp garments were steaming under
the powerful sun like a boiler on washing-day; "are there sharks here?"

"Ay," said Corkey, pointing to the sea astern, where the glassy surface
was broken and rippled by a sharp angular object, "that's a shark
a-follerin' of us now, leastwise the back fin of one.  If you don't
believe it, jump overboard and you'll soon be convinced."

This reference to the shark was overheard by Polly, who came out of her
bower to see it.  The monster of the deep came close up at that moment,
as if to gratify the child, and, turning on its back, according to shark
habit when about to seize any object, thrust its nose out of the water.
For one moment its double row of teeth were exposed to view, then they
closed on a lump of pork that had been accidentally knocked overboard by
Corkey.

"Is that the way you take care of our provisions?" said the captain,
sternly, to Baldwin.

"We've got a big hook, sir," said Edwin Jack, touching his cap; "shall
we try to recover the pork?"

"You may try," returned the captain.

Little Wilkins uttered something like a war-whoop as he leaped up and
assisted Jack to get out the shark-hook.  It was soon baited with
another piece of pork.  Ben Trench, who had a strong leaning to natural
history, became very eager; and the men generally, being ever ready for
sport, looked on with interest and prepared to lend a hand.  The shark,
however, was cautious.  It did indeed rush at the bait, and seemed about
to swallow it, but suddenly changed its mind, swam round it once or
twice, then fell slowly astern, and finally disappeared.

Although the fish was not caught, this little incident served to raise
the spirits of every one, and as the calm sunny weather lasted the whole
day, even the most thoughtful of the party found it difficult to realise
their forlorn condition; but when evening drew near, the aspect of
things quickly changed.  The splendid ocean-mirror, which had reflected
the golden crags and slopes, the towers and battlements of cloud-land,
was shivered by a sudden breeze and became an opaque grey; the fair blue
sky deepened to indigo; black and gathering clouds rose out of the
horizon, and cold white crests gleamed on the darkening waves.  The men
gathered in anxious groups, and Polly sat in the entrance of her bower
gazing on the gloomy scene, until her young heart sank slowly but
steadily.  Then, remembering her father's advice, she betook herself to
God in prayer.

Young though she was, Polly was no sentimentalist in religion.  She
believed with all her heart in Jesus Christ as a living, loving Saviour.
Her faith was very simple, and founded on experience.  She had prayed,
and had been answered.  She had sought Jesus in sorrow, and had been
comforted.  The theologian can give the why and how and wherefore of
this happy condition, but in practice he can arrive at it only by the
same short road.  One result of her prayer was that she went to sleep
that night in perfect peace, while most of her companions in misfortune
sat anxiously watching what appeared to be a gathering storm.

Before going to rest however, Polly had an earnest little talk with her
father.

"Polly," said Captain Samson, sitting down under the shelter of the
tarpaulin, and drawing the child's fair head on his breast, "I never
spoke to you before on a subject that p'r'aps you won't understand, but
I am forced to do it now.  It's about money."

"About money!" exclaimed Polly in surprise; "oh, father, surely you
forget!  The very last night we spent on shore, you spoke to me about
money; you gave me a half-sovereign, and said you meant to give a
blow-out to old Mrs Brown before leaving, and told me to buy--stay, let
me see--there was half a pound of tea, and four pounds of sugar, and
three penn'orth of snuff, and--"

"Yes, yes, Polly," interrupted the captain, with a smile, "but I meant
about money in a business way, you know, because if you chanced, d'ee
see, ever to be in England without me, you know,--it--"

"But I'll never be there without you, father, will I?" asked the child
with an earnest look.

"Of course not--that's to say, I _hope_ not--but you know, Polly, that
God arranges all the affairs of this world, and sometimes in His love
and wisdom He sees fit to separate people--for a time, you know, _only_
for a time--so that they don't always keep together.  Now, my darling,
if it should please Him to send me cruising to--to--anywhere in a
different direction from you, and you chanced ever to be in England
alone--in Scotland, that is--at your own home, you must go to Bailie
Trench--you know him--our old friend and helper when we were in shoal
water, my dear, and say to him that I handed all my savings over to Mr
Wilkins--that's Watty's father, Poll--to be invested in the way he
thought best.  When you tell that to Bailie Trench he'll know what to
do; he understands all about it.  I might send you to Mr Wilkins direct
but he's a very great man, d'ee see, and doesn't know you, and might
refuse to give you the money."

"To give me the money, father!  But what should I do with the money when
I got it?"

"Keep it, my darling."

"Oh!  I see, keep it safe for you till you came back?" said Polly.

"Just so, Poll, you're a clever girl; keep it for me till I come back,
or rather take it to Bailie Trench and he'll tell you how to keep it.
It's a good pot o' money, Poll, and has cost me the best part of a
lifetime, workin' hard and spendin' little, to lay it by.  Once I used
to think," continued the captain in a sad soliloquising tone, "that I'd
live to cast anchor near the old spot, and spend it with your mother,
Polly, and you; but the Lord willed it otherwise, and He does all things
well, blessed be His name!  Now you understand what you're to do about
the money, don't you, if you should ever find yourself without me in
Scotland, eh?"

Polly did not quite clearly understand, but after a little further
explanation she professed herself to be quite prepared for the
transaction of that important piece of financial business.

Poor Captain Samson sought thus to secure, to the best of his ability,
that the small savings of his life should go to Polly in the event of
her being saved and himself lost.  Moreover, he revealed the state of
his finances to Philosopher Jack, Ben Trench, and Watty Wilkins, whom he
found grouped apart at a corner of the raft in earnest conversation, and
begged of them, if they or any of them should survive, to see his
daughter's interest attended to.

"You see, my lads, although I would not for the world terrify the dear
child uselessly, by telling her that we are in danger, it must be clear
to you that if a gale springs up and our raft should be broken up, it's
not likely that all of us would be saved.  Yet Polly might escape, and
some of you also.  We are all in the Lord's hands, however, and have
nothing to fear if we are His followers."

Ah! that "if" went home.  The captain did not lay stress on it;
nevertheless stress was laid on it somehow, for the three youths found
it recurring again and again to memory that night, though they did not
speak of it to each other.

As the night advanced, the threatening gale passed away; the stars came
out in all their splendour, and the morning sun found the glassy sea
again ready to reflect his image.  Thus they floated for several days in
comparative peace and comfort.  But it came at last.

One evening a squall came rushing down on them, turning up the sea, and
converting it to ink and foam as it approached.  The rag of sail with
which they had previously courted the breeze in vain was hastily taken
in; the fastenings of everything were looked to.  Polly was placed in
her canvas bower, and the whole structure of the raft was strengthened
with a network of hawsers and cordage.

When the squall struck them, the raft appeared to tremble.  The seas
