carrying out in Britain would have produced some effect. The French fleet
was, every day, expected on the coast of England, and William would soon
be compelled to return to that country, if not to recall the greater part
of his army. In Scotland, too, the French were busy; and there were
materials in that country for creating a powerful diversion. To fight now
would be to forego every advantage, and to meet the views of William,
whose obvious interest it was to bring the contest to an immediate
decision, now, while every circumstance was in his favour.

But James, who had hitherto shown nothing but timidity and hesitation,
was now seized with an impulse of valour. Having acted with unfortunate
cowardice before Derry, and Schomberg's camp at Dundalk, he was, as
unfortunately, now seized with ardour to fight, when prudence and
discretion would have been his best policy. But while James was
determining to fight, in the teeth of the opinion and advice of his
bravest officers, his true character was shown in his taking every
precaution for his personal safety. He sent off his heavy baggage, and
engaged a vessel, at Waterford, to convey him to France.

William, on the other hand, was naturally eager for an early engagement.
He was still very insecurely seated upon the English throne. The people
were either discontented or indifferent. They looked with impatience and
indignation at the crowd of Dutch officers and civilians, whom William
had brought over with him; while the cold and ungracious manner of the
king contrasted, most unfavourably, with the bearing to which they had
been accustomed in English monarchs.

In Scotland, the Jacobite spirit was gathering in strength, and William
knew that, unless he speedily broke the strength of James's party in
Ireland, he would very shortly be confronted with difficulties and
dangers on all sides.

The position which the Irish army occupied was a strong one. Its right
rested upon Drogheda, a strong town in their possession. In front was the
Boyne, with steep banks lined with thick hedges, with cottages scattered
here and there, offering an excellent position for light troops. On the
left, the Boyne turned almost at a right angle, and formed a defence on
this flank. To the rear, the Irish position was covered by high hills and
the village of Donore. Further back was the pass of Duleek. The hedges
and cottages by the river side were occupied by the Irish infantry, and
upon some little hillocks, which ran along the water's edge, they erected
some light batteries.

King William reconnoitred the position with great attention, and saw that
it had been well chosen, and its advantages turned to account.
Notwithstanding the reports of deserters and others, he showed much
anxiety to determine the exact strength of the Irish. After examining the
position for some time from a height, he rode down towards the river,
accompanied by several of his officers. When within musket shot of the
bank, near the ford and village of Old Bridge, he perceived that a small
island in the Boyne was occupied by a party of the Irish horse. Near the
ford some field works had been thrown up. It was at this point that the
king determined to cross the river, and he spent some time conversing
with his officers, as to the arrangements for the passage.

He then rode slowly along the river bank, until he arrived nearly
opposite the left of the Irish line. Here he alighted from his horse, and
sat down on rising ground, watching his own battalions, which were
marching, with the greatest regularity and order, into the positions
assigned to them.

While he was so engaged, some officers of James's army were observed,
riding quietly along the opposite bank of the river, and also engaged in
watching the movements of the British troops. These were General
Sarsfield, the Duke of Berwick, the Marquis of Tyrconnell, the Count de
Lauzun, and others. Some of the English dragoons approached the river,
and were fired upon by the Irish. They returned the fire, and, while the
attention of both sides was engaged by the skirmish, a party of Irish
cavalry moved slowly down towards the river and halted behind a low
hedge, and then, wheeling about, again retired.

The movements of the king, and the group of officers accompanying him,
had been observed in the Irish army, and two field pieces were sent down,
concealed in the centre of the cavalry. The guns had been placed behind
the hedge when the horsemen withdrew, and, when William rose from the
ground and mounted his horse, fire was opened. The first cannon shot
killed two horses, and a man by his side. The next grazed the king's
right shoulder, tearing away his coat and inflicting a slight flesh
wound. Had the aim been slightly more accurate, or had the gunners fired
with grape, instead of round shot, it is probable that the whole course
of history would have been changed.

The rumour spread through both armies that the king was killed; but the
wound was a slight one, and, having had it hastily bound up, the king
rode quietly through the camps, in order to show the men that the hurt
was not serious. In the evening, he called a council of war. The Duke of
Schomberg was strongly opposed to an attack upon the enemy, while posted
in so strong a position, and urged that, by making a turning movement and
marching straight upon Dublin, the enemy would be obliged to fall back,
and fight under less advantageous circumstances. But the king, relying
upon his superior numbers and the discipline of his veteran troops,
determined to attack at once, knowing that it was all important to bring
the matter to a decision, as early as possible.

Schomberg then urged the necessity of occupying the pass of Slane, upon
the Boyne, considerably to the west of the Irish line, as he would thus
cut off their retreat, and, in the event of victory, render their defeat
a decided one; but the king saw that he should require his whole force to
dislodge the Irish from their position, and that it was useless to occupy
the pass of Slane with a small detachment, as these would be overwhelmed
by the retiring Irish.

It was twelve o'clock at night, before the council terminated, and then
the king mounted his horse and rode through the camp. He examined into
the state and preparation of each regiment, saw that the soldiers were
abundantly supplied with food and refreshment for the morning, and that
sufficient ammunition for the day's work had been served out. He directed
the men to wear green branches in their caps, and gave "Westminster" as
the word for the day.

The order of the battle finally determined upon was that the right wing
of the army, under General Douglas and Count Schomberg, son of the duke,
should pass the river at Slane and endeavour to turn the Irish left,
between Slane and Duleek. The left wing were to penetrate between the
Irish right and Drogheda; the centre to force the passage of the river,
at the ford of Old Bridge.

A council was also held in James's camp, and here also there was
difference of opinion. Some of the generals wished to hold the pass of
Slane in force, but James decided against this. As the morning
approached, the king's newborn courage began to die out. He ordered some
movements to the rear, and sent forward more of his baggage. He would
probably have declined the combat altogether, had it not been too late.
Finally, just as day was breaking over the council, he determined that
the army should retreat during the battle, and not commit themselves in a
decisive engagement. The French formed the left, and were to lead the
retreat, while the Irish held the right and centre.

It is almost certain that, if James had kept to his resolution to fight,
imprudent as it appeared to be, and had brought the French battalion into
action, instead of leading them out of the field, the result of the
battle of the Boyne would have been a very different one.



Chapter 8: Boyne Water.


The morning of Tuesday, the 1st of July, 1690, broke calm and bright. At
about six o'clock in the morning the English right wing, under General
Douglas and Count Schomberg, marched towards Slane. It consisted of
twenty-four squadrons of horse, and six battalions of infantry. As they
marched along at the back of the river, they discovered several shallows,
and crossed without proceeding as far as Slane. No serious resistance was
offered to their passage of the Boyne, as the Irish had here only some
parties of skirmishers, who fell back as they advanced.

After forming the troops in order, Douglas and Schomberg advanced, but
presently perceived the French battalions and a great part of the Irish
cavalry, forming the left wing of James's army, drawn up in order at some
distance. They consequently halted, and sent for reinforcements. When
these arrived, they extended their lines to the right, so as to outflank
the enemy, and, supporting their cavalry by alternate battalions of
infantry, again moved forward.

The Irish skirmishers fell back before their advance, taking advantage of
the banks of the ditches, which divided the ground into small fields, and
keeping up a galling fire upon the British as they advanced. With some
difficulty, the latter passed over this broken ground and formed in order
of battle, on the edge of what appeared to be a plain, but which was in
fact a deep bog, which completely covered the Irish left. Here they came
to a standstill.

William had waited, until he believed that his right would have had time
to fall upon the Irish left, and then ordered his centre to advance and
force the passage at Old Bridge. The Dutch guards, whom William relied
upon as his best and most trustworthy troops, advanced in splendid order
to the river side, with their drums beating the march. When they reached
the water's edge the drums ceased, and the soldiers entered the river.
The stream rose as the dense column marched in and dammed it up, and the
water reached the shoulders of the grenadiers, but they still moved on,
in regular order, keeping their arms and ammunition dry by holding them
above their heads. On the opposite bank, the hedges near the brink of the
river were lined with skirmishers, while in the rear, in a hollow covered
by some little hills, seven regiments of Irish infantry, supported by ten
troops of horse and Tyrconnell's regiment of cavalry, were drawn up. The
hills protected them from the fire of the British batteries, which passed
over their heads.

The Dutch troops continued their way unmolested, until they reached the
middle of the river, when a hot fire was opened upon them from the Irish
skirmishers; but the Dutch moved on, unshaken, and soon gained the
opposite bank, where they rapidly formed up, the skirmishers retiring
before them. Scarcely had the Dutch formed their squares, when the Irish
horse burst down upon them at full speed, and charged them with
impetuosity.

They stood the charge unbroken, but again and again the Irish horse
charged down upon them, with the greatest gallantry. William pushed two
regiments of French Huguenots and one of British across the river, to the
assistance of the Dutch guards, and ordered Sir John Hanmars and the
Count of Nassau's regiment to cross, lower down the stream, to support
them.

As the supports were making a passage, General Hamilton advanced, at the
head of a body of Irish infantry, to the water's edge, and, dashing into
the river, encountered the French Huguenot regiments in the middle of the
stream. A desperate fight ensued, but the French made their way across,
and Hamilton, falling back with his infantry, opened to the right and
left, permitting the Irish horse to charge through them.

These rushed with fury upon the French regiment of Colonel La Callimot,
and cut their way right through them. Then, wheeling, they charged them
in flank again, broke them, and drove them into the river. La Callimot
himself was killed, and but few of his regiment regained the opposite
bank.

In the meantime the Dutch guards, now reinforced, were advancing slowly,
the Irish infantry holding fast to the hedges and brushwood, and
contesting every inch of the ground, while, wherever the ground permitted
it, the Irish horse burst down upon them, evincing a gallantry and
determination which would have done honour to the finest cavalry in
Europe. The king continued to make repeated efforts to support his Dutch
troops, and, after the French were broken, he pushed forward the Danish
horse; but no sooner had they crossed the bank than the Irish cavalry
burst down upon them, broke them, and drove them back into the river.
They fled across the stream in disorder, and dispersed in all directions.

So far, success had rested principally with the Irish; the Dutch guards
alone remained unbroken in the centre; the French infantry and Danish
horse were broken and destroyed. Old Duke Schomberg exerted himself to
the utmost, to restore the battle at this point, and, having rallied the
French infantry advanced with them, and a few French cavalry, towards the
river, where he was met by some of the Irish horse returning from the
pursuit of the Danes. The old duke was cut down and his party again
routed, and at the same moment Walker, the clerical commander of Derry,
received a mortal wound.

After his successful defence of Derry, this man had gone to London, where
he had been feted and made much of, and had then attached himself to King
William's army, where he posed as a high military authority, although
much discouraged by the king, whom his arrogance and airs of authority
displeased.

While in the centre William's forces were getting worsted, and on his
right Douglas and Count Schomberg were inactive and powerless, he himself
was leading his left wing across the river. The passage was a difficult
one, and the king himself was only extricated, with much exertion, from a
quicksand into which his horse had plunged.

The Irish did not oppose the crossing, and as soon as his forces were
across the stream, William ranged them in order. They consisted of a
large body of Danish, Dutch, and Enniskillen horse, and a considerable
force of infantry. As soon as all were in order the king, though still
suffering from the wound he had received the day before, drew his sword
and put himself at the head of his troops.

The Irish right wing, which consisted chiefly of infantry, moved forward
to meet them, but perceiving the numerous cavalry, led by the king
himself, preparing to take them in flank, they halted, faced about and
marched slowly to the little hill of Donore. Having gained this point,
they again faced round and charged down upon the British, who had
followed them closely.

At this moment the Irish cavalry, who had moved rapidly from the centre
to the support of the right, charged down upon the Danish and Dutch horse
led by the king, and no sooner had they come in contact than the Danes
and Dutch turned and rode off, with the Irish cavalry in pursuit. The
king rode towards the Enniskilleners. Colonel Wolseley told his men that
it was the king, and asked if they wished to follow him. They replied
with a shout, and the king, placing himself at the head, rode towards the
Irish infantry; but as they advanced they were met by a well-directed
volley, and, being much more fond of plundering and slaughtering than of
close fighting, they turned horse and rode away.

Again and again the king rallied his infantry and brought them back to
the fight, but the Irish infantry stood their ground with great
steadiness, until Hamilton, their general, was wounded and taken in a
charge of cavalry. After this, they fell back from Donore upon Duleek in
good order, the enemy not wanting to molest them, and the rest of the
Irish infantry followed their example.

No more singular battle than that of the Boyne was ever fought. In the
morning, at break of day, part of James's army, with most of his
artillery, were in march for the pass of Slane, and actually on their
retreat. The left wing, composed chiefly of French infantry, supposed to
be the best troops in the army, never fired a shot. The centre and right,
composed entirely of Irish, most of whom had never before been in battle,
were alone engaged. With the exception of his Dutch guards, all William's
foreign troops had been repeatedly broken; his cavalry had been driven
off the field by the Irish horse, while no division of the Irish was
broken or suffered a decided defeat, until the infantry from the hill of
Donore were compelled to retreat, which they did in perfect order.

Throughout the day, the Irish cavalry showed a vast superiority to those
of the British, and even broke and destroyed regiments of infantry; and
when the whole army fell back they closed up the rear, and effectually
prevented any attempt at pursuit. Thus, the battle of the Boyne was
fought rather to cover a retreat than defend a position. The loss on
either side was estimated at about five hundred, and General Hamilton was
the only prisoner taken by the British.

The honours of the fight certainly rested with the Irish, who, against a
vastly superior force, comprising some of the best troops in Europe,
maintained themselves throughout the day, and gained, indeed, in most
points, a decided advantage.

King James's valour had entirely evaporated before the first shot was
fired. Instead of following William's example, and leading his troops in
the conflict which was to decide the fate of his crown, and which he
himself had precipitated, he took up his position at a safe distance from
danger, on the hill of Donore, and as soon as the battle approached that
point he rode off to Duleek, where he placed himself at the head of the
French troops, and led their retreat. He soon, however, rode on ahead,
and arrived in Dublin in a state of consternation and despair, the first
fugitive from the field of battle. In the meantime the army was whole and
unbroken, marching in perfect order from the field of battle, while its
king and commander was doing his best to ruin the cause by spreading
dismay and alarm throughout the country.

The next morning the king sent for the mayor and corporation of Dublin,
and told them that he was under the necessity of taking care of himself,
and recommended them to do the same, and to make the best terms they
could with the enemy. He then at once mounted and made his flight to
Waterford, ordering the bridges to be broken down behind him, although
the British army had not yet moved from its position on the Boyne. On
reaching Waterford James at once embarked on board the ship he had
ordered to be in readiness, and sailed for France. His conduct, and his
conduct alone, converted the battle of the Boyne, which was in effect a
kind of drawn battle, into a great victory for William.

It had, indeed, more than answered the object which the Irish commanders
proposed to themselves. Their plan was to accustom the new and badly
armed levies to stand firm against the steadiness and experience of
William's veteran troops, and then to withdraw without committing
themselves to a decisive combat, with a view of protracting the campaign
until William should be forced to leave Ireland, and his foreign army
should be worn out by winter service in an uncongenial climate. Every day
would, they calculated, improve their own army and weaken and reduce that
of the enemy.

Their position at the Boyne enabled them to try their plan of partial
combat to what extent they chose, without danger of being forced into a
more extensive action than they deemed expedient. The Irish troops had
greatly surpassed the expectation of their own officers, and had filled
William's generals with amazement; and it is probable that, if a large
