trace loose from the pitu, and free the big black leader, who was
the cleverest dog in the team. As soon as the dog had scented a
breathing-hole, Kotuko would reverse the sleigh, driving a couple of
sawed-off antlers, that stuck up like perambulator-handles from the
back-rest, deep into the snow, so that the team could not get away. Then
he would crawl forward inch by inch, and wait till the seal came up
to breathe. Then he would stab down swiftly with his spear and
running-line, and presently would haul his seal up to the lip of the
ice, while the black leader came up and helped to pull the carcass
across the ice to the sleigh. That was the time when the harnessed dogs
yelled and foamed with excitement, and Kotuko laid the long lash like a
red-hot bar across all their faces, till the carcass froze stiff. Going
home was the heavy work. The loaded sleigh had to be humoured among the
rough ice, and the dogs sat down and looked hungrily at the seal instead
of pulling. At last they would strike the well-worn sleigh-road to the
village, and toodle-kiyi along the ringing ice, heads down and tails
up, while Kotuko struck up the "An-gutivaun tai-na tau-na-ne taina" (The
Song of the Returning Hunter), and voices hailed him from house to house
under all that dim, star-littern sky.

When Kotuko the dog came to his full growth he enjoyed himself too. He
fought his way up the team steadily, fight after fight, till one fine
evening, over their food, he tackled the big, black leader (Kotuko the
boy saw fair play), and made second dog of him, as they say. So he was
promoted to the long thong of the leading dog, running five feet in
advance of all the others: it was his bounden duty to stop all fighting,
in harness or out of it, and he wore a collar of copper wire, very thick
and heavy. On special occasions he was fed with cooked food inside the
house, and sometimes was allowed to sleep on the bench with Kotuko. He
was a good seal-dog, and would keep a musk-ox at bay by running round
him and snapping at his heels. He would even--and this for a sleigh-dog
is the last proof of bravery--he would even stand up to the gaunt Arctic
wolf, whom all dogs of the North, as a rule, fear beyond anything
that walks the snow. He and his master--they did not count the team of
ordinary dogs as company--hunted together, day after day and night
after night, fur-wrapped boy and savage, long-haired, narrow-eyed,
white-fanged, yellow brute. All an Inuit has to do is to get food and
skins for himself and his family. The women-folk make the skins into
clothing, and occasionally help in trapping small game; but the bulk
of the food--and they eat enormously--must be found by the men. If the
supply fails there is no one up there to buy or beg or borrow from. The
people must die.

An Inuit does not think of these chances till he is forced to. Kadlu,
Kotuko, Amoraq, and the boy-baby who kicked about in Amoraq's fur hood
and chewed pieces of blubber all day, were as happy together as any
family in the world. They came of a very gentle race--an Inuit seldom
loses his temper, and almost never strikes a child--who did not know
exactly what telling a real lie meant, still less how to steal. They
were content to spear their living out of the heart of the bitter,
hopeless cold; to smile oily smiles, and tell queer ghost and fairy
tales of evenings, and eat till they could eat no more, and sing the
endless woman's song: "Amna aya, aya amna, ah! ah!" through the long
lamp-lighted days as they mended their clothes and their hunting-gear.

But one terrible winter everything betrayed them. The Tununirmiut
returned from the yearly salmon-fishing, and made their houses on the
early ice to the north of Bylot's Island, ready to go after the seal
as soon as the sea froze. But it was an early and savage autumn. All
through September there were continuous gales that broke up the smooth
seal-ice when it was only four or five feet thick, and forced it inland,
and piled a great barrier, some twenty miles broad, of lumped and ragged
and needly ice, over which it was impossible to draw the dog-sleighs.
The edge of the floe off which the seal were used to fish in winter
lay perhaps twenty miles beyond this barrier, and out of reach of the
Tununirmiut. Even so, they might have managed to scrape through the
winter on their stock of frozen salmon and stored blubber, and what
the traps gave them, but in December one of their hunters came across a
tupik (a skin-tent) of three women and a girl nearly dead, whose men
had come down from the far North and been crushed in their little skin
hunting-boats while they were out after the long-horned narwhal. Kadlu,
of course, could only distribute the women among the huts of the winter
village, for no Inuit dare refuse a meal to a stranger. He never knows
when his own turn may come to beg. Amoraq took the girl, who was about
fourteen, into her own house as a sort of servant. From the cut of her
sharp-pointed hood, and the long diamond pattern of her white deer-skin
leggings, they supposed she came from Ellesmere Land. She had never seen
tin cooking-pots or wooden-shod sleighs before; but Kotuko the boy and
Kotuko the dog were rather fond of her.

Then all the foxes went south, and even the wolverine, that growling,
blunt-headed little thief of the snow, did not take the trouble to
follow the line of empty traps that Kotuko set. The tribe lost a
couple of their best hunters, who were badly crippled in a fight with
a musk-ox, and this threw more work on the others. Kotuko went out, day
after day, with a light hunting-sleigh and six or seven of the strongest
dogs, looking till his eyes ached for some patch of clear ice where
a seal might perhaps have scratched a breathing-hole. Kotuko the dog
ranged far and wide, and in the dead stillness of the ice-fields
Kotuko the boy could hear his half-choked whine of excitement, above a
seal-hole three miles away, as plainly as though he were at his elbow.
When the dog found a hole the boy would build himself a little, low snow
wall to keep off the worst of the bitter wind, and there he would wait
ten, twelve, twenty hours for the seal to come up to breathe, his eyes
glued to the tiny mark he had made above the hole to guide the downward
thrust of his harpoon, a little seal-skin mat under his feet, and his
legs tied together in the tutareang (the buckle that the old hunters
had talked about). This helps to keep a man's legs from twitching as he
waits and waits and waits for the quick-eared seal to rise. Though there
is no excitement in it, you can easily believe that the sitting still in
the buckle with the thermometer perhaps forty degrees below zero is
the hardest work an Inuit knows. When a seal was caught, Kotuko the dog
would bound forward, his trace trailing behind him, and help to pull the
body to the sleigh, where the tired and hungry dogs lay sullenly under
the lee of the broken ice.

A seal did not go very far, for each mouth in the little village had a
right to be filled, and neither bone, hide, nor sinew was wasted. The
dogs' meat was taken for human use, and Amoraq fed the team with pieces
of old summer skin-tents raked out from under the sleeping-bench, and
they howled and howled again, and waked to howl hungrily. One could
tell by the soap-stone lamps in the huts that famine was near. In good
seasons, when blubber was plentiful, the light in the boat-shaped lamps
would be two feet high--cheerful, oily, and yellow. Now it was a
bare six inches: Amoraq carefully pricked down the moss wick, when an
unwatched flame brightened for a moment, and the eyes of all the family
followed her hand. The horror of famine up there in the great cold is
not so much dying, as dying in the dark. All the Inuit dread the dark
that presses on them without a break for six months in each year; and
when the lamps are low in the houses the minds of people begin to be
shaken and confused.

But worse was to come.

The underfed dogs snapped and growled in the passages, glaring at the
cold stars, and snuffing into the bitter wind, night after night. When
they stopped howling the silence fell down again as solid and heavy as a
snowdrift against a door, and men could hear the beating of their blood
in the thin passages of the ear, and the thumping of their own hearts,
that sounded as loud as the noise of sorcerers' drums beaten across
the snow. One night Kotuko the dog, who had been unusually sullen in
harness, leaped up and pushed his head against Kotuko's knee. Kotuko
patted him, but the dog still pushed blindly forward, fawning. Then
Kadlu waked, and gripped the heavy wolf-like head, and stared into the
glassy eyes. The dog whimpered and shivered between Kadlu's knees. The
hair rose about his neck, and he growled as though a stranger were at
the door; then he barked joyously, and rolled on the ground, and bit at
Kotuko's boot like a puppy.

"What is it?" said Kotuko; for he was beginning to be afraid.

"The sickness," Kadlu answered. "It is the dog sickness." Kotuko the dog
lifted his nose and howled and howled again.

"I have not seen this before. What will he do?" said Kotuko.

Kadlu shrugged one shoulder a little, and crossed the hut for his short
stabbing-harpoon. The big dog looked at him, howled again, and slunk
away down the passage, while the other dogs drew aside right and left to
give him ample room. When he was out on the snow he barked furiously, as
though on the trail of a musk-ox, and, barking and leaping and frisking,
passed out of sight. His trouble was not hydrophobia, but simple, plain
madness. The cold and the hunger, and, above all, the dark, had turned
his head; and when the terrible dog-sickness once shows itself in a
team, it spreads like wild-fire. Next hunting-day another dog sickened,
and was killed then and there by Kotuko as he bit and struggled among
the traces. Then the black second dog, who had been the leader in the
old days, suddenly gave tongue on an imaginary reindeer-track, and when
they slipped him from the pitu he flew at the throat of an ice-cliff,
and ran away as his leader had done, his harness on his back. After that
no one would take the dogs out again. They needed them for something
else, and the dogs knew it; and though they were tied down and fed by
hand, their eyes were full of despair and fear. To make things worse,
the old women began to tell ghost-tales, and to say that they had met
the spirits of the dead hunters lost that autumn, who prophesied all
sorts of horrible things.

Kotuko grieved more for the loss of his dog than anything else; for
though an Inuit eats enormously he also knows how to starve. But the
hunger, the darkness, the cold, and the exposure told on his strength,
and he began to hear voices inside his head, and to see people who
were not there, out of the tail of his eye. One night--he had unbuckled
himself after ten hours' waiting above a "blind" seal-hole, and was
staggering back to the village faint and dizzy--he halted to lean
his back against a boulder which happened to be supported like a
rocking-stone on a single jutting point of ice. His weight disturbed the
balance of the thing, it rolled over ponderously, and as Kotuko
sprang aside to avoid it, slid after him, squeaking and hissing on the
ice-slope.

That was enough for Kotuko. He had been brought up to believe that every
rock and boulder had its owner (its inua), who was generally a one-eyed
kind of a Woman-Thing called a tornaq, and that when a tornaq meant to
help a man she rolled after him inside her stone house, and asked him
whether he would take her for a guardian spirit. (In summer thaws the
ice-propped rocks and boulders roll and slip all over the face of the
land, so you can easily see how the idea of live stones arose.) Kotuko
heard the blood beating in his ears as he had heard it all day, and
he thought that was the tornaq of the stone speaking to him. Before he
reached home he was quite certain that he had held a long conversation
with her, and as all his people believed that this was quite possible,
no one contradicted him.

"She said to me, 'I jump down, I jump down from my place on the snow,'"
cried Kotuko, with hollow eyes, leaning forward in the half-lighted hut.
"She said, 'I will be a guide.' She said, 'I will guide you to the good
seal-holes.' To-morrow I go out, and the tornaq will guide me."

Then the angekok, the village sorcerer, came in, and Kotuko told him the
tale a second time. It lost nothing in the telling.

"Follow the tornait [the spirits of the stones], and they will bring us
food again," said the angekok.

Now the girl from the North had been lying near the lamp, eating very
little and saying less for days past; but when Amoraq and Kadlu next
morning packed and lashed a little hand-sleigh for Kotuko, and loaded it
with his hunting-gear and as much blubber and frozen seal-meat as they
could spare, she took the pulling-rope, and stepped out boldly at the
boy's side.

"Your house is my house," she said, as the little bone-shod sleigh
squeaked and bumped behind them in the awful Arctic night.

"My house is your house," said Kotuko; "but I think that we shall both
go to Sedna together."

Now Sedna is the Mistress of the Underworld, and the Inuit believe that
every one who dies must spend a year in her horrible country before
going to Quadliparmiut, the Happy Place, where it never freezes and the
fat reindeer trot up when you call.

Through the village people were shouting: "The tornait have spoken to
Kotuko. They will show him open ice. He will bring us the seal again!"
Their voices were soon swallowed up by the cold, empty dark, and
Kotuko and the girl shouldered close together as they strained on the
pulling-rope or humoured the sleigh through the ice in the direction of
the Polar Sea. Kotuko insisted that the tornaq of the stone had told him
to go north, and north they went under Tuktuqdjung the Reindeer--those
stars that we call the Great Bear.

No European could have made five miles a day over the ice-rubbish and
the sharp-edged drifts; but those two knew exactly the turn of the wrist
that coaxes a sleigh round a hummock, the jerk that nearly lifts it
out of an ice-crack, and the exact strength that goes to the few quiet
strokes of the spear-head that make a path possible when everything
looks hopeless.

The girl said nothing, but bowed her head, and the long wolverine-fur
fringe of her ermine hood blew across her broad, dark face. The sky
above them was an intense velvety black, changing to bands of Indian
red on the horizon, where the great stars burned like street-lamps. From
time to time a greenish wave of the Northern Lights would roll across
the hollow of the high heavens, flick like a flag, and disappear; or
a meteor would crackle from darkness to darkness, trailing a shower of
sparks behind. Then they could see the ridged and furrowed surface of
the floe tipped and laced with strange colours--red, copper, and bluish;
but in the ordinary starlight everything turned to one frost-bitten
gray. The floe, as you will remember, had been battered and tormented by
the autumn gales till it was one frozen earthquake. There were gullies
and ravines, and holes like gravel-pits, cut in ice; lumps and scattered
pieces frozen down to the original floor of the floe; blotches of old
black ice that had been thrust under the floe in some gale and heaved
up again; roundish boulders of ice; saw-like edges of ice carved by the
snow that flies before the wind; and sunken pits where thirty or forty
acres lay below the level of the rest of the field. From a little
distance you might have taken the lumps for seal or walrus, overturned
sleighs or men on a hunting expedition, or even the great Ten-legged
White Spirit-Bear himself; but in spite of these fantastic shapes, all
on the very edge of starting into life, there was neither sound nor the
least faint echo of sound. And through this silence and through this
waste, where the sudden lights flapped and went out again, the sleigh
and the two that pulled it crawled like things in a nightmare--a
nightmare of the end of the world at the end of the world.

When they were tired Kotuko would make what the hunters call a
"half-house," a very small snow hut, into which they would huddle with
the travelling-lamp, and try to thaw out the frozen seal-meat. When they
had slept, the march began again--thirty miles a day to get ten miles
northward. The girl was always very silent, but Kotuko muttered
to himself and broke out into songs he had learned in the
Singing-House--summer songs, and reindeer and salmon songs--all horribly
out of place at that season. He would declare that he heard the tornaq
growling to him, and would run wildly up a hummock, tossing his arms and
speaking in loud, threatening tones. To tell the truth, Kotuko was very
nearly crazy for the time being; but the girl was sure that he was being
guided by his guardian spirit, and that everything would come right.
She was not surprised, therefore, when at the end of the fourth march
Kotuko, whose eyes were burning like fire-balls in his head, told her
that his tornaq was following them across the snow in the shape of a
two-headed dog. The girl looked where Kotuko pointed, and something
seemed to slip into a ravine. It was certainly not human, but everybody
knew that the tornait preferred to appear in the shape of bear and seal,
and such like.

It might have been the Ten-legged White Spirit-Bear himself, or it might
have been anything, for Kotuko and the girl were so starved that their
eyes were untrustworthy. They had trapped nothing, and seen no trace of
game since they had left the village; their food would not hold out for
another week, and there was a gale coming. A Polar storm can blow for
ten days without a break, and all that while it is certain death to
be abroad. Kotuko laid up a snow-house large enough to take in the
hand-sleigh (never be separated from your meat), and while he was
shaping the last irregular block of ice that makes the key-stone of the
roof, he saw a Thing looking at him from a little cliff of ice half a
mile away. The air was hazy, and the Thing seemed to be forty feet long
and ten feet high, with twenty feet of tail and a shape that quivered
all along the outlines. The girl saw it too, but instead of crying aloud
with terror, said quietly, "That is Quiquern. What comes after?"

"He will speak to me," said Kotuko; but the snow-knife trembled in his
hand as he spoke, because however much a man may believe that he is a
friend of strange and ugly spirits, he seldom likes to be taken quite
at his word. Quiquern, too, is the phantom of a gigantic toothless
dog without any hair, who is supposed to live in the far North, and to
wander about the country just before things are going to happen. They
may be pleasant or unpleasant things, but not even the sorcerers care to
speak about Quiquern. He makes the dogs go mad. Like the Spirit-Bear, he
has several extra pairs of legs,--six or eight,--and this Thing jumping
up and down in the haze had more legs than any real dog needed. Kotuko
and the girl huddled into their hut quickly. Of course if Quiquern had
wanted them, he could have torn it to pieces above their heads, but the
sense of a foot-thick snow-wall between themselves and the wicked dark
was great comfort. The gale broke with a shriek of wind like the shriek
of a train, and for three days and three nights it held, never varying
one point, and never lulling even for a minute. They fed the stone lamp
between their knees, and nibbled at the half-warm seal-meat, and watched
the black soot gather on the roof for seventy-two long hours. The girl
counted up the food in the sleigh; there was not more than two days'
supply, and Kotuko looked over the iron heads and the deer-sinew
fastenings of his harpoon and his seal-lance and his bird-dart. There
was nothing else to do.

"We shall go to Sedna soon--very soon," the girl whispered. "In three
days we shall lie down and go. Will your tornaq do nothing? Sing her an
angekok's song to make her come here."

He began to sing in the high-pitched howl of the magic songs, and the
gale went down slowly. In the middle of his song the girl started, laid
her mittened hand and then her head to the ice floor of the hut. Kotuko
followed her example, and the two kneeled, staring into each other's
eyes, and listening with every nerve. He ripped a thin sliver of
whalebone from the rim of a bird-snare that lay on the sleigh, and,
after straightening, set it upright in a little hole in the ice, firming
it down with his mitten. It was almost as delicately adjusted as a
compass-needle, and now instead of listening they watched. The thin rod
quivered a little--the least little jar in the world; then it vibrated
steadily for a few seconds, came to rest, and vibrated again, this time
nodding to another point of the compass.

"Too soon!" said Kotuko. "Some big floe has broken far away outside."

The girl pointed at the rod, and shook her head. "It is the big
breaking," she said. "Listen to the ground-ice. It knocks."

When they kneeled this time they heard the most curious muffled grunts
and knockings, apparently under their feet. Sometimes it sounded as
though a blind puppy were squeaking above the lamp; then as if a stone
were being ground on hard ice; and again, like muffled blows on a drum;
but all dragged out and made small, as though they travelled through a
little horn a weary distance away.

"We shall not go to Sedna lying down," said Kotuko. "It is the breaking.
The tornaq has cheated us. We shall die."

All this may sound absurd enough, but the two were face to face with
a very real danger. The three days' gale had driven the deep water of
Baffin's Bay southerly, and piled it on to the edge of the far-reaching
