"But had he a right to take the soldier's money?" asked Marion
indignantly.

"Not exactly, but in war times many queer things happen that are never
told of at headquarters," answered George Walden.

Here the conversation ceased, for the soldier was quite exhausted. Soon
Marion gave him a quieting draught, and then George Walden slept.




CHAPTER XX.

THE STORM OF BATTLE AGAIN.


As related in the last chapter, Mrs. Ruthven and Jack had gone to
Oldville to do some necessary trading.

Arriving at the town, they found all in high excitement. The stores were
closed, and only the tavern was open, and here were congregated a number
of men who had but lately joined the Confederate ranks.

"What is the matter?" asked Mrs. Ruthven of one of the men.

"Another battle is on," was the answer. "We are going to drive the Yanks
out of this neighborhood."

"Another battle!" cried Jack. "Where?"

"They are fighting over near Larson's Corners. Can't you hear the
shooting?"

"I can hear it now--I didn't hear it before."

"Do you think they will come this way?" questioned Mrs. Ruthven
anxiously.

"Aint no telling how matters will turn," answered the man addressed, and
then hurried off to join the other newly enlisted soldiers. Soon the
soldiers were leaving the town on the double-quick.

Jack watched the departure of the men with interest, and then espied
Darcy Gilbert running toward him.

"Hi, Darcy!" he called out. "Where bound?"

"Jack! Just the one I wanted to meet. There's a fight on."

"So I hear. I reckon we had better call out the Home Guard again."

"By all means. The stores want protection, and so do the homesteads,"
went on Darcy. "Shall I go down the shore road and call up the boys?"

"Yes, and I'll take the Batsford road. If you see Doc Nivers tell him to
call up the boys on the mountain road, will you?"

"Yes. What of those at Brackett's plantation?"

"I'll send Hackett or Purroy after them," answered Jack.

The two lads separated, and Jack turned to his foster mother.

"Mother, you heard what was said," he began. "You don't object, do you?"

"No, Jack; do your duty, as a brave boy should. But be careful--I cannot
afford to lose you!" and she wiped away the tears which gathered in her
eyes.

"You will return home?"

"At once."

"If I were you I'd place Old Ben on guard at the plantation. I don't
believe anybody will harm the place, now it is flying a hospital flag.
Certainly the troops under Colonel Stanton won't trouble us."

"No; he is a gentleman, and I know I can trust him. Dear Harry! I wish
he was not with the Yankee army."

"Well, he is fighting according to the dictates of his conscience, so
there is no use in finding fault."

Mrs. Ruthven kissed Jack tenderly and hurried off, and then with all
speed our hero set to work to summon together the lads composing the
Home Guard.

The task was not difficult, for the firing in the distance--which was
gradually coming closer--had aroused everybody. In less than an hour the
Home Guard was out in force on the town green, with Jack in command.

"Boys, we may have some hot work to do," said the young captain. "I
expect everybody to do his best. I trust there is no coward among us."

"Not a bit of it!" came back in a shout.

"We aint no St. John Ruthvens," whispered one of the young soldiers, but
loud enough for a dozen or more to hear.

"That's so," answered another. And then he continued, "What a difference
between our Jack and his cowardly cousin!"

"We are here to defend property more than to take part in any battle,"
said Jack. "Do not let the guerrillas steal, no matter what side they
pretend to be on. A thief is a thief, whether he says he is a
Confederate or a Yankee."

"That's right!" shouted the old storekeeper, who stood by.

A little while later the firing came closer, and presently up the road a
cloud of dust was seen.

"The Yanks are coming!" was the cry, as a horseman dashed up.

"Coming?" repeated several.

"Yes, they are in retreat!"

A wild shout went up--cut short by the sudden belching forth of cannon
on the mountain side above the town. A little later some Federal troops
swept into view.

"They are coming! Get out of the way!"

Soon the soldiers filled the road and the whole of the green. They had
been fighting hard and were almost exhausted. Others followed until the
streets of the old town were crowded. Then began a systematic retreat
northward.

"We've got the Yanks on the run!" was the cry. "Give it to 'em, boys!"

The rattle of musketry was incessant, and ever and anon came the dull
booming of cannon. Soon more Federal troops appeared, and those who had
come first moved toward the mountain road.

It was a thrilling scene, and Jack longed to take part. But he realized
that just now there was nothing for the Home Guard to do. Had they
opened fire, the Federal troops would have annihilated them. Nobody
molested the stores or town buildings, although the church was hit by
several cannon balls. Gradually the fighting shifted to the mountain
side, and then in the direction of the Ruthven plantations.

"They are moving toward St. John's place," remarked Jack, some time
later, to Darcy. "We ought to go over to see that no damage is done
there."

"St. John ought to take care of the place himself," grumbled Darcy. "He
won't join the army or the Home Guard. What does he expect?"

Several sided with Darcy, but Jack shook his head. "I am going over. I
would like eight or ten to go with me. The others had better remain
around town." And so it was arranged.

The coming of the Federalists to the plantation owned by Mrs. Mary
Ruthven filled St. John with supreme terror. Hearing the firing, the
young man got up and dressed himself. He was just finishing when his
mother appeared.

"St. John, Pompey says the Yankees are coming!" said the mother. "You
must arm yourself and try to defend our home."

"The Yan--Yankees!" he said, with chattering teeth. "How--how near are
they?"

"They have passed through the town and are all over the mountain side.
Come, do not delay. I have given Pompey a gun and old Louis a pistol.
Arm yourself and take charge of them. If we do not protect ourselves, we
may all be killed."

Shaking so that he could scarcely walk, St. John went below and into the
library, where hung a rifle over the chimney piece and also a brace of
swords. He got down the rifle and loaded it. Then he strapped the larger
of the swords around his waist.

"Now you look quite like a soldier," said his mother encouragingly. "I
hope you can shoot straight."

"I--I don't want to kill--kill anybody," he answered. "If I do, the
Yankees will be very--very vindictive."

"But you must protect our home!" insisted Mrs. Mary Ruthven. "Come,
brace up!"

Still trembling, and with a face as white as chalk, St. John walked to
the veranda of the homestead. He gazed down the road and saw a body of
soldiers approaching, in a cloud of dust and smoke. Then a cannon boomed
out, and a ball hit the corner of the house, sending a shower of
splinters in all directions.

"They have struck the house!" shrieked Mrs. Ruthven. "We shall all be
murdered!"

"Spare us! spare us!" gasped St. John, as a company of soldiers came up
to the mansion on the double-quick. "We have harmed nobody! Spare us!"

"You big calf!" cried one of the soldiers. "We aint going to hurt you.
Git up from yer knees!" For St. John had indeed fallen upon his knees in
his abject terror.

"Who--who are you?"

"We are Confederates--if you'll only open yer eyes to see. Git up!" And
in disgust the Southern soldier pricked St. John's shoulder with his
bayonet. The spendthrift let out a yell of fear, rolled over, and dashed
into the house, leaving his gun behind him.

"St. John, where are you going?" cried his mother, coming after him.

"Oh, mother, we are lost!" he wailed.

"No, we are not. Go out again, and pick up your gun."

"I--I cannot! They will--will shoot me!" he shivered.

"But they are our own men, St. John. You are perfectly safe with them."

But he would not go, and she left him in the hallway, where he had sunk
down on a bench. In one way he was to be pitied, for his fear was beyond
his control.

Soon the Confederates left the plantation and the Federalists burst into
view. The cannon continued to boom forth, and presently came a cry from
the rear of the mansion:

"Fire! fire! The house is on fire!"

The report was true, and as the soldiers left the place up went a large
cloud of smoke, followed by the bursting out of flames in several
directions. Such was the state of affairs when Jack and his followers
reached the roadway in front of the plantation.

"The house is on fire!" ejaculated the young captain. "Come, we must put
out the flames."

"But the enemy----" began one of the other boys.

"The Yankees are making for the mountain road and our troops are to the
westward. I don't believe either will come this way again. Hurry up, or
it will be too late!"

Jack ran up to the house with all speed, to meet Mrs. Mary Ruthven on
the veranda.

"The house--it is doomed!" wailed the lady of the plantation.

"Get us all the pails and buckets you have," answered Jack. "And have
you a ladder handy?"

"There is a ladder in the stable, Jack. Oh, will you help put it out?"

"We'll do our best. Is St. John at home?"

"Yes," and so speaking, Mrs. Mary Ruthven ran off to arouse her son.

"You must help," she said. "Quick, or we will be homeless."

"But the--the Yankees?" he asked.

"Are gone." She clasped her hands entreatingly. "Oh, St. John, do be a
man for once!"

"A man? What do you mean, mother?" he cried, leaping up as soon as he
heard that the enemy was gone. "I am not afraid. I--I had a sudden
attack of pain around my--my heart, that's all."

"Then, if it is over, save the house," she answered coldly, and ran off
to tell the servants about the pails and buckets.




CHAPTER XXI.

A LIVELY FIRE.


In the meantime Jack and several others of the Home Guard had made their
way to the barn and brought forth two ladders, a short affair and one
which was both long and heavy.

"The short one can be placed on the veranda roof," said the young
captain. "The other we can place against the corner, where the fire is
burning the strongest."

"Somebody must have gone into the garret to set that fire," said another
of the boys. "Where are the water buckets?"

"Here da am, sah," replied one of the negro servants, and handed them
over.

"Somebody must keep at the well," said Jack. "Pompey, you know how to
use the buckets best. You draw for us."

"Yes, Massah Jack."

"We'll form a line to the cistern, too," went on our hero. "Now then,
work lively!"

The boys ran to the places assigned to them, and aided by the colored
servants placed the ladders as desired. Soon water was being passed up
and dashed upon the burning roof with all possible speed. But the fire
was a lively one, and the breeze which was blowing helped it to spread.

"What can I do?" asked St. John, as he stood by, rubbing his hands
nervously.

"Go down to the stable and the barns and put out the sparks blowing that
way," said Jack.

"Don't you want me here?"

"Yes, if you'll go up to the top of the ladder," answered our hero,
knowing full well St. John would do nothing of the sort.

"I--I never could climb a ladder," faltered the young man, and turned
toward the stable, where he spent his time in putting out the flying
sparks, as Jack had suggested.

It was hot work on the long ladder, and soon Jack was all but exhausted.
But he stuck to his post, knowing full well that, if he let up, the fire
would soon get the best of them. All of the boys worked like Trojans,
and the negro servants helped them as much as possible. Mrs. Ruthven
remained in the house, packing up her valuables, so as to be able to
leave, should it become necessary to do so.

  [Illustration: IT WAS HOT WORK ON THE LONG LADDER AND SOON JACK WAS
  ALL BUT EXHAUSTED.--_Page 173._]

"More water!" cried Jack. "The fire is eating to the center of the roof!
More water!"

"We are bringing it as fast as we can!" panted the boy below him.

"Make the servants form a line to the cistern."

"I will," answered the boy, and soon the water was coming up as rapidly
as Jack and the other lad on the roof could handle it.

At last the fire seemed to lose its force, and was extinguished at one
corner of the roof. Then all hands turned their attention to the spot
over the veranda. Here the flames had eaten under the gutter.

"We must have an ax!" exclaimed Jack, and one was quickly procured from
the woodpile.

"Hi! what are you going to do with that?" yelled St. John, as he caught
sight of the article.

"Going to chop a hole in the roof," answered our hero.

"How foolish! You'll make the fire worse."

"No, I won't--I know what I am doing, St. John."

"You shan't chop a hole in the roof," insisted the unreasonable young
man.

A cry of derision went up from half a dozen of the boys.

"Take a back seat, St. John," advised one. "You are too scared to know
what you are saying."

At this the spendthrift's face grew as red as a beet.

"Shut your tongue, Larry Wilson," he retorted. "I say you shan't chop a
hole in the roof. It will let the wind get to the flames."

"We want to get the water on the flames," replied Larry.

"And I say you shan't touch the roof with the ax!" screamed St. John. "I
command you to stop."

"All right then, we'll stop," said Larry, and Jack said the same. In a
moment more they were both on the ground, the other lads with them.

"Fo' de land sake, de house will burn up suah now!" groaned one of the
negroes.

"If it does, it will be St. John's fault," answered our hero. He was
thoroughly disgusted over the way St. John had acted.

"I'se gwine to tell de missus ob dis!" cried a second negro, and darted
away in search of Mrs. Mary Ruthven.

Soon the lady of the house came running out, with a bundle in one hand
and a box of jewelry in the other.

"What is this I hear, St. John?" she demanded.

"They want to chop in the roof, mother," he answered.

"We must make a hole, so that we can pour the water on the fire,"
explained Jack.

"Then go and make the hole," returned Mrs. Ruthven readily. "And please
be quick!"

"But, mother----" began St. John.

"St. John, they know more about putting out the fire than you do," was
the tart reply of the young man's parent. "Let them do as they wish."

"All right then," growled the unreasonable son. "But if the house burns
to the ground it will be their fault."

"It won't burn to the ground," answered Jack, and leaped up the ladder
again.

Soon our hero was chopping away at a lively rate. In the meantime the
others brought all the water possible to the scene.

When a hole was made in the roof the flames shot skyward for six or
eight feet. At this St. John uttered a loud cry, almost of exultation:
