
The doctor promised to comply with all Clara's wishes and to start the
following day.

Clara rang for the maid and said to her, when she arrived: "Please,
Tinette, pack a lot of fresh, soft coffee-cake in this box." A box
had been ready for this purpose many days. When the maid was leaving
the room she murmured: "That's a silly bother!"

Sebastian, who had happened to overhear some remarks, asked the
physician when he was leaving to take his regards to the little Miss,
as he called Heidi.

With a promise to deliver this message the doctor was just hastening
out, when he encountered an obstacle. Miss Rottenmeier, who had been
obliged to return from her walk on account of the strong wind, was
just coming in. She wore a large cape, which the wind was blowing
about her like two full sails. Both had retreated politely to give way
to each other. Suddenly the wind seemed to carry the housekeeper
straight towards the doctor, who had barely time to avoid her. This
little incident, which had ruffled Miss Rottenmeier's temper very
much, gave the doctor occasion to soothe her, as she liked to be
soothed by this man, whom she respected more than anybody in the
world. Telling her of his intended visit, he entreated her to pack the
things for Heidi as only she knew how.

Clara had expected some resistance from Miss Rottenmeier about the
packing of her presents. What was her surprise when this lady showed
herself most obliging, and immediately, on being told, brought
together all the articles! First came a heavy coat for Heidi, with a
hood, which Clara meant her to use on visits to the grandmother in the
winter. Then came a thick warm shawl and a large box with coffee-cake
for the grandmother. An enormous sausage for Peter's mother followed,
and a little sack of tobacco for the grandfather. At last a lot of
mysterious little parcels and boxes were packed, things that Clara had
gathered together for Heidi. When the tidy pack lay ready on the
ground, Clara's heart filled with pleasure at the thought of her
little friend's delight.

Sebastian now entered, and putting the pack on his shoulder, carried
it to the doctor's house without delay.




XVI

A GUEST ON THE ALP


The early dawn was tinging the mountains and a fresh morning-breeze
rocked the old fir-trees to and fro. Heidi opened her eyes, for the
rustling of the wind had awakened her. These sounds always thrilled
her heart, and now they drew her out of bed. Rising hurriedly, she
soon was neatly dressed and combed.

Coming down the little ladder and finding the grandfather's bed empty,
she ran outside. The old man was looking up at the sky to see what the
weather was going to be like that day. Rosy clouds were passing
overhead, but gradually the sky grew more blue and deep, and soon a
golden light passed over the heights, for the sun was rising in all
his glory.

"Oh, how lovely! Good-morning, grandfather," Heidi exclaimed.

"Are your eyes bright already?" the grandfather retorted, holding out
his hand.

Heidi then ran over to her beloved fir-trees and danced about, while
the wind was howling in the branches.

After the old man had washed and milked the goats, he brought them out
of the shed. When Heidi saw her friends again, she caressed them
tenderly, and they in their turn nearly crushed her between them.
Sometimes when Baerli got too wild, Heidi would say: "But Baerli, you
push me like the Big Turk," and that was enough to quiet the goat.

Soon Peter arrived with the whole herd, the jolly Thistlefinch ahead
of all the others. Heidi, being soon in the mist of them, was pushed
about among them. Peter was anxious to say a word to the little girl,
so he gave a shrill whistle, urging the goats to climb ahead. When he
was near her he said reproachfully: "You really might come with me
to-day!"

"No, I can't, Peter," said Heidi. "They might come from Frankfurt any
time. I must be home when they come."

"How often you have said that," grumbled the boy.

"But I mean it," replied Heidi. "Do you really think I want to be away
when they come from Frankfurt? Do you really think that, Peter?"

"They could come to uncle," Peter growled.

Then the grandfather's strong voice was heard: "Why doesn't the army
go forward? Is it the field-marshal's fault, or the fault of the
troop?"

Peter immediately turned about and led his goats up the mountain
without more ado.

Since Heidi had come home again to her grandfather she did many things
that had never occurred to her before. For instance, she would make
her bed every morning, and run about the hut, tidying and dusting.
With an old rag she would rub the chairs and table till they all
shone, and the grandfather would exclaim: "It is always Sunday with us
now; Heidi has not been away in vain."

On this day after breakfast, when Heidi began her self-imposed task,
it took her longer than usual, for the weather was too glorious to
stay within. Over and over again a bright sunbeam would tempt the busy
child outside. How could she stay indoors, when the glistening
sunshine was pouring down and all the mountains seemed to glow? She
had to sit down on the dry, hard ground and look down into the valley
and all about her. Then, suddenly remembering her little duties, she
would hasten back. It was not long, though, till the roaring fir-trees
tempted her again. The grandfather had been busy in his little shop,
merely glancing over at the child from time to time. Suddenly he heard
her call: "Oh grandfather, come!"

He was frightened and came out quickly He saw her running down the
hill crying: "They are coming, they are coming. Oh, the doctor is
coming first."

   [Illustration: THEY ARE COMING, OH, THE DOCTOR IS COMING FIRST]

When Heidi at last reached her old friend, he held out his hand, which
Heidi immediately seized. In the full joy of her heart, she exclaimed:
"How do you do, doctor? And I thank you a thousand times!"

"How are you, Heidi? But what are you thanking me for already?" the
doctor asked, with a smile.

"Because you let me come home again," the child explained.

The gentleman's face lit up like sunshine. He had certainly not
counted on such a reception on the Alp. On the contrary! Not even
noticing all the beauty around him, he had climbed up sadly, for he
was sure that Heidi probably would not know him any more. He thought
that he would be far from welcome, being obliged to cause her a great
disappointment. Instead, he beheld Heidi's bright eyes looking up at
him in gratefulness and love. She was still holding his arm, when he
said: "Come now, Heidi, and take me to your grandfather, for I want
to see where you live."

Like a kind father he had taken her hand, but Heidi stood still and
looked down the mountain-side.

"But where are Clara and grandmama?" she asked.

"Child, I must tell you something now which will grieve you as much as
it grieves me," replied the doctor. "I had to come alone, for Clara
has been very ill and could not travel. Of course grandmama has not
come either; but the spring will soon be here, and when the days get
long and warm, they will surely visit you."

Heidi was perfectly amazed; she could not understand how all those
things that she had pictured to herself so clearly would not happen
after all. She was standing perfectly motionless, confused by the
blow.

It was some time before Heidi remembered that, after all, she had come
down to meet the doctor. Looking up at her friend, she was struck by
his sad and cheerless face. How changed he was since she had seen
him! She did not like to see people unhappy, least of all the good,
kind doctor. He must be sad because Clara and grandmama had not come,
and to console him she said: "Oh, it won't last long till spring comes
again; then they will come for sure; they'll be able to stay much
longer then, and that will please Clara. Now we'll go to grandfather."

Hand in hand she climbed up with her old friend. All the way she tried
to cheer him up by telling him again and again of the coming summer
days. After they had reached the cottage, she called out to her
grandfather quite happily:

"They are not here yet, but it won't be very long before they are
coming!"

The grandfather warmly welcomed his guest, who did not seem at all a
stranger, for had not Heidi told him many things about the doctor?
They all three sat down on the bench before the door, and the doctor
told of the object of his visit. He whispered to the child that
something was coming up the mountain very soon which would bring her
more pleasure than his visit. What could it be?

The uncle advised the doctor to spend the splendid days of autumn on
the Alp, if possible, and to take a little room in the village instead
of in Ragatz; then he could easily walk up every day to the hut, and
from there the uncle could take him all around the mountains. This
plan was accepted.

The sun was in its zenith and the wind had ceased. Only a soft
delicious breeze fanned the cheeks of all.

The uncle now got up and went into the hut, returning soon with a
table and their dinner.

"Go in, Heidi, and set the table here. I hope you will excuse our
simple meal," he said, turning to his guest.

"I shall gladly accept this delightful invitation; I am sure that
dinner will taste good up here," said the guest, looking down over the
sun-bathed valley.

Heidi was running to and fro, for it gave her great joy to be able to
wait on her kind protector. Soon the uncle appeared with the steaming
milk, the toasted cheese, and the finely-sliced, rosy meat that had
been dried in the pure air. The doctor enjoyed his dinner better than
any he had ever tasted.

"Yes, we must send Clara up here. How she could gather strength!" he
said; "If she would have an appetite like mine to-day, she couldn't
help getting nice and fat."

At this moment a man could be seen walking up with a large sack on his
shoulders. Arriving on top, he threw down his load, breathing in the
pure, fresh air.

Opening the cover, the doctor said: "This has come for you from
Frankfurt, Heidi. Come and look what is in it."

Heidi timidly watched the heap, and only when the gentleman opened the
box with the cakes for the grandmother she said joyfully: "Oh, now
grandmother can eat this lovely cake." She was taking the box and the
beautiful shawl on her arm and was going to race down to deliver the
gifts, when the men persuaded her to stay and unpack the rest. What
was her delight at finding the tobacco and all the other things. The
men had been talking together, when the child suddenly planted herself
in front of them and said: "These things have not given me as much
pleasure as the dear doctor's coming." Both men smiled.

When it was near sunset, the doctor rose to start on his way down. The
grandfather, carrying the box, the shawl and the sausage, and the
guest holding the little girl by the hand, they wandered down the
mountain-side. When they reached Peter's hut, Heidi was told to go
inside and wait for her grandfather there. At parting she asked:
"Would you like to come with me up to the pasture to-morrow, doctor?"

"With pleasure. Good-bye, Heidi," was the reply. The grandfather had
deposited all the presents before the door, and it took Heidi long to
carry in the huge box and the sausage. The shawl she put on the
grandmother's knee.

Brigida had silently watched the proceedings, and could not open her
eyes wide enough when she saw the enormous sausage. Never in her life
had she seen the like, and now she really possessed it and could cut
it herself.

"Oh grandmother, don't the cakes please you awfully? Just look how
soft they are!" the child exclaimed. What was her amazement when she
saw the grandmother more pleased with the shawl, which would keep her
warm in winter.

"Grandmother, Clara has sent you that," Heidi said.

"Oh, what kind good people they are to think of a poor old woman like
me! I never thought I should ever own such a splendid wrap."

At this moment Peter came stumbling in.

"The uncle is coming up behind me, and Heidi must--" that was as far
as he got, for his eyes had fastened on the sausage. Heidi, however,
had already said good-bye, for she knew what he had meant. Though her
uncle never went by the hut any more without stepping in, she knew it
was too late to-day. "Heidi, come, you must get your sleep," he called
through the open door. Bidding them all good-night, he took Heidi by
the hand and under the glistening stars they wandered home to their
peaceful cottage.

[Illustration]




XVII

RETALIATION


Early the next morning the doctor climbed up the mountain in company
with Peter and his goats. The friendly gentleman made several attempts
to start a conversation with the boy, but as answer to his questions
he got nothing more than monosyllables. When they arrived on top, they
found Heidi already waiting, fresh and rosy as the early dawn.

"Are you coming?" asked Peter as usual.

"Of course I shall, if the doctor comes with us," replied the child.

The grandfather, coming out of the hut, greeted the newcomer with
great respect. Then he went up to Peter, and hung on his shoulder the
sack, which seemed to contain more than usual that day.

When they had started on their way, Heidi kept urging forward the
goats, which were crowding about her. When at last she was walking
peacefully by the doctor's side, she began to relate to him many
things about the goats and all their strange pranks, and about the
flowers, rocks and birds they saw. When they arrived at their
destination, time seemed to have flown. Peter all the time was sending
many an angry glance at the unconscious doctor, who never even noticed
it.

Heidi now took the doctor to her favorite spot. From there they could
hear the peaceful-sounding bells of the grazing cattle below. The sky
was deep blue, and above their heads the eagle was circling with
outstretched wings. Everything was luminous and bright about them, but
the doctor had been silent. Suddenly looking up, he beheld Heidi's
radiant eyes.

"Heidi, it is beautiful up here," he said. "But how can anybody with a
heavy heart enjoy the beauty? Tell me!"

"Oh," exclaimed Heidi, "one never has a sad heart here. One only gets
unhappy in Frankfurt."

A faint smile passed over the doctor's face. Then he began: "But if
somebody has brought his sorrow away with him, how would you comfort
him?"

"God in Heaven alone can help him."

"That is true, child," remarked the doctor. "But what can we do when
God Himself has sent us the affliction?"

After meditating a moment, Heidi replied: "One must wait patiently,
for God knows how to turn the saddest things to something happy in the
end. God will show us what He has meant to do for us. But He will only
do so if we pray to Him patiently."

"I hope you will always keep this beautiful belief, Heidi," said the
doctor. Then looking up at the mighty cliffs above, he continued:
"Think how sad it would make us not to be able to see all these
beautiful things. Wouldn't that make us doubly sad? Can you understand
me, child?"

A great pain shot through Heidi's breast. She had to think of the poor
grandmother. Her blindness was always a great sorrow to the child, and
she had been struck with it anew. Seriously she replied:
