          20. Who was mutilated by a bird?

Some of the questions seemed easy and some were difficult. The girls
sat puzzling over them, and writing the answers when they got
inspiration. Irene scribbled away delightedly, but Lorna, who had almost
forgotten the nursery rhymes of her childhood, was in much
mystification, and only filled in a few of the vacant spaces. Numbers 6,
7, 13 and 14 proved the most baffling and no one was able to solve all
twenty.

After allowing a considerable laxity in respect of time Mrs. Clark rang
the bell and declared the competition closed. The girls changed cards,
and waited with interest while their hostess read out the answers.


ANSWERS TO NURSERY RHYMES COMPETITION

          1. I, said the beetle,
             With my thread and needle.

          2. The old woman who lived in a shoe.

          3. Miss Muffet.

          4. Mary, Mary, quite contrary.

          5. Old King Cole, who called for his fiddlers three.

          6. Froggie would a-wooing go,
             Whether his mother would let him or no.

          7. Goosey goosey gander,
             Whither do you wander,
             Upstairs, downstairs,
             In my lady's chamber.
             There I met an old man
             Who wouldn't say his prayers,
             So I took him by the left leg
             And threw him down the stairs.

          8. Taffy was a Welshman,
             Taffy was a thief,
             Taffy came to my house
             And stole a piece of beef.

          9. Three little kittens
             Lost their mittens
             And they began to cry.

          10. Johnny shall have a new master
              And he shall have but a penny a day,
              Because he won't work any faster.

          11. Dickery, dickery, dock!
              The mouse ran up the clock!

          12. The cow jumped over the moon.

          13. The fair lady of Banbury Cross.
              Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes
              She shall have music wherever she goes.

          14. The Queen of Heart's tarts.

          15. Little Tommy Trout.

          16. Little Boy Blue.

          17. Little Jack Horner.

          18. Little Bo Peep.

          19. Jack and Jill.

          20. The maid was in the garden
              Hanging out the clothes,
              When by came a blackbird
              And nipped off her nose.

There was a good deal of laughter over the competition and much counting
up of marks. Irene, who had scored eighteen out of the possible twenty,
came out top, and was accordingly handed the pretty little photograph
frame which formed the prize.

"I only got six," mourned Lorna. "I was a perfect duffer at it."

"I had fifteen," purred Sheila, "but I couldn't for the life of me
remember who made Cock Robin's shroud, or who pulled Pussy out of the
well."

"It's such ages since I read any nursery rhymes," said Monica.

"That's just the fun of it, of course!" declared Mary. "Did you make up
the questions, Mrs. Clark?"

"No, I got the Canon to compose them. He'll be glad you liked them. Oh,
here he comes. He had to go to a committee meeting this afternoon. Did
you get tea, dear, at Major Littleton's?" (to her husband). "That's
right! Then sit down on this comfy chair and entertain us, please."

"Rather a big order," laughed Canon Clark, shaking hands with his young
visitors, and taking the proffered seat. "How do you want to be
entertained? No sermons to-day?" and his eyes twinkled. "Don't all speak
at once. I'm beginning to get nervous!"

"You can tell the most beautiful stories," suggested Sheila, who had
paid visits before to the Villa Bleue and knew the capabilities of her
host.

"Oh, yes, please, _do_ tell us a story!" agreed the others. "We'd like
it better than anything."

"I have one inside my desk which is just ready to send off to a
magazine. If it won't bore you to listen to it, I'll read it aloud and
let you judge whether it has any interest in it or not. An audience of
schoolgirls ought to be severe critics. As a rule they're omnivorous
readers of fiction. If you turn it down I shall tear it up."

"Oh, but we shan't!"

"_Please_ begin!"

Thus urged, Canon Clark fetched a manuscript from his study, and after
passing round the plate of taffy, to "sweeten his narrative" as he put
it, he sat down in his basket-chair on the veranda and began to read.


"THE LUCK OF DACREPOOL

         "I had known Jack Musgrave out East; we had chummed
         at Mandalay, messed together at Singapore, hunted
         big game up in Kashmir, and shot tigers in Bengal,
         and, when we said good-by, as he boarded the
         homeward-bound steamer at Madras, it was with a
         cordial invitation on his part that I should look
         him up if ever I happened to penetrate into the
         remote corner of Cumberland where his family acres
         were situated.

         "For a year or two my affairs kept me in India, and
         nothing seemed more unlikely than that--for the
         present, at any rate--Jack and I should cross paths
         again, but by one of those strange chances which
         sometimes occur in this world I found myself, on
         the Christmas Eve of 190-, standing on the platform
         of Holdergate Station, having missed the connection
         for Scotland, and with the pleasing prospect before
         me of spending the night, and possibly--if trains
         were not available--the ensuing Christmas Day at
         the one very second-rate inn in the village.

         "It was then that I remembered that Holdergate was
         the nearest station to Dacrepool Grange, and that,
         if Jack's memory still held good, I might find a
         hearty welcome and spend a pleasant evening
         recalling old times and discussing past shots,
         instead of putting up with the inferior
         accommodation offered by the landlady of the King's
         Arms. As no one either at the station or in the
         village seemed willing to vouchsafe me definite
         information as to whether the owner of Dacrepool
         was at home or abroad, parrying my inquiries with
         such scant courtesy and in so uncouth and
         unintelligible a dialect as to be scarce
         understood, I resolved to chance it, and with some
         difficulty hiring a farmer's gig, I started out on
         a six-mile drive over the bleak moorlands, which
         seemed to stretch as far as the eye could reach in
         a dim vista of brown heath and distant snow-clad
         fell. It was a dreary and unseasonable evening,
         with a damp mist rising from the sodden ground, and
         occasional falls of sleet, mingled with rain that
         chilled one to the bone. I buttoned my coat closely
         round my throat, and braced my nerves to meet the
         elements, hoping I might find my reward at the end
         of my journey, and inwardly cursing every mile of
         the rough road.

         "But even Cumberland miles cannot wind on forever,
         and my Jehu at length drew up at a massive stone
         gateway, which he assured me formed the entrance to
         Dacrepool Grange. There was neither light nor sound
         in the lodge, nor did any one come out in answer to
         our impatient calls, so we had perforce to open the
         gates for ourselves. They creaked on their rusty
         hinges, as if they had not been unclosed for many a
         day, and when I noted the neglected drive, where
         the overhanging trees swept our faces as we passed,
         I began to fear that I had come on a fool's errand,
         and that I should find the house shut up and my
         friend abroad.

         "On this point, however, my driver reassured me.
         'Nay, oo'be to home, theer's a light i' yon
         winder,' he said, pointing with his whip where a
         faint streak of yellow shone like a beacon into the
         surrounding gloom. The moon was struggling through
         the clouds, and I could dimly discern the outline
         of the quaint gabled front of the house, with its
         mullioned windows, and masses of clinging ivy.
         Dismounting at the old stone porch, I seized the
         knocker and beat a mighty tattoo. There was no
         reply. Even the light had disappeared from the
         window almost simultaneously with the approach of
         our carriage wheels, and though I hammered for
         fully five minutes I failed to obtain the slightest
         response to my knocks. I was on the point of
         turning away in despair and driving back in the gig
         to Holdergate, when a sound of footsteps was heard
         within, together with an unbolting and unbarring,
         the door was opened about six inches on the chain,
         and a hard-featured woman peeped cautiously out
         into the darkness.

         "I at once proclaimed my identity and my errand,
         but, by the light of the candle which she held in
         her hand, she looked me up and down with a glance
         of keen distrust and evident disfavor. 'How am I to
         know it is as you say?' she replied guardedly, and
         without making any move to grant me admittance.

         "'Then fetch your master,' I exclaimed with some
         heat, thrusting my card into her hand. 'He should
         know my name at any rate, though he seems to have
         trained you in strange notions of hospitality to
         keep a guest standing on the doorstep on a bitter
         evening in December.'

         "Grumbling under her breath she went away, and I
         was half inclined to follow her example and quit
         this very unpromising spot, when a quick step
         resounded in the hall, the door was flung open
         wide, and I was dragged forcibly into the house by
         my friend Jack, who hailed me with such unfeigned
         delight and enthusiasm that there could be little
         doubt of the genuineness of his welcome.

         "'You've sprung upon us at a queer time, as it
         happens, old man, but if you don't mind taking
         pot-luck we'll spend a ripping night together,' he
         cried, hauling me into the dining-room, where a
         pretty fairy of a girl sprang up to greet us. 'This
         is my sister Bessie, and I've talked about you so
         often that she'll give you as big a welcome as I
         do. It's only a poor best we can show you in the
         way of entertainment, but you'll make allowances
         when I tell you how I'm situated, and what we lack
         in kind we must make up in good will.'

         "'What's good enough for you will be good enough
         for me,' I replied heartily, submitting to be
         relieved of my coat and installed in the best chair
         by the blazing fire--a pleasant change indeed from
         the cold and the sleet outside.

         "'You must not think our guests usually receive
         such a churlish reception,' said Jack, laughing a
         little, 'but the fact is, we took you for the
         bailiffs. I'm sorry to say I've outrun the
         constable--it's really not my fault, for the old
         place was mortgaged to its last penny when it fell
         to me--but, as the case stands, I'm enduring a kind
         of siege; daren't put my nose out of my own door
         for fear I should be served with writs, and have to
         smuggle what supplies we can beg or borrow through
         the kitchen window. It's a queer kind of Christmas
         to spend, and a poor lookout for the New Year, for
         I'm afraid the old place is bound to go in the end,
         though I have vowed to stick to it as long as I can
         hold it, and Bessie has vowed to stick to me,
         though she might have a more cheerful home
         elsewhere if she liked. There's precious little to
         offer you in our larder, but perhaps we can furnish
         up something in the way of supper; can't we,
         Bessie?'

         "Miss Musgrave laughed merrily.

         "'Mr. Harper must imagine himself back in camp,'
         she replied; 'I hope he can manage to subsist on
         porridge and cheese and tinned provisions, for I
         don't think we have anything better to offer him.'

         "I would have subsisted on a far poorer diet to
         remain within sight of those bright eyes, and I
         endeavored to convince my host and hostess that I
         desired nothing more than to be treated as one of
         themselves, with such success that I seemed to drop
         at once into the family circle, and never spent a
         pleasanter or more jovial evening in my life. Jack
         and I sat up late after Bessie had retired,
         chatting of bygone days and past adventures till
         the jungles and plains seemed almost more real than
         the cheery blaze of the fire before us; but the
         talk came round at last to the affairs of the
         moment.

         "'Is not there any plan by which you could raise
         the wind, Jack?'" I inquired.

         "'Never a one. I've tried every end up, but there
         seems no way out of the trouble unless, indeed, we
         could find Sir Godfrey's treasure.'

         "'Who's he?'

         "'An ancestor of mine, rather a back number,
         considering he died somewhere about two hundred and
         fifty years ago--but a restless old gentleman, for
         he is still said to have a trick of haunting the
         house, and, according to popular tradition, hoping
         to be able to point out the hiding-place of a
         treasure he stowed away.'

         "'Was it genuine treasure?'

         "'I believe so. He went off to fight in the Civil
         Wars, and hid the family plate and jewels in a
         secure place which nobody knew of but himself. He
         had not the sense to leave any record of the spot,
         and when he was killed at Naseby his secret died
         with him, and the valuables--unless, as I sometimes
         suspect, the old chap had previously pledged
         them--were not forthcoming, nor have they ever been
         heard of since.'

         "'Has he ever appeared to you?'

         "'Not he; I only wish he would. The hoard would be
         a jolly windfall to me if I could manage to light
         upon it. But I'm not the kind who goes about seeing
         ghosts. I'm too plain and matter-of-fact by half,
         and, though I often hear mysterious taps on the
         panels of my bedroom, I prosaically set it down to
         rats and mice. Now, you're a psychic sort of a
         fellow, the seventh son of a seventh son; if he
         wants to make himself visible, perhaps you may get
         a sight of him; I'm afraid it's more than ever I
         shall.'

         "'Is there no clew at all left as to the
         hiding-place of the treasure?' I inquired.

         "'Only an old rhyme so obscure as to be quite
         unintelligible:

              He who plucks a rose at Yule
              Will bring back luck to Dacrepool.

         Even you, with your fondness for antiquities and
         rummaging strange things out of old books, can
         scarcely make anything of that, I should say.'

         "I shook my head, for the riddle seemed quite
         unreadable, and as we had already sat up until long
         past midnight I begged for my candle, and proposed
         to defer our conversation until the morning. Jack,
         declaring that none of the beds in the damp old
         house was fit to sleep in without a week of
         previous airing, insisted upon giving up his room
         to me, and passing the night himself on the
         dining-room sofa, and, in spite of my
         protestations, I was forced to acquiesce in his
         plans for my comfort.

         "Left alone, I looked with some curiosity round the
         gloomy oak-paneled chamber, where the fire-light
         flashed on the carved four-poster, with its faded
         yellow damask curtains, and lit up the moth-eaten
         tapestry that adorned a portion of the upper part
         of the walls, but scarcely illumined the dark
         corners which lay beyond. There were quaint old
         presses and chests roomy enough to hide a dozen
         ghosts in, and a portrait of a gentleman in the
         elaborate costume of the Stuart period seemed to
         look down upon me with strangely haunting eyes.

         "'A spooky enough place,' I murmured, 'hallowed by
         the spirits of numerous generations, no doubt.
         Well, I'll undertake they won't disturb me
         to-night, for I am dog-tired and mean to sleep like
         a log.'

         "I am an old traveler, and was soon in bed and
         enjoying a well-earned slumber, but my dreams were
         wild, for I seemed now to be driving furiously over
         the moorland, pursuing ever the phantom of pretty
         Bessie, who, with her bewitching smile, was luring
         me into the fog and darkness, and now to be barring
         the front door to defend her from some unknown
         assailant, whose perpetual rapping rang like an
         echo through my brain. With the impotent strength
         of dreamland I struggled vainly to close the door,
         which was opening slowly to admit the nameless
         horror. I seemed to feel a hot breath on my cheek,
         and with a wild shriek I woke, to find the
         moonlight streaming in through the broad
         diamond-paned window, falling in a white shaft
         across the floor, while the last embers of the fire
         were smoldering to ashes upon the hearth.

         "I sat up in bed with that feeling of broad
         awakeness and alertness which comes to us
         sometimes, and caught my breath as I listened, for
         through the stillness of the night came the
         unmistakable sound of a gentle tapping from behind
         the paneling of the wall. It was not continuous,
         but more as one might rap at the chamber door of a
         sleeping person, waiting every now and then to hear
         if one had obtained a response. An intense and
         vivid sensation came over me that I was not alone
         in the room; that there was some presence other
         than my own personality which was striving in some
         way to force itself upon my consciousness and
         arrest my attention. Was it only my fancy, or were
         the moonbeams actually shaping themselves into a
         human form, till against the dark background of the
         fireplace, I seemed to see the misty shadowy
         outline of a figure, so vague and ethereal that
         even as I looked it appeared to melt again into the
         moonlight and cease to exist?

         "With every nerve on the stretch I strained my
         eyes to gain a clearer impression. A passing cloud
         left the room for a few moments in darkness, but,
         as the beams shone out full and clear once more,
         that shadowy figure seemed to gather substance, and
         I felt as if some unknown force were compelling my
         attention and chaining my every sense in a mute
         endeavor to establish some chord of connection
         between me and the dim spirit world which floats
         forever round us. Now waxing, now waning, the
         vision grew, till I fancied I caught a glint of
         armor. For an instant a wild imploring glance met
         my own, and a transparent finger pointed to the
         richly-carved paneling below the arras, but as I
         sprang from the bed the vision faded swiftly away,
         leaving me standing on the floor in the calm
         moonlight doubting the evidence of my senses, and
         half convinced that I must still have been in the
         continuance of my dream.

         "Yet, as I looked, something in the carved paneling
         struck my notice, and, following the direction in
         which the spectral finger had pointed, I saw that
         the dragons and the twisted scrolls were united in
