that when the opportunity offered, you would do so.  No one could have
done better, or shown more coolness or courage.  Had it not been for
you, Bouldon would have lost his life; of that I am certain.  He was
almost gone when I came up."

"Why, Bracebridge, I considered that you saved both our lives,"
exclaimed Ellis, in a tone of surprise at hearing himself so praised.
"Had you not come up, we should both have been lost."

"Oh!  I only used a little judgment, and followed one of the many bits
of good advice my father has given me from time to time," said Ernest.
"I neither ought nor will take any of the credit which belongs to you;
so pray, my dear fellow, do not talk of what I have done."

Ellis, however, argued the point; but Ernest took care that the way he
had behaved should be thoroughly known and well understood by all the
boys, as well as by the Doctor.

The fishing-party had a very pleasant walk home, and seldom had fuller
baskets of fish been brought to the school.

That evening, after prayers, the Doctor called up Ellis, and, placing
him on his right hand, said that he wished to compliment him, among all
his companions, for his bravery and coolness, which had enabled him to
have the inestimable gratification of saving the life of a
fellow-creature, a school-fellow, and a friend; "and," added the Doctor,
turning to Ernest, "I feel that you, Bracebridge, deserve not less
credit for the generous way in which you have acted in the matter."

Ernest did not obtain less credit, and Ellis found himself in a very
different position to what he had before held in the school.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TRIALS OF EDWARD ELLIS--A GAME AT GOLF.

The summer holidays were over, and nearly all the boys had collected at
school.  Most of them loved their homes; but really our school was so
pleasant a place, that very few regretted returning to it.  Several new
boys came.  One of them was called Andrew Barber.  He was somewhat of a
noisy overbearing character, and showed from the first a strong
disposition to bully, and to quarrel with those who did not agree with
him.  He had, however, a box full of valuables, and a couple of bats, a
set of wickets, and two first-rate footballs, and a set of
hockey-sticks, so that with a pretty large class he was rather popular.
Dawson very quickly made up to him, and Blackall condescended to allow
him to cultivate his acquaintance.  I write about him from recollection.
Perhaps when he first came, the defects I recollect in his character
may not have been so apparent.  Bracebridge came back quiet and
gentlemanly as ever.  He had not been idle during the holidays.  It is
extraordinary how much he had seen, and done, and learned.  He had been
reading pretty hard both Greek and Latin, and Mathematics.  He had made
a tour through the manufacturing districts, the commencement of a series
his father promised to take him, to show him the true source of English
wealth.  He had had a very pleasant yachting expedition, and had learned
a good deal more about a vessel, and how to sail her, than he had before
known.  He had become a proficient in archery, and had filled a book
full of sketches.  Then he had read through a History of France, and
made a synopsis of the work, as well as two or three biographies; and he
had fished and ridden, and botanised and geologised, and seemed to have
seen and talked with a great number of interesting people.  Even Buttar,
to whom he gave this account of himself, was surprised; and yet Buttar
was one of the hardest readers in the school.

"How I can possibly get through so much, do you ask?" said Ernest.
"Why, I will tell you.  I am never idle.  I always arrange beforehand
what I want to do, and when I am at work, I give all my mind to that
work, and never allow myself a moment to think of anything else.  I have
the gift, and a valuable one it is, I feel, of being able to concentrate
my thoughts on the particular subject in which I am engaged, while I
never allow them to be drawn off by anything else.  I believe that my
mind is so constituted that I should do this of my own accord; but my
father has strongly urged on me the importance of the habit, and I
accordingly practise it systematically.  Whenever I find my mind
wandering away from the subject on which I am engaged, I bring it back
forcibly, just as if it were a truant, or a deserter from his colours.
Some people can think of two things at the same moment; but my father
says it is much better to think of one thing well at a time, as likewise
to do one thing well; so, as you may have observed, I never attempt
more.  The consequence of this system is, that I gain some credit, more
or less, for nearly everything I undertake."

"Indeed, you do," exclaimed Buttar enthusiastically.  "I wish that I
were like you; but my thoughts are constantly wool-gathering, whatever I
am about.  Now, Ellis is like you.  He can keep his mind fixed on his
work, whether mental or physical; and see how rapidly he has got on.  I
wonder when he is coming.  It is extraordinary how I took to liking that
fellow; I quite long to have him back among us."

"He wrote me word a few days ago that he expected to be here to-morrow.
He tells me that he looks forward to coming back with great pleasure,
though formerly it was always with pain and dread that he approached the
school."

"I am glad of it," remarked Buttar.  "There is a good deal in that
fellow.  I did not fancy so at first, but I am now convinced that he
could beat most of us at anything he tries.  He is a right honest good
chap into the bargain.  I hope that he will be here soon."

Poor Ellis would have had his spirits much raised, had he been aware how
those whom he most esteemed among his schoolfellows talked of him.

The Doctor made a rule of examining all the boys when they returned
after the holidays, to ascertain what progress they had made during the
time.  They had also a holiday task; but they all, except the very idle
ones, found it a very easy matter.

Ernest found himself at once put up a class, and the very first day he
went up, he took a good place in that class.  Bracebridge could not be
otherwise than a favourite with the Doctor, and with all the masters.
Monsieur Malin especially liked him.  He took so much pains to acquire
French, and to pronounce it properly, and would repeat words over and
over again till he had caught the right sound: then he at once
understood the necessity of attending to the idioms of the language, and
did not fancy that he was speaking French when he literally translated
English into French, as did most of his companions.  He moreover (and
the Frenchman fully appreciated his delicacy) never allowed a smile to
appear on his countenance, however absurd the mistake his master might
make when speaking English.

Monsieur Malin was a great linguist, and took a pleasure in imparting a
knowledge of his attainments to Ernest, who in that way began to study
Italian, German, and Spanish, and found, to his surprise, a wonderful
ease in picking them up.  He always carried in his pocket a little book,
in which he entered the words he wished to learn.  When he walked out,
he used to learn as many of these words as he could remember.  One day
he devoted to one language, one to another, and he found that he
acquired all three with very little more exertion of mind than was
necessary to learn one.  He had learned Latin and Greek with his father
in the same way, and at an early age he had had a very large vocabulary;
indeed, there was scarcely a word in English which he could not readily
translate into those languages when he came to school.  In consequence,
directly he learned a rule of grammar, he was able to apply it.  Other
boys, following the old system, went hammering and hammering away at
their grammar without understanding it, and without being able to apply
its rules, and lost their own time and patience, and that of their
unfortunate masters.

However, I am not writing an account of the lesson hours of my schoolboy
days, but rather of the play-hours.  At the same time, I believe that
they are more connected, and the importance of the latter is greater
than some people are apt to suppose.

Bracebridge, Buttar, Bouldon, and Gregson were waiting to welcome Ellis
when he got down from the coach, which passed through the village,
half-a-mile from the house.  They all, as they walked home, had a great
deal to say, and a great deal to tell him.  Each one was eager to
describe where he had been, and what he had done in the holidays, and to
know all that had happened to Ellis during the same period.  They then
had to tell him of all the changes which had occurred at the school.

"We have loads of new fellows," exclaimed Bouldon.  "There is Milman,
and Bishop, and Lloyd, and Taylor, and a fellow named Barber, and
Cooper, and Lindsay; and there are five or six little fellows, whose
names I don't know, and several more are coming, and they say two or
three big fellows, who will be especially under the Doctor.  A capital
increase for one half, though, to be sure, several have left in the
upper class.  It shows, however, that the school is getting up."

"I know that I wish one fellow had left," said Buttar.  "The school
suffers in consequence of him.  I wouldn't have a younger brother of
mine come as long as he is here, that I know, to be bullied by him; to
be kicked, and cuffed, and abused is bad enough, but to hear him talk--
to have to listen to his foul language and stories, and all sorts of
ideas which come into his abominable mind, is infinitely worse."

"You are right, Buttar," exclaimed Bracebridge, warmly.  "That fellow
Blackall and his tongue is a pest to society.  If he simply bullied he
could do very little harm; but, I say, what is the matter with Ellis?
how pale and wretched he looks!"

"Bracebridge," said Ellis, coming round to him hurriedly, "who is this
fellow Barber?  Where does he come from?  Do you know?  Oh, tell me!"

"From Doctor Graham's at Hampstead.  I know for certain.  He told me so
this morning," replied Bracebridge.  "But, my dear fellow, what is the
matter with you?"

"Oh, Bracebridge, you'll know too soon," Ellis gasped out.  They had
dropped a little behind the rest of the party.  "Yet you'll not think
ill of me.  You'll not believe what he says, will you?  Promise me that,
without proof, without better proof than he can give.  However it may
appear, I am not guilty; indeed I am not."

"What are you talking about?" exclaimed Ernest, thinking that poor Ellis
had gone mad.  "I have never heard a word against you.  Nobody has said
anything of which you might complain.  Had anyone, I would not believe
him, and I am sure your other friends would not.  Everybody who really
knows you likes you, trusts you, and believes you to be an excellent
fellow.  You have taken some fancy into your head.  Get rid of it, do."

"It is no fancy, indeed it is not," said Ellis, more calmly.  "Perhaps I
was wrong to say anything about the matter.  I know that there is a
French saying, _Qui s'excuse s'accuse_.  I'll not excuse myself more
than I have done to you.  Should anything be said against me, I may rest
sure of your friendship at all events.  More I do not desire."

"Indeed, my dear fellow, you may.  Whatever others may say, I will not
believe you capable of doing anything of which you need be ashamed,"
said Ernest, warmly pressing his friend's hand.

"Thankyou, thank you!" replied Ellis; "you make me feel less miserable.
Still your friendship will be sorely tried.  Of that I am certain."

Ernest, during all the time Ellis was speaking, was debating in his mind
whether or not he was labouring under some strange hallucination.
"Whatever it is that you fear, do not talk about it," he said, as soon
as Ellis had ceased speaking.  "It will do no good, and can only make
people think things which are very likely far from the truth.  I would
advise you not to talk even to me about it.  Come and have a good game
of cricket, or take a turn at fencing, or broadsword, or come and learn
golf.  There is a Scotch fellow, Macgreggor, who has come this half, and
has undertaken to teach us, and it has become all the rage.  It's a
capital game for summer, and gives one plenty of exercise.  One game or
the other will soon knock all such notions out of your head."

Poor Ellis smiled faintly as he replied, "I am afraid not, but I will
try to follow your advice.  I will keep up my spirits, and perhaps
matters will turn out better than I have a right to expect.  I should
like to learn golf, if you are doing so.  I have once or twice seen it
played at Blackheath, and I should think that it would suit me better
even than cricket."

"That's right, that's right," said Ernest.  "I say, you fellows, Ellis
has a great fancy to join us in learning golf.  He is like me; he
dislikes the same routine of games year after year, however good they
may be.  We'll get Macgreggor to give us a lesson this evening.  He
seems to be a very good-natured fellow, though he is so big and old."

Macgreggor was a private pupil of the Doctor's, who had lately come to
prepare for Cambridge.  He was a good specimen of a Highlander, who had
never before been south of the Tweed.  He spoke strong Scotch, but not
broad Scotch; that is, Lowland Scotch, with the full forcible
expressions which are to be found in such abundance in the language.  He
was a truly honourable, high-spirited fellow, and most kind-hearted and
generous.  Had Blackall's misdeeds come to his notice he would have
doubled him up, as our Yankee cousins would say, in no time.  The rest
of the party willingly agreed to the proposal.  As soon as they reached
the house, Ellis had to go and present himself to the Doctor, who was
struck by his grave and pale countenance.

"My dear boy, what is the matter with you?" asked the Doctor kindly.

"Nothing, sir; nothing," was the answer.  "It is not because I am sorry
to come back to school, because I am very happy to find myself here."

The Doctor looked pleased, and he knew that Ellis was not a boy to make
a set speech for the purpose of paying a compliment.  He was glad to
find also that he had not spent his holidays in idleness, but had
studied quite as hard as was wise, and had read a number of useful
works.

"You have done very well indeed," said the Doctor.  "If every boy would
follow your plan, and read attentively a good history during the
holidays, they would become very fair historians at a small expense of
labour, and they would save their time which is now, in most instances,
so miserably squandered.  Most boys during their school-life have from
fourteen to sixteen holidays, each about six weeks in length--in fact
they are idle for two whole years of the most valuable period of their
existence for acquiring knowledge.  During that time they might acquire
a thorough knowledge of the history of the whole world."

Ellis thanked the Doctor for his advice, and said that he would follow
it, and try to persuade some of his schoolfellows to do so likewise.

Dinner was over, so some was sent in for Ellis, and then he and his
friends set off, with Macgreggor and several other boys, to the
neighbouring heath, where they were to play golf.

Macgreggor had brought with him a supply of golf sticks or bats, which
he generously distributed among those who wished to play.  He soon fixed
on Bracebridge as being likely to prove one of the best players, and
told him that he should be his opponent on this occasion, although he
had received only three or four lessons from him.

Ernest chose Buttar, Ellis, and Knowles, who played already very well,
and Macgreggor took Bouldon, Gregson, and Jackson, another not bad
player, considering that he had only just taken a golf stick in hand.
As the ground over which they had to play was very irregular, they
marked their three holes in a triangle about a quarter of a mile apart.

"See, Ellis, what a beautiful golf stick Mac has given me," said
Bracebridge, showing his golf club.  It was a formidable-looking weapon,
about three feet long, formed of ash, curved and massive towards the
end, which was made of a lump of beech, the handle being neatly covered
with velvet.  The thick end of the club was loaded with four ounces of
lead, and faced with hard bone.  Altogether no weapon could have been
designed better adapted for hitting a small ball with a powerful stroke.
The golf ball itself was very small, not bigger than a small hen's egg.
It was formed of white leather, which had been soaked in water, and
stuffed full of feathers by means of a stick till it became perfectly
hard.  It was afterwards covered with four coats of fine white paint to
increase its hardness.

"You observe, Ellis," said Bracebridge, "the great object is to get a
ball both hard, light, strong, easily seen, and which will not be the
worse for a wetting.  All these qualifications are possessed by this
little fellow.  Why golf has gone out so much in England, I don't know.
Two centuries ago it was a fashionable game among the nobility; and we
hear of Prince Henry, eldest son of James the First, amusing himself
with it.  In those days it was called `bandy-ball,' on account of the
bowed or bandy stick with which it was played.  We now only apply the
term bandy to legs.  Still farther back, in the reign of Edward the
Third, the game was played, and known by the Latin name of _Gambuca_.
Now, are we all ready?"

Macgreggor, who had just come up with his companions, replied that all
his party were ready to begin.  Each side was accompanied by two boys,
carrying a number of other clubs, one of which was of iron, and some
were shorter, and some longer, to enable the players to strike the ball
out of any hole, or rut, or other place in which it might have got.

"These extra clubs are called putters, and the men who carry them cads,
or caddies," Ernest remarked to Ellis.  "This heavy iron club is, you
see, to knock the ball out of a rut, which would very likely cause the
fracture of one of our wooden clubs.  Now you understand all about the
matter.  Follow me; I'll tell you what to do when Macgreggor is not
near; otherwise, though he is playing against us, he will advise us what
to do."

