think it's a bit over-heavy," objected Mrs Welsh, as she lifted the
structure with difficulty.

"Well, ye might take off the wreath," was the widow's reply.

Mrs Nobbs removed the only part of the erection that was really pretty,
but still it was pronounced by Mrs Welsh to be too heavy, especially
for the fair and delicate brows of Pauline Rigonda.

While they were thus engaged Dr Marsh entered the hut, where, for the
sake of secrecy, the crown had been prepared, but Dr Marsh was a
privileged man, besides he was there professionally; little Brown-eyes
was sick--not seriously, but sufficiently so to warrant medical
intervention.

"Well, what have we here, ladies?" said the doctor blandly, "part of the
throne, eh?"

"Sure it is, in a sort of way, for it's the crown," answered Mrs Lynch,
"an' they think it's over-heavy."

"Not at all; by no means," cried the doctor heartily.  "It's splendid.
Put the wreath on--so.  Nothing could be finer.  Shall I carry it up for
you?  The coronation is fixed for noon, you know, so that we may have
time to finish off with a grand feast."

"No, no, doctor dear.  Thank 'ee kindly, but we must cover it up, so's
not to let the people see it till the right time."

"Well, see that you're not late with it."

Having caused Brown-eyes to put out her little tongue, and felt her
pulse, and nodded his head gravely once or twice without speaking, all
of which must have been highly comforting and beneficial to the child,
the doctor went out.

Not long afterwards the people began to assemble round the palace, in
front of which a wondrous throne had been erected.  Down in a dell
behind a cliff some fifty men had assembled secretly with the crown on a
cushion in their midst.  They were headed by Dr Marsh, who had been
unanimously elected to place the crown on Pauline's head.  In the palace
Pauline was being prepared by Mrs Lynch and Mrs Nobbs for the
ceremony.

On the top of a mound close to the palace a band of conspirators was
assembled.  These conspirators were screened from view by some thick
bushes.  Otto Rigonda was their ringleader, Teddy Malone and little
Buxley formed the rest of the band.  Otto had found a dead tree.  Its
trunk had been hollowed by decay.  He and his fellow-conspirators had
sawn it off near to the ground, and close to the root they had drilled a
touch-hole.  This huge piece of ordnance they had loaded with a heavy
charge of the ship's gunpowder.  Otto now stood ready with a piece of
slow-match at the touch-hole, and another piece, lighted, in hand.

Suddenly, about the hour of noon, Abel Welsh the carpenter, and Nobbs
the blacksmith, issued from the palace with two long tin implements.
Secretly, for two weeks previously, had these devoted men retired every
night to the opposite extremity of Big Island, and frightened into fits
the birds and beasts of that region with the sounds they produced in
practising on those instruments.  Applying the trumpets to their lips,
they sent forth a tremendous, though not uniform, blast.

The surrounding crowd, who expected something, but knew not what,
replied with a cheer not unmixed with laughter, for the two trumpets,
after the manner of asses, had to make some ineffectual preliminary
efforts before achieving a full-toned bray.  An answering note from the
dell, however, repressed the laughter and awoke curiosity.  Next moment
the doctor appeared carrying the crown, and followed by his fifty men,
armed with muskets, rifles, fowling-pieces, and revolvers.  Their
appearance was so realistic and impressive that the people forgot to
cheer.  At the same moment the palace door was thrown open, and Dominick
led the youthful queen to the foot of the throne.

Poor little Pauline looked so modest and pretty, and even timid, and
withal so angelically innocent in the simplicity of her attire, that the
people burst into an earnestly enthusiastic shout, and began for the
first time to feel that this was no game or play, but a serious reality.

Things had been so arranged that Pina and Dr Marsh reached the foot of
the throne together.  Then the latter took the pretty coral wreath off
the huge crown, and, to widow Lynch's felt, but not expressed,
indignation, placed _that_ on Pauline's head.

"Pauline Rigonda," he said in a loud voice, "I have been appointed by
the people of this island to crown you, in their name and by their
authority, as Queen of Refuge Islands, in the full belief that your
innocence and regard for truth and righteousness will be their best
guarantee that you will select as your assistants the men whom you think
best suited to aid you in the promotion of good government."

The serious tone of the doctor's voice, and the genuine shouts of
satisfaction from the people, put the poor little queen in such a
flutter that nearly all her courage forsook her, and she could scarcely
reply.  Nevertheless, she had a mind of her own.

"Doctor Marsh, and my dear people," she said at last, "I--I scarcely
know how to reply.  You overrate me altogether; but--but, if I rule at
all, I will do so by the blessed truths of this book (she held up a
Bible); and--and before taking a single step further I appoint as my--my
Prime Minister--if I may so call him--Joe Binney."

For one moment there was the silence of amazement, for neither Dominick
nor Dr Marsh knew of Pauline's intention.  Only the widow Lynch had
been aware of her resolve.  Next moment a hilarious cheer burst from the
crowd, and Teddy Malone, from his retreat, shouted, "God bliss the
Quane!" which infused hearty laughter into the cheer, whereupon Welsh
and Nobbs, thinking the right time had come, sent out of their tin
tubes, after a few ineffectual blurts, two terrific brays.  Fearing to
be too late, one of the armed men let off his piece, which was the
signal for a grand _feu de joie_.

"Now for it," thought the chief conspirator in the bushes, as he applied
his light to the slow-match.  He thought nothing more just then, for the
slow-match proved to be rather quick, fired the powder at once, and the
monster cannon, bursting with a hideous roar into a thousand pieces,
blew Otto through the bushes and down the mound, at the foot of which he
lay as one dead.

Consternation was on every face.  The queen, dropping her crown, sprang
to his side, Dr Marsh did the same, but Otto recovered almost
immediately.

"That _was_ a stunner!" he said, with a confused look, putting his hand
to his head, as they helped him to rise.

Strange to say, he was none the worse of the misadventure, but did his
part nobly at the Royal feast that followed.

That night she who had risen with the sun as Pauline Rigonda, laid her
fair young head upon the pillow as--the Island Queen.



CHAPTER NINE.

SHOWS HOW THEY WERE TORMENTED BY AN OLD FAMILIAR FIEND; HOW THEY KILLED
HIM, AND WHAT BEFELL THE QUEEN AND OTTO WHILE IN THE PURSUIT OF
LEGITIMATE PLEASURE.

When the widow Lynch told Pauline that "onaisy is the hid as wears a
crown," she stated a great truth which was borne in upon the poor queen
at the very commencement of her reign.

Up to that time Malines had quietly kept possession of the key of the
ship's liquor-room, knowing full well what extreme danger lay in letting
men have unrestrained command of strong drink.  But when the royal feast
referred to in the last chapter was pending, he could not well refuse to
issue an allowance of grog.  He did so, however, on the understanding
that only a small quantity was to be taken for the occasion, and that he
should himself open and lock the door for them.  He made this
stipulation because he knew well enough the men who wanted to drink
would break the door open if he refused to give up the key; and his
fears were justified, for some of the more mutinous among the men, under
the leadership of Jabez Jenkins and Morris, seized the key from the mate
when he produced it, carried all the spirit and wine casks to the shore,
ferried them over the lagoon to Big Island, and set them up
ostentatiously and conspicuously in a row not far from the palace.  As
this was understood by the people to be in connection with the
coronation festivities, no particular notice was taken of it.

But the result soon began to be felt, for after the festivities were
over, and most of the settlers had retired to rest, a group of kindred
souls gathered round the spirit casks, and went in for what one of them
termed a "regular spree."  At first they drank and chatted with moderate
noise, but as the fumes of the terrible fire-water mounted to their
brains they began to shout and sing, then to quarrel and fight, and,
finally, the wonted silence of the night was wildly disturbed by the
oaths and fiendish yells and idiotic laughter of maniacs.

"This won't do," said Dominick, issuing from his room in the palace, and
meeting the doctor.

"I had just come to the same conclusion," said the latter, "and was
about to consult you as to what we should do."

"Collect some of our best men and put a stop to it," returned Dominick;
"but here comes the prime minister--roused, no doubt, as we have been.
What say you, Joe; shall we attempt to quell them?"

"Well, master, that depends.  There's a braw lot on 'em, an' if they
beant far gone, d'ee see, they might gie us a deal o' trouble.  If they
_be_ far gone I'd advise ye to let 'em alone; the drink'll quell 'em
soon enough.  Arter that we'll know what to do."

Just as he spoke a woman was seen rushing frantically towards them.  It
was little Mrs Nobbs.  Poor thing!  All her wonted merriment had fled
from her comely face, and been supplanted by a look of horror.

"O sirs!" she cried, clasping her hands, and gasping as she spoke,
"come, come quick, my John has falled an' broke his pledge, an' he's
goin' to murder some of 'em.  I _know_ he'll do it; he's got hold o' the
fore-hammer.  Oh! come quick!"

They required no urging.  Running down to the scene of the orgies, they
found that the blacksmith, who had hitherto been considered--and really
was--one of the quietest men of the party, was now among the drunkards.
He stood in the midst of the rioters, his large frame swaying to and
fro, while he held the ponderous fore-hammer threateningly in his hands,
and insanity gleamed in his eyes as he glared fiercely at Jabez Jenkins.

On Jabez the liquor had a different effect, his temperament being
totally different.  He was a rather phlegmatic man, and, having drunk
enough to have driven two men like the blacksmith raving mad, he only
stood before him with a dull heavy look of stupidity, mingled with an
idiotic sneer of defiance.

"Fiend!" shouted Nobbs, gnashing his teeth, "you have got me to do it,
and now I'll smash in your thick skull--I'll--"

He stopped abruptly for a moment.  Joe Binney came up behind and gently
laid a hand on his shoulder.

"Come, John, you ain't agoin' to do it.  You knows you're not."

The quiet tone, the gentle yet fearless look, and, above all, the
sensible, kindly expression on his friend's countenance, effectually
subdued the blacksmith for a few seconds, but the fury soon returned,
though the channel in which it flowed was changed, for Jabez was
forgotten, having slunk away.

"Ha!" he shouted, grasping Joe by the hand and arm, "I've had it again!
You don't know how it shoots through my veins.  I--I've tried to break
with it, too--tried--tried!  D'ee know what it is to try, Joe, to try--
try--try till your blood curdles, an' your marrow boils, and your nerves
tingle--but I gained the victory once--I--ha! ha! yes, I took the pledge
an' kep' it, an' I've bin all right--till to-night.  My Mary knows that.
She'll tell you it's true--for months, and months, and months, and--but
I'll keep it _yet_!"

He shouted his last words in a tone of fierce defiance, let go his
friend, caught up the sledge-hammer, and, whirling it round his head as
if it had been a mere toy, turned to rush towards the sea.

But Joe's strong arm arrested him.  Well did he understand the nature of
the awful fiend, with which the blacksmith was fighting.  The scene
enacting was, with modifications, somewhat familiar to him, for he had
dwelt near a great city where many a comrade had fallen in the same
fight, never more to rise in this life.

Joe's superior strength told for a moment, and he held the struggling
madman fast, but before Dominick and the doctor could spring to his aid,
Nobbs had burst from him.  The brief check, however, seemed to have
changed his intentions.  Possibly he was affected by some hazy notion
that it would be a quicker end to leap headlong from the neighbouring
cliffs than to plunge into the sea.  At all events, he ran like a deer
up towards the woods.  A bonfire, round which the revellers had made
merry, lay in his path.  He went straight through it, scattering the
firebrands right and left.  No one attempted, no one dared, to stop him,
but God put a check in his way.  The course he had taken brought him
straight up to the row of casks which stood on the other side of the
fire, and again his wild mood was changed.  With a yell of triumph he
brought the sledge-hammer down on one of the casks, drove in the head,
and overturned it with the same blow, and the liquor gushing out flowed
into the fire, where it went up in a magnificent roar of flame.

The effect on those of the rioters who were not too drunk to understand
anything, was to draw forth a series of wild cheers, but high above
these rang the triumphant shout of the blacksmith as he gazed at the
destruction of his enemy.

By this time all the people in the settlement had turned out, and were
looking on in excitement, alarm, or horror, according to temperament.
Among them, of course, was the widow Lynch, who was quick to note that
events were taking a favourable turn.  Springing boldly to the side of
the smith, and, in her wild dishevelment of hair and attire, seeming a
not unfit companion, she cried--

"Don't spare them, John! sure there's another inimy close at yer back."

Nobbs had sense enough left to observe something of the ludicrous in the
woman and her advice.  He turned at once, uttered a wildly jovial laugh,
and driving in the head of another cask, overturned it.  As before, the
spirit rushed down the hill and was set ablaze, but the poor madman did
not pause now to look at the result.  His great enemy was in his power;
his spirit was roused.  Like one of the fabled heroes of old, he laid
about him with his ponderous weapon right and left until every cask was
smashed, and every drop of the accursed liquid was rushing down the
hillside to the sea, or flaming out its fierce existence in the air.

The people looked on awe-stricken, and in silence, while the madman
fought.  It was not with the senseless casks or the inanimate liquor
that poor John Nobbs waged war that night; it was with a real fiend who,
in days gone by, had many a time tripped him up and laid him low, who
had nearly crushed the heart of his naturally cheerful little wife, who
had ruined his business, broken up his home, alienated his friends, and,
finally, driven him into exile--a fiend from whom, for many months,
under the influence of "the pledge," he had been free, and who, he had
fondly hoped, was quite dead.

This sudden revival of the old foe, and this unexpected surprise and
fall, had roused this strong man's spirit to its utmost ferocity, and in
mighty wrath he plied his hammer like a second Thor.  But the very
strength and nervous power of the man constituted his weakness, when
brought under the subtle influence of the old tempter, and it is
probable that on his recovery, with nerves shaken, old cravings
awakened, and self-respect gone, he would have fallen again and again if
God had not made use of the paroxysm of rage to destroy the opportunity
and the cause of evil.  Nobbs did not know at that time, though he
learned it afterwards, that safety from the drink-sin--as from all other
sin--lies not in strong-man resolutions, or Temperance pledges, though
both are useful aids, but in Jesus, the Saviour _from sin_.

Some of those who witnessed the wholesale destruction of the liquor
would fain have made an effort to prevent it; but, fortunately for the
community, most of them were too drunk to care, and the others to
interfere; while all were so taken by surprise that the deed was done
and the grand conflagration ended before they had realised the full
significance of the blacksmith's act.

When the last head had been driven in, and the last gallon of spirit
summarily dismissed by the fire, Nobbs threw up his arms, and, looking
upward, gave vent to a cheer which ended in a prolonged cry.  For a
moment he stood thus, then the hammer dropt from his grasp, and he fell
back insensible.

Poor little Mrs Nobbs was by his side on her knees in a moment, parting
the dark hair from his broad brow, kissing his swart cheeks, and chafing
his strong hands.

"O John! darling John!" she cried, "come back--come back--don't die.
You never was hard or cruel to _me_!  Even the drink could not do that.
Come back, John!"

Dr Marsh here gently restrained her.  "Don't be alarmed," he said, as
he undid the smith's necktie; "he'll be all right presently.  Stand
back, don't crowd round him; and you go fetch a cup of water, Mrs
Nobbs."

The reassuring tones and the necessity for action did much to calm the
excited woman.  Before she had returned with the water her husband had
partially recovered.  They carried him to his hut, and left him to sleep
off the effects, while his poor little wife watched by his side.  When
left quite alone, she went down on her knees beside him, and prayed for
his deliverance with all her heart.  Then she rose and sat down with a
calm, contented look, muttering, "Yes; He _is_ the hearer and answerer
of prayer.  He _will_ answer me."

She might have gone further and said, "He _has_ answered me," for was
not the destruction of the liquor an answer to the petition before it
was put up?  "Before they call I will answer."

"Pina," said Otto the following day, in a tone almost of reproach,
during a private audience with the queen, "Pina, how came you to do such
an insane thing as choose Joe Binney for your premier?  Why didn't you
choose Dom?  You know well enough that he's fifty times cleverer than
