
"Where did you find it?" inquires the captain.

"I've jess tuk it out o' the claws o' the ugliest Injun as ever made
trail on a puraira--that beauty thar, whose karkidge the buzzards won't
be likely to tech."

While speaking Cully points to a corpse.  It is that of the Tenawa
chief, already identified among the slain.

"He must a' hed it in his clutch when suddenly shot down," pursues the
guide.  "An' whar did he git it?  Boys, our ole kummerade's wiped out
for sartin.  I know how Walt loved that thar piece.  He w'udn't a parted
wi' it unless along wi' his life."

This is the conviction of several others acquainted with Wilder.  It is
the company of Rangers to which he formerly belonged.

"Thar's been foul play somewhar," continues Cully.  "Walt went back to
the States--to Kaintuck, ef this chile ain't mistook.  But 'tain't
likely he stayed thar; he kedn't keep long off o' the purairas.  I tell
ye, boys, these hyar Injens hev been makin' mischief somewhar'.  Look
thar, look at them leggin's!  Thar's no eend o' white sculps on' 'em,
an' fresh tuk, too!"

The eyes of all turned towards these terrible trophies that in gory
garniture fringe the buck-skin leg-wear of the savages.  Cully, with
several others who knew Wilder well, proceed to examine them, in full
expectation of finding among them the skin of their old comrade's head.
There are twelve scalps, all of white men, with others that are Indian,
and not a few that exhibit the equally black, but shorter crop of the
Mexican.  Those that are indubitably of white men show signs of having
been recently taken, but none of them can be identified as the scalp of
Walt Wilder.

There is some relief in this, for his old comrades love.  Walt.  Still,
there is the damning evidence of the gun, which Cully declares could
only have been taken from him along with his life.  How has it got into
the hands of the Horned Lizard?

"I reckon we can settle that," says the Captain of the Rangers.  "The
renegade ought to know something about it."

This speech refers to Barbato, who has been taken prisoner, and about
whose disposal they have already commenced to deliberate.  His beard
betrayed him as a renegade; and, the paint having been partially wiped
from his skin, all perceive that he is a white man--a Mexican.  Some are
for shooting him on the spot, others propose hanging, while only a few
of the more humane advocate taking him on to the settlements and there
giving him a trial.  He will have to die anyhow--that is pretty sure;
for not only as a Mexican is he their enemy, but now doubly so from
being found in league with their most detested foes, the Tenawa
Comanches.

The wretch is lying on the ground near by, shaking with fear, in spite
of the fastenings in which he is tightly held.  He knows he is in dire
danger, and has only so far escaped through having surrendered to a
settler instead of to one of the Rangers.

"Let's gie him a chance o' his life; ef he'll tell all about it,"
counsels Cully.  "What d'ye say, cap?"

"I agree to that," responds the Ranger captain.  "He don't appear to be
worth shooting; though it may be as well to take him on to the
settlements, and shut him up in prison.  The promise of pardon may get
out of him all he knows; if not, the other will.  He's not an Indian,
and a bit of rope looped round his neck will, no doubt, loosen his
tongue.  Suppose we try boys?"

The "boys" are unanimous in their assent, and the renegade is at once
brought up for examination.  The man in the green blanket coat, who, as
a Santa Fe expeditioner, has spent over twelve months in Mexican
prisons, is appointed examiner.  He has been long enough among the
"yellerbellies" to have learnt their language.

The renegade is for a time reticent, and his statements are
contradictory.  No wonder he declines to tell what has occurred, so
compromising to himself!  But when the _lariat_ is at length noosed
around his neck, the loose end of it thrown over the limb of a pecan
tree--the other conditions being clearly expounded to him--he sees that
things can be no worse; and, seeing this, makes confession--full, if not
free.  He discloses everything--the attack and capture of the caravan,
with the slaughter of the white men who accompanied it; he tells of the
retreat of two of them to the cliff, one of whom, by the description,
can be none other than Walt Wilder.  When he at length comes to describe
the horrible mode in which their old comrade has perished, the Rangers
are almost frenzied with rage, and it is with difficulty some of them
can be withheld from breaking their given word, and tearing him limb
from limb.

He makes appeal to them for mercy, stating that he himself had no part
in that transaction; that, although they have found him among the
Indians, he was only as their prisoner; and forced to fight along with
them.

This is evidently untrue; but, false or true, it has the effect of
pacifying his judges, so far, that the _lariat_ is left loose around his
neck.

Further examination, and cross-examination, elicit other facts about the
captured caravan--in short, everything, except the secret alliance
between the Mexican officer and the Tenawa chief.  Not thinking of
this--in truth, having no suspicion of it--his examiners do not put any
questions about it; and, for himself, the wretch sees no reason to
declare it, but the contrary.  He indulges in the hope of one day
returning to the Del Norte, and renewing his relations with Colonel Gil
Uraga.

"Comrades!" cries the Ranger captain, addressing himself to his men, as
soon as the examination is concluded, "you all of you loved Walt
Wilder--all who knew him?"

"We did! we did!" is the response feelingly spoken.  "So did I.  Well,
he's dead, beyond a doubt.  It's nearly a month ago, and he could not
last so long, shut up in that cave.  His bones will be there, with those
of the other poor fellow, whoever he was, that went in with him.  It's
dreadful to think of it!  Now, from what this scoundrel says, it can't
be so very far from here.  And, as we can make him guide us to the
place, I propose we go there, get the remains of our old comrade, and
give them Christian burial."

With the Texan Rangers obedience to duty is less a thing of command than
request; and this is a request of such nature as to receive instant and
unanimous assent "Let us go!" is the universal response.  "We needn't
all make this journey," continues the captain.  "There's no need for any
more than our own boys, the Rangers, and such of the settlers as may
choose to go with us.  The rest, who have to look after the women, and
some for driving back the stock, can make their way home at once.  I
reckon we've left the track pretty clear of Indians, and they'll be in
no further danger from them."

Without further discussion, this arrangement is decided upon; and the
two parties commence making the preparations suitable to their
respective plans.

In less than half an hour after they separate; the settlers, with the
women, children, and cattle, wending their way eastward; while the
Rangers, guided by the renegade, ride off in the opposite direction--
toward the Llano Estacado.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

A PROPOSAL BY PROXY.

Day by day Hamersley grows stronger, and is able to be abroad.

Soon after Wilder, plucking him by the sleeve, makes request to have his
company at some distance from the dwelling.

Hamersley accedes to the request, though not without some surprise.  In
the demeanour of his comrade there is an air of mystery.  As this is
unusual with the ex-Ranger, he has evidently something of importance to
communicate.

Not until they have got well out of sight of the house, and beyond the
earshot of anyone inside or around it, does Walt say a word.  And then
only after they have come to a stop in the heart of a cotton-wood copse,
where a prostrate trunk offers them the accommodation of a seat.

Sitting down upon it, and making sign to Hamersley, still with the same
mysterious air, to do likewise, the backwoodsman at length begins to
unburden himself.

"Frank," says he, "I've brought ye out hyar to hev a little spell o'
talk, on a subjeck as consarns this coon consid'able."

"What subject, Walt?"

"Wal, it's about a wumman."

"A woman!  Why, Walt Wilder, I should have supposed that would be the
farthest thing from your thoughts, especially a such a time and in such
a place as this."

"True it shed, as ye say.  For all that, ef this chile don't
misunnerstan' the sign, a wumman ain't the furrest thing from yur
thoughts, at the same time an' place."

The significance of the observation causes the colour to start to the
cheeks of the young prairie merchant, late so pale.  He stammers out an
evasive rejoinder,--

"Well, Walt; you wish to have a talk with me.  I'm ready to hear what
you have to say.  Go on!  I'm listening."

"Wal, Frank, I'm in a sort o' a quandary wi' a critter as wears
pettikotes, an' I want a word o' advice from ye.  You're more practised
in thar ways than me.  Though a good score o' year older than yurself, I
hain't hed much to do wi' weemen, 'ceptin' Injun squaws an' now an' agin
a yeller gurl down by San Antone.  But them scrapes wan't nothin' like
thet Walt Wilder heve got inter now."

"A scrape!  What sort of a scrape?  I hope you haven't--"

"Ye needn't talk o' hope, Frank Hamersley.  The thing air past hopin',
an' past prayin' for.  Ef this chile know anythin' o' the signs o' love,
he has goed a good ways along its trail.  Yis, sir-ee; too fur to think
o' takin' the backtrack."

"On that trail, indeed?"

"Thet same; whar Cyubit sots his little feet, 'ithout neer a moccasin on
'em.  Yis, kummerade, Walt Wilder, for oncest in in his kureer, air in a
difeequelty; an' thet difeequelty air bein' fool enuf to fall in love--
the which he hez dun, sure, sartin."

Hamersley gives a shrug of surprise, accompanied with a slight glance of
indignation.  Walt Wilder in love!  With whom can it be?  As he can
himself think of only one woman worth falling in love with, either in
that solitary spot, or elsewhere on earth, it is but natural his
thoughts should turn to her.

Only for an instant, however.  The idea of having the rough Ranger for a
rival is preposterous.  Walt, pursuing the theme, soon convinces him he
has no such lofty aspirations.

"Beyond a doubt, she's been an' goed an' dud it--that air garl
Concheeter.  Them shining eyes o' her'n hev shot clar through this
chile's huntin' shirt, till thar's no peace left inside o' it.  I hain't
slep a soun' wink for mor'en a week o' nights; all the time dreemin' o'
the gurl, as ef she war a angel a hoverin' 'bout my head.  Now, Frank,
what am I ter do?  That's why I've axed ye to kum out hyar, and enter
into this confaberlation."

"Well, Walt, you shall be welcome to my advice.  As to what you should
do, that's clear enough; but what you may or can do will depend a good
deal on what Miss Conchita says.  Have you spoken to her upon the
subject?"

"Thar hain't yit been much talk atween us--i'deed not any, I mout say.
Ye know I can't parley thar lingo.  But I've approached her wi' as much
skill as I iver did bear or buffler.  An', if signs signerfy anythin',
she ain't bad skeeart about it.  Contrarywise, Frank.  If I ain't
terribly mistuk, she shows as ef she'd be powerful willin' to hev me."

"If she be so disposed there can't be much difficulty in the matter.
You mean to marry her, I presume?"

"In coorse I duz--that for sartin'.  The feelin's I hev torst that gurl
air diffrent to them as one hez for Injun squaws, or the queeries I've
danced wi' in the fandangoes o' San Antone.  Ef she'll agree to be myen,
I meen nothin' short o' the hon'rable saramony o' marridge--same as
atween man an' wife.  What do ye think o't?"

"I think, Walt, you might do worse than get married.  You're old enough
to become a Benedict, and Conchita appears to be just the sort of girl
that would suit you.  I've heard it said that these Mexican women make
the best of wives--when married to Americans."

Hamersley smiles, as though this thought were pleasant to him.

"There are several things," he continues, "that it will be necessary for
you to arrange before you can bring about the event you're aiming at.
First, you must get the girl's consent: and, I should think, also that
of her master and mistress.  They are, as it were, her guardians, and,
to a certain extent, responsible for her being properly bestowed.  Last
of all, you'll require the sanction of the Church.  This, indeed, may be
your greatest difficulty.  To make you and your sweetheart one, a
priest, or Protestant clergyman, will be needed; and neither can be had
very conveniently here, in the centre of the Staked Plain."

"Durn both sorts!" exclaims the ex-Ranger in a tone of chagrin.  "Ef't
warn't for the need o' 'em jest now, I say the Staked Plain air better
'ithout 'em, as wu'd anywars else.  Why can't she an' me be tied
thegither 'ithout any sech senseless saramony?  Walt Wilder wants no
mumblin' o' prayers at splicin' him to the gurl he's choosed for his
partner.  An' why shed thar be, supposin' we both gie our mutooal
promises one to the tother?"

"True.  But that would not be marriage such as would lawfully and
legally make you man and wife."

"Doggone the lawfulness or legullity o' it!  Priest or no priest, I want
Concheteter for my squaw; an' I've made up my mind to hev her.  Say,
Frank!  Don't ye think the old doc ked do it?  He air a sort o'
professional."

"No, no; the doctor would be of no use in that capacity.  It's his
business to unite broken bones, not hands and hearts.  But, Walt, if you
are really resolved on the thing, there will, no doubt, be an
opportunity to carry out your intention in a correct and legitimate
manner.  You must be patient, however, and wait till you come across
either a priest or a Protestant clergyman."

"Doggoned ef I care which," is the rejoinder of the giant.  "Eyther'll
do; an' one o' 'em 'ud be more nor surficient, ef 't war left ter Walt
Wilder.  But, hark'ee, Frank!" he continues, his face assuming an astute
expression, "I'd like to be sure 'bout the thing now--that is, to get
the gurl's way o' thinking on 't.  Fact is, I've made up my mind to be
sure, so as thar may be no slips or back kicks."

"Sure, how?"

"By procurin' her promise; getting betrothed, as they call it."

"There can be no harm in that.  Certainly not."

"Wal, I'm gled you think so; for I've sot my traps for the thing, an'
baited 'em too.  Thet air's part o' my reezun for askin' ye out hyar.
She's gin me the promise o' a meetin' 'mong these cotton woods, an' may
kum at any minnit.  Soon's she does, I'm agoin' to perpose to her; an' I
want to do it in reg'lar, straightforrard way.  As I can't palaver
Spanish, an' you kin, I know'd ye wudn't mind transleetin' atween us.
Ye won't, will ye?"

"I shall do that with the greatest pleasure, if you wish it.  But don't
you think, Walt, you might learn what you want to know without any
interpreter?  Conchita may not like my interference in an affair of such
a delicate nature.  Love's language is said to be universal, and by it
you should understand one another."

"So fur's thet's consarned, I reck'n we do.  But she, bein' a Mexikin,
may hev queery ideas about it; an' I want her promise guv in tarms from
which thar'll be no takin' the back track; same's I meen to give myen."

"All right, old fellow.  I'll see you get such a promise, or none."

"Thet's satisfactory, Frank.  Now, as this chile air agoin' to put the
thing stiff an' strong, do you transleet it in the same sort."

"Trust me, it shall be done--_verbatim et literatim_."

"Thet's the way!" joyfully exclaims Walt; thinking that the _verbatim et
literatim_--of the meaning of which he has not the slightest
conception--will be just the thing to clinch his bargain with Conchita.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The singular contract between the prairie merchant and his _ci-devant_
guide has just reached conclusion as a rustling is heard among the
branches of the cottonwoods, accompanied by a soft footstep.

Looking around, they see Conchita threading her way through the grove.
Her steps, cautious and stealthy, would tell of an "appointment," even
were this not already known to them.  Her whole bearing is that of one
on the way to meet a lover; and the sight of Walt Wilder, who now rises
erect to receive her, proclaims him to be the man.

It might appear strange that she does not shy back, on seeing him in
company with another man.  She neither starts nor shows any shyness;
evidence that the presence of the third party is a thing understood and
pre-arranged.

She advances without show of timidity; and, curtseying to the "Senor
Francisco," as she styles Hamersley, takes seat upon the log from which
he has arisen; Walt laying hold of her hand and gallantly conducting her
to it.

There is a short interregnum of silence.  This Conchita's sweetheart
endeavours to fill up with a series of gestures that might appear
uncouth but for the solemnity of the occasion.  So considered, they may
be deemed graceful, even dignified.

Perhaps not thinking them so himself, Walt soon seeks relief by turning
to his interpreter, and making appeal to him as follows--

"Doggone it, Frank!  Ye see I don't know how to talk to her, so you do
the palaverin.  Tell her right off, what I want.  Say I hain't got much
money, but a pair o' arems strong enuf to purtect her, thro' thick an'
thro' thin, agin the dangers o' the mountain an' the puraira, grizzly
bars, Injuns, an' all.  She sees this chile hev got a big body; ye kin
say to her thet his heart ain't no great ways out o' correspondence wi'
his karkidge.  Then tell her in the eend, thet his body an' his hands
an' heart--all air offered to her; an' if she'll except 'em they shall
be hern, now, evermore, an' to the death--so help me God!"

As the hunter completes his proposal thus ludicrously, though
emphatically pronounced, he brings his huge hand down upon his brawny
breast with a slap like the crack of a cricket bat.

Whatever meaning the girl may make out of his words, she can have had no
doubt about their earnestness or sincerity, judging by the gestures that
accompany them.

Hamersley can scarce restrain his inclination to laugh; but with an
effort he subdues it, and faithfully, though not very literally,
translates the proposal into Spanish.

When, as Walt supposes, he has finished, the ex-Ranger rises to his feet
and stands awaiting the answer, his huge frame trembling like the leaf
of an aspen.  He continues to shake all the while Conchita's response is
being delivered; though her first words would assure, and set his nerves
at rest, could he but understand them.  But he knows not his fate, till
it has passed through the tedious transference from one language to
another--from Spanish to his own native tongue.

"Tell him," is the response of Conchita, given without sign of
insincerity, "tell him that I love him as much as he can me.  That I
loved him from the first moment of our meeting, and shall love him to
the end of my life.  In reply to his honourable proposal, say to him
yes.  I am willing to become his wife."

When the answer is translated to Walt, he bounds at least three feet
into the air, with a shout of triumph such as he might give over the
fall of an Indian foe.

Then, advancing towards the girl, he flings his great arms around her,
lifts her from the ground as if she were a child's doll; presses her to
his broad, throbbing breast, and imprints a kiss upon her lips--the
concussion of which can be heard far beyond the borders of the
cottonwood copse.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

A DANGEROUS EAVESDROPPER.

However successful in his suit with Conchita, Walt Wilder is not without
a rival.  Hamersley has reason to suspect this soon after separating
from the lovers, which he does, leaving them to themselves.  It has
occurred to him, that the presence of more than two on that spot can be
no longer desirable.  His part has been performed, and he withdraws
without saying a word.

There is a third man, notwithstanding--a spectator--whose breast is
stirred with terrible emotion.

As the Kentuckian passes out through the copse, he catches sight of a
figure crouching behind the trunk of a tree--apparently that of a man.
Twilight is now on, and beneath the leafy branches reigns an obscurity
almost equalling night.  What he sees may be some straying animal, or
perhaps it is only fancy.  His thoughts are engrossed with that which
carries him on towards the house.  There one will be awaiting him, in
whose refined presence he will soon forget the uncouth spectacle of
courtship at which he has been assisting.

But the form he has observed cowering under the shadow of the
cotton-woods was no fancy, nor four-footed creature, but a human being,
a man--in short, Manuel the Indian.

Manuel is mad in love with the little mestiza, who, with Spanish blood
in her veins, is, nevertheless, maternally of his own race--that of the
_Indios mansos_, or "tame Indians," of New Mexico--so called in
contradistinction to the _Indios bravos_, the savages who, from the
conquest till this day, have never submitted themselves to Spanish rule.
Though Christianised, after a fashion, by the Franciscans, with others
of the missionary fathers--living in walled towns, each with its
_capilla_ or church, and cultivating the lands around, many of these
so-called Christian Indians still continue to practice Pagan rites, more
or less openly.  In some of their villages, it is said, the _estafa_, or
sacred fire, is kept burning, and has never been permitted to go out
since the time of Montezuma, from whom and his people they believe
themselves descended.  They are undoubtedly of Aztec race, and
sun-worshippers, as were the subjects of the unfortunate Emperor of
Tenochtitlas.

Travellers who have visited their more remote "pueblos" have witnessed
something of this sun-worship, seeing them ascend to the flat roofs of
their singularly constructed houses, and there stand in fixed attitude,
devoutly gazing at the sun as it ascends over the eastern horizon.

Notwithstanding the epithet "tame," which their Spanish conquerors have
applied to them, they are still more than half wild; and, upon
occasions, the savage instinct shows itself in deeds of cruelty and
blood.

This very instinct has been kindled in the heart of Manuel.  It was not
devotion to Don Valerian Miranda that moved him to follow the fortunes
of his master into exile; his love for Conchita accounts for his
presence there.  And he loves her with an ardour and singleness of
passion such as often burns in the breasts of his people.

The girl has given him no encouragement, rather the reverse.  For all
that, he has pursued her with zealous solicitation, regardless of
rebuffs and apparently unconscious of her scorn.

Hitherto he has had no rival, which has hindered him from despairing.
