"Don't mind the governor." said Richard; "he will have his joke.  Did
you ever read the _Talisman_, Tilly?--jolly story!--all about yours
truly.  You can get it for 4 pence ha'penny.  I say, what's to be done
with this chap, Johnny?  He's a little like Arthur of Brittany, isn't
he?  Suppose, just to keep your hand in--"

Here John turned very red, and got into a towering rage, and threatened
to tear up the Magna Charta to spite them all.  Whereat they all
laughed.

All this time I lay, bewildered and speechless, on the floor.  It was a
long time before they could bring their minds to decide what was to be
done with me; and, indeed, I began half to hope they had forgotten me in
their own squabbles, when a great burly form pushed his way into the
group, and asked what all the noise was about.

"As if I haven't noise enough in my place with all my six wives talking
at the same time," said he, "without your row.  What is it?  Can't you
settle it and be done?"

William Rufus turned me over again with his foot.

"That thing's the matter," said he.

King Hal stooped down, with his hands on his knees, and stared at me.
Then he gave a low whistle.

"Whew!" said he.  "That's a catch and a half.  Where did you get him?"

"Here, a quarter of an hour ago," said William the Conqueror.  "It was
me nobbled him."

"Not me--_I_," said Henry the First.

"You!" exclaimed the Conqueror.  "Why, what do you expect if you tell
lies like that?"

"I didn't mean I got him," explained Henry.  "I meant you should say it
was _I_."

"I shan't say it was you, when it was me," said William.  "I'm not given
to that style of thing, I can tell you."

"No, no," began Henry again.  "What I mean is, that instead of saying it
was _me_--"

"Who said it was you?  I said it was me."

"Yes, and that's where you make a mistake.  You should say--"

"Look here," said Henry the Eighth, "suppose you settle that outside.
The thing is--whoever nobbled him, as William says--hadn't we better
give him a cold chop, now we've got him?"

"Better try him first," said John.  "I make a strong point of that in
Magna Charta, you know."

"Much easier to take the chop first," said Henry.

"I prefer stakes myself," said Queen Mary, joining the party.

"Well, well, any way you like," said King Hal; "anything for a quiet
life.  The ladies are worrying me to give them a day out, and an Old
Bailey trial will be a nice variety for them.  Only, let's have it done
in proper state, if we have it at all.  I suppose you'd like me to be
judge, eh?"

Nobody seemed particularly pleased at this proposal; and Richard said--

"You'd better ask Elizabeth, hadn't you?"

"Oh, good gracious, no!" exclaimed Henry in alarm.  "Don't say a word
about it to her, or there'll be a terrible rumpus.  I assure you I have
studied law all my life.  Come along.  Bring him downstairs and let's
begin.  Here, Teddy," cried he to a nice-looking boy not far off, who
must have been Edward the Fifth.  "Here, Teddy, run and tell Catherine,
and Annie, and Janie, and Annie Cleeves, and Kitty Howard, and Kitty
Parr--let's see, is that all?" said he, counting them over on his
fingers; "yes, six--tell 'em all to hurry up, and not to let Elizabeth
see them, whatever they do.  Oh, and you can tell all the lot of
Majesties after Johnny here they'd better come, too.  Come, look alive,
my lad."

"All, very well," said Teddy; "how am I to look alive after the way I've
been served?  Besides, I can never remember all their names."

"Well, look them up in the catalogue--they're all down there.  Tell
them, the big dock downstairs.  And if we're lucky and get the job over
in time, I don't mind standing treat all round in the refreshment-room
afterwards.  That will fetch them, I fancy; eh, what?"

Sub-Chapter II.

THE TRIAL.

The room suddenly grew dim and silent again, and I began to think that
after all I had been only dreaming.  But when I lifted my head and
looked round, the place of the kings was empty.  There was William the
Conqueror's footstool where he had upset it; and there lay the pen and
ink on the floor under King John's chair.  As for the big group in the
middle, not a soul was left there except Chaucer and William Caxton, who
had taken possession of the two easiest chairs, and were deep in a game
of chess.

As I picked myself slowly up off the floor, I became aware of the gleam
of a lantern approaching me, and heard a footstep coming down the hall.
It was too dark to see who it was till he was close up; then, with a
gasp, I recognised Marwood, the hangman!

"Oh," said he pleasantly, "you're the young party, are you?  Come, cheer
up.  You've got to be tried first.  The fact is, they couldn't find the
regular police, and asked me to step up for you.  Come, my lad," said
he, proceeding to pinion me with the cord in his hand, "this will brace
you up wonderfully.  You may depend on me to do the job neatly.  I've
just invented a new noose, and have been wanting a light weight to try
it on, so you're in luck.  Come along, and don't keep them waiting."

And he proceeded to conduct me to the Chamber of Horrors.  As we passed
along the hall, one or two of the figures nodded to us; and Oliver
Cromwell requested in Marwood to let him know when his part of the
business was going to begin, as he should like to be present.

"I don't care about the trial, you know," said he.  "Seen plenty of that
sort of thing.  But I'd like to see how you do your job, you know; so
don't forget."  And he slipped a shilling into Marwood's hand.

"You've no idea of the civility I receive from some of these gentlemen,"
said the latter to me with emotion.  "Little drops of kindness like this
always touch me.  You shall have a little drop too, my boy, presently."

I tried feebly to laugh at the joke; but I couldn't, whereupon he got
very sulky, and bundled me down the stairs without another word.

By the dim light of a few candles placed about the room I could see that
the Chamber of Horrors was packed by a dense crowd of sightseers, who
occupied seats on the floor of the court, and sat impatiently whispering
together, expecting my arrival.

As I stumbled up the steps of the Old Bailey dock (where room had been
made for me between Burke and Hare) the usual thrill of sensation passed
round the court.  I could see Henry the Eighth and his wives opposite me
in the small dock, while the other crowned heads jostled one another on
the platform of the guillotine.  There, too, was the old hermit peeping
out through the bars of his cage, and the warder in charge of the
condemned cell was sweeping his place out and changing the sheets on the
bed.

"Now then," said Henry the Eighth, when all the bustle had subsided,
"wire in, somebody!  Let's begin."

"You'd better get a jury first," said King John.  "That's one of the
first things I insist upon in Magna Charta."

"Order in the court!" cried Henry, "and Magna Charta be bothered!  I
shall do as I like!"

"Do have a jury, love," said Catherine Parr; "it's _such_ fun when they
come in with their verdict!"

"Oh, all right; have it your own way.  I should have thought, though, I
could come in with a verdict as well as they.  Now then, you there!"
said he, addressing the convicts round me, "answer to your names."

And he proceeded to call the names out from the catalogue.

When a dozen had answered, Anne of Cleeves said, "That's enough, Henry
dear; we've got twelve."

"Oh, have we?" said he.  "You can have more if you like, you know;
there's plenty left."

The ladies, however, decided that a dozen was enough, and the trial
began.

"Prisoner at the bar," said Edward the Black Prince, who was acting as
usher, "are you guilty or not guilty?"

"What's the use of asking him that," said Henry the Eighth, "when
everybody knows, eh?"

John here began to explain that he had arranged the matter in Magna
Charta, whereupon the judge exclaimed--

"Oh, gracious! if we're to have that up every two minutes I'll adjourn
the court!  Now, you there!" said he to me; "why don't you answer?"

I tried in dumb show to explain that I was not aware what I was being
tried for; but as no one saw the point of my answer, I tremblingly
pleaded "Not guilty."

"Oh," said Henry, growing very red in the face, "all right!  Now,
somebody, let's have the indictment!"

To my horror, I suddenly saw reflected on a screen, in large characters,
at the far end of the room, my recent examination paper, with all my
answers appended thereto!  As I staggered back in terror, Henry laughed.

"Too late now," said he; "you've said `Not guilty', so you've got to be
tried--got to be tried.  Eh, what?  Now start away; begin at the top.
What's that he says about Alfred the Great?  Where is Alf, by the way?"

"Oh," said Edward the Third, "he can't come.  The fact is, they've taken
him and dressed him up as a French General, and he's so awfully busy, he
says, you'd better let his part of the thing slide."

"All serene!" replied Henry.  "Lucky job for you, prisoner.  I know what
a rage he'd be in over that toast-and-muffin story you've been telling
about him.  He'd have done you brown, my boy, I can promise you!  Never
mind.  Now let's go on to the next.  Read it out, Nigger."

Edward the Black Prince, who answered to this genial pet name,
accordingly read--

"`William the Conqueror was a cruel tyrant.  He made many homes
desolate, and wrote Doomsday Book in the year 1087.'"

"There!" cried the Conqueror, coming to the rail of the guillotine and
striking it in a passion with his gauntlet; "what do you think of that?
_I_ wrote Doomsday Book!  It's a lie.  My lords and gentlemen of the
jury, I can stand anything else, but when he says I wrote Doomsday Book,
I say it's a lie, and I hope to see him hung!"

"Hanged," suggested Henry the First.

"All right, all right," said Henry the Eighth, "keep cool, and you shall
see him hung, and Henry shall see him hanged.  We'll oblige all parties.
So you mean to say, Willie, you never did such a thing?"

"No, never; I hope I know my place better," said the Conqueror; "and I'm
surprised at you for asking such a question."

"Got that all down, Nigger?" asked the judge.

"Yes.  Forge ahead!" said the Black Prince.  "Now we come to the next,
`William the Second, surnamed Rufus, shot in the New Forest, by Walter
Tyrrell.'"

"Eh?" shouted Rufus, pushing his father aside, and coming to the front.
"What's that?  Me shot by Walter?  Me--"

"Do say _I_," suggested Henry the First.

The Red King rounded on him at once.

"Oh!" he cried, "it was you, then, was it?  You're the one that did it!
I guessed as much!  I knew you were at the bottom of it all along.  What
do you think of that, my lords and gentlemen?"

"The thing is," drawled Edward the Second, "did Walter--"

"Order in the court!" cried Henry the Eighth.  "Kindly allow me to
conduct my own case.  All you've got to say, Rufus, is whether it's true
what he says, that Walter Tyrrell shot you?"

"Him!" cried Rufus.  "He couldn't hit a haystack a yard off, if he
tried."

"Then he didn't do it?  That's all right.  Why couldn't you have said so
at once?  All down, Nigger?  That makes two lies.  Now call up the
next."

"Henry the First, surnamed Beauclerk, never smiled again after his son
was lost, and died of a surfeit of lampreys," read the prince.

"Oh, those lampreys!" groaned Henry; "I am perfectly sick of them.  I
assure you, my lords and gentlemen, they were no more lampreys--"

"No, not after you'd done supper," growled Rufus.

"In that case, William," retorted Beauclerk, "I should have said
`there,' and not `they.'  But I do assure you, gentlemen, I never saw a
lamprey in my life; and as for smiling again," added he, in quite an
apologetic way, "I did it often, when nobody was by; _really I did_."

"Are you sure?" asked the judge.  "Show us how you did it."

Whereupon Henry the First favoured the court with a fascinating leer,
which left no doubt on any one's mind that he had been falsely accused.

So two more lies were set down against me; and the Black Prince called
over the next.

"`Stephen usurped the throne on Henry's death.'"

"Quite right, quite right," said Matilda; "perfectly correct."

"`Matilda, after a civil war, in which her bad temper made her many
enemies--'"

"Oh you story!" exclaimed the empress.  "Oh! you wicked young man!"

"Address the judge, please," said Henry the Eighth.

"Oh, you wicked young man," repeated the empress, turning to the bench;
"I'd like to scratch you, I would!"

"Don't do that," said Henry: "I get quite enough of that at home, I
assure you.  Anyhow, Nigger can chalk it down a lie for you, eh?"

"And one for me, too, please," said Stephen.  "How can a fellow usurp
what belongs to him?"

"Give it up," said Coeur de Lion.  "Ask another."

"Silence in the court," cried the judge.  "Put it down, Nigger, and for
mercy sake drive on, or we shall be here all night."

"`Henry the Second murdered Thomas a Becket, and was served right by
having a family of bad sons,'" read the usher.

"That's nice!" said Henry, advancing.  "Bad sons, indeed!  Never had a
better lot in all my life.  Really, my lord, that ought to count for
four lies right off.  The idea of calling my Johnny a bad boy.  Why, my
lord, he was his father's own boy.  You've only to look at him; and if
he was a bit of a romp, why, so were you and I in our day."

"Speak for yourself," said Henry the Eighth severely.  "But what about
Becket?"

"Ah, well, there was a little accident, I believe, about him, and he got
hurt.  But I assure you I never touched him; in fact, I was a hundred
miles away at the time.  I'll prove an alibi if you like."

"No, no," said the judge; "that is quite sufficient.  Chalk down two,
Nigger: one for Becket and one for the bad family.  How many does that
