his sleepy condition almost stepped upon the head of a huge crocodile,
which, ignorant of their presence, had landed its head on the islet in
order to have a snooze.  Then he roused Ailie, and led her, more than
half asleep, down to the beach, and lifted her into the canoe, after
which he pushed off, and paddled briskly over the still waters of the
star-lit lake.  Ailie merely yawned during all these proceedings; said,
"Dear me! is it time to--yeaow! oh, I'm _so_ sleepy;" mumbled something
about papa wondering what had become of Jim Scroggles, and about her
being convinced that--"yeaow!--the ship must have lost itself among the
whales and monkeys;" and then, dropping her head on the leopard-skins
with a deep sigh of comfort, she returned to the land of Nod.

Glynn Proctor worked so well that it was still early in the morning and
quite dark when he arrived at the encampment where they had been made
prisoners.  His heart beat audibly as he approached the dark
landing-place, and observed no sign of his comrades.  The moment the bow
of the canoe touched the shore, he sprang over the side, and, without
disturbing the little sleeper, drew it gently up the bank, and fastened
the bow-rope to a tree; then he hurried to the spot where they had slept
and found all the fires out except one, of which a few dull embers still
remained; but no comrade was visible.

It is a felicitous arrangement of our organs of sense, that where one
organ fails to convey to our inward man information regarding the
outward world, another often steps in to supply its place, and perform
the needful duty.  We have said that Glynn Proctor saw nothing of his
comrades,--although he gazed earnestly all round the camp--for the very
good reason that it was almost pitch-dark; but although his eyes were
useless, his ears were uncommonly acute, and through their
instrumentality he became cognisant of a sound.  It might have been
distant thunder, but was too continuous and regular for that.  It might
have been the distant rumbling of heavy wagons or artillery over a paved
road; but there were neither wagons nor roads in those African wilds.
It might have been the prolonged choking of an alligator--it might, in
fact, have been _anything_ in a region like that, where _everything_,
almost, was curious, and new, and strange, and wild, and unaccountable;
and the listener was beginning to entertain the most uncomfortable ideas
of what it probably was, when a gasp and a peculiar snort apprised him
that it was a human snore!--at least, if not a human snore, it was that
of some living creature which indulged to a very extravagant degree in
that curious and altogether objectionable practice.

Stepping cautiously forward on tip-toe, Glynn searched among the leaves
all round the fire, following the direction of the sounds, but nothing
was to be found; and he experienced a slight feeling of supernatural
dread creeping over him, when a peculiarly loud metallic snore sounded
clear above his head.  Looking up, he beheld by the dull red light of
the almost extinct fire, the form of Phil Briant, half-seated,
half-reclining, on the branch of a tree not ten feet from the ground,
and clasping another branch tightly with both arms.

At that moment, Ailie, who had awakened, ran up, and caught Glynn by the
hand.

"Hallo!  Briant!" exclaimed Glynn.

A very loud snore was the reply.

"Briant!  Phil Briant, I say; hallo!  Phil!" shouted Glynn.

"Arrah! howld yer noise will ye," muttered the still sleeping
man--"sno--o--o--o--re!"

"A fall! a fall!--all hands ahoy! tumble up there, tumble up!" shouted
Glynn, in the nautical tones which he well knew would have their effect
upon his comrade.

He was right.  They had more than their usual effect on him.  The
instant he heard them, Phil Briant shouted--"Ay, ay, sir!" and, throwing
his legs over the side of what he supposed to be his hammock, he came
down bodily on what he supposed to be the deck with a whack that caused
him to utter an involuntary but tremendous howl.

"Oh! och! oh! murther! oh whirra!" he cried, as he lay half-stunned.
"Oh, it's kilt I am entirely--dead as mutton at last, an' no mistake.
Sure I might have knowd it--och! worse luck!  Didn't yer poor owld
mother tell ye, Phil, that ye'd come to a bad end--she did--"

"Are ye badly hurt?" said Glynn, stooping over his friend in real alarm.

At the sound of his voice Briant ceased his wails, rose into a sitting
posture, shaded his eyes with his hand (a most unnecessary proceeding
under the circumstances), and stared at him.

"It's me, Phil; all right, and Ailie.  We've escaped, and got safe back
again."

"It's jokin' ye are," said Briant, with the imbecile smile of a man who
only half believes what he actually sees.  "I'm draimin', that's it.  Go
away, avic, an' don't be botherin' me."

"It's quite true, though, I assure you, my boy.  I've managed to give
the niggers the slip; and here's Ailie, too, all safe, and ready to
convince you of the fact."

Phil Briant looked at one and then at the other in unbounded amazement
for a few seconds, after which he gave a short laugh as if of pity for
his own weakness, and his face assumed a mild aspect as he said softly,
"It's all a draim, av coorse it is!"  He even turned away his eyes for a
moment in order to give the vision time to dissipate.  But on looking
round again, there it was, as palpable as ever.  Faith in the fidelity
of his own eyesight returned in a moment, and Phil Briant, forgetting
his bodily pains, sprang to his feet with a roar of joy, seized Ailie in
his arms and kissed her, embraced Glynn Proctor with a squeeze like that
of a loving bear, and then began to dance an Irish jig, quite regardless
of the fact that the greater part of it was performed in the fire, the
embers of which he sent flying in all directions like a display of
fireworks.  He cheered, too, now and then like a maniac--"Oh, happy day!
I've found ye, have I? after all me trouble, too!  Hooray! an' wan
chair more for luck.  Av me sowl only don't lape clane out o' me body,
it's meself'll be thankful!  But, sure--I'm forgittin'--"

Briant paused suddenly in the midst of his uproarious dance, and seized
a burning stick, which he attempted to blow into a flame with intense
vehemence of action.  Having succeeded, he darted towards an open space
a few yards off, in the centre of which lay a large pile of dry sticks.
To these he applied the lighted brand, and the next instant a glare of
ruddy flame leaped upwards, and sent a shower of sparks high above the
forest trees into the sky.  He then returned, panting a good deal, but
much composed, and said--"Now, darlints, come an' help me to gather the
bits o' stick; somebody's bin scatterin' them all over the place, they
have, bad luck to them! an' then ye'll sit down and talk a bit, an' tell
me all about it."

"But what's the fire for?" asked Ailie.

"Ay, ye may say that," added Glynn; "we don't need such a huge bonfire
as that to cook our supper with."

"Och! be aisy, do.  It'll do its work; small doubt o' that.  The cap'n,
poor man, ye know, is a'most deranged, an' they're every one o' them off
at this good minute scourin' the woods lookin' for ye.  O, then, it's
sore hearts we've had this day!  An' wan was sent wan way, an' wan
another, an' the cap'n his-self he wint up the river, and, before he
goes, he says to me, says he, `Briant, you'll stop here and watch the
camp, for maybe they'll come wanderin' back to it, av they've bin and
lost theirselves; an' mind ye don't lave it or go to slape.  An' if they
do come, or ye hear any news o' them, jist you light up a great fire,
an' I'll be on the look-out, an' we'll all on us come back as fast as we
can.'  Now, that's the truth, an' the whole truth, an' nothin' but the
truth, as the judge said to the witness when he swore at him."

This was a comforting piece of information to Glynn and Ailie, so,
without further delay, they assisted their overjoyed comrade to collect
the scattered embers of the fire and boil the kettle.  In this work they
were all the more energetic that the pangs of hunger were beginning to
remind them of the frugal and scanty nature of their last meal.

The bonfire did its work effectually.  From all parts of the forest to
which they had wandered, the party came, dropping in one by one to
congratulate the lost and found pair.  Last of all came Captain Dunning
and Tim Rokens, for the harpooner had vowed he would "stick to the cap'n
through thick and thin."  Tim kept his word faithfully.  Through thick
tangled brakes and thin mud-swamps did he follow his wretched commander
that night until he could scarcely stand for fatigue, or keep his eyes
open for sleep; and when the captain rushed into the camp at last, and
clasped his sobbing child to his heart, Tim Rokens rushed in along with
him, halted beside him, thrust his hands into his pockets, and looked
on, while his eyes blinked with irresistible drowsiness, and his
mud-bespattered visage beamed with excessive joy.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

PHILOSOPHICAL REMARKS ON "LIFE"--A MONKEY SHOT AND A MONKEY FOUND--JACKO
DESCRIBED.

"Such is life!"  There is deep meaning in that expression, though it is
generally applied in a bantering manner to life in all its phases, under
all its peculiar and diversified circumstances.  Taking a particular
view of things in general, we may say of life that it is composed of
diverse and miscellaneous materials--the grave and the gay; the sad and
the comic; the extraordinary and the commonplace; the flat and the
piquant; the heavy and the light; the religious and the profane; the
bright and the dark; the shadow and the sunshine.  All these, and a
great deal more, similar as well as dissimilar, enter into the
composition of what we familiarly term life.

These elements, too, are not arranged according to order, at least,
order that is perceptible to our feeble human understandings.  That
there does exist both order and harmony is undeniable; but we cannot see
it.  The elements appear to be miscellaneously intermingled--to be
accidentally thrown together; yet, while looking at them in detail there
seems to us a good deal of unreasonable and chaotic jumble, in regarding
them as a whole, or as a series of wholes, it becomes apparent that
there is a certain harmony of arrangement that may be termed
kaleidoscopically beautiful; and when, in the course of events, we are
called to the contemplation of something grand or lovely, followed
rather abruptly by something curiously contemptible or absurd, we are
tempted to give utterance to the thoughts that are too complicated and
deep for rapid analysis, in the curt expression "Such is life."

The physician invites his friends to a social _reunion_.  He chats and
laughs at the passing jest, or takes part in the music--the glee, or the
comic song.  A servant whispers in his ear.  Ten minutes elapse, and he
is standing by the bed of death.  He watches the flickering flame; he
endeavours to relieve the agonised frame; he wipes the cold sweat from
the pale brow, and moistens the dry lips, or pours words of true,
earnest, tender comfort into the ears of the bereaved.  The contrast
here is very violent and sudden.  We have chosen, perhaps, the most
striking instance of the kind that is afforded in the experience of men;
yet such, in a greater or less degree, is life, in the case of every one
born into this wonderful world of ours, and such, undoubtedly, it was
intended to be.  "There is a time for all things."  We were made capable
of laughing and crying; therefore, these being sinless indulgences in
the abstract, we _ought_ to laugh and cry.  And one of our great aims in
life should be to get our hearts and affections so trained that we shall
laugh and cry at the right time.  It may be well to remark, in passing,
that we should avoid, if possible, doing both at once.

Now, such being life, we consider that we shall be doing no violence to
the harmonies of life if we suddenly, and without further preface,
transport the reader into the middle of next day, and a considerable
distance down the river up which we have for some time been travelling.

Here he (or she) will find Ailie and her father, and the whole party in
fact, floating calmly and pleasantly down the stream in their canoe.

"Now, this is wot I do enjoy," said Rokens, laying down his paddle and
wiping the perspiration from his brow; "it's the pleasantest sort o'
thing I've known since I went to sea."

To judge from the profuse perspiration that flowed from his brow, and
from the excessive redness of his face, one would suppose that Rokens'
experience of "pleasant sort o' things" had not hitherto been either
extensive or deep.  But the man meant what he said, and a well-known
proverb clears up the mystery--"What's one man's meat is another's
poison!"  Hard work, violent physical exertion, and excessive heat were
Rokens' delight, and, whatever may be the opinion of flabby-muscled,
flat individuals, there can be no reasonable doubt that Rokens meant it,
when he added, emphatically, "It's fuss-rate; tip-top; A1 on Lloyd's,
that's a fact!"

Phil Briant, on hearing this, laid down his paddle, also wiped his
forehead with the sleeve of his coat, and exclaimed--"Ditto, says I."

Whereupon Glynn laughed, and Jim Scroggles grunted (this being _his_
method of laughing), and the captain shook his head, and said--

"P'r'aps it is, my lads, a pleasant sort o' thing, but the sooner we're
out of it the better.  I've no notion of a country where the natives
murder poor little boys in cold blood, and carry off your goods and
chattels at a moment's notice."

The captain looked at Ailie as he spoke, thereby implying that she was
part of the "goods and chattels" referred to.

"Shure it's a fact; an' without sayin' by yer lave, too," added Briant,
who had a happy facility of changing his opinion on the shortest notice
to accommodate himself to circumstances.

"Oh, the monkey!" screamed Ailie.

Now as Ailie screamed this just as Briant ceased to speak, and,
moreover, pointed, or appeared to point, straight into that individual's
face, it was natural to suppose that the child was becoming somewhat
personal--the more so that Briant's visage, when wrinkled up and tanned
by the glare of a tropical sun, was not unlike to that of a large
baboon.  But every one knew that Ailie was a gentle, well-behaved
creature--except, perhaps, when she was seized with one of her gleeful
fits that bordered sometimes upon mischief--so that instead of supposing
that she had made a personal attack on the unoffending Irishman, the
boat's crew instantly directed their eyes close past Briant's face and
into the recesses of the wood beyond, where they saw a sight that filled
them with surprise.

A large-leaved tree of the palm species overhung the banks of the river
and formed a support to a wild vine and several bright-flowering
parasitical plants that drooped in graceful luxuriance from its branches
and swept the stream, which at that place was dark, smooth, and deep.
On the top of this tree, in among the branches, sat a monkey--at least
so Ailie called it; but the term ape or baboon would have been more
appropriate, for the creature was a very large one, and, if the
expression of its countenance indicated in any degree the feelings of
its heart, also a very fierce one--an exceedingly ferocious one indeed.
This monkey's face was as black as coal, and its two deep-seated eyes
were, if possible, blacker than coal.  Its head was bald, but the rest
of its body was plentifully covered with hair.

Now this monkey was evidently caught--taken by surprise--for instead of
trying to escape as the canoe approached, it sat there chattering and
exhibiting its teeth to a degree that was quite fiendish, not to say--
under the circumstances--unnecessary.  As the canoe dropped slowly down
the river, it became obvious that this monkey had a baby, for a very
small and delicate creature was seen clinging round the big one's waist
with its little hands grasping tightly the long hair on the mother's
sides, its arms being much too short to encircle her body.  Ailie's
heart leapt with an emotion of tender delight as she observed that the
baby monkey's face was white and sweet-looking; yes, we might even go
the length of saying that, for a monkey, it was actually pretty.  But it
had a subdued, sorrowful look that was really touching to behold.  It
seemed as though that infantine monkey had, in the course of its brief
career, been subjected to every species of affliction, to every
imaginable kind of heart-crushing sorrow, and had remained deeply meek
and humble under it all.  Only for one brief instant did a different
expression cross its melancholy face.  That was when it first caught
sight of the canoe.  Then it exposed its very small teeth and gums after
the fashion of its mother; but repentance seemed to follow instantly,
for the sad look, mixed with a dash of timidity, resumed its place, and
it buried its face in its mother's bosom.

At that moment there was a loud report.  A bullet whistled through the
air and struck the old monkey in the breast.  We are glad to say, for
the credit of our sailors, that a howl of indignation immediately
followed, and more than one fist was raised to smite the trader who had
fired the shot.  But Captain Dunning called the men to order in a
peremptory voice, while every eye was turned towards the tree to observe
the effect of the shot.  As for Ailie, she sat breathless with horror at
the cruelty of the act.

The old monkey gave vent to a loud yell, clutched her breast with her
hands, sprang wildly into the air, and fell to the ground.  Her leap was
so violent that the young one was shaken off and fell some distance from
its poor mother, which groaned once or twice and then died.  The baby
seemed unhurt.  Gathering itself nimbly up, it ran away from the men who
had now landed, but who stood still, by the captain's orders, to watch
its motions.  Looking round, it observed its mother's form lying on the
ground, and at once ran towards it and buried its little face in her
breast, at which sight Ailie began to cry quietly.  In a few seconds the
little monkey got up and gently pawed the old one; then, on receiving no
sign of recognition, it uttered a faint wail, something like
"Wee-wee-wee-wee-oo!" and again hid its face in the breast of its dead
parent.

"Ah! the poor cratur," said Briant, in a tone of voice that betrayed his
emotion.  "O, why did ye kill her?"

"Me ketch 'im?" said Bumble, looking inquiringly at the captain.

"Oh, do!" answered Ailie, with a sob.

The negro deemed this permission sufficient, for he instantly sprang
forward, and throwing a piece of net over the little monkey, secured it.

Now the way in which that baby monkey struggled and kicked and shrieked,
when it found itself a prisoner, was perfectly wonderful to see!  It
seemed as if the strength of fifty little monkeys had been compressed
into its diminutive body, and King Bumble had to exert all his strength
in order to hold the creature while he carried it into the canoe.  Once
safely there and in the middle of the stream, it was let loose.  The
first thing it did on being set free was to give a shriek of triumph,
for monkeys, like men, when at last _allowed_ to do that which they have
long struggled in vain to accomplish, usually take credit for the
achievement of their own success.

Its next impulse was to look round at the faces of the men in search of
its mother; but the poor mother was now lying dead covered with a cloth
in the bottom of the canoe, so the little monkey turned from one to
another with disappointment in its glance and then uttered a low wail of
sorrow.  Glynn Proctor affirmed positively that it looked twice at Phil
Briant and even made a motion towards him; but we rather suspect that
Glynn was jesting.  Certain it is, however, that it looked long and
earnestly at Ailie, and there is little doubt that, young though it was,
it was able to distinguish something in her tender gaze of affection and
pity that proved attractive.  It did not, however, accept her invitation
to go to her, although given in the most persuasive tones of her silver
voice, and when any of the men tried to pat its head, it displayed such
a row of sharp little teeth and made such a fierce demonstration of its
intention to bite, that they felt constrained to leave it alone.  At
last Ailie held her hand towards it and said--

"Won't it come to me, dear, sweet pet?  _Do_ come; I'll be as kind to
you almost as your poor mother."  The monkey looked at the child, but
said nothing.

"Come, monkey, dear puggy, _do_ come," repeated Ailie, in a still more
insinuating voice.

The monkey still declined to "come," but it looked very earnestly at the
child, and trembled a good deal, and said, "Oo-oo-wee; oo-oo-wee!"
