left, after distributing his tracts, Sammy rose up and sought to hide
himself--from himself, had that been possible--in the lowest slums of
London.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

TELLS OF SOME CURIOUS AND VIGOROUS PECULIARITIES OF THE LOWER ORDERS.

Now it must not be supposed that Mrs Frog, having provided for her baby
and got rid of it, remained thereafter quite indifferent to it.  On the
contrary, she felt the blank more than she had expected, and her
motherly heart began to yearn for it powerfully.

To gratify this yearning to some extent, she got into the habit of
paying frequent visits, sometimes by night and sometimes by day, to the
street in which Samuel Twitter lived, and tried to see her baby through
the stone walls of the house!  Her eyes being weak, as well as her
imagination, she failed in this effort, but the mere sight of the house
where little Matty was, sufficed to calm her maternal yearnings in some
slight degree.

By the way, that name reminds us of our having omitted to mention that
baby Frog's real name was Matilda, and her pet name Matty, so that the
name of Mita, fixed on by the Twitters, was not so wide of the mark as
it might have been.

One night Mrs Frog, feeling the yearning strong upon her, put on her
bonnet and shawl--that is to say, the bundle of dirty silk, pasteboard,
and flowers which represented the one, and the soiled tartan rag that
did duty for the other.

"Where are ye off to, old woman?" asked Ned, who, having been recently
successful in some little "job," was in high good humour.

"I'm goin' round to see Mrs Tibbs, Ned.  D'you want me?"

"No, on'y I'm goin' that way too, so we'll walk together."

Mrs Frog, we regret to say, was not particular as to the matter of
truth.  She had no intention of going near Mrs Tibbs, but, having
committed herself, made a virtue of necessity, and resolved to pay that
lady a visit.

The conversation by the way was not sufficiently interesting to be
worthy of record.  Arrived at Twitter's street an idea struck Mrs Frog.

"Ned," said she, "I'm tired."

"Well, old girl, you'd better cut home."

"I think I will, Ned, but first I'll sit down on this step to rest a
bit."

"All right, old girl," said Ned, who would have said the same words if
she had proposed to stand on her head on the step--so easy was he in his
mind as to how his wife spent her time; "if you sit for half-an-hour or
so I'll be back to see you 'ome again.  I'm on'y goin' to Bundle's shop
for a bit o' baccy.  Ain't I purlite now?  Don't it mind you of the
courtin' days?"

"Ah!  Ned," exclaimed the wife, while a sudden gush of memory brought
back the days when he was handsome and kind,--but Ned was gone, and the
slightly thawed spring froze up again.

She sat down on the cold step of a door which happened to be somewhat in
the shade, and gazed at the opposite windows.  There was a light in one
of them.  She knew it well.  She had often watched the shadows that
crossed the blind after the gas was lighted, and once she had seen some
one carrying something which looked like a baby!  It might have been a
bundle of soiled linen, or undarned socks, but it might have been Matty,
and the thought sent a thrill to the forlorn creature's heart.

On the present occasion she was highly favoured, for, soon after Ned had
left, the shadows came again on the blind, and came so near it as to be
distinctly visible.  Yes, there could be no doubt now, it _was_ a baby,
and as there was only one baby in that house it followed that the baby
was _her_ baby--little Matty!  Here was something to carry home with
her, and think over and dream about.  But there was more in store for
her.  The baby, to judge from the shadowy action of its fat limbs on the
blind, became what she called obstropolous.  More than that, it yelled,
and its mother heard the yell--faintly, it is true, but sufficiently to
send a thrill of joy to her longing heart.

Then a sudden fear came over her.  What if it was ill, and they were
trying to soothe it to rest!  How much better _she_ could do that if she
only had the baby!

"Oh! fool that I was to part with her!" she murmured, "but no.  It was
best.  She would surely have bin dead by this time."

The sound of the little voice, however, had roused such a tempest of
longing in Mrs Frog's heart, that, under an irresistible impulse, she
ran across the road and rang the bell.  The door was promptly opened by
Mrs Twitter's domestic.

"Is--is the baby well?" stammered Mrs Frog, scarce knowing what she
said.

"_You've_ nothink to do wi' the baby that I knows on," returned Mrs
Twitter's domestic, who was not quite so polite as her mistress.

"No, honey," said Mrs Frog in a wheedling tone, rendered almost
desperate by the sudden necessity for instant invention, "but the doctor
said I was to ask if baby had got over it, or if 'e was to send round
the--the--I forget its name--at once."

"What doctor sent you?" asked Mrs Twitter, who had come out of the
parlour on hearing the voices through the doorway, and with her came a
clear and distinct yell which Mrs Frog treasured up in her thinly clad
but warm bosom, as though it had been a strain from Paradise.  "There
must surely be some mistake, my good woman, for my baby is quite well."

"Oh! thank you, thank you--yes, there must have been some mistake," said
Mrs Frog, scarce able to restrain a laugh of joy at the success of her
scheme, as she retired precipitately from the door and hurried away.

She did not go far, however, but, on hearing the door shut, turned back
and took up her position again on the door-step.

Poor Mrs Frog had been hardened and saddened by sorrow, and suffering,
and poverty, and bad treatment; nevertheless she was probably one of the
happiest women in London just then.

"_My_ baby," she said, quoting part of Mrs Twitter's remarks with a
sarcastic laugh, "no, madam, she's not _your_ baby _yet_!"

As she sat reflecting on this agreeable fact, a heavy step was heard
approaching.  It was too slow for that of Ned.  She knew it well--a
policeman!

There are hard-hearted policemen in the force--not many, indeed, but
nothing is perfect in this world, and there are a _few_ hard-hearted
policemen.  He who approached was one of these.

"Move on," he said in a stern voice.

"Please, sir, I'm tired.  On'y restin' a bit while I wait for my
'usband," pleaded Mrs Frog.

"Come, move on," repeated the unyielding constable in a tone that there
was no disputing.  Indeed it was so strong that it reached the ears of
Ned Frog himself, who chanced to come round the corner at the moment and
saw the policeman, as he imagined, maltreating his wife.

Ned was a man who, while he claimed and exercised the right to treat his
own wife as he pleased, was exceedingly jealous of the interference of
others with his privileges.  He advanced, therefore, at once, and
planted his practised knuckles on the policeman's forehead with such
power that the unfortunate limb of the law rolled over in one direction
and his helmet in another.

As every one knows, the police sometimes suffer severely at the hands of
roughs, and on this occasion that truth was verified, but the policeman
who had been knocked down by this prize-fighter was by no means a feeble
member of the force.  Recovering from his astonishment in a moment, he
sprang up and grappled with Ned Frog in such a manner as to convince
that worthy he had "his work cut out for him."  The tussle that ensued
was tremendous, and Mrs Frog retired into a doorway to enjoy it in
safety.  But it was brief.  Before either wrestler could claim the
victory, a brother constable came up, and Ned was secured and borne away
to a not unfamiliar cell before he could enjoy even one pipe of the
"baccy" which he had purchased.

Thus it came to pass, that when a certain comrade expected to find Ned
Frog at a certain mansion in the West-end, prepared with a set of
peculiar tools for a certain purpose, Ned was in the enjoyment of board
and lodging at Her Majesty's expense.

The comrade, however, not being aware of Ned's incarceration, and
believing, no doubt, that there was honour among thieves, was true to
his day and hour.  He had been engaged down somewhere in the country on
business, and came up by express train for this particular job; hence
his ignorance as to his partner's fate.

But this burglar was not a man to be easily balked in his purpose.

"Ned must be ill, or got a haccident o' some sort," he said to a very
little but sharp boy who was to assist in the job.  "Howsever, you an'
me'll go at it alone, Sniveller."

"Wery good, Bunky," replied Sniveller, "'ow is it to be?  By the winder,
through the door, down the chimbly, up the spout--or wot?"

"The larder windy, my boy."

"Sorry for that," said Sniveller.

"Why?"

"'Cause it _is_ so 'ard to go past the nice things an' smell 'em all
without darin' to touch 'em till I lets you in.  Couldn't you let me
'ave a feed first?"

"Unpossible," said the burglar.

"Wery good," returned the boy, with a sigh of resignation.

Now, while these two were whispering to each other in a box of an
adjoining tavern, three police-constables were making themselves at home
in the premises of Sir Richard Brandon.  One of these was Number 666.

It is not quite certain, even to this day, how and where these men were
stationed, for their proceedings--though not deeds of evil--were done in
the dark, at least in darkness which was rendered visible only now and
then by bull's-eye lanterns.  The only thing that was absolutely clear
to the butler, Mr Thomas Balls, was, that the mansion was given over
entirely to the triumvirate to be dealt with as they thought fit.

Of course they did not know when the burglars would come, nor the
particular point of the mansion where the assault would be delivered;
therefore Number 666 laid his plans like a wise general, posted his
troops where there was most likelihood of their being required, and kept
himself in reserve for contingencies.

About that "wee short hour" of which the poet Burns writes, a small boy
was lifted by a large man to the sill of the small window which lighted
Sir Richard Brandon's pantry.  To the surprise of the small boy, he
found the window unfastened.

"They've bin an' forgot it!" he whispered.

"Git in," was the curt reply.

Sniveller got in, dropped to his extreme length from the sill, let go
his hold, and came down lightly on the floor--not so lightly, however,
but that a wooden stool placed there was overturned, and, falling
against a blue plate, broke it with a crash.

Sniveller became as one petrified, and remained so for a considerable
time, till he imagined all danger from sleepers having been awakened was
over.  He also thought of thieving cats, and thanked them mentally.  He
likewise became aware of the near presence of pastry.  The smell was
delicious, but a sense of duty restrained him.

Number 666 smiled to himself to think how well his trap had acted, but
the smile was lost in darkness.

Meanwhile, the chief operator, Bunky, went round to the back door.
Sniveller, who had been taught the geography of the mansion from a
well-executed plan, proceeded to the same door inside.  Giles could have
patted his little head as he carefully drew back the bolts and turned
the key.  Another moment, and Bunky, on his stocking soles, stood within
the mansion.

Yet another moment, and Bunky was enjoying an embrace that squeezed most
of the wind out of his body, strong though he was, for Number 666 was
apt to forget his excessive power when duty constrained him to act with
promptitude.

"Now, then, show a light," said Giles, quietly.

Two bull's-eyes flashed out their rich beams at the word, and lit up a
tableau of three, in attitudes faintly resembling those of the Laocoon,
without the serpents.

"Fetch the bracelets," said Giles.

At these words the bull's-eyes converged, and Sniveller, bolting through
the open door, vanished--he was never heard of more!

Then followed two sharp _clicks_, succeeded by a sigh of relief as
Number 666 relaxed his arms.

"You needn't rouse the household unless you feel inclined, my man," said
Giles to Bunky in a low voice.

Bunky did _not_ feel inclined.  He thought it better, on the whole, to
let the sleeping dogs lie, and wisely submitted to inevitable fate.  He
was marched off to jail, while one of the constables remained behind to
see the house made safe, and acquaint Sir Richard of his deliverance
from the threatened danger.

Referring to this matter on the following day in the servants' hall,
Thomas Balls filled a foaming tankard of ginger-beer--for, strange to
say, he was an abstainer, though a butler--and proposed, in a highly
eulogistic speech, the health and prosperity of that admirable body of
men, the Metropolitan Police, with which toast he begged to couple the
name of Number 666!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

NUMBER 666 OFF DUTY.

Some time after the attempt made upon Sir Richard Brandon's house, Giles
Scott was seated at his own fireside, helmet and truncheon laid aside,
uniform taken off, and a free and easy suit of plain clothes put on.

His pretty wife sat beside him darning a pair of very large socks.  The
juvenile policeman, and the incorrigible criminal were sound asleep in
their respective cribs, the one under the print of the Queen, the other
under that of Sir Robert Peel.  Giles was studying a small book of
instructions as to the duties of police-constables, and pretty Molly was
commenting on the same, for she possessed that charming quality of mind
and heart which induces the possessor to take a sympathetic and lively
interest in whatever may happen to be going on.

"They expect pretty hard work of you, Giles," remarked Molly with a
sigh, as she thought of the prolonged hours of absence from home, and
the frequent night duty.

"Why, Moll, you wouldn't have me wish for easy work at my time of life,
would you?" replied the policeman, looking up from his little book with
an amused smile.  "Somebody must always be taking a heavy lift of the
hard work of this world, and if a big hulking fellow like me in the
prime o' life don't do it, who will?"

"True, Giles, but surely you won't deny me the small privilege of
wishing that you had a _little_ less to do, and a _little_ more time
with your family.  You men,--especially you Scotchmen--are such an
argumentative set, that a poor woman can't open her lips to say a word,
but you pounce upon it and make an argument of it."

"Now Molly, there you go again, assuming my duties!  Why do you take me
so sharp?  Isn't taking-up the special privilege of the police?"

"Am I not entitled," said Molly, ignoring her husband's question, "to
express regret that your work should include coming home now and then
with scratched cheeks, and swelled noses, and black eyes?"

"Come now," returned Giles, "you must admit that I have fewer of these
discomforts than most men of the force, owing, no doubt, to little men
being unable to reach so high--and, d'you know, it's the little men who
do most damage in life; they're such a pugnacious and perverse
generation!  As to swelled noses, these are the fortune of war, at least
of civil war like ours--and black eyes, why, my eyes are black by
nature.  If they were of a heavenly blue like yours, Molly, you might
have some ground for complaint when they are blackened."

"And then there is such dreadful tear and wear of clothes," continued
Molly; "just look at that, now!"  She held up to view a sock with a hole
in its heel large enough to let an orange through.

"Why, Molly, do you expect that I can walk the streets of London from
early morning till late at night, protect life and property, and
preserve public tranquillity, as this little book puts it, besides
engaging in numerous scuffles and street rows without making a hole or
two in my socks?"

"Ah!  Giles, if you had only brain enough to take in a simple idea! it's
not the making of holes that I complain of.  It is the making of such
awfully big ones before changing your socks!  There now, don't let us
get on domestic matters.  You have no head for these, but tell me
something about your little book.  I am specially interested in it, you
see, because the small policeman in the crib over there puts endless
questions about his duties which I am quite unable to answer, and, you
know, it is a good thing for a child to grow up with the idea that
father and mother know everything."

"Just so, Molly.  I hope you'll tell your little recruit that the first
and foremost duty of a good policeman is to obey orders.  Let me see,
then, if I can enlighten you a bit."

"But tell me first, Giles--for I really want to know--how many are there
of you altogether, and when was the force established on its present
footing, and who began it, and, in short, all about it.  It's _so_ nice
to have you for once in a way for a quiet chat like this."

"You have laid down enough of heads, Molly, to serve for the foundation
of a small volume.  However, I'll give it you hot, since you wish it,
and I'll begin at the end instead of the beginning.  What would you say,
now, to an army of eleven thousand men?"

"I would say it was a very large one, though I don't pretend to much
knowledge about the size of armies," said Molly, commencing to mend
another hole about the size of a turnip.

"Well, that, in round numbers, is the strength of the Metropolitan
Police force at the present time--and not a man too much, let me tell
you, for what with occasional illnesses and accidents, men employed on
special duty, and men off duty--as I am just now--the actual available
strength of the force at any moment is considerably below that number.
Yes, it is a goodly army of picked and stalwart men, (no self-praise
