
Good Mrs Durby did not require much persuasion.  She consented to set
off as soon as possible, if she should obtain permission from Mrs
Tipps, who was aware that she had intended to visit her brother about
that time.  She received the precious ring, which, for security, was put
into a pill-box; this was introduced into an empty match-box, which
Netta wrapped in a sheet of note-paper and put Mrs Durby's name on it.
For further security Mrs Durby enlarged the parcel by thrusting the
match-box into an old slipper, the heel of which she doubled over the
toe, and then wrapped the whole in several sheets of brown paper until
the parcel assumed somewhat the shape and size of her own head.  It was
also fastened with strong cords, but Mrs Durby's powers of making a
parcel were so poor that she left several uncouth corners and ragged
ends of paper sticking out here and there.  She wrote on it in pencil
the simple name--Durby.

Meanwhile Joseph and his friend, having finished luncheon, prepared to
set out on their visit to Captain Lee.  As they quitted the house, Tipps
ran back to the door and called his sister out of the parlour.

"I say, Netta, what about this fifty pounds that mother was talking of?"
he said.  "Do you mean to say that you are really short of that sum, and
in debt?"

"We are, but I see a way out of the difficulty.  Don't distress
yourself, Joe; we shall have everything squared up, as you call it in a
few days."

"Are you _quite_ sure of that?" asked Tipps, with a doubting look.  "You
know I have got an uncommonly cheap lodging, and a remarkably economical
landlady, who manages so splendidly that I feed on a mere trifle a week.
Seventy-five pounds a year, you know, is more than I know what to do
with.  I can live on thirty-five or so, and the other forty is--"

"We don't require it Joe," said Netta, laughing.  "There, go away, you
are giving me cold by keeping me in the passage, and your friend is
getting impatient."

She pushed him out, nodded, and shut the door.  Tipps hastened after his
friend, apologised for the delay, and, stepping out smartly, they were
soon ushered into Captain Lee's drawing-room.  The captain was writing.
Emma was seated near the window sewing.

"Ha!  Tipps, my fine fellow, glad to see you; why, I was just thinking
of you," said the captain, extending his hand.

"I have called," began Tipps, bowing to Emma and shaking the captain's
hand, "to introduce my--my--eh!--ah, my--what's the matter?"

There was some reason for these exclamations, for Captain Lee stood
gazing in mute amazement at young Gurwood, while the latter returned the
compliment with his eyebrows raised to the roots of his hair.  The
similarity of their expressions did not, however, last long, for Edwin
became gradually confused, while the captain grew red and
choleric-looking.

"So," said the latter at length, in a very stern voice, "_this_ is your
friend, Mr Tipps?"

"Sir," exclaimed Edwin, flushing crimson, "you ought not to condemn any
one unheard."

"_I_ do not condemn you, sir," retorted the captain.

"By word, no, but by look and tone and gesture you do."

"Captain Lee," exclaimed Tipps, who had stood perfectly aghast with
amazement at this scene, "what _do_ you mean?--surely."

"I mean," said the captain, "that this youth was taken up by one of our
own detectives as a thief, some weeks ago, and was found travelling in a
first-class carriage without a ticket."

Young Gurwood, who had by this time recovered his self-possession,
turned to his friend and said,--"Explain this matter, Tipps, you know
all about it.  The only point that can puzzle you is, that I did not
know the name of Captain Lee when I travelled with him, and therefore
did not connect him with the gentleman to whom you said you meant to
introduce me."

Tipps drew a long breath.

"Oh," said he, "I see it all now.  Why, Captain Lee, my friend is
_perfectly_ innocent.  It was quite a mistake, I assure you; and the
best proof of it is that he is a personal friend of our police
superintendent, who was on the spot at the time the accident occurred,
but we were all thrown into such confusion at the time, that I don't
wonder things were not cleared up."

Tipps hereupon went into a detailed account of the matter as far as he
knew it, at first to the surprise and then to the amusement of Captain
Lee.  Fortunately for Gurwood, who would have found it difficult to
explain the circumstance of his travelling without a ticket, the captain
was as prompt to acknowledge his erroneous impression as he had been to
condemn.  Instead of listening to Tipps, he stopped him by suddenly
grasping Gurwood's hand, and thanking him heartily for the prompt and
able assistance he had rendered in rescuing his daughter from her
perilous position on the day of the accident.

Of course Edwin would not admit that "rescue" was the proper term to
apply to his action, and refused to admit that Miss Lee was in the
slightest degree indebted to him, at the same time assuring her and her
father that it had afforded him the highest possible pleasure to have
been of the slightest service to them.  The end of it was that they all
became extremely good friends, and the captain in particular became
quite jocular in reference to mistakes in general and stealing in
particular, until Tipps, pulling out his watch, declared that
procrastination was the thief of time, and that as he happened to have
business to transact with the police superintendent in reference to the
very accident which had caused them all so much trouble, he must
unwillingly bid them adieu.

"Stay, Tipps," exclaimed the captain, rising, "I shall accompany you to
the station, and introduce our friend Gurwood to the scene of his future
labours, where," continued the captain, turning with a hearty air and
patronising smile to Edwin, "I hope you will lay the foundation of a
career which will end in a manager's or secretary's situation, or some
important post of that sort.  Good-bye, Emma I'll not be back till
dinner-time."

Emma bowed to the young men, and said good-bye to her father with a
smile so ineffably captivating, that Edwin resolved then and there to
lay the foundation of a career which would end in a wife with nut-brown
hair and large lustrous eyes.

Poor Edwin!  He was not the first man whose wayward spirit had been
chained, his impulses directed to good ends and aims, and his destiny
fixed, by the smile of an innocent, loving, pretty girl.  Assuredly,
also, he was not the last!



CHAPTER TEN.

SHARP PRACTICE.

Standing with his back to the fireplace, his legs slightly apart, his
hands in his pockets, and his eyes fixed on the ceiling, Mr Sharp,
Police Superintendent of the Grand National Trunk Railway, communed with
himself and dived into the future.

Mr Sharp's powers of diving were almost miraculous.  He had an
unusually keen eye for the past and the present, but in regard to the
future his powers were all but prophetic.  He possessed a rare capacity
for following up clues; investigating cases; detecting falsehoods, not
only of the lip, but of the eye and complexion; and, in a word, was able
to extract golden information out of the most unpromising circumstances.
He was also all but ubiquitous.  Now tracking a suspicion to its source
on his own line in one of the Midland counties; anon comparing notes
with a brother superintendent at the terminus of the Great Western, or
Great Northern, or South-Eastern in London.  Sometimes called away to
give evidence in a county court; at other times taking a look in at his
own home to kiss his wife or dandle his child before dashing off per
express to follow up a clue to John O'Groats or the Land's End.  Here,
and there, and everywhere--calm, self-possessed, and self-contained,
making notes in trains, writing reports in his office, making
discoveries and convictions, and sometimes making prisoners with his own
hands by night and day, with no fixed hours for work, or rest, or meals,
and no certainty in anything concerning him, save in the uncertainty of
his movements, Mr Sharp with his myrmidons was the terror of evil
doers, and, we may truly add, the safeguard of the public.

Little did that ungrateful public know all it owed to the untiring
watchfulness and activity of Mr Sharp and his men.  If he and his
compeers were to be dismissed from our lines for a single week, the
descent of a host of thieves and scoundrels to commit wide-spread
plunder would teach the public somewhat severely how much they owe to
the efficient management of this department of railway business, and how
well, constantly and vigilantly--though unobtrusively--their interests
are cared for.

But to return.  Mr Sharp, as we have said stood communing with himself
and diving into the future.  Apparently his thoughts afforded him some
amusement, for his eyes twinkled slightly, and there was a faintly
humorous twist about the corners of his mouth.

David Blunt sat at a desk near him, writing diligently.  Against the
wall over his head hung a row of truncheons.  Besides the desk, a bench,
two or three wooden chairs, and a chest, there was little furniture in
the room.

Blunt's busy pen at length ceased to move, and Sharp looked at him.

"Well, Blunt," he said, "I see nothing for it but to make a railway
porter of you."

"By all means, sir," said Blunt, with a smile, laying down his pen.

"Gorton station," continued Sharp, "has become a very nest of thieves.
It is not creditable that such a state of things should exist for a week
on our line.  They have managed things very cleverly as yet.  Five or
six bales of cloth have disappeared in the course of as many days,
besides several loaves of sugar and half-a-dozen cheeses.  I am pretty
sure who the culprits are, but can't manage to bring it home to them,
so, as I have said, we must convert you into a porter.  You have only
been once engaged on this part of the line--that was at the accident
when you were so hard on poor Mr Gurwood, so that none of the Gorton
people will know you.  I have arranged matters with our passenger
superintendent.  It seems that Macdonell, the station-master at Gorton,
has been complaining that he is short-handed and wants another porter.
That just suits us, so we have resolved to give you that responsible
situation.  You will get a porter's uniform from--"

At this point Mr Sharp was interrupted by the door opening violently,
and a detective in plain clothes entering with a stout young man in his
grasp.

"Who have we here?" asked Mr Sharp.

"Man travelling without a ticket sir," replied the detective, whose calm
demeanour was in marked contrast to the excitement of his prisoner.

"Ha! come here; what have you to say for yourself?" demanded the
superintendent of the man.

Hereupon the man began a violent exculpation of himself, which entailed
nearly half-an-hour of vigorous cross-questioning, and resulted in his
giving a half-satisfactory account of himself, some trustworthy
references to people in town, and being set free.

This case having been disposed of, Mr Sharp resumed his conversation
with Blunt.

"Having been changed, then, into a railway porter, Blunt, you will
proceed to Gorton to discharge your duties there, and while doing so you
will make uncommonly good use of your eyes, ears, and opportunities."

Mr Sharp smiled and Blunt chuckled, and at the same time Joseph Tipps
entered the room.

"Good-evening, Mr Sharp," he said.  "Well, anything more about these
Gorton robberies?"

"Nothing more yet, Mr Tipps, but we expect something more soon, for a
new porter is about to be sent to the station."

Tipps, who was a very simple matter-of-fact man in some ways, looked
puzzled.

"Why, how will the sending of a new porter to the station throw light on
the matter?"

"You shall know in the course of time, Mr Tipps," replied the
superintendent.  "We have wonderful ways of finding out things here."

"Indeed you have," said Tipps; "and, by the way, that reminds me that
they have some wonderful ways of finding out things on the Continent as
well as here.  I have just heard of a clever thing done by a German
professor.  It seems that on one of the lines--I forget which--a large
box full of silver-plate was despatched.  It had a long way to go, and
before reaching its destination the plate was stolen, and the box filled
up with sand.  On this being discovered, of course every sort of
investigation was set on foot, but without success.  At last the thing
came to the ears of a professor of chemistry--or the police went to him,
I don't know which--and it occurred to him that he might get a clue to
the thieves by means of the sand in the box.  You see the great
difficulty the police had, was to ascertain at which of the innumerable
stations on the long line, it was likely that the theft had taken place.
The professor ordered samples of the sand at all the stations on the
line to be sent to him.  These he analysed and examined with the
microscope, and found that one of the samples was precisely similar in
all respects to the sand in the box.  The attention of the police was at
once concentrated on the station from which that sand had been gathered,
and in a short time the guilty parties were discovered and the theft
brought home to them.  Now, wasn't that clever?"

"Very good, very good, indeed," said Mr Sharp, approvingly, "and rather
peculiar.  I had a somewhat peculiar case myself last week.  You know
some time ago there was a quantity of cloth stolen on this line, for
which, by the way, we had to pay full compensation.  Well, I could not
get any clue to the thieves, but at last I thought of a plan.  I got
some patterns of the cloth from the party that lost it, and sent one of
these to every station on the line where it was likely to have been
stolen.  Just the other day I got a telegram from Croon station stating
that a man had been seen going about in a new suit exactly the same as
the pattern.  Off I went immediately, pounced on the man, taxed him with
the theft, and found the remainder of the cloth in his house."

"Capital," exclaimed Tipps, "that was smartly managed.  And, by the way,
wasn't there something about a case of stealing muffs and boas lately?"

"Yes, and we got hold of that thief too, the day before yesterday,"
replied Mr Sharp.  "I felt sure, from the way in which the theft was
committed, that it must be one of our own men, and so it turned out.  He
had cut open a bale and taken out several muffs and boas of first-rate
sable.  One set of 'em he gave to his sweetheart, who was seen wearing
them in church on Sunday.  I just went to her and said I was going to
put a question to her, and warned her to speak the truth, as it would be
worse for all parties concerned if she attempted to deceive me.  I then
asked her if she had got the muff and boa from Jim Croydon, the porter.
She blushed scarlet, and admitted it at once, but said, poor thing, that
she had no idea they had been stolen, and I believe her.  This case
occurred just after I had watched the milk-truck the other night for
three hours, and found that the thief who had been helping himself to it
every morning for some weeks past was the watchman at the station."

"I fear there are a great many bad fellows amongst us," said Tipps,
shaking his head.

"You are quite mistaken," replied the superintendent.  "There _were_ a
good many bad fellows, but I flatter myself that there are very few
_now_ in proportion to the number of men on the line.  We are constantly
winnowing them out, purifying the ore, as it were, so that we are
gradually getting rid of all the dross, and leaving nothing but sterling
metal on the line.  Why, Mr Tipps, you surely don't expect that
railways are to be exempted from black sheep any more than other large
companies.  Just look at the army and navy, and see what a lot of
rascals have to be punished and drummed out of the service every now and
then.  Same everywhere.  Why, when I consider that we employ over twenty
thousand men and boys, and that these men and boys are tempted, more
almost than any other class of people, by goods lying about constantly
in large quantities in the open air, and in all sorts of lonely and
out-of-the-way places, my surprise is that our bad men are so few.  No
doubt we shall always have one or two prowling about, and may
occasionally alight on a nest of 'em, but we shall manage to keep 'em
down--to winnow them out faster, perhaps, than they come in.  I am just
going about some little pieces of business of that sort now," added Mr
Sharp; putting on his hat.  "Did you wish to speak with me about
anything in particular, Mr Tipps?"

"Yes; I wished to ask you if that fat woman, Mrs ---, what's her name?"

"You mean Mrs Podge, I suppose?" suggested Sharp; "she who kicked her
heels so vigorously at Langrye after the accident."

"Ah!  Mrs Podge--yes.  Does she persist in her ridiculous claim for
damages?"

"She does, having been urged to do so by some meddling friend; for I'm
quite sure that she would never have thought of doing so herself, seeing
