tell of gorillas being in them regions?"

"I rather think not," said Sam; "and to my mind it looks more like a
rock than anything else."

A rock it proved to be, to the discomfiture of Slagg and Stumps; but the
rock was not without interest, for it was soon seen that a rope was
attached to it, and that the rope, stretching across the entrance to a
creek, was lost in the foliage on the side opposite to the rock.

"Why, I do believe," said Sam, suddenly, in an impressive whisper, "that
there is a vessel of some sort at the other end of that rope, behind the
point, partly hid by the trees.  Don't you see the top of her masts?"

After long and earnest gazing, and much whispered conversation--though
there was no occasion for caution at such a distance from the land--they
came to the conclusion that a vessel lay concealed just within the mouth
of the creek towards which the wind was driving them, and that, as they
apparently had not been discovered by those who owned the vessel, their
wisest course would be to land, if possible without attracting
attention, somewhat farther along the coast.

"But how is that to be done," asked Robin, "as we have neither oar nor
rudder?"

"Nothing easier," returned Slagg, seizing the axe and wrenching up the
plank that had prevented Stumps from finding a watery grave, "I've on'y
got to cut a handle at one end, an' we've got an oar at once."

In a few minutes the handy youth converted the piece of plank into a
rude oar, with which he steered the raft, so that it gradually drew to
the southward of the creek where the strange vessel lay, and finally
took the land in another inlet not far distant.

It was evident, from the silence around, that no one was stirring in the
vessel, and that their approach had not been perceived.  Congratulating
themselves on this piece of good fortune, they lowered their sail, drew
the raft under the bushes, which in some parts of the inlet came close
down to the sea, and then hurried stealthily through a palm-grove
towards the vessel.  They reached the margin of the grove in a few
minutes, and there discovered that the stranger was apparently a Chinese
craft, but whether a trading-vessel, or smuggler, or pirate, they had no
means of knowing.

As they lay flat on their faces in the rank grass, peeping through the
luxuriant undergrowth, they could see that two men paced the deck with
musket on shoulder as if on guard, but no other human beings were
visible.

"Shall we go forward and trust them as honest traders?" asked Sam in a
whisper.

"I think not," replied Slagg; "if all's true that one hears, there is
not much honesty afloat in them seas.  My advice is to stay where we are
and see what turns up."

"What think you, Robin?"

Robin was of opinion that they should trust the strangers and go
forward.  Stumps agreed with him, but Sam thought with Slagg.  Their
indecision, however, was cut short by a most startling occurrence.

While they were yet whispering together, the sound of voices was heard
in the distance.  Our castaways at once sank flatter into the grass, and
became mute.

In a few minutes the voices drew gradually nearer, until they were quite
close to the alarmed watchers.  Suddenly, from among the bushes on the
other side of an open space just in front of them, there issued a band
of men, walking in single file.  Their appearance might have aroused
grave anxiety in the most unsuspecting breast, for, besides possessing
faces in which the effects of dissipation and evil passions were plainly
stamped, they were armed--as the saying is--to the teeth, with short
swords, cavalry pistols, and carbines.  They were dressed in varied
Eastern costume, and appeared to be of Malay origin, though some bore
closer resemblance to the Chinese.

The man who marched in advance--evidently the leader of the band--was
unusually tall and powerful, with a remarkably stern, but not altogether
forbidding, countenance.

"Pirates!" whispered Slagg.

"Looks like them, but may be smugglers," replied Sam in the same
cautious tone.

Even Robin's unsuspecting and inexperienced nature would not permit him
to believe that they were honest traders.  Had any doubts on the subject
lingered in their minds, these would have been effectually cleared away
by the scenes which immediately followed.

While the pirates were still at some distance from the shore, sudden
shouts and yells came from the vessel, which had, up to that time, been
lying so peacefully at anchor, and it was at once clear that a furious
hand-to-hand fight was taking place upon her deck.

"It must be the poor slaves who have risen," whispered Sam.

The pirates had drawn their swords and pistols at the first sound of the
fight, and rushed to the rescue.  They well knew that, while they had
been on shore, the unfortunate captives chained in the vessel's hold had
succeeded in freeing themselves, and were endeavouring to overcome the
few men left to guard them.

Slaves captured at various times by the scoundrels who infest those
seas, are sometimes made to work at the oars--which are much used during
calm weather--until they die, or become so worn out as to be useless,
when they are mercilessly thrown overboard.  That the slaves referred to
on this occasion, animated probably by despair, had effected their
release, and plucked up heart to assault the armed guard, was a matter
of some surprise to the pirates: not so, however, to our adventurers,
when they saw, foremost among the mutineers, a man clad in the garb of a
European sailor.

"That's the boy as has put 'em up to it," said Jim Slagg, in a
suppressed but eager voice, "they'd never have had the pluck to do it of
themselves."

"We'd better go an' help 'em," said Stumps, whose usually stupid face
was lighted up with excitement.

"Right, lad," exclaimed Slagg, starting up; but Sam laid his hand firmly
on his arm.

"Too late," he said; "don't you see that the guard have prevailed.
Besides, the pirate crew are in their boats--almost at the vessel.  See,
they swarm up the side."

"Poor, poor sailor!" said Robin Wright, in a voice of the deepest pity.

"You may well say that; no doubt he is killed by this time," said Slagg;
"but no--he is fightin' still!"

This was indeed true.  Some of the slaves, rendered desperate no doubt,
were still maintaining the hopeless fight with handspikes and such arms
as they had succeeded in wresting from the guard at the first onset, and
the stalwart figure of the European sailor was seen swaying aloft a
clubbed musket and felling a pirate at every blow.  Animated by his
example, the other slaves fought with resolute bravery, but when the
rest of the pirate crew joined the guard and surrounded them, they were
instantly overpowered.  Then those who had not been already slain were
led hastily to the side, a sword was drawn across their throats, or
thrust through them, and the bodies were tossed into the sea.  Among
those led thus to the side was the brave sailor.  Although his features
could not be distinguished at such a distance by those in ambush, it
could be clearly seen that he came boldly forward, resolved, no doubt,
to meet his fate like a man.

"Oh, God, spare him!" burst in a voice of agony from Robin, who sprang
up as if with the intention of rushing to the rescue, regardless of
consequences, but a second time Sam Shipton's restraining hand was
ready.

"What could we do, with the sea between us and the ship?  Even if we
were on the deck could we four deliver him from a hundred?"

Robin sank down again with a groan, but his fascinated eyes still gazed
at the pirate vessel.  To his great surprise, the sailor at that moment
uttered a long and ringing cheer!  The act seemed to overawe even the
bloodstained pirates, for they hesitated an instant.  Then one of them
pointed his sword at the sailor's back, but at the same moment the
leader of the band was seen to strike up the sword and give some hurried
directions.  A rope was instantly brought, with which the arms and legs
of the seaman were secured, and he was carried below.

"Our prayer has been answered!" exclaimed Robin with renewed excitement;
"they _are_ going to spare him."

Sam shook his head.  "I fear not, Robin; at least, if I may judge from
what I have read of these villains, they have only spared him for a time
for the purpose of torturing him."

Robin shuddered.  "Well, I don't know," he said, "whatever they may do,
God _has_ answered our prayer, for they _have_ spared him; and if God
could deliver him thus at the last moment, surely He can deliver him
altogether.  But was it not remarkable that he should give such a cheer
when--as he must have thought--at the point of death, for it sounded
more like a cheer of triumph than defiance?"

"It was strange indeed.  The effect of strong excitement, I fancy."

While they were conversing, the pirates were busily engaged in getting
up the anchor and hoisting the sails of their craft.  At the same time
the long oars or sweeps were manned by such of the slaves as remained
alive, and the vessel slowly glided out of the creek, and put to sea.
Fortunately the fight had engrossed the attention of those on board so
much that they had failed to observe the little raft, which, although
partially concealed by bushes, might not otherwise have escaped
detection.

Our voyagers were still congratulating themselves on their good fortune
in this respect, when the pirate-ship was observed to change her course,
turn completely round and return towards the land!

"They've seen us!" ejaculated Robin in consternation.

"Our doom is fixed," said Sam in a tone of bitter despair.

Slagg and his friend were so much overwhelmed that they could not speak.

On came the vessel--under oars--straight for the creek where the raft
lay.  There could be no doubt now that they had been seen.

While they gazed in blank dismay, utterly unable to decide on any course
of action, an event occurred which totally altered the aspect of
affairs.  Suddenly, as if by magic, the pirate-ship was converted into a
great black-and-white cloud, from out of which there shot an
indescribable mass of broken spars and wreckage which fell in all
directions in a heavy shower into the sea.  Two seconds later and there
came a roar as if a crash of the loudest thunder had rent the sky.  The
powder-magazine had been fired, and the pirate-ship had been blown
literally to atoms!

When the last of the terrible shower had fallen, nothing whatever of the
vessel was to be seen save the floating morsels of the wreck.  It was,
we might say, a tremendous instance of almost absolute annihilation.

Recovering from the shock of horror and surprise, Sam Shipton ran
swiftly down to the spot where the raft lay, followed by his companions.

"There may be some left alive!" he cried.  "Quick--shove her off.
Yonder's a pole, Robin, fetch it."

Another minute and they were afloat.  Pushing with the pole, sculling
with the rude oar, and paddling with a plank torn off, they made for the
scene of the explosion.

"I see something moving," said Stumps, who, having no implement to work
with, stood up in front and directed their course.

Soon they were in the midst of the _debris_.  It was an awful sight, for
there, mingled with riven spars and planks and cabin furniture, and
entangled in ravelled cordage, lay the torn lifeless remains of the
pirates.  Sharks were already swimming about in anticipation of a feast.

"Did you not see symptoms of life somewhere?" asked Sam, as he stood
beside Stumps, and looked earnestly round.

"Yes, I did, but I don't now--O yes! there it is again.  Give way,
Slagg, give way.  There!"

The raft was soon alongside of the moving object.  It was the body of
the gallant sailor who had fought so well that day.  His limbs were
still fast bound, excepting one arm, with which now and then he struck
out feebly, as if trying to swim.  Lying on his back his mouth and nose
were above water.

"Gently, gently, boys," said Robin, as they lifted the head out of the
water and slowly drew the shoulders up; "now, a good heave and--that's
it."

The body slid heavily on the raft, and the motion seemed to rouse the
seaman's spirit, for he uttered a faint cheer, while they knelt round
him, and tried in various ways to restore him to consciousness.

"Hurrah for old England!" he cried presently, in an imbecile manner,
making an abortive effort to lift his loose arm; "never say die--
s'long's there's--a shok in th' lotter."

"Well done, old saltwater!" cried Slagg, unable to restrain a laugh;
"you'll live to fight yet, or I'm mistaken."

There was indeed some prospect that the poor fellow would recover, for,
after a short time, he was able to gaze at his rescuers with an
intensity of surprise that betokened the return not only of
consciousness but of reason.

"Well, well," he said, after gazing around for some time in silence as
he lay with his head supported on the sail, "I s'pose it's all right,
and I'll wake up all square in the mornin', but it's out o' sight the
most comical dream I've had since I was a babby.  I only hope it'll take
a pleasanter turn if it's agoin' to continue."

With this philosophical reflection the sailor shut his eyes, and
disposed himself to sleep until the period of real waking should arrive.

Thinking this the best thing he could do in the circumstances, his
rescuers turned to examine whether any of the others had survived the
explosion, but, finding that all were dead or had sunk, they returned to
the land.

Here, after securing the raft, they made a sort of litter, with the sail
spread on the oar and a plank, on which they carried the sailor to the
sheltered spot whence they had witnessed the fight.  As the poor man had
by that time fallen into a genuine slumber--which appeared to be
dreamless--he was left under the care of Stumps and Slagg, while Sam and
Robin went off to ascertain whether or not the island was inhabited.

"We will go straight up to the highest point at once, so as to get a
bird's-eye view of it," said Sam.  "I can't help thinking that it must
be inhabited, for these scoundrels would not care to land, I should
fancy, unless there was some one to rob."

"It may be so, Sam.  But if they had come to rob, don't you think they
would not have returned to their ship without captives or booty?"

"There is something in that, Robin.  Come; we shall see."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

STRANGE DISCOVERIES ON PIRATE ISLAND.

On reaching the first rising-ground that lay before them, Robin and his
friend received a great disappointment, for, instead of a richly wooded
country, which the coast scenery where they landed had led them to
expect, they found an exceedingly barren region, as far, at least, as
the next ridge in advance.

"No use to go further," said Sam, despondingly; "nothing but barren
rocks and a few scrubby bushes here.  Evidently there are no
inhabitants, for it would be almost impossible to live on such a place."

"But it may be better further inland," said Robin.  "I can't think that
the pirates would come here for nothing.  At all events let us go to the
next ridge."

Without replying, Sam followed Robin, but the next ridge revealed
nothing more hopeful.  Indeed the prospect thence was, if possible, more
depressing, for it was seen that the island was small, that its sides
were so steep all round, as far as the eye could reach, that there was
apparently no landing-place except at the spot where they had been
driven on shore.  The elevated interior seemed as barren as the
circumference, and no neighbouring island was to be seen in all the wide
field of vision.  The only living creatures visible were innumerable
sea-birds which circled round the cliffs, and which, on espying the
intruders, came clamouring overhead, as if to order them angrily away.

"Having come thus far we may as well go to the top and have a look all
round," said Robin, "and see--here is something like a track worn on the
rock."  Sam's drooping spirits revived at once.  He examined the track
carefully and pronounced it a "human" track.  "The sea-gulls could not
make it, Robin.  Goats, sheep, and cows cannot live without grass,
therefore it was not made by them.  A track is not usually worn on hard
rock by the passage of pirates only once or twice over them.  There is
mystery here, Robin.  Come on!"

It will be observed that Robin's spirit was more hopeful than that of
his friend, nevertheless Sam being physically more energetic, was, when
not depressed, prone to take the lead.  He walked smartly forward
therefore, followed humbly by his friend, and they soon reached what
proved to be the summit of the island.

Here supreme astonishment was the chief ingredient in their feelings,
for they stood on the edge of a slope, at the foot of which, as in a
basin, lay what seemed to be a small cultivated garden in the midst of a
miniature valley covered with trees and shrubs, through which a tiny
rivulet ran.  This verdant little gem was so hemmed in by hills that it
could not be seen from the sea or any low part of the island.  But what
surprised the discoverers most was the sight of an old woman, bent
nearly double, who was busily at work in the garden.  Not far from her
was an old man, who, from his motions while at work, appeared to be
blind.  Their costume being nondescript, besides ragged, did not betoken
their nationality.

