
"Or I've a really jolly writing case--almost new--"

"I don't want your lockets or your writing cases; I've heaps of my
own. I know one thing I do want, though, and if you like to trade, you
can."

"Done! Only name it, and it's yours with my blessing."

"Well, I want this essay--"

"My essay! What do you mean?"

Gwen snatched back her exercise book as a mother clutches her
first-born.

"I mean what I say. If you like to hand over 'Thomas Carlyle' to me,
I'll take it instead of the sov., and call us quits. It would be a new
experience to win a prize. How amazed everyone would be!"

"You surely wouldn't pass it off as your own?"

"Why not?"

"Why, Netta! That would be rather strong, even for you!"

"I told you long ago I was no saint. Besides, what's the harm? It's a
business arrangement. You offered to pay me in kind, and this happens
to be the 'pound of flesh', I fancy. It's perfectly fair."

"Um! Don't quite see the fairness myself."

"But it is!" protested Netta rather huffily. "I believe lots of
popular authors don't do all their own writing themselves. They engage
secretaries to help them. I've even heard of clergymen buying their
sermons."

"Oh, oh! Father doesn't!" Gwen's tone was warm.

"Well, I didn't say he did, but I believe it's done all the same. And if
a vicar can read somebody else's sermon in the pulpit as if it were his
own, I may hand in somebody else's essay. _Quod est demonstrandum_, my
child."

"Can't see it!" grunted Gwen.

"Look here, Gwen Gascoyne, you've got to see it! I've been uncommonly
patient with you, but I don't quite appreciate the joke of being done
out of that sov. I must either have it or its equivalent. You can
please yourself which."

Netta's eyes were flashing, and her mouth was twitching ominously. She
was a jolly enough fair-weather comrade, but she could be uncommonly
nasty if things went wrong.

"I suppose you don't consider it unfair to keep me waiting all this
time?" she added scathingly.

Gwen kicked the desk and groaned.

"Well, it just amounts to this: if you don't choose to come to terms,
I'll tell Lemonade. Yes, I will! I don't care a scrap if I went into
her room as well as you. You broke the china, and you'd get into the
worst row. It wouldn't be pleasant for you. I think you'd better hand
over Mr. Thomas Carlyle to me, my dear."

"And what am I to do, I should like to know?"

"Write another on a different author."

"There isn't time."

"Yes there is, heaps! I don't want it to be as good as this,
naturally. Well, are you going to trade, or are you not? I can't wait
here all day!"

For answer, Gwen held out the exercise book. She was in a desperately
tight corner; everything seemed to have conspired against her. She
knew Netta and her mad, reckless moods quite well enough to appreciate
the fact that her threat to tell Miss Roscoe was no idle one. When her
temper was roused, Netta was capable of anything.

"It's her fault more than mine if it's not fair. I really can't help
it," thought Gwen, trying to find excuses for herself.

"Oh! Glad you've come to your senses at last!" sneered Netta, as she
clutched the precious manuscript and stalked away, slamming the door
behind her. There was no one else in the room, so Gwen laid her head
down on the desk, and indulged in an altogether early Victorian
exhibition of feeling. Her essay--her cherished essay, over which she
had taken such superhuman pains, to be torn away from her like this!
It was to have brought her such credit from Miss Roscoe, for even if
it did not win the prize, it would surely be highly commended. And she
had made herself a party to a fraud, for however much she might try
to whitewash her act, she knew she had no right to allow Netta to use
her work.

"Dad would despise me! Oh, what an abominable mix and muddle it all
is! And I was going to start the New Year so straight!" wailed Gwen.

Netta in the meantime had put the essay away in her locker with the
utmost satisfaction. She felt she had decidedly scored. Neither
brilliant nor a hard worker, she had no opportunity of distinguishing
herself in the Form under ordinary circumstances: here chance had
flung into her hand the very thing she wanted. It would not take long
to copy the sixteen pages of rather sprawling writing, then "Thomas
Carlyle" would be her own.

"And a surprise for everyone!" she chuckled complacently. "Of course,
it's rather dear--a whole pound! But--yes, most undoubtedly it's worth
it!"

To Gwen, not the lightest part of the business was that she was faced
with the horrible necessity of writing another essay. Only two days
remained, so time pressed. It was impossible to look up any subject
adequately, so she chose Dickens, as being an author whose books she
knew fairly well, and by dint of much brain racking and real hard
labour contrived to give some slight sketch of his life and an
appreciation of his genius. She was painfully conscious, however, that
the result was poor, the style slipshod, and the general composition
lacking both in unity and finish. She pulled a long face as she signed
her name to it.

"That isn't going to do much for you, Gwen Gascoyne," she said to
herself. "It won't even get 'commended'. Bah! I'm sick of the whole
thing!"

She felt more sick still on the day when Miss Roscoe returned the
essays.

"I had hoped the average standard would be higher," commented the
Principal. "Very few girls have treated the subject in any really
critical spirit. There is only one paper worthy of notice--that on
Thomas Carlyle by Netta Goodwin, and it is so excellent that it stands
head and shoulders above all the others. I am very pleased, Netta,
very pleased indeed, that you should have done so well. Your essay is
carefully thought out and nicely expressed, and is evidently the
result of much painstaking work. You thoroughly deserve the prize
which I offered, and I have written your name in the book."

The Fifth Form gasped as Netta, with a smile of infinite triumph,
marched jauntily up the room to receive her copy of Browning's Poems.
Each girl looked at her neighbour in almost incredulous astonishment.
Netta Goodwin, of all people in the world, to have won such praise!

Gwen drew her breath hard, and clenched her fists till her nails hurt
her palms. At that moment, I am afraid, she hated Netta.

"Who was your author, Gwen? I chose Thackeray," said Louise Mawson
afterwards.

"Dickens--and I only got 'fairly creditable'," responded Gwen. "It's
just rotten!"

Which was a word utterly tabooed both at Rodenhurst and at home, but
the sole one that seemed bad enough for the occasion.

"So I hear Netta Goodwin's was the prize essay," remarked Father that
evening. "Well, we can't all of us win prizes, can we? It was a
strange coincidence that she should have written on Thomas Carlyle
too!"

"Most remarkably strange, and very unfortunate for me," admitted Gwen,
drinking her cup of bitterness to the dregs.




CHAPTER XII

Gwen turns Henwife


To Gwen the spring term seemed to pass much more rapidly than the
autumn one had done. She was growing used to the Fifth Form; and the
work, though certainly not easy, was now, thanks to the extra coaching
that she had received, well within her compass. She did not feel so
terribly harassed over her preparation, and instead of, as formerly,
spending the whole evening until bedtime at her books, she was able to
spare a chance hour or two occasionally for other things. The change
of thoughts and the extra interests did her good; she lost her worried
expression, and though she still could not help wrinkling up her
forehead when trying to answer a question, some of her other bad
habits began to drop away. Beatrice had not to correct her nearly so
often, consequently there was less fridging of tempers between the two
sisters, and a great increase of calm in the home atmosphere. It was a
matter of tacit understanding at the Parsonage that Gwen raised most
of the household storms. Winnie and Lesbia had peace-loving
dispositions, and jogged along very evenly; and the boys, though apt
to be mischievous, were always good-humoured little fellows, not much
given to quarrelling unless they were teased. At present such a
blessed tranquillity reigned at the breakfast and tea-tables that
Beatrice really began to hope that the family volcano was quieting
down, and that her eruptions and explosions would be things of the
past.

Perhaps it was partly the pleasant spring weather that had such a
beneficial effect on Gwen's temper. She loved the early growing season
of the year, when every day was a little longer and lighter than the
last, and the bulbs were pushing up in the garden, and the hazel
catkins showering clouds of pollen in the lane, and the rooks cawing
and building in the clump of elms near the mill, and great flights of
screaming white sea-gulls, noisy, chattering jackdaws, and cheery,
whistling starlings flew all together in mixed flocks to feed on the
wolds. The morning walk to North Ditton across the heath, so bleak and
wretched in December, was a daily delight now the sun was glinting
over the sea and the gorse was in bud, and the stonechats, which had
vanished during the cold weather, were back among the boulders,
darting from stone to stone in short, jerky flight, with that sharp,
jarring cry which is the prelude to their sweeter spring note. The
moorland air at 8 a.m. was so fresh and pure and exhilarating that it
seemed to blow away all the cobwebs, and Gwen often felt inclined to
dance along the path for sheer joy of the sun and the wind, and the
birds and the countless green things that were rapidly showing their
heads through the brown skeletons of last autumn's heather and
bilberry. The thrill of springtime is a totally different sensation
from what we experience on even the most gorgeous day in October;
there is a message of hope in the air, a foretaste of the coming
summer, a glow of reawakened vitality, an exaltation half physical and
half spiritual, as every year nature tells us afresh in her own
fashion the miracle of the Resurrection.

Life was a busy round at the Parsonage. Winnie devoted each moment she
could spare to the garden and the hen-yard, and Gwen, who at present
had a craving for out-of-doors, lent a hand as often as she could. She
whistled and sang over her work as she transplanted forget-me-nots,
sowed seeds, or tidied up the rockery, and her stalwart arms made the
lawn mower fly.

"There's some advantage in growing!" she declared, as she trundled
away the wheelbarrow full of weeds. "My muscles have hardened since
last year. I'll wheel you back up the garden, Martin, if you like.
Tumble in!"

Gwen and Winnie had a great scheme between them of building a summer
house, and every Saturday they managed to get on a little with their
operations. There was a large pile of young felled trees in the yard
which Mr. Gascoyne had bought for firewood, and some of these were
admirable for the purpose. With considerable toil they dragged out
half a dozen, dug holes in the ground, and planted them as posts to
make a framework. Smaller boughs were nailed across and across, and
then bunches of heather were tucked and tied securely into all the
interstices. The roof was at first a terrible problem, till Winnie
conceived the brilliant idea of using an old worn-out gate that lay in
the orchard. It was heavy to lift, but with the aid of Father,
Beatrice, and Nellie the maid, they managed to heave it up so that it
rested securely upon the six posts. Then they thatched it neatly with
heather and fir boughs.

"I don't suppose for a moment that it will be watertight," said
Winnie; "but we shan't use it in wet weather. What I want is a nice
shady place to sit in at the end of the tennis lawn. It will be
perfectly lovely to have tea here. I believe I can make seats with
some of those stumps."

"I'd back you to do anything in the joinering line," laughed Dick, who
still came for lessons on Saturday mornings, and generally stayed to
chat and help the gardeners, though he was yet debarred from any very
violent exertions, greatly to his indignation. "You ought to be a
Colonial. I believe you'd be equal to running up a shanty on your own
and making the furniture out of old boxes."

"Perhaps I'll emigrate some day," nodded Winnie. "It would be more in
my line than teaching. I'll leave University honours to Gwen, and try
my luck in another hemisphere. Women are wanted in Canada if they're
domesticated--and I flatter myself I'm that."

"Don't know that I won't join you when I've got my degree!" declared
Gwen. "I've yearned to go to Canada ever since I saw those ripping
pictures on the kinematograph--only Father'd have to promise to come
and see me every fortnight."

"How particularly possible! Gwen, you're a rotter!" chirped Dick,
throwing a piece of stick at her. "I thought your last idea was to
study medicine and go to College with me."

"Perhaps I shan't be able to do either: scholarships don't grow on
every bush like blackberries. Probably I'll just have to stay at home
and 'wash dishes and feed the swine'. By the by, we haven't shown you
our eleven little pigs! They're absolute darlings, as sweet as the
Duchess's baby in _Alice in Wonderland_. Come along this instant, and
I'll catch one for you to nurse. We've never had a pet pig before, but
I declare I mean to tame one of these. They're the sharpest, cutest
little scaramouches you ever saw: as funny as kittens, and twice as
intelligent as puppies. Yes; I'm a pig enthusiast at present, and if
you laugh I'll make you buy one for yourself!"

There was plenty of scope for Gwen's energy as spring came on and
added hatch after hatch of fluffy chickens and downy ducklings to
Winnie's hen-yard. She helped to arrange the coops, to make wired
enclosures for the tiny chicks, and, hardest task of all, to collect
the young pullets and cockerels that were allowed to roam on the
common, and lock them up safely for the night.

"No one who hasn't tried henkeeping could possibly conceive the
difficulty of getting in those wretched long-legged, half-fledged
fowls," declared Gwen. "They know I'm going to shut them up, and
they're so clever they come for the Indian corn when I call 'chuck,
chuck', and eat it with one eye upon me. Then when I try to cajole
them into the henhouse they fly all ways. Lesbia, you may come and act
guard, but I won't have the boys; they only rush about and frighten
the chickens. The last time I took Stumps the Buff Orpington with the
black feather in its tail flew over the hedge into the turnip field.
I didn't get him back till it was moonlight, then I caught him
perching on a stump, and carried him round."

The particular pride of Winnie's heart was a clutch of little
Partridge Wyandottes, mothered by a comfortable old Plymouth Rock hen.
The setting of eggs had been given her by a farmer's wife in the
