they commenced a thorough investigation of the premises, outside and in.
Then they went to the smithy, where Mrs Maggot knew her husband had
concealed two large kegs of smuggled liquor on the hearth under a heap
of ashes and iron debris, but these had been so cleverly, yet
carelessly, hidden that the men sat down on the heap under which they
lay, to rest and wipe their heated brows after their fruitless search.

"Hast 'ee found the brandy?" inquired Mrs Maggot, with a look of
innocence, when the two men returned.

"Not yet," replied Eben Trezise; "but we've not done.  There's a certain
shaft near by that has got a bad name for drinkin', missus; p'raps you
may have heard on it?  Its breath do smell dreadful bad sometimes."

Both men laughed at this, and winked to each other, while Mrs Maggot
smiled, and, with a look of surprise, vowed that she had not heard of
the disreputable shaft referred to.

Despite her unconcerned look, however, Mrs Maggot felt anxious, for she
was aware that her husband had recently obtained an unusually large
quantity of French brandy and tobacco from the Scilly Islands, between
which and the coasts of Cornwall smuggling was carried on in a most
daring and extensive manner at the time of our story, and she knew that
the whole of the smuggled goods lay concealed in one of those numerous
disused shafts of old mines which lie scattered thickly over that part
of the country.  Maggot's absence rendered her position still more
perplexing, but she was a woman of ready wit and self-reliance, and she
comforted herself with the knowledge that the brandy lay buried far down
in the shaft, and that it would take the boatsmen some time to dig to
it--that possibly they might give up in despair before reaching it.

While the men went off to search for the shaft, and while Mrs Maggot
was calmly nursing her spirited little baby, Maggot himself, in company
with his bosom friend John Cock, was sauntering slowly homeward along
the cliffs near Kenidjack Castle, the ruins of which occupy a bold
promontory a little to the north of Cape Cornwall.  They had just come
in sight of the tin-mine and works which cover Nancharrow valley from
the shore to a considerable distance inland, where stand the tall
chimneys and engine-houses, the whims and varied machinery of the
extensive and prolific old tin-mine named Wheal Owles.

The cliffs on which the two men stood are very precipitous and rugged--
rising in some places to a height of about 300 feet above the rocks
where the waters of the Atlantic roll dark and deep, fringing the coast
with a milky foam that is carried away by the tide in long streaks, to
be defiled by the red waters which flow from Nancharrow valley into
Porth Ledden Cove.

This cove is a small one, with a narrow strip of sand on its shore.  At
its northern extremity is a deep narrow gorge, into which the waves
rush, even in calm weather, with a peculiar sound.  In reference to this
it is said that the waves "buzz-and-go-in," hence the place has been
named Zawn Buzzangein.  The sides of the Zawn are about sixty feet high,
and quite precipitous.  In one part, especially, they overhang their
base.  It was here that Maggot and his friend stopped on their way home,
and turned to look out upon the sea.

"No sign o' pilchers yet," observed Maggot, referring to the immense
shoals of pilchards which visit the Cornish coasts in the autumn of each
year, and form a large portion of the wealth of the county.

"Too soon," replied John Cock.

"By the way, Jack," said Maggot, "wasn't it hereabouts that the schooner
went ashore last winter?"

"Iss, 'twor down theer, close by Pullandeese," replied the other,
pointing to a deep pool in the rocks round which the swell of the
Atlantic broke in white foam.  "I was theere myself.  I had come down
'bout daylight--before others were stirring, an' sure 'nuff there she
lay, on the rocks, bottom up, an' all the crew lost.  We seed wan o'
them knackin' on the rocks to the north, so we got ropes an' let a man
down to fetch un up, but of coorse it was gone dead."

"That minds me, Jack," said Maggot, "that I seed a daw's nest here the
last time I come along, so lev us go an' stroob that daw's nest."

"Thee cusn't do it," said John Cock.

Maggot laughed, and said he not only could but would, so he ran down to
the neighbouring works and returned with a stout rope, which he fixed
firmly to a rock at the edge of the overhanging cliff.

We have already said that Maggot was a noted madcap, who stuck at
nothing, and appeared to derive positive pleasure from the mere act of
putting his life in danger.  No human foot could, by climbing, have
reached the spot where the nest of the daw, or Cornish chough, was
fixed--for the precipice, besides being perpendicular and nearly flat,
projected a little near the top, where the nest lay in a crevice
overhanging the surf that boiled and raged in Zawn Buzzangein.  Indeed,
the nest was not visible from the spot where the two men stood, and it
could only be seen by going round to the cliffs on the opposite side of
the gorge.

Without a moment's hesitation Maggot swung himself over the edge of the
precipice, merely cautioning his comrade, as he did so, to hold on to
the rope and prevent it from slipping.

He slid down about two yards, and then found that the rock overhung so
much that he was at least six feet off from the crevice in which the
young daws nestled comfortably together, and no stretch that he could
make with his legs, long though they were, was sufficient to enable him
to get on the narrow ledge just below the nest.  Several times he tried
to gain a footing, and at each effort the juvenile daws--as yet ignorant
of the desperate nature of man--opened their little eyes to the utmost
in undisguised amazement.  For full five minutes Maggot wriggled and the
daws gazed, and the anxious comrade above watched the vibrations and
jerks of the part of the rope that was visible to him while he listened
intently.  The bubbles on Zawn Buzzangein, like millions of watery eyes,
danced and twinkled sixty feet below, as if in wonder at the object
which swung wildly to and fro in mid-air.

At last Maggot managed to touch the rock with the extreme point of his
toe.  A slight push gave him swing sufficient to enable him to give one
or two vigorous shoves, by which means he swung close to the side of the
cliff.  Watching his opportunity, he planted both feet on the narrow
ledge before referred to, stretched out his hands, pressed himself flat
against the rock, let go the rope, and remained fast, like a fly
sticking to a wall.

This state of comparative safety he announced to his anxious friend
above by exclaiming,--"All right, _John--I've_ got the daws."

This statement was, however, not literally true, for it cost him several
minutes of slow and careful struggling to enable him so to fix his
person as to admit of his hands being used for "stroobing" purposes.  At
length he gained the object of his ambition, and transferred the
horrified daws from their native home to his own warm but unnatural
bosom, in which he buttoned them up tight.  A qualm now shot through
Maggot's heart, for he discovered that in his anxiety to secure the daws
he had let go the rope, which hung at a distance of full six feet from
him, and, of course, far beyond his reach.

"Hullo!  John," he cried.

"Hullo!" shouted John in reply.

"I've got the _daws_," said Maggot, "but I've lost the _rope_!"

"Aw! my dear," gasped John; "have 'ee lost th' rope?"

It need scarcely be said that poor John Cock was dreadfully alarmed at
this, and that he eagerly tendered much useless advice--stretching his
neck the while as far as was safe over the cliff.

"I say, John," shouted Maggot again.

"Hullo!" answered John.

"I tell 'ee what: I'm goin' to jump for th' rope.  If I do miss th'
rope, run thee round to Porth Ledden Cove, an' tak' my shoes weth 'ee;
I'll be theere before 'ee."

Having made this somewhat bold prediction, Maggot collected all his
energies, and sprang from his narrow perch into the air, with arms and
hands wildly extended.  His effort was well and bravely made, but his
position had been too constrained, and his foothold too insecure, to
admit of a good jump.  He missed the rope, and, with a loud cry, shot
like an arrow into the boiling flood below.

John Cock heard the cry and the plunge, and stood for nearly a minute
gazing in horror into Zawn Buzzangein.  Presently he drew a deep sigh of
relief, for Maggot made his appearance, manfully buffeting the waves.
John watched him with anxiety while he swam out towards the sea, escaped
the perpendicular sides of the Zawn, towards which the breakers more
than once swept him, doubled the point, and turned in towards the cove.
The opposite cliffs of the gorge now shut the swimmer out from John's
view, so he drew another deep sigh, and picking up his comrade's shoes,
ran round with all his might to Porth Ledden Cove, where, true to his
word, having been helped both by wind and tide, Maggot had arrived
before him.

"Are 'ee safe, my dear man?" was John's first question.

"Iss," replied Maggot, shaking himself, "safe enough, an' the daws too,
but semmen to me they've gone dead."

This was too true.  The poor birds had perished in their captor's bosom.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

CONTINUES TO TREAT OF SPIRITS, AND SHOWS THE VALUE OF HOSPITALITY.

Having accomplished the feat narrated in the last chapter Maggot
proceeded with his friend towards the town.  On their way they had to
pass the mouth of an old shaft in which both of them chanced to be much
interested at that time, inasmuch as it contained the produce of a
recent smuggling expedition on a large scale, consisting of nearly a
hundred tubs of brandy.  The liquor had been successfully brought ashore
and concealed in the mine, and that night had been fixed on for its
removal.  Mules had been provided, and about fifty men were appointed to
meet at a certain spot, at a fixed hour, to carry the whole away into
the neighbouring towns.

Maggot and his comrade began to converse about the subject that was
uppermost in their minds, and the former increased his pace, when John
Cock drew his attention to the fact that the sun was getting low.

"The boys will be mustering now," said John, "an' them theere daws have
kep' us late enough already."

"They do say that the boatsmen are informed about the toobs," observed
Maggot.

"More need to look alive," said John.

"Hallo!" exclaimed Maggot suddenly; "there's some wan in the shaft!"

He pointed to a neighbouring mound of rubbish, on which, just as he
spoke, a man made his appearance.

Without uttering a word the smugglers sauntered towards the mound,
assuming a careless air, as though they were passing that way by chance.
On drawing near they recognised Ebenezer Trezise, the coastguard-man.

"Good-hevening, sur," said Maggot; "semmen as if you'd found a keenly
lode."

"Why, iss, we've diskivered a noo vein," said Trezise with a sly smile,
"and we're sinkin' a shaft here in the hope o' raisin' tin, or
_somethin'_."

"Ha! hope you'll let John an' me have a pitch in the noo bal, won't
'ee?" said Maggot with a laugh.

"Oh, cer'nly, cer'nly," replied the boatsman; "if you'll lend us a hand
to sink the shaft.  You appear to have been in the water, and 'twill
warm 'ee."

"No, thank 'ee," replied Maggot; "I've bin stroobin' a daw's nest under
cliff, an' I fell into the say, so I'm goin' hum to dry myself, as I'm
afeared o' kitchin' cold, being of a delikit constitootion.  But I'll
p'raps lend thee a hand afterwards."

Maggot nodded as he spoke, and left the place at a slow saunter with his
comrade, followed by the thanks and good-wishes of the boatsman, who
immediately returned to the laborious task of clearing out the old
shaft.

"They've got the scent," said Maggot when out of earshot; "but we'll do
'em yet.  Whenever thee gets on the leeside o' that hedge, John, do 'ee
clap on all sail for Balaswidden, where the boys are waitin', an' tell
'em to be ready for a call.  I'll send Zackey, or wan o' the child'n to
'ee."

John went off on his errand the moment he was out of sight of the
boatsmen, and Maggot walked smartly to his cottage.

"Owld ooman," he said, commencing to unbutton his wet garments, "do 'ee
git ready a cup o' tay, as fast as you can, lass; we shall have company
to-night."

"Company!" exclaimed Mrs Maggot in surprise; "what sort o' company?"

"Oh! the best, the best," said Maggot with a laugh; "boatsmen no less--
so look sharp.  Zackey booy, come here."

Zackey put down the unfortunate black kitten (which immediately sought
comfort in repose) and obeyed his father's summons, while his mother,
knowing that her husband had some plot in his wise head, set about
preparing a sumptuous meal, which consisted of bread and butter, tea and
fried mackerel, and Cornish pasty.

"Zackey, my son," said Maggot while he continued his toilet.

"Iss, father."

"I want 'ee to come down to the owld shaft with me, an' when I give 'ee
the ward cut away as hard as thee legs can spank to Balaswidden, an'
fetch the lads that are theere to the owld shaft.  They knaw what to do,
but tell 'em to make so little noise as they can.  Dost a hear, my son?"

"Iss, faither," replied Zackey, with a wink of such profound meaning
that his sire felt quite satisfied he was equal to the duty assigned
him.

"Now, doan't 'ee wag tongue more than enough," continued Maggot; "and go
play with the chet till I'm ready."

The urchin at once descended like a thunderbolt on the black kitten, but
that marvellous animal had succeeded in snatching five minutes' repose,
which seemed to be amply sufficient to recruit its energies, for it
began instantly to play--in other words to worry and scratch the boy's
hand--with the utmost glee and good-humour.

In a few minutes Maggot and his son went out and hastened to the old
shaft, where they found the boatsmen still hard at work with pick and
shovel clearing away the rubbish.

"You haven't found a bunch o' copper yet, I dessay?" said Maggot with a
grin.

"No, not yet, but we shan't be long," replied Eben Trezise with a
knowing smile.

"It's warm work," observed Maggot, as he looked down the hole, and saw
that what the boatsman said was true, and that they would not be long of
reaching the spot where the liquor had been concealed.

Trezise admitted that it _was_ warm work, and paused to wipe his heated
brow.

"I wish we had a drop o' water here," he said, looking up.

"Ha!" exclaimed Maggot; "not much chance o' findin' water in _that_
hole, I do think--no, nor brandy nuther."

"Not so sure o' that," said Trezise, resuming his work.

"Now, et _is_ a shame to let 'ee die here for want of a drop o' water,"
said Maggot in a compassionate tone; "I'll send my booy hum for some."

The boatsmen thanked him, and Zackey was ordered off to fetch a jug of
water; but his father's voice arrested him before he had gone a hundred
yards.

"Hold on a bit, my son.--P'raps," he said, turning to Trezise, "you'd
come up hum with me and have a dish o' tay?  Missus have got it all
ready."

The invitation appeared to gratify the boatsmen, who smiled and winked
at each other, as though they thought themselves very clever fellows to
have discovered the whereabouts of a hidden treasure, and to be
refreshed in the midst of their toil by one whom they knew to be a noted
smuggler, and whom they strongly suspected of being concerned in the job
they were at that time endeavouring to frustrate.  Throwing down their
tools they laughingly accepted the invitation, and clambered out of the
shaft.

"Now's your time," whispered Maggot with a nod to his hopeful son, and
then added aloud--

"Cut away, Zackey booy, an' tell mother to get the tay ready.  Run, my
son, let us knaw what thee legs are made of."

"He's a smart lad," observed Trezise, as Zackey gave his father an
intelligent look, and dashed away at the top of his speed.

"Iss, a clever cheeld," assented Maggot.

"Bin down in the mines, I dessay?" said Trezise.

"Iss, oh iss; he do knaw tin," replied Maggot with much gravity.

In a few minutes the two coastguard-men were seated at Mrs Maggot's
well-supplied board, enjoying the most comfortable meal they had eaten
