"Look for yourself--well?"

"A brass piece, as I live!--a six-pound carronade!"

"We are fighting the guerilla [Note 1] of Cenobio, a small army of
itself.  Neither stockade nor motte will avail us now."

"What is to be done?" asked my companion.

"Nothing but die with arms in our hands.  We will not die without a
struggle, and the sooner we prepare for it the better."

I leaped from the roof, and ordered the bugler to sound the _assembly_.

In a moment the clear notes rang out, and the soldiers formed before me
in the corral.

"My brave comrades!" cried I, "they have got the advantage of us at
last.  They are bringing down a piece of artillery, and I fear these
pickets will offer us but poor shelter.  If we are driven out, let us
strike for that island of timber; and, mark me--if we are broken, let
every man fight his way as he best can, or die over a fallen enemy."

A determined cheer followed this short harangue, and I continued:

"But let us first see how they use their piece.  It is a small one, and
will not destroy us all at once.  Fling yourselves down as they fire.
By lying flat on your faces you may not suffer so badly.  Perhaps we can
hold the corral until our friends reach us.  At all events we shall
try."

Another cheer rang along the line.

"Great heaven, Captain! it's terrible!" whispered the major.

"What is terrible?"  I asked, feeling at the moment a contempt for this
blaspheming coward.

"Oh! this--this business--such a fix to be--"

"Major! remember you are a soldier."

"Yes; and I wish I had resigned, as I intended to do, before this cursed
war commenced."

"Never fear," said I, tempted to smile at the candour of his cowardice;
"you'll drink wine at Hewlett's in a month.  Get behind this log--it's
the only point shot-proof in the whole stockade."

"Do you think, Captain, it _will_ stop a shot?"

"Ay--from a siege-gun.  Look out, men, and be ready to obey orders!"

The six-pounder had now approached within five hundred yards of the
stockade, and was leisurely being unlimbered in the midst of a group of
the enemy's artillerists.

At this moment the voice of the major arrested my attention.

"Great heaven, Captain!  Why do you allow them to come so near?"

"How am I to prevent them?"  I asked, with some surprise.

"Why, my rifle will reach farther than that.  It might keep them off, I
think."

"Major, you are dreaming!" said I.  "They are two hundred yards beyond
range of our rifles.  If they would only come within that, we should
soon send them back for you."

"But, Captain, mine will carry twice the distance."

I looked at the major, under the belief that he had taken leave of his
senses.

"It's a _zundnadel_, I assure you, and will kill at eight hundred
yards."

"Is it possible?" cried I, starting; for I now recollected the
curious-looking piece which I had ordered to be cut loose from the
saddle of Hercules.  "Why did you not tell me that before?  Where is
Major Blossom's rifle?"  I shouted, looking around.

"This hyur's the major's _gun_" answered Sergeant Lincoln.  "But if it's
a rifle, I never seed sich.  It looks more like a two-year old cannon."

It was, as the major had declared, a Prussian needle-gun--then a new
invention, but of which I had heard something.

"Is it loaded, Major?"  I asked, taking the piece from Lincoln.

"It is."

"Can you hit that man with the sponge?" said I, returning the piece to
the hunter.

"If this hyur thing'll carry fur enuf, I kin," was the reply.

"It will kill at a thousand yards, point blank," cried the major, with
energy.

"Ha! are you sure of that, Major?"  I asked.

"Certainly, Captain.  I got it from the inventor.  We tried it at
Washington.  It is loaded with a conical bullet.  It bored a hole
through an inch plank at that distance."

"Well.  Now, Sergeant, take sure aim; this may save us yet."

Lincoln planted himself firmly on his feet, choosing a notch of the
stockade that ranged exactly with his shoulder.  He then carefully wiped
the dust from the sights; and, placing the heavy barrel in the notch,
laid his cheek slowly against the stock.

"Sergeant, the man with the shot!"  I called out.

As I spoke, one of the artillerists was stooping to the muzzle of the
six-pounder, holding in his hand a spherical case-shot.  Lincoln pressed
the trigger.  The crack followed, and the artillerist threw out his
arms, and doubled over on his head without giving a kick.

The shot that he had held rolled out upon the green-sward.  A wild cry,
expressive of extreme astonishment, broke from the guerilleros.  At the
same instant a cheer rang through the corral.

"Well done!" cried a dozen of voices at once.

In a moment the rifle was wiped and reloaded.

"This time, Sergeant, the fellow with the linstock."

During the reloading of the rifle, the Mexicans around the six-pounder
had somewhat recovered from their surprise, and had rammed home the
cartridge.  A tall artillerist stood, with linstock and fuse, near the
breech, waiting for the order to fire.

Before he received that order the rifle again cracked; his arm new up
with a sudden jerk, and the smoking rod, flying from his grasp, was
projected to the distance of twenty feet.

The man himself spun round, and, staggering a pace or two, fell into the
arms of his comrades.

"Cap'n, jest allow me ter take that ere skunk next time."

"Which one, Sergeant?"  I asked.

"Him thet's on the black, makin' such a dot-rotted muss."

I recognised the horse and figure of Dubrosc.

"Certainly, by all means," said I, with a strange feeling at my heart as
I gave the order.

But before Lincoln could reload, one of the Mexicans, apparently an
officer, had snatched up the burning fuse, and, running up, applied it
to the touch.

"On your faces, men!"

The ball came crashing through the thin pickets of the corral, and,
whizzing across the inclosure, struck one of the mules on the flank,
tearing open its hip, causing it to kick furiously as it tumbled over
the ground.

Its companions, stampeding, galloped for a moment through the pen; then,
collecting in a corner, stood cowered up and quivering.  A fierce yell
announced the exultation of the guerilleros.

Dubrosc was sitting on his powerful mustang, facing the corral, and
watching the effects of the shot.

"If he wur only 'ithin range ov my own rifle!" muttered Lincoln, as he
glanced along the sights of the strange piece.

The crack soon followed--the black horse reared, staggered, and fell
back on his rider.

"Ten strike, set 'em up!" exclaimed a soldier.

"Missed the skunk!" cried Lincoln, gritting his teeth as the horseman
was seen to struggle from under the fallen animal.

Rising to his feet, Dubrosc sprang out to the front, and shook his fist
in the air with a shout of defiance.

The guerilleros galloped back; and the artillerists, wheeling the
six-pounder, dragged it after, and took up a new position about three
hundred yards farther to the rear.

A second shot from the piece again tore through the pickets, striking
one of our men, and killing him instantly.

"Aim at the artillerists, Sergeant.  We have nothing to fear from the
others."

Lincoln fired again.  The shot hit the ground in front of the enemy's
gun; but, glancing, it struck one of the cannoniers, apparently wounding
him badly, as he was carried back by his comrades.

The Mexicans, terror-struck at this strange instrument of destruction,
took up a new position, two hundred yards still farther back.

Their third shot ricocheted, striking the top of the strong plank behind
which the major was screening himself, and only frightening the latter
by the shock upon the timber.

Lincoln again fired.

This time his shot produced no visible effect, and a taunting cheer from
the enemy told that they felt themselves beyond range.

Another shot was fired from the _zundnadel_, apparently with a similar
result.

"It's beyond her carry, Cap'n," said Lincoln, bringing the butt of his
piece to the ground, with an expression of reluctant conviction.

"Try one more shot.  If it fail, we can reserve the other for closer
work.  Aim high!"

This resulted as the two preceding ones; and a voice from the
guerilleros was heard exclaiming:

"_Yankees bobos! mas adelante_!"  (A little farther, you Yankee fools!)

Another shot from the six-pounder cracked through the planks, knocking
his piece from the hands of a soldier, and shivering the dry stock-wood
into fifty fragments.

"Sergeant, give me the rifle," said I.  "They must be a thousand yards
off; but, as they are as troublesome with that carronade as if they were
only ten, I shall try one more shot."

I fired, but the ball sank at least fifty paces in front of the enemy.

"We expect too much.  It is not a twenty-four pounder.  Major, I _envy_
you two things--your rifle and your horse."

"Hercules?"

"Of course."

"Lord, Captain! you may do what you will with the rifle; and if ever we
get out of the reach of these infernal devils, Hercules shall be--."

At this moment a cheer came from the guerilleros, and a voice was heard
shouting above the din:

"_La metralla! la metralla_!"  (The howitzer!)

I leaped upon the roof, and looked out upon the plain.  It was true.  A
howitzer-carriage, drawn by mules, was debouching from the woods, the
animals dragging it along at a gallop.

It was evidently a piece of some size, large enough to tear the light
picketing that screened us to atoms.

I turned towards my men with a look of despair.  My eye at this moment
rested on the drove of mules that stood crowded together in a corner of
the pen.  A sudden thought struck me.  Might we not mount them and
escape?  There were more than enough to carry us all, and the rancho was
filled with bridles and ropes.  I instantly leaped from the roof, and
gave orders to the men.

"Speedily, but without noise!" cried I, as the soldiers proceeded to
fling bridles upon the necks of the animals.

In five minutes each man, with his rifle slung, stood by a mule, some of
them having buckled on _tapadas_, to prevent the animals from kicking.

The major stood ready by his horse.

"Now, my brave fellows," shouted I in a loud voice, "we must take it
cavalry fashion--Mexican cavalry, I mean."  The men laughed.  "Once in
the woods, we shall retreat no farther.  At the words `_Mount and
follow_', spring to your seats and follow Mr Clayley.  I shall look to
your rear--don't stop to fire--hold on well.  If anyone fall, let his
nearest comrade take him up.  Ha! anyone hurt there?"  A shot had
whistled through the ranks.  "Only a scratch," was the reply.

"All ready, then, are you?  Now, Mr Clayley, you see the high timber--
make direct for that.  Down with the bars!  `_Mount and follow_'!"

As I uttered the last words, the men leaped to their seats; and Clayley,
riding the bell-mule, dashed out of the corral, followed by the whole
train, some of them plunging and kicking, but all galloped forward at
the sound of the bell upon their guide.

As the dark cavalcade rushed out upon the prairie, a wild cry from the
guerilleros told that this was the first intimation they had had of the
singular _ruse_.  They sprang to their saddles with yells, and galloped
in pursuit.  The howitzer, that had been trailed upon the corral, was
suddenly wheeled about and fired; but the shot, ill-directed in their
haste, whistled harmlessly over our heads.

The guerilleros, on their swift steeds, soon lessened the distance
between us.

With a dozen of the best men I hung in the rear, to give the foremost of
the pursuers a volley, or pick up any soldier who might be tossed from
his mule.  One of these, at intervals, kicked as only a Mexican mule
can; and when within five hundred yards of the timber, his rider, an
Irishman, was flung upon the prairie.

The rearmost of our party stopped to take him up.  He was seized by
Chane, who mounted him in front of himself.  The delay had nearly been
fatal.  The pursuers were already within a hundred yards, firing their
pistols and escopettes without effect.  A number of the men turned in
their seats and blazed back.  Others threw their rifles over their
shoulders, and pulled trigger at random.  I could perceive that two or
three guerilleros dropped from their saddles.  Their comrades, with
shouts of vengeance, closed upon us nearer and nearer.  The long lazos,
far in advance, whistled around our heads.

I felt the slippery noose light upon my shoulders.  I flung out my arms
to throw it off, but with a sudden jerk it tightened around my neck.  I
clutched the hard thong, and pulled with all my might.  It was in vain.

The animal I rode, freed from my _manege_, seemed to plunge under me,
and gather up its back with a vicious determination to fling me.  It
succeeded; and I was launched in the air, and dashed to the earth with a
stunning violence.

I felt myself dragged along the gravelly ground.  I grasped the weeds,
but they came away in my hands, torn up by the roots.  There was a
struggle above and around me.  I could hear loud shouts and the firing
of guns.  I felt that I was being strangled.

A bright object glistened before my eyes.  I felt myself seized by a
strong, rough hand, and swung into the air and rudely shaken, as if in
the grasp of some giant's arm.

Something twitched me sharply over the cheeks.  I heard the rustling of
trees.  Branches snapped and crackled, and leaves swept across my face.
Then came the flash--flash, and the crack--crack--crack of a dozen
rifles, and under their blazing light I was dashed a second time with
violence to the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Troop of guerillas, who in Spanish are properly _guerilleros_.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE RESCUE.

"Rough handlin', Cap'n.  Yer must excuse haste."

It was the voice of Lincoln.

"Ha! in the timber?  Safe, then!" ejaculated I in return.

"Two or three wounded--not bad neither.  Chane has got a stab in the
hip--he gin the feller goss for it.  Let me louze the darned thing off
o' your neck.  It kum mighty near chokin' yer, Cap'n."

Bob proceeded to unwind the noose end of a lazo that, with some six feet
of a raw hide thong, was still tightly fastened around my neck.

"But who cut the rope?" demanded I.

"I did, with this hyur toothpick.  Yer see, Cap'n, it warn't yer time to
be hung just yet."

I could not help smiling as I thanked the hunter for my safety.

"But where are the guerilleros?" asked I, looking around, my brain still
somewhat confused.

"Yander they are, keepin' safe out o' range o' this long gun.  Just
listen to 'em!--what a hillerballoo!"

The Mexican horsemen were galloping out on the prairie, their arms
glistening under the clear moonlight.

"Take to the trees, men!" cried I, seeing that the enemy had again
unlimbered, and were preparing to discharge their howitzer.

In a moment the iron shower came whizzing through the branches without
doing any injury, as each of the men had covered his body with a tree.
Several of the mules that stood tied and trembling were killed by the
discharge.

Another shower hurtled through the bushes, with a similar effect.

I was thinking of retreating farther into the timber, and was walking
back to reconnoitre the ground, when my eye fell upon an object that
arrested my attention.  It was the body of a very large man lying flat
upon his face, his head buried among the roots of a good-sized tree.
The arms were stiffly pressed against his side, and his legs projected
at full stretch, exhibiting an appearance of motionless rigidity, as
