
Of course, being capable of reading this book, you are too old to
require to be told that there is nothing of our _nursery_ savage about
him.  That peculiar abortion was born and bred in the nursery, and
dwells only there, and was never heard of beyond civilised lands--
although something not unlike him, alas! may be seen here and there
among the lanes and purlieus where our drunkards and profligates resort.
No; our savage chief does not roar, or glare, or chatter, or devour his
food in its blood like the giant of the famous Jack.  He carries himself
like a man, and a remarkably handsome man too, with his body firm and
upright, and his head bent a little forward, with his eyes fixed on the
ground, as if in meditation, while he walks along.

But a truce to digressive explanation.  Let us follow him.

Reaching the banks of the river, he stops, and, standing in an attitude
worthy of Apollo, though he is not aware that we are looking at him,
gazes first up the stream and then down.  This done, he looks across,
after which he tries to penetrate the depths of the water with his eye.

As no visible result follows, he wisely gives up staring and wishing,
and apparently resolves to attain his ends by action.  Felling a small
tree, about as thick as his thigh, with an iron hatchet he cuts off it a
length of about six feet.  Into one end of this he drives a
sharp-pointed hard-wood spike, several inches long, and to the other end
attaches a stout rope made of the fibrous husk of the cocoa-nut.  The
point of the spike he appears to anoint--probably a charm of some
kind,--and then suspends the curious instrument over a forked stick at a
considerable height from the ground, to which he fastens the other end
of the rope.  This done, he walks quietly away with an air of as much
self-satisfaction as if he had just performed a generous deed.

Well, is that all?  Nay, if that were all we should owe you a humble
apology.  Our chief, "savage" though he be, is not insane.  He _has_ an
object in view--which is more than can be said of everybody.

He has not been long gone, an hour or two, when the smooth surface of
the river is broken in several places, and out burst two or three heads
of hippopotami.  Although, according to Disco Lillihammer, the
personification of ugliness, these creatures do not the less enjoy their
existence.  They roll about in the stream like puncheons, dive under one
another playfully, sending huge waves to the banks on either side.  They
gape hideously with their tremendous jaws, which look as though they had
been split much too far back in the head by a rude hatchet--the tops of
all the teeth having apparently been lopped off by the same clumsy blow.
They laugh too, with a demoniacal "Ha! ha! ha!" as if they rejoiced in
their excessive plainness, and knew that we--you and I, reader--are
regarding them with disgust, not unmingled with awe.

Presently one of the herd betakes himself to the land.  He is tired of
play, and means to feed.  Grass appears to be his only food, and to
procure this he must needs go back from the river a short way, his
enormous lips, like an animated mowing-machine, cutting a track of short
cropped grass as he waddles along.

The form of that part of the bank is such that he is at least inclined,
if not constrained, to pass directly under the suspended beam.  Ha! we
understand the matter now.  Most people do understand, when a thing
becomes obviously plain.  The hippopotamus wants grass for supper; the
"savage" chief wants hippopotamus.  Both set about arranging their plans
for their respective ends.  The hippopotamus passes close to the forked
stick, and touches the cord which sustains it in air like the sword of
Damocles.  Down comes the beam, driving the spike deep into his back.  A
cry follows, something between a grunt, a squeak, and a yell, and the
wounded animal falls, rolls over, jumps up, with unexpected agility for
such a sluggish, unwieldy creature, and rumbles, rushes, rolls, and
stumbles back into the river, where his relatives take to flight in
mortal terror.  The unfortunate beast might perhaps recover from the
wound, were it not that the spike has been tipped with poison.  The
result is that he dies in about an hour.  Not long afterwards the chief
returns with a band of his followers, who, being experts in the use of
the knife and hatchet, soon make mince-meat of their game--laden with
which they return in triumph to their homes.

Let us follow them thither.



CHAPTER TEN.

DESCRIBES AFRICAN DOMESTICITY, AND MANY OTHER THINGS RELATIVE THERETO,
BESIDES SHOWING THAT ALARMS AND FLIGHTS, SURPRISES AND FEASTS, ARE NOT
CONFINED TO PARTICULAR PLACES.

When our negro chief--whose name, by the way, was Kambira--left the
banks of the river, followed by his men bearing the hippopotamus-flesh,
he set off at a swinging pace, like to a man who has a considerable walk
before him.

The country through which they passed was not only well wooded, but well
watered by numerous rivulets.  Their path for some distance tended
upwards towards the hills, now crossing over mounds, anon skirting the
base of precipitous rocks, and elsewhere dipping down into hollows; but
although thus serpentine in its course, its upward tendency never varied
until it led them to the highest parts of a ridge from which a
magnificent prospect was had of hill and dale, lake, rivulet and river,
extending so far that the distant scenery at the horizon appeared of a
thin pearly-grey colour, and of the same consistency as the clouds with
which it mingled.

Passing over this ridge, and descending into a wide valley which was
fertilised and beautified by a moderately-sized rivulet, Kambira led his
followers towards a hamlet which lay close to the stream, nestled in a
woody hollow, and, like all other Manganja villages, was surrounded by
an impenetrable hedge of poisonous euphorbia--a tree which casts a deep
shade, and renders it difficult for bowmen to aim at the people inside.

In the immediate vicinity of the village the land was laid out in little
gardens and fields, and in these the people--men, women, and children,--
were busily engaged in hoeing the ground, weeding, planting, or
gathering the fruits of their labour.

These same fruits were plentiful, and the people sang with joy as they
worked.  There were large crops of maize, millet beans, and ground-nuts;
also patches of yams, rice, pumpkins, cucumbers, cassava, sweet
potatoes, tobacco, cotton, and hemp, which last is also called "bang,"
and is smoked by the natives as a species of tobacco.

It was a pleasant sight for Kambira and his men to look upon, as they
rested for a few minutes on the brow of a knoll near a thicket of
bramble bushes, and gazed down upon their home.  Doubtless they thought
so, for their eyes glistened, so also did their teeth when they
smilingly commented on the scene before them.  They did not, indeed,
become enthusiastic about scenery, nor did they refer to the picturesque
grouping of huts and trees, or make any allusion whatever to light and
shade; no, their thoughts were centred on far higher objects than these.
They talked of wives and children, and hippopotamus-flesh; and their
countenances glowed--although they were not white--and their strong
hearts beat hard against their ribs--although they were not clothed, and
their souls (for we repudiate Yoosoof's opinion that they had none),
their souls appeared to take quiet but powerful interest in their
belongings.

It was pleasant also, for Kambira and his men to listen to the sounds
that floated up from the valley,--sweeter far than the sweetest strains
of Mozart or Mendelssohn,--the singing of the workers in the fields and
gardens, mellowed by distance into a soft humming tone; and the hearty
laughter that burst occasionally from men seated at work on bows,
arrows, fishing-nets, and such-like gear, on a flat green spot under the
shade of a huge banyan-tree, which, besides being the village workshop,
was the village reception-hall, where strangers were entertained on
arriving,--also the village green, where the people assembled to dance,
and sing, and smoke "bang," to which last they were much addicted, and
to drink beer made by themselves, of which they were remarkably fond,
and by means of which they sometimes got drunk;--in all which matters
the intelligent reader will not fail to observe that they bore a marked
resemblance to many of the civilised European nations, except, perhaps,
in their greater freedom of action, lightness of costume, and colour of
skin.

The merry voices of children, too, were heard, and their active little
black bodies were seen, while they engaged in the play of savages--
though not necessarily in savage play.  Some romped, ran after each
other, caught each other, tickled each other, occasionally whacked each
other--just as our own little ones do.  Others played at games, of which
the skipping-rope was a decided favourite among the girls, but the play
of most of the older children consisted in imitating the serious work of
their parents.  The girls built little huts, hoed little gardens, made
small pots of clay, pounded imaginary corn in miniature mortars, cooked
it over ideal fires, and crammed it down the throats of imitation
babies; while the boys performed deeds of chivalric daring with reed
spears, small shields, and tiny bows and arrows, or amused themselves in
making cattle-pens, and in sculpturing cows and crocodiles.  Human
nature, in short, was powerfully developed, without anything particular
to suggest the idea of "savage" life, or to justify the opinion of Arabs
and half-caste Portuguese that black men are all "cattle."

The scene wanted only the spire of a village church and the tinkle of a
Sabbath bell to make it perfect.

But there _was_ a tinkle among the other sounds, not unlike a bell which
would have sounded marvellously familiar to English ears had they been
listening.  This was the ringing of the anvil of the village blacksmith.
Yes, savage though they were, these natives had a blacksmith who
wrought in iron, almost as deftly, and to the full as vigorously, as any
British son of Vulcan.  The Manganja people are an industrious race.
Besides cultivating the soil extensively, they dig iron-ore out of the
hills, and each village has its smelting-house, its charcoal-burners,
its forge with a pair of goatskin bellows, and its blacksmith--we might
appropriately say, its _very_ blacksmith!  Whether the latter would of
necessity, and as a matter of course, sing bass in church if the land
were civilised enough to possess a church, remains to be seen!  At the
time we write of he merely hummed to the sound of the hammer, and forged
hoes, axes, spears, needles, arrow-heads, bracelets, armlets, necklets,
and anklets, with surprising dexterity.

Pity that he could not forge a chain which would for ever restrain the
murderous hands of the Arabs and half-caste Portuguese, who, for ages,
have blighted his land with their pestilential presence!

After contemplating the picture for a time, Kambira descended the
winding path that led to the village.  He had not proceeded far when one
of the smallest of the children--a creature so rotund that his body and
limbs were a series of circles and ovals, and so black that it seemed an
absurdity even to think of casting a shadow on him--espied the advancing
party, uttered a shrill cry of delight, and ran towards them.

His example was followed by a dozen others, who, being larger, outran
him, and, performing a war-dance round the men, possessed themselves, by
amicable theft, of pieces of raw meat with which they hastened back to
the village.  The original discoverer of the party, however, had other
ends in view.  He toddled straight up to Kambira with the outstretched
arms of a child who knows he will be welcomed.

Kambira was not demonstrative, but he was hearty.  Taking the little
ball of black butter by the arms, he whirled him over his head, and
placed him on his broad shoulders, with a fat leg on each side of his
neck, and left him there to look after himself.  This the youngster did
by locking his feet together under the man's chin, and fastening his fat
fingers in his woolly hair, in which position he bore some resemblance
to an enormous chignon.

Thus was he borne crowing to the chief's hut, from the door of which a
very stout elderly woman came out to receive them.

There was no one else in the hut to welcome them, but Yohama, as the
chief styled her, was sufficient; she was what some people call "good
company."  She bustled about making preparations for a feast, with a
degree of activity that was quite surprising in one so fat--so very
fat--asking questions the while with much volubility, making remarks to
the child, criticising the hippopotamus-meat, or commenting on things in
general.

Meanwhile Kambira seated himself in a corner and prepared to refresh
himself with a pipe of bang in the most natural and civilised fashion
imaginable; and young Obo--for so Yohama called him--entered upon a
series of gymnastic exercises with his father--for such Kambira was--
which partook of the playfulness of the kitten, mingled with the
eccentricity and mischief of the monkey.

It would have done you good, reader, if you possess a spark of sympathy,
to have watched these two as they played together.  The way in which Obo
assaulted his father, on whose visage mild benignity was enthroned,
would have surprised you.  Kambira was a remarkably grave, quiet and
reserved man, but that was a matter of no moment to Obo, who threatened
him in front, skirmished in his rear, charged him on the right flank
with a reed spear, shelled him on the left with sweet potatoes, and
otherwise harassed him with amazing perseverance and ingenuity.

To this the enemy paid no further attention than lay in thrusting out an
elbow and raising a knee, to check an unusually fierce attack, or in
giving Obo a pat on the back when he came within reach, or sending a
puff of smoke in his face, as if to taunt and encourage him to attempt
further deeds of daring.

While this was going on in the chief's hut, active culinary preparations
were progressing all over the village--the women forsook their hoes and
grinding-mortars, and the looms on which they had been weaving cotton
cloth, the men laid down various implements of industry, and, long ere
the sun began to descend in the west, the entire tribe was feasting with
all the gusto, and twenty times the appetite, of aldermen.

During the progress of the feast a remarkably small, wiry old negro,
entertained the chief and his party with a song, accompanying himself
the while on a violin--not a European fiddle, by any means, but a native
production--with something like a small keg, covered with goatskin, for
a body, a longish handle, and one string which was played with a bow by
the "Spider."  Never having heard his name, we give him one in
accordance with his aspect.

Talk of European fiddlers!  No Paganini, or any other _nini_ that ever
astonished the Goths and Vandals of the north, could hold a candle--we
had almost said a fiddle--to this sable descendant of Ham, who, squatted
on his hams in the midst of an admiring circle, drew forth sounds from
his solitary string that were more than exquisite,--they were
excruciating.

The song appeared to be improvised, for it referred to objects around,
as well as to things past, present, and to come; among others, to the
fact that slave parties attacked villages and carried off the
inhabitants.

At such points the minstrel's voice became low and thrilling, while his
audience grew suddenly earnest, opened their eyes, frowned, and showed
their teeth; but as soon as the subject was changed the feeling seemed
to die away.  It was only old memories that had been awakened, for no
slavers had passed through their country for some time past, though
rumours of an attack on a not very distant tribe had recently reached
and greatly alarmed them.

Thus they passed the afternoon, and when the cool of the evening drew on
a dance was proposed, seconded, and carried unanimously.

They were about to begin when a man was seen running down the path
leading to the village at a speed which proved him to be the bearer of
tidings.  In a few minutes he burst into the midst of them with glaring
eyeballs and labouring chest--for he had run fast, though not far, and
told his news in rapid short sentences--to the effect that a band of
slavers, led by Portuguese, were on their way to the valley, within a
mile or so of it, even while he spoke; that he thought the leader was
Marizano; and that they were _armed with the loud-sounding guns_!

The consternation consequent on this news was universal, and there was
good ground for it, because Marizano was a well-known monster of
cruelty, and his guns had rendered him invincible hitherto, wherever he
went, the native spear and bow being utterly useless in the hands of men
who, however courageous, were shot down before they could come within
arrow-range of their enemies.

It is the custom of the slave-dealers, on going into the interior for
the purpose of procuring slaves, to offer to buy them from such tribes
as are disposed to sell.  This most of the tribes are willing to do.
Fathers do not indeed, sell their own children, or husbands their wives,
from preference, but chiefs and head-men are by no means loath to get
rid of their criminals in this way--their bad stock, as it were, of
black ivory.  They also sell orphans and other defenceless ones of their
tribes, the usual rate of charge being about two or three yards of
calico for a man, woman, or child.

But the Arab slave-dealer sometimes finds it difficult to procure enough
of "cattle" in this way to make up a band sufficiently large to start
with for the coast because he is certain to lose four out of every five,
at the _lowest estimate_, on his journey down.  The drove, therefore,
must be large.  In order to provide it he sends out parties to buy where
they can, and to steal when they have the chance.  Meanwhile he takes up
his quarters near some tribe, and sets about deliberately to produce
war.  He rubs up old sores, foments existing quarrels, lends guns and
ammunition, suggests causes of dispute, and finally gets two tribes to
fight.  Of course many are slaughtered, fearful barbarities and excesses
are committed, fields are laid waste and villages are burnt, but this is
a matter of no consequence to our Arab.  Prisoners are sure to be taken,
and he buys the prisoners; for the rest,--there are plenty of natives in
Africa!

When all else fails, not being very particular, he sends off a party
under some thorough-going scoundrel, well-armed, and with instructions
to attack and capture wherever they go.

No wonder, then, that the rumoured approach of Marizano and his men
caused the utmost alarm in Kambira's village, and that the women and
children were ordered to fly to the bush without delay.  This they
required no second bidding to do, but, oh! it was a sad sight to see
them do it.  The younger women ran actively, carrying the infants and
leading the smaller children by the hands, and soon disappeared; but it
was otherwise with the old people.  These, men and women, bowed with
age, and tottering as much from terror as decrepitude, hobbled along,
panting as they went, and stumbling over every trifling obstruction in
their path, being sometimes obliged to stop and rest, though death might
be the consequence; and among these there were a few stray little
creatures barely able to toddle, who had probably been forgotten or
forsaken by their mothers in the panic, yet were of sufficient age to be
aware, in their own feeble way, that danger of some sort was behind
them, and that safety lay before.  By degrees all--young and old, strong
and feeble--gained the shelter of the bush, and Kambira was left with a
handful of resolute warriors to check the invaders and defend his home.

Well was it at that time for Kambira and his men that the approaching
band was _not_ Marizano and his robbers.

When the head of the supposed enemy's column appeared on the brow of the
adjacent hill, the Manganja chief fitted an arrow to his bow, and,
