was the effect of various counter-currents of air into which they had
flown.  The order was at once given to haul on the regulators and coil
up the towing lines.  It was promptly obeyed, but before a few fathoms
had been coiled in, the kites again became as steady as before, with
this change, however, that they travelled in a north-westerly direction.

The value of the leeboards now became apparent.

These were hinged down the middle so as to fold and become small enough
to stow in the bottom of each boat when not in use.  When unfolded and
hung over the side, they presented a surface of resistance to the water
much greater than that of an ordinary boat's keel, so that very little
leeway indeed was made.  By means of the steering-oar Captain Vane kept
his boat advancing straight northward, while the kite was puffing in a
north-westerly direction.  The kite was thus compelled by the boat also
to travel due north, though of course it did so in a sidelong manner.

Thus far the advance continued prosperously, the pace being but little
checked and the course unaltered, but when, an hour or two later, the
wind again shifted so as to carry the kites further to the west, the
pace became much slower, and the leeway, or drift to leeward,
considerable.  Ultimately the wind blew straight to the west, and the
boats ceased to advance.  "This won't do, uncle," said Leo, who was
close astern of the _Faith_, "I'm drifting bodily to leeward, and making
no headway at all."

"Down with the tops,--I mean, the kites," shouted the Captain.  "Pass
the word to Alf."

Accordingly, the kites were reeled in, the regulators being so pulled
and eased off that they were kept just fluttering without tugging during
the operation.  When, however, they passed out of the wind-stratum into
the region of calm which still prevailed immediately above the sea, the
kites descended in an alarming manner, swaying to and fro with
occasional wild swoops, which rendered it necessary to haul in on the
lines and reel up with the utmost speed.

Captain Vane was very successful in this rather difficult operation.
While he hauled in the line Benjy reeled it up with exemplary speed, and
the kite was finally made to descend on the boat like a cloud.  When
secured the locking-cross was removed, the distending-rods were folded
inwards, the restraining, or what we may term the waist-band was
applied, and the whole affair was changed into a gigantic Mrs Gamp
umbrella.  Being placed in the bow of the boat, projecting over the
water, it formed a not ungraceful though peculiar bowsprit, and was well
out of the way.

Leo and Butterface were equally successful, but poor Alf was not so
fortunate.  The too eager pursuit of knowledge was the cause of Alf's
failure as has often been the case with others!  He took on himself, as
chief of his boat, the difficult and responsible task of hauling in the
line,--which involved also the occasional and judicious manipulation of
the regulating cord, when a sudden puff of wind should tend to send the
kite soaring upwards with six or eight horse-power into the sky.  To
Ivitchuk was assigned the easy task of gathering in the "slack" and
holding on to Alf if a sudden jerk should threaten to pull him
overboard.  Anders reeled up.

Just as the kite was passing out of the windy region above into the calm
region below Alf beheld floating near the boat a beautiful, and to him
entirely new, species of marine creature of the jelly-fish kind.  With a
wild desire to possess it he leaned over the boat's edge to the
uttermost and stretched out his left hand, while with his right he held
on to the kite!  Need we say that the kite assisted him?--assisted him
overboard altogether, and sent him with a heavy plunge into the sea!

Ivitchuk dropped his line and stretched out both arms towards the spot
where the "Kablunet" had gone down.  Akeetolik roared.  Anders howled,
and dropped his reel.  Left to itself, the kite, with characteristic
indecision, made an awful swoop towards the North Pole with its right
shoulder.  Changing its mind, it then made a stupendous rush with its
left to the south-east.  Losing presence of mind it suddenly tossed up
its tail, and, coming down head foremost, went with fatal facility into
the deep sea.

When Alf rose and was dragged panting into the boat, his first glance
was upwards,--but not in thankfulness for his preservation!

"Gone!" he groaned, rising to his feet.

But the kite was not gone.  The word had barely left his lips when it
rose half its length out of the water, and then fell, in melancholy
inaptitude for further mischief, flat upon the sea.

"Anything damaged?" asked the Captain, as he and Leo rowed their boats
towards the _Charity_.

"Nothing," replied Alf with a guilty look, "the stick and things seem to
be all right, but it has got _awfully_ wet."

"No matter," said the Captain, laughing at Alf's forlorn look, "the sun
will soon dry it.  So long as nothing is broken or torn, we'll get on
very well.  But now, boys, we must go to work with oars.  There must be
no flagging in this dash for the Pole.  It's a neck-or-nothing business.
Now, mark my orders.  Although we've got four oars apiece, we must only
work two at a time.  I know that young bloods like you are prone to go
straining yourselves at first, an' then bein' fit for nothing
afterwards.  We must keep it up steadily.  Two in each boat will pull at
a time for one hour, while the other two rest or sleep, and so on, shift
about; till another breeze springs up.  Don't fold it up tight, Alf.
Leave it pretty slack till it is dry, and then put on its belt."

"Don't you think we might have supper before taking to the oars?"
suggested Leo.

"I second that motion," cried Benjy.

"And I support it," said Alf.

"Very good, get out the prog; an' we'll lay ourselves alongside, three
abreast, as Nelson did at the Battle o' the Nile," said the Captain.

Their food was simple but sufficient.  Pemmican--a solid greasy
nutricious compound--was the foundation.  Hard biscuit, chocolate, and
sugar formed the superstructure.  In default of fire, these articles
could be eaten cold, but while their supply of spirits of wine lasted, a
patent Vesuvian of the most complete and almost miraculous nature could
provide a hot meal in ten minutes.  Of fresh water they had a two-weeks'
supply in casks, but this was economised by means of excellent water
procured from a pond in a passing berg--from which also a lump of clear
ice had been hewn, wrapped in a blanket, and carried into the Captain's
boat as a supply of fresh water in solid form.

Laying the oars across the boats to keep them together, they floated
thus pleasantly on the glassy sea, bathed in midnight sunshine.  And
while they feasted in comfort inexpressible--to the surprise, no doubt,
of surrounding gulls and puffins--Benjamin Vane once again gave
utterance to the opinion that it was the most glorious and altogether
astonishing state of things that he had ever heard or dreamed of since
the world began!



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A GALE AND A NARROW ESCAPE.

This is a world of alternations.  We need not turn aside to prove that.
The calm with which the voyage of our discoverers began lasted about
four days and nights, during which period they advanced sometimes slowly
under oars, sometimes more or less rapidly under kites--if we may so
express it--according to the state of the wind.

And, during all that time the discipline of two and two--at watch, or at
sleep, if not at work--was rigidly kept up.  For none knew better than
Captain Vane the benefit of discipline, and the demoralising effect of
its absence, especially in trying circumstances.  It is but just to add
that he had no difficulty in enforcing his laws.  It is right also to
state that the women were not required to conform, even although they
were accustomed to hard labour and willing to work as much as required.
In all three boats the bow was set apart as the women's quarters, and
when Toolooha, Oblooria or Tekkona showed symptoms of a desire to go to
sleep--(there was no retiring for the night in these latitudes)--a
blanket stretched on two oars cut their quarters off from those of the
men, and maintained the dignity of the sex.

But soon the serene aspect of nature changed.  Grey clouds overspread
the hitherto sunny sky.  Gusts of wind came sweeping over the sea from
time to time, and signs of coming storm became so evident that the
Captain gave orders to make all snug and prepare for dirty weather.

"You see, lads," he said, when the three boats were abreast, and the
kites had been furled, "we don't know what may happen to us now.  Nobody
in the world has had any experience of these latitudes.  It may come on
to blow twenty-ton Armstrongs instead of great guns, for all we know to
the contrary.  The lightning may be sheet and fork mixed instead of
separate for any light we've got on the subject, and it may rain whales
and walruses instead of cats and dogs; so it behoves us to be ready."

"That's true, father," said Benjy, "but it matters little to me, for
I've made my will.  Only I forgot to leave the top with the broken peg
and the rusty penknife to Rumty Swillpipe; so if you survive me and get
home on a whale's back--or otherwise--you'll know what to do."

"This is not a time for jesting, Ben," said Alf rather seriously.

"Did I say it was?" inquired Ben, with a surprised look.

Alf deigned no reply, and Butterface laughed, while he and the others
set about executing the Captain's orders.

The arrangements made in these india-rubber boats for bad weather were
very simple and complete.  After the lading in each had been snugly
arranged, so as to present as flat a surface on the top as possible, a
waterproof sheet was drawn over all, and its edges made fast to the
sides of the boat, by means of tags and loops which were easily fastened
and detached.  As each sheet overhung its boat, any water that might
fall upon it was at once run off.  This, of course, was merely put on to
protect the cargo and any one who chose to take shelter under it.  The
boat being filled with air required no such sheet, because if filled to
overflowing it would still have floated.  All round this sheet ran a
strong cord for the crew, who sat outside of it as on a raft, to lay
hold of if the waves should threaten to wash them off.  There were also
various other ropes attached to it for the same purpose, and loops of
rope served for rowlocks.

When all had been arranged, those whose duty it was to rest leaned
comfortably against the lumps caused by inequalities of the cargo, while
the others took to their oars.

"It's coming!" cried Benjy, about half-an-hour after all had been
prepared.

And unquestionably it _was_ coming.  The boy's quick eyes had detected a
line on the southern horizon, which became gradually broader and darker
as it rose until it covered the heavens.  At the same time the indigo
ripple caused by a rushing mighty wind crept steadily over the sea.  As
it neared the boats the white crests of breaking waves were seen
gleaming sharply in the midst of the dark blue.

"Clap the women under hatches," shouted the Captain, with more good
sense than refinement.

Benjy, Butterface, and Anders at the word lifted a corner of their
respective sheets.  Obedient Toolooha, Oblooria, and Tekkona bent their
meek heads and disappeared: The sheets were refastened, and the men,
taking their places, held on to the cords or life-lines.  It was an
anxious moment.  No one could guess how the boats would behave under the
approaching trial.

"Oars out," cried the Captain, "we must run before it."

A hiss, which had been gradually increasing as the squall drew near,
broke into a kind of roar, and wind and waves rushed upon them as the
men bent their backs to the oars with all their might.

It was soon found that the boats had so little hold of the water that
the wind and oars combined carried them forward so fast as to decrease
considerably the danger of being whelmed by a falling wave.  These waves
increased every moment in size, and their crests were so broken and cut
off by the gale that the three boats, instead of appearing as they had
hitherto done the only solid objects in the scene, were almost lost to
sight in the chaos of black waves and driving foam.  Although they tried
their best to keep close together they failed, and each soon became
ignorant of the position of the others.  The last that they saw of Alf's
boat was in the hollow between two seas like a vanishing cormorant or a
northern diver.  Leo was visible some time longer.  He was wielding the
steering-oar in an attitude of vigorous caution, while his Eskimos were
pulling as if for their lives.  An enormous wave rose behind them,
curled over their heads and appeared ready to overwhelm them, but the
sturdy rowers sent the boat forward, and the broken crest passed under
them.  The next billow was still larger.  Taken up though he was with
his own boat the Captain found time to glance at them with horror.

"They're gone!" he cried, as the top of the billow fell, and nothing was
seen save the heads of the four men like dark spots on the foam.  The
boat had in truth been overwhelmed and sunk, but, like a true lifeboat
it rose to the surface like a cork the instant the weight of water was
removed, and her crew, who had held on to the life-lines and oars, were
still safe.

"Well done the little _Hope_!" cried the Captain, while Benjy gave vent
to his feelings in a cheer, which was evidently heard by Leo, for he was
seen to wave his hand in reply.  Next moment another wave hid the _Hope_
from view, and it was seen no more at that time.

"I feel easier now, Benjy, thank God, after _that_.  Alf is a fair
steersman, and our boats are evidently able to stand rough usage."

Benjy made no reply.  He was rubbing the water out of his eyes, and
anxiously looking through the thick air in the hope of seeing Leo's boat
again.  The poor boy was grave enough now.  When the might and majesty
of the Creator are manifested in the storm and the raging sea, the
merely humorous fancies of man are apt to be held in check.

The Captain's boat went rushing thus wildly onwards, still, fortunately,
in the right direction; and for some hours there was no decrease in the
force of the gale.  Then, instead of abating, as might have been
expected, it suddenly increased to such an extent that speedy
destruction appeared to be inevitable.

"No sort o' craft could live long in _this_," muttered the Captain, as
if to himself rather than to his son, who sat with a firm expression on
his somewhat pale countenance, looking wistfully towards the northern
horizon.  Perhaps he was wondering whether it was worth while to risk so
much for such an end.  Suddenly he shaded his eyes with his hand and
gazed intently.

"Land!" he exclaimed in a low eager tone.

"Whereaway, boy?  Ay, so there is something there.  What say you,
Chingatok?  Is it land?"

The giant, who, during all this time, had calmly plied a pair of oars
with strength equal almost to that of four men, looked over his shoulder
without, however, relaxing his efforts.

"No," he said, turning round again, "it is an ice-hill."

"A berg!" exclaimed the Captain.  "We will make for it.  Tie your
handkerchief, Benjy, to the end of an oar and hold it up.  It will serve
as a guide to our comrades."

In a wonderfully short space of time the berg which Benjy had seen as a
mere speck on the horizon rose sharp, rugged, and white against the
black sky.  It was a very large one--so large that it had no visible
motion, but seemed as firm as a rock, while the billows of the Arctic
Ocean broke in thunder on its glassy shore.

"We'll get shelter behind it, Ben, my boy," said the Captain, "hold the
oar well up, and don't let the rag clap round the blade.  Shake it out
so.  God grant that they may see it."

"Amen," ejaculated Benjy to the prayer with heartfelt intensity.

There was danger as well as safety in the near vicinity to this berg,
for many of its pinnacles seemed ready to fall, and there was always the
possibility of a mass being broken off under water, which might destroy
the equilibrium of the whole berg, and cause it to revolve with awfully
destructive power.

However, there was one favourable point--the base was broad, and the
ice-cliffs that bordered the sea were not high.

In a few more minutes the western end of the berg was passed.  Its last
cape was rounded, and the _Faith_ was swept by the united efforts of
Chingatok, Benjy, and Toolooha, (who _would_ not remain under cover),
into the comparatively still water on the lee, or northern side of the
berg.

"Hurrah!" shouted Benjy in a tone that was too energetic and peculiar to
have been called forth by the mere fact of his own escape from danger.

Captain Vane looked in the direction indicated by the boy's glistening
eyes--glistening with the salt tears of joy as well as with salt sea
spray--and there beheld the other two boats coming dancing in like wild
things on the crests of the heaving waves.  They had seen the signal of
the handkerchief, understood and followed it, and, in a few minutes
more, were under the lee of the ice-cliffs, thanking God and
congratulating each other on their deliverance.

A sheltered cove was soon found, far enough removed from cliffs and
pinnacles to insure moderate safety.  Into this they ran, and there they
spent the night, serenaded by the roaring gale, and lullabied by the
crash of falling spires and the groans of rending ice.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

RECORDS A WONDERFUL APPARITION BUT A FURIOUS NIGHT.

When the storm had passed, a profound calm once more settled down on the
face of nature, as if the elements had been utterly exhausted by the
conflict.  Once more the sea became like a sheet of undulating glass, in
which clouds and sun and boats were reflected vividly, and once again
our voyagers found themselves advancing towards the north, abreast of
each other, and rowing sociably together at the rate of about four miles
an hour.

When advancing under oars they went thus abreast so as to converse
freely, but when proceeding under kites they kept in single file, so as
to give scope for swerving, in the event of sudden change of wind, and
to prevent the risk of the entanglement of lines.

"What is that?" exclaimed Benjy, pointing suddenly to an object ahead
which appeared at regular intervals on the surface of the water.

"A whale, I think," said Leo.

"A whale usually spouts on coming up, doesn't it?" said Alf.

Chingatok uttered an unpronounceable Eskimo word which did not throw
light on the subject.

"What is it, Anders?" shouted the Captain.

"What you say?" asked the interpreter from Alf's boat, which was on the
other side of the _Hope_.

"If these squawkin' things would hold their noise, you'd hear better,"
growled the Captain before repeating the question.

His uncourteous remark had reference to a cloud of gulls which circled
round and followed the boats with remonstrative cries and astonished
looks.

