    "We are sending Dorothea down to you by the first train in the
     morning, and we beg you will keep a strict eye on her. An
     individual named Montague Ponsonby has been paying her great
     attentions, and we wish to break off the attachment. He is well
     born, but absolutely penniless, and as Dorothea will some day
     be an heiress, we do not wish her to throw herself away upon
     him. Please do your best to prevent any such folly.

    "Your affectionate sister,
         "ELIZABETH STRONG."

Miss Morton, on grasping the drift of this epistle, exhibited symptoms
of distress. She flung out her arms in a dramatic attitude, and confided
to the audience her disinclination to take over the unwelcome task of
becoming duenna to her niece. There was no other course open to her,
apparently; the idea of sending the girl home by the next train, or of
hastily packing her own box and departing somewhere on urgent business
did not seem to occur to her. She grumbled, but accepted the
responsibility, and Jemima, the pert maidservant, made faces behind her
back, till summoned by a violent knocking, when she flew to the door and
admitted Dorothea, with bag and baggage.

Lilias, as the fashionable niece, was "got up regardless." Her hair was
done in a Grecian knot, a veil was twisted round her picture hat, and
she sailed into the room with the assurance of a Society beauty.

Aunt Monica, suppressing the letter of warning, gave the customary
greetings, then--with the imprudence characteristic of a stage
aunt--announced her intention of going out to do shopping while her
niece unpacked her possessions.

Instead of doing anything so sensible as to unpack, Dorothea sank into a
chair, and in an attitude of great languor and despair confided her love
affairs to the sympathetic and interested servant, who swore fealty and
offered all possible assistance. Her kind intentions were put at once to
the test, for immediately another violent knocking was heard, she flung
open the door, and after a whispered colloquy announced "Mr. Montague
Ponsonby."

The entrance of Carmel, as hero of the drama, created quite a sensation.
Materials for masculine attire were scanty at Chilcombe Hall, and, as
the girls felt rather mean for not having invited the mistresses to
their performance, they had not dared to ask for the loan of any
theatrical properties, and had been obliged to concoct costumes from
anything that came to hand. Carmel had put her feet through the sleeves
of her brown knitted jumper, and drawn it up so that the cuffs fitted
just below her knees, and made a really striking resemblance to a pair
of gentleman's sporting breeches. A coat covered any deficiencies at the
waist, a paper collar and a scarlet tie encircled her throat,
india-rubber waders did service for top-boots, her hair was tucked under
a felt hat (with the trimming wrenched off), and last, but not least,
her lip was adorned with the black mustache which Prissie had used on
Hallowe'en. She looked such a magnificent and sporting object, that it
was no wonder the fashionable Dorothea fell into her arms.

It is perhaps unusual for a gentleman to conduct his love-making with
his hat on, but the audience was not "viper-critical" and allowed some
latitude to Mr. Montague Ponsonby. They admired the ardor with which he
pressed his suit, the fervor of his protestations of fidelity, the
dramatic roll of his dark eyes, and the tender tone of his voice. His
entrance was considered a very brisk bit of acting, and when he paused
for breath, in a graceful stage attitude, sixteen pairs of hands gave a
hearty clap.

The lovers, possibly a little sated with the ecstacies of their
affection, turned to the sordid details of life, and sitting hand in
hand upon the sofa (improvised out of four bedroom chairs and an
eiderdown) planned an immediate elopement. They had decided to hire a
car and make for Scotland, and were discussing which hotel to stay at,
and what they should order for dinner, when the inevitable happened. The
pert maidservant rushed in, and in a voice squeaky with tragedy, warned
them of the immediate approach of Miss Monica Morton.

Of course, they ought to have expected it. Nobody except two utter
idiots would have sat philandering upon the sofa in what might be termed
"the lion's den," knowing that "the lion" might at any moment walk in
with her shopping-basket and catch them. The surprise and horror
depicted on their countenances would have commanded a good salary at a
cinema studio. Mr. Montague Ponsonby was for bluffing it, but Dorothea's
astute female brains seized a readier way out of the situation. She laid
her lover flat upon the sofa, and covered him hastily with her traveling
rug, then, opening her suitcase, flung its contents on the floor, and
knelt down in the midst of a muddle of shoes, nightdresses, and other
paraphernalia.

Aunt Monica exhibited a natural amazement at finding her niece
conducting her unpacking in the sitting-room, instead of upstairs, but
accepted her explanations with wonderful indulgence. She professed
herself tired with shopping, and moved towards the sofa to rest.

Dorothea, with sudden solicitude, sprang up to offer her a chair, and
made every human effort to lead her away from the couch. She was a
persistent, not to say obstinate, old lady, however, and she meant to
have her own way in her own house. Waving her niece aside, and
proclaiming her weariness, she sank down heavily upon the sofa. The
result was tragic, for a stifled groan resounded through the room, and
the top-boots of the luckless Montague Ponsonby kicked wildly in the
air. Miss Morton, naturally alarmed, and instantly jumping to the
conclusion that he was a burglar, screamed loudly for assistance, and a
passing policeman hastened to her call.

It is wonderful how efficient and handy the police always are on the
stage. They are invariably at the right place at the right moment, and
always step in just in time to stop a murder, prevent an explosion, or
rescue the heroine. Dulcie, who in a long blue coat, with a paper helmet
and a strap under her chin, represented the majesty of the law, hauled
the squirming Montague from the couch, and secured his wrists tightly
with a piece of clothes line supplied by the pert servant, who ought to
have been ashamed of herself for going back on her promise to help the
lovers, but probably felt a deeper obligation to the policeman, who was,
no doubt, her sweetheart, which accounted for his very convenient
presence on the doorstep.

"I arrest you in the King's name!" declared that officer, when the
clothes line was sufficiently knotted, and Montague had ceased
struggling. "You will be brought up on trial before the court, and
charged with house-breaking and resisting the police."

It was only then that the wretched man began to protest his innocence,
and that Dorothea, falling on her knees, explained his name, errand, and
intentions, and entreated her aunt to overlook the matter.

Miss Morton wavered visibly. It was evident that her natural kindness of
heart gave her a bias towards the lovers--she had, perhaps, been through
an affair of the same sort herself in her youth--yet on the other hand
her duty to her sister urged her to take stern measures. She drew the
letter from her pocket with the seeming intention of strengthening her
resolution against the hopes of Montague, and was shaking her head
sadly over it, when the obstreperous servant, who had rushed for no
apparent reason, except habit, to the door, bounded back, waving a
yellow envelope. A well-trained maid usually presents a telegram upon a
tray, but Miss Morton must have been accustomed to Jemima's rough ways,
or was too agitated to rebuke her; she tore open the missive, glanced at
its contents, and with a scream of joy sank fainting into her domestic's
faithful arms.

Of course, somebody had to read the telegram aloud. The policeman seemed
to think it was his business. He picked it up, and proclaimed it in the
manner of a town crier. It was short, but much to the point.

    "Please encourage Montague Ponsonby. Uncle has died and
     left him vast fortune.
         "ELIZABETH."

Everybody recovered at the good news. Miss Morton rose from the arms of
Jemima, apologized to Mr. Ponsonby for having mistaken him for a
burglar, and invited him to stay to lunch. He begged her not to mention
the matter, and as soon as his wrists had been released by the
policeman, he shook hands cordially with his prospective aunt, and made
a pretty speech expressing his desire to become a member of the family.

This was undoubtedly the moment for the curtain to descend, but as that
most useful of stage adjuncts was conspicuous by its absence, the actors
lined up instead, and made their parting bows with much eclat, Dorothea
leaning elegantly upon her lover's shoulder, Aunt Monica holding aloft
the telegram, the policeman saluting, and the maidservant blowing
kisses.

The applause was so thunderous that the performers were obliged to beg
the audience to use self-restraint and limit the noise, for fear one of
the mistresses should feel in duty bound to pay a surprise visit, and be
scandalized at the costumes. Moreover, a clanging bell warned them that
the recreation hour was over, so there was a hasty exit and a quick
change into normal garments. Miss Hardy was kind that evening, and
turned a blind eye to deficiencies of order. She was seen
surreptitiously reading the program, and it was the general opinion in
the dormitory that she and the other mistresses were much disappointed
at having been excluded from the entertainment.

"It did seem rather mean not to ask them," said Gowan,
self-reproachfully, "though they'd have spoilt the whole show. I vote we
give another some time--a prunes and prism affair without any lovers in
it--and let them all come."

"Right you are! But it will be a tame business after this!" agreed
Bertha.




CHAPTER XIV

All in a Mist


The Blue Grotto entertainment was very successfully emulated by the
occupants of the Gold, Green, Rose, and Brown bedrooms, and quite a
sufficient sum of money was raised in the various collections to pay
half the expense of the little wicker carriage for the invalid child.
The school took a special walk one day to Five Stone Bridge, to see her
take an airing in her new chariot, and though they agreed that it did
not look nearly so picturesque as the wooden box, it was undoubtedly far
more comfortable, and more suitable for one suffering from her
complaint. She smiled shyly at the long line of girls, whispered a
bashful "Thank you" for the chocolates they gave her, and appeared
scared to the verge of tears when they spoke to her.

"I don't blame her, poor kid!" said Gowan, as the school marched on,
slightly disappointed. "I shouldn't like to be made a show of myself,
and be stared at by everybody. She looked as if she wished us far
enough. Never mind! She'll eat the chocs. and enjoy herself now we've
gone. She's rather a sweet little morsel, isn't she, after all?"

Christmas was drawing near, and the school turned from schemes of
general philanthropy to the more pressing business of making presents
for immediate relatives and friends. Various pieces of sewing, which had
languished all the term, were taken out and worked at feverishly; there
was quite an epidemic of needlecraft, and a wet day was almost welcomed
as affording an opportunity for getting on with the gifts. Everybody
seemed suddenly in need of embroidery silks, transfers, beads, wools,
crochet needles, and other such articles, and a special deputation
waited on Miss Walters asking permission to go a shopping expedition to
Glazebrook to purchase these indispensables. Miss Walters, who always
had an eye to school discipline, made the matter a question of marks,
and granted the privilege only to those whose exercise books showed a
certain standard of proficiency. Hester, Ida, Noreen, Joyce, Bertha,
Carmel, and Doris were the only ones who reached the required totals, so
under charge of Miss Herbert they were sent off one afternoon to the
town, armed with a long list of commissions from the luckless ones who
remained behind.

Chilcombe Hall was four and a half miles from Glazebrook, and there was
no motor omnibus service. It was arranged, therefore, for the party to
walk on the outward journey, and to return with all their parcels in a
couple of taxicabs. They started after an extremely early lunch, in
order to do the important business of matching embroidery silks by
daylight. It had been quite a fine sunny morning, but clouded over at
noon, and although no rain fell the sky was gray and cheerless.

The girls did not much mind the condition of the weather so long as they
could see to make their purchases. They spent a considerable time in the
principal fancy-work shop of the town, and tried the patience of the
assistants by demanding articles that were quite unobtainable. A visit
to a stationer's and a confectioner's almost completed their list of
requirements, and only a few extras remained to be bought. Some of the
party were standing in the entrance of a big general store, waiting
while Miss Herbert executed commissions for Miss Walters, when Joyce was
suddenly greeted by a friend, a lady who was just about to step into her
motor.

"Why, Joyce!" she exclaimed. "Have you been shopping here? So have
I--look at my pile of parcels! Have you finished? Are you going straight
back to school? I shall pass Chilcombe on my way home, and can take you
in the car if you like, and some of your schoolfellows too. There's
room for four if you don't mind squeezing!"

It seemed much too good an offer to be refused. Joyce suggested, indeed,
that she ought to consult Miss Herbert, who was in an upper department
of the shop, but Mrs. Baldwin declared she could not wait.

"I don't see that Miss Herbert can mind. We're quite ready to go, and it
will save one taxi," urged Bertha.

So it was hastily decided for Joyce, Bertha, Doris, and Carmel to go in
the car, and Noreen ran upstairs to tell Miss Herbert of the
arrangement. The latter, with Hester and Ida, was choosing lamp-shades
and fancy candlesticks. It was only when Noreen had gone that Carmel
remembered suddenly that she had never bought the packet of chocolates
which she had promised to bring back for Dulcie. She stopped with her
foot on the step of the car, and excused herself.

"There's something I still have to do!" she explained. "I must come back
in the taxi with the others after all! I'm so sorry!"

Mrs. Baldwin had an appointment at home, and was impatient to start, so
the door was slammed on Joyce, Bertha, and Doris, and they drove away
all smiles, and waving a good-by through the window. There was a sweets
department close at hand in the Stores, and Carmel bought a present of
chocolate for Dulcie and of butterscotch for Lilias, then went upstairs
to the lamp-shade counter to rejoin Miss Herbert and the other girls. To
her surprise she found they had gone. She searched for them all round
the upper story of the shop, but did not see them anywhere. She had kept
a watchful eye on the stairs when buying the sweets, and was quite sure
that they had not passed down while she was there. She returned to the
lamp-shade counter and questioned the assistant, who told her that she
had noticed the lady and the three girls in school hats walk down
another staircase which led to a side door of the stores. In much alarm,
Carmel hurried that way into the street, but not a trace of them was to
be seen. She walked as far as the railway station, hoping to catch them
there engaging a taxi, but not a solitary conveyance of any description
was on the stand. She was indeed in a fix. She saw clearly that, of
course, they all supposed she had gone with Mrs. Baldwin in the car, and
by this time they were probably on the road to Chilcombe without her. It
was nobody's fault but her own.

The feeling that she had only herself to blame did not make the
situation any less unpleasant. She was four and a half miles away from
school, and unless she could secure a taxi, she would be obliged to walk
back. She inquired from a porter, but he shook his head, and said it
was unlikely there would be any cabs at the station till the express
came in at six o'clock.

Carmel thanked him, and turned away with her eyes full of tears. Owing
to her Sicilian education she was not accustomed to going about by
herself. England was still more or less of a strange country to her, and
she did not know the ways of the land. Lilias, in her place, would have
gone to the principal hotel, explained who she was, and asked the
manager to find some sort of carriage to convey her back to school. Such
a course never occurred to Carmel, however; instead, she tied her
numerous parcels together, blinked back her tears, set her teeth, and
started forth to walk.

Fortunately, there was no mistaking the high road, and it was still
comparatively early. If she put her best foot foremost she might
reasonably expect to reach Chilcombe before dark. She had soon left the
houses of Glazebrook behind, and was passing between hedges and fields.
For the first mile and a half all went well; she was a little tired, but
rather pleased with her own pluck. According to Sicilian customs, which
are almost eastern in their guardianship of signorinas, it was an
unheard-of thing for a young lady in her position to take a country walk
without an escort. The remembrance of the beggars and footpads that
lurked about Sicilian roads gave her uneasy twinges, and though she had
been told of the comparative safety of British highways, her heart beat
considerably when she passed anybody, and she scurried along in a
flutter lest some ill-intentioned person should stop and speak to her.
The farther she went from the town the fewer people were on the road,
and for quite half a mile she had met nobody at all. She had been going
steadily down a steep hill, and at the bottom she stepped suddenly into
a great belt of fog that lay like a white wall in front of her. It was
as if she had passed into a country of dreams. She could scarcely see
the hedges, and all round was a dense mass of mist, clammy and cold and
difficult to breathe. It was silent, too, for no sound seemed to travel
through it, not a bird twittered, and no animal stirred in the fields.
Carmel felt as utterly alone as if she were on the surface of the moon.
All the familiar objects of the landscape were blotted out. It was still
light, but this white thick mist was worse than darkness. She stamped
along for the sake of hearing her own footsteps. She wished she had a
dog with her. She kept to the left-hand side of the road, and followed
the hedge, hoping that the fog was only in the valley, and that she
would soon pass out of it. On and on it stretched, however, till she
must have been walking through it for quite twenty minutes. Then she
began to grow uneasy. There was a border of grass under the hedge bank
wider than she remembered noticing on the road, and the suspicion
assailed her that all unknowingly she must have turned down a side lane
and have lost her way.

She went forward now with doubting footsteps. Where was the path leading
her? If she could only find some cottage, she could inquire. But there
was no human habitation, nothing but the endless hedges and an
occasional gate into a field. What was that in front of her? She
stopped, and drew back with a cry of fear. Across her track gleamed
water. She had almost stepped into it. Whether it was stream, pond, or
river the thick mist did not reveal, but it certainly barred her
footpath. She shivered, and turning round, walked back in the direction
from which she had come, hoping to regain the high road.

Then a wonderful atmospheric effect was displayed. A breeze sprang up
and blew aside some of the fog, and the rising moon shone down on a land
of white shadows. It was impossible to tell what was real and what was
unreal. On the other side of the lane stretched what appeared to be a
vast lake, but might only be mist on the meadows; cloud-like masses
shaped themselves into spectral forms and rolled away into the dim and
nebulous distance, where they settled into weird domes and towers and
walls, a veritable elf king's castle. It was so uncanny and silent and
strange that Carmel was far more frightened than she had felt before.
Old fairy tales of her childhood crowded into her mind, memories of
phantoms and ghosts and goblins, the legends of Undine and the water
sprites, the ballad of the Erl-King in the haunted forest. She had
learnt the poem once, and she found herself repeating the words:

    "'Why trembles my darling? Why shrinks he with fear?'
     'Oh Father, my Father! the Erl-King is near!
     The Erl-King with his crown and his beard long and white!'
     'Oh! your eyes are deceived by the vapours of night!'

       *       *       *       *       *

    "'I love thee, I dote on thy face so divine!
     I must and will have thee, and force makes thee mine!'
     'My Father! My Father! Oh hold me now fast!
     He pulls me, he hurts, and will have me at last!'"

And as if that were not bad enough, the ballad of Lenore recurred
to her:

    "How swift the flood, the mead, the wood,
         Aright, aleft are gone!
     The bridges thunder as they pass,
         But earthly sound is none.

    "Tramp, tramp, across the land they speed,
         Splash, splash, across the sea;
     'Hurrah! the dead can ride apace,
         Dost fear to ride with me?'"
