Thus in little more than an hour were five of the Englishmen murdered.

It now seemed as if the revenge of the Otaheitans had been sated, for
after the last tragic act they remained for some time in front of
Brown's house talking, and resting their hands on the muzzles of their
guns.

All this time Edward Young was lying asleep in ignorance of what was
being done, and purposely kept in ignorance by the women.  Having been
told by Quintal's wife, they knew part of the terrible details of the
massacre, but they had no power to check the murderers.  They, however,
adopted what means they could to shield Young, who, as we have said, was
a favourite with all the natives, and closed the door of the hut in
which he lay to prevent his being awakened.

The suspicions of Adams having at length been aroused, he went down to
Brown's house to see what all the firing could be about.  The children,
meanwhile, having some vague fears that danger threatened, had run into
their mother's huts.  Everything passed so quickly, in fact, that few of
the people had time to understand or think, or take action in any way.

Reaching the edge of Brown's garden, and seeing the four Otaheitans
standing as we have described, Adams stopped and called out to know what
was the matter.

"Silence," shouted one of them, pointing his gun.  Being unarmed, and
observing the body of Brown on the ground, Adams at once leaped into the
bush and ran.  He was hotly pursued by the four men, but being strong
and swift of foot, he soon left them behind.  In passing Williams's
house, he went towards it, intending to snatch up some thick garments,
and, if possible, a musket and ammunition, for he had no doubt now that
some of his countrymen must have been killed, and that he would have to
take to the bush along with them.  An exclamation of horror escaped him
when he came upon the armourer's body.  It needed no second glance to
tell that his comrade was dead.  Passing into the house, he caught up an
old blanket and a coat, but there was no musket.  He knew that without
arms he would be at the mercy of the savages.  Being a cool and
courageous man, he therefore made a long detour through the bush until
he reached his own house, and entered by a back window.  His sick wife
received him with a look of glad surprise.

"Is it true they have killed some of the white men?" she asked.

"Ay, too true," he replied, quickly; "and I must take to the bush for a
while.  Where can I find a bag to hold some yams?  Ah, here you are.
There's no fear o' them hurting you, lass."

As he spoke a shot was heard.  The natives had seen and followed him.  A
ball, coming through the window, entered the back of his neck and came
out at the front.  He fell, but instantly sprang up and leaped through
the doorway, where he was met by the four natives.

Besides being a powerful man, Adams was very active, and the wound in
his neck was only a flesh one.  He knocked down Timoa, the foremost of
the band, with one blow of his fist, and grappling with Nehow, threw him
violently over his prostrate comrade; but Menalee, coming up at the
moment, clubbed his musket and made a furious blow at Adams's head.  He
guarded it with one hand, and in so doing had one of his fingers broken.
Tetaheite and Menalee then both sprang upon him, but he nearly
throttled the one, tripped up the other, and, succeeding by a violent
wrench in breaking loose, once more took to his heels.

In running, the Otaheitans were no match for him.  He gradually left
them behind.  Then Timoa called out to him to stop.

"No, you scoundrels," he shouted back in reply, "you want to kill me;
but you'll find it a harder job than you think."

"No, no," cried Nehow, vehemently, "we don't want to kill you.  Stop,
and we won't hurt you."

Adams felt that loss of blood from his wound was quickly reducing his
strength.  His case was desperate.  He formed a quick resolve and acted
promptly.  Stopping, he turned about and walked slowly but steadily back
towards the natives, with his hands in his pockets and his eyes fixed
sternly upon them.

"Well, I have stopped, you see," he said, on coming up.  "I will take
you at your word."

"We will do you no harm if you will follow us," said Timoa.

They then went together to the house of Young.  Here they found its
owner, just roused by the noise of the scuffle with Adams, listening to
the explanations of the women, who were purposely trying to lead him
astray lest he should go out and be shot.  The entrance of the four
natives, armed and covered with blood, and Adams unarmed and wounded, at
once showed him how matters stood.

"This is a terrible business," he said in a low tone to Adams, while the
murderers were disputing noisily about going into the woods to hunt down
McCoy and Quintal.  "Have they killed many of our comrades?"

"God knows," said Adams, while Quintal's wife bound up the wound in his
neck.  "There has been firin' enough to have killed us all twice over.
I thought some of you were spending the ammunition foolishly on hogs or
gulls.  Williams is dead, I know, and poor Brown, for I saw their
bodies, but I can't say--"

"Fletcher Christian is killed," said Quintal's wife, interrupting.

"Fletcher Christian!" exclaimed Adams and Young in the same breath.

"Ay, and Isaac Martin and John Mills," continued the woman.

While she was speaking, the four Otaheitans, having apparently come to
an agreement as to their future proceedings, loaded their muskets
hastily, and rushing from the house soon disappeared in the woods.

We shall not harrow the reader's feelings by following farther the
bloody details of this massacre.  Let it suffice to add, briefly, that
after retiring from a fruitless search for the white men in the bush,
Menalee quarrelled with Timoa and shot him.  This roused the anger of
the other two against Menalee, who fled to the bush and tried to make
friends with McCoy and Quintal.  This he appeared to succeed in doing,
but when he was induced by them to give up his musket, he found out his
mistake, for they soon turned it on himself and killed him.  Then
Young's wife, Susannah, was induced to kill Tetaheite with an axe, and
Young himself immediately after shot Nehow.

When McCoy and Quintal were told that all the Otaheitan men were dead
they returned to the settlement.  It was a terrible scene of desolation
and woe.  Even these two rough and heartless men were awed for a time
into something like solemnity.

The men now left alive on the island were Young, Adams, Quintal, and
McCoy.  In the households of these four the widows and children of the
slain were distributed.  The evidences of the bloody tragedy were
removed, the murdered men were buried, and thus came to a close the
first great epoch in the chequered history of Pitcairn Island.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

MATT QUINTAL MAKES A TREMENDOUS DISCOVERY.

Upwards of four years had now elapsed since the mutiny of the _Bounty_,
and of the nine mutineers who escaped to Pitcairn Island, only four
remained, with eleven women and a number of children.

These latter had now become an important and remarkably noisy element in
the colony.  They and time together did much to efface the saddening
effects of the gloomy epoch which had just come to a close.  Time,
however, did more than merely relieve the feelings of the surviving
mutineers and widows.  It increased the infantry force on the island
considerably, so that in the course of a few years there were added to
it a Robert, William, and Edward Young, with a little sister named Dolly
Young, to keep them in countenance.  There also came a Jane Quintal and
an Arthur Quintal, who were closely followed by a Rebecca Adams and a
James Young.  So that the self-imposed cares and burdens of that pretty,
active, and self-denying little creature, Otaheitan Sally, increased
with her years and stature.

Before the most of these made their appearance, however, the poor
Otaheitan wives and widows became downcast and discontented.  One cannot
wonder at this.  Accustomed though they no doubt had been to war and
bloodshed on their native island, they must have been shocked beyond
measure by the scenes of brutality and murder through which they had
passed.  The most of them being now without husbands, and the men who
remained being not on very amicable terms among themselves, these poor
creatures seem to have been driven to a state of desperation, for they
began to pine for their old home, and actually made up their minds to
quit the island in one of the _Bounty's_ old boats, and leave the white
men and even the children behind them.  See Note 1.

The old boat turned out to be so leaky, however, that they were
compelled to return.  But they did not cease to repine and to desire
deliverance.  Gentle-spirited and tractable though they undoubtedly
were, they had evidently been tried beyond their powers of endurance.
They were roused, and when meek people are roused they not unfrequently
give their friends and acquaintances, (to say nothing of those nearer),
a considerable surprise.

Matthew Quintal, who had a good deal of sly humour about him, eventually
hit on a plan to quiet them, at least for a time.

"What makes you so grumpy, old girl?" he said one day to his wife, while
eating his dinner under the shade of a palm-tree.

"We wiss to go home," she replied, in a plaintive tone.

"Well, well, you _shall_ go home, so don't let your spirits go down.  If
you've got tired of me, lass, you're not worth keeping.  We'll set to
work and build you a new boat out o' the old un.  We'll begin this very
day, and when it's finished, you may up anchor and away to Otaheite, or
Timbuctoo for all that I care."

The poor woman seemed pleased to hear this, and true to his word,
Quintal set to work that very day, with McCoy, whom he persuaded to
assist him.  His friend thought that Quintal was only jesting about the
women, and that in reality he meant to build a serviceable boat for
fishing purposes.  Young and Adams took little notice of what the other
two were about; but one day when the former came down to the beach on
Bounty Bay, he could not help remarking on the strange shape of the
boat.

"It'll never float," he remarked, with a look of surprise.

"It's not wanted to float," replied Quintal, "at least not just yet.  We
can make it float well enough with a few improvements afterwards."

Young looked still more surprised, but when Quintal whispered something
in his ear, he laughed and went away.

The boat was soon ready, for it was to some extent merely a modification
of the old boat.  Then all the women were desired to get into it and
push off, to see how it did.

"Get in carefully now, old girls," said Quintal, with a leer.  "Lay hold
of the oars and we'll shove you through the first o' the surf.  Lend a
hand, McCoy.  Now then, give way all--hi!"

With a vigorous shove the two men sent the boat shooting through the
surf, which was unusually low that day.  Young and Adams, with some of
the children, stood on the rocks and looked on.  The women lay to their
oars like men, and the boat leaped like a flying-fish through the surf
into deep water.  Forgetting, in the excitement of the moment, the
object they had in view, the poor things shouted and laughed with glee;
but they dipped their oars with sad irregularity, and the boat began to
rock in a violent manner.  Then Young's wife, Susannah, caught what in
nautical parlance is called "a crab;" that is, she missed her stroke and
fell backwards into the bottom of the boat.

With that readiness to render help which was a characteristic of these
women, Christian's widow, Mainmast, leaped up to assist the fallen
Susannah.  It only wanted this to destroy the equilibrium of the boat
altogether.  It turned bottom up in a moment, and left the female crew
floundering in the sea.

To women of civilised lands this might have been a serious accident, but
to these Otaheitan ladies it was a mere trifle.  Each had been able to
swim like a duck from earliest childhood.  Indeed, it was evident that
some of their own little ones were equally gifted, for several of them,
led by Sally, plunged into the surf and went out to meet their parents
as they swam ashore.

The men laughed heartily, and, after securing the boat and hauling it up
on the beach, returned to the settlement, whither the women had gone
before them to change their garments.

This incident effectually cured the native women of any intention to
escape from the island, at least by boat, but it did not tend to calm
their feelings.  On the contrary, it seemed to have the effect of
filling them with a thirst for vengeance, and they spent part of that
day in whispered plottings against the men.  They determined to take
their lives that very night.

While they were thus engaged, their innocent offspring were playing
about the settlement at different games, screaming at times with
vehement delight, and making the palm-groves ring with laughter.  The
bright sun shone equally upon the heads that whirled with merriment and
those that throbbed with dark despair.

Suddenly, in the midst of her play, little Sally came to an abrupt
pause.  She missed little Matt Quintal from the group.

"Where's he gone, Charlie?" she demanded of her favourite playmate,
whose name she had by that time learned to pronounce.

"I dunno," answered Charlie, whose language partook more of the nautical
tone of Quintal than of his late father.

"D'you know, Dan'l?" she asked of little McCoy.

"I dunno nuffin'," replied Dan, "'xcep' he's not here."

"Well, I must go an' seek 'im.  You stop an' play here.  I leave 'em in
your care, Toc.  See you be good."

It would have amused you, reader, if you had seen with your bodily eyes
the little creatures who were thus warned to be good.  Even Dan McCoy,
who was considered out and out the worst of them, might have sat to
Rubens for a cherub; and as for the others, they were, we might almost
say, appallingly good.  Thursday October, in particular, was the very
personification of innocence.  It would have been much more appropriate
to have named him Sunday July, because in his meek countenance goodness
and beauty sat enthroned.

Of course we do not mean to say that these children were good from
principle.  They had no principle at that time.  No, their actuating
motive was selfishness; but it was not concentrated, regardless
selfishness, and it was beautifully counteracted by natural amiability
of temperament.

But they were quite capable of sin.  For instance, when Sally had left
them to search for her lost sheep, little Dan McCoy, moved by a desire
for fun, went up behind little Charlie Christian and gave him an
unmerited kick.  It chanced to be a painful kick, and Charlie, without a
thought of resentment or revenge, immediately opened his mouth, shut his
eyes, and roared.  Horrified by this unexpected result, little Dan also
shut his eyes, opened his mouth, and roared.

The face that Charlie made in these circumstances was so ineffably
funny, that Toc burst into uncontrollable laughter.  Hearing this, the
roarers opened their eyes, slid quickly into the same key, and tumbled
head over heels on the grass, in which evolutions they were imitated by
the whole party, except such as had not at that time passed beyond the
staggering age.

Meanwhile Sally searched the neighbouring bush in vain; then bethinking
her that Matt Quintal, who was fond of dangerous places, might have
clambered down to the rocks to bathe, she made the best of her way to
the beach, at a place which, being somewhat difficult of access from
above, was seldom visited by any save the wild and venturesome.

She had only descended a few yards when she met the lost one clambering
up in frantic haste, panting violently, his fat cheeks on fire, and his
large eyes blazing.

"Oh, Matt, what is it?" she exclaimed, awestruck at the sight of him.

"Sip!--sip!" he cried, with labouring breath, as he pointed with one
hand eagerly to the sea and with the other to the shore; "bin men down
dare!--look, got suffin'!  Oh!"

A prolonged groan of despair escaped the child as he fumbled in a
trousers-pocket and pushed three fingers through a hole in the bottom of
it.

"It's hoed through!"

"What's hoed through?" asked Sally, with quick sympathy, trying to
console the urchin for some loss he had sustained.

"De knife!" exclaimed little Dan, with a face of blank woe.

"The knife! what knife?  But don't cry, dear; if you lost it through
that hole it must be lying on the track, you know, somewhere between us
and the beach."

This happy thought did not seem to have occurred to Matt, whose cheeks
at once resumed their flush and his eyes their blaze.

Taking his hand, Sally led him down the track.

They looked carefully as they went, and had not gone far when Matt
sprang forward with a scream of delight and picked up a clasp-knife.  It
was by no means a valuable one.  It had a buckhorn handle, and its
solitary blade, besides being broken at the point, was affected with
rust and tobacco in about equal proportions.

"Oh, Matt, where did you find it?"

"Come down and you see," he exclaimed, pointing with greater excitement
than ever to the beach below.

They were soon down, and there, on the margin of the woods, they found a
heap of cocoa-nut shells scattered about.

"Found de knife dere," said Matt, pointing to the midst of the shells,
and speaking in a low earnest voice, as if the subject were a solemn
