"Yes, I think I know whom you mean."

"And she is clever, too. But I don't think it is her beauty or her
talent that makes her curious charm. It is something beyond all this. I
never saw her do a really unamiable thing, and yet I think she must
love power very much. You will soon find out for yourself what she is
like. As for Janey Denton, she is just a good sort, something like me.
And Laura Everett is very proud of her family, and she is clever. And
Annie Millar is Laura's shadow, and does nothing whatever except what
Laura wishes. Then there is Agnes Sparkes. She is supposed to be my
friend, and she is very pretty, fair, and lively and clever. But of all
the girls who have come here to-day the two who will make their mark in
the world are beyond doubt Rosamund Cunliffe and Laura Everett. Now, I
think I will let you find out the rest for yourself."




CHAPTER II.

ROSAMUND TAKES THE LEAD.


Before that day had come to an end, Lucy had discovered how true were
Phyllis Flower's words. For Rosamund Cunliffe, without making herself in
the least disagreeable, without saying one single rude thing, yet
managed to take the lead, and that so effectively that even Lucy herself
found that she could not help following in her train.

For instance, after dinner, when the girls--all of them rather tired,
and perhaps some of them a little cross, and no one exactly knowing what
to do--clustered about the open drawing-room windows, it was Rosamund
who proposed that the rugs should be rolled back and that they should
have a dance.

Lucy opened her eyes. Nobody before had ever dared to make such a
suggestion in the house of Sunnyside. Lucy, it is true, had dancing
lessons from a master who came once a week to instruct her and other
girls in the winter season, and she had occasionally gone to a
children's party. But beyond that she had never danced, looking forward
to it, however, as a possible recreation by-and-by.

Rosamund's clear voice was now heard.

"Let us push back the sofas. This is a splendid room. We can roll up the
rugs in a twinkling. Where is Mrs. Merriman? She will play the dance
music. Oh, there are seven of us--one too many. Perhaps you will play
for us, Lucy?"

"But I don't know any dance music," said Lucy; "and then mother would
not like the rugs being disturbed. The room is arranged just as father
and mother wish it to be. I think perhaps"----

She colored painfully.

"We will do nothing without leave, of course," said Phyllis Flower.
"I'll just run and find Mrs. Merriman and ask her."

Before Lucy could prevent her, Phyllis had darted out of the room,
returning in a minute or two with the required permission.

"It's all right, girls," she said; "we can trip it on the light
fantastic toe as long as ever we please, and the rugs may go to
Hong-kong for all Mrs. Merriman cares."

Lucy colored with rage. Rosamund gave a quiet smile--a smile which
seemed to denote power. Phyllis's dancing eyes lit for a moment on
Lucy's face. Those eyes said in the most provoking manner, "I told you
so." And then some one went to the piano, and a minute or two later all
the girls, Lucy included, were dancing round and round the room in the
merry waltz.

Even Lucy enjoyed it when once it had begun, and the little performer at
the piano played well, and kept excellent time. And by-and-by Lucy
forgot herself, and could not help laughing when Rosamund seized her
round the waist and whirled her round and round, and taught her to
reverse, and instructed her in one or two other matters unknown to Lucy
up to the present.

The dance lasted for over an hour; and just in the midst of it, when
Lucy was really laughing in quite a heart-whole manner, she raised her
eyes and saw no less a person than Mr. Merriman himself standing in the
doorway. He was smiling, and his eyes were fixed on Rosamund's face.

The moment Rosamund saw him she stopped at once, and said to Lucy, "Is
that your father, the great professor?"

"Yes," said Lucy.

"Please introduce him to me."

Lucy longed to say, "It will tire him; I can't do it." She longed to
give any sort of excuse, but none would come to her lips. She was forced
to take Rosamund up to Mr. Merriman.

"This is Rosamund Cunliffe," she said, "and she wants to know you,
father."

"I am very much pleased to see you, Miss Cunliffe," said Mr. Merriman;
and then Rosamund stood in the doorway and talked.

Lucy went back and tried to dance with another girl, and the dance music
still went on. But she could not help straining her ears and trying to
catch the subject of Rosamund's conversation. Why, she was absolutely
laughing, and the Professor, who was generally so grave and quiet, was
laughing also. What did it all mean?

"Father, aren't you tired?--Miss Cunliffe, you are tiring father," said
Lucy at last, running up to the door and trying to speak calmly.

"No, my dear," said her father. "On the contrary, I am intensely
interested.--You must tell me that story again, Miss Cunliffe. Would you
like to come and see my library?"

The two went off together, and Lucy felt almost as though she must burst
into tears. Phyllis's eyes again met her face, and she had to restrain
her feelings. The "I told you so" look was too maddening almost for
endurance.

Rosamund's love of power showed itself further in the arrangement of her
bedroom. She took down the dividing curtain between herself and Jane
Denton without asking any one's permission; and she slept in the bed
intended for Jane, and rearranged the drawers, putting them into another
part of the room; and complained about the wardrobe, saying that she
would like it put opposite the door instead of in its present position.
And whatever she wished was immediately done, and whatever she said was
said so politely that no one took offense. And Lucy had to confess to
herself that Phyllis was right, and that Rosamund would be a power--the
leading power--in the school.

Early the next day the two teachers arrived. Mademoiselle Omont was very
French in appearance, very dark, with sparkling black eyes and neatly
arranged soft dark hair. She had a truly Parisian accent, and a pretty,
graceful way about her. Miss Archer was a stolid-looking woman of about
five-and-thirty years of age. She had a long talk, on her arrival, with
Mrs. Merriman, and then she went to her room and stayed there for some
little time, so that it was not until tea-time that the girls and the
two resident governesses met.

Lucy looked with great approbation at Miss Archer when she took her seat
opposite the tea-tray.

"She will bring order into this chaos," thought the girl. "She will
force all these girls to behave properly. She will insist on order. I
see it in her face."

But as the thought passed through Lucy's mind, Rosamund jumped suddenly
up from her own place, requested Phyllis Flower to change with her, and
sat down close to Miss Archer. During tea she talked to the English
governess in a low tone, asking her a great many questions, and
evidently impressing her very much in her favor.

"Oh, dear!" thought Lucy, "if this sort of thing goes on I shall lose my
senses. If there is to be any order, if the whole scheme which mother
has thought out so carefully, and father has approved of, means to
establish a girl like Rosamund Cunliffe here as our leader, so that we
are forced to do every single thing she wishes, I shall beg and implore
of father and mother to let me go and live with Aunt Susan in the old
Rectory at Dartford."

Lucy's cheeks were flushed, and she could scarcely keep the tears back
from her eyes. After tea, however, as she was walking about in front of
the house, wondering if she should ever know a happy moment again, Miss
Archer made her appearance. When she saw Lucy she called her at once to
her side.

"What a nice girl Rosamund Cunliffe seems!" was her first remark.

"Oh! don't begin by praising her," said Lucy. "I don't think I can quite
stand it."

"What is the matter, my dear? You are little Lucy Merriman, are you
not--the daughter of Mrs. Merriman and the Professor?"

"I am."

"And this house has always been your home?"

"I was born here," said Lucy almost tearfully.

"Then, of course, you feel rather strange at first with all these girls
scattered about the place. But when lessons really begin, and you get
into working order, you will be different. You will have to take your
place with the others in class, and everything is to be conducted as
though it were a real school."

"I will do anything you wish," said Lucy, and she turned a white face,
almost of despair, towards Miss Archer. "I will do anything in all the
world you wish if you will promise me one thing."

Miss Archer felt inclined to say, "What possible reason have you to
expect that I should promise you anything?" but she knew human nature,
and guessed that Lucy was troubled.

"Tell me what you wish," she said.

"I want you not to make a favorite of Rosamund Cunliffe. Already she has
begun to upset everything--last night all the drawing-room arrangements,
her own bedroom afterwards; then, to-day, the other girls have done
nothing but obey her. If this goes on, how is order to be maintained?"

Miss Archer looked thoughtful.

"From the little I have seen of Rosamund, she seems to be a very amiable
and clever girl," she said. "She evidently has a great deal of strength
of character, and cannot help coming to the front. We must be patient
with her, Lucy."

Lucy felt a greater ache than ever at her heart. She was certain that
Miss Archer was already captivated by Rosamund's charms. What was she to
do? To whom was she to appeal? It would be quite useless to speak to her
mother, for her mother had already fallen in love with Rosamund; and
indeed she had with all the young girls who had arrived such a short
time ago. Mrs. Merriman was one of the most affectionate people on
earth. She had the power of taking an unlimited number of girls, and
boys, too, into her capacious heart. She could be spent for them, and
live for them, and never once give a thought to herself. Now, in
addition to the pleasure of having so many young people in the house,
she knew she was helping her husband and relieving his mind from weighty
cares. The Professor could, therefore, go on with the writing of his
great work on Greek anthology; even if the money for this unique
treatise came in slowly, there would be enough to keep the little family
from the products of the school. Yes, he should be uninterrupted, and
should proceed at his leisure, and give up the articles which were
simply wearing him into an early grave.

Lucy knew, therefore, that no sympathy could be expected from her
mother. It is true that her father might possibly understand; but then,
dared she worry him? He had been looking very pale of late. His health
was seriously undermined, and the doctors had spoken gravely of his
case. He must be relieved. He must have less tension, otherwise the
results would be attended with danger. And Lucy loved him, as she also
loved her mother, with all her heart and soul.

When Miss Archer left her, having nothing particular to do herself and
being most anxious to avoid the strange girls, she went up the avenue,
and passing through a wicket-gate near the entrance, walked along by the
side of a narrow stream where all sorts of wild flowers were always
growing. Here might be seen the blue forget-me-not, the meadow-sweet,
great branches of wild honeysuckle, dog-roses, and many other flowers
too numerous to mention. As a rule, Lucy loved flowers, as most country
girls do; but she had neither eyes nor ears for them to-day. She was
thinking of her companions, and how she was to tolerate them. And as she
walked she saw in a bend in the road, coming to meet her, a stout,
elderly, very plainly dressed woman.

Lucy stood still for an instant, and then uttered a perfect shout of
welcome, and ran into the arms of her aunt Susan.

Mrs. Susan Brett was the wife of a hard-working clergyman in a town
about ten miles away. She had no children of her own, and devoted her
whole time to helping her husband in his huge parish. She spent little
or no money on dress, and was certainly a very plain woman. She had a
large, pale face, somewhat flat, with wide nostrils, a long upper lip,
small pale-blue eyes, and a somewhat bulgy forehead. Plain she
undoubtedly was, but no one who knew her well ever gave her looks a
thought, so genial was her smile, so hearty her hand-clasp, so
sympathetic her words. She was beloved by her husband's parishioners,
and in especial she was loved by Lucy Merriman, who had a sort of
fascination in watching her and in wondering at her.

From time to time Lucy had visited the Bretts in their small Rectory in
the town of Dartford. Nobody in all the world could be more welcome to
the child in her present mood than her aunt Susan, and she ran forward
with outstretched arms.

"Oh, Aunt Susy, I am glad to see you! But what has brought you to-day?"

"Why, this, my dear," said Mrs. Brett. "I just had three hours to spare
while William was busy over his sermon for next Sunday. He is writing a
new sermon--he hasn't done that for quite six months--and he said he
wanted the house to himself, and no excuse for any one to come in. And
he just asked me if I'd like to have a peep into the country; that
always means a visit to Sunnyside. So I said I'd look up the trains, and
of course there was one just convenient, so I clapped on my hat--you
don't mind it being my oldest one--and here I am."

"Oh, I am so glad!" said Lucy. "I think I wanted you, Aunt Susan, more
than any one else in all the world."

She tucked her hand through her aunt's arm as she spoke, and they turned
and walked slowly along by the riverside.

Mrs. Brett, if she had a plain face, had by no means a correspondingly
plain soul. On the contrary, it was attuned to the best, the richest,
the highest in God's world. She could see the loveliness of trees, of
river, of flowers. She could listen to the song of the wild birds, and
thank her Maker that she was born into so good a world. Nothing rested
her, as she expressed it, like a visit into the country. Nothing made
the dreadful things she had often to encounter in town seem more
endurable than the sweet-peas, the roses, the green trees, the green
grass, the fragrance and perfume of the country; and when she saw her
little niece--for she was very fond of Lucy--looking discontented and
unhappy, Mrs. Brett at once perceived a reason for her unexpected visit
to Sunnyside.

"We needn't go too fast, need we?" she said. "If we go down this path,
and note the flowers--aren't the flowers lovely, Lucy?"----

"Yes," replied Lucy.

"We shall be in time for tea, shall we not? But tell me, how is your
father, dear? I see you are in trouble of some sort. Is he worse?"

"No, Aunt Susy; I think he is better. He has had better nights of late,
and mother is not so anxious about him."

"Then what is the worry, my love, for worry of some sort there doubtless
is?"

"It is the girls, Aunt Susy."

"What girls, my love?"

"Those girls that mother has invited to finish their education at
Sunnyside. They came yesterday, and the teachers, Mademoiselle Omont and
Miss Archer, arrived to-day. And the girls don't suit me--I suppose I am
so accustomed to being an only child. I cannot tell you exactly why, but
I haven't been a bit myself since they came."

"A little bit jealous, perhaps," said Aunt Susan, giving a quick glance
at Lucy's pouting face, then turning away with a sigh.

"You will be surprised, Lucy," she continued after a pause, "when I tell
you that I used to be fearfully jealous when I was young. It was my
besetting sin."

"Oh, Aunt Susy, I simply don't believe it!"

"You don't? Then I will show you some day, when you and I are having a
snug evening at the old Rectory at Dartford, a letter I once received
from my dear father. He took great pains to point out to me my special
fault, as he called it; and his words had a wonderful effect, and I went
straight to the only source of deliverance, and by slow degrees I lost
that terrible feeling which took all the sunshine out of my life."

"Tell me more, please, Aunt Susan," said Lucy.

"Well, you see, dear, I was not like yourself an only child. I was one
of several, and I was quite the plain one of the family. I am very plain
now, as you perceive; but I had two beautiful little sisters. They were
younger than I, and Florence had quite a beautiful little face, and so
had Janet. Wherever they went they were admired and talked about, and I
was thought nothing of. Then I had three brothers, and they were
good-looking, too, and strong, and had excellent abilities, and people
thought a great deal about them; but no one thought anything about me. I
was the eldest, but I was never counted one way or the other as of the
slightest consequence. My people were quite rich, and Florence and Janet
were beautifully dressed, and taken down to the drawing-room to see
visitors; but I was never noticed at all. I could go if I liked, but it
did not gratify anybody, so by degrees I stayed away. You do not know
what bitter feelings I had in my heart, for they really were undeniably
some of the most attractive children you could possibly find; and
Florence was so witty, and Janet so delicate and refined and sweet in
all her ways! I could not be angry with them, but I did think it
fearfully unfair that so many blessings should be poured on their heads
and so few given to me, for I was not even specially clever.

"Then I thought I would make a friend of my brother Roger. He was a very
fine fellow, and for a time I did get into his confidence, and I was
fairly happy. But he went to Rugby, and at Christmas he brought some of
his school-fellows back with him, and they paid the most absurd
attentions to Florence and Janet, and they snubbed me; and I suppose
Roger, poor dear! was weak enough to be influenced by them, for he took
no notice of me either, so you can just imagine what a bad time I had.

"Well, my dear, one day there came a letter from an old cousin asking
either of the two girls, Florence or Janet, or myself, to go to stay
with her in the country. She had a very nice house, and a pony and trap,
and she could take us about and give us a good time. My mother was
exceedingly anxious that the twins--I forgot to tell you that they were
twins--should go, and she said so to me. She said they wanted change of
