size and fertility of these emeralds of Ocean.  At other places these
islets had grown apace, and were shaded by one or two cocoa-nut trees,
which grew literally in the sand, and were constantly washed by the
ocean spray--yet, as I have before remarked, their fruit was most
refreshing and sweet to our taste.

Again, at this time Jack and I pondered the formation of the large coral
islands.  We could now understand how the low ones were formed; but the
larger islands cost us much consideration, yet we could arrive at no
certain conclusion on the subject.

Having satisfied our curiosity, and enjoyed ourselves during the whole
day in our little boat, we returned, somewhat wearied, and withal rather
hungry, to our bower.

"Now," said Jack, "as our boat answers so well we will get a mast and
sail made immediately."

"So we will!" cried Peterkin as we all assisted to drag the boat above
high-water mark.  "We'll light our candle and set about it this very
night.  Hurrah, my boys, pull away!"

As we dragged our boat, we observed that she grated heavily on her keel;
and as the sands were in this place mingled with broken coral rocks, we
saw portions of the wood being scraped off.

"Hallo!" cried Jack on seeing this, "that won't do.  Our keel will be
worn off in no time at this rate."

"So it will," said I, pondering deeply as to how this might be
prevented.  But I am not of a mechanical turn naturally, so I could
conceive no remedy save that of putting a plate of iron on the keel; but
as we had no iron, I knew not what was to be done.  "It seems to me,
Jack," I added, "that it is impossible to prevent the keel being worn
off thus."

"Impossible?" cried Peterkin.  "My dear Ralph, you are mistaken; there
is nothing so easy."

"How?"  I inquired in some surprise.

"Why, by not using the boat at all!" replied Peterkin.

"Hold your impudent tongue, Peterkin!" said Jack as he shouldered the
oars.  "Come along with me, and I'll give you work to do.  In the first
place, you will go and collect coca-nut fibre, and set to work to make
sewing-twine with it--"

"Please, captain," interrupted Peterkin, "I've got lots of it made
already--more than enough, as a little friend of mine used to be in the
habit of saying every day after dinner."

"Very well," continued Jack; "then you'll help Ralph to collect
cocoa-nut cloth and cut it into shape, after which we'll make a sail of
it.  I'll see to getting the mast and the gearing; so let's to work."

And to work we went right busily, so that in three days from that time
we had set up a mast and sail, with the necessary rigging, in our little
boat.  The sail was not, indeed, very handsome to look at, as it was
formed of a number of oblong patches of cloth; but we had sewed it well
by means of our sail-needle, so that it was strong, which was the chief
point.--Jack had also overcome the difficulty about the keel by pinning
to it a _false_ keel.  This was a piece of tough wood, of the same
length and width as the real keel, and about five inches deep.  He made
it of this depth because the boat would be thereby rendered not only
much more safe, but more able to beat against the wind--which, in a sea
where the trade-winds blow so long and so steadily in one direction, was
a matter of great importance.  This piece of wood was pegged very firmly
to the keel; and we now launched our boat with the satisfaction of
knowing that when the false keel should be scraped off we could easily
put on another,--whereas, should the real keel have been scraped away,
we could not have renewed it without taking our boat to pieces, which
Peterkin said made his "marrow quake to think upon."

The mast and sail answered excellently; and we now sailed about in the
lagoon with great delight, and examined with much interest the
appearance of our island from a distance.  Also, we gazed into the
depths of the water, and watched for hours the gambols of the curious
and bright-coloured fish among the corals and seaweed.  Peterkin also
made a fishing-line; and Jack constructed a number of hooks, some of
which were very good, others remarkably bad.  Some of these hooks were
made of iron-wood--which did pretty well, the wood being extremely
hard--and Jack made them very thick and large.  Fish there are not
particular.  Some of the crooked bones in fish-heads also answered for
this purpose pretty well.  But that which formed our best and most
serviceable hook was the brass finger-ring belonging to Jack.  It gave
him not a little trouble to manufacture it.  First he cut it with the
axe, then twisted it into the form of a hook.  The barb took him several
hours to cut.  He did it by means of constant sawing with the broken
penknife.  As for the point, an hour's rubbing on a piece of sandstone
made an excellent one.

It would be a matter of much time and labour to describe the appearance
of the multitudes of fish that were day after day drawn into our boat by
means of the brass hook.  Peterkin always caught them--for we observed
that he derived much pleasure from fishing--while Jack and I found ample
amusement in looking on, also in gazing down at the coral groves, and in
baiting the hook.  Among the fish that we saw, but did not catch, were
porpoises and swordfish, whales and sharks.  The porpoises came
frequently into our lagoon in shoals, and amused us not a little by
their bold leaps into the air and their playful gambols in the sea.  The
swordfish were wonderful creatures--some of them apparently ten feet in
length, with an ivory spear six or eight feet long projecting from their
noses.  We often saw them darting after other fish, and no doubt they
sometimes killed them with their ivory swords.  Jack remembered having
heard once of a swordfish attacking a ship, which seemed strange indeed;
but as they are often in the habit of attacking whales, perhaps it
mistook the ship for one.  This swordfish ran against the vessel with
such force that it drove its sword quite through the thick planks; and
when the ship arrived in harbour, long afterwards, the sword was found
still sticking in it!

Sharks did not often appear; but we took care never again to bathe in
deep water without leaving one of our number in the boat, to give us
warning if he should see a shark approaching.  As for the whales, they
never came into our lagoon; but we frequently saw them spouting in the
deep water beyond the reef.  I shall never forget my surprise the first
day I saw one of these huge monsters close to me.  We had been rambling
about on the reef during the morning, and were about to re-embark in our
little boat to return home, when a loud blowing sound caused us to wheel
rapidly round.  We were just in time to see a shower of spray falling,
and the flukes or tail of some monstrous fish disappear in the sea a few
hundred yards off.  We waited some time to see if he would rise again.
As we stood, the sea seemed to open up at our very feet; an immense
spout of water was sent with a snort high into the air, and the huge,
blunt head of a sperm-whale rose before us.  It was so large that it
could easily have taken our little boat, along with ourselves, into its
mouth!  It plunged slowly back into the sea, like a large ship
foundering, and struck the water with its tail so forcibly as to cause a
sound like a cannon-shot.

We also saw a great number of flying-fish, although we caught none; and
we noticed that they never flew out of the water except when followed by
their bitter foe the dolphin, from whom they thus endeavoured to escape.
But of all the fish that we saw, none surprised us so much as those
that we used to find in shallow pools after a shower of rain; and this
not on account of their appearance, for they were ordinary-looking and
very small, but on account of their having descended in a shower of
rain!  We could account for them in no other way, because the pools in
which we found these fish were quite dry before the shower, and at some
distance above high-water mark.  Jack, however, suggested a cause which
seemed to me very probable.  We used often to see waterspouts in the
sea.  A waterspout is a whirling body of water, which rises from the sea
like a sharp-pointed pillar.  After rising a good way, it is met by a
long tongue, which comes down from the clouds; and when the two have
joined, they look something like an hour-glass.  The waterspout is then
carried by the wind--sometimes gently, sometimes with violence--over the
sea, sometimes up into the clouds; and then, bursting asunder, it
descends in a deluge.  This often happens over the land as well as over
the sea; and it sometimes does much damage, but frequently it passes
gently away.  Now, Jack thought that the little fish might perhaps have
been carried up in a waterspout, and so sent down again in a shower of
rain.  But we could not be certain as to this point, yet we thought it
likely.

During these delightful fishing and boating excursions we caught a good
many eels, which we found to be very good to eat.  We also found turtles
among the coral rocks, and made excellent soup in our iron kettle.
Moreover, we discovered many shrimps and prawns, so that we had no lack
of variety in our food; and, indeed, we never passed a week without
making some new and interesting discovery of some sort or other, either
on the land or in the sea.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

A MONSTER WAVE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES--THE BOAT LOST AND FOUND--PETERKIN'S
TERRIBLE ACCIDENT--SUPPLIES OF FOOD FOR A VOYAGE IN THE BOAT--WE VISIT
PENGUIN ISLAND, AND ARE AMAZED BEYOND MEASURE--ACCOUNT OF THE PENGUINS.

One day, not long after our little boat was finished, we were sitting on
the rocks at Spouting Cliff, and talking of an excursion which we
intended to make to Penguin Island the next day.

"You see," said Peterkin, "it might be all very well for a stupid fellow
like me to remain here and leave the penguins alone; but it would be
quite inconsistent with your characters as philosophers to remain any
longer in ignorance of the habits and customs of these birds, so the
sooner we go the better."

"Very true," said I.  "There is nothing I desire so much as to have a
closer inspection of them."

"And I think," said Jack, "that you had better remain at home, Peterkin,
to take care of the cat; for I'm sure the hogs will be at it in your
absence, out of revenge for your killing their great-grandmother so
recklessly."

"Stay at home!" cried Peterkin.  "My dear fellow, you would certainly
lose your way, or get upset, if I were not there to take care of you."

"Ah, true!" said Jack gravely; "that did not occur to me.  No doubt you
must go.  Our boat does require a good deal of ballast; and all that you
say, Peterkin, carries so much weight with it that we won't need stones
if you go."

Now, while my companions were talking, a notable event occurred, which,
as it is not generally known, I shall be particular in recording here.

While we were talking, as I have said, we noticed a dark line, like a
low cloud or fog-bank, on the seaward horizon.  The day was a fine one,
though cloudy, and a gentle breeze was blowing; but the sea was not
rougher, or the breaker on the reef higher, than usual.  At first we
thought that this looked like a thundercloud, and as we had had a good
deal of broken weather of late, accompanied by occasional peals of
thunder, we supposed that a storm must be approaching.  Gradually,
however, this line seemed to draw nearer without spreading up over the
sky, as would certainly have been the case if it had been a storm-cloud.
Still nearer it came, and soon we saw that it was moving swiftly
towards the island; but there was no sound till it reached the islands
out at sea.  As it passed these islands we observed, with no little
anxiety, that a cloud of white foam encircled them, and burst in spray
into the air; it was accompanied by a loud roar.  This led us to
conjecture that the approaching object was an enormous wave of the sea;
but we had no idea how large it was till it came near to ourselves.
When it approached the outer reef, however, we were awestruck with its
unusual magnitude; and we sprang to our feet, and clambered hastily up
to the highest point of the precipice, under an indefinable feeling of
fear.

I have said before that the reef opposite Spouting Cliff was very near
to the shore, while just in front of the bower it was at a considerable
distance out to sea.  Owing to this formation, the wave reached the reef
at the latter point before it struck at the foot of Spouting Cliff.  The
instant it touched the reef we became aware, for the first time, of its
awful magnitude.  It burst completely over the reef at all points with a
roar that seemed louder to me than thunder, and this roar continued for
some seconds while the wave rolled gradually along towards the cliff on
which we stood.  As its crest reared before us we felt that we were in
great danger, and turned to flee; but we were too late.  With a crash
that seemed to shake the solid rock, the gigantic billow fell, and
instantly the spouting-holes sent up a gush of waterspouts with such
force that they shrieked on issuing from their narrow vents.  It seemed
to us as if the earth had been blown up with water.  We were stunned and
confused by the shock, and so drenched and blinded with spray that we
knew not for a few moments whither to flee for shelter.  At length we
all three gained an eminence beyond the reach of the water.  But what a
scene of devastation met our gaze as we looked along the shore!  This
enormous wave not only burst over the reef, but continued its way across
the lagoon, and fell on the sandy beach of the island with such force
that it passed completely over it and dashed into the woods, levelling
the smaller trees and bushes in its headlong course.

On seeing this, Jack said he feared our bower must have been swept away,
and that the boat, which was on the beach, must have been utterly
destroyed.  Our hearts sank within us as we thought of this, and we
hastened round through the woods towards our home.  On reaching it we
found, to our great relief of mind, that the force of the wave had been
expended just before reaching the bower; but the entrance to it was
almost blocked up by the torn-up bushes and tangled heaps of seaweed.
Having satisfied ourselves as to the bower, we hurried to the spot where
the boat had been left; but no boat was there.  The spot on which it had
stood was vacant, and no sign of it could we see on looking around us.

"It may have been washed up into the woods," said Jack, hurrying up the
beach as he spoke.  Still no boat was to be seen, and we were about to
give ourselves over to despair when Peterkin called to Jack and said:

"Jack, my friend, you were once so exceedingly sagacious and wise as to
make me acquainted with the fact that cocoa-nuts grow upon trees.  Will
you now be so good as to inform me what sort of fruit that is growing on
the top of yonder bush? for I confess to being ignorant, or at least
doubtful, on the point."

We looked towards the bush indicated, and there, to our surprise, beheld
our little boat snugly nestled among the leaves.  We were very much
overjoyed at this, for we would have suffered any loss rather than the
loss of our boat.  We found that the wave had actually borne the boat on
its crest from the beach into the woods, and there launched it into the
heart of this bush, which was extremely fortunate; for had it been
tossed against a rock or a tree, it would have been dashed to pieces,
whereas it had not received the smallest injury.  It was no easy matter,
however, to get it out of the bush and down to the sea again.  This cost
us two days of hard labour to accomplish.

We had also much ado to clear away the rubbish from before the bower,
and spent nearly a week in constant labour ere we got the neighbourhood
to look as clean and orderly as before; for the uprooted bushes and
seaweed that lay on the beach formed a more dreadfully confused-looking
mass than one who had not seen the place after the inundation could
conceive.

Before leaving the subject I may mention, for the sake of those who
interest themselves in the curious natural phenomena of our world, that
this gigantic wave occurs regularly on some of the islands of the
Pacific once, and sometimes twice, in the year.  I heard this stated by
the missionaries during my career in those seas.  They could not tell me
whether it visited all of the islands, but I was certainly assured that
it occurred periodically in some of them.

After we had got our home put to rights, and cleared of the debris of
the inundation, we again turned our thoughts to paying the penguins a
visit.  The boat was therefore overhauled and a few repairs done.  Then
we prepared a supply of provisions, for we intended to be absent at
least a night or two--perhaps longer.  This took us some time to do;
for, while Jack was busy with the boat, Peterkin was sent into the woods
to spear a hog or two, and had to search long, sometimes, ere he found
them.  Peterkin was usually sent on this errand when we wanted a pork
chop (which was not seldom), because he was so active and could run so
wonderfully fast that he found no difficulty in overtaking the hogs; but
being dreadfully reckless, he almost invariably tumbled over stumps and
stones in the course of his wild chase, and seldom returned home without
having knocked the skin off his shins.  Once, indeed, a more serious
accident happened to him.  He had been out all the morning alone, and
did not return at the usual time to dinner.  We wondered at this, for
Peterkin was always very punctual at the dinner-hour.  As supper-time
drew near we began to be anxious about him, and at length sallied forth
to search the woods.  For a long time we sought in vain; but a little
before dark we came upon the tracks of the hogs, which we followed up
until we came to the brow of a rather steep bank or precipice.  Looking
over this, we beheld Peterkin lying in a state of insensibility at the
foot, with his cheek resting on the snout of a little pig, which was
pinned to the earth by the spear.  We were dreadfully alarmed, but
hastened to bathe his forehead with water, and had soon the satisfaction
of seeing him revive.  After we had carried him home, he related to us
how the thing had happened.

"You must know," said he, "I walked about all the forenoon, till I was
as tired as an old donkey, without seeing a single grunter--not so much
as a track of one; but as I was determined not to return empty-handed, I
resolved to go without my dinner, and--"

"What!" exclaimed Jack, "did you _really_ resolve to do that?"

"Now, Jack, hold your tongue," returned Peterkin.  "I say that I
resolved to forego my dinner and to push to the head of the small
valley, where I felt pretty sure of discovering the hogs.  I soon found
that I was on the right scent, for I had scarcely walked half-a-mile in
the direction of the small plum-tree we found there the other day when a
squeak fell on my ear.  `Ho, ho,' said I, `there you go, my boys;' and I
hurried up the glen.  I soon started them, and singling out a fat pig,
ran tilt at him.  In a few seconds I was up with him, and stuck my spear
right through his dumpy body.  Just as I did so, I saw that we were on
the edge of a precipice--whether high or low, I knew not; but I had been
running at such a pace that I could not stop, so the pig and I gave a
howl in concert and went plunging over together.  I remembered nothing
