jaguar-skin above referred to, he bent his bow quickly, and sent an
arrow straight through the middle of it, thereafter raising himself with
a look of pride.

"Why, the fellow thinks I want him to show off his powers of shooting,"
said Lawrence.

"So he do--de idjit!" said Quashy.

With much anxiety of expression, great demonstration of vigorous action,
and many painful efforts of inventive genius, the two men tried to
convey their wishes to that son of the soil, but all in vain.  At last
in desperation Quashy suddenly seized the jaguar-skin, threw it over his
own shoulders, placed a long pole in Lawrence's hands, and said--

"Now, massa, you look out, I's agwine to spring at you, and you stick
me."

He uttered a mighty roar as he spoke, and bounded towards his master,
who, entering at once into the spirit of the play, received him on the
point of his spear, whereupon the human jaguar instantly fell and
revelled for a few seconds in the agonies of death.  Then he calmly
rose.

"Now," said he, with a look of contempt, "if he no understan' dat, it's
'cause he hain't got no brains."

At first the Indian had gazed at this little scene with a look of
intense astonishment.  When it was finished he burst into a fit of
hearty laughter.  Evidently it was the best piece of acting he had seen
since he was born, and if he had been other than a savage, he must
certainly have shouted "bravo!" perhaps "encore!" and clapped his hands.

"Boh! he's a born idjit!" cried Quashy, turning away in disgust, but a
new idea seemed to flash into his fertile brain.

"Stop a bit!" he suddenly exclaimed, seizing a piece of flat bark that
lay at his feet.  On this, with the point of a charred stick, he drew a
triangular form, with three dots in it for two eyes and a nose.  An oval
attached to this represented a body; at the other end a long waving line
served for a tail; four short lines below indicated legs.  This creature
he covered all over with spots.

"There," he cried, sticking it into a bush, and glaring at the Indian,
"jaguar!--jaguar!"

Catching up the pole which Lawrence had thrown down, he rushed at this
jaguar, and pierced it through the heart.  Thereafter, in hot haste, he
picked up Tiger's bow and arrows, ran down to the river, put them into a
small canoe, and thrust it into the water.  Holding on with one hand, he
waved with the other.

"Ho! hi! come along, you stuppid idjit!"

The "stuppid idjit" was enlightened at last.  With a dignified smile,
which would probably have been a frown if he had understood Quashy's
words, he went up to his hut, and selected a lance and a bow, with
which, and a quiver of arrows, he returned to the little hunting canoe.

Seeing that they were now understood, Lawrence took his shot-gun and
pistols; the negro also armed himself, and in a few minutes more they
found themselves paddling gently down the sluggish current of the river.

The scenery through which those curiously assorted hunters passed that
day in their light canoe was singularly beautiful; and when, turning up
one of the narrow streams that fed the main river, they came into a
region of sweet, mellow twilight, caused by the over-arching trees,
where the very aspect of nature suggested, though it could not create,
coolness, Lawrence felt as if he had been at last transported into those
famous regions of fairyland which, if they really existed, and we were
in very deed to get into them, would, perchance, not equal, and
certainly could not excel, our own actual world!

Gigantic trees towered upwards till their heads were lost in the
umbrageous canopy, while their stems were clasped by powerful snake-like
creepers, or adorned with flowering parasites.  The bushes grew so thick
and tangled that it seemed as if neither man nor beast could penetrate
them--which indeed was the case, as regards man, in many places; yet
here and there unexpected openings permitted the charmed eyes to rest
upon romantic vistas where creepers, convolvuli, and other flowers, of
every shape, hue, and size, hung in festoons and clusters, or carpeted
the ground.  Fruit, too, was there in abundance.  Everything seemed to
bear fruit.  The refreshing and not too luscious prickly pear; the
oukli, an enormous cactus, not unlike the prickly pear but with larger
fruit, whose delightful pulp was of a blood-red colour; the ancoche,
with sweet-tasted pearl-like drops, and many others.

There was plenty of animal life, also, in and around this stream, to
interest the hunters, who were now obliged to exert themselves a little
to make head against the sluggish current.  Water-hens were innumerable,
and other wild-fowl flew or paddled about, enjoying, apparently, a most
luxuriant existence, while brown ant-hills were suggestive of
exceedingly busy life below as well as above ground.  There are many
kinds of ants out there, some of them very large, others not quite so
large, which, however, make up in vicious wickedness what they lack in
size.

At one bend in the stream they came suddenly on a boa-constrictor which
was swimming across; at another turn they discovered a sight which
caused Lawrence to exclaim--

"There's a breakfast for you, Quashy.  What would you say to that?"

"I'd like to hab 'im cooked, massa."

The reference was to an alligator which was crossing the stream a few
yards ahead of them, with a live boa in his jaws.  The huge serpent was
about twelve feet long, and wriggled horribly to escape, but the monster
had it fast by the middle.  Evidently its doom was fixed.

Several tapirs and a band of grunting peccaries were also seen, but all
these were passed without molestation, for the ambitions of our hunters
that day soared to nothing less than the tiger of the American jungles--
the sneaking, lithe, strong, and much-dreaded jaguar.

Spotted Tiger seemed to have at last become fully aware of the spirit of
his companions, for he took no apparent note of the various animals seen
as they passed along, and evidently was on the outlook for the monarch
of the jungle.  Having been told by Pedro that he was a celebrated
hunter, Lawrence felt sure that he would lead them to success.

"Why you no shoot de deer an' pepper de alligators, massa?" asked Quashy
at last, after several of the creatures mentioned had been seen and
passed.

"Because I don't want them," returned Lawrence, "and I have no pleasure
in useless destruction of life.  Besides, I am anxious to shoot a
jaguar, having a strong wish to take home the claws and skull of one--
the first for my friends, the last for a museum.  When we want food I
will shoot deer, or anything else that's eatable."

Quashy remained silent.  He seemed to be revolving his master's reply in
a philosophical way, when something between a snarl and a growl turned
his thoughts sharply into another channel.

Tiger quietly prepared his bow and arrows and laid his spears so that
they should be handy.  Lawrence and the negro also got ready their
weapons, and then they advanced with caution, dipping their paddles
lightly, and gazing earnestly into the jungle on the right bank of the
stream.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE HUNT CONTINUED; ONE OF THE HUNTERS ALMOST CONCLUDED.  EXPLORATIONS
INDULGED IN, AND A CAPTURE EFFECTED.

"Dar, massa, dar he is," exclaimed Quashy, in a hoarse whisper, pointing
into the bushes.

"Nonsense, man," replied Lawrence, in a low voice, "it's only an
ant-hill."

Even in that moment of excitement, Lawrence could scarce refrain from
laughter at the face of his humble follower, for Quashy's business in
life had not accustomed him to much sport at any time; and the prospect
of actually assisting at the slaughter of a jaguar or a puma had stirred
every nerve and fibre of his black being into intense excitation, so
that his eyes and nostrils were dilated to the utmost, and he panted
vehemently--with hope, of course, not fear!

Tiger, on the contrary, was cool and calm, though watchful.  He paid no
attention whatever to his companions, being too well acquainted with his
work to stand in need of either advice or assistance from them.

As guide, the savage occupied the bow of the canoe; Lawrence sat in the
middle, and Quashy in the stern, for he understood how to steer.  Having
been admonished to hold his tongue, he crouched so as, if possible, to
diminish his size.  He also pursed his lips,--and what a tight rounding
and projecting of superfluous flesh that pursing was no tongue can
adequately tell.  He also glared, and this "talking with the eyes" was a
mute sermon in itself.

Yet no jaguar could be seen.  Silently, with dip of paddle that made no
sound, and glide of craft through the water that produced only an oily
ripple, they slowly ascended the stream.

At first Lawrence had seized his fowling-piece, which was charged with
ball for the occasion; but as time passed, and the Indian showed no
intention of landing, he laid the gun down, and again took up his
paddle.

After a time, through some inadvertence of Quashy, the canoe was sent
rather close in among the reeds and giant leaves of the bank.

"That was stupid of you, Quash," said Lawrence, as he stood up to assist
Tiger in backing out.

"Das true, massa," said the negro, in profoundest humility of
self-condemnation, "I's a black idjit."

As the fore part of the canoe had touched on a mudbank, Lawrence seized
one of the Indian's lances, and used the butt end as a pole with which
to push off.  Under this impulse the canoe was gradually sliding into
deep water, when a rustling of the leaves was heard, and next instant a
full-sized jaguar sprang upon the Indian with cat-like agility.  Whether
the brute had slipped on the muddy bank we cannot say, but it missed its
aim, and, instead of alighting on the shoulders of the man, it merely
struck him on the head with one of its paws in passing, and went with a
tremendous splash into the water.

Tiger fell forward insensible from the severe scalp-wound inflicted.
Next instant the jaguar rose, grasped the edge of the canoe, and almost
overturned it as it strove to climb in; and there is no doubt that in
another moment it would have succeeded, for the attack was so sudden
that Quashy sat paralysed, while Lawrence forgot his pistols, and his
gun lay in the bottom of the canoe!  Happily, however, he recovered
enough of presence of mind to use the lance in his hands.  Turning the
point of the weapon to the jaguar's mouth, he thrust it in with such
tremendous force that it passed right down its throat and into its very
vitals.  With a gasping snarl the monster fell back into the stream, and
was quickly drowned as well as impaled.

"Help me to haul him on board," cried Lawrence.

Thus awakened, the negro, relieving his feelings by giving vent to a
roar which partook somewhat of a cheer, seized the jaguar's tail.  His
master grasped its ears, and in another moment it lay in the bottom of
the canoe.

"Now, help to lay the poor fellow beside it," said Lawrence.

"O massa!--he not dead, eh?" groaned the negro, as he assisted in the
work.

"No; nor likely to die yet a while," replied Lawrence, with much
satisfaction, as he examined and bound up the scalp-wound.  "It is not
deep; he'll soon come round; but we must get him home without delay.
Out with your paddle, Quashy, and use it well.  I'll take the bow."

The canoe, which, during these proceedings, had been floating slowly
down stream, was now turned in the right direction, and in a short time
was out upon the larger river.

Here, however, they had to labour with energy against the stream, and it
was far on in the afternoon before they came in sight of the Indian's
hut.  By that time Spotted Tiger had partially recovered, as Lawrence
observed during a pause made for rest.  On reaching an eddy, which
carried the canoe in the right direction, they rested again.  The
cessation of paddling appeared to rouse the wounded man, for he sat up,
and, with a half-dazed look, stared at the head of the dead jaguar, on
the haunch of which his elbow leaned.  Then he cast an inquiring look at
Lawrence, who replied to him with a nod and a smile, and went on to
indicate, by means of pantomime, what had occurred.

He pointed to the animal's claws, and to Tiger's head; then to the
bloody spear which lay at his side, and to the jaguar's blood-stained
throat, after which he pointed to his own breast and nodded again.

The Indian evidently understood him, for an expression of gratitude
overspread his countenance as he extended his right hand--English
fashion--for a shake.  Our hero was not slow to grasp it, and the two
exchanged a squeeze which told of lasting friendship and good-will.

A few minutes later, and the canoe was run upon the bank in front of the
hut, where all the children were assembled to receive them.

It did not seem as if any of the family were deeply affected by the
shaky appearance of the father as he stepped on shore, but the younger
members evinced feelings of intense delight when the jaguar was lifted
out; and two of them, seizing the tail as a tow-rope, passed it over
their shoulders, and dragged the carcass up to the hut to show it to
their mother.

O mothers! loving repositories of childhood's joys and woes, ye are
unquestionably the same in substance and in spirit all the world over!

Tiger's wife was more affected than Lawrence expected she would have
been by her husband's accident, and tended him with anxious care.  By
taking hold of him, and laying him gently down in a corner opposite to
that of his sick child, Lawrence gave him to understand that it was his
duty to take rest.  To say truth, he did not require much persuasion,
but at once laid his head on his pillow, and quietly went to sleep.

"The hospital is filling rather quickly, Manuela," said Lawrence, when
he had finished tending his new patient, "and your duties are
increasing, I fear."

"No fear.  Me likes to nuss," replied the girl, with a look that puzzled
the young doctor.

It was Manuela's fascinating smile that came hardest on our poor hero.
When she looked grave or sad, he could regard her as a mere statue, an
unusually classical-looking bronze savage; but when she smiled, there
was something so bewitchingly sweet in the lines of her little face that
he felt constrained to shut his eyes, turn away, and groan in spirit, to
think that she was brown, and a savage!

"Was there _ever_ a case," he thought, "so mysteriously miserable, so
singularly sad, as mine!  If she were only white, I would marry her at
once, (if she would have me), for the sake of her gentle spirit alone,--
ay, even though she were the child of a costermonger; but I cannot, I
_do_ not, love a savage, the daughter of a savage chief, with a skin the
colour of shoe leather!  No, it is impossible! and yet, I am in love
with her spirit.  I know it.  I feel it.  I never heard of such a
strange thing before,--a man in love with a portion of a woman, and that
the immaterial portion!"

The last word changed the current of his thoughts, for it suggested the
idea of another "portion" belonging to some girls with which men are too
apt to fall in love!

"Massa, de grub's ready," said Quashy, entering the hut at that moment.

"Go to work then, Quash.  Don't wait.  I'll be with you directly."

But Quashy did wait.  He was much too unselfish a son of ebony to think
of beginning before his master.

When they had seated themselves on the grass outside the hut, along with
Manuela, who left her post of duty in order to dine, and had made a
considerable impression on the alligator-ragout and tiger-steaks and
other delicacies, Quashy heaved a deep sigh of partial satisfaction, and
asked if Tiger would be well enough to go out hunting next day.

"I think not," said Lawrence; "no doubt he may _feel_ able for it, but
if he shows any disposition to do so, I shall forbid him."

"How you forbid him, when you not can speak hims tongue?" asked Manuela,
in a mild little voice, but with an arch look to which her arched black
eyebrows gave intense expression.

"Well," replied Lawrence, laughing, "I must try signs, I suppose, as
usual."

"No use, massa," said Quashy; "nebber make him understan'.  I gib you a
plan.  See here.  You tie him up hand an' foot; den we go off huntin' by
our lone, an' let him lie till we comes back."

Lawrence shook his head.  "I fear he would kill us on our return.  No,
we must just go off early in the morning before he wakes, and get
Manuela to try her hand at sign-language.  She can prevail on him, no
doubt, to remain at home."

"I vill try," said Manuela, with a laugh.

In pursuance of this plan, Lawrence and Quashy rose before broad
daylight the following morning, launched the little canoe they had used
the day before, put gun, spears, etcetera, on board, and were about to
push off, when one of the boys of the family ran down, and seemed to
wish to accompany them.

"We'd better take him," said Lawrence; "he's not very big or old, but he
seems intelligent enough, and no doubt knows something of his father's
haunts and sporting customs."

"You's right, massa," assented the negro.

Lawrence made a sign to the lad to embark, and Quashy backed the
invitation with--

"Jump aboord, Leetle Cub."

Instead of obeying, Leetle Cub ran up into the bush, but presently
returned with a long stick like a headless lance, a bow and arrows, and
an instrument resembling a large grappling anchor, made of wood.
Placing these softly in the canoe, the little fellow, who seemed to be
about ten years of age, stepped in, and they all pushed off into the
river--getting out of sight of the hut without having roused any one.
Turning into the same stream which they had visited the day before, they
pushed past the place where the jaguar had been killed, and entered on
an exploration, as Lawrence called it.

"I'm very fond of an exploration, Quashy," he said, dipping his paddle
softly, and working gently, for there was so little current that it
seemed more like the narrows of a lake than a stream.

"Yes, I's bery fond ob 'sploration too, massa," replied the negro, with
a self-satisfied nod.  "It am so nice not to know whar you's gwine to,
or whar you's comin' to, or who's dar, or who's not dar, or what fish'll
turn up, or what beast'll turn down, or what nixt--oh! it _am_ so jolly!
what you sniggerin' at, you dirty leetle cub?"
