and thus enjoyed the pleasure of his society for a considerable time
after the breaking out of the war.

I preferred this course to that of returning home, because, first, I
could not bear the thought of leaving the country without making every
possible exertion to ascertain the fate of my yacht's crew, and
rendering them succour if possible; and, secondly, because I felt an
irresistible desire to alleviate, professionally, the sufferings of
those who were certain to be wounded during the war.  I also experienced
much curiosity to know something more of the power and influence of
modern war-engines.  Perhaps some people will think this latter an
unworthy motive.  It may have been so; I cannot tell.  All I can say is
that it was a very secondary one, and would not, of itself, have been
sufficient to induce me to remain for an hour to witness the horrors and
carnage of battle-fields.  Still, putting the various motives together,
I felt justified in remaining.

In order that I might render still more effective service to the cause
of humanity, I wrote, immediately after my appointment as surgeon, to an
intimate friend, north of the Tweed, offering my services as war
correspondent to a paper of which he was editor, namely, the _Scottish
Bawbee_.

That celebrated journal,--well known on the east, west, and north coasts
of Scotland, and extensively circulated in the centre and south of the
country, including England,--is liberal in its principles, conservative
in reference only to things that are good, and violently radical when
treating of those that are bad.  It enjoys the credit of being curt in
its statements, brief in the expression of its opinions, perfectly
silent in reference to its surmises, distinctly repudiative of the gift
of prophecy, consistently averse to the attribution of motives,
persistently wise in giving the shortest possible account of murders and
scandalous cases, and copious in its references to literature, art, and
religious progress, besides being extremely methodical in its
arrangement.

In regard to the latter quality, I cannot refrain from referring to its
sensible mode of treating births, marriages, and deaths, by putting the
Christian and surname of the born, married, or defunct as the _first_
words in each announcement, so that one's digestion at breakfast is
aided by reading with some comfort of the joys and sorrows of one's
friends, instead of having incipient dyspepsia engendered by a painful
search for the main facts in confusing sentences.

The editor's reply came by return of post.  It contained the acceptance
of my services, and a proposal of extremely liberal terms, allowing me,
besides a handsome retaining fee, two horses, and such travelling
attendants as might be found necessary.  There were also certain
emphatic stipulations which are worth recording.  I was not, on any
pretext whatever, to attempt the divination, much less the revelation,
of the future.  I was never, upon any consideration, to be seduced into
lengthy descriptions of things that I did not see, or minute particulars
about matters which I did not know.  I was utterly to ignore, and refuse
to be influenced by, personal predilections or prejudices in regard to
either combatant.  I was to say as little about scenery as was
consistent with a correct delineation of the field of war, and never to
venture on sentimental allusions to sunsets, moonlights, or
water-reflections of any kind.  I was not to forget that a newspaper was
a vehicle for the distribution of news, the announcement of facts and
the discussion thereof, not a medium for the dissemination of fancies
and fiddlededee.  Above all, I was never to write a column and a half of
speculation as to the possible and _probable_ movements of armies; to be
followed "in our next" by two columns of the _rumoured_ movements of
armies; to be continued "in our next" by two columns and a half of the
_actual_ movements of armies; to wind up "in our next" with three
columns of retrospective consideration as to what might, could, would,
or _should_ have been the movements of armies; but that I was, on the
contrary, to bear in remembrance the adage about "brevity" being the
"soul of wit," and, when I had nothing to write, to write nothing.  By
so doing, it was added, I should please the editor and charm the public,
one of whose minor griefs is, as regards newspapers, that it is brought
into a state of disgust with every event of this life long before it has
happened, and thoroughly nauseated with it long after it is past,--to
say nothing of the resulting mental confusion.

In case any gentleman of the press should feel injured by these
statements, I must remind him that I am not responsible for them.  They
are the sentiments of the _Scottish Bawbee_, which must be taken for
what they are worth.  It is true, I heartily agree with them, but that
is an entirely different subject, on which I do not enter.

I readily agreed to fall in with the wishes of the editor, and
thenceforward devoted myself, heart and soul, to correspondence and
surgery.  In both fields of labour I found ample scope for all the
powers of body and mind that I possessed.

Just about this time I received a letter from my dear mother, who was
aware of my plans.  It cost me some anxiety, as it was utterly
impossible that I should comply with the injunctions it contained.
"Jeffry, my dear boy," she wrote, "let me entreat you, with all the
solemnity of maternal solicitude, to take care of your health.  Let
Russians and Turks kill and expose themselves as they please, but ever
bear in remembrance that it is your duty to avoid danger.  Whatever you
do, keep your feet dry and your--I need not go further into particulars;
medical allusions cannot always be couched in language such as one
desires.  Never sleep on damp ground, nor, if possible, without a roof
or a covering of some sort over your head.  Even a parasol is better
than nothing.  If, despite your precautions, you should catch cold, tie
a worsted sock--one of the red and black striped ones I have knitted for
you--round your neck, and take one drop of aconite--only one, remember--
before going to bed.  I know how, with your allopathic notions, you will
smile at this advice, but I assure you, as your mother, that it will
prove an infallible cure.  Never sit in a draught when you can avoid it.
If you ever come under fire, which I trust you never may, be sure to
get behind a house, or a wall, or a stone, if possible; if you cannot do
so, get behind a soldier, one larger than yourself would be preferable
of course, but if you have not the opportunity of doing this, then turn
your side to the enemy, because in that position you are a much narrower
target, and more likely to escape their bullets.  I need not caution you
not to run away.  I would rather see you, dear boy, in a premature
grave, than hear that you had run away.  But you _could not_ run away.
No Childers ever did so--except from school.

"Let the phial of globules which I gave you at parting be your bosom
friends, till their friendship is required in another and a lower
region.  They are a sovereign remedy against rheumatism, catarrh,
bronchitis, dyspepsia, lumbago, nervous affections, headaches, loss of
memory, debility, monomania, melancholia, botherolia, theoretica, and,
in short, all the ills that flesh is heir to, if only taken in time."

It struck me, as I folded my mother's letter and that of the editor,
that there never was a man who went into any course of action better
guarded and advised than myself.  At the moment when this thought
occurred to me, my friend Nicholas burst into my room in a state of
unusual excitement.

"Come, Jeff," he said, "I'm detailed for another secret duty.  People
seem to have inordinate faith in me, for all my duties are secret!  Are
you willing to go with me?"

"Go where?"  I asked.

"That I may not tell," he replied; "anywhere, or nowhere, or everywhere.
All I can say is, that if you go, it will be to act as surgeon to a
squadron of cavalry.  I see you have letters.  Good news from home--eh?
What of Bella?"

"Yes" I replied, "good news and good advice--listen."

I reopened the letters and read them aloud.

"Capital!" exclaimed Nicholas, "just the thing for you.  No doubt my
expedition will furnish a column and a half, if not more, of
unquestionable facts for the _Scottish Bawbee_.  Get ready, my boy; I
start in half-an-hour."

He swung off in the same hearty, reckless manner with which he had
entered; and I immediately set about packing up my surgical instruments
and note-books, and making other preparations for a journey of unknown
extent and duration.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

MY FIRST EXPERIENCE OF ACTUAL WAR, AND MY THOUGHTS THEREON.

We set out by the light of the moon.  Our party consisted of a small
force of Russian light cavalry.  The officer in command was evidently
well acquainted with our route, for he rode smartly ahead without
hesitation or sign of uncertainty for several hours.

At first Nicholas and I conversed in low tones as we cantered side by
side over hill and dale, but as the night advanced we became less
communicative, and finally dropped into silence.  As I looked upon
village and hamlet, bathed in the subdued light, resting in quietness
and peace, I thought sadly of the evils that war would surely bring upon
many an innocent and helpless woman and child.

It was invariably in this course that my thoughts about war flowed.  I
was, indeed, quite alive to the national evils of war, and I will not
admit that any man-of-peace feels more sensitively than I do the fact
that, in war, a nation's best, youngest, and most hopeful blood is
spilled, while its longest lives and most ardent spirits are ruthlessly,
uselessly sacrificed--its budding youths, its strapping men, its
freshest and most muscular, to say nothing of mental, manhood.  Still,
while contemplating war and its consequences, I have always been much
more powerfully impressed with the frightful consequences to women and
children, than anything else.  To think of our wives, our little ones,
our tender maidens, our loving matrons, and our poor helpless babes,
being exposed to murder, rapine, torture, and all the numerous and
unnameable horrors of war, for the sake of some false, some fanciful,
some utterly ridiculous and contemptible idea, such as the connection of
one or two provinces of a land with this nation or with that, or the
"integrity of a foreign empire," has always filled me with sensations of
indignation approaching to madness, not unmingled, I must add, with
astonishment.

That savages will fight among themselves is self-evident; that Christian
nations shall defend themselves from the assaults of savages is also
obvious; but that two Christian nations should go to war for anything,
on any ground whatever, is to my mind inexplicable and utterly
indefensible.

Still, they do it.  From which circumstance I am forced to conclude that
the Christianity as well as the civilisation and common-sense of one or
the other of such nations is, for the time, in abeyance.

Of course I was not perplexed in regard to the Turks.  Their religion is
not Christian.  Moreover, it was propagated by the sword, and teaches
coercion in religious matters; but I could not help feeling that the
Russians were too ready to forsake diplomacy and take to war.

"My dear fellow," said Nicholas, rousing himself, when I stated my
difficulty, "don't you see that the vacillating policy of England has
driven us to war in spite of ourselves?  She would not join the rest of
Europe in compelling Turkey to effect reforms which she--Turkey--had
promised to make, so that nothing else was left for us but to go to
war."

"My dear fellow," I retorted, somewhat hotly, "that Turkey has behaved
brutally towards its own subjects is a well-known fact.  That she has
treated the representatives of all the great powers of Europe with
extreme insolence is another well-known fact, but it is yet to be proved
that the efforts of diplomacy were exhausted, and even if they were, it
remained for Europe, not for Russia, to constitute herself the champion
of the oppressed."

"Jeff, my boy," returned Nicholas, with a smile, "I'm too sleepy to
discuss that subject just now, further than to say that I don't agree
with you."

He did indeed look sleepy, and as we had been riding many hours I
forbore to trouble him further.

By daybreak that morning we drew near to the town of Giurgevo, on the
Roumanian--or, I may say, the Russian--side of the Danube, and soon
afterwards entered it.

Considerable excitement was visible among its inhabitants, who, even at
that early hour, were moving hurriedly about the streets.  Having parted
from our escort, Nicholas and I refreshed ourselves at the Hotel de
l'Europe, and then went to an hospital, where my companion wished to
visit a wounded friend--"one," he said, "who had lately taken part in a
dashing though unsuccessful expedition."

This visit to Giurgevo was my first introduction to some of the actual
miseries of war.  The hospital was a clean, well-ventilated building.
Rows of low beds were ranged neatly and methodically along the
whitewashed walls.  These were tenanted by young men in every stage of
suffering and exhaustion.  With bandaged heads or limbs they sat or
reclined or lay, some but slightly wounded and still ruddy with the hue
of health on their young cheeks; some cut and marred in visage and
limbs, with pale cheeks and blue lips, that told of the life-blood
almost drained.  Others were lying flat on their backs, with the soft
brown moustache or curly brown hair contrasting terribly with the grey
hue of approaching death.

In one of the beds we found the friend of Nicholas.

He was quite a youth, not badly wounded, and received us with
enthusiasm.

"My dear Nicholas," he said, in reply to a word of condolence about the
failure of the expedition, "you misunderstand the whole matter.
Doubtless it did not succeed, but that was no fault of ours, and it was
a glorious attempt.  Come, I will relate it.  Does your friend speak
Russian?"

"He at all events understands it," said I.

On this assurance the youth raised his hand to his bandaged brow as if
to recall events, and then related the incident, of which the following
is the substance.

While the Russians were actively engaged in preparing to cross the
Danube at a part where the river is full of small islands, the Turks
sent monitors and gunboats to interrupt the operations.  The Russians
had no vessels capable of facing the huge ironclads of the enemy.  Of
the ten small boats at the place, eight were engaged in laying torpedoes
in the river to protect the works, and two were detailed to watch the
enemy.  While they were all busily at work, the watchers in a boat named
the _Schootka_ heard the sound of an approaching steamer, and soon after
descried a Turkish gunboat steaming up the river.  Out went the little
_Schootka_ like a wasp, with a deadly torpedo at the end of her spar.
The gun-boat saw and sought to evade her, put on full steam and hugged
the Turkish shore, where some hundreds of Circassian riflemen kept up an
incessant fire on the Russian boat.  It was hit, and its commander
wounded, but the crew and the second in command resolved to carry out
the attack.  The _Schootka_ increased her speed, and, to the
consternation of the Turks, succeeded in touching the gun-boat just
behind the paddle-boxes, but the torpedo refused to explode, and the
_Schootka_ was compelled to haul off, and make for shelter under a heavy
fire from the gun-boat and the Circassian riflemen, which quite riddled
her.  While she was making off a second Turkish gun-boat hove in sight.
The _Schootka_ had still another torpedo on board, one on the Harvey
principle.  This torpedo may be described as a somewhat square and flat
case, charged with an explosive compound.  When used it is thrown into
the sea and runs through the water on its edge, being held in that
position by a rope and caused to advance by pulling on it sidewise.
Anglers will understand this when I state that it works on the principle
of the "otter," and, somewhat like the celebrated Irish pig going to
market, runs ahead the more it is pulled back by the tail.  With this
torpedo the daring Russians resolved to attack the second gunboat, but
when they threw it overboard it would not work; something had gone wrong
with its tail, or with the levers by which, on coming into contact with
the enemy, it was to explode.  They were compelled therefore to abandon
the attempt, and seek shelter from the Turkish fire behind an island.

"So then," said I, on quitting the hospital, "torpedoes, although
_terrible_ in their action, are not always _certain_."

"Nothing is always certain," replied Nicholas, with a smile, "except the
flight of time, and as the matter on which I have come requires
attention I must now leave you for a few hours.  Don't forget the name
of our hotel.  That secure in a man's mind, he may lose himself in any
town or city with perfect safety--_au revoir_."

For some time I walked about the town.  The morning was bright and calm,
suggesting ideas of peace; nevertheless my thoughts could not be turned
from the contemplation of war, and as I wandered hither and thither,
looking out for reminiscences of former wars, I thought of the curiously
steady way in which human history repeats itself.  It seems to take
about a quarter of a century to teach men to forget or ignore the
lessons of the past and induce them to begin again to fight.  Here, in
1829, the Russians levelled the fortifications which at that time
encircled the town; here, in 1854, the Russians were defeated by the
Turks; and here, in 1872, these same Russians and Turks were at the same
old bloody and useless game--ever learning, yet never coming to a
knowledge of the great truth, that, with all their fighting, nothing has
been gained and nothing accomplished save a few changes of the men on
the chess-board, and the loss of an incalculable amount of life and
treasure.

As the day advanced it became very sultry.  Towards the afternoon I
stopped and gazed thoughtfully at the placid Danube, which, flowing
round the gentle curve of Slobosia, reflected in its glittering waters
the white domes and minarets of the opposite town of Rustchuk.  A low,
rumbling sound startled me just then from a reverie.  On looking up I
perceived a small puff of smoke roll out in the direction of the Turkish
shore.  Another and another succeeded, and after each shot a smaller
puff of smoke was seen to hang over the Turkish batteries opposite.
