them had now become the most interesting of all the animal creation.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

"JERKING" AN ELEPHANT.

Next day was one of severe, but joyful labour.  It was spent in "curing"
the elephant, not in a _medical_ sense, but in the language of the
provision-store.

Although not equal to either beef or mutton, or even pork, the flesh of
the elephant is sufficiently palatable to be eaten.  There is no reason
why it should not be, for the animal is a clean feeder, and lives
altogether on vegetable substances--the leaves and tender shoots of
trees, with several species of bulbous roots, which he well knows how to
extract from the ground with his tusks and trunk.  It does not follow
from this that his _beef_ should be well tasted--since we see that the
hog, one of the most unclean of feeders, yields most delicious "pork;"
while another of the same family (_pachydermatii_) that subsists only on
sweet succulent roots, produces a flesh both insipid and bitter.  I
allude to the South American tapir.  The quality of the food, therefore,
is no criterion of the quality of the flesh.

It is true that the beef of the elephant was not what Von Bloom and most
of his family would have chosen for their regular diet.  Had they been
sure of procuring a supply of antelope venison, the great carcass might
have gone, not to the "dogs," but to their kindred the hyenas.  But they
were not sure of getting even a single antelope, and therefore decided
upon "curing" the elephant.  It would be a safe stock to have on hand,
and need not interfere with their eating venison, or any other dainty
that might turn up.

The first thing done was to cut out the tusks.  This proved a tough job,
and occupied full two hours.  Fortunately there was a good axe on hand.
But for this and Swartboy's knowledge, double the time might have been
wasted in the operation.

The ivory having been extracted and put away in a safe place, the
"cutting up" then commenced in earnest.  Von Bloom and Swartboy were the
"baas-butchers," while Hans and Hendrik played the part of "swabs."  As
the carcass lay half under water, they would have had some difficulty in
dealing with the under part.  But this they did not design to touch.
The upper half would be amply sufficient to provision them a long while;
and so they set about removing the skin from that side that was
uppermost.

The rough thick outer coat they removed in broad sheets cut into
sections; and then they peeled off several coats of an under-skin, of
tough and pliant nature.  Had they needed water-vessels, Swartboy would
have saved this for making them--as it is used for such purposes by the
Bushmen and other natives.  But they had vessels enough in the wagon,
and this skin was thrown away.

They had now reached the pure flesh, which they separated in large
sheets from the ribs; and then the ribs were cut out, one by one, with
the axe.  This trouble they would not have taken--as they did not want
the ribs--but they cut them away for another reason, namely, to enable
them to get at the valuable fat, which lies in enormous quantities
around the intestines.  Of course for all cooking purposes, the fat
would be to them invaluable, and indeed almost necessary to render the
flesh itself eatable.

It is no easy matter to get at the fat in the inside of an elephant, as
the whole of the intestines have first to be removed.  But Swartboy was
not to be deterred by a little trouble; so _climbing into the interior_
of the huge carcass, he commenced cutting and delving, and every now and
then passing a multitude of "inwards" out to the others, who carried
them off out of the way.

After a long spell of this work, the fat was secured, and carefully
packed in a piece of clean under-skin; and then the "butchering" was
finished.

Of course the four feet, which along with the trunk are considered the
"tit-bits," had already been separated at the fetlock joint; and stood
out upon the bank, for the future consideration of Swartboy.

The next thing to be done was to "cure" the meat.  They had a stock of
suit--that precious, though, as lately discovered, _not_ indispensable
article.  But the quantity--stowed away in a dry corner of the wagon--
was small, and would have gone but a short way in curing an elephant.

They had no idea of using it for such a purpose.  Flesh can be preserved
without salt; and not only Swartboy, but Von Bloom himself, knew how to
preserve it.  In all countries where salt is scarce, the process of
"jerking" meat is well understood, and consists simply in cutting it
into thin strips and hanging it out in the sun.  A few days of bright
warm sunshine will "jerk" it sufficiently; and meat thus dried will keep
good for months.  A slow fire will answer the purpose nearly as well;
and in the absence of sunshine, the fire is often resorted to.

Sun-dried meat in South Africa is called "biltongue."  The Spaniards of
Mexico name it "tasajo," while those of Peru style it "charqui."  In
English it is "jerked" meat.

Several hours were spent in cutting the elephant-beef into strips, and
then a number of forked poles were set up, others were laid horizontally
over the forks, and upon these the meat was suspended, and hung down in
numberless festoons.

Before the sun went down, the neighbourhood of the camp presented a rare
appearance.  It looked somewhat like the enclosure of a yarn-bleacher,
except that the hanging strips, instead of being white, were of a
beautiful clear ruby colour.

But the work was not yet completed.  The feet remained to be
"preserved," and the mode of curing these was entirely different.  That
was a secret known only to Swartboy, and in the execution of it the
Bushman played first fiddle, with the important air of a _chef de
cuisine_.  He proceeded as follows:--

He first dug a hole in the ground, about two feet deep, and a little
more in diameter--just large enough to admit one of the feet, which was
nearly two feet diameter at the base.  The earth which came out of this
hole Swartboy placed in the form of a loose embankment around the edge.

By his direction the boys had already collected upon the spot a large
quantity of dried branches and logs.  These Swartboy now built over the
hole, into a pyramid of ten feet high, and then set the pile on fire.
He next proceeded to make three other pits precisely similar, and built
over each a fire like the first, until four large fires were burning
upon the ground.

The fires being now fairly under way, he could only wait until each had
burned down.  This would carry the process into the night, and so it
turned out; but Swartboy had a foresight of this.  He knew he would get
through with the more important portion of his work before bedtime.

When the first fire had burned quite to red cinders, Swartboy's hardest
turn of duty began.  With a shovel he lifted the cinders out of the
hole, until it was empty; but he was more than an hour in performing
this apparently simple labour.  The difficulty arose from the intense
heat he had to encounter, which drove him back after every few moments'
work; so that he was compelled to retreat at intervals in order to cool
himself.

The "baas," as well as Hendrik and Hans, took turns with him, until all
four were perspiring as if they had been shut up for half-an-hour in a
baker's oven.

When the hole was thoroughly scooped clean of coals, Swartboy, assisted
by Von Bloom, lifted one of the huge feet; and, carrying it as near as
they dare go on account of the scorching heat, they dropped it in upon
its base.

The sandy earth which had been originally removed, and which was now as
hot as molten lead, was pushed over, and around the foot; and then the
cinders were raked on top, and over that another huge fire was kindled.

The same process was gone through with the other three feet, and all
four were to be left in the "oven" until the fires should be burned
down, when they would be found sufficiently baked.

Swartboy would then rake off the cinders, take out the feet with a sharp
wooden spit, beat them well to get rid of the dust, scrape the sand
clear, then pare off the outside skin, when they would be ready either
to be eaten or would keep for a long time.

Swartboy would do all this as soon as the four huge bonfires should burn
down.

But that would not be before the morning; so all of them, fatigued by
the extraordinary exertions of the day, finished their suppers of
broiled trunk, and went to rest under the protecting shadow of the
nwana.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE HIDEOUS HYENA.

Fatigued as they were, they would soon have fallen asleep.  But they
were not permitted to do so.  As they lay with closed eyes in that
half-dreamy state that precedes sleep, they were suddenly startled by
strange voices near the camp.

These voices were uttered in peals of loud laughter; and no one,
unacquainted with them, would have pronounced them to be anything else
than the voices of human beings.  They exactly resembled the strong
treble produced by the laugh of a maniac negro.  It seemed as if some
Bedlam of negroes had been let loose, and were approaching the spot.

I say approaching, because each moment the sounds grew clearer and
louder; and it was evident that whatever gave utterance to them was
coming nearer to the camp.

That there was more than one creature was evident--ay, and it was
equally evident that there was more than one _kind_ of creature; for so
varied were the voices, it would have puzzled a ventriloquist to have
given imitations of them all.  There was howling, and whining, and
grunting, and growling, and low melancholy moaning as of some one in
pain, and hissing, and chattering, and short sharp intonations, as if it
were the barking of dogs, and then a moment or two of deep silence, and
again that chorus of human-like laughter, that in point of horror and
hideous suggestions surpassed all the other sounds.

You will suppose that such a wild concert must have put the camp in a
state of great alarm.  Not a bit of it.  Nobody was frightened the
least--not even innocent little Truey, nor the diminutive Jan.

Had they been strangers to these sounds, no doubt they would have been
more than frightened.  They would have been terrified by them; for they
were calculated to produce such an effect upon any one to whose ears
they were new.

But Von Bloom and his family had lived too long upon the wild karoo to
be ignorant of those voices.  In the howling, and chattering, and
yelping, they heard but the cries of the jackal; and they well knew the
maniac laugh of the hideous hyena.

Instead of being alarmed, and springing from their beds, they lay still
and listened--not dreading any attack from the noisy creatures.

Von Bloom and the children slept in the wagon; Swartboy and Totty upon
the ground--but these lay close to the fires, and therefore did not fear
wild beasts of any kind.

But the hyenas and jackals upon this occasion appeared to be both
numerous and bold.  In a few minutes after they were first heard, their
cries rose around the camp on all sides, so near and so loud as to be
positively disagreeable--even without considering the nature of the
brutes that uttered them.

At last they came so close, that it was impossible to look in any
direction without seeing a pair of green or red eyes gleaming under the
light of the fires!  White teeth, too, could be observed, as the hyenas
opened their jaws, to give utterance to their harsh laughter-like cries.

With such a sight before their eyes, and such sounds ringing in their
ears, neither Von Bloom nor any of his people--tired as they were--could
go to sleep.  Indeed, not only was sleep out of the question, but, worse
than that, all--the field-cornet himself not excepted--began to
experience some feelings of apprehension, if not actual alarm.

They had never beheld a troop of hyenas so numerous and fierce.  There
could not be less than two dozen of them around the camp, with twice
that number of jackals.

Von Bloom knew that although, under ordinary circumstances, the hyena is
not a dangerous animal, yet there are places and times when he will
attack human beings.  Swartboy knew this well, and Hans, too, from
having read of it.  No wonder, then, that some apprehension was felt by
all of them.

The hyenas now behaved with such boldness, and appeared so ravenous,
that sleep was out of the question.  Some demonstration must be made to
drive the brutes away from the camp.

Von Bloom, Hans, and Hendrik, laid hold of their guns, and got out of
the wagon, while Swartboy armed himself with his bow and arrows.  All
four stood close by the trunk of the nwana, on the other side from that
where the fires were.  In this place they were in the shadow, where they
could best observe anything that should come under the light of the
fires without being themselves seen.  Their position was well chosen.

They had scarcely fixed themselves in it, when they perceived a great
piece of neglect they had been guilty of.  Now, for the first time it
occurred to them what had brought the hyenas around them in such
numbers.  Beyond a doubt it was the flesh of the elephant,--the
_biltongue_.

That was what the beasts were after; and all now saw that a mistake had
been committed in hanging the meat too low.  The hyenas might easily get
at it.

This was soon made manifest; for, even at the moment while they stood
watching the red festoons, plainly visible under the light of Swartboy's
fires, a shaggy spotted brute rushed forward, reared up on his
hind-legs, seized one of the pieces, dragged it down from the pole, and
then ran off with it into the darkness.

A rushing sound could be heard as the others joined him to get share of
his plunder; and, no doubt, in less than half a minute the morsel was
consumed; for, at the end of that time, glancing eyes and gleaming teeth
showed that the whole troop was back again and ready to make a fresh
seizure.

None of the hunters had fired, as the nimbleness with which the brutes
moved about rendered it difficult to take aim at any one of them; and
all knew that powder and lead were too precious to be wasted on a
"flying shot."

Emboldened by their success, the hyenas had now drawn nearer, and in a
moment more would have made a general charge upon the scaffolds of
flesh, and, no doubt, would have succeeded in carrying off a large
quantity of it.  But just then it occurred to Von Bloom that it would be
best to lay aside their guns and remedy the mistake they had made, by
putting the biltongue out of reach.  If they did not do so, they would
either have to remain awake all night and guard it, or else lose every
string of it.

How was it to be put out of reach?

At first they thought of collecting it into a heap and stowing it away
in the wagon.  That would not only be an unpleasant job, but it would
interfere with their sleeping-quarters.

An alternative, however, presented itself.  They saw that if the
scaffolds were only high enough, the meat might be easily hung so as to
be out of reach of the hyenas.  The only question was, how to place the
cross-poles a little higher.  In the darkness they could not obtain a
new set of uprights, and therein lay the difficulty.  How were they to
get over it?

Hans had the credit of suggesting a way: and that was, to take out some
of the uprights, splice them to the others, with the forked ends
uppermost, and then rest the horizontal poles on the upper forks.  That
would give a scaffold tall enough to hang the meat beyond the reach of
either jackals or hyenas.

Hans's suggestion was at once adopted.  Half of the uprights were taken
up and spliced against the others so as to raise their forks full twelve
feet in the air; and then the cross-poles were rested over their tops.
By standing upon one of the wagon-chests, Von Bloom was able to fling
the strips of meat over the horizontal poles, and in such a manner that
it hung only a few inches down, and was now quite beyond the reach of
the ravenous brutes.

When the business was finished, the party resumed their station under
the shadow of the tree, intending to watch for a while, and see how the
wolfish intruders would act.

They had not long to watch.  In less than five minutes the troop
approached the biltongue, howling, and gibbering, and laughing, as
before; only this time uttering peculiar cries, as if to express
disappointment.  They saw at a glance that the tempting festoons were no
longer within their reach!

