motionless, with the exception of the sea-mews that wheeled round the
summits of the cliffs or dived into the glassy sea.

All these things were noted and appreciated in various degrees by the
members of the party who hastened towards Saint Margaret's Bay, but none
of them commented much on the scenery.  They were too well accustomed to
the face of nature in every varying mood to be much struck with her face
on the present occasion.  Perhaps we may except Guy Foster, who, being
more of a city man than his companions, besides being more highly
educated, was more deeply impressed by what he saw that evening.  But
Guy was too much absorbed by the object of the expedition to venture any
remark on the beautiful aspect of nature.

"D'ye see that lugger, Bax?" said Bluenose, pointing to a particular
spot on the sea.

"Between the Yankee and the Frenchman?" said Bax, "I see it well enough.
What then?"

"That's Long Orrick's boat," replied the Captain, "I'd know it among a
thousand.  Depend on it we'll nab him to-night with a rich cargo of
baccy and brandy a-board.  The two B's are too much for him.  He'd sell
his soul for baccy and brandy."

"That's not such an uncommon weakness as you seem to think," observed
Guy.  "Every day men sell their souls for more worthless things."

"D'ye think so?" said Bluenose, with a philosophical twist in his
eyebrows.

"I know it," returned Guy; "men often sell both body and soul (as far as
we can judge) for a mere idea."

Here Bax, who had been examining the lugger in question with a
pocket-telescope, said that he had no doubt whatever Bluenose was right,
and hastened forward at a smarter pace than before.

In less than two hours they descended the steep cliffs to the shingle of
Saint Margaret's Bay; and at the same time the wind began to rise, while
the shades of night gradually overspread the scene.

Saint Margaret's Bay is one of those small, quiet, secluded hamlets
which are not unfrequently met with along our coasts, and in regard to
which the stranger is irresistibly led to ask mentally, if not really,
"Why did people ever come to build cottages and dwell here, and what do
they do?  How do they make a livelihood?"

No stranger ever obtains a satisfactory answer to these questions, for
the very good reason that, short though they be, the answers to them
would involve almost a volume, or a speech equal in length to that with
which the Chancellor of the Exchequer introduces his annual budget.
There would be various classes to describe, numerous wants to apprehend,
peculiar circumstances and conditions of social life to explain; in
short, the thing is a mystery to many, and we merely remark on the fact,
without having any intention of attempting to clear the mystery away.

So narrow is the strip of shingle that lies between the sea and the
cliffs in Saint Margaret's Bay, that the cottages have been built close
up to the latter--much too close, we venture to think, for safety; but
perhaps men who live in constant peril of their lives, count the
additional risk of being crushed along with their families under twenty
or thirty tons of chalk, unworthy of consideration!

On descending to the beach the first thing our party saw was the burly
figure of Coleman seated on his "donkey" by the "sad sea waves."

It must not be supposed that the coast-guard-man was literally astride
of a live ass!  No; his "donkey" was an exceedingly ingenious
contrivance invented specially for the use of a class of men who, being
human, cannot avoid becoming fatigued--yet who, being sentinels, must
not on any account whatever be permitted to encourage sleep.

The men of the coast-guard are subject to prolonged and frequent periods
of watching, by night as well as by day, hence they are liable to become
wearied.  It has been wisely considered that the most self-denying
mortal alive will, when hard pressed, sit down on a rock or on the
ground, if need be, just to relieve his legs a little.  The same wise
consideration has recalled the fact that when men do this they become
helplessly incapable of resisting the drowsy god, and will assuredly go
to sleep, against their will and their judgment.

To meet this case, some truly great mind invented the "donkey."  This
contrivance is simply a stool with _one_ leg.  The top of the stool is
not round, but oblong, and very small.  A hole in the centre receives
the solitary leg, which is attached to it by a piece of cord, and can be
pulled out when occasion requires, and the machine thrown over the arm
as one would throw a cloak or scarf.  The beauty of the donkey is, that
it forms an excellent seat on which a man can balance himself and rest
with great comfort as long as he keeps awake; but should he fall asleep,
even for one instant, he infallibly comes to the ground with a shock so
severe that he is quite certain to remain wakeful during the remainder
of his vigil!

"What, ho!  Coleman," cried Bax, as he and his friends drew near, "have
you actually acquired the art of sleeping on a donkey?"

Coleman rose and turned round with a good-humoured smile on his ruddy
visage:

"Nay, not quite that," said he, "but the hiss of the waves is apt to
dull the hearin' a bit, an' one don't naturally look for enemies from
land'ard, d'ye see?"

"Mayhap not," said Bluenose, taking a fresh quid of tobacco out of a
brass box which he carried at all times in his waistcoat pocket; "but I
expect an enemy from seaward to-night who'll be oncommon glad to make
your acquaintance, no doubt!"

Here the Captain chuckled, engulfed his fresh quid, and proceeded to
explain the nature of their errand.  Having done so, he asked Coleman
what he thought of it.

The worthy coast-guard-man scratched his nose and stared at the shingle
for some minutes before venturing to reply.

"I think," said he at length, "that we'll cook his goose to-night;
that's wot it is."

Coleman paused, and looked thoughtfully at Bluenose.  The Captain nodded
his head pleasantly, but said nothing, and Coleman proceeded:--

"He'll come in with the flood-tide no doubt, if the gale don't drive him
in sooner, an' run ashore as near to the cave as possible; but he'll be
scared away if he sees anything like unusual watchin' on the shore, so
you'd better get out o' sight as fast as ye can, and keep there."

"Don't you think it would be as well that you also should keep out of
sight, and so leave the coast clear for him?" suggested Bax.

"Not so," said Coleman with a grin, "he'd see that I'd done it for an
object.  Long Orrick keeps his weather eye too wide open to be caught so
easy as that comes to."

"Well, but come up for half-an-hour, and have a glass of beer while we
talk over the business," said Bax.

Coleman shook his head, "Can't quit my post; besides, I don't drink no
beer."

"Brayvo! old feller," cried Bluenose, "give us your flipper.  Water,
cold, for ever! say I, as the whale remarked to the porpoise.  But let's
go under the lee o' the boat-'ouse an' talk it out, for we shan't nab
Long Orrick this night, if we doesn't go at 'im like a cat at a mouse."

"Just listen to that old codfish," said Tommy Bogey to Peekins, "takin'
credit to his-self for not drinkin', though he smokes like a steam-tug,
an' chews like--like--I'm a Dutchman if I know what, unless it be like
the bo'sun of a seventy-four gun ship."

"Do bo'suns of seventy-four gun ships chew very bad?" inquired Peekins.

"Oh! don't they!" exclaimed Tommy, opening his eyes very wide, and
rounding his mouth so as to express his utter inability to convey any
idea of the terrific powers of bo'suns in that particular line.  "But
Bluenose beats 'em all.  He'd chew oakum, I do believe, if he didn't get
baccy, and yet he boasts of not drinkin'!  Seems to me he's just as bad
as the rest of us."

"D'you think so?" said Peekins, with a doubtful look; "don't you think
the man who does only two nasty things is better off than the one that
does three?"

"Nasty things!" exclaimed Tommy in a tone of amazement.  "Don't Bax
drink and smoke, and d'ye think _he'd_ do one or t'other if they was
nasty?  Peekins, you small villian as was a blue spider only a week
since, if you ever talks of them things being nasty again, I'll wop
you!"

"You hear that, Bax?" said Guy Foster, who, being only a few paces ahead
of the boys, had overheard the remark, spoken as it was in rather a loud
key.

Bax nodded his head, and smiled, but made no reply.

It is but just to say that Tommy's threat was uttered more than half in
jest.  He would as soon have thought of "wopping" a little girl as of
maltreating his meek companion.  But Peekins was uncertain how to take
his threat, so, not being desirous of a wopping, he held his tongue and
humbly followed his comrades.

The party walked for some time at the foot of the cliffs under the lee
of a boat-house, engaged in earnest conversation as to the best mode of
proceeding in the meditated enterprise.  It was evident to all of them
that the hour for action could not now be far distant; for the gale
increased every moment; the light on the South Foreland was already
sending its warning rays far and wide over the angry sea, whence the
floating lights that mark the sands sent back their nightly greeting,
while dark thunderous clouds mantled over the sky and deepened the
shades of night which, ere long, completely overspread land and sea.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE SMUGGLERS' CAVE--A SURPRISE, A DECEPTION, A FIGHT, AND AN ESCAPE.

The Fiddler's Cave, _alias_ Canterbury Cave, _alias_ the Smugglers'
Cave, is a cavern of unknown extent situated under the high chalk cliffs
at the southern extremity of Saint Margaret's Bay.

Tradition informs us that its first appellation was bestowed in
consequence of a fiddler having gone into it with his dog many years
ago, and never having come out again.  Four days afterwards the dog
crept out in a dying condition.  It is supposed that the man must have
wandered too far into the cavern, and been overpowered by foul air.
Tradition also says that there is a passage from it, underground, all
the way to Canterbury, a distance of eighteen miles; hence its second
name.  No one, however, seems to have verified this report.  The Kentish
smugglers, from whom the cave derives its last title, have undoubtedly
made much use of it in days of old.  At the period of our story, the
entrance to Fiddler's Cave was so much obstructed by rubbish and sand
that a man had to stoop low on entering the passage which led to the
interior.  At the present day the entrance is so nearly closed up that a
man could not creep along it even on his hands and knees.

Here, on the threatening night of which we are writing, a boatman stood
on the watch, close under the rocks that overhung the entrance to the
cavern.  The man was habited, like most of his brethren of the coast, in
rough garments, with long boots, sou'-wester cap, and oiled, tarred, and
greased upper garments, suitable to the stormy night in which he had
seen fit to hold his vigil.

A feeble ray of light that struggled in the cavern showed that the man
clutched a pistol in his right hand, and with a frown on his brow,
glanced alternately out to sea where all was darkness, and along shore
where the only visible living object was the figure of old Coleman
seated on his "donkey."  It need scarcely be added that the sight of the
coast-guard-man was the cause of the smuggler's frown.

The gale was now blowing stiffly, and rolling black clouds so covered
the sky that the moon was entirely obscured by them, save when an
occasional break permitted a few rays to stream down and reveal the
elemental strife that was going on below.

Coleman, regardless of the storm, maintained his position on his
one-legged companion, and bending his body to the blast, endeavoured to
pierce the gloom that enshrouded everything seaward beyond the large
breakers that sent their foam hissing up to his very feet.  While he sat
there he thought, or muttered, thus:--

"It's odd, now, I'd ha' thought he'd have run ashore afore this; seein'
that I've sat on this here donkey for more nor an hour, a-purpose to let
him see that I'm only watchin' _here_, and nowhere else.  He can't but
see there's a goodish lump o' the coast free to him so long as I sit
here.  But he's a sly feller; p'raps he suspects somethin'.  An' yet,
I'll go bound, he don't guess that there's six or seven of his worst
enemies hidin' all along the coast, with eyes like needles, and ears on
full cock!  How'sever, it won't do to sit much longer.  If he don't come
in five minutes, I'll git up an' walk along in an easy unsuspectin' way.
Dear me, wot a set o' hypocrites we've got to be in the hexecution of
our dooty!"

While Coleman moralised thus, in utter ignorance of the near proximity
of an eye-witness, the smuggler at the mouth of the cave, who was no
other than Orrick's friend, Rodney Nick, muttered some remarks between
his teeth which were by no means complimentary to the other.

"What are ye sittin' there for, ye old idiot?" said he savagely.  "I do
b'lieve ye've larned to sleep on the donkey.  Ha! there's two of ye
together, an' the wooden one's the best.  Wouldn't I just like to be yer
leftenant, my boy? an' I'd come to know why you don't go on your beat.
Why, there may be no end o' cats and galleys takin' the beach wi' baccy
an' lush enough to smother you up alive, an' you sittin' there snuffin'
the east wind like an old ass, as ye are."

The smuggler uttered the last sentence in deep exasperation, for the
time appointed for signalising his comrades at sea had arrived, and yet
that stolid coast-guard-man sat there as if he had become fastened to
the shingle.

"I've a good mind to run out an' hit ye a crack over yer figure-head,"
he continued, grasping his pistol nervously and taking a step forward.
"Hallo! one would a'most think you'd heard me speak," he added and
shrank back, as Coleman rose from his seat (the five minutes having
expired), and sauntered with a careless air straight towards the cave.

On reaching it he paused and looked into it.  Rodney Nick crouched in
the shadow of a projecting rock, and grasped his pistol tightly for a
moment, under the impression that he was about to be discovered.  He was
one of those fierce, angry men who are at all times ready to risk their
lives in order to gratify revenge.  Old Coleman had more than once
thwarted Rodney Nick in his designs, besides having in other ways
incurred his dislike, and there is no doubt that had the coast-guard-man
discovered him at that moment, he would have paid for the discovery with
his life.  Fortunately for both of them Coleman turned after standing a
few seconds at the mouth of the cave, and retraced his steps along the
beach.

He prolonged his walk on this occasion to the extremity of his beat,
but, long before reaching that point his figure was lost to the
smuggler's view in darkness.

"At last!" exclaimed Rodney Nick, taking a dark lantern from his breast,
and peering cautiously in every direction.  "Now then, Long Orrick, if
ye look sharp we'll cheat 'em again, and chew our quids and drink our
grog free of dooty!"

As he muttered his words the smuggler flashed the lantern for an
instant, in such a manner that its brilliant bull's-eye was visible far
out at sea.  Again he let its light shine out for one instant; then he
closed the lid and awaited the result.

Out upon the sea, not far from the wild breakers that thundered and
burst in foam on the south end of the Goodwin Sands, a boat, of the size
and form styled by men of the coast a "cat," was tossing idly on the
waves.  The men in her were employed in the easy task of keeping her
head to the wind, and in the anxious occupation of keeping a "bright
look-out" on the shore.

"Time's up," said one of the men, turning suddenly towards his
companions, and allowing the light of a dark lantern to fall on the face
of a watch which he held in his hand.

"Dowse the glim, you lubber," cried the angry voice of Long Orrick, "and
keep a sharp look-out for the signal.  If it don't come we'll run for
Old Stairs Bay, an' if they're too sharp for us there we'll make for
Pegwell Bay, and drop the tubs overboard with sinkers at 'em."

For nearly quarter of an hour the party in the boat watched in silence.
It was evident that Long Orrick was becoming impatient from the way in
which he turned, now to windward, to scan the threatening sky, and then
to land-ward, to look for the expected signal.  He felt, on the one
hand, that if the gale continued to increase, it would be necessary to
run for the nearest place of safety; and he felt, on the other hand,
that if he did not succeed in landing the goods at Fiddler's Cave, there
would be small chance of his getting them ashore at all.

"There's the glim," cried one of the men.

"All right! up with a bit o' the sail," said Long Orrick, seizing the
tiller from the man who held it.

In a second or two they were driving before the wind straight for the
shore.  With such a stiff breeze the boat was soon close to the
breakers, and now the utmost care was necessary in order to prevent it
from broaching-to and being capsized.  No anxiety was felt, however, by
the crew of the little craft.  Deal boatmen are noted for their
expertness in beaching their boats and in putting off to sea in rough
