As soon as it became dark, the camp fires were allowed to bum low;
and shortly afterwards the whole corps, with the exception of the
sentries, were sound asleep. At four o'clock they were roused, and
marched silently off in the appointed direction. By five o'clock
each party was at its post and, for half an hour, they lay in
expectancy. The Barclays were with Major Tempe's party, near the
bridge. Louis Duburg, and Tim, were with the party at the village.

The attack upon the village was to take place at half-past five;
and never did moments appear so slow, to the boys, as those which
passed as they awaited the signal. At last the silence was broken
by the sharp crack of a rifle, followed by three or four others.

"There goes the Prussian sentry, and there is our reply," Major
Tempe said. "Now, lads, forward!"

As he spoke, the sentry on the bridge fired his rifle; immediately,
this was repeated by the next sentry on the line, and the signal
was taken up by each sentry, until the sound died in the distance.
As it had done so, the franc tireurs had made a rush forwards. They
were met by a straggling discharge from the Germans as, half
asleep, they hurried out from the guard room. This was answered by
the fire of the franc tireurs, who surrounded them. Five fell; and
the others, surprised and panic stricken, threw down their arms.
They were instantly secured, and the bridge was at once seized.

The firing still continued in the village; but in another five
minutes it ceased and, shortly afterwards, Louis Duburg ran up with
the tidings that the village was taken. The Germans, surprised in
their beds, had offered but a slight resistance. Four were killed,
and sixteen taken prisoners; one franc tireur, only, was slightly
wounded.

"Take two men with you," Major Tempe said, "and escort those five
prisoners to the village. Give them over to Lieutenant Houdin; and
tell him to send them, with the prisoners he has taken, under
charge of six men to the forest. Let their hands be tied behind
their backs, for we cannot spare a larger escort. Tell him to be
sure that the escort are loaded, and have fixed bayonets. Directly
he has sent off the prisoners let him join me here, with the rest
of his force."

Lieutenant Ribouville now set to work to inspect the bridge; and
ordered the men--who were provided with the necessary implements--to
set to, and dig a hole down to the crown of the principal arch. It
was harder work than they had expected. The roadway was solid, the
ballast pressed down very tightly, and the crown of the arch covered,
to a considerable depth, with concrete.  Only a few men could work at
once and, after a half-hour's desperate labor, the hole was nothing
like far enough advanced to ensure the total destruction of the
bridge, upon the charge being fired. In the meantime the Prussian
sentries were arriving from up and down the line and, although not
in sufficient force to attack, had opened fire from a distance.

"Don't you think that will do, Ribouville?" Major Tempe asked.

"No, sir," the other replied. "It might blow a hole through the top
of the arch, but I hardly think that it would do so. Its force
would be spent upwards."

At this moment Ralph--who had done his spell of work, and had been
down to the stream, to get a drink of water--came running up.

"If you please, Lieutenant Ribouville, there is a hole right
through the pier, just above the water's edge. It seems to have
been left to let any water that gets into the pier, from above,
make its escape. I should think that would do to hold the charge."

"The very thing," Lieutenant Ribouville said, delightedly. "What a
fool I was, not to have looked to see if such a hole existed!

"Stop work, men, and carry the barrels down to the edge of the
water."

The stream was not above waist deep; and the engineer officer
immediately waded into it, and examined the hole. He at once
pronounced it to be admirably suited to the purpose. It did not--as
Ralph had supposed--go straight through; but there were two holes,
one upon each side of the pier, nearly at the same level, and each
extending into the center of the pier. The holes were about four
inches square.

The barrels of gun cotton were now hastily opened on the bank, and
men waded out with the contents. Lieutenant Ribouville upon one
side, and Ralph upon the other, took the cotton and thrust it, with
long sticks, into the ends of the hole. In five minutes the
contents of the two barrels were safely lodged, the fuse inserted,
and the operation of tamping--or ramming--in dry sand, earth, and
stones commenced.

"Make haste!" Major Tempe shouted. "Their numbers are increasing
fast. There are some fifteen or twenty, on either side."

A brisk fire of rifles was now going on. The day had fairly broken;
and the franc tireurs, sheltered behind the parapet of the bridge,
on the bank of the river, were exchanging a lively fire with the
enemy. Three-quarters of an hour had passed since the first shot
was fired.

Suddenly a distant boom was heard, followed in a few seconds by a
slight whizzing noise, which grew rapidly into a loud scream and,
in another moment, there was an explosion close to the bridge. The
men all left off their work, for an instant.

"And what may that be, Mister Percy? A more unpleasant sound I
niver heard, since I was a baby."

"I quite agree with you, Tim, as to its unpleasantness. It is a
shell. The artillery are coming up from Luneville. The fire of the
sentries would take the alarm, in a couple of minutes; give them
another fifteen to get ready, and half an hour to get within range.

"Here comes another."

"Are you ready, Ribouville?" the commandant shouted. "They have
cavalry, as well as artillery. We must be off, or we shall get
caught in a trap."

"I am ready," was the answer.

"Barclay, strike a match, and put it to the end of your fuse, till
it begins to fizz.

"Have you lit it?"

"Yes, sir," Ralph said, a moment later.

"So have I," the lieutenant said. "They will burn about three
minutes.

"Now for a run!"

In a couple of minutes the franc tireurs were retreating, at the
double; and they had not gone a hundred yards when they heard the
sound of two tremendous explosions, following closely one upon
another. Looking back, they saw the pier had fallen in fragments;
and that the bridge lay, a heap of ruins, in the stream.

"Hurrah, lads!" shouted the commandant. "You have done your work
well. Those who get out of this with a whole skin may well be proud
of their day's work.

"Don't mind the shells," he continued, as two more of the missiles
burst, in quick succession, within a short distance of them. "They
make an ugly noise; but they won't hurt us, at this distance."

The German artillerymen had apparently arrived at the same
conclusion, for they now ceased to fire; and the retreating corps
were only exposed to an occasional shot from the infantry, who had
followed them from the bridge.

"The artillery and cavalry will be up, before we reach the wood,"
Percy said to his brother, as they trotted along, side by side.

"They may come up," Ralph said, "but they can do us no harm, on the
broken ground; and will catch a Tartar, if they don't mind."

The ground was indeed unfavorable for cavalry, and artillery. It
was broken up with the spurs of the hill. Here and there great
masses of rock cropped out of the ground, while patches of forest
extended over a considerable portion of the ground. In one of
these, standing upon rising and broken ground, Major Tempe halted
his men; and opened so heavy a fire upon the enemy's cavalry, when
the column appeared, that they were at once halted; and although,
when the artillery arrived, a few shells were fired into the wood,
the franc tireurs had already retired, and gained the forest
without further molestation. Upon calling the roll, it was
discovered that six men, only, were missing. These had fallen--either
killed or wounded--from the fire of the enemy's infantry, during the
time that the operation at the bridge were being carried out.

There was great rejoicing at the success of their enterprise, the
effect of which would certainly be to block the traffic along that
line, for at least a week. Their satisfaction was, however,
somewhat damped by the sight of several dense columns of smoke in
the plain; showing that the Germans had, as usual, wreaked their
vengeance upon the innocent villagers. The feeling of disgust was
changed to fury when some of the peasants--who had fled into the
woods, upon the destruction of their abodes--reported that the
Germans, having found that three of the franc tireurs were only
wounded, had dragged them along to the entrance to the village; and
had hung them there upon some trees, by the roadside. Had it not
been for Major Tempe's assurance, that their comrades should be
avenged, the franc tireurs would at once have killed their
prisoners.

In the evening the men were formed up, the prisoners ranged in
line, and twelve were taken by lot; and these, with the officer
taken with them--when night fell--were bound and marched off, under
a guard of thirty men. Neither of the boys formed part of the
escort, which was an immense relief to them for, although they were
as indignant as the rest, at the murder of their wounded comrades
by the Germans; and quite agreed in the justice of reprisal, still,
they were greatly relieved when they found that they would not have
to be present at the execution.

Two hours later Major Tempe returned, with the escort. The officer,
and eleven of his men, had been hung on trees by the roadside, at a
distance of half a mile, only, from the village; the twelfth man
had been released, as bearer of a note from Major Tempe to the
German commanding officer saying that, as a reprisal for the murder
of the three wounded franc tireurs, he had hung twelve Germans; and
that, in future, he would always hang four prisoners for every one
of his men who might be murdered, contrary to the rules of war.

This act of retributive justice performed, the corps retreated to
join the army of the Vosges, under General Cambriels. The news of
the destruction of the bridge across the Vesouze had preceded them;
and when, after three days' heavy marching, they reached the
village which formed the headquarters of the general, they were
received with loud cheers by the crowds of Mobiles who thronged its
little streets. It was out of the question to find quarters; and
the major therefore ordered the men to bivouac in the open, while
he reported himself to General Cambriels.

The commandant of the franc tireurs was personally known to General
Cambriels, having at one time served for some years under his
command; and he was most warmly received by the veteran, one of the
bravest and most popular of the French generals. As general of the
district, he had received all Major Tempe's reports; and was
therefore acquainted with the actions of the corps.

"Ah, major!" he said, after the first greetings, "if I had only a
few thousand men, animated with the spirit and courage of your
fellows, the Germans would never get through the Vosges. As it is I
shall, of course, do my best; but what can one do with an army of
plow boys, led by officers who know nothing of their duty, against
troops like the Germans?

"As for my franc tireurs, they are in many cases worse than
useless. They have no discipline, whatever. They embroil me with
the peasantry. They are always complaining. The whole of them,
together, have not done as much real service as your small band.
They shoot down Uhlans, when they catch them in very small parties;
but have no notion, whatever, of real fighting.

"However, I cannot thank you too warmly. Your name will appear in
the Gazette, tomorrow, as colonel; and I must ask you to extend the
sphere of your duties. We want officers, terribly; and I will
brigade four or five of these corps of franc tireurs under your
orders, so as to make up a force of a thousand men. You will have
full authority over them, to enforce any discipline you may choose.
I want you to make a body to act as an advanced guard of
skirmishers to my army of Mobiles. I have a few line troops, but I
want them as a nucleus for the force.

"What do you say?"

"Personally, general, I should greatly prefer remaining with my own
little corps, upon every man of whom I can rely. At the same time,
I should not wish for a moment to oppose my own likings, or
dislikings, to the general good of the service. Many of these corps
of franc tireurs are composed of excellent materials and, if well
led and disciplined, would do anything. I can only say I will do my
best."

"Thank you, Tempe. Is there anything else I can do for you?"

"I should like to see a step given to the three officers serving
under me," the major said. "They have all served in the regular
army, and all have equally well done their duty."

"It shall be done; and two of them shall be posted to other corps,
while one takes the command of your own," the general said. "Do you
wish commissions for any of the men?"

Major Tempe named three of the men, and then added:

"The two members of the corps who have most distinguished
themselves I have not mentioned, general, because they are too
young to place over the heads of the others; at the same time,
their services certainly deserve recognition. I mentioned them, in
the dispatches I sent to you, as having done immense service by
going down, in disguise, into the midst of the Germans. In fact, at
Saverne they saved the corps from destruction. They are two young
English lads, named Barclay."

"I remember distinctly," General Cambriels said. "They speak French
fluently, I suppose, as well as German?"

"Both languages like natives," the major answered.

"And can they ride?"

"Yes, admirably," Major Tempe said. "I knew them before the war,
and they are excellent horsemen."

"Then they are the very fellows for me," General Cambriels said. "I
will give them commissions in the provisional army, at once; and
put them upon my own staff. They would be of great value to me.

"You will spare them, I hope?"

"I shall be extremely sorry to do so, general; but for their own
sakes, and for the good of the service, I will of course do so."

"Thanks, colonel. I shall put the franc tireurs of Dijon in general
orders, tomorrow, as having performed good service to the country;
and please to thank them, in my name, for their services."

"Thank you very much, general. It will give me more pleasure than
even the step that you have been kind enough to give to myself."

"Good evening, colonel. We must have a long chat together, one of
these days.

"The chief of my staff will give you the names of the corps to be
placed under your orders. The matter was settled this morning, and
I have picked out the best of those here. Orders have been sent for
them to assemble at Raoul--a village, a mile from here--in the
morning; with a notification that they are placed under your
command.

"Goodbye."



Chapter 11: A Fight In The Vosges.


Upon Colonel Tempe's rejoining the men--who were already busy
preparing their suppers--he ordered the assembly to be sounded and,
when they were formed up, he formally thanked them, in the name of
the general, for the service that they had rendered; adding that
they would appear in general orders, upon the following day.

The men replied with a cheer of "Vive la France!"

Their commander then informed them that he, himself, had received a
step in rank and would, in future, command them with several other
corps; that Lieutenant Ribouville would, in future, be their
special commander, with the rank of captain; that the other two
lieutenants would be promoted; and that three of their number would
receive commissions and, while one of them remained under Captain
Ribouville, the others would--with the newly-made captains--be
attached to other corps. The two Barclays would receive commissions
as officers, on the staff of General Cambriels, himself.

When Colonel Tempe finished speaking, the boys could hardly believe
their ears; and looked at each other, to inquire if they heard
aright. There could be no mistake about it; for Colonel Tempe
called them forward and, shaking hands with them, congratulated
them on the promotion which, he said, they had well earned. The men
gave a hearty cheer; for the young English lads were general
favorites, for their good temper and willingness to oblige.

Directly the men were dismissed, the colonel again called the lads
to him.

"I am sorry to lose you," he said, "but of course it is for your
good. Come with me, at once, to General Cambriels. I will introduce
you, and you had better ask for four days' leave. You can get the
railway in four hours' ride from here. You will have no difficulty
in finding a place in some of the commissariat cities going to
fetch stores. If you start tonight, you can catch a train before
morning, and be in Dijon quite early. A couple of days will be
sufficient to get your uniforms made, and to buy horses.

"Your cousin will go with you. I gave him leave, last night, to
start upon our arrival here. He is not so strong as you are; and
the surgeon says that he must have rest, and quiet. He is quite
worn out.

"Now, pile your rifles--you will not want them any more--and come
with me. I have said good night to the general, but he will excuse
me."

Still bewildered, the boys did as they were ordered. As they were
piling their rifles, they heard a loud blubbering. Looking round,
they saw Tim Doyle, weeping most copiously.

"What is the matter, Tim?"

"Matter! Your honor, ain't yer going to lave us? What am I going to
do, at all?"

The boys hurried away, without reply--for Colonel Tempe was waiting
for them--and, on the way to headquarters, mentioned Tim's grief at
parting with them.

The general received the lads most kindly and, at once, granted
them four days' leave to go to Dijon, to procure uniform.

Colonel Tempe then said:

"You do not want orderlies, do you, general?"

"I do, indeed," the general answered. "I have about a dozen cavalry
men, of different regiments, who form my escort and act as
orderlies; but they are my entire force of cavalry."

"I have an Irishman in my corps, general, who only joined to be
near these young fellows. He was brought up among horses; and you
have only to put him in a hussar uniform, and he would make a
capital orderly, and would act as servant to your new staff
officers."

"By all means," the general said; "send him over, in the morning.
We will make a hussar of him, in half an hour; we have got a few
uniforms in store."

What a meeting that was, near Dijon! The boys, upon reaching the
station, had found a train on the point of starting; and it was
seven in the morning when they reached the town. The shops open
early, in French country towns; and although their tailor had not
as yet taken his shutters down, he was up and about, and willingly
measured them for their new uniforms--promising that they should
have them, without fail, the next afternoon. They then walked up to
the cottage; and dropped in just as the party, there, were sitting
down to breakfast.

There was a loud exclamation from Captain Barclay, and a scream of
delight from their mother, and Milly; and it was a good ten minutes
before they were sitting round the table, talking coherently. It
was but six weeks since they had left, but it seemed like years;
and there was as much to tell, and to talk about, as if they had
just returned, after an absence of half a lifetime, in India.

"How long have you got leave for?" was one of the first questions.

"Only four days," Percy said. "The corps has now joined the army of
the Vosges, and will act regularly with it. A move forward will
take place, in a few days, so that we could not ask for longer."

