
There was a rush, but Dave and Tom got in front of Dick.

"Who wants to try the paddle first?" asked Dave, his fists clenching, as
he faced the mischievous Grammar School boys.

"But I haven't thought of a thing, fellows," protested Prescott.

"Say, I want some of you fellows to help me take off old Pond's gate
to-night," called Toby Ross. "We can take it down and hang it on the
fountain in the square. That'll be a good mile from his house, and old
Pond will be awful mad, because he'll have to tote it all the way back
himself. He's too stingy to hire a teamster to take it back."

"And that's your idea of fun is it?" demanded Dick.

"Sure!" grinned Toby.

"It might be for a seven-year-old, but it sounds pretty stupid for an
eighth grader."

"What do you want me to do, then--set old Pond's house a-fire?" queried
Toby with an injured air.

"We'll have to take down a lot of signs and change 'em," proposed Ned
Allen.

"What do you think of that, Dick?" asked Spoff Henderson.

"That sounds kiddish, too, doesn't it?" objected Dick. "And the trick is
at least three times as old as Gridley."

"We can slip in at the back of George Farmer's place," suggested Wrecker
Lane. "You know, he's always bragging about the fine milk he serves.
Well, if we can get in at the cooling trough in his yard we can empty
half the milk out of each big can and fill it up with water. Then won't
he hear a row from his customers about watered milk?"

That brought a guffaw from some of the youngsters, but Dick shook his
head.

"That's kiddish, too," he remarked.

"Say, what do you call kiddish tricks?" Hoof Sadby wanted to know.

"Why, things that have been done, over and over again, by small boys.
All the tricks you fellows have named have been done by our
grandfathers. That's why I call 'em kiddish. A fellow who can't think up
a new one is only a kid. Use your brains, fellows."

"Well, if you're so all-fired smart, you tell us a new one that has some
ginger in it," growled Wrecker.

"I told you that I hadn't any," retorted Dick. "I admit that I'm dull.
But, if I do play any tricks to-night, they'll have to be just a little
bit new. Boys of our age haven't any business traveling around with
Hallowe'en jokes that are so old that they've voted and worn whiskers
for forty years. It isn't showing proper respect for old age."

"Dick has a few new ones in his tank. Don't you worry about that,"
muttered some of the wise ones. "You just find Dick & Co. on the street
to-night, and stick to 'em, and you'll see plenty of fun happening."

"I'll tell you something else that we fellows are growing a bit too old
for, too, if you want to know," Dick offered presently, for the crowd
still insisted on hanging out close to this usually fertile leader in
fun.

"Fire away," groaned Spoff.

"Well, then, I mean the kind of tricks that destroy people's property.
The fellow that shies a stone through the window of some one he doesn't
like, or who carries off gates, or tramples flower beds is only a cheap
penny pirate."

That was rather daring, for Dick's condemnation had touched rather
closely some forms of mischief that boys always imagine as belonging to
them on Hallowe'en night.

However, the general opinion was against quarreling with Dick. Without
him and his chums on the streets, the Grammar School boys knew that
there wouldn't be as much sport.

"You're trying to think up some good ones, aren't you?" asked Dave, as
he and Dick were about to part on the homeward way at noon.

"Yes, of course; but I hope you other fellows have brains that are
working faster than mine is to-day."

"Oh, you'll have something ready by to-night," laughed Dave.

"I hope so."

That afternoon the boys and girls in Old Dut's room did not appear to
have their minds very much on their lessons. A man of Old Dut's
experience knew why.

"I'll stay at home and sit tight on my place to-night," murmured the
principal to himself. "Like as not I'm slated to be one of the biggest
Hallowe'en victims."

When Dick reached Main Street that evening he found himself instantly
the center of a crowd of at least twenty boys from the Central Grammar.

"What'll we do, Dick?" came the hail.

"Anything you like," agreed Prescott.

"But what have you thought up?"

"Nothing."

"Cut that!"

"Honest, fellows, I haven't."

"Never mind," sang out Dave. "We fellows will just roam around town for
a while and see what is happening. Something will pop into our minds,
and then we can have a bit of mischief."

"Hullo!" muttered Toby. "Say! Just look at Hoof!"

"Whatcher got there, Hoof?" demanded a laughing chorus.

For Hoof Sadby, looking more sheepish than ever before in his life, had
appeared on the scene carrying a baby. It was a real, live one, too--his
year-and-a-half-old brother, to be exact.

"Say, don't guy me too much, fellows," begged Hoof sadly. "I'm in a
pickle, sure. Pop and mother are going to a sociable to-night. That is,
they've already gone. And they said----" Hoof paused. "They said----" he
tried again. Then, in final desperation he shot it out quickly. "They
said I'd have to stay home, and--mind the baby!"

"Isn't that a shame?" came a sympathetic chorus, but a few of the
fellows laughed.

"It's a boy, any way," argued Hoof, rather brokenly, "and a smart little
fellow, too. Now, if he's going to grow up right as a boy the kid ought
to start in early. So I've wrapped him up warm and have brought him out
with me."

"What are you going to do with him, Hoof?"

"I'm going to tote the little fellow around to see the fun--if you
fellows can stand having me with you," announced Hoof sadly, rather
pleadingly.

"Why, of course you can come, can't he, fellows?" appealed Dick.

"If you're sure that the youngster won't catch cold," agreed Tom Reade.
"A baby is a human being, you know, and has some rights of his own."

"Oh, I won't let the little shaver catch cold," promised Hoof. "See how
warmly I've got him wrapped up."

As some of the fellows crowded about their encumbered mate, baby laughed
and tried to reach them.

"He's a good fellow, if he is young," spoke up Greg. "Bring him along,
Hoof."

So that was settled, and the crowd turned down one of the side streets.
These darker thoroughfares, as all knew by experience, were safer for
Hallowe'en pranks. The dark places were the easiest ones in which to
escape when pursuit offered.

Nor had the Grammar School crowd been strolling along more than
two minutes when Dick suddenly halted them by holding up one hand.

"What is it?" whispered several, mysteriously, as they crowded about the
leader.

"There's Mose Waterman's house, and it's all dark there," murmured Dick.
"And it's the same over at Mr. Gordon's. Now, you know, Waterman and
Gordon have never spoken to each other since they had that law suit."

"Yes, yes!"

"Well, the warm weather lately has led Mose Waterman to leave his porch
chairs out later'n usual. Now, fellows, suppose we lift the chairs from
Waterman's porch and put 'em over on Gordon's porch. That wouldn't be
far for Waterman to go after 'em, but do you think he'd do it? Never! He
will growl, and swear that Gordon stole the chairs. And Mr. Gordon is
too angry with Mose Waterman to take the chairs back. So it'll give us
fun for a fortnight strolling by in the day time and noticing whether
Waterman has his chairs back."

"Wow!" "Whoop!" "And you said, Dick"--reproachfully--"that you couldn't
think up anything!"

Half a dozen figures moved swiftly and stealthily. In a twinkling the
transfer of porch chairs from Waterman's house to Gordon's had been
made. The young mischief-makers passed on, looking for more nonsense.
But that joke became almost classic in Gridley. For days and days after
that Waterman and Gordon glared at each other from their front windows,
or whenever they met on the street. But neither would touch the chairs,
and neighbors grinned every time they passed and saw the chairs still on
the Gordon porch. One night, in November, however, Gordon took the
chairs as far as the middle of the road. An hour later Mose Waterman
slipped out from his unlighted house and carried the chairs back and
into his own house. The neighbors had had their hearty laughs, however.

"Say, I'll bet that's the best thing done to-night," chuckled Toby Ross,
as the "gang" pressed on to new scenes and new laughs.

But it wasn't quite the best thing done that night as later events
showed.




CHAPTER XVII

THE NEWEST TRICK OF ALL


"Here's where old Miss Lowthry lives," muttered Ned Allen, halting
before a gate leading into the grounds surrounding a cosy little
cottage.

"It wouldn't be very manly to do anything to scare lone women, would
it?" demanded Dick.

"She's an old maid," protested Toby.

"That's no crime," insisted Dick.

"She has no use for boys," breathed Ben Alvord, complainingly.

"From some things that boys do, I don't altogether blame her," chuckled
young Prescott.

"And--say! Don't Miss Lowthry hate babies!" grunted Wrecker Lane. "You
remember Fred Porter? His folks used to live in that next house. When
Fred was a baby they say he used to cry something awful. Well, once in
the summer, after Fred had cried every night for a week, and Miss
Lowthry had to hear it all through her open windows, what did she do but
go to the health board and ask that the Porters be ordered to make their
baby stop crying. There was an awful fuss about it, and Miss Lowthry
made some talk about all babies being brats."

"They are not," denied Hoof Sadby indignantly.

"That's what I'm trying to tell you," went on Wrecker calmly. "That's
why I have no use for old maids that hate babies. Now, there are some
old maids that are really fine. But Miss Lowthry!"

"Wrecker, you live right near here," murmured Dick suddenly.

"'Course I do."

"Then come aside. I want to whisper something to you."

Then Dick talked in whispers with Wrecker for a few moments. The other
boy was seen by the curious suddenly to double up with laughter. From
that attitude Wrecker recovered, only to start off on the run.

"Say, what is it?" demanded a dozen cautious voices as Dick came back to
the crowd.

"Now, see here, fellows, don't want to know too much. Just stay around
and see what happens, and you'll all enjoy it as much as Miss Lowthry
does."

"Then it's against her?" breathed Ben Alvord. "Good! great!"

"Now, you, Dave, stay here with me," Dick went on, disposing of his
forces with the air of a general. "The rest of you fellows scoot across
the lawn and hide in the bushes. Hide so that you can't be seen from the
street or from the front door of the cottage, either. Then just wait and
see what happens."

Tom Reade and Greg managed to get the crowd started. Then Dick called,
softly:

"Oh, say, Hoof! I'll hold the baby for you a while. You must be tired."

Hoof started, and glared suspiciously. But he knew that Dick was "always
on the square," and so, after swallowing hard, passed the tiny, bundled
youngster over to Prescott's waiting arms. "Say, be careful what you do
with him," pleaded Sadby. "He's a fine little fellow."

Then the crowd hid. How they watched and waited! Miss Lowthry's sitting
room was lighted, and the boys could see her, seated in a rocking chair,
reading a book.

It seemed ages ere Wrecker Lane returned. When he came he brought a
basket. Some soft fragments of blanket rested in the bottom of it.

"Just the thing," chuckled Dick softly, placing the baby in the basket.
"Now, skip over there, Wrecker, and hide with the fellows in the
bushes."

Dick waited until Wrecker Lane vanished.

"Now, come along, Dave," chuckled Prescott. "You ring the bell just as I
place the basket on the steps. Then we'll both hot-foot it to join the
fellows."

A few moments later Dick and Dave scurried to cover, snuggling down
among a lot of Grammar School boys who were holding their handkerchiefs
wedged in their mouths.

Then they heard the front door open, saw Miss Lowthry peer out, and then
heard her utter a shriek, followed with:

"Mercy me! Who has dared to leave a foundling on my step?"

And then, as she bent over and poked the pieces of blanket aside:

"Mercy! What a horridly homely brat!"

"It isn't!" exploded Hoof, in an undertone, as he snatched the
handkerchief from his mouth. "Gracious! Wouldn't I like to pinch her!"

But Miss Lowthry must have recognized her duty as a citizen, for she
picked up the basket and bore it into the house, slamming the door
behind her.

"Wow! Oh, dear! oh, dear!" laughed a lot of mischievous youngsters
hidden in the bushes.

"Look!" whispered Dave Darrin. "She has taken the basket into her
sitting room. She's placed it on a table. There she goes to the
telephone. Whee! See how she's working her arm, jerking that telephone
bell crank!"

Some conversation that the young peepers, of course, couldn't hear
passed over the telephone. Then Miss Lowthry hung up the receiver and
thrust her forefingers into her ears as she turned to stare at the human
contents of the basket on the table.

"The poor kid's hollering," muttered Hoof. "Can you blame it?"

All that followed, and which the boys could see through the lighted
windows of the room interested them mightily. But at last they heard a
heavy step on the sidewalk. Then one of the blue-coated guardians of
Gridley's peace turned in at the gate, went up to the door and rang the
bell.

"She sent for the police," chuckled Dick Prescott.

"Of course," grinned Dave.

The peeping boys saw the officer step through into the old maid's
sitting room. Miss Lowthry pointed at the basket in a highly dramatic
way. The policeman bent over to take a kindly look at the tiny youngster
therein, then adjusting the pieces of blanket, he lifted the basket.

"Now, it's time to do your turn, Hoof," whispered Dick, giving young
Sadby a nudge. "Slip over the fence and do it right."

Miss Lowthry followed the policeman to the door, opening it for him and
letting him out.

"Boo-hoo!" sounded a heart-broken voice out on the sidewalk, in the
darkness beyond. Then, as the policeman stepped down from the steps,
Hoof suddenly let out a wail and darted into the yard.

"Say, Mister Cop, have you got it?" demanded Hoof eagerly.

"Got what?" demanded the policeman.

"My baby brother! You see, Mister Cop, some fellows took my baby brother
and carried him off for a joke."

Then Hoof came into the pale light that was shed just past the open
front door. There were tears in his eyes, all right, for an onion was
one of the things that "Wrecker" Lane had brought from home. Hoof had
rubbed a slice of the onion on the skin under his eyes, and the tears
that he wanted to show were genuine enough.

"Is this your brother?" demanded the policeman, lowering the basket he
was carrying.

The Sadby baby had begun to cry again, but at sight of Hoof the little
fellow stopped suddenly, crowed and reached out with its little hands.

"After that do you have to ask if that's my kid brother?" demanded Hoof
Sadby proudly.

"I guess it is, all right, Sadby," replied the policeman. "I know you.
Well, if this is your brother, please take him off my hands--and
welcome. You see, Miss Lowthry, it was nothing but the humorous prank of
some boys. This is Hallowe'en."

"Boys!" sniffed Miss Lowthry, glaring. "Humph! I think I could eat a
couple of boys, right now, if I could see them skinned alive and then
boiled."

Hoof, once he had possession of the basket, raced away as though nothing
else on earth mattered. This was good policy for, if he lingered, the
policeman might begin to ask questions.

When the door had closed and the officer was gone, Dick and his crowd
slipped out from concealment, joining Hoof and his baby brother.

"Oh, me, oh, my!" groaned Dave Darrin, stifling with laughter. "We must
play this on some more folks."

"But say," warned Dick Prescott, "don't you think that, by the time
we've played this on three or four more people, the policeman will begin
to be suspicious of Hoof's wailing accents and his great joy at finding
