the State legislature. It was an able document, and as it was now
recognized everywhere that he was a truly national figure, it was given
careful attention. It treated of the corruption in canal management, of
the franchise tax, of taxation in general, and a large portion was
devoted to the trusts. At that time the trusts were receiving great
attention everywhere, and it was felt that what the governor had to say
about them, that they were largely over-capitalized, that they
misrepresented the condition of their affairs, that they promoted unfair
competition, and that they wielded increased power over the wage-earner,
was strictly true.

In Chicago there is a wealthy organization known as the Hamilton Club,
and the members were very anxious to have Governor Roosevelt as their
guest on Appomattox Day, April 10, 1899. A delegation went to New York
to invite the governor, and he accepted the invitation with pleasure.

"The middle West is very dear to me," said he. "It will be a pleasure to
meet my many friends there."

Of course he was expected to speak, and said the subject of his address
would be "The Strenuous Life,"--certainly a subject close to his own
heart, considering the life he himself had led.

When Mr. Roosevelt reached the metropolis of the Great Lakes, he found
a large crowd waiting at the railroad station to receive him. The
reception committee was on hand, with the necessary coaches, and people
were crowded everywhere, anxious to catch a sight of the man who had
made himself famous by the advance up San Juan Hill.

But for the moment Governor Roosevelt did not see the reception
committee, nor did he see the great mass of people. In a far corner of
the platform he caught sight of six men, dressed in the faded and
tattered uniform of the Rough Riders. They were not men of wealth or
position, but they were men of his old command, and he had not forgotten
them.

"Glad to see you, boys, glad to see you!" he shouted, as he elbowed his
way toward them. "Come up here and shake hands."

"Glad to see you, Colonel," was the ready answer, and the faces of the
men broke into broad smiles. They shook hands readily, and willingly
answered all of the questions the governor put to them. He asked how
each of them was doing, calling them by their names, and concluded by
requesting them to come up to the Auditorium later, "for an all-round
chat."

"It was a great meeting," said one who was there. "Before the train came
in, those old Rough Riders were nervous and showed it. They knew that
Roosevelt had become a great man, and they were just a little afraid he
would pass them by. When the meeting was over, they went off as happy as
a lot of children, and one of them said, 'Say, fellows, Teddy's just all
right yet, ain't he?' And another answered: 'Told you he would be. He's
a white man through and through, none whiter anywhere.'"

The banquet was held in the Auditorium Theatre building, and was said to
be the largest ever given in Chicago. Many distinguished guests were
present, both from the North and the South, and the place was a mass of
flowers and brilliantly illuminated, while a fine orchestra discoursed
music during the meal. When Theodore Roosevelt arose to speak, there was
cheering that lasted fully a quarter of an hour.

The speech made upon this occasion is one not likely to be forgotten.
Previous to that time the word "strenuous" had been heard but seldom,
but ever since it has stood for something definite, and is much in use.
In part Mr. Roosevelt spoke as follows:--

"I wish to preach, not the doctrine of ignoble ease, but the doctrine of
the strenuous life; the life of toil and effort; of labor and strife; to
preach that highest form of success which comes, not to the man who
desires mere easy peace, but to the man who does not shirk from danger,
from hardship, or from bitter toil, and who out of these wins the
splendid ultimate triumph."

Another paragraph is equally interesting and elevating:--

"We do not admire the man of timid peace. We admire the man who embodies
victorious effort; the man who never wrongs his neighbor, who is prompt
to help a friend; but who has those virile qualities necessary to win in
the stern strife of actual life. It is hard to fail; but it is worse
never to have tried to succeed."

And to this he adds:--

"As it is with the individual so it is with the nation. It is a base
untruth to say that happy is the nation that has no history. Thrice
happy is the nation that has a glorious history. Far better is it to
dare mighty things to win glorious triumphs, even though checkered by
failure, than to take rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy
much nor suffer much, because they live in the gray twilight that knows
neither victory nor defeat."[1]

[Footnote 1: For other extracts from this speech, see Appendix A, p.
297.]

[Illustration: Theodore Roosevelt]




CHAPTER XXI

THE CONVENTION AT PHILADELPHIA--THEODORE ROOSEVELT SECONDS THE
NOMINATION OF PRESIDENT MCKINLEY--BECOMES CANDIDATE FOR THE
VICE-PRESIDENCY--REMARKABLE TOURS THROUGH MANY STATES


As the time came on to nominate parties for the office of President and
Vice-President of the United States, in 1900, there was considerable
speculation in the Republican party regarding who should be chosen for
the second name on the ticket.

It was felt by everybody that President McKinley had honestly earned a
second term, not alone by his management of the war with Spain, but also
because of his stand touching the rebellion in the Philippines, and on
other matters of equal importance.

About the Vice-Presidency the political managers were not so sure, and
they mentioned several names. But in the hearts of the people there was
but one name, and that was Theodore Roosevelt.

"We must have him," was heard upon every side. "He will be just the
right man in the right place. He will give to the office an importance
never before attached to it, and an importance which it deserves."

Personally, Governor Roosevelt did not wish this added honor. As the
Executive of the greatest State in our Union, he had started great
reforms, and he wanted to finish them.

"My work is here," he said to many. "Let me do what I have been called
to do, and then I will again be at the service of the whole nation once
more."

The National Republican Convention met in Philadelphia, June 19, in
Exposition Hall, beautifully decorated with flags and banners. Senator
Mark Hanna, President McKinley's warmest personal friend, was chairman,
and the delegates, numbering over seven hundred, came, as usual at such
conventions, from every State in the Union. Governor Roosevelt himself
was a delegate, and sat near the middle aisle, five or six seats from
the front. He was recognized by everybody, and it is safe to say that
he was the most conspicuous figure at the convention.

Up to the last minute many of the political leaders were, in a measure,
afraid of Theodore Roosevelt. They understood his immense popularity,
and were afraid that the convention might be "stampeded" in his favor.

"If they once start to yell for Roosevelt, it will be good-by to
everybody else," said one old politician. "They are just crazy after the
leader of the Rough Riders."

But this man did not understand the stern moral honesty of the man under
consideration. Roosevelt believed in upholding William McKinley, and had
said so, and it was no more possible for him to seek the Presidential
nomination by an underhanded trick than it was for President McKinley to
do an equally base thing when he was asked to allow his name to be
mentioned at the time he had pledged himself to support John Sherman.[2]
Both men were of equal loyalty, and the word of each was as good as his
bond.

[Footnote 2: See "American Boys' Life of William McKinley," p. 191.]

It was Senator Foraker who put up President McKinley for nomination, and
the vigorous cheering at that time will never be forgotten. Fifteen
thousand throats yelled themselves hoarse, and then broke into the
ringing words and music of "The Union Forever!" in a manner that made
the very convention hall tremble. Then came cries for Roosevelt, "For
our own Teddy of the Rough Riders!" and, written speech in hand, he
arose amid that vast multitude to second the candidacy of William
McKinley. Not once did he look at the paper he held in his hand, but
with a force that could not be misunderstood he addressed the
assemblage.

"I rise to second the nomination of William McKinley, because with him
as a leader this people has trod the path of national greatness and
prosperity with the strides of a giant," said he, "and because under him
we can and will succeed in the election. Exactly as in the past we have
remedied the evils which we undertook to remedy, so now when we say that
a wrong shall be righted, it most assuredly will be righted.

"We stand on the threshold of a new century, a century big with the
fate of the great nations of the earth. It rests with us to decide now
whether in the opening years of that century we shall march forward to
fresh triumphs, or whether at the outset we shall deliberately cripple
ourselves for the contest."

His speech was the signal for another burst of applause, and when
finally Theodore Roosevelt was named as the candidate for
Vice-President, the crowd yelled until it could yell no longer, while
many sang "Yankee Doodle" and other more or less patriotic airs, keeping
time with canes and flag-sticks. When the vote was cast, only one
delegate failed to vote for Theodore Roosevelt, and that was Theodore
Roosevelt himself.

The platform of the party was largely a repetition of the platform of
four years before. Again the cry was for "sound money," and for the
continuance of President McKinley's policy in the Philippines.

The campaign which followed was truly a strenuous one--to use a favorite
word of the candidate. President McKinley decided not to make many
speeches, and thus the hard work previous to election day fell upon
Theodore Roosevelt.

He did not shirk the task. As with everything he undertook, he entered
into the campaign with vigor, resolved to deserve success even if he did
not win it.

"I will do my best in the interests of our party, and for the benefit of
the people at large," said Theodore Roosevelt. "No man can do more than
that."

In the few short months between the time when he was nominated and when
the election was held, Governor Roosevelt travelled over 20,000 miles by
rail, visiting nearly 600 towns, and addressing, on a rough estimate,
fully 3,000,000 of people! In that time he delivered 673 speeches, some
of them half an hour and some an hour in length.

In his thousands of miles of travel the candidate for the
Vice-Presidency visited many States, particularly those lying between
New York and Colorado. At nearly every town he was greeted by an immense
crowd, all anxious to do the leader of the Rough Riders honor. In the
large cities great banquets were held, and he was shown much respect
and consideration. In many places those who had fought under him came to
see and listen to him, and these meetings were of especial pleasure.
Often he would see an old Rough Rider hanging back in the crowd, and
would call him to the front or do his best to reach the ex-soldier and
shake him by the hand.

One occurrence is worthy of special mention. The Democratic party had
nominated William Jennings Bryan as their candidate for President. There
was a great labor picnic and demonstration at Chicago, and both Governor
Roosevelt and Mr. Bryan were invited to speak.

"You had better not accept, governor," said some friends to Theodore
Roosevelt. "There may be trouble."

"I am not afraid," answered the former leader of the Rough Riders.

"But Mr. Bryan and yourself are to be there at practically the same
time."

"That does not matter," said the governor. And he went to Chicago on
September 3, to attend the Labor Day celebrations. The picnic was held
at Electric Park, and in the presence of fifteen thousand people
Governor Roosevelt and Mr. Bryan "buried the hatchet" for the time
being, and spoke to those surrounding them on the dignity of labor and
the duties of the laboring man to better himself and his social
conditions. In that motley collection of people there were frequent
cries of "Hurrah for Teddy!" and "What's the matter with Bryan? He's all
right!" but there was no disturbance, and each speaker was listened to
with respectful attention from start to finish. It was without a doubt a
meeting to show true American liberty and free speech at its best.

But all of the stops on his tours were not so pleasant to Governor
Roosevelt. In every community there are those who are low-bred and bound
to make an exhibition of their baseness. At Waverly, New York, a stone
was flung at him through the car window, breaking the glass but missing
the candidate for whom it was intended. At once there was excitement.

"Are you hurt, Governor?" was the question asked.

"No," returned Theodore Roosevelt. And then he added, with a faint
smile, "It's only a bouquet, but I wish, after this, they wouldn't make
them quite so hard."

There was also a demonstration against the candidate at Haverstraw, New
York, which threatened for a while to break up an intended meeting. But
the worst rowdyism was encountered at Victor, a small town in Colorado,
near the well-known mining centre of Cripple Creek. Victor was full of
miners who wanted not "sound money," but "free silver," for free silver,
so styled, meant a great booming of silver mining.

"We don't want him here," said these miners. "We have heard enough about
him and his gold standard. He had better keep away, or he'll regret it."

When Theodore Roosevelt was told he might have trouble in the mining
camps, he merely shrugged his shoulders.

"I know these men," he said. "The most of them are as honest and
respectable as the citizens of New York. I am not afraid of the vicious
element. The better class are bound to see fair play."

The governor spoke at a place called Armory Hall, and the auditorium was
packed. He had just begun his speech when there was a wild yelling and
cat-calling, all calculated to drown him out. He waited for a minute,
and then, as the noise subsided, tried to go on once more, when a voice
cried out:--

"What about rotten beef?" referring to the beef furnished during the
Santiago campaign, which had, of course, come through a Republican
Commissary Department.

"I ate that beef," answered the governor, quickly. And then he added to
the fellow who had thus questioned him: "You will never get near enough
to be hit with a bullet, or within five miles of it." At this many burst
into applause, and the man, who was a coward at heart, sneaked from the
hall in a hurry. He was no soldier and had never suffered the hardships
of any campaign, and many hooted him as he deserved.

But the trouble was not yet over. Theodore Roosevelt finished his
address, and then started to leave the hall in company with a number of
his friends. On the way to the train a crowd of rowdies followed the
candidate's party, and threw all sorts of things at them. One man made a
personal attack on the governor and hit him on the chest with a stick.
He tried to leap away, but was knocked down by a personal friend of
Theodore Roosevelt.

"Down with the gold bugs!" was the cry, and the violence of the mob
increased. The friends of Governor Roosevelt rallied to his support, and
blows were given and taken freely. But with it all the candidate reached
his train in safety, and in a few minutes more had left the town far
behind. He was not much disturbed, and the very next day went on with
his speech-making as if nothing out of the ordinary had happened. The
better classes of citizens of Victor were much disturbed over the
happening, and they sent many regrets to Governor Roosevelt, assuring
him that such a demonstration would never again be permitted to occur.




CHAPTER XXII

ELECTED VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES--PRESIDES OVER THE
SENATE--TAX UPON THEODORE ROOSEVELT'S STRENGTH--START ON ANOTHER GRAND
HUNTING TOUR


But the campaign, sharp and bitter as it had been, was not yet at an
end. In New York City there followed a "Sound Money Parade," which was
perhaps the largest of its kind ever witnessed in the United States. It
was composed of all sorts and conditions of men, from bankers and
brokers of Wall Street to the humble factory and mill hands from up the
river and beyond. The parade took several hours to pass, and was
witnessed by crowds almost as great as had witnessed the Dewey
demonstration.

In New York City, as the time drew closer for the election, there was
every intimation that the contest would be an unusually "hot" one, and
that there would be much bribery and corruption. It was said by some
that police methods were very lax at that time, and that the saloons,
which ought to be closed on election day, would be almost if not quite
wide open.

[Illustration: _Photograph by Pach Bros., N.Y._

PRESIDENT MCKINLEY AND VICE-PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT.]

"We must have an honest election," said Governor Roosevelt. And without
loss of time he sent letters to Mayor Van Wyck, and to the sheriff and
the district attorney of the county of New York, calling their attention
to the facts in the case, and telling them that he would hold them
strictly responsible if they did not do their full duty. As a
consequence the election was far more orderly than it might otherwise
have been in the metropolitan district.

The results of the long contest were speedily known. McKinley and
Roosevelt had been elected by a large plurality, and both they and their
numerous friends and supporters were correspondingly happy. Great
parades were had in their honor, and it was predicted, and rightly, that
the prosperity which our country had enjoyed for several years in the
past would continue for many years to come.

During those days the United States had but one outside difficulty,
which was in China. There a certain set of people called the Boxers
arose in rebellion and threatened the lives of all foreigners, including
American citizens. An International Army was organized, including
