

FIRST CHOIR

  The LORD strong and mighty,
  The LORD mighty in battle.


FIRST CHOIR

  Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
  Yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors:
  And the King of Glory shall come in.


SECOND CHOIR

  Who is this King of Glory?


FIRST CHOIR

  The LORD of Hosts,
  He is the King of Glory.

      --_As arranged by Richard G. Moulton_

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FOUR-HORSE RACE

From "Black Rock"


1. The great event of the day, however, was to be the four-horse race,
for which three teams were entered--one from the mines driven by
Nixon, Craig's friend, a citizens' team, and Sandy's. The race was
really between the miners' team and that from the woods, for the
citizens' team, though made up of speedy horses, had not been driven
much together, and knew neither their driver nor each other. In the
miners' team were four bays, very powerful, a trifle heavy perhaps,
but well matched, perfectly trained, and perfectly handled by their
driver. Sandy had his long rangy roans, and for leaders, a pair of
half-broken pinto bronchos. The pintos, caught the summer before upon
the Alberta prairies, were fleet as deer, but wicked and uncertain.
They were Baptiste's special care and pride. If they would only run
straight, there was little doubt that they would carry the roans and
themselves to glory; but one could not tell the moment they might
bolt or kick things to pieces.

2. Being the only non-partisan in the crowd, I was asked to referee.
The race was about half a mile and return, the first and last quarters
being upon the ice. The course, after leaving the ice, led up from the
river by a long, easy slope to the level above; and at the further
end, curved somewhat sharply around the Old Fort. The only condition
attaching to the race was, that the teams should start from the
scratch, make the turn of the Fort, and finish at the scratch. There
were no vexing regulations as to fouls. The man making the foul would
find it necessary to reckon with the crowd, which was considered
sufficient guarantee for a fair and square race. Owing to the hazards
of the course, the result would depend upon the skill of the drivers
quite as much as the speed of the teams. The points of hazard were at
the turn round the Old Fort, and at a little ravine which led down to
the river, over which the road passed by means of a long, log bridge
or causeway.

3. From a point upon the high bank of the river, the whole course lay
in open view. It was a scene full of life and vividly picturesque.
There were miners in dark clothes and peak caps; citizens in ordinary
garb; ranch-men in wide cowboy hats and buckskin shirts and leggings,
some with cartridge-belts and pistols; a few half-breeds and Indians
in half-native, half-civilized dress; and scattering through the
crowd, the lumbermen with gay scarlet and blue blanket coats, and some
with knitted tuques of the same colour. A very good-natured but
extremely uncertain crowd it was. At the head of each horse stood a
man, but at the pintos' heads Baptiste stood alone, trying to hold
down the off-leader, thrown into a frenzy of fear by the yelling of
the crowd.

4. Gradually all became quiet, till, in the midst of absolute
stillness, came the words: "Are you ready?" then the pistol-shot, and
the great race had begun. Above the roar of the crowd came the shrill
cry of Baptiste, as he struck his broncho with the palm of his hand,
and swung himself into the sleigh beside Sandy, as it shot past.

5. Like a flash the bronchos sprang to the front, two lengths before
the other teams; but, terrified by the yelling of the crowd, instead
of bending to the left bank up which the road wound, they wheeled to
the right and were almost across the river before Sandy could swing
them back into the course.

6. Baptiste's cries, a curious mixture of French and English,
continued to strike through all other sounds, till they gained the top
of the slope to find the others almost a hundred yards in front, the
citizens' team leading, with the miners' following close. The moment
the pintos caught sight of the teams before them, they set off at a
terrific pace and steadily devoured the intervening space. Nearer and
nearer the turn came, the eight horses in front, running straight and
well within their speed. After them flew the pintos, running savagely
with ears set back, leading well the big roans, thundering along and
gaining at every bound. And now the citizens' team had almost reached
the Fort, running hard and drawing away from the bays. But Nixon knew
what he was about, and was simply steadying his team for the turn. The
event proved his wisdom, for in the turn the leading team left the
track, lost a moment or two in the deep snow, and before they could
regain the road, the bays had swept superbly past, leaving their
rivals to follow in the rear. On came the pintos, swiftly nearing the
Fort. Surely at that pace they cannot make the turn. But Sandy knows
his leaders. They have their eyes upon the teams in front, and need no
touch of rein. Without the slightest change in speed the nimble-footed
bronchos round the turn, hauling the big roans after them, and fall in
behind the citizens' team, which is regaining steadily the ground lost
in the turn.

7. And now the struggle is for the bridge over the ravine. The bays in
front, running with mouths wide open, are evidently doing their best;
behind them, and every moment nearing them, but at the limit of their
speed too, come the lighter and fleeter citizens' team; while opposite
their driver are the pintos, pulling hard, eager and fresh. Their
temper is too uncertain to send them to the front; they run well
following, but when leading cannot be trusted, and besides, a broncho
hates a bridge; so Sandy holds them where they are, waiting and hoping
for his chance after the bridge is crossed. Foot by foot the citizens'
team creep up upon the flank of the bays, with the pintos in turn
hugging them closely, till it seems as if the three, if none slackens,
must strike the bridge together; and this will mean destruction to one
at least. This danger Sandy perceives, but he dare not check his
leaders. Suddenly, within a few yards of the bridge, Baptiste throws
himself upon the lines, wrenches them out of Sandy's hands, and, with
a quick swing, forces the pintos down the steep side of the ravine,
which is almost sheer ice with a thin coat of snow. It is a daring
course to take, for the ravine, though not deep, is full of
undergrowth, and is partially closed up by a brush heap at the further
end. But with a yell, Baptiste hurls his four horses down the slope,
and into the undergrowth. "Allons, mes enfants! Courage! vite, vite!"
cries their driver, and nobly do the pintos respond. Regardless of
bushes and brush heaps, they tear their way through; but as they
emerge, the hind bob-sleigh catches a root, and, with a crash, the
sleigh is hurled high into the air. Baptiste's cries ring out high and
shrill as ever, encouraging his team, and never cease till, with a
plunge and a scramble, they clear the brush heap lying at the mouth of
the ravine, and are out on the ice on the river, with Baptiste
standing on the front bob, the box trailing behind, and Sandy nowhere
to be seen.

8. Three hundred yards of the course remain. The bays, perfectly
handled, have gained at the bridge, and in the descent to the ice, and
are leading the citizens' team by half a dozen sleigh lengths. Behind
both comes Baptiste. It is now or never for the pintos. The rattle of
the trailing box, together with the wild yelling of the crowd rushing
down the bank, excites the bronchos to madness, and, taking the bits
in their teeth, they do their first free running that day. Past the
citizens' team like a whirlwind they dash, clear the intervening
space, and gain the flanks of the bays. Can the bays hold them? Over
them leans their driver, plying for the first time the hissing lash.
Only fifty yards more. The miners begin to yell. But Baptiste, waving
his lines high in one hand, seizes his tuque with the other, whirls it
above his head and flings it with a fiercer yell than ever at the
bronchos. Like the bursting of a hurricane the pintos leap forward,
and with a splendid rush cross the scratch, winners by their own
length.

      --_By arrangement with the Westminster Co., Limited,
           and Rev. C. W. Gordon (Ralph Connor)_


  PREPARATORY.--Make a black-board sketch of the
  race-course, fixing the position of "the scratch," "the
  Old Fort," "the high bank with the spectators," "the
  bridge," etc.

  In what passages does the excitement reach its greatest
  height? How are the Pitch and Time affected?
  (Introduction, pp. 13 and 22.)

  What is the Stress employed throughout? Where is the
  Stress most marked? Give reasons. (Introduction, pp. 27
  and 28.)

       *       *       *       *       *


MRS. MALAPROP'S VIEWS

From "The Rivals"


The scene is Mrs. Malaprop's lodgings at Bath. Present, Lydia Languish.
Enter Mrs. Malaprop and Sir Anthony Absolute.


_Mrs. Malaprop._--There, Sir Anthony, there sits the deliberate
simpleton who wants to disgrace her family, and lavish herself on a
fellow not worth a shilling.

_Lydia._--Madam, I thought you once--

_Mrs. Malaprop._--You thought, miss! I don't know any business you
have to think at all: thought does not become a young woman. But the
point we would request of you is, that you will promise to forget this
fellow; to illiterate him, I say, quite from your memory.

_Lydia._--Ah, madam! our memories are independent of our wills. It is
not so easy to forget.

_Mrs. Malaprop._--But I say it is, miss! there is nothing on earth so
easy as to forget, if a person chooses to set about it. I'm sure I
have as much forgot your poor dear uncle as if he had never
existed--and I thought it my duty so to do; and let me tell you,
Lydia, these violent memories don't become a young woman.

_Sir Anthony._--Why, sure she won't pretend to remember what she's
ordered not! Ay, this comes of her reading!

_Lydia._--What crime, madam, have I committed to be treated thus?

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Now don't attempt to extirpate yourself from the
matter; you know I have proof controvertible of it. But tell me, will
you promise to do as you're bid? Will you take a husband of your
friends' choosing?

_Lydia._--Madam, I must tell you plainly that had I no preference for
any one else, the choice you have made would be my aversion.

_Mrs. Malaprop._--What business have you, miss, with preference and
aversion. They don't become a young woman; and you ought to know that
as both always wear off, 'tis safest in matrimony to begin with a
little aversion. I am sure I hated your poor dear uncle before
marriage as if he'd been a blackamoor; and yet, miss, you are sensible
what a wife I made? and when it pleased Heaven to release me from him,
'tis unknown what tears I shed! But suppose we were going to give you
another choice, will you promise us to give up this Beverley?

_Lydia._--Could I belie my thoughts so far as to give that promise, my
actions would certainly as far belie my words.

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Take yourself to your room. You are fit company for
nothing but your own ill-humours.

_Lydia._--Willingly, ma'am--I cannot change for the worse.
  (_Exit_)

_Mrs. Malaprop._--There's a little intricate hussy for you!

_Sir Anthony._--It is not to be wondered at, ma'am: all this is the
natural consequence of teaching girls to read. Had I a thousand
daughters, by heaven I'd as soon have them taught the black art as
their alphabet!

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Nay, nay, Sir Anthony: you are an absolute
misanthropy.

_Sir Anthony._--In my way hither, Mrs. Malaprop, I observed your
niece's maid coming forth from a circulating library! She had a book
in each hand; they were half-bound volumes with marble covers! From
that moment I guessed how full of duty I should see her mistress!

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Those are vile places indeed!

_Sir Anthony._--Madam, a circulating library in a town is an evergreen
tree of diabolical knowledge,--it blossoms through the year! And
depend on it, Mrs. Malaprop, that they who are so fond of handling the
leaves will long for the fruit at last.

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Fy, fy, Sir Anthony! you surely speak laconically.

_Sir Anthony._--Why, Mrs. Malaprop, in moderation now, what would you
have a woman know?

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Observe me, Sir Anthony. I would by no means wish a
daughter of mine to be a progeny of learning; I don't think so much
learning becomes a young woman: for instance, I would never let her
meddle with Greek, or Hebrew, or algebra, or simony, or fluxions, or
paradoxes, or such inflammatory branches of learning; neither would it
be necessary for her to handle any of your mathematical, astronomical,
diabolical instruments. But, Sir Anthony, I would send her at nine
years old to a boarding-school, in order to learn a little ingenuity
and artifice. Then, sir, she should have a supercilious knowledge in
accounts; and as she grew up I would have her instructed in geometry,
that she might know something of the contagious countries: but above
all, Sir Anthony, she should be mistress of orthodoxy, that she might
not misspell and mispronounce words so shamefully as girls usually do;
and likewise that she might reprehend the true meaning of what she is
saying. This, Sir Anthony, is what I would have a woman know; and I
don't think there is a superstitious article in it.

_Sir Anthony._--Well, well, Mrs. Malaprop, I will dispute the point no
further with you; though I must confess that you are a truly moderate
and polite arguer, for almost every third word you say is on my side
of the question. But, Mrs. Malaprop, to the more important point in
debate: you say you have no objection to my proposal?

_Mrs. Malaprop._--None, I assure you. I am under no positive
engagement with Mr. Acres; and as Lydia is so obstinate against him,
perhaps your son may have better success.

_Sir Anthony._--Well, madam, I will write for the boy directly. He
knows not a syllable of this yet, though I have for some time had the
proposal in my head. He is at present with his regiment.

_Mrs. Malaprop._--We have never seen your son, Sir Anthony; but I hope
no objection on his side.

_Sir Anthony._--Objection! let him object if he dare! No, no, Mrs.
Malaprop, Jack knows that the least demur puts me in a frenzy
directly. My process was always very simple: in their younger days,
'twas "Jack, do this"; if he demurred I knocked him down, and if he
grumbled at that I always sent him out of the room.

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Ay, and the properest way, o'my conscience! Nothing
is so conciliating to young people as severity. Well, Sir Anthony, I
shall give Mr. Acres his discharge, and prepare Lydia to receive your
son's invocations; and I hope you will represent her to the captain as
an object not altogether illegible.

_Sir Anthony._--Madam, I will handle the subject prudently. Well I
must leave you; and let me beg you, Mrs. Malaprop, to enforce this
matter roundly to the girl. Take my advice--keep a tight hand: if she
rejects this proposal, clap her under lock and key; and if you were
just to let the servants forget to bring her dinner for three or four
days, you can't conceive how she'd come about. (Exit)

_Mrs. Malaprop._--Well, at any rate I shall be glad to get her from
under my intuition. She has somehow discovered my partiality for Sir
Lucius O'Trigger: sure Lucy can't have betrayed me! No, the girl is
such a simpleton, I should have made her confess it. (Calls) Lucy!
Lucy!--Had she been one of your artificial ones, I should never have
trusted her.

    --_Richard Brinsley Sheridan_


  What is the difference between Mrs. Malaprop's mental
  attitude toward Lydia and toward Sir Anthony? How is
  this difference indicated in the Stress of voice?
  (Introduction, pp. 27 and 28.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GLOVE AND THE LIONS


  King Francis was a hearty king, and lov'd a royal sport,
  And one day, as his lions strove, sat looking on the court;
  The nobles fill'd the benches round, the ladies by their side,
  And 'mongst them Count de Lorge, with one he hoped to make
    his bride;
  And truly 'twas a gallant thing to see that crowning show,           5
  Valour and love, and a king above, and the royal beasts below.

  Ramp'd and roar'd the lions, with horrid laughing jaws;
  They bit, they glared, gave blows like beams, a wind went with
    their paws;
  With wallowing might and stifled roar, they roll'd one on another,
  Till all the pit, with sand and mane, was in a thund'rous smother;  10
  The bloody foam above the bars came whizzing through the air;
  Said Francis then, "Good gentlemen, we're better here than there!"

  De Lorge's love o'erheard the King, a beauteous, lively dame,
  With smiling lips, and sharp bright eyes, which always seem'd
    the same:
  She thought, "The Count, my lover, is as brave as brave can be;     15
  He surely would do desperate things to show his love of me!
  King, ladies, lovers, all look on; the chance is wond'rous fine;
  I'll drop my glove to prove his love; great glory will be mine!"

  She dropp'd her glove to prove his love: then looked on him
    and smiled;
  He bow'd, and in a moment leap'd among the lions wild:              20
  The leap was quick; return was quick; he soon regain'd his place;
  Then threw the glove, but not with love, right in the lady's face!
  "In truth!" cried Francis, "rightly done!" and he rose from where
    he sat:
  "No love," quoth he, "but vanity, sets love a task like that!"

      --_Leigh Hunt_


  PREPARATORY.--Divide the poem into four scenes, and
  describe each scene.

  What are the difficulties of Articulation in ll. 2, 9,
  10, and 14.

  What attitude of mind is indicated by the King's first
  speech? By his second speech? What difference in Stress?
  (Introduction, pp. 27-29.) What is the Force in each
  case? (Introduction, p. 25.)

  15, 16, and 17. Use these lines as an illustration to
  show that Visualization is necessary in order to secure
  good vocal expression.

  In what Time do you read the lady's thoughts!
  (Introduction, p. 13.)

  Give examples from stanzas ii, and iv, where the
  sympathy with the picture may be sufficiently strong to
  lead to imitation of movements or sounds. (Introduction,
  pp. 5 and 6.)

       *       *       *       *       *

