Most of the great railway companies have a Totem and the use of such
things is increasing to-day.

Here in the drawing are some Totems seen daily in our towns. Doubtless
you can add to the number.


TALE 63

Symbols

If you have thought much about it, O Guide! you will surely find that,
for decoration, it is better to use a beautiful symbol of anything,
rather than a good photograph of it. For the symbol lets the imagination
loose, and the other chains it to the ground; the one is the spirit, and
the other the corpse. These things you cannot tell to the little folks,
but you can prove them to yourself, and you will see why I wish to give
some symbols here for use.

There is another reason, one which you _can_ give to them. It is this:
Only the highly trained artist can make a good portrait drawing, while
the smallest child, if it sticks to symbols, is sure, in some degree, of
a pleasant success in its very first effort.

These that I give, are copied from Indian art, and whether in colour, in
raised modelling, or in black lines, can be used successfully to
decorate anything that you are likely to make.

[Illustration: Seventeen Gestures Currently Used in the Sign Language]


TALE 64

Sign Language

All men, especially wild men, and some animals have a language of signs.
That is, they talk to each other without making any sounds; using
instead, the movements of parts of the body. This is "eye talk," while
words are "ear talk."

Among the animals, horses bob their heads when they are hungry and paw
with a front foot when thirsty or eager to be off. Dogs wag their tails
when pleased, and cows shake their heads when angry.

Policemen, firemen, railway men, and others use signs because there is
too much noise to be heard. School children use signs because they are
not allowed to talk in school. Most children know the signs for "yes"
and "no," "come here," "go away," "hurry up," "you can't touch me,"
"hush!", "shame on you!", "up," "down," "word of honour," "swimming,"
etc.

The traffic policeman is using signs all day long. By a movement of the
hand he signals:--stop, go on, come here, hurry up, wait, turn around,
go by, stay back, over there, you look out, right here, and one or two
others.

How many signs can you add to these two lists?


TALE 65

The Language of Hens

Yes; Hens talk somewhat as we do; only they haven't so many words, and
don't depend on them as we have to.

There are only ten words in ordinary hen-talk.

The _cluck, cluck_ of the mother means "Come along, kiddies."

The low _kawk_ of warning, usually for a hawk.

The _chuck, chuck_ of invitation means, "Good food."

The _tuk-ut-e-ah-tuk_ means, "Bless my soul, what is that?"

The _cut, cut, get your hair cut_, of a Hen that has just laid and is
feeling greatly relieved; no doubt, saying, "Thank goodness, that's
done!" or maybe it is a notice to her mate or friend that "Business is
over, let's have some fun. Where are you?"

The soft, long-drawn _tawk--tawk--tawk_, that is uttered as the Hen
strolls about, corresponds to the whistling of the small boy; that is,
it is a mere pastime, expressing freedom from fear or annoyance.

The long, harsh, _crauk, crauk_ of fear when captured.

The quick _clack, clack, clatter_ when springing up in fear of capture.

The _put, put_ of hunger.

And, of course, the _peep, peep_ of chickens and the
_cock-a-doodle-doo_, which is the song of the Rooster.

Some Hens may have more; but these given here are hen-talk for
mother-love, warning, invitation, surprise, exultation, cheerfulness,
fear, astonishment, and hunger. Not a bad beginning in the way of
language.


TALE 66

Why the Squirrel Wears a Bushy Tail

"Oh, Mother, look at that Gray Squirrel!" shouted Billie. "What a
beautiful bushy tail he has!" Then, after a pause he added, "Mother,
what is its tail for? Why is it so big and fluffy? I know a 'Possum has
a tail to hang on a limb with, and a Fish can swim with his tail, but
why is a Gray Squirrel's tail so bushy and soft?"

Alas! Mother didn't know, and couldn't tell where to find out. It was
long after, that little Billie got the answer to his childish, but
really important question. The Alligator may use his tail as a club, the
Horse, his tail as a fly-flapper, the Porcupine his tail as a spiked
war-club, the 'Possum his as a hooked hanger, the Fox his as a muffler,
the Fish his as a paddle; but the Gray Squirrel's tail is a parachute, a
landeasy. I have seen a Gray Squirrel fall fifty feet to the ground, but
his tail was in good condition; he spread it to the utmost and it landed
him safely right side up.

I remember also a story of a Squirrel that lost his tail by an accident.
It didn't seem to matter much for a while. The stump healed up, and the
Squirrel was pert as ever; but one day he missed his hold in jumping,
and fell to the ground. Ordinarily, that would have been a small matter;
but without his tail he was jarred so severely that a dog, who saw him
fall, ran up and killed him before he could recover and climb a tree.


TALE 67

Why a Dog Wags His Tail

There is an old story that the Dog said to the Cat: "Cat, you are a
fool; you growl when you are pleased and wag your tail when you are
angry." Which happens to be true; and makes us ask: Why does a Dog wag
his tail to mean friendship?

The fact is, it is part of a wig-wag code, which is doubly interesting
now that all our boys are learning wig-wagging with a white flag. We
think that our army people invented this method; but Woodcraft men know
better.

First, notice that any Dog that has any white on his body has at least a
little white on the end of his tail. This is well known; and the reason
is that the wild ancestor had a white brush on the end of his tail; a
white flag, indeed; and this was the flag of his signal code.

Suppose, then, that a wild Dog, prowling through the woods, sights some
other animal. Instantly he crouches; for it is good woodcraft to avoid
being seen and then watch from your hiding-place. As the stranger comes
near, the crouching Dog sees that it is one of his own kind, and that it
is needless to hide any longer; indeed, that it is impossible to remain
hidden. So the moment the stranger stops and looks at the crouching Dog,
the latter stands straight up on all fours, raises his tail up high, and
wags the white tip from side to side in the sign which means, "Let's be
friends."

Every Dog knows the sign, every Dog in every town does it yet; every boy
has seen it a thousand times. We flatter ourselves that we invented the
wig-wag code with our little white flag. Maybe so; but the Dog had it
long before we did.


TALE 68

Why the Dog Turns Around Three Times Before Lying Down

Yes, they all do it; the big St. Bernard, the foolish littlest lap Dog,
the ragged street Dog; give them bare boards, or a silken cushion, or
snow, three turns around and down they go.

Why? Not so hard to answer as some simple questions. Long, long ago, the
wild great-great-grandfather of the Dog--a yellow creature with black
hair sprinkled on his back, sharp ears, light spots over his eyes, and a
white tail-tip--used to live in the woods, or on the prairies. He did
not have a home to which he might return every time he wanted to rest
or sleep; so he camped wherever he found himself, on the plains, in a
thicket, or even in some hole in a rock; and he carried his bedclothes
on his back. But he always found it worth while to add a little comfort
by smoothing the grass, the leaves, the twigs, or the pebbles before
lying down; and the simplest way to do this was by curling up, and
turning round three times, with the body brushing the high grass or
pebbles into a comfortable shape for a bed.

Yes, and they all do it to-day just the same, big and little, which is
only one of the many proofs that they are descended from the same
wild-wood great-grandfather, and still remember his habits.


TALE 69

The Deathcup of Diablo

[Illustration: The Deathcup Toadstool]

The world went very well in those bright days of the long ago, when the
wedding of El Sol and Maka Ina set all living things rejoicing. Green
youth and sparkling happiness were everywhere. Only one there
was--Diablo--who found in it poor comfort. He had no pleasure in the
growing grass. The buttercups annoyed him with the gayness of their
gold. It was at this time he chewed their stalks, so that many ever
since have been flattened and mangled. And the cherry with its fragrant
bloom he breathed on with his poison breath, so its limbs were burnt and
blackened into horrid canker bumps. And poisonous froth he blew on the
sprouting rose leaves, so they blackened and withered away. The jewel
weed, friend of the humming birds, he trampled down, but it rose so many
times and so bravely, that he left the yellow dodder like an herb-worm,
or a root-born leech to suck its blood all summer long, and break it
down. Then to trail over the trunks of trees and suck their life, he
left the demon vine, the Poison Ivy with its touch of burning fire. He
put the Snapping Turtle in the beautiful lakes to destroy its harmless
creatures and the Yellow-eyed Whizz he sent, and the Witherbloom with
its breath of flame.

And last he made the Deathcup Toadstool, and sowed it in the woods.

He saw the Squirrels eating and storing up the sweet red russula. He saw
it furnish food to mice and deer, so he fashioned the Deathcup Amanita
to be like it; and scattered it wherever good mushrooms grew, a trap for
the unwary.

Tall and shapely is the Deathcup; beautiful to look upon and smelling
like a mushroom. But beware of it, a very little is enough, a morsel of
the cup; the next night or maybe a day later the poison pangs set in.
Too late perhaps for medicine to help, and Amanita, the Deathcup, the
child of Diablo, has claimed another victim.

How shall we know the deadly Amanita among its kindly cousins, the good
mushrooms? Wise men say by these:--The poison cup from which its
springs; the white kid collar on its neck; the white or yellow gills;
and the white spores that fall from its gills if the cup, without the
stem, be laid gills down on a black paper for an hour.

By these things we may know the wan Demon of the woods, but the wisest
Guides say to their tribe:--"Because death lurks in that shapely
mushroom, though there are a hundred good for food, they are much alike,
and safety bids you shun them; let them all alone."

So Diablo went on his way rejoicing because he had spoiled so much good
food for good folk.

This, the danger of the Deathcup, is the Seventh Secret of the Woods.

[Illustration: The Poison Ivy]


TALE 70

Poison Ivy or the Three-Fingered Demon of the Woods

You have been hearing about good fairies and good old Mother Carey and
Medicine in the Sky. Now I am going to warn you against the
three-fingered Demon, the wicked snakevine that basks on stone walls and
climbs up the tree trunk, and does more harm than all the other plants,
vines, trees, and bushes put together; for it is not like the Deathcup,
easy to see and easy to let alone.

This is the Poison Ivy. Does it not look poisonous as it crawls
snake-like up some trunk, sending suckers out into the tree to suck the
sap; and oozing all over its limbs with poison in tiny wicked little
drops? Sometimes it does not climb but crawls on the ground, but by this
ye may always know it: It has only three fingers on its hand; that is,
only three leaflets on each stalk.

The one thing that looks like it, is the Boston Ivy, but that does not
grow in the woods, and the Poison Ivy leaf always has the little bump
and bite out on the side of the leaf as you see in the drawing.

It is known and feared for its power to sting and blister the skin when
it is handled or even touched. The sting begins with an unpleasant
itching which gets worse, especially if rubbed, until it blisters and
breaks open with sores which are very hard to heal.

The cause of the sting is a blistering oil, which is found in tiny drops
on all parts of the leaf and branches; it is a fixed oil; that is, it
will not dry up, and as long as it is on the skin, it keeps on burning
and blistering, worse and worse.


THE CURE

And this is the cure for the sting of the Demon Vine:--

Anything that will dissolve and remove oil without injuring the skin:--

Hot water, as hot as you can stand it, is good; a little salt in it
helps.

Hot soapy water is good.

Hot water with washing soda is good.

A wash of alcohol is good.

But best of all is a wash of strong alcohol in which is a little sugar
of lead as an antiseptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Guide should remember that three persons out of five are immune from
Poison Ivy, while a few are so sensitive that they are poisoned by flies
carrying it to them on their feet. It can be easily cured if treated at
once; if neglected it often becomes very bad and may need the help of a
doctor.

This is the Eighth Secret of the Woods.


TALE 71

The Medicine in the Sky

This is one of the greatest and best secrets of Woodcraft--The Medicine
in the Sky.

Let me tell you a story about it. There was once an Indian who left his
own people, to live with the white man, in the East. But the Great
Spirit was displeased, for he did not mean the Indian to live in houses
or cities. After a year, the red man came back very thin and sick,
