telephone wires through densely wooded sections and to the tops of
high mountains, and even if the impossible could be accomplished the
expense of keeping such lines in proper repair would be so great that
no one could afford to shoulder it. Poles rot and wires rust out with
wear and exposure to weather. Then there is the damage from gales,
ice-storms, and falling timber. Even under the best of conditions
linemen would be kept busy all the time repairing the equipment. And
as if these difficulties were not great enough in times of peace think
of the added burden of protecting miles and miles of telephone wires
in time of war. Contrast with this the small district to be protected
when it comes to a wireless station. Instead of having soldiers
scattered through miles of territory the few needed can be
concentrated within easy reach of provisions and reinforcements. And
the same advantages that the radio telephone has on land prevail as
well at sea for transmission of messages by cable is a frightfully
expensive thing. Not only is the laying of such a line difficult,
dangerous, and costly, but to maintain it is expensive and hard as
well. In time of war it is particularly at a disadvantage since the
cable can be cut and all communication with the outside world easily
severed. Wireless, on the other hand, is not dependent on any such
extravagant equipment. It finds its own way through air, water, and
earth with very little help from us; and if it has its defects we must
not forget that the first telephones were far from perfect, and that
both telephone and cable have also their disadvantages."




CHAPTER XIII

INFORMATION FROM A NEW SOURCE


During the interval when the new radio station was being put in order
and the parts of the outfit assembled Bob King and the two city
electricians toiled early and late. They scarcely stopped to eat, so
feverish was their haste. Mr. Crowninshield had let it be known that
if the wireless apparatus was in condition to send and receive
messages within a week he would add to the regular wages of the
mechanics a generous bonus and this incentive was sufficient to cause
the avaricious workmen to transgress the laws of the labor unions and
forget any fatigue they may have experienced.

As for Bob he was far too eager to get into touch with O'Connel and
the _Siren_ to covet extra pay for rushing through the installment of
the new service. A private signal had been agreed upon between him and
his former associate and also an hour set when each day the operator
aboard the yacht was to call him. O'Connel was to allow seven days for
the work at Surfside to be finished and then his messages were to
begin and both Mr. Crowninshield and his alert employee meant to be
ready for him.

Hence Bob whipped on his helpers, using every ray of daylight that
could be turned to the purpose and much of the night. Even after
everything was placed and connected up there would yet remain a great
deal of testing out and tinkering before the set would be in perfect
working condition and it was for this delay he was preparing.

Much to his surprise, however, the parts went together with
astonishingly little trouble. They had been well made and fitted
perfectly. Everything needed was at hand and in consequence there was
no sending to the city for materials and waiting until they could be
shipped. Therefore as the allotted time sped by the job that
accompanied it moved rapidly to its end.

"We are going to make it, sir," ejaculated Bob with shining eyes,
beaming enthusiastically on the master of the estate. "She will be all
set up and working by Saturday. That is the day O'Connel was to make
his first try to get into communication with us. I can hardly wait to
hear what he has to say."

"I am pretty anxious to know myself," returned the elder man. "If he
can get a message through we should then find out where the yacht is
and whether Lola is aboard her."

"I'm crazy to learn what has become of the villains who pinched the
dog," added Bob. "Do you take it they are still cruising with the
boat?"

"Oh, they must have been paid off and landed somewhere," was the
answer. "There would be no sense in detaining the thieves on the ship
until now. It would only mean paying them and having them to feed;
besides one does not care to make two rascals members of a house
party."

"You think they have escaped us then."

"If by escaping you mean getting to the city yes," nodded Mr.
Crowninshield. "But I do not feel at all sure with Dacie and Lyman on
their track that they will be entirely safe and unmolested in town.
Those detectives are like bloodhounds and will run them down no matter
where they may be hiding. The mere fact that they have got to New York
or Boston will not be much protection."

"You intend to get them then as well as to recover Lola."

"I certainly do," retorted Mr. Crowninshield with emphasis. "I am
going to recover my property, jail the thieves, and bring the people
who received the stolen goods to justice."

"They have a week's start of us," Bob observed doubtfully.

"But we have not been idle all that time, man, Dacie and Lyman have
been working; O'Connel has been using his eyes and ears--I hope; and
we have this wireless set up."

"Yes, we have certainly accomplished something," admitted Bob.

"Accomplished something! I should say we had! Besides, this is not the
sort of case one need hurry on. Nothing is going to be done suddenly,"
explained the financier. "Having got the dog the people on the yacht
will move at their leisure. They do not fear that any one is at their
heels chasing them up. Furthermore the sea offers unending
concealment for their crime should they be pursued and trapped. It is
the thieves themselves who are the scapegoats and the ones in danger,
according to their reckoning."

"I suppose so," agreed Bob. "Still, I cannot help wishing we might
have got after them without even these few days intervening."

"You forget, my son, that our wireless is going to cover space so
quickly that hereafter we shall have our information very quickly and
shall be exactly as well off as most detectives used to be in double
the time."

"Yes, that is so."

"Once we are in touch with O'Connel we can know every thought they
think aboard the _Siren_ as soon as they have thought it."

The uncertainties that clouded the younger man's face vanished.

"That's right," smiled he. "From now on we should be able to checkmate
them pretty neatly."

Mr. Crowninshield put his finger to his lips significantly. The two
city electricians were approaching.

"Well, sir," began the foreman, "I guess your wireless tests out
pretty near right; we've signalled our home company and got a reply
from New York clear as a bell. With this chap at hand," he motioned to
Bob, "you won't be needing us much longer, I reckon."

"Have you got to rush back to another job?" questioned the financier.

"Well, there is always plenty to do," grinned the man good-humoredly.

"You couldn't remain over a few days and overhaul my yacht, could you?
She is anchored out in the bay close at hand. If you could be
tightening things aboard her and seeing everything is right I would
keep this young man at this shore station."

"Why--" the mechanic hesitated, fingering the roll of bills that
stuffed his pocket. "Why," repeated he, "I imagine we could fix things
up with the boss and stick round until whatever you wanted done was
completed, sir."

"Arrange it then. Get the yacht into condition quickly so we can put
to sea any day now that we choose."

"We'll do that, Mr. Crowninshield," responded the men in chorus.
"Unless there is a lot to do to the outfit--"

"There isn't. It was all new in the fall; and we have been in Florida
this winter too, so the ship has been in commission and constantly
taken care of."

"In that case there will probably be little repairing," nodded the
spokesman. "Maybe tightening and oiling, and a few small parts to be
replaced."

"That is about it."

"Couldn't I--" Bob began but Mr. Crowninshield held up a cautioning
finger.

"I'd rather have you on shore," announced he quietly. Then turning to
the electricians he added, "I suppose the radio aboard the yacht does
not differ much from this set. There will be nothing but what you can
handle."

"Nothing, sir; nothing at all," was the answer. "Besides, we are quite
familiar with shipboard equipment. We do a lot of such work. Just
before we came down here we went down to Long Island and put the
_Siren_, a very fine steam yacht, into shape."

"The _Siren_, eh?" repeated Mr. Crowninshield as indifferently as he
could.

"Yes, sir. Perhaps you know the boat, sir."

"I've never been aboard her," replied the capitalist slowly. "She
belongs to----"

"To Mr. Daly, sir. As fine a yacht as was ever in the water."

Daly! At the name both Bob and his employer started. It was the very
man Mr. Crowninshield had suspected.

"So Daly has a place down on Long Island, has he?" drawled he.

"Oh, no, sir. Mr. Daly's place is on an island off the Maine coast. He
had just put in at the Long Island port for some minor repairs. He
said he was going to cruise a while this summer and wanted to be sure
everything was shipshape before going to Maine. The mate told me they
were waiting to pick up some people at Buzzard's Bay."

"Going to take the yacht through the Canal?"

"Yes."

"An interesting trip," observed Mr. Crowninshield slowly. "That Canal
is quite a time saver for New Yorkers." He yawned and started to move
away. Bob held his breath, waiting.

"I suppose you don't know where Daly was going for his cruise,"
inquired he over his shoulder.

"No, sir, I don't," was the response of the workman who seemed
flattered at having aroused this degree of interest in his story. "I
believe, though, that before they started they were to put into
Newport for provisions."

Newport! Then it was doubtless Newport where O'Connel was to be taken
aboard! Bob dared not raise his eyes lest the excitement that danced
in them be detected.

"And after provisioning up there Daly was to cruise, eh?" called Mr.
Crowninshield. "Well, the Atlantic is wide and he will have plenty of
room."

"That's right, sir," chuckled the mechanic, delighted by the
condescension of the great man whom all New Yorkers knew by
reputation. Think of hobnobbing in this pleasant fashion with one of
the big financiers of Wall Street!

"How simple and kind a gentleman Mr. Crowninshield is!" commented he
patronizingly after the capitalist was out of hearing. "And so
artless!"

Bob struggled not to smile.

Kind Mr. Crowninshield might be but hardly simple. Certainly not
artless. What a rare lot of amusing incidents the world contained!




CHAPTER XIV

BOB AS PEDAGOGUE


The wireless was now in commission and the next morning, after having
waited until the hour designated for O'Connel's signal and received no
message, Bob and his pupils assembled for their first lesson, not in a
stuffy room but on the broad, well-shaded veranda of Surfside. A cool
breeze rippled the water, stirring it into tiny waves and as Dick
dropped into one of the big wicker chairs he fidgeted to be out in the
freshly-painted knockabout that bobbed invitingly at the float.

His father intercepted his yearning glance and instantly interpreted
it.

"Come, now!" said he half playfully. "Quit making sheep's eyes at that
boat, son. An hour's wireless lesson isn't going to cut your morning
very short or prevent you from having plenty of time to sail, swim, or
motor. Whether it does or not you've got to endure it. Your summer
holiday is long enough in all conscience. If I had until October with
nothing more arduous to do than put up with an hour's instruction
early each day I should think myself almighty lucky."

"I am lucky, Dad," conceded Dick quickly, "only----"

"Lucky! I should say you were! You don't know what work means. Well,
it was you who wanted this radio outfit. You were all for it and----"

"I am for it still, Dad," interrupted Dick eagerly.

"Then go to it and master it," retorted his father. "If you do not
relish the lessons swallow them down for the sake of the fun you are
going to have later; for if you are intelligent enough to handle your
wireless with some brain and understanding you are going to enjoy it a
hundred per cent. more in the end."

"I know I shall," Dick agreed. "It is only that I am crazy to get at
the thing itself."

The boy's father shook his head.

"You are like all your generation," said he severely. "Eager to leap
the preliminaries and land at the top of the ladder with the first
bound. It is an impatient age and the vice extends to the old as well
as the young. Nobody wants to fit himself for anything nowadays. In my
youth men expected to serve apprenticeships and did not hope to
achieve a position until they had learned how to fill it. But now
everybody leaps at the big job and the big salary that goes with it
and blunders along, taking out his ignorance and lack of experience on
the general public. As for you youngsters, you covet at fifteen
everything that those who are fifty have. You want automobiles, boats,
victrolas and radio telephones before you know how to run them, much
less pay for them. Look at Bob, here. He is worth two of you for he
can earn what he has. Often I tell myself I am a fool to indulge you
and Nancy as I do. I ought by rights to make you do without what you
want until you can foot the bill for it." Mr. Crowninshield took a few
hasty paces across the piazza. "Still," added he, his voice softening,
"I fancy that scheme would be a sight harder on me than on you, for I
like nothing better than to get you what you want."

For a moment he paused, looking fondly at his son. Then as if afraid
of himself he bristled and continued: "But to return to this
wireless--remember that if you do not learn something about it and how
to use it I shall take it away. I mean it, mind!"

"Yes, Dad," was the timid answer.

With this awful alternative looming like a specter in his path was it
to be wondered at that Dick resolutely turned his gaze from the
allurements of the harbor and settled himself in the big chair with
all his attention focussed on Bob King's radio lesson. Moreover, human
nature is selfish enough to like company in its misery and were not
his mother, Nancy and Walter consigned to the same fate as himself?

Therefore the initial lesson began gayly.

At first Bob, seated in the chair of state facing his class, was shy
and embarrassed; but soon he forgot himself in his subject and losing
his hesitancy he spoke with the authority of one who has mastered his
art.

"I am going to begin," said he, "just as they began with me at the
radio station for I think if you get the principles of wireless at the
outset you will find it much easier to understand it. And to do this
we shall not start with wires, generators, detectors, or anything of
that sort; instead we must go back of them all to the earth and the
air, and learn how it is possible for sound to travel without the aid
of human devices. For in reality there is something that takes the
place of man-made wires. This is the ether. Surrounding the earth
moves the air we breathe; and as we go higher this air becomes thinner
and thinner until, by and by, a height is reached where the air gives
place to ether, a sort of radiant energy that bridges the zone between
the air space that encircles the earth and the sun, and brings to us
its heat. This great sea of ether is made up of particles that are
never still and which are so small that they get between every
substance they encounter, thereby becoming a universal medium for
transmitting light, heat, color and many other things to our earth.
Without this body of ether, there would be no agency to pass on to us
(as well as to the many other planets of our solar system and those
outside it) the energy the sun generates, which is the thing that
keeps us alive."

Bob waited a moment to make sure that his point was clear and then
proceeded:

"Now this energy as it moves through the ether takes the form of
waves; and these waves go out not in a single train but since the
ether is continually disturbed by the sun, in series of wave trains
that vary in frequency. Such waves are electromagnetic in character,
and light, heat, sound, and the waves carrying wireless messages are
all of a similar type, differing only in their relative rates of
vibration. If unobstructed, and moving through free ether, all of them
travel at practically the same velocity, that is about one hundred
eighty-six thousand miles a second. When, however, they encounter
other substances, as they are continually bound to do, this rate of
velocity changes. The waves of sound, for example, sent out by the
wireless telephone are very slow compared with the high-rate
vibrations that produce waves resulting in light."

Again the youthful teacher paused.

"Now this constant turmoil in the ether which creates the magnetic
area explains why the magnetized needle of a compass unfailingly
points north and south. This one simple fact is a certain proof of its
existence. And once granting a magnetic field to be there it is less
difficult to understand how wireless waves are produced in this
congenial medium and find their way through it, following in their
journey the curve of the earth's surface."

Bob smiled at his audience encouragingly.

"If you can once get this wave law through your heads the rest is not
hard," asserted he, "for the whole wireless system is based on wave
motion."

"With an ocean spread out before us we ought to be able to understand
waves," interpolated Nancy.

"We ought," nodded Bob. "And yet better than using the ocean as an
illustration imagine a small pond. Think, instead, of a nice quiet
little round pond if you can. Now when you chuck a stick or a pebble
into that still water you know how the ripples will at once go out.
There will be rings of them, and the bigger they get the fainter they
will be. In other words, as the area widens the strength of the waves
decreases; and as this same principle applies to radio you can see
that it takes a lot of energy from a wireless station to reach a
receiver a great distance away."

"I've got that!" cried Dick with such spontaneity that every one
laughed.

"Wave lengths, however, have nothing to do with actual distance," went
on Bob quickly. "Of course we think of the wave length as the distance
between one ridge of water and another. There is, though, no law that
would make it possible to translate these spaces into our scale of
miles, for sometimes they are near together, sometimes far apart.
Distance, therefore, depends on the speed with which the wave travels
and the frequency with which the water is disturbed. If you keep
tossing things in quick succession into the water you will get a
correspondingly quick succession of waves. The law governing wireless
waves is exactly the same. Their length depends on the velocity of the
wave and the frequency of the oscillations that cause it. Or to put it
another way, in order to reckon a wave length you must determine its
velocity (which is not impossible when you remember that sound travels
about one thousand one hundred and twenty feet every second) and the
number of vibrations the particular note causing the wave is making
per second. Now science has been able to compute just how many
