regard to the proposed characters which the different members of the
party were to adopt. Molly would make an ideal shepherdess. Hester was
to be in white, and was to represent St Agnes. Nora was to be Queen of
the Fairies, and Nan little Bo-Peep. Annie had not yet decided on her
own character, but was strongly inclined to act the part of a gipsy.
Annie further suggested that it would save a great deal of trouble and
have a decidedly pretty effect if all the girls under twelve years of
age were dressed as white fairies, with wings, and all the boys of the
same age as brownies. She considered that so many fairies and brownies
would have a very picturesque effect, and would help to throw up the gay
_bizarre_ colours of the older girls and boys.

Her suggestion was immediately adopted, and Hester and Molly sat down
then and there to write invitations.

Besides the Lorrimers, about a hundred and forty other children were
invited, and the girls expected that quite sixty or seventy of these
would take the parts of fairies and brownies.

"You don't know how relieved the mothers will be," exclaimed Annie.
"When people have no imagination it is the most difficult thing in the
world to think of a dress for a fancy ball which has not been adopted
dozens and dozens of times before. Please keep the notes open for a
moment, Hester, for I mean to slip into each of them some very simple
directions with regard to the dress, which will insure our having a
certain amount of uniformity."

Annie was in her element now, and even Molly was constrained to admire
the absolute genius which she showed in all matters which required tact
and brisk, quick work. Annie could write fluently, and her little slips
of paper, with their simple and plain directions, were soon ready, and
Molly and Hester set to work making copies of them as fast as they
could. The letters of invitation were all posted before they went to bed
that night. Nora shut her eyes to dream of herself as queen of the
fairies, and Molly and Hester sat down to write letters which required a
little more thought than the invitations which had just been got
through. Hester wrote--

     "DEAR FATHER,

     "I am sorry you are still away; I like to feel that I am of use to
     you. Whenever you come back you will have a hearty welcome from me.
     We are all well here and the weather is splendid; even Nora is
     quite well, although the doctor says she must lie on her back for
     some weeks longer. Annie is still with us, and Molly has been
     staying here to help look after Nora; not that she is wanted much
     for that post, for Annie is the most indefatigable nurse, and Nora
     simply adores her. But Molly is great company for me and I am
     delighted to have her, she is such a dear girl. I hope what you say
     about Squire Lorrimer is not true. I can see that Molly is very
     anxious, and the Squire and Mrs. Lorrimer have just gone to London,
     which is quite unusual. There is evidently something the matter,
     but none of the children have been told what it is. How I wish you
     could help the Squire, father. I know you are very very rich, and
     oh, it will break Molly's heart if they have to leave the dear old
     Towers. Now, I must talk to you about Nan's birthday. We are going
     to have a children's ball in the old ball-room at the Towers. It is
     going to be quite lovely. Annie is designing our dresses. She makes
     us all quite enthusiastic, she has such exquisite taste. I hope you
     will come home in time to see us in our pretty dresses. I am to be
     St. Agnes, and Annie says that I shall look like a dream! Did you
     ever think that your sensible Hetty would talk such folly?--Your
     affectionate daughter,

                              "HESTER THORNTON."

Hester finished her letter, folded it up, and addressed it. She then
glanced towards Molly, whose fair head was bent low over the sheet of
paper which she was filling. She wrote--

     "DARLING MOTHER,

     "I went to the Towers this morning with Hester and found that you
     had gone. Is anything the matter? Oh, if I had been at home you
     might have told me. I can't bear either you or father to have a
     burden that I don't share. I feel anxious and unhappy, but I will
     try very hard to be brave. Nonie is getting on so nicely, and Annie
     Forest is very kind to her. Mother, darling, there is going to be a
     great big party on the fifteenth, Nan's birthday, and Hester and
     Nora and Annie and I are very anxious that it should be a
     children's ball--a fancy ball, you know, mother, and that it should
     be held in our beautiful old ball-room. It is the Thorntons' party,
     and they will go to all the expense, but they haven't a big room
     like ours, so I thought we might lend them the big hall and the
     drawing-rooms and the ball-room, and they are beginning
     preparations already. If by any chance you or father object, will
     you send me a telegram to-morrow? I wish I could kiss you
     good-night.--Your most loving

                              "MOLLY."

Molly's letter was also directed and stamped, and when these important
epistles had been taken to the post, the whole household went to bed.

That is, with one exception.

Annie Forest, notwithstanding her gaiety and the high spirits she had
been in all day, had a care upon her mind.

It was three weeks now since the day when Mrs. Martin had pawned Mrs.
Willis's beautiful ring for the small sum of thirty shillings. That
thirty shillings had purchased cambric and embroidery and lace, and even
a few knots of coloured ribbon, to make three charming frocks for Nora
Lorrimer, but alack and alas, though the frocks lay neatly folded up in
their drawer waiting to be worn on the first festive occasion, poor
Annie had not the faintest idea how to get back the ring. That morning's
post had certainly been an important one. It had not only brought a
letter for Hester which had nearly turned the heads of two households,
but had brought Annie two epistles of a profoundly and painfully
interesting character. One was from her father, telling her that he must
postpone sending her her usual birthday present for a time, and the
other was from Mrs. Willis herself. Mrs. Willis wrote from Paris. She
was staying there for a short time on her way home, and asked Annie to
send her the diamond ring without delay by registered post. The ring was
of a very antique pattern and she wished to have it copied for a wedding
present for one of her pupils.

     "Try and post it to me at once, dear," she said, "for I shall not
     be in Paris after Saturday. I return to London that day and shall
     very likely accept Hester Thornton's invitation to come to the
     Grange for a few days. You shall then have the ring back to make
     your finger look smart for the remainder of your visit. I am
     writing in great haste in order to catch this post, so do not fail
     me, my love. The ring will be perfectly safe if you register it.
     My dear love to Hester and Nan, and much to yourself.--Your
     affectionate

                              "M. WILLIS."

Annie had glanced her eyes quickly over the contents of this disquieting
letter at breakfast time, but it was only now, in the solitude of her
own room, that she ventured to take it out and study it. What was she to
do? How could she possibly get the ring out of pawn without any money to
redeem it? She dared not confide this trouble to Mrs. Martin. She
thought and thought until her head ached and her bright eyes looked
dull.

What kind of man was the pawnbroker? Why were pawnbrokers called uncles?
Was it because they were really good-natured and helpful? She wondered
if it might be possible for her to induce the pawnbroker to let her have
the ring out on condition that she paid for it by instalments? If he
really was quite a good-natured order of uncle, he might consent to such
an arrangement. Annie felt, however, that it would be useless to get
Mrs. Martin to make such terms with him.

"She was very proud about him," thought Annie. "She did not wish to go
to him at all. I'm afraid he's disagreeable. I'm afraid he's not the
sort of man who would help a girl out of a difficulty. What _shall_ I
do? The ring _must_ go to-morrow if Mrs. Willis is to do anything with
it before she leaves Paris. It ought to have gone to-day, but to-morrow
is the very last, the very last chance. We are all going to Nortonbury
to-morrow to buy the materials for the dresses. Oh, suppose I go and see
the pawnbroker and tell him of my difficulty, and assure him that I will
honestly pay him back that money if he will only let me have the ring
again. I have four shillings still in my purse, and father's sovereign
will be certain to come sooner or later. I could show uncle father's
letter, he would then see that I was not humbugging. I expect he would
like me to call him uncle, as it seems to be _the_ name. Yes, I really
think I will go, but I must on no account whatever let Mrs. Martin or
Molly or Hester know anything about this. I should rather like to
confide in Nora, for she would think it no end of a lark; but if I did,
the poor darling would know that I had got into all this trouble on
account of her dresses, and that would simply never do. Yes, there seems
nothing for it but to visit my uncle, the pawnbroker."

Annie presently laid her head on her pillow and went to sleep.

When she awoke in the morning she still thought an appeal to the
pawnbroker the only available solution of her difficulty. The girls were
much excited about their gay shopping, and the landau was ordered to be
round at an early hour to convey Hester, Nan, Molly, and Annie to
Nortonbury. Nora had to resign herself to the company of her nurse, but
her thoughts were so full of pleasurable anticipations that under the
circumstances she did not mind the loss of her favourite Annie.

Before starting, Annie ran quickly round to Mrs. Martin's rooms.

"Here I am," she exclaimed in her bright way. "I have just rushed up to
say good morning to you before we start. You have heard of all the fun
that we are going to have, haven't you, nursey?"

"Folly, I call it," said nurse. "Throwing away good money on fallals and
wings and clouds. Miss Nan was up here last night so late that I
thought I'd never get her to bed, bamboozling me with stories of all the
children round the country being turned into fairies, which you know,
Miss Annie, is sheer nonsense and impossible to do, and Miss Nora, who
has narrowly escaped her death, is to lie on rose leaves with clouds
under her. The folly of it is beyond belief, even if it can be done,
which I sincerely hope it can't. In old days people took their pleasures
properly. Children were kept in the nursery and were sent early to bed,
and young ladies were presented to her Gracious Majesty the Queen, and
then went to balls in good stiff silks and no wings nor clouds about
'em. They met the gentlemen they were to marry at the balls, and then
there was a proper wedding breakfast and all the rest, as it should be.
I don't hold with the scarum days of the present."

"Look here, nursey," exclaimed Annie, "the fairies will look lovely, and
I'll show you myself how innocent and simple the clouds are, and as to
the wings, I'll make a pair for you if you like."

"No, thank you, Miss Annie, I hope I know what's due to myself."

"Well, I must run away," continued Annie. "You know we're just off to
Nortonbury."

"So I hear, miss."

"It was to Nortonbury you went when you sold my ring; you were a dear to
do it."

"I wouldn't do it for no one else, miss, and I don't know even now how I
came to demean myself by such a job."

"Was," said Annie in an almost trembling voice, "was the uncle very
disagreeable, then?"

"Miss Forest, such a word oughtn't to pass your lips."

"Why so, nurse? I cannot imagine why you dislike such helpful people."

"We won't argue the point," said nurse; "the subject is not suited to
the young."

Annie fidgeted. Nan's voice was heard down stairs shouting for her.

"Nurse," she said in sudden desperation, "I want to get the ring back;
tell me the name of the uncle."

A look of relief came over Mrs. Martin's face.

"I'd be glad if you had that valuable ring again," she said. "Have you
got the money for it? It would be thirty-two shillings; thirty shillings
for the loan and two shillings interest."

"Annie, we're all waiting," shouted Nan.

"Oh, do tell me the address," said Annie.

"You had better let me get the ring out of pawn for you, miss."

"No, no, I must get it to-day."

"Have you got the money, Miss Forest?"

"What would be the use of going if I hadn't?" prevaricated Annie.

"Well, but you're not going to take my young ladies to a pawnbroker's?"

"No, I promise not to take any of them; I'll go alone, quite alone. You
may trust me, really. Oh, nursey, nursey, I'm in such trouble."

Again the bright lovely eyes and sweet voice did their work.

Mrs. Martin fumbled for her keys, and taking a small piece of blue paper
out of her work-box, put it into Annie's hand.

"There," she said. "I'm sorry I ever made or meddled with this thing.
Mind you don't take one of my young ladies with you."

"I promise," said Annie. She thrust the paper into her pocket and rushed
from the room.




CHAPTER XIV.

POOR MRS. MYRTLE.


The girls spent a busy morning in Nortonbury, and if Annie had any care
on her mind she certainly did not show it. She was a splendid girl to go
shopping with. She could make up her mind quickly with regard to the
exact material she required. Her choice was practically made before she
entered a shop, her taste in colour and texture was excellent, and with
her to guide them, Hester and Molly got through their business with
great celerity. Many parcels were piled up on the front seat of the
landau, but work as they would, the girls could not get through their
necessary shopping in the morning. Hester therefore determined to lunch
at a restaurant which she knew well, and to finish buying the rest of
the materials for the fancy dresses before they returned to the Grange.
It was while they were at lunch that Annie seized the opportunity to
secure a few moments to herself. She had not yet had time even to glance
at the address which nurse had given her on the little slip of blue
paper. But it was now or never, if she were to seek the pawnbroker
without the others discovering where she was going.

Hester had ordered a very tempting lunch, and Nan was attacking her
nicely roasted chicken and bread sauce with appetite, when Annie,
snatching up a sandwich, sprang suddenly to her feet.

"I'm not hungry," she exclaimed, "and as there is so much to be done, I
won't waste time eating. Mrs. Willis wrote to me yesterday and asked me
to send her a small parcel. It contains a ring which she lent me, and as
it ought to be registered, I will go to the post-office now and get it
done while you are at lunch."

"But you really must eat something first," exclaimed Hester. "You will
be ill if you don't; the carriage is to call for us in a few minutes,
and you may just as well drive to the post-office in it; you would do it
in half the time."

"But I would rather walk," replied Annie. "I am perfectly sick of
driving. I see by Nan's face that lunch will be quite an affair of half
an hour, and I'll be back long before then."

She left the shop before Hester had time to remonstrate, and the next
moment found herself in the street.

"Now for it," she exclaimed, a little catch of excitement in her breath.
She took out her purse, opened it, and removing the slip of blue paper,
looked at the words written on it. The address rather surprised her. It
was a fancy goods shop, and was kept by a woman of the name of Myrtle.

     "MRS. MYRTLE,
       "Haberdashery and Fancy Goods Warehouse,
        "30, Eden Street,"

was the address on the sheet of paper.

Annie had never in the course of her life come in contact with a live
pawnbroker, but she had a vague idea that pawnbrokers were of the male
species, and that they invariably had three gilt balls over their
establishments.

She was relieved rather than otherwise to find that this pawnbroker was
of the female sex, and fancied that it would be easier to deal with her
on this account. A policeman directed her to Eden Street, which was a
thoroughly respectable broad thoroughfare off the High Street.
