the floor above, broke through it, and struck both men to the ground.

Joe lay stunned and motionless for a few seconds, for a beam had hit him
on the head; but Gorman leaped up and made off a moment or two before
the entrance of the policeman, who had run back to the house on hearing
Joe's war-whoop.

It is needless to add that Joe spent the remainder of his vigil that
night in an extremely wakeful condition, and that he gave a most graphic
account of his adventure with the ghosts on his return to the station!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The Salvage Corps is a body of men appointed by the insurance
offices to save and protect goods at fires, and otherwise to watch over
their interests.  They wear a uniform and helmets, something like those
of the firemen, and generally follow close in their wake--in their own
vans--when fires break out.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A NEW PHASE OF LIFE.

"Mother," said Master William Willders one night to his parent, as he
sat at supper--which meal consisted of bread and milk; "he's the
jolliest old feller, that Mr Tippet, I ever came across."

"I'm glad you like him, Willie," said Mrs Willders, who was busy
patching the knees of a pair of small unmentionables; "but I wish, dear,
that you would not use slang in your speech, and remember that fellow is
not spelt with an e-r at the end of it."

"Come now, mother, don't you go an' get sarcastic.  It don't suit you;
besides, there's no occasion for it,--for I do my best to keep it down,
but I'm so choke full of it that a word or two will spurt up now and
then in spite o' me."

Mrs Willders smiled and continued her patching; Willie grinned and
continued his supper.

"Mother," said Willie, after an interval of silence.

"Well, my son?"

"What d'ye think the old feller--ah!  I mean fellow--is up to just now?"

"I don't know, Willie."

"He's inventin' a calc'latin' machine, as is to do anythin' from simple
addition to fractions, an' he says if it works well he'll carry it on to
algebra an' mathematics, up to the fizmal calc'lus, or somethin' o' that
sort.  Oh, you've no notion how he strains himself at it.  He sits down
in his shirt-sleeves at a writin'-table he's got in a corner, an' tears
away at the little hair he has on the sides of his head (I do believe he
tore it all off the top with them inventions), then he bangs up an'
seizes his tools, and shouts, `Look here, Willie, hold on!' an' goes
sawin' and chisellin' and hammerin' away like a steam-engine.  He's all
but bu'st himself over that calc'latin' machine, and I'm much afraid
that he'll clap Chips into the sausage-machine some day, just to see how
it works.  I hope he won't, for Chips an' I are great friends, though
we've only bin a month together."

"I hope he's a good man," said Mrs Willders thoughtfully.

"Well, I'm sure he must be!" cried Willie with enthusiasm, "for he is
very kind to me, and also to many poor folk that come about him
regularly.  I'm gettin' to know their faces now, and when to expect 'em.
He always takes 'em into his back room--all sorts, old men and old
women an' children, most of 'em seedy enough, but some of 'em well off
to _look_ at.  What he says to 'em I don't know, but they usually come
out very grave, an go away thankin' him, and sayin' they won't forget
his advice.  If the advice is to come back soon they certainly _don't_
forget it!  And he's a great philosopher, too, mother, for he often
talks to me about my int'lec's.  He said jist t'other day, `Willie,'
said he, `get into a habit o' usin' yer brains, my boy.  The Almighty
put us into this world well-made machines, intended to be used in all
our parts.  Now, you'll find thousands of people who use their muscles
and neglect their brains, and thousands of others who use their brains
and neglect their muscles.  Both are wrong, boy; we're machines, lad--
wonderful machines--and the machines won't work well if they're not used
_all_ over.'  Don't that sound grand, mother?"

Willie might have received an answer if he had waited for one, but he
was too impatient, and went rattling on.

"And who d'ye think, mother, came to see old Tippet the other day, but
little Cattley, the clown's boy.  You remember my tellin' you about
little Cattley and the auction, don't you?"

"Yes, Willie."

"Well, he came, and just as he was goin' away I ran out an' asked him
how the fairy was.  `She's very ill,' he said, shakin' his head, and
lookin' so mournful that I had not the heart to ask more.  But I'm goin'
to see them, mother."

"That's right, my boy," said Mrs Willders, with a pleased look; "I like
to hear you talk of going to see people in distress.  `Blessed are they
that consider the poor,' Willie."

"Oh, as to that, you know, I don't know that they _are_ poor.  Only I
feel sort o' sorry for 'em, somehow, and I'm awful anxious to see a real
live fairy, even though she _is_ ill."

"When are you going?" inquired Mrs Willders.

"To-morrow night, on my way home."

"Did you look in at Frank's lodging in passing to-night?"

"Yes, I did, and found that he was in the station on duty again.  It
wasn't a bad sprain, you see, an' it'll teach him not to go jumpin' out
of a first-floor window again."

"He couldn't help it," said the widow.  "You know his escape by the
stair had been cut off, and there was no other way left."

"No other way!" cried Willie; "why didn't he _drop_?  He's so proud of
his strength, is Blazes, that he jumped off-hand a' purpose to show it!
Ha! he'd be the better of some o' my caution.  Now, mother, I'm off to
bed."

"Get the Bible, then," said Mrs Willders.

Willie got up and fetched a large old family Bible from a shelf, and
laid it on the table before his mother, who read a chapter and prayed
with her son; after which Willie gave her one of his "roystering" kisses
and went to bed.

The lamps had been lighted for some time next night, and the
shop-windows were pouring forth their bright rays, making the streets
appear as light as day, when Willie found himself in the small
disreputable street near London Bridge in which Cattley the clown dwelt.

Remembering the directions given to him by little Jim Cattley, he soon
found the underground abode near the burnt house, the ruins of which had
already been cleared away and a considerable portion of a new tenement
erected.

If the stair leading to the clown's dwelling was dark, the passage at
the foot of it was darker; and as Willie groped his way carefully along,
he might have imagined it to be a place inhabited only by rats or cats,
had not gleams of light, and the sound of voices from sundry closed
doors, betokened the presence of human beings.  Of the compound smells
peculiar to the place, those of beer and tobacco predominated.

At the farther end of this passage, there was an abrupt turn to the
left, which brought the boy unexpectedly to a partially open door, where
a scene so strange met his eyes that he involuntarily stood still and
gazed.

In a corner of the room, which was almost destitute of furniture, a
little girl, wan, weary, and thin, lay on a miserable pallet, with
scanty covering over her.  Beside her stood Cattley--not, as when first
introduced, in a seedy coat and hat; but in full stage costume--with
three balls on his head, white face, triangular roses on his cheeks, and
his mouth extended outward and upward at the corners, by means of red
paint.  Little Jim sat on the bed beside his sister, clad in pink
skin-tights, with cheeks and face similar to his father, and a red crest
or comb of worsted on his head.

"Ziza, darling, are you feeling better, my lamb?" said the elder clown,
with a gravity of expression in his real mouth that contrasted strangely
with the expression conveyed by the painted corners.

"No, father, not much; but perhaps I'm gettin' better, though I don't
feel it," said the sweet, faint voice of the child, as she opened her
large hollow eyes, and looked upward.

"So, that's the fairy!" thought Willie sadly, as he gazed on the child's
beautiful though wasted features.

"We'll have done d'rectly, darling," said the clown tenderly; "only one
more turn, and then we'll leave you to rest quietly for some hours.
Now, then, here we are again!" he added, bounding into the middle of the
room with a wild laugh.  "Come along, Jim, try that jump once more."

Jim did not speak; but pressing his lips to his sister's brow, leaped
after his sire, who was standing an a remarkably vigorous attitude, with
his legs wide apart and his arms akimbo, looking back over his shoulder.

"Here we go," cried Jim in a tiny voice, running up his father's leg and
side, stepping lightly on his shoulder, and planting one foot on his
head.

"Jump down," said the clown gravely.

Jim obeyed.

"That won't do, Jim.  You must do it all in one run; no pausing on the
way--but, whoop! up you go, and both feet on my head at once.  Don't be
afeard; you can't tumble, you know."

"I'm not afeard, father," said Jim; "but I ain't quite springy in my
heart to-night.  Stand again and see if I don't do it right off."

Cattley the elder threw himself into the required attitude; and Cattley
junior, rushed at him, ran up him as a cat runs up a tree, and in a
moment was standing on his father's head with his arms extended.
Whoop!--next moment he was turning round in the air; and whoop! in
another moment he was standing on the ground, bowing respectfully to a
supposed audience.

To Jim's immense amazement, the supposed audience applauded him
heartily; and said, "Bravyo! young 'un," as it stepped into the room, in
the person of William Willders.

"Why! who may _you_ be?" inquired the clown senior, stepping up to the
intruder.

Before Willie could answer the clown junior sprang on his father's
shoulders, and whispered in his ear.  Whatever he said, the result was
an expression of benignity and condescension on the clown's face--as far
as paint would allow of such expression.

"Glad to meet you, Master Willders," he said.  "Proud to know anyone
connected with T. Tippet, Esquire, who's a trump.  Give us your flipper.
What may be the object of your unexpected, though welcome visit to this
this subterraneous grotto, which may be said to be next door to the
coral caves, where the mermaids dwell."

"Yes, and there's one o' the mermaids singing," remarked the clown
junior, with a comical leer, as a woman's voice was heard in violent
altercation with some one.  "She's a sayin' of her prayers now;
beseechin' of her husband to let her have her own way."

Willie explained that, having had the pleasure of meeting with Jim at an
auction sale some weeks ago, he had called to renew his acquaintance;
and Jim said he remembered the incident--and that, if he was not
mistaken, a desire to see a live fairy in plain clo'se, with her wings
off, had something to do with his visit.

"Here she is;--by the way, what's your name?"

"Bill Willders."

"Here she is, Bill; this is the fairy," he said, in quite an altered
tone, as he went to the bed, and took one of his sister's thin hands in
both of his.  "Ziza, this is the feller I told ye of, as wanted to see
you, dear; b'longs to Mr Tippet."

Ziza smiled faintly, as she extended her hand to Willie, who took it and
pressed it gently.

Willie felt a wonderfully strong sensation within his heart as he looked
into the sufferer's large liquid eyes; and for a few seconds he could
not speak.  Suddenly he exclaimed, "Well, you ain't one bit like what I
expected to see.  You're more like a angel than a fairy."

Ziza smiled again, and said she didn't feel like either the one or the
other.

"My poor lamb," said the clown, sitting down on the bed, and parting the
dark hair on Ziza's forehead, with a hand as gentle as that of a mother,
"we're goin' now.  Time's up.  Shall I ask Mrs Smith to stay with you
again, till we come back?"

"Oh, no, no!" cried the child hurriedly, and squeezing her fingers into
her eyes, as if to shut out some disagreeable object.  "Not Mrs Smith.
I'd rather be alone."

"I _wish_ I could stay with you, Ziza," said Jim earnestly.

"It's of no use wishin', Jim," said his father, "you can't get off a
single night.  If you was to fail 'em you'd lose your engagement, and we
can't afford that just at this time, you know; but I'll try to get Mrs
James to come.  She's a good woman, I know, and--"

"Mister Cattley," interrupted Willie, "if you'll allow a partic'larly
humble individual to make a observation, I would say there's nothin' in
life to prevent me from keeping this 'ere fairy company till you come
back.  I've nothin' particular to do as I knows on, an' I'm raither fond
of lonely meditation; so if the fairy wants to go to sleep, it'll make
no odds to me, so long's it pleases her."

"Thankee, lad," said the clown; "but you'll git wearied, I fear, for we
won't be home till mornin'--"

"Ah!" interrupted Willie, "till daylight does appear.  But that's no
odds, neither--'cause I'm not married yet, so there's nobody awaitin'
for me--and" (he winked to Jim at this point) "my mother knows I'm out."

The clown grinned at this.  "You'd make one of _us_, youngster," said
he, "if ye can jump.  Howsever, I'm obliged by your offer, so you can
stay if Ziza would like it."

Ziza said she _would_ like it with such goodwill, that Willie adored her
from that moment, and vowed in his heart he would nurse her till she--he
did not like to finish the sentence; yet, somehow, the little that he
had heard and seen of the child led him irresistibly to the conclusion
that she was dying.

This having been satisfactorily arranged, the Cattleys, senior and
junior, threw cloaks round them, exchanged their wigs for caps; and,
regardless of the absurd appearance of their faces, hurried out to one
of the minor theatres, with heavy hearts because of the little fairy
left so ill and comfortless at home.

In a few minutes they were tumbling on the stage, cracking their jokes,
and convulsing the house with laughter.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

WILLIE IN A NEW LIGHT.

Left alone with the fairy, Willie Willders began his duties as
sick-nurse, a sphere of action into which he had never thought of being
introduced, even in his wildest dreams.

He began by asking the fairy if she was all right and comfortable, to
which she replied that she was not; upon which he explained that he
meant, was she as right and comfortable as could be expected in the
circumstances; could he do anything for her, in fact, or get her
anything that would make her more comfortable than she was--but the
fairy shook her poor head and said, "No."

"Come now, won't you have somethin' to eat?  What had you for dinner?"
said Willie, in a cheery voice, looking round the room, but not
discovering any symptoms of food beyond a few empty plates and cups (the
latter without handles), and a tea-pot with half a spout.

"I had a little bread and butter," said the fairy.

"No tipple?" inquired the nurse.

"No, except water."

"Ain't there none in the house?"

"No."

"D'ye git nothin' better at other times?" inquired Willie in surprise.

"Not often.  Father is very poor.  He was ill for a long time, too, and
if it hadn't been for your kind master I think we should all have
starved.  He's better now, but he needs pretty good living to keep him
up to his work--for there's a deal of training to be done, and it wears
him out if he don't get meat.  But the pantomimes began and we were
getting on better, when the fire came and burnt everything we had
almost, so we can't afford much meat or beer, and I don't like beer, so
I've got them persuaded to let me live on bread and butter and water.  I
would like tea better, because it's hot, but we can't afford that."

Here was a revelation!  The fairy lived upon bread and butter and water!
Willie thought that, but for the interpolation of the butter, it would
have borne marvellous resemblance to prison fare.

"When had you dinner?" inquired Willie suddenly.

"I think about four o'clock."

"An' can't you eat nothin' now?"

Again the fairy shook her head.

