drawings which his cousin had just brought home from Australia, "I never
saw anything so extraordinary before in all my life; why here is an
animal with three heads, and two of them are very low down, and much
smaller than the others." "What do you mean, Herbert?" asked his cousin,
who just then came into the room. "There are no three-headed
animals--let me see the picture. Oh! no wonder you were puzzled; it does
look like a queer creature. That is a kangaroo, and the small heads
belong to her children, whom she carries about in a bag formed by a hole
in her skin, until they are old enough to walk; and the little things
seem very happy there; and sometimes, as their mother moves along over
the grass, you may see them nibbling it."

[Illustration]




THE PEACOCK.


Proud bird! I watched thee stalking by,
  With stately step and slow,
As though thou fain would'st charm each eye
  With glittering pomp and show:

And truly thou art brave to see,
  In heaven's hues arrayed,
And plainer birds at sight of thee
  Might shrink and be dismayed:

Yet, pampered bird! there still are those
  I value higher far,
Albeit their garb nor glints nor glows
  With many a jeweled star.

I love them for their gentle ways,
  Their voices soft and sweet
In summer chorus, that repays
  Right well their winter's meat.

For what is outward form at best
  But accident of birth?
That form in splendid raiment drest
  Is still but common earth.

And yet 'tis he whose painted plumes
  Shine fairest in the sun,
Who haughtiest look of pride assumes,
  As though by him 'twere done.

We smile to see yon bird strut by,
  Thus proud of his array;
But human friends we may espy
  As foolish every day.

Not beauty's form nor grand attire
  Upon the wise will tell,
But _acts_ of those who e'er aspire
  To do their DUTY well.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: FEEDING THE PET.]




SWANS.


This beautiful and majestic bird was considered the bird-royal in
England, owing to a law of England that when found in a partially wild
state on the sea and navigable rivers it belonged to the crown; but of
course it is to be found on the ponds and lakes of many a gentleman's
estate, and is always prized as a great ornament to the lake. The swan
is also very valuable in clearing the ponds of weeds, and makes a most
effective clearance, as they eat them before they rise to the surface.
The swan affords a pleasing illustration of the love of the mother-bird
for its young, and has been known to vanquish a fox who made an attack
on its nest--showing that the instinct of motherhood kindles boldness
and bravery in the breast of the most timid animals. The nest is
generally made on an islet, and composed of reeds and rushes, and when
the five or seven large eggs are hatched, the mother may be seen
swimming about with the young ones on her back.

[Illustration]




THE SEA LION.


Although such large and powerful creatures, these sea lions are innocent
and playful. See, one of them has reared himself up on his hind legs, if
legs they may be called, and is sitting on a chair with his flappers
over the back of the chair. It inhabits the eastern shores of
Kamtchatka, and is in some places extremely abundant, and measuring
about fifteen feet in length. It is much addicted to roaring, which, as
much as the mane of the old males, has obtained for it the name of the
Sea Lion. The old males have a fierce appearance, yet they fly in great
haste on the approach of man, but if driven to extremities they will
fight desperately; but in captivity they are capable of being tamed, and
become very familiar with man. The scientific name of the sea lion is
Otary.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE LION.]




A--THE ASS.


_A Forbear to vex the patient Ass,
Its heaving sides to goad,
And far and safe its useful back
Will carry many a load._


B--THE BITTERN.


_In reedy swamp and lonely marsh,
Where all is shade and gloom,
The Bittern stalks, and you may hear
His voice in sullen boom._


C--THE CAMEL.


_The Camel is a useful beast,
Patient, and slow, and mild;
To man a blessing and a boon
In Afric's sandy wild._




BADGERS.


One day at the Zoological Gardens, I saw the group of Badgers as they
are here given. Little do visitors to the gardens take into account how
much a wild animal goes through till it has got used to a state of
things so opposite to its natural habits. Their wants are attended to as
much as possible, but cannot be always met; and so we have here a
devoted mother, worn out by the demands of her cubs, and vainly anxious
to hide herself from daylight and man's gaze. She has long given up
trying to dig or scratch her way out. All she can do is to lean against
the wall, ready for a last defence, should anybody come within her
prison. She dares not curl up into a ball, like the one cub, and go to
sleep; while this little careless imp on her back, happy and trustful,
adds to her tiredness by his weight.

[Illustration]




THE BIRD'S NEST.


"Her little nest, so soft and warm,
  God teaches her to make it;
I would not dare to do her harm,
  I would not dare to take it."

How curious is the structure of the nest of the Bullfinch or Chaffinch!
The inside of it is lined with cotton and fine silken threads; and the
outside cannot be sufficiently admired, though it is composed only of
various kinds of fine moss. The color of these mosses, resembling that
of the bark of the tree in which the nest is built, proves that the bird
intended it should not be easily discovered. In some nests, hair, wool,
and rushes are cleverly interwoven. In others, the parts are firmly
fastened by a thread, which the bird makes of hemp, wool, hair, or, more
commonly, of spiders' webs. Other birds--as, for instance, the blackbird
and the lapwing--after they have constructed their nests, plaster the
inside with mortar; they then stick upon it, while quite wet, some wool
or moss to give warmth; but all alike construct their nests so as to add
to their security.

[Illustration]




THE CHAMOIS.


The chamois are indeed high-born, for among the high mountain-peaks,
where the eternal snow rests and the Alpine roses bloom, there they make
their home! There they spring up over the snowy slopes to those heights
to which man cannot climb. They rest upon the glittering ice, the snow
does not blind them, neither does it cool their hot blood. Carelessly
they stride across the snowed-over crevices, and when the terrible
storms, at which men are so alarmed, hurl down rocks and avalanches from
the summits, the Chamois do not fear them. They find their way safely
through the thickest mist and darkest clouds. Agile and light-footed,
gentle and peaceable, proud and courageous, they lead a happy life among
the mountains, as long as man does not molest them.

[Illustration]




JACKO WITH PUSSY'S BONE.


Jacko is a bird called a Macaw, and has fine feathers--scarlet and
yellow and blue. Jacko can talk a little. He says, "Come along, Jacko,
come along;" and when you come, as soon as he thinks you near enough, he
pecks at you with his great beak. When he is in a good temper he will
say, "Poor, poor!" He will sit upon the ivy all the morning and talk to
himself, and he will call the gardener, and he will cough and sneeze,
and crow and cackle, in a very funny manner. If Jacko sees sparrows
picking up a few crumbs, he will rush up, sweeping his great wings along
the ground, and take their meal for himself. If he sees poor Pussy
picking a bone, he takes great delight in creeping down from his ivy,
helping himself down with beak and claws, and at a sight of Jacko's
approach Pussy darts away, leaving the bone in Jacko's possession.
Pussy, of course, does not like this, but stands at a respectable
distance, and with curved back and flashing eyes shows her indignation
at Jacko. Presently Jacko retires to the ivy and Pussy resumes her
feast.

[Illustration]




MEMBERS OF THE POACHING FRATERNITY.


Among the various wild animals which inhabit the earth, it is difficult
to decide which are really friendly and which are really hostile to
man's interests. The actual fact appears to be that there is neither
hostility nor friendship. If farmers and gardeners kill off too many
birds, nature revenges herself by sending a plague of insects which the
small birds, if alive, would have eaten. Gamekeepers ruthlessly shoot
hawks and kites, or snare stoats and polecats, with the result that
their game grows up too thick for its feeding ground, sickly specimens
are allowed to linger on, and a destructive murrain follows. The rook,
no doubt, is fond of eggs; but nevertheless he does the farmer good
service when he devours the grubs which are turned up by the plow; and
as the salmon disease, which of late has proved so destructive, is
attributed by the best authorities to overcrowding, that glossy-coated
fisherman, the otter, is really a benefactor to the followers of Izaak
Walton's gentle craft.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: NEDDY'S BREAKFAST.]




A COW WORKING A PUMP.


My informant writes me as follows: "We have a wonderful cow here--about
ten years old, and very clever at opening gates and breaking fences.
There is an Abyssinnian pump about three feet high in the center of the
field, near my house, over a trough, which is, or ought to be, filled
daily. It was on a hot day, when my man had omitted to pump the trough
full, that the cow was first observed to help herself: the way in which
she managed to pump was by pushing the handle up with her head and then
forcing it down with her horns. Very little elevation of the handle is
required to get water, and she would work it for five minutes together,
and sometimes drank from the spout, and sometimes from the trough."

