and out of it came so many boxes and bales that Dame Ilse was lost in
wonder at the wealth of her future son-in-law. The day for the wedding
was chosen, and all their friends and neighbours were bidden to the
feast. As Lucia was trying on her bridal wreath she said to her mother:
'This wedding-garland would please me indeed if father Peter could lead
me to the church. If only he could come back again! Here we are rolling
in riches while he may be nibbling at hunger's table.' And the very idea
of such a thing made her weep, while even Dame Ilse said:

'I should not be sorry myself to see him come back--there is always
something lacking in a house when the good man is away.'

But the fact was that she was growing quite tired of having no one to
scold. And what do you think happened?

On the very eve of the wedding a man pushing a wheelbarrow arrived at
the city gate, and paid toll upon a barrel of nails which it contained,
and then made the best of his way to the bride's dwelling and knocked at
the door.

The bride herself peeped out of the window to see who it could be, and
there stood father Peter! Then there was great rejoicing in the house;
Lucia ran to embrace him, and even Dame Ilse held out her hand in
welcome, and only said: 'Rogue, mend your ways,' when she remembered the
empty treasure cupboard. Father Peter greeted the bridegroom, looking
at him shrewdly, while the mother and daughter hastened to say all
they knew in his favour, and appeared to be satisfied with him as a
son-in-law. When Dame Ilse had set something to eat before her husband,
she was curious to hear his adventures, and questioned him eagerly as to
why he had gone away.

'God bless my native place,' said he. 'I have been marching through the
country, and have tried every kind of work, but now I have found a job
in the iron trade; only, so far, I have put more into it than I have
earned by it. This barrel of nails is my whole fortune, which I wish to
give as my contribution towards the bride's house furnishing.'

This speech roused Dame Ilse to anger, and she broke out into such
shrill reproaches that the bystanders were fairly deafened, and Friedlin
hastily offered Master Peter a home with Lucia and himself, promising
that he should live in comfort, and be always welcome. So Lucia had her
heart's desire, and father Peter led her to the church next day, and
the marriage took place very happily. Soon afterwards the young people
settled in a fine house which Friedlin had bought, and had a garden and
meadows, a fishpond, and a hill covered with vines, and were as happy as
the day was long. Father Peter also stayed quietly with them, living, as
everybody believed, upon the generosity of his rich son-in law. No one
suspected that his barrel of nails was the real 'Horn of Plenty,' from
which all this prosperity overflowed.

Peter had made the journey to the treasure mountain successfully,
without being found out by anybody. He had enjoyed himself by the way,
and taken his own time, until he actually reached the little brook in
the valley which it had cost him some trouble to find. Then he pressed
on eagerly, and soon came to the little hollow in the wood; down he
went, burrowing like a mole into the earth; the magic root did its work,
and at last the treasure lay before his eyes. You may imagine how gaily
Peter filled his sack with as much gold as he could carry, and how
he staggered up the seventy-seven steps with a heart full of hope and
delight. He did not quite trust the gnome's promises of safety, and
was in such haste to find himself once more in the light of day that
he looked neither to the right nor the left, and could not afterwards
remember whether the walls and pillars had sparkled with jewels or not.

However, all went well--he neither saw nor heard anything alarming; the
only thing that happened was that the great iron-barred door shut with
a crash as soon as he was fairly outside it, and then he remembered
that he had left the magic root behind him, so he could not go back for
another load of treasure. But even that did not trouble Peter much; he
was quite satisfied with what he had already. After he had faithfully
done everything according to Father Martin's instructions, and pressed
the earth well back into the hollow, he sat down to consider how he
could bring his treasure back to his native place, and enjoy it there,
without being forced to share it with his scolding wife, who would
give him no peace if she once found out about it. At last, after
much thinking, he hit upon a plan. He carried his sack to the nearest
village, and there bought a wheelbarrow, a strong barrel, and a quantity
of nails. Then he packed his gold into the barrel, covered it well with
a layer of nails, hoisted it on to the wheelbarrow with some difficulty,
and set off with it upon his homeward way. At one place upon the road
he met a handsome young man who seemed by his downcast air to be in some
great trouble. Father Peter, who wished everybody to be as happy as he
was himself, greeted him cheerfully, and asked where he was going, to
which he answered sadly:

'Into the wide world, good father, or out of it, where ever my feet may
chance to carry me.'

'Why out of it?' said Peter. 'What has the world been doing to you?'

'It has done nothing to me, nor I to it,' he replied. 'Nevertheless
there is not anything left in it for me.'

Father Peter did his best to cheer the young man up, and invited him to
sup with him at the first inn they came to, thinking that perhaps hunger
and poverty were causing the stranger's trouble. But when good food was
set before him he seemed to forget to eat. So Peter perceived that what
ailed his guest was sorrow of heart, and asked him kindly to tell him
his story.

'Where is the good, father?' said he. 'You can give me neither help nor
comfort.'

'Who knows?' answered Master Peter. 'I might be able to do something
for you. Often enough in life help comes to us from the most unexpected
quarter.'

The young man, thus encouraged, began his tale.

'I am,' said he, 'a crossbow-man in the service of a noble count, in
whose castle I was brought up. Not long ago my master went on a journey,
and brought back with him, amongst other treasures, the portrait of a
fair maiden so sweet and lovely that I lost my heart at first sight of
it, and could think of nothing but how I might seek her out and marry
her. The count had told me her name, and where she lived, but laughed at
my love, and absolutely refused to give me leave to go in search of her,
so I was forced to run away from the castle by night. I soon reached the
little town where the maiden dwelt; but there fresh difficulties awaited
me. She lived under the care of her mother, who was so severe that she
was never allowed to look out of the window, or set her foot outside the
door alone, and how to make friends with her I did not know. But at last
I dressed myself as an old woman, and knocked boldly at her door. The
lovely maiden herself opened it, and so charmed me that I came near
forgetting my disguise; but I soon recovered my wits, and begged her
to work a fine table-cloth for me, for she is reported to be the best
needlewoman in all the country round. Now I was free to go and see her
often under the presence of seeing how the work was going oil, and one
day, when her mother had gone to the town, I ventured to throw off my
disguise, and tell her of my love. She was startled at first; but I
persuaded her to listen to me, and I soon saw that I was not displeasing
to her, though she scolded me gently for my disobedience to my master,
and my deceit in disguising myself. But when I begged her to marry me,
she told me sadly that her mother would scorn a penniless wooer, and
implored me to go away at once, lest trouble should fall upon her.

'Bitter as it was to me, I was forced to go when she bade me, and I have
wandered about ever since, with grief gnawing at my heart; for how can
a masterless man, without money or goods, ever hope to win the lovely
Lucia?'

Master Peter, who had been listening attentively, pricked up his ears
at the sound of his daughter's name, and very soon found out that it was
indeed with her that this young man was so deeply in love.

'Your story is strange indeed,' said he. 'But where is the father of
this maiden--why do you not ask him for her hand? He might well take
your part, and be glad to have you for his son-in-law.'

'Alas!' said the young man, 'her father is a wandering good-for-naught,
who has forsaken wife and child, and gone off--who knows where? The wife
complains of him bitterly enough, and scolds my dear maiden when she
takes her father's part.'

Father Peter was somewhat amused by this speech; but he liked the young
man well, and saw that he was the very person he needed to enable him
to enjoy his wealth in peace, without being separated from his dear
daughter.

'If you will take my advice,' said he, 'I promise you that you shall
marry this maiden whom you love so much, and that before you are many
days older.'

'Comrade,' cried Friedlin indignantly, for he thought Peter did but jest
with him, 'it is ill done to mock at an unhappy man; you had better find
someone else who will let himself be taken in with your fine promises.'
And up he sprang, and was going off hastily, when Master Peter caught
him by the arm.

'Stay, hothead!' he cried; 'it is no jest, and I am prepared to make
good my words.'

Thereupon he showed him the treasure hidden under the nails, and
unfolded to him his plan, which was that Friedlin should play the part
of the rich son-in-law, and keep a still tongue, that they might enjoy
their wealth together in peace.

The young man was overjoyed at this sudden change in his fortunes, and
did not know how to thank father Peter for his generosity. They took
the road again at dawn the next morning, and soon reached a town, where
Friedlin equipped himself as a gallant wooer should. Father Peter filled
his pockets with gold for the wedding dowry, and agreed with him that
when all was settled he should secretly send him word that Peter might
send off the waggon load of house plenishings with which the rich
bridegroom was to make such a stir in the little town where the bride
lived. As they parted, father Peter's last commands to Friedlin were to
guard well their secret, and not even to tell it to Lucia till she was
his wife.

Master Peter long enjoyed the profits of his journey to the mountain,
and no rumour of it ever got abroad. In his old age his prosperity was
so great that he himself did not know how rich he was; but it was always
supposed that the money was Friedlin's. He and his beloved wife lived in
the greatest happiness and peace, and rose to great honour in the town.
And to this day, when the citizens wish to describe a wealthy man, they
say: 'As rich as Peter Bloch's son-in-law!'




The Cottager And His Cat

Once upon a time there lived an old man and his wife in a dirty,
tumble-down cottage, not very far from the splendid palace where the
king and queen dwelt. In spite of the wretched state of the hut, which
many people declared was too bad even for a pig to live in, the old man
was very rich, for he was a great miser, and lucky besides, and would
often go without food all day sooner than change one of his beloved gold
pieces.

But after a while he found that he had starved himself once too often.
He fell ill, and had no strength to get well again, and in a few days he
died, leaving his wife and one son behind him.

The night following his death, the son dreamed that an unknown man
appeared to him and said: 'Listen to me; your father is dead and your
mother will soon die, and all their riches will belong to you. Half of
his wealth is ill-gotten, and this you must give back to the poor from
whom he squeezed it. The other half you must throw into the sea. Watch,
however, as the money sinks into the water, and if anything should swim,
catch it and keep it, even if it is nothing more than a bit of paper.'

Then the man vanished, and the youth awoke.

The remembrance of his dream troubled him greatly. He did not want to
part with the riches that his father had left him, for he had known all
his life what it was to be cold and hungry, and now he had hoped for a
little comfort and pleasure. Still, he was honest and good-hearted, and
if his father had come wrongfully by his wealth he felt he could never
enjoy it, and at last he made up his mind to do as he had been bidden.
He found out who were the people who were poorest in the village, and
spent half of his money in helping them, and the other half he put in
his pocket. From a rock that jutted right out into the sea he flung it
in. In a moment it was out of sight, and no man could have told the
spot where it had sunk, except for a tiny scrap of paper floating on
the water. He stretched down carefully and managed to reach it, and
on opening it found six shillings wrapped inside. This was now all the
money he had in the world.

The young man stood and looked at it thoughtfully. 'Well, I can't do
much with this,' he said to himself; but, after all, six shillings were
better than nothing, and he wrapped them up again and slipped them into
his coat.

He worked in his garden for the next few weeks, and he and his mother
contrived to live on the fruit and vegetables he got out of it, and then
she too died suddenly. The poor fellow felt very sad when he had laid
her in her grave, and with a heavy heart he wandered into the forest,
not knowing where he was going. By-and-by he began to get hungry, and
seeing a small hut in front of him, he knocked at the door and asked if
they could give him some milk. The old woman who opened it begged him
to come in, adding kindly, that if he wanted a night's lodging he might
have it without its costing him anything.

Two women and three men were at supper when he entered, and silently
made room for him to sit down by them. When he had eaten he began to
look about him, and was surprised to see an animal sitting by the fire
different from anything he had ever noticed before. It was grey in
colour, and not very big; but its eyes were large and very bright, and
it seemed to be singing in an odd way, quite unlike any animal in the
forest. 'What is the name of that strange little creature?' asked he.
And they answered, 'We call it a cat.'

'I should like to buy it--if it is not too dear,' said the young man;
'it would be company for me.' And they told him that he might have it
for six shillings, if he cared to give so much. The young man took out
his precious bit of paper, handed them the six shillings, and the next
morning bade them farewell, with the cat lying snugly in his cloak.

For the whole day they wandered through meadows and forests, till in the
evening they reached a house. The young fellow knocked at the door
and asked the old man who opened it if he could rest there that night,
adding that he had no money to pay for it. 'Then I must give it to you,'
answered the man, and led him into a room where two women and two men
were sitting at supper. One of the women was the old man's wife, the
other his daughter. He placed the cat on the mantel shelf, and they all
crowded round to examine this strange beast, and the cat rubbed itself
against them, and held out its paw, and sang to them; and the women were
delighted, and gave it everything that a cat could eat, and a great deal
more besides.

After hearing the youth's story, and how he had nothing in the world
left him except his cat, the old man advised him to go to the palace,
which was only a few miles distant, and take counsel of the king, who
was kind to everyone, and would certainly be his friend. The young man
thanked him, and said he would gladly take his advice; and early next
morning he set out for the royal palace.

He sent a message to the king to beg for an audience, and received a
reply that he was to go into the great hall, where he would find his
Majesty.

The king was at dinner with his court when the young man entered, and
he signed to him to come near. The youth bowed low, and then gazed in
surprise at the crowd of little black creatures who were running about
the floor, and even on the table itself. Indeed, they were so bold that
they snatched pieces of food from the King's own plate, and if he drove
them away, tried to bite his hands, so that he could not eat his food,
and his courtiers fared no better.

'What sort of animals are these?' asked the youth of one of the ladies
sitting near him.

'They are called rats,' answered the king, who had overheard the
question, 'and for years we have tried some way of putting an end to
them, but it is impossible. They come into our very beds.'

At this moment something was seen flying through the air. The cat was on
the table, and with two or three shakes a number of rats were lying
dead round him. Then a great scuffling of feet was heard, and in a few
minutes the hall was clear.

For some minutes the King and his courtiers only looked at each other in
astonishment. 'What kind of animal is that which can work magic of this
sort?' asked he. And the young man told him that it was called a cat,
and that he had bought it for six shillings.

And the King answered: 'Because of the luck you have brought me, in
freeing my palace from the plague which has tormented me for many years,
I will give you the choice of two things. Either you shall be my Prime
Minister, or else you shall marry my daughter and reign after me. Say,
which shall it be?'

'The princess and the kingdom,' said the young man.

And so it was.

[From Islandische Marchen.]




The Prince Who Would Seek Immortality

Once upon a time, in the very middle of the middle of a large kingdom,
there was a town, and in the town a palace, and in the palace a king.
This king had one son whom his father thought was wiser and cleverer
than any son ever was before, and indeed his father had spared no pains
to make him so. He had been very careful in choosing his tutors and
governors when he was a boy, and when he became a youth he sent him to
travel, so that he might see the ways of other people, and find that
they were often as good as his own.

It was now a year since the prince had returned home, for his father
felt that it was time that his son should learn how to rule the kingdom
