A Slave named Androcles once escaped from his master and fled to the
forest. As he was wandering about there he came upon a Lion lying down
moaning and groaning. At first he turned to flee, but finding that the
Lion did not pursue him, he turned back and went up to him. As he came
near, the Lion put out his paw, which was all swollen and bleeding, and
Androcles found that a huge thorn had got into it, and was causing all
the pain. He pulled out the thorn and bound up the paw of the Lion, who
was soon able to rise and lick the hand of Androcles like a dog. Then
the Lion took Androcles to his cave, and every day used to bring him
meat from which to live. But shortly afterwards both Androcles and the
Lion were captured, and the slave was sentenced to be thrown to the
Lion, after the latter had been kept without food for several days. The
Emperor and all his Court came to see the spectacle, and Androcles was
led out into the middle of the arena. Soon the Lion was let loose from
his den, and rushed bounding and roaring towards his victim. But as soon
as he came near to Androcles he recognized his friend, and fawned upon
him, and licked his hands like a friendly dog. The Emperor, surprised at
this, summoned Androcles to him, who told him the whole story. Whereupon
the slave was pardoned and freed, and the Lion let loose to his native
forest.

_Gratitude is the sign of noble souls._



214

        The preceding fable is here given in the form
        used in Thomas Day's very famous, but probably
        little read, _History of Sandford and Merton_.
        (See No. 380.) Day's use of the story is
        probably responsible for its modern popularity.
        Jacobs points out that it dropped out of AEsop,
        although it was in some of the medieval fable
        books. A very similar tale, "Of the Remembrance
        of Benefits," is in the _Gesta Romanorum_ (Tale
        104). The most striking use of the fable in
        modern literature is in George Bernard Shaw's
        play _Androcles_. It will be instructive to
        compare the force of Day's rather heavy and
        slow telling of the story with that of the
        concise, unelaborated version by Jacobs.


ANDROCLES AND THE LION

THOMAS DAY

There was a certain slave named Androcles, who was so ill-treated by his
master that his life became insupportable. Finding no remedy for what he
suffered, he at length said to himself, "It is better to die than to
continue to live in such hardships and misery as I am obliged to suffer.
I am determined therefore to run away from my master. If I am taken
again, I know that I shall be punished with a cruel death; but it is
better to die at once than to live in misery. If I escape, I must betake
myself to deserts and woods, inhabited only by wild beasts; but they
cannot use me more cruelly than I have been used by my fellow-creatures.
Therefore I will rather trust myself with them than continue to be a
miserable slave."

Having formed this resolution, he took an opportunity of leaving his
master's house, and hid himself in a thick forest, which was at some
miles' distance from the city. But here the unhappy man found that he
had only escaped from one kind of misery to experience another. He
wandered about all day through a vast and trackless wood, where his
flesh was continually torn by thorns and brambles. He grew hungry, but
could find no food in this dreary solitude. At length he was ready to
die with fatigue, and lay down in despair in a large cavern which he
found by accident.

This unfortunate man had not lain long quiet in the cavern, before he
heard a dreadful noise, which seemed to be the roar of some wild beast,
and terrified him very much. He started up with a design to escape and
had already reached the mouth of the cave when he saw coming towards him
a lion of prodigious size, who prevented any possibility of retreat. The
unfortunate man then believed his destruction to be inevitable; but, to
his great astonishment, the beast advanced towards him with a gentle
pace, without any mark of enmity or rage, and uttered a kind of mournful
voice, as if he demanded the assistance of the man.

Androcles, who was naturally of a resolute disposition, acquired courage
from this circumstance, to examine his monstrous guest, who gave him
sufficient leisure for that purpose. He saw, as the lion approached him,
that he seemed to limp upon one of his legs and that the foot was
extremely swelled as if it had been wounded. Acquiring still more
fortitude from the gentle demeanor of the beast, he advanced up to him
and took hold of the wounded paw, as a surgeon would examine a patient.
He then perceived that a thorn of uncommon size had penetrated the ball
of the foot and was the occasion of the swelling and lameness he had
observed. Androcles found that the beast, far from resenting this
familiarity, received it with the greatest gentleness and seemed to
invite him by his blandishments to proceed. He therefore extracted the
thorn, and, pressing the swelling, discharged a considerable quantity of
matter, which had been the cause of so much pain and uneasiness.

As soon as the beast felt himself thus relieved, he began to testify his
joy and gratitude by every expression within his power. He jumped about
like a wanton spaniel, wagged his enormous tail, and licked the feet and
hands of his physician. Nor was he contented with these demonstrations
of kindness; from this moment Androcles became his guest; nor did the
lion ever sally forth in quest of prey without bringing home the produce
of his chase and sharing it with his friend. In this savage state of
hospitality did the man continue to live during the space of several
months. At length, wandering unguardedly through the woods, he met with
a company of soldiers sent out to apprehend him, and was by them taken
prisoner and conducted back to his master. The laws of that country
being very severe against slaves, he was tried and found guilty of
having fled from his master, and, as a punishment for his pretended
crime, he was sentenced to be torn in pieces by a furious lion, kept
many days without food to inspire him with additional rage.

When the destined moment arrived, the unhappy man was exposed, unarmed,
in the midst of a spacious area, enclosed on every side, round which
many thousand people were assembled to view the mournful spectacle.

Presently a dreadful yell was heard, which struck the spectators with
horror; and a monstrous lion rushed out of a den, which was purposely
set open, and darted forward with erected mane, and flaming eyes, and
jaws that gaped like an open sepulchre.--A mournful silence instantly
prevailed! All eyes were turned upon the destined victim, whose
destruction now appeared inevitable. But the pity of the multitude was
soon converted into astonishment, when they beheld the lion, instead of
destroying his defenceless prey, crouch submissively at his feet; fawn
upon him as a faithful dog would do upon his master, and rejoice over
him as a mother that unexpectedly recovers her offspring. The governor
of the town, who was present, then called out with a loud voice and
ordered Androcles to explain to them this unintelligible mystery, and
how a savage beast of the fiercest and most unpitying nature should thus
in a moment have forgotten his innate disposition, and be converted into
a harmless and inoffensive animal.

Androcles then related to the assembly every circumstance of his
adventures in the woods, and concluded by saying that the very lion
which now stood before them had been his friend and entertainer in the
woods. All the persons present were astonished and delighted with the
story, to find that even the fiercest beasts are capable of being
softened by gratitude and moved by humanity; and they unanimously joined
to entreat for the pardon of the unhappy man from the governor of the
place. This was immediately granted to him, and he was also presented
with the lion, who had in this manner twice saved the life of Androcles.



215


THE WIND AND THE SUN

A dispute once arose between the North Wind and the Sun as to which was
the stronger of the two. Seeing a Traveler on his way, they agreed to
try which could the sooner get his cloak off him. The North Wind began,
and sent a furious blast, which, at the onset, nearly tore the cloak
from its fastenings; but the Traveler, seizing the garment with a firm
grip, held it round his body so tightly that Boreas spent his remaining
force in vain.

The Sun, dispelling the clouds that had gathered, then darted his genial
beams on the Traveler's head. Growing faint with the heat, the Man flung
off his coat and ran for protection to the nearest shade.

_Mildness governs more than anger._



216

        The following brief fable has given us one of
        the best known expressions in common speech,
        "killing the goose that lays the golden eggs."
        People who never heard of AEsop know what that
        expression means. It is easy to connect the
        fable with our "get rich quick" craze. (Compare
        with No. 254.)


THE GOOSE WITH THE GOLDEN EGGS

A certain Man had a Goose that laid him a golden egg every day. Being of
a covetous turn, he thought if he killed his Goose he should come at
once to the source of his treasure. So he killed her and cut her open,
but great was his dismay to find that her inside was in no way different
from that of any other goose.

_Greediness overreaches itself._



217

        The most successful of modern literary
        fabulists was the French poet Jean de la
        Fontaine (1621-1695). A famous critic has said
        that his fables delight the child with their
        freshness and vividness, the student of
        literature with their consummate art, and the
        experienced man with their subtle reflections
        on life and character. He drew most of his
        stories from AEsop and other sources. While he
        dressed the old fables in the brilliant style
        of his own day, he still succeeded in being
        essentially simple and direct. A few of his 240
        fables may be used to good effect with
        children, though they have their main charm for
        the more sophisticated older reader. (See Nos.
        234, 241, and 242.) The best complete
        translation is that made in 1841 by Elizur
        Wright, an American scholar. The following
        version is from his translation. Notice that La
        Fontaine has changed the goose to a hen.


THE HEN WITH THE GOLDEN EGGS

LA FONTAINE

        How avarice loseth all,
          By striving all to gain,
        I need no witness call
          But him whose thrifty hen,
        As by the fable we are told,
        Laid every day an egg of gold.
        "She hath a treasure in her body,"
        Bethinks the avaricious noddy.
        He kills and opens--vexed to find
          All things like hens of common kind.
        Thus spoil'd the source of all his riches,
        To misers he a lesson teaches.
          In these last changes of the moon,
            How often doth one see
            Men made as poor as he
          By force of getting rich too soon!



218


THE WOLF IN SHEEP'S CLOTHING

A Wolf wrapped himself in the skin of a Sheep and by that means got
admission into a sheep-fold, where he devoured several of the young
Lambs. The Shepherd, however, soon found him out and hung him up to a
tree, still in his disguise.

Some other Shepherds, passing that way, thought it was a Sheep hanging,
and cried to their friend, "What, brother! is that the way you serve
Sheep in this part of the country?"

"No, friends," cried he, turning the hanging body around so that they
might see what it was; "but it is the way to serve Wolves, even though
they be dressed in Sheep's clothing."

_The credit got by a lie lasts only till the truth comes out._



219


THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE

The Hare one day laughed at the Tortoise for his short feet, slowness,
and awkwardness.

"Though you may be swift as the wind," replied the Tortoise
good-naturedly, "I can beat you in a race."

The Hare looked on the challenge as a great joke, but consented to a
trial of speed, and the Fox was selected to act as umpire and hold the
stakes.

The rivals started, and the Hare, of course, soon left the Tortoise far
behind. Having reached midway to the goal, she began to play about,
nibble the young herbage, and amuse herself in many ways. The day being
warm, she even thought she would take a little nap in a shady spot, for
she thought that if the Tortoise should pass her while she slept, she
could easily overtake him again before he reached the end.

The Tortoise meanwhile plodded on, unwavering and unresting, straight
towards the goal.

The Hare, having overslept herself, started up from her nap and was
surprised to find that the Tortoise was nowhere in sight. Off she went
at full speed, but on reaching the winning-post, found that the Tortoise
was already there, waiting for her arrival.

_Slow and steady wins the race._



220

THE MILLER, HIS SON, AND THEIR ASS

A Miller and his Son were driving their Ass to a neighboring fair to
sell him. They had not gone far when they met with a troop of women
collected round a well, talking and laughing.

"Look there," cried one of them, "did you ever see such fellows, to be
trudging along the road on foot when they might ride?"

The Miller, hearing this, quickly made his Son mount the Ass, and
continued to walk along merrily by his side. Presently they came up to a
group of old men in earnest debate.

"There," said one of them, "it proves what I was saying. What respect is
shown to old age in these days? Do you see that idle lad riding while
his old father has to walk? Get down, you young scapegrace, and let the
old man rest his weary limbs."

Upon this, the Miller made his Son dismount, and got up himself. In this
manner they had not proceeded far when they met a company of women and
children.

"Why, you lazy old fellow," cried several tongues at once, "how can you
ride upon the beast while that poor little lad there can hardly keep
pace by the side of you?"

The good-natured Miller immediately took up his Son behind him. They had
now almost reached the town.

"Pray, honest friend," said a citizen, "is that Ass your own?"

"Yes," replied the old man.

"Oh, one would not have thought so," said the other, "by the way you
load him. Why, you two fellows are better able to carry the poor beast
than he you."

"Anything to please you," said the Miller; "we can but try."

So, alighting with his Son, they tied the legs of the Ass together, and
by the help of a pole endeavored to carry him on their shoulders over a
bridge near the entrance of the town. This entertaining sight brought
the people in crowds to laugh at it, till the Ass, not liking the noise
nor the strange handling that he was subject to, broke the cords that
bound him and, tumbling off the pole, fell into the river. Upon this,
the old man, vexed and ashamed, made the best of his way home again,
convinced that by trying to please everybody he had pleased nobody, and
lost his Ass into the bargain.

_He who tries to please everybody pleases nobody._



221


THE TRAVELERS AND THE BEAR

Two Men, about to journey through a forest, agreed to stand by each
other in any dangers that might befall. They had not gone far before a
savage Bear rushed out from a thicket and stood in their path. One of
the Travelers, a light, nimble fellow, got up into a tree. The other,
seeing that there was no chance to defend himself single-handed, fell
flat on his face and held his breath. The Bear came up and smelled at
him, and taking him for dead, went off again into the wood. The Man in
the tree came down and, rejoining his companion, asked him, with a sly
smile, what was the wonderful secret which he had seen the Bear whisper
into his ear.

"Why," replied the other, "he told me to take care for the future and
not to put any confidence in such cowardly rascals as you are."

_Trust not fine promises._



222


THE LARK AND HER YOUNG ONES

A Lark, who had Young Ones in a field of grain which was almost ripe,
was afraid that the reapers would come before her young brood were
fledged. So every day when she flew off to look for food, she charged
them to take note of what they heard in her absence and to tell her of
it when she came home.

One day when she was gone, they heard the owner of the field say to his
son that the grain seemed ripe enough to be cut, and tell him to go
early the next day and ask their friends and neighbors to come and help
reap it.

When the old Lark came home, the Little Ones quivered and chirped round
her and told her what had happened, begging her to take them away as
fast as she could. The mother bade them be easy; "for," said she, "if he
depends on his friends and his neighbors, I am sure the grain will not
be reaped tomorrow."

Next day she went out again and left the same orders as before. The
owner came, and waited. The sun grew hot, but nothing was done, for not
a soul came. "You see," said the owner to his son, "these friends of
ours are not to be depended upon; so run off at once to your uncles and
cousins, and say I wish them to come early to-morrow morning and help us
reap."

This the Young Ones, in a great fright, told also to their mother. "Do
not fear, children," said she. "Kindred and relations are not always
very forward in helping one another; but keep your ears open and let me
know what you hear to-morrow."

The owner came the next day, and, finding his relations as backward as
his neighbors, said to his son, "Now listen to me. Get two good sickles
ready for to-morrow morning, for it seems we must reap the grain by
ourselves."

The Young Ones told this to their mother.

"Then, my dears," said she, "it is time for us to go; for when a man
undertakes to do his work himself, it is not so likely that he will be
disappointed." She took away her Young Ones at once, and the grain was
reaped the next day by the old man and his son.

_Depend upon yourself alone._



223


THE OLD MAN AND HIS SONS

An Old Man had several Sons, who were always falling out with one
another. He had often, but to no purpose, exhorted them to live together
in harmony. One day he called them around him and, producing a bundle of
sticks, bade them try each in turn to break it across. Each put forth
all his strength, but the bundle resisted their efforts. Then, cutting
the cord which bound the sticks together, he told his Sons to break them
separately. This was done with the greatest ease.

"See, my Sons," exclaimed he, "the power of unity! Bound together by
brotherly love, you may defy almost every mortal ill; divided, you will
fall a prey to your enemies."

_A house divided against itself cannot stand._



224


THE FOX AND THE GRAPES

A Fox, just at the time of the vintage, stole into a vineyard where the
ripe sunny Grapes were trellised up on high in most tempting show. He
made many a spring and a jump after the luscious prize; but, failing in
all his attempts, he muttered as he retreated, "Well! what does it
matter! The Grapes are sour!"



225


THE WIDOW AND THE HEN

A Widow woman kept a Hen that laid an egg every morning. Thought the
woman to herself, "If I double my Hen's allowance of barley, she will
lay twice a day." So she tried her plan, and the Hen became so fat and
sleek that she left off laying at all.

_Figures are not always facts._



226


THE KID AND THE WOLF

A Kid being mounted on the roof of a lofty house and seeing a Wolf pass
below, began to revile him. The Wolf merely stopped to reply, "Coward!
It is not you who revile me, but the place on which you are standing."



227


THE MAN AND THE SATYR

A Man and a Satyr having struck up an acquaintance, sat down together to
eat. The day being wintry and cold, the Man put his fingers to his mouth
and blew upon them.

"What's that for, my friend?" asked the Satyr.

"My hands are so cold," said the Man, "I do it to warm them."

In a little while some hot food was placed before them, and the Man,
raising the dish to his mouth, again blew upon it. "And what's the
meaning of that, now?" said the Satyr.

"Oh," replied the Man, "my porridge is so hot I do it to cool it."

"Nay, then," said the Satyr, "from this moment I renounce your
friendship, for I will have nothing to do with one who blows hot and
cold with the same mouth."



228


THE DOG AND THE SHADOW

A Dog had stolen a piece of meat out of a butcher's shop, and was
crossing a river on his way home, when he saw his own shadow reflected
in the stream below. Thinking that it was another dog with another piece
of meat, he resolved to make himself master of that also; but in
snapping at the supposed treasure, he dropped the bit he was carrying,
and so lost all.

_Grasp at the shadow and lose the substance--the common fate of those
who hazard a real blessing for some visionary good._



229


THE SWALLOW AND THE RAVEN

The Swallow and the Raven contended which was the finer bird. The Raven
ended by saying, "Your beauty is but for the summer, but mine will stand
many winters."

_Durability is better than show._



230


MERCURY AND THE WOODMAN

A Woodman was felling a tree on the bank of a river, and by chance let
slip his axe into the water, when it immediately sank to the bottom.
Being thereupon in great distress, he sat down by the side of the stream
and lamented his loss bitterly. But Mercury, whose river it was, taking
compassion on him, appeared at the instant before him; and hearing from
him the cause of his sorrow, dived to the bottom of the river, and
bringing up a golden axe, asked the Woodman if that were his. Upon the
Man's denying it, Mercury dived a second time, and brought up one of
silver. Again the Man denied that it was his. So diving a third time, he
produced the identical axe which the Man had lost. "That is mine!" said
the Woodman, delighted to have recovered his own; and so pleased was
Mercury with the fellow's truth and honesty that he at once made him a
present of the other two.

The Man goes to his companions, and giving them an account of what had
happened to him, one of them determined to try whether he might not have
the like good fortune. So repairing to the same place, as if for the
purpose of cutting wood, he let slip his axe on purpose into the river
and then sat down on the bank and made a great show of weeping. Mercury
appeared as before, and hearing from him that his tears were caused by
the loss of his axe, dived once more into the stream; and bringing up a
golden axe, asked him if that was the axe he had lost.

"Aye, surely," said the Man, eagerly; and he was about to grasp the
treasure, when Mercury, to punish his impudence and lying, not only
refused to give him that, but would not so much as restore him his own
axe again.

_Honesty is the best policy._



231


THE MICE IN COUNCIL

Once upon a time the Mice being sadly distressed by the persecution of
the Cat, resolved to call a meeting to decide upon the best means of
getting rid of this continual annoyance. Many plans were discussed and
rejected.

At last a young Mouse got up and proposed that a Bell should be hung
round the Cat's neck, that they might for the future always have notice
of her coming and so be able to escape. This proposition was hailed with
the greatest applause, and was agreed to at once unanimously. Upon this,
an old Mouse, who had sat silent all the while, got up and said that he
considered the contrivance most ingenious, and that it would, no doubt,
be quite successful; but he had only one short question to put; namely,
which of them it was who would Bell the Cat?

_It is one thing to propose, another to execute._



232


THE MOUNTEBANK AND THE COUNTRYMAN

A certain wealthy patrician, intending to treat the Roman people with
some theatrical entertainment, publicly offered a reward to any one who
would produce a novel spectacle. Incited by emulation, artists arrived
from all parts to contest the prize, among whom a well-known witty
Mountebank gave out that he had a new kind of entertainment that had
never yet been produced on any stage. This report, being spread abroad,
brought the whole city together. The theater could hardly contain the
number of spectators. And when the artist appeared alone upon the stage,
without any apparatus or any assistants, curiosity and suspense kept
the spectators in profound silence. On a sudden he thrust down his head
into his bosom, and mimicked the squeaking of a young pig so naturally
that the audience insisted upon it that he had one under his cloak and
ordered him to be searched, which, being done and nothing appearing,
they loaded him with the most extravagant applause.

A Countryman among the audience observed what passed. "Oh!" says he, "I
can do better than this"; and immediately gave out that he would perform
the next day. Accordingly on the morrow a yet greater crowd was
collected. Prepossessed, however, in favor of the Mountebank, they came
rather to laugh at the Countryman than to pass a fair judgment on him.
They both came out upon the stage. The Mountebank grunts away at first,
and calls forth the greatest clapping and applause. Then the Countryman,
pretending that he concealed a little pig under his garments (and he
had, in fact, really got one) pinched its ear till he made it squeak.
The people cried out that the Mountebank had imitated the pig much more
naturally, and hooted to the Countryman to quit the stage; but he, to
convict them to their face, produced the real pig from his bosom. "And
now, gentlemen, you may see," said he, "what a pretty sort of judges you
are!"

_It is easier to convict a man against his senses than against his
will._



233

        Stories dealing with the disastrous effects of
        "day-dreaming" are very common in the world's
        literature. The three selections that follow
        are given as very familiar samples for
        comparison. The first is a simple version by
        Jacobs.


THE MILKMAID AND HER PAIL

Patty, the Milkmaid, was going to market, carrying her milk in a Pail on
her head. As she went along she began calculating what she could do with
the money she would get for the milk. "I'll buy some fowls from Farmer
Brown," said she, "and they will lay eggs each morning, which I will
sell to the parson's wife. With the money that I get from the sale of
these eggs I'll buy myself a new dimity frock and a chip hat; and when I
go to market, won't all the young men come up and speak to me! Polly
Shaw will be that jealous; but I don't care. I shall just look at her
and toss my head like this." As she spoke, she tossed her head back, the
Pail fell off it and all the milk was spilt. So she had to go home and
tell her mother what had occurred.

"Ah, my child," said her mother,

"_Do not count your chickens before they are hatched._"



234

        The next is Wright's translation of La
        Fontaine's famous fable on the day-dreaming
        theme. Notice how much more complicated its
        application becomes in contrast with the
        obvious truth of the proverb in the preceding
        version. La Fontaine is responsible for the
        story's popularity in modern times. The most
        fascinating study on the way fables have come
        down to us is Max Mueller's "On the Migration of
        Fables," in which he follows this story from
        India through all its many changes until it
        reaches us in La Fontaine.


THE DAIRYWOMAN AND THE POT OF MILK

LA FONTAINE

        A pot of milk upon her cushioned crown,
        Good Peggy hastened to the market town,
        Short clad and light, with speed she went,
        Not fearing any accident;
          Indeed, to be the nimble tripper,
            Her dress that day,
            The truth to say,
          Was simple petticoat and slipper.
            And thus bedight,
            Good Peggy, light,--
          Her gains already counted,--
            Laid out the cash
            At single dash,
          Which to a hundred eggs amounted.
            Three nests she made,
            Which, by the aid
          Of diligence and care, were hatched.
            "To raise the chicks,
            I'll easy fix,"
          Said she, "beside our cottage thatched.
            The fox must get
            More cunning yet,
          Or leave enough to buy a pig.
            With little care
            And any fare,
          He'll grow quite fat and big;
            And then the price
            Will be so nice,
          For which the pork will sell!
            Twill go quite hard
            But in our yard
        I'll bring a cow and calf to dwell--
          A calf to frisk among the flock!"
        The thought made Peggy do the same;
        And down at once the milk-pot came,
          And perished with the shock.
        Calf, cow, and pig, and chicks, adieu!
        Your mistress' face is sad to view;
        She gives a tear to fortune spilt;
        Then with the downcast look of guilt
        Home to her husband empty goes,
        Somewhat in danger of his blows.
        Who buildeth not, sometimes, in air
        His cots, or seats, or castles fair?
        From kings to dairywomen,--all,--
        The wise, the foolish, great and small,--
        Each thinks his waking dream the best.
        Some flattering error fills the breast:
        The world with all its wealth is ours,
        Its honors, dames, and loveliest bowers.
        Instinct with valor, when alone,
        I hurl the monarch from his throne;
        The people, glad to see him dead,
        Elect me monarch in his stead,
        And diadems rain on my head.
        Some accident then calls me back,
        And I'm no more than simple Jack.



235

        The day-dreaming idea is next presented in the
        form found in the story of the barber's fifth
        brother in the _Arabian Nights_. Would this
        story be any more effective if it had a
        paragraph at the end stating and emphasizing
        the moral?


THE STORY OF ALNASCHAR

Alnaschar, my fifth brother, was very lazy, and of course wretchedly
poor. On the death of our father we divided his property, and each of us
received a hundred drachms of silver for his share. Alnaschar, who hated
labor, laid out his money in fine glasses, and having displayed his
stock to the best advantage in a large basket, he took his stand in the
market-place, with his back against the wall, waiting for customers. In
this posture he indulged in a reverie, talking aloud to himself as
follows:

"This glass cost me a hundred drachms of silver, which is all I have in
the world. I shall make two hundred by retailing it, and of these very
shortly four hundred. It will not be long before these produce four
thousand. Money, they say, begets money. I shall soon therefore be
possessed of eight thousand, and when these become ten thousand I will
no longer be a glass-seller. I will trade in pearls and diamonds; and
as I shall become rich apace, I will have a splendid palace, a great
estate, slaves, and horses; I will not, however, leave traffic till I
have acquired a hundred thousand drachms. Then I shall be as great as a
prince, and will assume manners accordingly.

"I will demand the daughter of the grand vizier in marriage, who, no
doubt, will be glad of an alliance with a man of my consequence. The
marriage ceremony shall be performed with the utmost splendor and
magnificence. I will have my horse clothed with the richest housings,
ornamented with diamonds and pearls, and will be attended by a number of
slaves, all richly dressed, when I go to the vizier's palace to conduct
my wife thence to my own. The vizier shall receive me with great pomp,
and shall give me the right hand and place me above himself, to do me
the more honor. On my return I will appoint two of my handsomest slaves
to throw money among the populace, that every one may speak well of my
generosity.

"When we arrive at my own palace, I will take great state upon me, and
hardly speak to my wife. She shall dress herself in all her ornaments,
and stand before me as beautiful as the full moon, but I will not look
at her. Her slaves shall draw near and entreat me to cast my eyes upon
her; which, after much supplication, I will deign to do, though with
great indifference. I will not suffer her to come out of her apartment
without my leave; and when I have a mind to visit her there, it shall be
in a manner that will make her respect me. Thus will I begin early to
teach her what she is to expect the rest of her life.

"When her mother comes to visit her she will intercede with me for her.
'Sir,' she will say (for she will not dare to call me son, for fear of
offending me by so much familiarity), 'do not, I beseech, treat my
daughter with scorn; she is as beautiful as an Houri, and entirely
devoted to you.' But my mother-in-law may as well hold her peace, for I
will take no notice of what she says. She will then pour out some wine
into a goblet, and give it to my wife, saying, 'Present it to your lord
and husband; he will not surely be so cruel as to refuse it from so fair
a hand.' My wife will then come with the glass, and stand trembling
before me; and when she finds that I do not look on her, but continue to
disdain her, she will kneel and entreat me to accept it; but I will
continue inflexible. At last, redoubling her tears, she will rise and
put the goblet to my lips, when, tired with her importunities, I will
dart a terrible look at her and give her such a push with my foot as
will spurn her from me." Alnaschar was so interested in this imaginary
grandeur that he thrust forth his foot to kick the lady, and by that
means overturned his glasses and broke them into a thousand pieces.



236

        "The Camel and the Pig" is from P. V. Ramaswami
        Raju's _Indian Folk Stories and Fables_, an
        excellent book of adaptations for young
        readers. The idea that every situation in life
        has its advantages as well as its disadvantages
        is one of those common but often overlooked
        truths which serve so well as the themes of
        fable. Emerson's "Fable," the story of the
        quarrel between the mountain and the squirrel,
        is a most excellent presentation of the same
        idea (see No. 363). "The Little Elf," by John
        Kendrick Bangs, makes the same point for
        smaller folks.


THE CAMEL AND THE PIG

ADAPTED BY P. V. RAMASWAMI RAJU

A camel said, "Nothing like being tall! See how tall I am!"

A Pig who heard these words said, "Nothing like being short; see how
short I am!"

The Camel said, "Well, if I fail to prove the truth of what I said, I
will give up my hump."

The Pig said, "If I fail to prove the truth of what I have said, I will
give up my snout."

"Agreed!" said the Camel.

"Just so!" said the Pig.

They came to a garden inclosed by a low wall without any opening. The
Camel stood on this side the wall, and, reaching the plants within by
means of his long neck, made a breakfast on them. Then he turned
jeeringly to the Pig, who had been standing at the bottom of the wall,
without even having a look at the good things in the garden, and said,
"Now, would you be tall or short?"

Next they came to a garden inclosed by a high wall, with a wicket gate
at one end. The Pig entered by the gate and, after having eaten his fill
of the vegetables within, came out, laughing at the poor Camel, who had
to stay outside, because he was too tall to enter the garden by the
gate, and said, "Now, would you be tall or short?"

Then they thought the matter over, and came to the conclusion that the
Camel should keep his hump and the Pig his snout, observing,--

        "Tall is good, where tall would do;
        Of short, again, 'tis also true!"



237

        Many scholars have believed that all fables
        originated in India. The great Indian
        collection of symbolic stories known as Jataka
        Tales, or Buddhist Birth Stories, has been
        called "the oldest, most complete, and most
        important collection of folklore extant." They
        are called Birth Stories because each one gives
        an account of something that happened in
        connection with the teaching of Buddha in some
        previous "birth" or incarnation. There are
        about 550 of these Jatakas, including some 2000
        stories. They have now been made accessible in
        a translation by a group of English scholars
        and published in six volumes under the general
        editorship of Professor Cowell. Many of them
        have long been familiar in eastern collections
        and have been adapted in recent times for use
        in schools. Each Jataka is made up of three
        parts. There is a "story of the present" giving
        an account of an incident in Buddha's life
        which calls to his mind a "story of the past"
        in which he had played a part during a former
        incarnation. Then, there is a conclusion
        marking the results. Nos. 237 and 238 are
        literal translations of Jatakas by T. W.
        Rhys-Davids in his _Buddhist Birth Stories_. In
        adapting for children, the stories of the
        present may be omitted. In fact, everything
        except the direct story should be eliminated.
        The "gathas," or verses, were very important in
        connection with the original purpose of
        religious teaching, but are only incumbrances
        in telling the story either for its own sake or
        for its moral.

THE ASS IN THE LION'S SKIN

At the same time when Brahma-datta was reigning in Benares, the future
Buddha was born one of a peasant family; and when he grew up he gained
his living by tilling the ground.

At that time a hawker used to go from place to place, trafficking in
goods carried by an ass. Now at each place he came to, when he took the
pack down from the ass's back, he used to clothe him in a lion's skin
and turn him loose in the rice and barley fields. And when the watchmen
in the fields saw the ass they dared not go near him, taking him for a
lion.

So one day the hawker stopped in a village; and while he was getting his
own breakfast cooked, he dressed the ass in a lion's skin and turned him
loose in a barley field. The watchmen in the field dared not go up to
him; but going home, they published the news. Then all the villagers
came out with weapons in their hands; and blowing chanks, and beating
drums, they went near the field and shouted. Terrified with the fear of
death, the ass uttered a cry--the bray of an ass!

And when he knew him then to be an ass, the future Buddha pronounced the
first verse:

        "This is not a lion's roaring,
        Nor a tiger's nor a panther's;
        Dressed in a lion's skin,
        'Tis a wretched ass that roars!"

But when the villagers knew the creature to be an ass, they beat him
till his bones broke; and, carrying off the lion's skin, went away. Then
the hawker came; and seeing the ass fallen into so bad a plight,
pronounced the second verse:

        "Long might the ass,
        Clad in a lion's skin,
        Have fed on the barley green;
        But he brayed
          And that moment he came to ruin."

And even while he was yet speaking the ass died on the spot.



238


THE TALKATIVE TORTOISE

The future Buddha was once born in a minister's family, when
Brahma-datta was reigning in Benares; and when he grew up he became the
king's adviser in things temporal and spiritual.

Now this king was very talkative; while he was speaking others had no
opportunity for a word. And the future Buddha, wanting to cure this
talkativeness of his, was constantly seeking for some means of doing so.

At that time there was living, in a pond in the Himalaya mountains, a
tortoise. Two young hamsas, or wild ducks, who came to feed there, made
friends with him, and one day, when they had become very intimate with
him, they said to the tortoise:

"Friend tortoise! the place where we live, at the Golden Cave on Mount
Beautiful in the Himalaya country, is a delightful spot. Will you come
there with us?"

"But how can I get there?"

"We can take you if you can only hold your tongue, and will say nothing
to anybody."

"Oh! that I can do. Take me with you."

"That's right," said they. And making the tortoise bite hold of a stick,
they themselves took the two ends in their teeth, and flew up into the
air.

Seeing him thus carried by the hamsas, some villagers called out, "Two
wild ducks are carrying a tortoise along on a stick!" Whereupon the
tortoise wanted to say, "If my friends choose to carry me, what is that
to you, you wretched slaves!" So just as the swift flight of the wild
ducks had brought him over the king's palace in the city of Benares, he
let go of the stick he was biting, and falling in the open courtyard,
split in two! And there arose a universal cry, "A tortoise has fallen in
the open courtyard, and has split in two!"

The king, taking the future Buddha, went to the place, surrounded by his
courtiers; and looking at the tortoise, he asked the Bodisat, "Teacher!
how comes he to be fallen here?"

The future Buddha thought to himself, "Long expecting, wishing to
admonish the king, have I sought for some means of doing so. This
tortoise must have made friends with the wild ducks; and they must have
made him bite hold of the stick, and have flown up into the air to take
him to the hills. But he, being unable to hold his tongue when he hears
any one else talk, must have wanted to say something, and let go the
stick; and so must have fallen down from the sky, and thus lost his
life." And saying, "Truly, O king! those who are called
chatter-boxes--people whose words have no end--come to grief like this,"
he uttered these verses:

        "Verily the tortoise killed himself
         While uttering his voice;
         Though he was holding tight the stick,
         By a word himself he slew.

        "Behold him then, O excellent by strength!
         And speak wise words, not out of season.
         You see how, by his talking overmuch,
         The tortoise fell into this wretched plight!"

The king saw that he was himself referred to, and said, "O Teacher! are
you speaking of us?"

And the Bodisat spake openly, and said, "O great king! be it thou, or be
it any other, whoever talks beyond measure meets with some mishap like
this."

And the king henceforth refrained himself, and became a man of few
words.



239

        The following is, also, an oriental story. It
        is taken from the _Hitopadesa_ (Book of Good
        Counsel), a collection of Sanskrit fables. This
        collection was compiled from older sources,
        probably in the main from the _Panchatantra_
        (Five Books), which belonged to about the fifth
        century. Observe the emphasis placed upon the
        teaching of the fable by putting the statement
        of it at the beginning and recurring to it at
        the close.


A LION TRICKED BY A RABBIT

_He who hath sense hath strength. Where hath he strength who wanteth
judgment? See how a lion, when intoxicated with anger, was overcome by a
rabbit._

Upon the mountain Mandara there lived a lion, whose name was Durganta
(hard to go near), who was very exact in complying with the ordinance
for animal sacrifices. So at length all the different species assembled,
and in a body represented that, as by his present mode of proceeding the
forest would be cleared all at once, if it pleased his Highness, they
would each of them in his turn provide him an animal for his daily food.
And the lion gave his consent accordingly. Thus every beast delivered
his stipulated provision, till at length, it coming to the rabbit's
turn, he began to meditate in this manner: "Policy should be practiced
by him who would save his life; and I myself shall lose mine if I do not
take care. Suppose I lead him after another lion? Who knows how that may
turn out for me? I will approach him slowly, as if fatigued."

The lion by this time began to be very hungry; so, seeing the rabbit
coming toward him, he called out in a great passion, "What is the reason
thou comest so late?"

"Please your Highness," said the rabbit, "as I was coming along I was
forcibly detained by another of your species; but having given him my
word that I would return immediately, I came here to represent it to
your Highness."

"Go quickly," said the lion in a rage, "and show me where this vile
wretch may be found!"

Accordingly, the rabbit conducted the lion to the brink of a deep well,
where being arrived, "There," said the rabbit, "look down and behold
him." At the same time he pointed to the reflected image of the lion in
the water, who, swelling with pride and resentment, leaped into the
well, as he thought, upon his adversary; and thus put an end to his
life.

I repeat, therefore:

_He who hath sense hath strength. Where hath he strength who wanteth
judgment?_



240

        Marie de France lived probably in the latter
        part of the twelfth century and was one of the
        most striking figures in Middle English
        literature. She seems to have been born in
        France, lived much in England, translated from
        the Anglo-Norman dialect into French, and is
        spoken of as the first French poet. One of her
        three works, and the most extensive, is a
        collection of 103 fables, which she says she
        translated from the English of King Alfred. Her
        original, whatever it may have been, is lost.
        One of her fables, in a translation by
        Professor W. W. Skeat, is given below. It
        contains the germ of Chaucer's "Nun's Priest's
        Tale," in _The Canterbury Tales_.


THE COCK AND THE FOX

MARIE DE FRANCE

        A Cock our story tells of, who
        High on a trash hill stood and crew.
        A Fox, attracted, straight drew nigh,
        And spake soft words of flattery.
          "Dear Sir!" said he, "your look's divine;
        I never saw a bird so fine!
        I never heard a voice so clear
        Except your father's--ah! poor dear!
        His voice rang clearly, loudly--but
        Most clearly when his eyes were shut!"
        "The same with me!" the Cock replies,
        And flaps his wings, and shuts his eyes.
        Each note rings clearer than the last--
        The Fox starts up and holds him fast;
        Toward the wood he hies apace.
          But as he crossed an open space,
        The shepherds spy him; off they fly;
        The dogs give chase with hue and cry.
        The Fox still holds the Cock, though fear
        Suggests his case is growing queer.
        "Tush!" cries the Cock, "cry out, to grieve 'em,
        'The cock is mine! I'll never leave him!'"
        The Fox attempts, in scorn, to shout,
        And opes his mouth; the Cock slips out,
        And in a trice has gained a tree.
          Too late the Fox begins to see
        How well the Cock his game has played;
        For once his tricks have been repaid.
        In angry language, uncontrolled,
        He 'gins to curse the mouth that's bold
        To speak, when it should silent be.
        "Well," says the Cock, "the same with me;
        I curse the eyes that go to sleep
        Just when they ought sharp watch to keep
        Lest evil to their lord befall."
          Thus fools contrariously do all;
        They chatter when they should be dumb,
        And, when they _ought_ to speak, are mum.



241

        The following is Wright's translation of the
        first fable in La Fontaine's collection.
        Rousseau, objecting to fables in general,
        singled out this particular one as an example
        of their bad effects on children, and echoes of
        his voice are still in evidence. It would, he
        said, give children a lesson in inhumanity.
        "You believe you are making an example of the
        grasshopper, but they will choose the ant . . .
        they will take the more pleasant part, which is
        a very natural thing." Another observer said:
        "As for me, I love neither grasshopper nor ant,
        neither avarice nor prodigality, neither the
        miserly people who lend nor the spendthrifts
        who borrow." These statements represent
        complex, analytic points of view which are
        probably outside the range of most children.
        They will see the grasshopper simply as a type
        of thorough shiftlessness and the ant as a type
        of forethought, although La Fontaine does
        suggest that the ant might on general
        principles be a little less "tight-fisted." The
        lesson that idleness is the mother of want, the
        necessity of looking ahead, of providing for
        the future, of laying up for a rainy day--these
        are certainly common-sense conclusions and the
        only ones the story itself will suggest to the
        child.


THE GRASSHOPPER AND THE ANT

LA FONTAINE

        A grasshopper gay
        Sang the summer away,
        And found herself poor
        By the winter's first roar.
        Of meat or of bread,
        Not a morsel she had!
        So a begging she went,
        To her neighbor the ant,
          For the loan of some wheat,
          Which would serve her to eat,
        Till the season came round.
          "I will pay you," she saith,
          "On an animal's faith,
        Double weight in the pound
        Ere the harvest be bound."
          The ant is a friend
          (And here she might mend)
          Little given to lend.
        "How spent you the summer?"
          Quoth she, looking shame
          At the borrowing dame.
        "Night and day to each comer
          I sang, if you please."
          "You sang! I'm at ease;
        For 'tis plain at a glance,
        Now, ma'am, you must dance."



242

        The translation of the following fable is that
        of W. Lucas Collins, in his _La Fontaine and
        Other French Fabulists_. This fable has always
        been a great favorite among the French, and the
        translator has caught much of the sprightly
        tone of his original.


THE COCK, THE CAT, AND THE YOUNG MOUSE

LA FONTAINE

        A pert young Mouse, to whom the world was new,
        Had once a near escape, if all be true.
        He told his mother, as I now tell you:
        "I crossed the mountains that beyond us rise,
          And, journeying onwards, bore me
        As one who had a great career before me,
        When lo! two creatures met my wondering eyes,--
        The one of gracious mien, benign and mild;
          The other fierce and wild,
        With high-pitched voice that filled me with alarm;
        A lump of sanguine flesh grew on his head,
          And with a kind of arm
          He raised himself in air,
          As if to hover there;
        His tail was like a horseman's plume outspread."
        (It was a farmyard Cock, you understand,
        That our young friend described in terms so grand,
        As 'twere some marvel come from foreign land.)
          "With arms raised high
        He beat his sides, and made such hideous cry,
          That even I,
        Brave as I am, thank heaven! had well-nigh fainted:
          Straightway I took to flight,
          And cursed him left and right.
        Ah! but for him, I might have got acquainted
          With that sweet creature,
        Who bore attractiveness in every feature:
        A velvet skin he had, like yours and mine,
          A tail so long and fine,
        A sweet, meek countenance, a modest air--
          Yet, what an eye was there!
        I feel that, on the whole,
        He must have strong affinities of soul
        With our great race--our ears are shaped the same.
        I should have made my bow, and asked his name,
          But at the fearful cry
        Raised by that monster, I was forced to fly."
        "My child," replied his mother, "you have seen
        That demure hypocrite we call a Cat:
        Under that sleek and inoffensive mien
          He bears a deadly hate of Mouse and Rat.
        The other, whom you feared, is harmless--quite;
        Nay, perhaps may serve us for a meal some night.
        As for your friend, for all his innocent air,
        We form the staple of his bill of fare."

        _Take, while you live, this warning as your guide--_
            _Don't judge by the outside._



243

        John Gay (1685-1732) was an English poet and
        dramatist. His work as a whole has been pretty
        well forgotten, but he has been recently
        brought back to the mind of the public by the
        revival of his satirical _Beggar's Opera_, the
        ancestor of the modern comic opera. Gay
        published a collection of fables in verse in
        1727, "prepared for the edification of the
        young Duke of Cumberland." A second group,
        making sixty-six in all, was published after
        his death. Since these fables are probably the
        best of their kind in English, a few of them
        are frequently met with in collections. "The
        Hare with Many Friends" has been the favorite,
        and rightly so, as it has something of the
        humor and point that belong to the real fable.
        Perhaps the fact that it has a personal
        application enabled Gay to write with more
        vigor and sincerity than elsewhere.


THE HARE WITH MANY FRIENDS

JOHN GAY

        Friendship, like love, is but a name,
        Unless to one you stint the flame.
        The child whom many fathers share,
        Hath seldom known a father's care.
        'Tis thus in friendship; who depend
        On many rarely find a friend.
        A Hare, who, in a civil way,
        Complied with everything, like Gay,
        Was known by all the bestial train
        Who haunt the wood, or graze the plain.
        Her care was, never to offend,
        And every creature was her friend.
        As forth she went at early dawn,
        To taste the dew-besprinkled lawn,
        Behind she hears the hunter's cries,
        And from the deep-mouthed thunder flies.
        She starts, she stops, she pants for breath;
        She hears the near advance of death;
        She doubles, to mislead the hound,
        And measures back her mazy round:
        Till, fainting in the public way,
        Half dead with fear she gasping lay.
        What transport in her bosom grew,
        When first the Horse appeared in view!
        "Let me," says she, "your back ascend,
        And owe my safety to a friend.
        You know my feet betray my flight;
        To friendship every burden's light."
        The Horse replied: "Poor honest Puss,
        It grieves my heart to see thee thus;
        Be comforted; relief is near,
        For all your friends are in the rear."
          She next the stately Bull implored;
        And thus replied the mighty lord,
        "Since every beast alive can tell
        That I sincerely wish you well,
        I may, without offence, pretend,
        To take the freedom of a friend;
        Love calls me hence; a favorite cow
        Expects me near yon barley-mow;
        And when a lady's in the case,
        You know, all other things give place.
        To leave you thus might seem unkind;
        But see, the Goat is just behind."
          The Goat remarked her pulse was high,
        Her languid head, her heavy eye;
        "My back," says he, "may do you harm;
        The Sheep's at hand, and wool is warm."
          The Sheep was feeble, and complained
        His sides a load of wool sustained:
        Said he was slow, confessed his fears,
        For hounds eat sheep as well as hares.
          She now the trotting Calf addressed,
        To save from death a friend distressed.
        "Shall I," says he, "of tender age,
        In this important care, engage?
        Older and abler passed you by;
        How strong are those, how weak am I!
        Should I presume to bear you hence,
        Those friends of mine may take offence.
        Excuse me, then. You know my heart.
        But dearest friends, alas, must part!
        How shall we all lament! Adieu!
        For see, the hounds are just in view."



244

        Tomas de Yriarte (1750-1791) was a Spanish poet
        of some note, remembered now mainly as the
        author of _Literary Fables_, the first attempt
        at literary fable-writing in Spanish. As the
        name is meant to imply, they concern themselves
        with the follies and weaknesses of authors.
        There are about eighty fables in the complete
        collection, and they are full of ingenuity and
        cleverness. One of the simplest and best of
        these is given here in the translation by R.
        Rockliffe, which first appeared in _Blackwood's
        Magazine_ in 1839. It laughs at the lucky
        chance by which even stupidity sometimes "makes
        a hit" and then stupidly proceeds to pat itself
        on the back.


THE MUSICAL ASS

TOMAS YRIARTE

        The fable which I now present
        Occurred to me by accident;
        And whether bad or excellent,
        Is merely so by accident.
        A stupid ass one morning went
        Into a field by accident
        And cropp'd his food and was content,
        Until he spied by accident
        A flute, which some oblivious gent
        Had left behind by accident;
        When, sniffing it with eager scent,
        He breathed on it by accident,
        And made the hollow instrument
        Emit a sound by accident.
        "Hurrah! hurrah!" exclaimed the brute,
        "How cleverly I play the flute!"

        _A fool, in spite of nature's bent._
        _May shine for once--by accident._



245

        Ivan Andreevitch Krylov (1768-1844) was a
        Russian author whose fame rests almost entirely
        upon his popular verse fables (200 in number)
        which have been used extensively as textbooks
        in Russian schools. They have "joyousness,
        simplicity, wit, and good humor." The following
        specimen is from I. H. Harrison's translation
        of Krylov's _Original Fables_. It gives a good
        illustration of the necessity of "teamwork."


THE SWAN, THE PIKE, AND THE CRAB

IVAN KRYLOV

  When partners with each other don't agree,
  Each project must a failure be,
  And out of it no profit come, but sheer vexation.

  A Swan, a Pike, and Crab once took their station
    In harness, and would drag a loaded cart;
    But, when the moment came for them to start,

  They sweat, they strain, and yet the cart stands still; what's lacking?
    The load must, as it seemed, have been but light;
    The Swan, though, to the clouds takes flight,
  The Pike into the water pulls, the Crab keeps backing.

  Now which of them was right, which wrong, concerns us not;
  The cart is still upon the selfsame spot.



246

        This fable from the Old Testament is one of the
        very oldest on record in which a story is
        practically applied to a human problem. The
        causes of political corruption apparently have
        not changed much in three thousand years.
        American citizens gather together at certain
        times to choose mayors and other officers to
        rule over them, and when they say to the
        fruitful olive tree, or fig tree, or vine,
        "Come thou and reign over us," he replies,
        "Should I forsake my productive factory, or
        mine, or profession, to be mayor?" But when
        they say to the bramble, "Come thou and reign
        over us," he replies, "Put your trust in me,
        and let those suffer who object to my
        management of public affairs." Jotham's lesson
        of political duty is one greatly needed in the
        present-day attempt to raise our standard of
        citizenship.


THE BRAMBLE IS MADE KING

_Judges ix: 6-16_

And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of
Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that was in Shechem. And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood
in the top of Mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and
said unto them:--

"Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you. The
trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said
unto the olive tree, 'Reign thou over us.' But the olive tree said unto
them, 'Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honor God and
man, and go to be promoted over the trees?'

"And the trees said to the fig tree, 'Come thou and reign over us.' But
the fig tree said unto them, 'Should I forsake my sweetness and my good
fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?'

"Then said the trees unto the vine, 'Come thou and reign over us.' And
the vine said unto them, 'Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and
man, and go to be promoted over the trees?'

"Then said all the trees unto the bramble, 'Come thou and reign over
us.' And the bramble said unto the trees, 'If in truth ye anoint me
king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble and devour the cedars of Lebanon.'"



247

        The concrete illustrations by means of which
        Jesus constantly taught are called parables.
        "Without a parable spake he not unto them." The
        parable differs from the fable proper in
        dealing with more fundamental or ideal truth.
        The fable moves on the plane of the prudential
        virtues, the parable on the plane of the higher
        self-forgetting virtues. Because of that
        difference there is in the parable "no jesting
        nor raillery at the weakness, the follies, or
        the crimes of men." All is deeply earnest,
        befitting its high spiritual point of view. As
        a rule the parables use for illustration
        stories of what might actually happen. Two of
        the most familiar of the parables follow. What
        true neighborliness means is the message of
        "The Good Samaritan."


THE GOOD SAMARITAN

_Luke x:25-37_

And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying, "Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He said unto him, "What is
written in the law? how readest thou?" And he answering said, "Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as
thyself." And He said unto him, "Thou hast answered right; this do, and
thou shalt live." But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus,
"And who is my neighbor?"

And Jesus answering said, "A certain man went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and
wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there
came down a certain priest that way; and when he saw him, he passed by
on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came
and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain
Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was; and when he saw him, he
had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring
in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an
inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow, when he departed, he took
out two pence and gave them to the host and said unto him, 'Take care of
him: and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again I will repay
thee.'

"Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbor unto him that
fell among the thieves?"

And he said, "He that showed mercy on him."

Then said Jesus unto him, "Go and do thou likewise."



248


THE PRODIGAL SON

_Luke xv:10-32_

"Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repenteth."

And he said, "A certain man had two sons; and the younger of them said
to his father, 'Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to
me.' And he divided unto them his living.

"And not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, and
took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with
riotous living. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine
in that land; and he began to be in want. And he went and joined
himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to
feed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that
the swine did eat; and no man gave unto him.

"And when he came to himself, he said, 'How many hired servants of my
father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I
will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, "Father, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants."'

"And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him, 'Father, I have sinned
against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son.' But the father said to his servants, 'Bring forth the best robe
and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet;
and bring hither the fatted calf and kill it; and let us eat and be
merry; for this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is
found.' And they began to be merry.

"Now his elder son was in the field; and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants and
asked what these things meant. And he said unto him, 'Thy brother is
come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath
received him safe and sound.' And he was angry and would not go in;
therefore came his father out and entreated him. And he answering, said
to his father, 'Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither
transgressed I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou never gavest me
a kid that I might make merry with my friends. But as soon as this thy
son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast
killed for him the fatted calf.' And he said unto him, 'Son, thou art
ever with me; and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should
make merry, and be glad; for this thy brother was dead, and is alive
again; and was lost, and is found.'"



249

        This little apologue is taken from _Norwood_
        (1867), a novel written by Henry Ward Beecher
        for the New York _Ledger_ in the days when that
        periodical, under the direction of Robert
        Bonner, was the great family weekly of America.
        In the course of the fiction Mr. Beecher
        emphasizes the value of stories for children.
        "Story-hunger in children," he says, "is even
        more urgent than bread-hunger." And after the
        story has been told: "How charming it is to
        narrate fables for children. . . . Children are
        unconscious philosophers. They refuse to pull
        to pieces their enjoyments to see what they are
        made of. Rose knew as well as her father that
        leaves never talked. Yet, Rose never saw a leaf
        without feeling that there was life and meaning
        in it."


THE ANXIOUS LEAF

HENRY WARD BEECHER

Once upon a time a little leaf was heard to sigh and cry, as leaves
often do when a gentle wind is about.

And the twig said, "What is the matter, little leaf?"

And the leaf said, "The wind just told me that one day it would pull me
off and throw me down to die on the ground!"

The twig told it to the branch on which it grew, and the branch told it
to the tree. And when the tree heard it, it rustled all over, and sent
back word to the leaf, "Do not be afraid; hold on tightly, and you shall
not go till you want to." And so the leaf stopped sighing, but went on
nestling and singing.

Every time the tree shook itself and stirred up all its leaves, the
branches shook themselves, and the little twig shook itself, and the
little leaf danced up and down merrily, as if nothing could ever pull it
off.

And so it grew all summer long till October. And when the bright days of
autumn came, the little leaf saw all the leaves around becoming very
beautiful. Some were yellow, and some scarlet, and some striped with
both colors.

Then it asked the tree what it meant. And the tree said, "All these
leaves are getting ready to fly away, and they have put on these
beautiful colors, because of joy."

Then the little leaf began to want to go, and grew very beautiful in
thinking of it, and when it was very gay in color, it saw that the
branches of the tree had no color in them, and so the leaf said, "Oh,
branches! why are you lead color and we golden?"

