        As if in fire-lit camp they lay;
        And I, like to an Indian scout,
        Around their party prowled about."

Cultivate his imagination by helping the child to image what he has
read. Let us play that we are sailing with Columbus in a little ship
over the great green ocean. When we look far off from the top of a
wave we see nothing but sky and white-capped water; all around us are
angry faces and angry waves.

It is easy to work on the emotions of a little child and thoughtless
persons may find it amusing but it is a serious matter, for it has an
injurious effect upon his nerves. Ghost stories and books which
inspire fear of the supernatural often do much harm to imaginative
children.

The boundless curiosity of the child may be aroused and stimulated so
that he gets to know himself and the world about him in a way that
furnishes him with constant and delightful employment. The growth of
his mind is rapid and healthful, because he is reaching out to
comprehend and verify and apply to his own purposes the knowledge that
he derives from books and that which he obtains from observation. It
is not easy to realize the ignorance of children. Dr. G. Stanley Hall
found by experiments with a large number of six-year-olds in Boston,
that 55 percent did not know that wooden things are made from trees.
The world is strange to them; they must grope their way, they are
attracted by the bright, the flashy, the sensational, and their tastes
will develop in these directions unless they are taught better.
Grown-ups estimate in terms of previous experience; the child has had
little previous experience to which to refer. Edward Thring says:

"The emptiness of a young boy's mind is often not taken into account,
at least emptiness so far as all knowledge in it being of a
fragmentary and piecemeal description, nothing complete. It may well
happen that an intelligent boy shall be unable to understand a
seemingly simple thing, because some bit of knowledge which his
instructor takes it for granted he possesses, and probably thinks
instinctive, is wanting to fill up the whole."

To impart the desire for knowledge and the power of getting it is next
to character-building the most important work of the school. Encourage
self-activity to the fullest extent. When the child asks a question be
careful not to put him off or discourage him, but if it is possible to
show him how to find the answer for himself do so, even at the expense
of considerable time and trouble. Aid that quenches curiosity retards
mental growth. Many children ask questions merely for the sake of
talking, and forget the question before they have heard the answer. As
the child gradually becomes able to use them show him how to employ
books as tools. Keep reference books on low shelves or tables in
convenient places, where it is easy to get at them. Show the child
that the dictionary, the atlas, and the encyclopaedia contain stores
of knowledge accumulated by the work of many scholars for many years
and laboriously classified and arranged for the benefit of seekers
after information. Show him how to investigate a subject under several
different titles and how to get what he needs from a book by the use
of the table of contents, index, and running head lines, and how to
use card catalogues and Poole's Index. Help him to look up on the map
the places he reads about. Explain the scale of miles and teach him to
use his imagination in making the map real; show him that the dots
represent towns and cities with churches, parks, and trolley cars, and
that the waving lines are rivers on which are steam boats carrying the
productions of one section to another.

As he grows older teach him to draw his own conclusions from
conflicting statements and to preserve the happy medium between
respect for the authority of books and confidence in his own
observation. Most boys and girls do not observe and they do not think;
they have no opinions except those made for them by others. We are too
apt to cultivate the memory and to neglect observation, imagination,
and judgment. The result is a wooden type of mind which has too great
respect for printed matter and little initiative in accurate
observation and in using the imagination and the judgment in making
what has been observed and read practically useful.

Encourage the child to talk about what he reads in a natural way, but
do not allow him to become a prig by saying what he supposes you would
like to have him rather than what he really thinks.

Do not be too eager to stamp your individuality upon the child; he has
a right to his own. Find out what his tastes and inclinations are and
develop him through them. Ascertain what he is really interested in;
very often it is something quite different from what you suppose. His
point of view is different from yours. Translate what you wish him to
be interested in into terms of his own life and experience. Success
in education comes to a great extent from skill in establishing
relations between what the child already knows and that which you wish
him to acquire.

No part of education has more to do with character-building than the
inculcating of a love of good literature. S. S. Laurie calls
literature "the most potent of all instruments in the hands of the
educator, whether we have regard to intellectual growth or to the
moral and religious life". "It is easy," he says, "if only you set
about it in the right way, to engage the heart of a child, up to the
age of eleven or twelve, on the side of kindliness, generosity,
self-sacrifice; and to fill him, if not with ideals of greatness and
goodness, at least with the feelings or emotions which enter into
these ideals. You thus lay a basis in feeling and emotion on which may
be built a truly manly character at a later period--without such a
