
"I didn't know as you would be willing to tell."

"I shan't tell any one but you. It's Miss Hawkins,--firm of Hawkins &
Brewer. That is, her father belongs to the firm, not she. And Paul,"
here he clutched our hero's arm convulsively, "I've made a declaration
of my love, and--and----"

"Well?"

"She has answered my letter."

"Has she?" asked Paul with some curiosity, "What did she say?"

"She has written me to be under her window this evening."

"Why under her window? why didn't she write you to call?"

"Probably she will, but it's more romantic to say, 'be under my
window.'"

"Well, perhaps it is; only you know I don't know much about such
things."

"Of course not, Paul," said Mr. Benton; "you're only a boy, you know."

"Are you going to be under her window, Nich,--I mean Mr. Benton?"

"Of course. Do you think I would miss the appointment? No earthly power
could prevent my doing it."

"Then I had better leave you," said Paul, making a movement to go.

"No, I want you to accompany me as far as the door. I feel--a little
agitated. I suppose everybody does when they are in love," added Mr.
Benton, complacently.

"Well," said Paul, "I will see you to the door, but I can't stay, for
they will wonder at home what has become of me."

"All right."

"Are we anywhere near the house?"

"Yes, it's only in the next street," said Mr. Benton, "O, Paul, how my
heart beats! You can't imagine how I feel!"

Mr. Benton gasped for breath, and looked as if he had swallowed a fish
bone, which he had some difficulty in getting down.

"You'll know how to understand my feelings sometime, Paul," said Mr.
Benton; "when your time comes, I will remember your service of to-night,
and I will stand by you."

Paul inwardly hoped that he should never fall in love, if it was likely
to affect him in the same way as his companion, but he thought it best
not to say so.

By this time they had come in sight of a three-story brick house, with
Benjamin Hawkins on the door-plate.

"That's the house," said Mr. Benton, in an agitated whisper.

"Is it?"

"Yes, and that window on the left-hand side is the window of her
chamber."

"How do you know?"

"She told me in the letter."

"And where are you to stand?"

"Just underneath, as the clock strikes nine. It must be about the time."

At that moment the city clock struck nine.

Mr. Benton left Paul, and crossing the street, took up his position
beneath the window of his charmer, beginning to sing, in a thin, piping
voice, as preconcerted between them--

     "Ever of thee,
     I'm fo-o-ondly dreaming."

The song was destined never to be finished.

From his post in a doorway opposite, Paul saw the window softly open. He
could distinguish a tall female figure, doubtless Miss Hawkins herself.
She held in her hand a pitcher of water, which she emptied with
well-directed aim full upon the small person of her luckless admirer.

The falling column struck upon his beaver, thence spreading on all
sides. His carefully starched collar became instantly as limp as a rag,
while his coat suffered severely from the shower.

His tuneful accents died away in dismay.

"Ow!" he exclaimed, jumping at least a yard, and involuntarily shaking
himself like a dog, "who did that?"

There was no answer save a low, musical laugh from the window above,
which was involuntarily echoed by Paul.

"What do you mean by laughing at me?" demanded Mr. Benton, smarting with
mortification, as he strode across the street, trying to dry his hat
with the help of his handkerchief, "Is this what you call friendship?"

"Excuse me," gasped Paul, "but I really couldn't help it."

"I don't see anything to laugh at," continued Mr. Benton, in a resentful
tone; "because I have been subjected to unmanly persecution, you must
laugh at me, instead of extending to me the sympathy of a friend."

"I suppose you won't think of her any more," said Paul, recovering
himself.

"Think of her!" exclaimed Mr. Benton, "would you have me tear her from
my heart, because her mercenary parent chooses to frown upon our love,
and follow me with base persecution."

"Her parent!"

"Yes, it was he who threw the water upon me. But it shall not avail,"
the young man continued, folding his arms, and speaking in a tone of
resolution, "bolts and bars shall not keep two loving hearts asunder."

"But it wasn't her father," urged Paul, perceiving that Mr. Benton was
under a mistake.

"Who was it, then?"

"It was the young lady herself."

"Who threw the water upon me? It is a base slander."

"But I saw her."

"Saw who?"

"A tall young lady with black hair."

"And was it she who threw the water?" asked Mr. Benton, aghast at this
unexpected revelation.

"Yes."

"Then she did it at the command of her proud parent."

Paul did not dispute this, since it seemed to comfort Mr. Benton. It is
doubtful, however, whether the young man believed it himself, since he
straightway fell into a fit of gloomy abstraction, and made no response
when Paul bade him "good-night."





XXIII.

PAUL LOSES HIS SITUATION AND GAINS A FRIEND.


Paul had a presentiment that he should not long remain in the employ
of Smith & Thompson; it was not many weeks before this presentiment was
verified.

After having received such instruction as was necessary, the calico
department was left in Paul's charge. One day a customer in turning over
the patterns shown her took up a piece which Paul knew from complaints
made by purchasers would not wash.

"This is pretty," said she, "it is just what I have been looking for.
You may cut me off twelve yards."

"Yes, ma'am."

"Wait a minute, though," interposed the lady, "will it wash?"

"I don't think it will," said Paul, frankly, "there have been some
complaints made about that."

"Then I shall not want it. Let me see what else you have got."

The customer finally departed, having found nothing to suit her.

No sooner had she left the store than Mr. Smith called Paul.

"Well, did you sell that lady anything?"

"No, sir."

"And why not?" demanded Smith, harshly.

"Because she did not like any of the pieces."

"Wouldn't she have ordered a dress pattern if you had not told her the
calico would not wash?"

"Yes, sir, I suppose so," said Paul, preparing for a storm.

"Then why did you tell her?" demanded his employer, angrily.

"Because she asked me."

"Couldn't you have told her that it would wash?"

"That would not have been the truth," said Paul, sturdily.

"You're a mighty conscientious young man," sneered Smith, "You're
altogether too pious to succeed in business. I discharge you from my
employment."

"Very well, sir," said Paul, his heart sinking, but keeping up a brave
exterior, "then I have only to bid you good-morning."

"Good-morning, sir," said his employer with mock deference, "I advise
you to study for the ministry, and no longer waste your talents in
selling calico."

Paul made no reply, but putting on his cap walked out of the store. It
was the middle of the week, and Mr. Smith was, of course, owing him a
small sum for his services; but Paul was too proud to ask for his money,
which that gentleman did not see fit to volunteer.

"I am sure I have done right," thought Paul. "I had no right to
misrepresent the goods to that lady. I wonder what Uncle Hugh will say."

"You did perfectly right," said the sexton, after Paul had related the
circumstances of his dismissal. "I wouldn't have had you act differently
for twenty situations. I have no doubt you will get a better position
elsewhere."

"I hope so," said Paul. "Now that I have lost the situation, Uncle Hugh,
I don't mind saying that I never liked it."

Now commenced a search for another place. Day after day Paul went out,
and day after day he returned with the same want of success.

"Never mind, Paul," said the sexton encouragingly. "When you do succeed,
perhaps you'll get something worth waiting for."

One morning Paul went out feeling that something was going to
happen,--he didn't exactly know what,--but he felt somehow that there
was to be a change in his luck. He went out, therefore, with more
hopefulness than usual; yet, when four o'clock came, and nothing had
occurred except failure and disappointment, which unhappily were not
at all out of the ordinary course, Paul began to think that he was very
foolish to have expected anything.

He was walking listlessly along a narrow street, when, on a sudden, he
heard an exclamation of terror, of which, on turning round, he easily
discovered the cause.

Two spirited horses, attached to an elegant carriage, had been terrified
in some way, and were now running at the top of their speed.

There was no coachman on the box; he had dismounted in order to ring
at some door, when the horses started. He was now doing his best to
overtake the horses, but in a race between man and horse, it is easy to
predict which will have the advantage.

There seemed to be but one person in the carriage. It was a lady,--whose
face, pale with terror, could be seen from the carriage window. Her
loud cries of alarm no doubt terrified the horses still more, and, by
accelerating their speed, tended to make matters worse.

Paul was roused from a train of despondent reflections by seeing the
horses coming up the street. He instantly comprehended the whole danger
of the lady's situation.

Most boys would have thought of nothing but getting out of the way, and
leaving the carriage and its inmate to their fate. What, indeed, could a
boy do against a pair of powerful horses, almost beside themselves with
fright?

But our hero, as we have already had occasion to see, was brave and
self-possessed, and felt an instant desire to rescue the lady, whose
glance of helpless terror, as she leaned her head from the window, he
could see. Naturally quickwitted, it flashed upon him that the only way
to relieve a horse from one terror, was to bring another to bear upon
him.

With scarcely a moment's premeditation, he rushed out into the middle of
the street, full in the path of the furious horses, and with his cheeks
pale, for he knew his danger, but with determined air, he waved his arms
aloft, and cried "Whoa!" at the top of his voice.

The horses saw the sudden movement. They saw the boy standing directly
in front of them. They heard the word of command to which they had been
used, and by a sudden impulse, relieved from the blind terror which had
urged them on, they stopped suddenly, and stood still in the middle of
the street, still showing in their quivering limbs the agitation through
which they had passed.

Just then the coachman, panting with his hurried running, came up and
seized them by the head.

"Youngster," said he, "you're a brave fellow. You've done us a good
service to-day. You're a pretty cool hand, you are. I don't know what
these foolish horses would have done with the carriage if it had not
been for you."

"Let me get out," exclaimed the lady, not yet recovered from her fright.

"I will open the door," said Paul, observing that the coachman was fully
occupied in soothing the horses.

He sprang forward, and opening the door of the carriage assisted the
lady to descend.

She breathed quickly.

"I have been very much frightened," she said; "and I believe I have been
in very great danger. Are you the brave boy who stopped the horses?"

Paul modestly answered in the affirmative.

"And how did you do it? I was so terrified that I was hardly conscious
of what was passing, till the horses stopped."

Paul modestly related his agency in the matter.

The lady gazed at his flushed face admiringly.

"How could you have so much courage?" she asked. "You might have been
trampled to death under the hoofs of the horses."

"I didn't think of that. I only thought of stopping the horses."

"You are a brave boy. I shudder when I think of your danger and mine. I
shall not dare to get into the carriage again this afternoon."

"Allow me to accompany you home?" said Paul, politely.

"Thank you; I will trouble you to go with me as far as Broadway, and
then I can get into an omnibus."

She turned and addressed some words to the coachman, directing him to
drive home as soon as the horses were quieted, adding that she would
trust herself to the escort of the young hero, who had rescued her from
the late peril.

"You're a lucky boy," thought John, the coachman. "My mistress is one
that never does anything by halves. It won't be for nothing that you
have rescued her this afternoon."

As they walked along, the lady, by delicate questioning, succeeded in
drawing from our hero his hopes and wishes for the future. Paul, who
was of a frank and open nature, found it very natural to tell her all he
felt and wished.

"He seems a remarkably fine boy," thought the lady to herself. "I should
like to do something for him."

They emerged into Broadway.

"I will detain you a little longer," said the lady; "and perhaps trouble
you with a parcel."

"I shall be very glad to take it," said Paul politely.

Appleton's bookstore was close at hand. Into this the lady went,
followed by her young companion.

A clerk advanced, and inquired her wishes.

"Will you show me some writing-desks?"

"I am going to purchase a writing-desk for a young friend of mine," she
explained to Paul; "as he is a boy, like yourself, perhaps you can guide
me in the selection."

"Certainly," said Paul, unsuspiciously.

Several desks were shown. Paul expressed himself admiringly of one made
of rosewood inlaid with pearl.

"I think I will take it," said the lady.

The price was paid, and the desk was wrapped up.

"Now," said Mrs. Danforth, for this proved to be her name, "I will
trouble you, Paul, to take the desk for me, and accompany me in the
omnibus, that is, if you have no other occupation for your time."

"I am quite at leisure," said Paul. "I shall be most happy to do so."

Paul left the lady at the door of her residence in Fifth Avenue, and
promised to call on his new friend the next day.

He went home feeling that, though he had met with no success in
obtaining a place, he had been very fortunate in rendering so important
a service to a lady whose friendship might be of essential service to
him.




XXIV.

PAUL CALLS ON MRS. DANFORTH.


"Mrs. Edward Danforth," repeated the sexton, on hearing the story of
Paul's exploit.

"Why, she attends our church."

"Do you know Mr. Danforth?" asked Paul, with interest.

"Only by sight. I know him by reputation, however."

"I suppose he is very rich."

"Yes, I should judge so. At any rate, he is doing an extensive
business."

"What is his business?"

"He is a merchant."

"A merchant," thought Paul; "that is just what I should like to be, but
I don't see much prospect of it."

"How do you like Mrs. Danforth?" inquired the sexton.

"Very much," said Paul, warmly. "She was very kind, and made me feel
quite at home in her company."

"I hope she may be disposed to assist you. She can easily do so, in her
position."

The next day Paul did not as usual go out in search of a situation.
His mind was occupied with thoughts of his coming interview with Mrs.
Danforth, and he thought he would defer his business plans till the
succeeding day.

At an early hour in the evening, he paused before an imposing residence
on Fifth Avenue, which he had seen but not entered the day previous.

He mounted the steps and pulled the bell.

A smart-looking man-servant answered his ring.

"Is Mrs. Danforth at home?" asked Paul.

"Yes, I believe so."
