Donald, with a blush. "With your father, I mean," added he, with a
deeper blush, as he realized that he had actually asked a girl to go
out in a boat with him.

"I should be delighted to go, but I can't. Mother won't let me go on the
water when the sun is out, it hurts my eyes so," answered Nellie; and
the young man was sure she was very sorry she could not go.

"Perhaps we can go after sunset, then," suggested Donald. "I am sorry
Ned is not at home; for his yacht is finished, and father says the paint
is dry enough to use her. We are going to have a little trial trip in
her over to Turtle Head, and, perhaps, round by Searsport."

"Is the Sea Foam really done?" asked Nellie, her eyes sparkling with
delight.

"Yes, she is all ready, and father will deliver her to Ned on Monday, if
everything works right about her. I thought some of your folks,
especially Ned, would like to be in her on the first trip."

"I should, for one; but I suppose it is no use for me to think of it. My
eyes are ever so much better, and I hope I shall be able to sail in the
Sea Foam soon."

"I hope so, too. We expect she will beat the Skylark; father thinks she
will."

"I don't care whether she does or not," laughed Nellie.

"Do you think I could see your father just a moment?" asked Donald. "I
only want to know whether or not he will go with us."

"I think so; I will go and speak to him. Come in, Don John," replied
Nellie, rising from her lolling-chair, and walking around the corner of
the house to the front door.

Donald followed her. The elegant mansion was located on a corner lot,
with a broad hall through the centre of it, on one side of which was the
large drawing-room, and on the other the sitting and dining-rooms. At
the end of the great hall was a door opening into the library, a large
apartment, which occupied the whole of a one-story addition to the
original structure. It had also an independent outside door, which
opened upon the piazza; and opposite to it was a flight of steps, down
to the gravel walk terminating at a gate on the cross street. People who
came to see Captain Patterdale on business could enter at this gate, and
go to the library without passing through the house. On the present
occasion, a horse and wagon stood at the gate, which indicated to Miss
Nellie that her father was engaged. This team had stood there for an
hour, and Donald had watched it for half that time, waiting for the
owner to leave, though he was not at all anxious to terminate the
interview with his fair schoolmate.

Nellie knocked at the library door, and her father told her to come in.
She passed in, while Donald waited the pleasure of the rich man in the
hall.

He was invited to enter. Captain Patterdale was evidently bored by his
visitor, and gave the young man a cordial greeting. Donald stated his
business very briefly; but the captain did not say whether he would or
would not go upon the trial trip of the Sea Foam. He asked a hundred
questions about the new yacht, and it was plain that he did not care to
resume the conversation with his visitor, who walked nervously about the
room, apparently vexed at the interruption, and dissatisfied thus far
with the result of his interview with the captain.

What would have appeared to be true to an observer was actually so. The
visitor was one Jacob Hasbrook, from a neighboring town, and his
reputation for honesty and fair dealings was not the best in the world.
Captain Patterdale held his note, without security, for thirteen hundred
and fifty dollars. Hasbrook had property, but his creditors were never
sure of him till they were paid. At the present interview he had
astonished Captain Patterdale by paying the note in full, with interest,
on the day it became due. But it was soon clear enough to the rich man
that the payment was only a "blind" to induce him to embark in a
doubtful speculation with Hasbrook. The nature and immense profits of
the enterprise had been eloquently set forth by the visitor, and his own
capacity to manage it enlarged upon; but the nabob, who had made his
fortune by hard work, was utterly wanting in enthusiasm. He had received
the money in payment of his note, which he had expected to lose, or to
obtain only after resorting to legal measures, and he was fully
determined to have nothing more to do with the man. He had said all this
as mildly as he could; but Hasbrook was persistent, and probably felt
that in paying an honest debt he had thrown away thirteen hundred and
fifty dollars.

He would not go, though Captain Patterdale gave him sufficient excuse
for doing so, or even for cutting his acquaintance. The rich man
continued to talk with Don John, to the intense disgust of the
speculator, who stood looking at a tin box, painted green, which lay on
a chair. Perhaps he looked upon this box as the grave of his hopes; for
it contained the money he had just paid to the captain--the wasted
money, because the rich man would not embark with him in his brilliant
enterprise, though he had taken so much pains, and parted with so much
money, to prove that he was an honest man. He appeared to be interested
in the box, and he looked at it all the time, with only an impatient
glance occasionally at the nabob, who appeared to be trifling with his
bright hopes. The tin chest was about nine inches each way, and
contained the private papers and other valuables of the rich man,
including, now, the thirteen hundred and fifty dollars just received.

Captain Patterdale was president of the Twenty-first National Bank of
Belfast, which was located a short distance from his house. The tin box
was kept in the vaults of the bank; but the owner had taken it home to
examine some documents at his leisure, intending to return it to the
bank before night. As it was in the library when Mr. Hasbrook called,
the money was deposited in it for safe keeping over night.

"I'm afraid I can't go with you, Donald," said Captain Patterdale, after
he had asked him all the questions he could think of about the Sea Foam.

"I am sorry, sir; for Miss Nellie wanted to go, and I was going to ask
father to wait till after sunset on her account," added the young man.

Mr. Hasbrook began to look hopeful; for the last remark of the nabob
indicated a possible termination of the conversation. Donald began his
retreat toward the hall of the mansion, for he wanted to see the fair
daughter again; but he had not reached the door before the captain
called him back.

"I suppose your father wants some more money to-night," said he, feeling
in his pocket for the key to open the tin box.

"He didn't say anything to me about it, sir," replied Donald; "I don't
think he does."

Hasbrook looked hopeless again; for Captain Patterdale began to
calculate how much he had paid, and how much more he was to pay, for the
yacht. While he was doing so, there was a knock at the street door,
and, upon being invited to do so, Mr. Laud Cavendish entered the library
with a bill in his hand.

Mr. Laud Cavendish was a great man in his own estimation, and a great
swell in the estimation of everybody else. He was a clerk or salesman in
a store; but he was dressed very elegantly for a provincial city like
Belfast, and for a "counter-jumper" on six or eight dollars a week. He
was about eighteen years old, tall, and rather slender. His upper lip
was adorned with an incipient mustache, which had been tenderly coaxed
and colored for two years, without producing any prodigious result,
though it was the pride and glory of the owner. Mr. Cavendish was a
dreamy young gentleman, who believed that the Fates had made a bad
mistake in his case, inasmuch as he was the son of an honest and
industrious carpenter, instead of the son and heir of one of the nabobs
of Belfast. He believed that he was fitted to adorn the highest circle
in society, to shine among the aristocracy of the city, and it was a
cruel shame that he should be compelled to work in a store, weigh out
tea and sugar, carry goods to the elegant mansions where he ought to be
admitted at the front, instead of the back, door, collect bills, and
perform whatever other service might be required of him. The Fates had
blundered and conspired against him; but he was not without hope that
the daughter of some rich man, who might fall in love with him and his
mustache, would redeem him from his slavery to an occupation he hated,
and lift him up to the sphere where he belonged. Laud was "soaring after
the infinite," and so he rather neglected the mundane and practical, and
his employer did not consider him a very desirable clerk.

Mr. Laud Cavendish came with a bill in his hand, the footing of which
was the sum due his employer for certain necessary articles just
delivered at the kitchen door of the elegant mansion. Captain Patterdale
opened the tin box, and took therefrom some twenty dollars to pay the
bill, which Laud receipted. Mr. Hasbrook hoped he would go, and that Don
John would go; and perhaps they would have gone if a rather exciting
event had not occurred to detain them.

"Father! father!" exclaimed Miss Nellie, rushing into the library.

"What's the matter, Nellie?" demanded her father, calmly; for he had
long been a sea captain, and was used to emergencies.

"Michael has just dropped down in a fit!" gasped Nellie.

"Where is he?"

"In the yard."

Captain Patterdale, followed by his three visitors, rushed through the
hall, out at the front door, near which the unfortunate man had fallen,
and, with the assistance of his companions, lifted him from the ground.
Michael was the hired man who took care of the horses, and kept the
grounds around the elegant mansion in order. He was raking the gravel
walk near the piazza where Nellie was laboring to keep cool. As we have
hinted before, and as Nellie and Don John had several times repeated,
the day was intensely hot. The sun where the man worked was absolutely
scorching, and the hired man had experienced a sun-stroke. Captain
Patterdale and his visitors bore him to his room in the L, and Don John
ran for the doctor, who appeared in less than ten minutes. The visitors
all did what they could, Mr. Laud Cavendish behaving very well.
Michael's wife and other friends soon arrived, and there was nothing
more for Laud to do. He went down stairs, and, finding Nellie in the
hall, he tried to comfort her; for she was very much concerned for poor
Michael.

"Do you think he will die, Mr. Cavendish?" asked she, almost as much
moved as though the poor man had been her father.

"O, no! I think he will recover. These Irishmen have thick heads, and
they don't die so easily of sun-stroke; for that's what the doctor says
it is," replied Laud, knowingly.

Nellie thought, if this was a true view of _coup de soleil_, Laud would
never die of it. She thought this; but she was not so impolite as to say
it. She asked him no more questions; for she saw Don John approaching
through the dining-room.

"Good afternoon, Miss Patterdale," said Laud, with a bow and a flourish,
as he retired towards the library, where he had left his hat.

In a few moments more, the rattle of the wagon, with which he delivered
goods to the customers, was heard as he drove off. Don John came into
the hall, and Nellie asked him ever so many questions about the
condition of Michael, and what the doctor said about him; all of which
the young man answered to the best of his ability.

"Do you think he will die, Don John?" she asked.

"I am sure I can't tell," replied Donald; "I hope not."

"Michael is real good, and I am so sorry for him!" added Nellie.

But Michael is hardly a personage in our story, and we do not purpose to
enter into the diagnosis of his case. He has our sympathies on the merit
of his sufferings alone, and quite as much for Nellie's sake; for it was
tender, and gentle, and kind in her to feel so much for a poor Irish
laborer. While she and Donald were talking about the case, Mr. Hasbrook
came down stairs, and passed through the hall into the library, where
he, also, had left his hat. In a few moments more the rattle of his
wagon was heard, as he drove off, indignant and disgusted at the
indifference of the nabob in refusing to take an interest in his
brilliant enterprise. He was angry with himself for having paid his note
before he had enlisted the payee in his cause.

"How is he, father?" asked Nellie, as Captain Patterdale entered the
hall.

"The doctor thinks he sees some favorable symptoms."

"Will he die?"

"The doctor thinks he will get over it. But he wants some ice, and I
must get it for him."

"I suppose you will not go in the Sea Foam now?" asked Donald.

"No; it is impossible," replied the captain, as he passed into the
dining-room to the refrigerator.

The father was like the daughter; and though he was a _millionnaire_, or
a _demi-millionnaire_--we don't know which, for we were never allowed to
look over his taxable valuation--though he was a nabob, he took right
hold, and worked with his own hands for the comfort and the recovery of
the sufferer. It was creditable to his heart that he did so, and we
never grudge such a man his "pile," especially when he has earned it by
his own labor, or made it in honorable, legitimate business. The captain
went up stairs again with a large dish of ice, to assist the doctor in
the treatment of his patient.

Donald staid in the hall, talking with Miss Nellie, as long as he
thought it proper to do so, though not as long as he desired, and then
entered the library where he, also, had left his hat. Perhaps it was a
singular coincidence that all three of the visitors had left their hats
in that room; but then it was not proper for them to sit with their hats
on in the presence of such a magnate as Captain Patterdale, and no
decent man would stop for a hat when a person had fallen in a fit.

Captain Patterdale's hat was still there; and, unluckily, there was
something else belonging to him which was not there.




CHAPTER II.

ABOUT THE TIN BOX.


Captain Patterdale worked with the doctor for a full hour upon poor
Michael, who at the end of that time opened his eyes, and soon declared
that he was "betther entirely." He insisted upon getting up, for it was
not "the likes of himself that was to lay there and have his honor
workin' over him." But the doctor and the nabob pacified him, and left
him, much improved, in the care of his wife.

"How is he, Dr. Wadman?" asked the sympathizing Nellie, as they came
down stairs together.

"He is decidedly better," replied the physician.

"Will he die?"

"O, no; I think not. His case looks very hopeful now."

"I thought folks always died with sun-stroke," said Nellie, more
cheerfully.

"No; not unless their heads are very soft," laughed the doctor.

"Well, I shouldn't think Laud Cavendish would dare to go out when the
sun shines," added the fair girl, with a snap of her bright eyes.

"It isn't quite safe for him to do so. Unfortunately, such people don't
know their own heads. I will come in again after tea," said the doctor,
as he went out of the house, at the front door; for he had not left his
hat in the library.

"I am so glad Michael is better!" continued Nellie. "When I saw him
drop, I felt as cold as ice, and I was afraid I should drop too before I
