
"I'll stick by the lifeboat," shouted the man-of-war's man, and they
parted.

Ah! it was grand to see that lifeboat go into action.  She could be
easily seen, though the night was so dark, for she was painted pure
white and bright blue, with a scarlet strip round her--a "thing of
light," but by no means a light thing!  She was so large, and stout, and
heavy, that she required a strong carriage on four wheels to transport
her from her boat-house to the edge of the sea, which foamed, and
hissed, and leaped up at her bow as if to taste the morsel which it
hoped soon to swallow.

While the boat was yet on its carriage, her stout coxswain, or captain,
clambered in.

"Now then, my jolly volunteers," he shouted, "jump up, and on wi' your
life-belts."

At that word our handsome young sailor laid his hands on the edge of the
boat and vaulted into her as if he had been made of india-rubber.  Ten
more men followed his example, and quickly put on their belts.

"Nobody's allowed to go off without a life-belt," said the coxswain to
the young sailor, "besides, it's against rules to let you go."

"How's that?" asked the youth; "you called for volunteers."

"Yes, but our volunteer-crew is already made up, so you must jump out.
Thank you all the same, my fine fellow."

The man-of-war's man was too well disciplined to think of resistance,
even for a moment.  With a look of disappointment and an active bound,
he leaped out upon the sand.

At that moment one of the men raised an oar, which was blown round by a
sudden blast, and its end struck another of the crew on the temple,
rendering him almost insensible.  He had to be put out at once, and
another volunteer was called for.  Like a flash of light, our youthful
seaman again vaulted into the boat.  His services were now accepted, and
a cork life-belt was given to him, which he quickly put on.

Meanwhile crowds of men, and even some women and boys, stood ready at
the launching-ropes.  The word was given.  There was a strong and a long
pull altogether, and the lifeboat sprang into the sea as if it had been
alive, with her crew seated and the oars out.  A huge wave caught her
bow and raised her up almost perpendicular.  She seemed as if about to
dance a reel upon her rudder.  Our man-of-war's man had rode in many a
wild sea, but never before had he seen the like of that.  Nevertheless,
he clung to his seat like a limpet, and pulled at his oar with all his
might.  The others were more accustomed to that special work.  Just as
she seemed about to topple over, the boat dropped forward and plunged
out to sea.  The next wave caught her in the same way, but with less
power.  Another stroke of the short, stout oars, and they had got fairly
off into deep water.

Then did the heart of the young sailor beat wildly, for, besides
rejoicing in that fierce struggle with the storm, he knew that his
mission was one of mercy as well as danger.  But how much more wildly
did his heart beat when he reached the wreck, and, by the light of the
blazing tar-barrel, beheld about twenty human beings--some of them women
and children--clinging to the wreck, which was buried in foaming water
by every sea.

One by one they were got into the lifeboat with great difficulty.  Then
the boat was pushed off and rowed towards the land.  What a deep-toned
shout there was on shore when her light form was dimly seen coming in on
the crest of a great billow!  And what a mighty cheer rang out when she
drew closer, and the man at the bow-oar stood up and cried, "Thank God,
_all_ saved!"

Just then a monster wave fell on the stern of the boat and filled it.
One little girl was swept overboard and went away with the backward rush
of water, as the boat was hauled out of danger.  Every one saw this, and
a terrible cry went up, but only one man moved.  Our young sailor sprang
after the child.  He knew that it was almost certain death to enter that
surf without a rope, but a spirit of self-sacrifice--founded on the
great example of Jesus--urged him on.  He had no time to think--only to
act.  He caught the child and was dragged along with her into the wild
sea.  At that moment another Coastguardsman, who chanced to be a friend
of the man-of-war's man, came upon the scene.  Seeing what had occurred,
he seized the end of a rope which some men had just brought down, tied
it round his waist, dashed into the sea, caught the sailor and the girl
in the wide grasp of his strong arms--and then all three were hauled to
the land in safety.

The poor child was nearly insensible, and had to be carried to a
neighbouring cottage; and the young sailor staggered so from exhaustion
that his friend and another man were obliged to support him as he went.

"Who is he?" inquired one of the fisherwomen, as she followed behind.

The Coastguardsman looked over his shoulder with a proud glance in his
sparkling eye, and said aloud, "His name is Richard Thorogood."

A statement which was received with three loud and ringing cheers.



CHAPTER THREE.

But what of the wreck under the Sunland cliffs, which had sent up
rocket-signals of distress on that same dismal night?

When our Coastguardsman with the black beard reached the scene, he
found, as he had expected, that his comrades of the Coastguard had not
been idle.  They had brought down the famous rocket apparatus, with
which so many lives are saved every year on our stormy shores.

The wreck was in a very different position from that in the bay.
Instead of being far away from shore, among rolling billows that raged
over the flat sands, this vessel, a brig, lay hard and fast among the
rocks, not a hundred yards from the foot of the cliffs.  Against these
frowning cliffs the wild waves thundered as if they wished to beat them
down.  Failing in that, they fell back and seemed to go mad with
disappointment; leaping, hissing, and whirling among the rocks on which
the brig had been cast.  The brig was so near, that the men on shore
could see the forms of her crew as they clung to the rigging,
frantically waving their arms and sending up shrieks of despair and loud
cries for help.  Truly there was urgent need for help, for the sea broke
over the vessel so furiously that it was evident she must soon go to
pieces.

There was only one little spot of partial shelter at the foot of the
cliffs where man could stand on that fearful night.  Here the men of the
Coastguard had set up the rocket apparatus.  The rocket was in position,
and about to be fired, when our black-bearded Coastguardsman arrived.
The light was applied.  Suddenly the group of spray-washed men, and a
few pale-faced spectators who had ventured to descend, and part of the
overhanging cliffs, burst into intense light as the great rocket went
out to sea with a wild roar.  It was like a horrid fiery serpent, and
carried a line tied to its tail!  It plunged into the waves, and all was
dark again, but there was no cheer from the wreck.  The aim had not been
good, and the rocket-line had missed its mark.

"Fetch another! look alive!" shouted our black-bearded friend, as he
seized, set up, and aimed a second rocket.

Again the light burst forth, and the rocket sprang out in the teeth of
the gale.  It fell beyond the brig, and the line caught in the rigging!
The wrecked crew seemed to understand what was required of them, for
they immediately began to haul on the rocket-line.  To the shore-end of
it was fastened, by the men on the rocks, a block or pulley with a
double or endless line, called a "whip," through it.  When the men in
the brig had hauled this block on board they fastened it to the stump of
the main mast.  Then the rescuers on shore tied a thick cable or hawser
to their double line and ran it out to the wreck, but when this thick
rope reached the crew, they did not seem to know what to do with it, for
it was not hauled upon, but continued to hang loose.

"They must be foreigners, and don't know what to do next," said one.

"P'rhaps they've got too cold to work it," said another.  "I wish we had
a little more light to see what they're about."

"We can't afford to wait," cried our friend Blackbeard, quickly throwing
off his upper garments; "run me out, lads, on the whip.  There won't be
much risk if you're quick."

"Risk!" exclaimed one of his comrades; "it will be certain death!"

But the daring Coastguardsman had already seized the thin line and
plunged into the boiling surf.

His anxious comrades knew that delay would only make death more certain,
so they hauled on the endless line as quickly as they could.  Of course,
being rove through the block before mentioned, the other half of it went
out to the wreck with the gallant rescuer holding on.  And what an awful
swim that was!  The line pulled him out, indeed, but it could not buoy
him up.  Neither could it save him from the jagged rocks that rose out
of the sea every now and then, like black teeth which were quickly
re-swallowed by each crashing wave.  It was more like a dive than a
swim, for the seething foam burst over him continually; but every time
he rose above the surface to gasp for breath, he sent up a great shout
to God for strength to enable him to save the perishing!  Those loud
prayers were drowned by the roaring tempest, but, though unheard by man,
they did not fail to enter the ears of Him who rules in earth and
Heaven.

Once the hero was thrown headlong on a rock, and so severely bruised
that he lost hold of the rope, and when swept off again was left
foundering in the foam.  His comrades could barely see that something
had happened to him, and a loud cry of consternation arose when they
felt the line run light and slack.  But our hero caught it again, and
the cry was changed to a cheer as they ran him out to the vessel's side.

He was soon on board, and saw at a glance what was the matter.  The crew
of the brig, being benumbed by long exposure, had not strength to tie
the heavy cable round the mast.  This the Coastguardsman did for them at
once, and, as he did so, observed that there were two little girls among
the crew.  Then he gave a well-understood signal with a ship's lantern
to the men on shore, who fastened a slung lifebuoy to their whip line,
hung it by a block to the thick cable, and ran it quickly out to the
wreck.

There was no time to lose now.  Our hero seized the two little girls and
put them into the bag which hung from the circular lifebuoy.

"Take care of my darlings," gasped the captain of the brig, who clung to
the ship's side almost quite exhausted.

"Come, get into the buoy, and go ashore with 'em yourself," cried our
hero.

"No.  The three of us would be too heavy; send the steward.  He's a
light man and brave," replied the captain.

The steward was ordered to jump on the buoy and cling to it, so as to
guard the little ones and prevent their being thrown out.

A signal having been again given with the lantern, the lifebuoy was
drawn swiftly to land.  It was a terrible passage, for the brig had
begun to roll on her rocky bed, and at every roll the hawser and the
lifebuoy dipped into the sea, or were jerked violently out of it, while
the risk of being let drop on the black rocks that came grinning to the
surface was very great.

But all went well.  The three were received on the rocks with cheers,
and conveyed up the cliffs to the Coastguard-house above, where warm
welcome and shelter awaited them.  The cheers were not heard by those in
the wreck, but the re-appearance of the lifebuoy proved that the
children had been saved, and a deep "Thanks be to God!" burst from their
father's lips.

Still the captain refused to go, when urged.  "No," he said, "let the
men go first."

So, one by one, the men were safely hauled on shore.

"Now, captain, it's your turn at last," said our hero, approaching him.

He still hesitated.  Then the stout Coastguardsman absolutely lifted him
into the lifebuoy.

"No time for ceremony," he said, with a smile, giving the signal with
his lantern, "the brig's going fast.  Tell 'em to look sharp on shore,
for I'm gettin' used up with all this work."

Away went the captain, and in a few minutes back came the lifebuoy.  Not
a moment too soon.  Blackbeard sprang in as the mizzen-mast snapped with
a report like a cannon, and went over the side.  The next wave broke up
the wreck itself.  Before the lifebuoy had gained the shore it was
plunged into the sea, out of which it no longer rose, the support of the
wreck being gone.  The men on shore now hauled on the rope with
desperate energy, for a few minutes more would be sure to settle the
question of life or death.  Through the surging breakers and over the
rugged rocks the lifebuoy was dragged, and a shout of relief arose when
the gallant Coastguardsman was seen clinging to it.  But he was
insensible, and it was with difficulty that they loosened the grip of
his powerful hands.

Then they bore him up the cliffs and laid him in his own bed, and looked
anxiously upon his deadly white face as they covered him with blankets,
applied hot bottles to his feet, and chafed his cold, stiff limbs.

At last there came a fluttering sigh, and the eyelids gently opened.

"Where am I?" he asked faintly.

A young man having the appearance of a clergyman, laid his hand gently
on his shoulder.

"All right, Tom!" he said; "through the goodness of the Lord you're
saved, and fourteen souls along with you."

"Thank God!" said Tom Thorogood fervently, and, as he said so, the tide
of life once more coursed strongly through his veins, and brought back
the colour to his manly face.



CHAPTER FOUR.

The great city was sound asleep.  It was the deadest hour of the night,
if we may apply that term to three o'clock in the morning, the hour at
which most people have sought and found their pillows.  Late revellers
had ceased to shout and sing, early risers had yet a good hour of rest
before them, if not more.  Of course there were many wakeful sick folk--
ah! how many in that mighty hive called London!  But these did not
disturb the profound quiet that had descended on the city: only a few
weak but steady lights in windows here and there told of their
existence.

Among the sleepless, on that calm dark night, there was one man to whom
we draw attention.  His bronzed cheeks and tall muscular frame told that
he was not one of the wakeful sick, neither was he a sick-nurse, to
