German, not ashamed to express by gesture or by word the fatherly
emotions an American would have compressed into a slap on the shoulder
and a brief 'All right'.

Mrs Jo sat and enjoyed the prospect like a romantic soul as she was, and
then they had a quiet talk together, saying freely all that was in their
hearts, and finding much comfort in the confidence which comes when love
casts out fear. It was agreed that nothing be said except to Nan,
who was to be thanked and rewarded for her courage, discretion, and
fidelity.

'I always knew that girl had the making of a fine woman in her, and this
proves it. No panics and shrieks and faintings and fuss, but calm
sense and energetic skill. Dear child, what can I give or do to show my
gratitude?' said Mrs Jo enthusiastically.

'Make Tom clear out and leave her in peace,' suggested Ted, almost
himself again, though a pensive haze still partially obscured his native
gaiety.

'Yes, do! he frets her like a mosquito. She forbade him to come out here
while she stayed, and packed him off with Demi. I like old Tom, but he
is a regular noodle about Nan,' added Rob, as he went away to help his
father with the accumulated letters.

'I'll do it!' said Mrs Jo decidedly. 'That girl's career shall not be
hampered by a foolish boy's fancy. In a moment of weariness she may give
in, and then it's all over. Wiser women have done so and regretted it
all their lives. Nan shall earn her place first, and prove that she can
fill it; then she may marry if she likes, and can find a man worthy of
her.'

But Mrs Jo's help was not needed; for love and gratitude can work
miracles, and when youth, beauty, accident, and photography are added,
success is sure; as was proved in the case of the unsuspecting but too
susceptible Thomas.



Chapter 8. JOSIE PLAYS MERMAID

While the young Bhaers were having serious experiences at home, Josie
was enjoying herself immensely at Rocky Nook; for the Laurences knew how
to make summer idleness both charming and wholesome. Bess was very fond
of her little cousin; Mrs Amy felt that whether her niece was an actress
or not she must be a gentlewoman, and gave her the social training
which marks the well-bred woman everywhere; while Uncle Laurie was never
happier than when rowing, riding, playing, or lounging with two gay
girls beside him. Josie bloomed like a wild flower in this free life,
Bess grew rosy, brisk, and merry, and both were great favourites with
the neighbours, whose villas were by the shore or perched on the cliffs
along the pretty bay.

One crumpled rose-leaf disturbed Josie's peace, one baffled wish filled
her with a longing which became a mania, and kept her as restless and
watchful as a detective with a case to 'work up'. Miss Cameron, the
great actress, had hired one of the villas and retired thither to rest
and 'create' a new part for next season. She saw no one but a friend
or two, had a private beach, and was invisible except during her daily
drive, or when the opera-glasses of curious gazers were fixed on a
blue figure disporting itself in the sea. The Laurences knew her, but
respected her privacy, and after a call left her in peace till she
expressed a wish for society--a courtesy which she remembered and repaid
later, as we shall see.

But Josie was like a thirsty fly buzzing about a sealed honey-pot, for
this nearness to her idol was both delightful and maddening. She pined
to see, hear, talk with, and study this great and happy woman who could
thrill thousands by her art, and win friends by her virtue, benevolence,
and beauty. This was the sort of actress the girl meant to be, and few
could object if the gift was really hers; for the stage needs just such
women to purify and elevate the profession which should teach as well as
amuse. If kindly Miss Cameron had known what passionate love and longing
burned in the bosom of the little girl whom she idly observed skipping
over the rocks, splashing about the beach, or galloping past her gate on
a Shetland pony, she would have made her happy by a look or a word. But
being tired with her winter's work and busy with her new part, the lady
took no more notice of this young neighbour than of the sea-gulls in the
bay or the daisies dancing in the fields. Nosegays left on her doorstep,
serenades under her garden-wall, and the fixed stare of admiring eyes
were such familiar things that she scarcely minded them; and Josie grew
desperate when all her little attempts failed.

'I might climb that pine-tree and tumble off on her piazza roof, or get
Sheltie to throw me just at her gate and be taken in fainting. It's no
use to try to drown myself when she is bathing. I can't sink, and she'd
only send a man to pull me out. What can I do? I will see her and tell
her my hopes and make her say I can act some day. Mamma would believe
her; and if--oh, if she only would let me study with her, what perfect
joy that would be!'

Josie made these remarks one afternoon as she and Bess prepared for a
swim, a fishing party having prevented their morning bathe.

'You must bide your time, dear, and not be so impatient. Papa promised
to give you a chance before the season is over, and he always manages
things nicely. That will be better than any queer prank of yours,'
answered Bess, tying her pretty hair in a white net to match her suit,
while Josie made a little lobster of herself in scarlet.

'I hate to wait; but I suppose I must. Hope she will bathe this
afternoon, though it is low tide. She told Uncle she should have to go
in then because in the morning people stared so and went on her beach.
Come and have a good dive from the big rock. No one round but nurses and
babies, so we can romp and splash as much as we like.'

Away they went to have a fine time; for the little bay was free from
other bathers, and the babies greatly admired their aquatic gymnastics,
both being expert swimmers.

As they sat dripping on the big rock Josie suddenly gave a clutch that
nearly sent Bess overboard, as she cried excitedly:

'There she is! Look! coming to bathe. How splendid! Oh, if she only
would drown a little and let me save her! or even get her toe nipped by
a crab; anything so I could go and speak!'

'Don't seem to look; she comes to be quiet and enjoy herself. Pretend
we don't see her, that's only civil,' answered Bess, affecting to be
absorbed in a white-winged yacht going by.

'Let's carelessly float that way as if going for seaweed on the rocks.
She can't mind if we are flat on our backs, with only our noses out.
Then when we can't help seeing her, we'll swim back as if anxious to
retire. That will impress her, and she may call to thank the very polite
young ladies who respect her wishes,' proposed Josie, whose lively fancy
was always planning dramatic situations.

Just as they were going to slip from their rock, as if Fate relented at
last, Miss Cameron was seen to beckon wildly as she stood waist-deep in
the water, looking down. She called to her maid, who seemed searching
along the beach for something, and not finding what she sought, waved a
towel towards the girls as if summoning them to help her.

'Run, fly! she wants us, she wants us!' cried Josie, tumbling into the
water like a very energetic turtle, and swimming away in her best style
towards this long desired haven of joy. Bess followed more slowly, and
both came panting and smiling up to Miss Cameron, who never lifted her
eyes, but said in that wonderful voice of hers:

'I've dropped a bracelet. I see it, but can't get it. Will the little
boy find me a long stick? I'll keep my eye on it, so the water shall not
wash it away.'

'I'll dive for it with pleasure; but I'm not a boy,' answered Josie,
laughing as she shook the curly head which at a distance had deceived
the lady.

'I beg your pardon. Dive away, child; the sand is covering it fast. I
value it very much. Never forgot to take it off before.'

'I'll get it!' and down went Josie, to come up with a handful of
pebbles, but no bracelet.

'It's gone; never mind--my fault,' said Miss Cameron, disappointed, but
amused at the girl's dismay as she shook the water out of her eyes and
gasped bravely:

'No, it isn't. I'll have it, if I stay down all night!' and with one
long breath Josie dived again, leaving nothing but a pair of agitated
feet to be seen.

'I'm afraid she will hurt herself,' said Miss Cameron, looking at Bess,
whom she recognized by her likeness to her mother.

'Oh, no; Josie is a little fish. She likes it'; and Bess smiled happily
at this wonderful granting of her cousin's desire.

'You are Mr Laurence's daughter, I think? How d'ye do, dear? Tell papa
I'm coming to see him soon. Too tired before. Quite savage. Better now.
Ah! here's our pearl of divers. What luck?' she asked, as the heels went
down and a dripping head came up.

Josie could only choke and splutter at first, being half strangled;
but though her hands had failed again, her courage had not; and with a
resolute shake of her wet hair, a bright look at the tall lady, and a
series of puffs to fill her lungs, she said calmly:

'"Never give up" is my motto. I'm going to get it, if I go to Liverpool
for it! Now, then!' and down went the mermaid quite out of sight this
time, groping like a real lobster at the bottom of the sea.

'Plucky little girl! I like that. Who is she?' asked the lady, sitting
down on a half-covered stone to watch her diver, since the bracelet was
lost sight of.

Bess told her, adding, with the persuasive smile of her father: 'Josie
longs to be an actress, and has waited for a month to see you. This is a
great happiness for her.'

'Bless the child! why didn't she come and call? I'd have let her in;
though usually I avoid stage-struck girls as I do reporters,' laughed
Miss Cameron.

There was no time for more; a brown hand, grasping the bracelet, rose
out of the sea, followed by a purple face as Josie came up so blind and
dizzy she could only cling to Bess, half drowned but triumphant.

Miss Cameron drew her to the rock where she sat, and pushing the hair
out of her eyes, revived her with a hearty 'Bravo! bravo!' which assured
the girl that her first act was a hit. Josie had often imagined her
meeting with the great actress--the dignity and grace with which she
would enter and tell her ambitious hopes, the effective dress she would
wear, the witty things she would say, the deep impression her budding
genius would make. But never in her wildest moments had she imagined
an interview like this; scarlet, sandy, streaming, and speechless she
leaned against the illustrious shoulder, looking like a beautiful seal
as she blinked and wheezed till she could smile joyfully and exclaim
proudly:

'I did get it! I'm so glad!'

'Now get your breath, my dear; then I shall be glad also. It was very
nice of you to take all that trouble for me. How shall I thank you?'
asked the lady, looking at her with the beautiful eyes that could say so
many things without words.

Josie clasped her hands with a wet spat which rather destroyed the
effect of the gesture, and answered in a beseeching tone that would have
softened a far harder heart than Miss Cameron's:

'Let me come and see you once--only once! I want you to tell me if I
can act; you will know. I'll abide by what you say; and if you think
I can--by and by, when I've studied very hard--I shall be the happiest
girl in the world. May I?'

'Yes; come tomorrow at eleven. We'll have a good talk; you shall show me
what you can do, and I'll give you my opinion. But you won't like it.'

'I will, no matter if you tell me I'm a fool. I want it settled; so
does mamma. I'll take it bravely if you say no; and if you say yes, I'll
never give up till I've done my best--as you did.'

'Ah, my child, it's a weary road, and there are plenty of thorns among
the roses when you've won them. I think you have the courage, and this
proves that you have perseverance. Perhaps you'll do. Come, and we'll
see.'

Miss Cameron touched the bracelet as she spoke, and smiled so kindly
that impetuous Josie wanted to kiss her; but wisely refrained, though
her eyes were wet with softer water than any in the sea as she thanked
her.

'We are keeping Miss Cameron from her bath, and the tide is going out.
Come, Josie,' said thoughtful Bess, fearing to outstay their welcome.

'Run over the beach and get warm. Thank you very much, little mermaid.
Tell papa to bring his daughter to see me any time. Good-bye'; and with
a wave of her hand the tragedy queen dismissed her court, but remained
on her weedy throne watching the two lithe figures race over the sand
with twinkling feet till they were out of sight. Then, as she calmly
bobbed up and down in the water, she said to herself: 'The child has a
good stage face, vivid, mobile; fine eyes, abandon, pluck, will. Perhaps
she'll do. Good stock--talent in the family. We shall see.'

Of course Josie never slept a wink, and was in a fever of joyful
excitement next day. Uncle Laurie enjoyed the episode very much,
and Aunt Amy looked out her most becoming white dress for the grand
occasion; Bess lent her most artistic hat, and Josie ranged the wood
and marsh for a bouquet of wild roses, sweet white azalea, ferns, and
graceful grasses, as the offering of a very grateful heart.

At ten she solemnly arrayed herself, and then sat looking at her neat
gloves and buckled shoes till it was time to go, growing pale and sober
with the thought that her fate was soon to be decided; for, like all
young people she was sure that her whole life could be settled by one
human creature, quite forgetting how wonderfully Providence trains us
by disappointment, surprises us with unexpected success, and turns our
seeming trials into blessings.

'I will go alone: we shall be freer so. Oh, Bess, pray that she may tell
me rightly! So much depends on that! Don't laugh, uncle! It is a very
serious moment for me. Miss Cameron knows that, and will tell you so.
Kiss me, Aunt Amy, since mamma isn't here. If you say I look nice, I'm
quite satisfied. Good-bye.' And with a wave of the hand as much like her
model's as she could make it, Josie departed, looking very pretty and
feeling very tragical.

Sure now of admittance, she boldly rang at the door which excluded so
many, and being ushered into a shady parlour, feasted her eyes upon
several fine portraits of great actors while she waited. She had read
about most of them, and knew their trials and triumphs so well that she
soon forgot herself, and tried to imitate Mrs Siddons as Lady Macbeth,
looking up at the engraving as she held her nosegay like the candle in
the sleep-walking scene, and knit her youthful brows distressfully while
murmuring the speech of the haunted queen. So busy was she that Miss
Cameron watched her for several minutes unseen, then startled her by
suddenly sweeping in with the words upon her lips, the look upon her
face, which made that one of her greatest scenes.

'I never can do it like that; but I'll keep trying, if you say I may,'
cried Josie, forgetting her manners in the intense interest of the
moment.

'Show me what you can do,' answered the actress, wisely plunging into
the middle of things at once, well knowing that no common chat would
satisfy this very earnest little person.

'First let me give you these. I thought you'd like wild things better
than hot-house flowers; and I loved to bring them, as I'd no other way
to thank you for your great kindness to me,' said Josie, offering her
nosegay with a simple warmth that was very sweet.

'I do love them best, and keep my room full of the posies some good
fairy hangs on my gate. Upon my word, I think I've found the fairy
out--these are so like,' she added quickly, as her eye went from the
flowers in her hand to others that stood near by, arranged with the same
taste.

Josie's blush and smile betrayed her before she said, with a look full
of girlish adoration and humility: 'I couldn't help it; I admire you so
much. I know it was a liberty; but as I couldn't get in myself, I loved
to think my posies pleased you.'

Something about the child and her little offering touched the woman,
and, drawing Josie to her, she said, with no trace of actress in face or
voice:

'They did please me, dear, and so do you. I'm tired of praise; and love
is very sweet, when it is simple and sincere like this.'

Josie remembered to have heard, among many other stories, that Miss
Cameron lost her lover years ago, and since had lived only for art.
Now she felt that this might have been true; and pity for the splendid,
lonely life made her face very eloquent, as well as grateful. Then, as
if anxious to forget the past, her new friend said, in the commanding
way that seemed natural to her:

'Let me see what you can do. Juliet, of course. All begin with that.
Poor soul, how she is murdered!'

Now, Josie had intended to begin with Romeo's much-enduring sweetheart,
and follow her up with Bianca, Pauline, and several of the favourite
idols of stage-struck girls; but being a shrewd little person, she
suddenly saw the wisdom of Uncle Laurie's advice, and resolved to
follow it. So instead of the rant Miss Cameron expected, Josie gave poor
Ophelia's mad scene, and gave it very well, having been trained by
the college professor of elocution and done it many times. She was too
young, of course, but the white gown, the loose hair, the real flowers
she scattered over the imaginary grave, added to the illusion; and she
sung the songs sweetly, dropped her pathetic curtsies, and vanished
behind the curtain that divided the rooms with a backward look that
surprised her critical auditor into a quick gesture of applause. Cheered
by that welcome sound, Josie ran back as a little hoyden in one of the
farces she had often acted, telling a story full of fun and naughtiness
at first, but ending with a sob of repentance and an earnest prayer for
pardon.

'Very good! Try again. Better than I expected,' called the voice of the
oracle.

Josie tried Portia's speech, and recited very well, giving due emphasis
to each fine sentence. Then, unable to refrain from what she considered
