soon appeared that she was not there by chance or accident; which leads
us sorrowfully to remark, that in her wrongdoing she often found a ready
companion and supporter in Noddy Newman. She was rather inclined to be a
romp; and though she was not given to "playing with the boys," the
absence of any suitable playmate sometimes led her to invite the
half-reformed vagabond of Woodville to assist in her sport.

"You are a pretty fellow, Noddy Newman!" said she, her pouting lips
giving an added emphasis to her reproachful remark. "Why didn't you come
down to the Point, as you said you would?"

"Because I couldn't, Miss Fanny," growled Noddy. "I had to wash out this
confounded boat-house, or be reported to Miss Bertha."

"Couldn't you do that after you got back?"

"Ben said I must do it before nine o'clock. I wanted to go down to the
Point, as I agreed, but you see I couldn't."

"I waited for you till I got tired out," pouted Fanny; but she neglected
to add that five minutes on ordinary occasions were the full limit of
her patience.

"Hang the old boat-house! I told Ben I wished it was burned up."

"So do I; but come along, Noddy. We will go now."

"I can't go till I've washed out the boat-house."

"Yes, you can."

"But if Ben comes down and finds the place hasn't been washed out, he
will tell Miss Bertha."

"Let him tell her--who cares?"

"She will talk to me for an hour."

"Let her talk--talking won't kill you."

"I don't like to be talked to in that way by Miss Bertha."

"Fiddle-de-dee! You can tell her I wanted you," said Fanny, her eyes
snapping with earnestness.

"Shall I tell her what you wanted me for?" asked Noddy, with a cunning
look.

"Of course you needn't tell her that. But come along, or I shall go
without you."

"No--you wouldn't do that, Miss Fanny. You couldn't."

"Well, won't you come?"

"Not now."

"I can't wait."

"I will go just as soon as I have done washing the boat-house."

"Plague on the boat-house!" snapped Fanny. "I wish it was burned up.
What a nice fire it would make!--wouldn't it, Noddy?"

The bright eyes of the wayward miss sparkled with delight as she thought
of the blazing building; and while her more wayward companion described
the miseries which he daily endured in his regular work, she hardly
listened to him. She seemed to be plotting mischief; but if she was, she
did not make Noddy her confidant this time.

"Come, Noddy," said she, after a few moments' reflection, "I will
promise to make it all right with Bertha."

Noddy dropped the broom with which he had begun to sweep up some chips
and shavings Ben had made in repairing a boat-hook.

"If you will get me out of the scrape, I will go now," said he.

"I will; you may depend upon me."

"Then I will go."

"Where is Ben, now?"

"He has gone up to the house."

"Then you run down to the Point, and bring the boat up to the pier. I am
tired, and don't want to walk down there again."

Noddy was entirely willing, and bounded off like a deer, for he had
fully made up his mind to disobey orders, and his impulsive nature did
not permit him to consider the consequences. He was absent but a few
moments, and presently appeared rowing a small boat up the river. At the
pier he turned the boat, and backed her up to the landing steps.

"All ready, Miss Fanny!" shouted the young boatman, for his companion in
mischief was not in sight.

Still she did not appear; and Noddy was about to go in search of her,
when she came out of the boat-house, and ran down to the steps. Her face
was flushed, and she seemed to be very much agitated. Noddy was afraid,
from her looks, that something had happened to spoil the anticipated
sport of the morning; but she stepped into the boat, and told him, in
hurried tones, to push off.

"What's the matter, Miss Fanny?" he asked, not a little startled by her
appearance.

"Nothing, Noddy; pull away just as fast as ever you can."

"Are we caught?" said he, as he followed Fanny's direction.

"No; caught! no. Why don't you row faster, Noddy? You don't pull worth a
cent."

"I am pulling as hard as I can," replied he, unable to keep pace with
her impatience.

"I wouldn't be seen here now for anything!" exclaimed Fanny, earnestly,
as she glanced back at the boat-house, with a look so uneasy that it
almost unmanned her resolute companion.

Noddy pulled with all his might, and the light boat darted over the
waves with a speed which ought to have satisfied his nervous passenger.
As they reached the point of Van Alstine's Island, a dense smoke was
seen to rise from the boat-house on the pier; and a few moments later,
the whole building was wrapped in flames.




CHAPTER II.

THE CIRCUS AT WHITESTONE.


"Do you see that?" exclaimed Noddy, as he stopped rowing, and gazed at
the flames which leaped madly up from the devoted building.

"I see it," replied Fanny, with even more agitation than was manifested
by her companion.

"I don't understand it," added Noddy.

"The boat-house is on fire, and will burn up in a few minutes more. I
think it is plain enough;" and Fanny struggled to be calm and
indifferent.

"We must go back and see to it."

"We shall do nothing of the kind. Pull away as hard as ever you can, or
we shall not get to Whitestone in season."

"I don't care about going to Whitestone now; I want to know what all
that means."

"Can't you see what it means? The boat-house is on fire."

"Well, how did it catch afire? That's what bothers me."

"You needn't bother yourself about it. My father owns the boat-house,
and it isn't worth much."

"All that may be; but I want to know how it got afire."

"We shall find out soon enough when we return."

"But I want to know now."

"You can't know now; so pull away."

"I shall have the credit of setting that fire," added Noddy, not a
little disturbed by the anticipation.

"No, you won't."

"Yes, I shall. I told Ben I wished the boat-house would catch afire and
burn up. Of course he will lay it to me."

"No matter if he does; Ben isn't everybody."

"Well, he is 'most everybody, so far as Miss Bertha is concerned; and
I'd rather tumbled overboard in December than have that fire happen just
now."

"You were not there when the fire broke out," said Fanny, with a strong
effort to satisfy her boatman.

"That's the very reason why they will lay it to me. They will say I set
the boat-house afire, and then ran away on purpose."

"I can say you were with me when the fire broke out, and that I know you
didn't do it," replied Fanny.

"That will do; but I would give all my old shoes to know how the fire
took, myself."

"No matter how it took."

"Yes, it is matter, Miss Fanny. I want to know. There wasn't any fire in
the building when I left it."

"Perhaps somebody stopped there in a boat, and set it on fire."

"Perhaps they did; but I know very well they didn't," answered Noddy,
positively. "There hasn't been any boat near the pier since we left it."

"Perhaps Ben left his pipe among those shavings."

"Ben never did that. He would cut his head off sooner than do such a
thing. He is as scared of fire as he is of the Flying Dutchman."

"Don't say anything more about it. Now row over to Whitestone as quick
as you can," added Fanny, petulantly.

"I'm not going over to Whitestone, after what has happened. I shouldn't
have a bit of fun if I went."

"Very well, Noddy; then you may get out of the scrape as you can," said
the young lady, angrily.

"What scrape?"

"Why, they will accuse you of setting the boat-house afire; and you told
Ben you wished it was burned down."

"But I didn't set it afire."

"Who did, then?"

"That's just what I want to find out. That's what worries me; for I
can't see how it happened, unless it took fire from that bucket of water
I left on the floor."

Fanny was too much disturbed by the conduct of her boatman, or by some
other circumstance, to laugh at Noddy's joke; and the brilliant sally
was permitted to waste itself without an appreciative smile. She sat
looking at the angry flames as they devoured the building, while her
companion vainly attempted to hit upon a satisfactory explanation of the
cause of the fire. Noddy was perplexed; he was absolutely worried, not
so much by the probable consequences to himself of the unfortunate
event, as by the cravings of his own curiosity. He did not see how it
happened; and if a potent juggler had performed a wonderful feat in his
presence, he could not have been more exercised in mind to know how it
was done.

Noddy was neither a logician nor a philosopher; and therefore he was
utterly unable to account for the origin of the fire. In vain he wasted
his intellectual powers in speculations; in vain he tried to remember
some exciting cause to which the calamity could be traced. Meanwhile,
Miss Fanny was deliberating quite as diligently over another question;
for she apparently regarded the destruction of the boat-house as a small
affair, and did not concern herself to know how it had been caused. But
she was very anxious to reach Whitestone before ten o'clock, and her
rebellious boatman had intimated his intention not to carry out his part
of the agreement.

"What are you thinking about, Noddy?" asked she, when both had
maintained silence for the full space of three minutes, which was a
longer period than either of them had ever before kept still while
awake.

"I was thinking of that fire," replied Noddy, removing his gaze from the
burning building, and fixing it upon her.

"Are you going to Whitestone, or not?" continued she, impatiently.

"No; I don't want to go to Whitestone, while all of them down there are
talking about me, and saying I set the boat-house afire."

"They will believe you did it, too."

"But I didn't, Miss Fanny. You know I didn't."

"How should I know it?"

"Because I was with you; besides, you came out of the boat-house after I
did."

"If you will row me over to Whitestone, I will say so; and I will tell
them I know you didn't do it."

Noddy considered the matter for a moment, and, perhaps concluding that
it was safer for him to keep on the right side of Miss Fanny, he
signified his acceptance of the terms by taking up his oars, and pulling
towards Whitestone. But he was not satisfied; he was as uneasy as a fish
out of water; and nothing but the tyranny of the wayward young lady in
the boat would have induced him to flee from the trouble which was
brewing at Woodville. He had quite lost sight of the purpose which had
induced him to disobey Bertha's orders.

Our young adventurers had not left Woodville without an object. There
was a circus at Whitestone--a travelling company which had advertised to
give three grand performances on that day. Miss Fanny wanted to go; but,
either because her father was otherwise occupied, or because he did not
approve of circuses, he had declined to go with her. Bertha did not
want to go, and also had an engagement.

Fanny had set her heart upon going; and she happened to be too wilful,
just at that period, to submit to the disappointment to which her
father's convenience or his principles doomed her. Bertha had gone to
the city at an early hour in the morning to spend the day with a friend,
and Fanny decided that she would go to the circus, in spite of all
obstacles, and in the face of her father's implied prohibition. When she
had proceeded far enough to rebel, in her own heart, against the will of
her father, the rest of the deed was easily accomplished.

Noddy had never been to a circus; and when Fanny told him what it
was,--how men rode standing up on their horses; how they turned
somersets, and played all sorts of antics on the tight rope and the
slack rope; and, above all, what funny things the clowns said and
did,--he was quite ready to do almost anything to procure so rare a
pleasure as witnessing such a performance must afford him. It did not
require any persuasion to induce him to assist Fanny in her
disobedience. The only obstacle which had presented itself was his
morning work in the boat-house, which Bertha's departure for the city
had prevented him from doing at an earlier hour.

To prevent Ben from suspecting that they were on the water, in case they
should happen to be missed, he had borrowed a boat and placed it at the
Point, where they could embark without being seen, if Ben or any of the
servants happened to be near the pier. The boatman, who made it his
business to see that Noddy did his work on time in the morning, did not
neglect his duty on this occasion; and when Noddy started to meet Fanny
at the appointed place, he had been called back, as described in the
first chapter.
