been playing a trick!  When he had been sorry for her pain and had
winced at the sound of her low exclamation, she had been deliberately
laying a trap to harm him.  For a few seconds he was stunned--perhaps,
if he had not been his father's son, he might have been stunned only.
But he was more.  When the first seconds had passed, there arose slowly
within him a sense of something like high, remote disdain.  It grew in
his deep boy's eyes as he gazed directly into the pupils of the long
soft dark ones.  His body felt as if it were growing taller.

"You are very clever," he said slowly.  Then, after a second's pause,
he added, "I was too young to know that there was any one
so--clever--in the world."

The Lovely Person laughed, but she did not laugh easily.  She spoke to
her companion.

"A grand seigneur!" she said.  "As one looks at him, one half believes
it is true."

The man with the beard was looking very angry.  His eyes were savage
and his dark skin reddened.  Marco thought that he looked at him as if
he hated him, and was made fierce by the mere sight of him, for some
mysterious reason.

"Two days before you left Moscow," he said, "three men came to see your
father.  They looked like peasants.  They talked to him for more than
an hour.  They brought with them a roll of parchment.  Is that not
true?"

"I know nothing," said Marco.

"Before you went to Moscow, you were in Budapest.  You went there from
Vienna.  You were there for three months, and your father saw many
people.  Some of them came in the middle of the night."

"I know nothing," said Marco.

"You have spent your life in traveling from one country to another,"
persisted the man.  "You know the European languages as if you were a
courier, or the _portier_ in a Viennese hotel.  Do you not?"

Marco did not answer.

The Lovely Person began to speak to the man rapidly in Russian.

"A spy and an adventurer Stefan Loristan has always been and always
will be," she said.  "We know what he is.  The police in every capital
in Europe know him as a sharper and a vagabond, as well as a spy.  And
yet, with all his cleverness, he does not seem to have money.  What did
he do with the bribe the Maranovitch gave him for betraying what he
knew of the old fortress?  The boy doesn't even suspect him.  Perhaps
it's true that he knows nothing.  Or perhaps it is true that he has
been so ill-treated and flogged from his babyhood that he dare not
speak. There is a cowed look in his eyes in spite of his childish
swagger.  He's been both starved and beaten."

The outburst was well done.  She did not look at Marco as she poured
forth her words.  She spoke with the abruptness and impetuosity of a
person whose feelings had got the better of her. If Marco was sensitive
about his father, she felt sure that his youth would make his face
reveal something if his tongue did not--if he understood Russian, which
was one of the things it would be useful to find out, because it was a
fact which would verify many other things.

Marco's face disappointed her.  No change took place in it, and the
blood did not rise to the surface of his skin.  He listened with an
uninterested air, blank and cold and polite.  Let them say what they
chose.

The man twisted his pointed beard and shrugged his shoulders.

"We have a good little wine-cellar downstairs," he said.  "You are
going down into it, and you will probably stay there for some time if
you do not make up your mind to answer my questions.  You think that
nothing can happen to you in a house in a London street where policemen
walk up and down.  But you are mistaken. If you yelled now, even if any
one chanced to hear you, they would only think you were a lad getting a
thrashing he deserved. You can yell as much as you like in the black
little wine-cellar, and no one will hear at all.  We only took this
house for three months, and we shall leave it to-night without
mentioning the fact to any one.  If we choose to leave you in the
wine-cellar, you will wait there until somebody begins to notice that
no one goes in and out, and chances to mention it to the
landlord--which few people would take the trouble to do.  Did you come
here from Moscow?"

"I know nothing," said Marco.

"You might remain in the good little black cellar an unpleasantly long
time before you were found," the man went on, quite coolly.  "Do you
remember the peasants who came to see your father two nights before you
left?"

"I know nothing," said Marco.

"By the time it was discovered that the house was empty and people came
in to make sure, you might be too weak to call out and attract their
attention.  Did you go to Budapest from Vienna, and were you there for
three months?" asked the inquisitor.

"I know nothing," said Marco.

"You are too good for the little black cellar," put in the Lovely
Person.  "I like you.  Don't go into it!"

"I know nothing," Marco answered, but the eyes which were like
Loristan's gave her just such a look as Loristan would have given her,
and she felt it.  It made her uncomfortable.

"I don't believe you were ever ill-treated or beaten," she said.  "I
tell you, the little black cellar will be a hard thing.  Don't go
there!"

And this time Marco said nothing, but looked at her still as if he were
some great young noble who was very proud.

He knew that every word the bearded man had spoken was true.  To cry
out would be of no use.  If they went away and left him behind them,
there was no knowing how many days would pass before the people of the
neighborhood would begin to suspect that the place had been deserted,
or how long it would be before it occurred to some one to give warning
to the owner.  And in the meantime, neither his father nor Lazarus nor
The Rat would have the faintest reason for guessing where he was.  And
he would be sitting alone in the dark in the wine-cellar.  He did not
know in the least what to do about this thing.  He only knew that
silence was still the order.

"It is a jet-black little hole," the man said.  "You might crack your
throat in it, and no one would hear.  Did men come to talk with your
father in the middle of the night when you were in Vienna?"

"I know nothing," said Marco.

"He won't tell," said the Lovely Person.  "I am sorry for this boy."

"He may tell after he has sat in the good little black wine-cellar for
a few hours," said the man with the pointed beard.  "Come with me!"

He put his powerful hand on Marco's shoulder and pushed him before him.
Marco made no struggle.  He remembered what his father had said about
the game not being a game.  It wasn't a game now, but somehow he had a
strong haughty feeling of not being afraid.

He was taken through the hallway, toward the rear, and down the
commonplace flagged steps which led to the basement.  Then he was
marched through a narrow, ill-lighted, flagged passage to a door in the
wall.  The door was not locked and stood a trifle ajar. His companion
pushed it farther open and showed part of a wine-cellar which was so
dark that it was only the shelves nearest the door that Marco could
faintly see.  His captor pushed him in and shut the door.  It was as
black a hole as he had described. Marco stood still in the midst of
darkness like black velvet. His guard turned the key.

"The peasants who came to your father in Moscow spoke Samavian and were
big men.  Do you remember them?" he asked from outside.

"I know nothing," answered Marco.

"You are a young fool," the voice replied.  "And I believe you know
even more than we thought.  Your father will be greatly troubled when
you do not come home.  I will come back to see you in a few hours, if
it is possible.  I will tell you, however, that I have had disturbing
news which might make it necessary for us to leave the house in a
hurry.  I might not have time to come down here again before leaving."

Marco stood with his back against a bit of wall and remained silent.

There was stillness for a few minutes, and then there was to be heard
the sound of footsteps marching away.

When the last distant echo died all was quite silent, and Marco drew a
long breath.  Unbelievable as it may appear, it was in one sense almost
a breath of relief.  In the rush of strange feeling which had swept
over him when he found himself facing the astounding situation
up-stairs, it had not been easy to realize what his thoughts really
were; there were so many of them and they came so fast.  How could he
quite believe the evidence of his eyes and ears?  A few minutes, only a
few minutes, had changed his prettily grateful and kindly acquaintance
into a subtle and cunning creature whose love for Samavia had been part
of a plot to harm it and to harm his father.

What did she and her companion want to do--what could they do if they
knew the things they were trying to force him to tell?

Marco braced his back against the wall stoutly.

"What will it be best to think about first?"

This he said because one of the most absorbingly fascinating things he
and his father talked about together was the power of the thoughts
which human beings allow to pass through their minds--the strange
strength of them.  When they talked of this, Marco felt as if he were
listening to some marvelous Eastern story of magic which was true.  In
Loristan's travels, he had visited the far Oriental countries, and he
had seen and learned many things which seemed marvels, and they had
taught him deep thinking.  He had known, and reasoned through days with
men who believed that when they desired a thing, clear and exalted
thought would bring it to them.  He had discovered why they believed
this, and had learned to understand their profound arguments.

What he himself believed, he had taught Marco quite simply from his
childhood.  It was this: he himself--Marco, with the strong boy-body,
the thick mat of black hair, and the patched clothes--was the magician.
He held and waved his wand himself--and his wand was his own Thought.
When special privation or anxiety beset them, it was their rule to say,
"What will it be best to think about first?" which was Marco's reason
for saying it to himself now as he stood in the darkness which was like
black velvet.

He waited a few minutes for the right thing to come to him.

"I will think of the very old hermit who lived on the ledge of the
mountains in India and who let my father talk to him through all one
night," he said at last.  This had been a wonderful story and one of
his favorites.  Loristan had traveled far to see this ancient Buddhist,
and what he had seen and heard during that one night had made changes
in his life.  The part of the story which came back to Marco now was
these words:

"Let pass through thy mind, my son, only the image thou wouldst desire
to see a truth.  Meditate only upon the wish of thy heart, seeing first
that it can injure no man and is not ignoble.  Then will it take
earthly form and draw near to thee.  This is the law of that which
creates."

"I am not afraid," Marco said aloud.  "I shall not be afraid. In some
way I shall get out."

This was the image he wanted most to keep steadily in his mind--that
nothing could make him afraid, and that in some way he would get out of
the wine-cellar.

He thought of this for some minutes, and said the words over several
times.  He felt more like himself when he had done it.

"When my eyes are accustomed to the darkness, I shall see if there is
any little glimmer of light anywhere," he said next.

He waited with patience, and it seemed for some time that he saw no
glimmer at all.  He put out his hands on either side of him, and found
that, on the side of the wall against which he stood, there seemed to
be no shelves.  Perhaps the cellar had been used for other purposes
than the storing of wine, and, if that was true, there might be
somewhere some opening for ventilation.  The air was not bad, but then
the door had not been shut tightly when the man opened it.

"I am not afraid," he repeated.  "I shall not be afraid.  In some way I
shall get out."

He would not allow himself to stop and think about his father waiting
for his return.  He knew that would only rouse his emotions and weaken
his courage.  He began to feel his way carefully along the wall.  It
reached farther than he had thought it would.

The cellar was not so very small.  He crept round it gradually, and,
when he had crept round it, he made his way across it, keeping his
hands extended before him and setting down each foot cautiously.  Then
he sat down on the stone floor and thought again, and what he thought
was of the things the old Buddhist had told his father, and that there
was a way out of this place for him, and he should somehow find it,
and, before too long a time had passed, be walking in the street again.

It was while he was thinking in this way that he felt a startling
thing.  It seemed almost as if something touched him.  It made him
jump, though the touch was so light and soft that it was scarcely a
touch at all, in fact he could not be sure that he had not imagined it.
He stood up and leaned against the wall again. Perhaps the suddenness
of his movement placed him at some angle he had not reached before, or
perhaps his eyes had become more completely accustomed to the darkness,
for, as he turned his head to listen, he made a discovery: above the
door there was a place where the velvet blackness was not so dense.
There was something like a slit in the wall, though, as it did not open
upon daylight but upon the dark passage, it was not light it admitted
so much as a lesser shade of darkness.  But even that was better than
nothing, and Marco drew another long breath.

"That is only the beginning.  I shall find a way out," he said.

"I SHALL."

He remembered reading a story of a man who, being shut by accident in a
safety vault, passed through such terrors before his release that he
believed he had spent two days and nights in the place when he had been
there only a few hours.

"His thoughts did that.  I must remember.  I will sit down again and
begin thinking of all the pictures in the cabinet rooms of the Art
History Museum in Vienna.  It will take some time, and then there are
the others," he said.

It was a good plan.  While he could keep his mind upon the game which
had helped him to pass so many dull hours, he could think of nothing
else, as it required close attention--and perhaps, as the day went on,
his captors would begin to feel that it was not safe to run the risk of
doing a thing as desperate as this would be.  They might think better
of it before they left the house at least.  In any case, he had learned
enough from Loristan to realize that only harm could come from letting
one's mind run wild.

"A mind is either an engine with broken and flying gear, or a giant
power under control," was the thing they knew.

He had walked in imagination through three of the cabinet rooms and was
turning mentally into a fourth, when he found himself starting again
quite violently. This time it was not at a touch but at a sound. Surely
it was a sound. And it was in the cellar with him. But it was the
tiniest possible noise, a ghost of a squeak and a suggestion of a
movement. It came from the opposite side of the cellar, the side where
the shelves were. He looked across in the darkness, and in the darkness
saw a light which there could be no mistake about. It _was_ a light, two
lights indeed, two round phosphorescent greenish balls. They were two
eyes staring at him. And then he heard another sound. Not a squeak this
time, but something so homely and comfortable that he actually burst out
laughing. It was a cat purring, a nice warm cat! And she was curled up
on one of the lower shelves purring to some new-born kittens. He knew
there were kittens because it was plain now what the tiny squeak had
been, and it was made plainer by the fact that he heard another much
more distinct one and then another. They had all been asleep when he had
come into the cellar. If the mother had been awake, she had probably
been very much afraid. Afterward she had perhaps come down from her
shelf to investigate, and had passed close to him. The feeling of relief
which came upon him at this queer and simple discovery was wonderful. It
was so natural and comfortable an every-day thing that it seemed to make
spies and criminals unreal, and only natural things possible. With a
mother cat purring away among her kittens, even a dark wine-cellar was
not so black. He got up and kneeled by the shelf. The greenish eyes did
not shine in an unfriendly way. He could feel that the owner of them was
a nice big cat, and he counted four round little balls of kittens. It
was a curious delight to stroke the soft fur and talk to the mother cat.
She answered with purring, as if she liked the sense of friendly human
nearness. Marco laughed to himself.



"It's queer what a difference it makes!" he said.  "It is almost like
finding a window."

The mere presence of these harmless living things was companionship.
He sat down close to the low shelf and listened to the motherly
purring, now and then speaking and putting out his hand to touch the
warm fur.  The phosphorescent light in the green eyes was a comfort in
itself.

"We shall get out of this--both of us," he said.  "We shall not be here
very long, Puss-cat."

He was not troubled by the fear of being really hungry for some time.
He was so used to eating scantily from necessity, and to passing long
hours without food during his journeys, that he had proved to himself
that fasting is not, after all, such a desperate ordeal as most people
imagine.  If you begin by expecting to feel famished and by counting
the hours between your meals, you will begin to be ravenous.  But he
knew better.

The time passed slowly; but he had known it would pass slowly, and he
had made up his mind not to watch it nor ask himself questions about
it.  He was not a restless boy, but, like his father, could stand or
sit or lie still.  Now and then he could hear distant rumblings of
carts and vans passing in the street. There was a certain degree of
companionship in these also.  He kept his place near the cat and his
hand where he could occasionally touch her.  He could lift his eyes now
and then to the place where the dim glimmer of something like light
showed itself.

Perhaps the stillness, perhaps the darkness, perhaps the purring of the
mother cat, probably all three, caused his thoughts to begin to travel
through his mind slowly and more slowly.  At last they ceased and he
fell asleep.  The mother cat purred for some time, and then fell asleep
herself.



XV

A SOUND IN A DREAM

Marco slept peacefully for several hours.  There was nothing to awaken
