"A what?"

"A dead-beat. Don't you understand English?"

"He told me that he did business on Wall street."

The boot-black shrieked with laughter.

"He do business on Wall street!" he repeated. "You're jolly green, you
are!"

Frank was inclined to be angry, but he had the good sense to see that
his new friend was right. So he said good-humoredly, "I suppose I am.
You see I am not used to the city."

"It's just such fellows as you he gets hold of," continued the
boot-black. "Didn't he make you treat?"

"I may as well confess it," thought Frank. "This boy may help me with
advice."

"Yes," he said aloud. "I hadn't but twenty-five cents, and he made me
spend it all. I haven't a cent left."

"Whew!" ejaculated the other boy. "You're beginnin' business on a small
capital."

"That's so," said Frank. "Do you know any way I can earn money?"

Dick Rafferty was a good-natured boy, although rough, and now that Frank
had appealed to him for advice he felt willing to help him, if he could.

"What can you do?" he asked, in a business-like tone. "Have you ever
worked?"

"Yes," answered Frank.

"What can you do?"

"I can milk cows, hoe corn and potatoes, ride horse to plough, and--"

"Hold up!" said Dick. "All them things aint goin' to do you no good in
New York. People don't keep cows as a reg'lar thing here."

"Of course I know that."

"And there aint much room for plantin' corn and potatoes. Maybe you
could get a job over in Jersey."

"I'd rather stay in New York. I can do something here."

"Can you black boots, or sell papers?"

"I can learn."

"You need money to set up in either of them lines," said Dick Rafferty.

"Would twenty-five cents have been enough?" asked Frank.

"You could have bought some evening papers with that."

"I wish somebody would lend me some money," said Frank; "I'd pay it back
as soon as I'd sold my papers. I was a fool to let that fellow swindle
me."

"That's so," assented Dick; "but it's no good thinkin' of that now. I'd
lend you the money myself, if I had it; but I've run out my account at
the Park Bank, and can't spare the money just at present."

"How long have you been in business?" asked Frank.

"Ever since I was eight years old; and I'm goin' on fifteen now."

"You went to work early."

"Yes, I had to. Father and mother both died, and I was left to take care
of myself."

"You took care of yourself when you were only eight years old?" asked
Frank, in surprise.

"Yes."

"Then I ought to make a living, for I am fifteen,--a year older than you
are now."

"Oh, you'll get along when you get started," said Dick, encouragingly.
"There's lots of things to do."

"Is there anything to do that doesn't require any capital?" inquired
Frank, anxiously.

"Yes, you can smash baggage."

"Will people pay for that?" asked Frank, with a smile.

"Of course they will. You jest hang round the ferries and steamboat
landin's, and when a chap comes by with a valise or carpet-bag, you jest
offer to carry it, that's all."

"Is that what you call smashing baggage?"

"Of course. What did you think it was?"

Frank evaded answering, not caring to display his country ignorance.

"Do you think I can get a chance to do that?" he asked.

"You can try it and see."

"I came in by the Hartford boat myself, to-day," said Frank. "If I'd
thought of it, I would have begun at once."

"Only you wouldn't have knowed the way anywhere, and if a gentleman
asked you to carry his valise to any hotel you'd have had to ask where
it was."

"So I should," Frank admitted.

"I'll show you round a little, if you want me to," said Dick. "I shan't
have anything to do for an hour or two."

"I wish you would."

So the two boys walked about in the lower part of the city, Dick
pointing out hotels, public buildings, and prominent streets. Frank had
a retentive memory, and stored away the information carefully. Penniless
as he was, he was excited and exhilarated by the scene of activity in
which he was moving, and was glad he was going to live in it, or to
attempt doing so.

"When I am used to it I shall like it much better than the country," he
said to Dick. "Don't you?"

"I don't know about that," was the reply. "Sometimes I think I'll go
West;--a lot of boys that I know have gone there."

"Won't it take a good deal of money to go?" asked Frank.

"Oh, there's a society that pays boys' expenses, and finds 'em nice
homes with the farmers. Tom Harrison, one of my friends, went out six
weeks ago, and he writes me that it's bully. He's gone to some town in
Kansas."

"That's a good way off."

"I wouldn't mind that. I'd like ridin' in the cars."

"It would be something new to you; but I've lived in the country all my
life, I'd rather stay here awhile."

"It's just the way a feller feels," said Dick philosophically. "I've
bummed around so much I'd like a good, stiddy home, with three square
meals a day and a good bed to sleep on."

"Can't you get that here?" asked Frank.

"Not stiddy. Sometimes I don't get but one square meal a day."

Frank became thoughtful. Life in the city seemed more precarious and
less desirable than he anticipated.

"Well, I must go to work again," said Dick, after a while.

"Where are you going to sleep to-night?" asked Frank.

"I don't know whether I'd better sleep at the Astor House or Fifth
avenue," said Dick.

Frank looked perplexed.

"You don't mean that, do you?" he asked.

"Of course I don't. You're too fresh. Don't get mad," he continued
good-naturedly, seeing the flush on Frank's cheek. "You'll know as much
about the city as I do before long. I shall go to the Newsboys' Lodgin'
House, where I can sleep for six cents."

"I wish I had six cents," said Frank. "If I could only get work I'd soon
earn it. You can't think of anything for me to do, can you?"

Dick's face lighted up.

"Yes," he said, "I can get you a job, though it aint a very good one. I
wonder I didn't think of it before."

"What is it?" asked Frank, anxiously.

"It's to go round with a blind man, solicitin' contributions."

"You mean begging?"

"Yes; you lead him into stores and countin' rooms, and he asks for
money."

"I don't like it much," said Frank, slowly, "but I must do something.
After all, it'll be he that's begging, not I."

"I'll take you right round where he lives," said Dick. "Maybe he'll go
out this evenin'. His other boy give him the slip, and he hasn' got a
new one yet."




CHAPTER III.

FRANK FINDS AN EMPLOYER.


A stone's throw from Centre street stands a tall tenement-house,
sheltering anywhere from forty to fifty families in squalid
wretchedness. The rent which each family pays would procure a neat house
in a country town, with perhaps a little land beside; but the city has a
mysterious fascination for the poorer classes, and year after year many
who might make the change herd together in contracted and noisome
quarters, when they might have their share of light and space in country
neighborhoods.

It was in front of this tenement-house that Dick halted, and plunged
into a dark entrance, admonishing Frank to follow. Up creaking and
dilapidated staircases to the fourth floor the boys went.

"Here we are," said Dick, panting a little from the rapidity of his
ascent, and began a vigorous tattoo on a door to the left.

"Is this where the blind gentleman lives?" asked Frank, looking around
him dubiously.

"He isn't much of a gentleman to look at," said Dick, laughing. "Do you
hear him?"

Frank heard a hoarse growl from the inside, which might have been "Come
in." At any rate, Dick chose so to interpret it, and opened the door.

The boys found themselves in a scantily furnished room, with a close,
disagreeable smell pervading the atmosphere. In the corner was a low
bedstead, on which lay a tall man, with a long, gray beard, and a
disagreeable, almost repulsive, countenance. He turned his eyes, which,
contrary to Frank's expectations, were wide open, full upon his
visitors.

"What do you want?" he asked querulously. "I was asleep, and you have
waked me up."

"Sorry to disturb you, Mr. Mills," said Dick; "but I come on business."

"What business can you have with me?" demanded the blind man. "Who are
you?"

"I am Dick Rafferty. I black boots in the Park," replied Dick.

"Well, I haven't got any money to pay for blacking boots."

"I didn't expect you had. I hear your boy has left you."

"Yes, the young rascal! He's given me the slip. I expect he's robbed me
too; but I can't tell, for I'm blind."

"Do you want a new boy?"

"Yes; but I can't pay much. I'm very poor. I don't think the place will
suit you."

"Nor I either," said Dick, frankly. "I'd rather make a living outside.
But I've got a boy with me who has just come to the city, and is out of
business. I guess he'll engage with you."

"What's his name? Let him speak for himself."

"My name is Frank Kavanagh," said our hero, in a clear, distinct voice.

"How old are you?"

"Fifteen."

"Do you know what your duties will be?"

"Yes; Dick has told me."

"I told him you'd want him to go round on a collecting tour with you
every day," said Dick.

"That isn't all. You'll have to buy my groceries and all I need."

"I can do that," said Frank, cheerfully, reflecting that this would be
much more agreeable than accompanying the old man round the streets.

"Are you honest?" queried the blind man, sharply.

Frank answered, with an indignant flush, "I never stole a cent in my
life."

"I supposed you'd say that," retorted the blind man, with a sneer. "They
all do; but a good many will steal for all that."

"If you're afraid I will, you needn't hire me," said Frank,
independently.

"Of course I needn't," said Mills, sharply; "but I am not afraid. If you
take any of my money I shall be sure to find it out, if I am blind."

"Don't mind him, Frank," said Dick, in a low voice.

"What's that?" asked the blind man, suspiciously. "What are you two
whispering about?"

"I told Frank not to mind the way you spoke," said Dick.

"Your friend will lend you some, then."

"Not much," answered Dick, laughing. "I'm dead-broke. Haven't you got
any money, Mr. Mills?"

"I have a little," grumbled the blind man; "but this boy may take it,
and never come back."

"If you think so," said Frank, proudly, "you'd better engage some other
boy."

"No use; you're all alike. Wait a minute, and I'll give you some money."

He drew from his pocket a roll of scrip, and handed one to Frank.

"I don't think that will be enough," said Frank. "It's only five cents."

"Are you sure it isn't a quarter?" grumbled Mills.

"Yes, sir."

"What do you say,--you, Dick?"

"It's only five cents, sir."

"Is that twenty-five?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then take it, and mind you don't loiter."

"Yes, sir."

"And be sure to bring back the change."

"Of course I will," said Frank indignantly, resenting his employer's
suspicion.

"What do you think of him, Frank?" asked Dick, as they descended the
stairs.

"I don't like him at all, Dick," said Frank, decidedly. "I wish I could
