looked very attractive with its clean white cloth, its pretty china,
and its vases of flowers in the middle. She had a good view of her
schoolfellows, more than half of whom seemed of about the same age as
herself, though there were tall girls, with their hair already put up,
and a few younger ones who had apparently only just entered their
teens. Grace was sung, and then the urns began to fill an almost
ceaseless stream of cups, while plates of bread and butter circulated
with much rapidity.

"We're late to-day," explained Honor's neighbour, "because the train
from the North does not get in until five. Our usual tea-time is four
o'clock, after games; then we have supper at half-past seven, when
we've finished evening preparation. Did you bring any jam? Your hamper
will be unpacked to-morrow, and the pots labelled with your name. I
expect you'll find one opposite your plate at breakfast. Jam and
marmalade are the only things we're allowed, except plain cakes."

Tea on the first afternoon was generally an exciting occasion at St.
Chad's. There were so many greetings between old friends, so much news
and such various topics to be discussed, that conversation, in a
sufficiently subdued undertone, went on very briskly. The girls had
enjoyed their Easter holidays, but most of them seemed pleased to
return to school, for the summer term was always the favourite at
Chessington College.

"Have you heard who's in the Eleven?" began Madge Summers. "They've
actually put in Grace Shaw, and she bowls abominably. I think it's rank
favouritism on Miss Young's part. She always gives St. Hilary's a turn
when she can."

"She was a Hilaryite herself," returned Adeline Vaughan. "That's the
worst of having a games mistress who's been educated at the school;
she's sure to show partiality for her old house."

"And yet in one way it's better, because she understands all our
customs and private rules. It would be almost impossible to explain
everything to a new-comer."

"What about the house team?" asked Ruth Latimer. "Is anything fixed?"

"Not yet. There's to be a practice to-morrow, and it will go by our
scores."

"I shall stick to tennis," declared Pauline Reynolds. "One gets a fair
chance there, at any rate, and we must keep up the credit of St. Chad's
in the courts. I don't know whether we've any chance of winning the
shield. I wish we could get a real champion!"

"You should see Flossie Taylor play!" burst out Edith and Claudia
Hammond-Smith, who were anxious to bring their cousin forward, and to
ensure her popularity among the other girls.

"I've not heard that she made any record at St. Bride's," remarked
Dorothy Arkwright, who resented Flossie's removal to St. Chad's.

"She hasn't had an opportunity. She only came to school last Christmas,
and it wasn't the tennis season. Wait till you see her serve!"

"Miss Young will have to be judge, not I," replied Dorothy coldly.

"Flossie is in your bedroom, Dorothy," announced Claudia. "She has the
cubicle near the fireplace."

"If you're sleeping in the bed next to mine," said Flossie, eyeing
Dorothy across the table with a rather patronizing air, "I sincerely
hope you don't snore."

"Of course not!" responded Dorothy, in some indignation.

"At St. Bride's," continued Flossie, "one of my room-mates snored
atrociously. I used to have to get up and shake her, and pull the
pillow from under her head, before I could go to sleep."

"You'd better not try that on with me!"

"I would, in a minute, if you kept me awake."

"It is a shame she's not in our room," interposed Edith. "We've asked
Miss Maitland to let her change with Geraldine Saunders, and I think
perhaps she may. We want Flossie all to ourselves; I do hope she'll let
us!"

"So do I!" retorted Dorothy feelingly. "The Hammond-Smiths are welcome
to their cousin, so far as I'm concerned," she whispered to Chatty
Burns; "I don't like her. She's trying to show off. Edith and Claudia
are making far too much fuss over her."

"They always gush," commented Chatty. "Still, I dare say Flossie will
need taking down a little."

"It would do her all the good in the world," replied Dorothy. Then,
turning to the Hammond-Smiths, she remarked aloud: "There's a new girl
here who may be just as good as your cousin, for anything we know.
Honor Fitzgerald, do you play tennis?"

"I can play, but how you'll like it is another story," answered Honor.
"We two," nodding at Flossie, "had better try a set by ourselves, and
then you can choose the winner."

"I'm sure I don't care about it, thank you." Flossie's tone was
supercilious.

"All right! We don't force ourselves where we're not wanted in my part
of the world."

"Is that Ireland? Then I suppose your name is Biddy?"

"Certainly not!"

"I thought all Irish girls were called Biddy; are you sure you're not?"

"My name is Honor Fitzgerald."

"Really! I'm astonished it isn't Mulligan, or O'Grady."

The Hammond-Smiths giggled, and poked Effie and Blanche Lawson.

"Isn't Flossie funny?" they whispered delightedly.

"I think she's very rude," observed Dorothy Arkwright. "I call that an
extremely cheap form of wit."

"Irish names are often rather peculiar," drawled Claudia Hammond-Smith.

"They're quite as good as English ones, and sometimes a great deal more
ancient and aristocratic," returned Honor.

"One for Claudia, and for Flossie Taylor too!" said Dorothy to Chatty
Burns.

"Paddy, for instance," interposed Flossie, who saw that the Lawsons
were listening, as well as her cousins. "St. Patrick and pigs always go
together, in my mind. I suppose you keep a pig in Ireland?"

"Don't answer her!" whispered Honor's neighbour. "They're only teasing
you because you're new. They want to see how much you'll stand."

But poor Honor was unaccustomed as yet to schoolgirl banter, and could
not abstain from replying:

"Does it matter whether we do or not?"

She spoke quietly, but there was a gleam in her eye, as if her temper
were rising.

"Not in the least! I only thought all Irish people cultivated pigs."

"It's no worse than keeping a cat, or a dog."

"My dear Paddy, of course not! Still, I shouldn't care to have the
creatures in the drawing-room. Take a little more bread and butter. I'm
sorry we've no potatoes to offer you."

The Hammond-Smiths and the Lawsons tittered, and Dorothy Arkwright was
about to state her frank opinion of their behaviour when Honor's
pent-up wrath exploded.

"We don't keep pigs in the drawing-room," she exclaimed. "There's a
saying that it takes nine tailors to make a man, so if your name is
Taylor you can only be the ninth part of a lady!" Then, realizing that
her upraised voice had drawn upon her the attention, not only of all
the girls, but also of Miss Maitland, she flushed crimson, scraped back
her chair, and fled precipitately from the room.

Miss Maitland looked surprised. It was an unheard-of thing for any girl
to leave the tea-table without permission. Such a breach of school
decorum had surely never been committed before at St. Chad's! There was
a very complete code of etiquette observed at the house, and to break
one of the laws of politeness was considered an unpardonable offence.

"She's made a bad beginning," whispered Ruth Latimer to Maisie Talbot.
"It's most unfortunate. It was really the fault of Flossie Taylor and
the Hammond-Smiths. They needn't have teased her so."

"Still, it was silly of her to lose her temper," replied Maisie. "She
stalked out of the room like a queen of tragedy. Miss Maitland can't
bear girls who give way to their impulses; she despises what she calls
'early Victorian hysterics', and I quite agree with her."

"Yes, we must learn to be stoics here," said Ruth; "and as for teasing,
the wisest thing is to take no notice of it."

A monitress had been dispatched to fetch Honor back, but in a short
time she returned alone, and reported that she could not find her. Miss
Maitland made no comment, and as the meal was now over she gave the
signal of dismissal. Most of the girls went to the recreation room, but
Maisie Talbot, who had not yet quite concluded her unpacking, ran
straight upstairs. Noticing something move behind a curtain in the
corner of the bedroom, she pulled it aside. There was Honor, sitting in
a queer little heap on the floor, and rubbing her eyes in a very
suggestive manner. She jumped up in a moment, however, and pretended
that she was only arranging her boots.

"I'd finished tea," she remarked airily, "so I thought I might as well
empty my box, and put my dresses away in my wardrobe."

"You'll have to ask Miss Maitland's leave next time, before you march
out of the room, or you'll get into trouble," said Maisie. "If it
weren't your first evening, you'd be expected to make a public apology.
Of course, Flossie Taylor and the Hammond-Smiths were aggravating, but
you should just have laughed at them, and then they'd have stopped. We
don't behave like kindergarten children here."

Maisie spoke scathingly. She was a girl who had scant sympathy with
what she called "babyishness", and disliked any exhibition of feeling.
And, after all, she only voiced the general opinion of the school,
which, by an unwritten law, had established a calm imperturbation as
the height of good breeding.

"I don't care in the least what any of you think!" retorted Honor, and
she hung up her skirt with such a jerk that she broke the loop.

Yet, although she spoke lightly, she evidently did care. She was very
quiet indeed all the rest of the evening, and hardly spoke at
recreation. Chatty Burns sat down next to her and tried to begin a
conversation, but Honor answered so briefly that she very soon gave up
the effort in despair, and moved away; while the other girls were so
interested in their own affairs that they did not trouble to remember
their new schoolfellow. At nine o'clock prayers were read, and
everybody went upstairs to bed.

When the lights were out, and the room was in perfect silence, a
strange, suppressed noise issued from Honor's corner. It might, of
course, have been snoring; and Honor explained elaborately next morning
that Irish people often have a peculiar way of breathing in their
sleep--an affection from which she sometimes suffered herself.

"All the same, I don't quite believe her," confided Pauline Reynolds,
who occupied the next cubicle, to Lettice Talbot, a more sympathetic
character than her sister Maisie. "I know what it is to feel home-sick,
and to smother one's nose in the pillow! If that wasn't sobbing, it was
as like it as anything I've ever heard in my life."




CHAPTER II

Honor's Home


For a full understanding of Honor Fitzgerald we must go back a few
weeks, and see her in that Irish home which was so far away and so
utterly different from Chessington College. Kilmore Castle was a great,
rambling, old-fashioned country house, built beside an inland creek of
the sea, and sheltered by a range of hills from the wild winds of
Kerry. To Honor that was the dearest and most beautiful spot in the
world. She loved every inch of it--the silvery strips of water that led
between bold, rocky headlands out to the broad Atlantic; the tall
mountain peaks that showed so rugged an outline against the sky; the
brown, peat-stained river that came brawling down from the uplands, and
poured itself noisily into the creek; the wide, lonely moors, with
their stretches of brilliant green grass and dark, treacherous bog
pools; and the craggy cliffs that made a barrier against the
ever-dashing waves, and round which thousands of sea birds flew, with
harsh cries and whir of white wings.

Its situation at the end of a long peninsula made Kilmore Castle an
isolated little kingdom of its own. On the shore stood a row of low,
fishermen's white-washed cabins, dignified by the name of "the
village"; but otherwise there was no human habitation in sight, and
Ballycroghan, the market town and nearest postal, railway, and
telegraph station, was ten miles off.

Trees were rarities at Kilmore; a few stunted specimens, all blown one
way by the prevailing gale, grew as if huddled together for protection
at the foot of the glen, but they were the exception that proved the
rule; nevertheless, under the sheltering walls of the Castle Mrs.
Fitzgerald had managed to acclimatize some exotic shrubs, and to
cultivate quite a beautiful garden of flowers, for the temperature was
uniformly mild, though the winds were boisterous. Brilliant St.
Brigid's anemones, the poet's narcissus, tulips, jonquils, and
hyacinths bloomed here almost as early as in the Scilly Isles, and made
patches of fragrant brightness under the sitting-room windows; while in
the crannies of the walls might be seen delicate maidenhair and other
ferns, too tender generally to stand a winter in the open.

Born and bred in this far-away corner of the world, Honor had grown up
almost a child of nature. Her whole life had been spent as much as
possible out-of-doors, boating, fishing, or swimming in the creek;
driving in a low-backed car over the rough Kerry roads; galloping her
shaggy little pony on the moors; following the otter hounds up the
river, and sharing in any sport that her father considered suitable for
her age and sex. She was the only girl among five brothers, and in her
mother's opinion was by far the most difficult to manage of the whole
flock. All the wild Irish blood of the family seemed to have settled in
her; the high spirits, the fire, the pride, the quick temper, the
impatience of control, the happy-go-lucky, idle, irresponsible ways of
a long line of hot-headed ancestors had skipped a generation or two,
and, as if they had been bottling themselves up during the interval,
had reappeared with renewed force in this particular specimen of the
Fitzgerald race.

"She's more trouble than the five boys put together," her mother often
declared, and her friends cordially agreed with her. Mrs. Fitzgerald
herself was a mild, quiet, nervous, delicate lady, as much astonished
at her lively, tempestuous daughter as a meek little hedge-sparrow
would be, that had hatched a young cuckoo. Frankly, she did not
understand Honor, whose strong, uncontrolled character differed so
entirely from her own gentle, clinging, dependent disposition; and
whose storms of grief or anger, wild fits of waywardness and equally
passionate repentance, and self-willed disobedience, alternating with
sudden bursts of reformation, were a constant source of worry and
anxiety, and the direct opposite of her ideal of girlhood. Poor Mrs.
Fitzgerald would have liked a docile, tractable daughter, who would
have been content to sit beside her sofa doing fancy work, instead of
riding to hounds; and who would have had more consideration for her
weak state of health. She appreciated Honor's warm-hearted affection to
the full, but at the same time wished she could make her realize that
rough hugs, boisterous kisses, and loud tones were hardly suitable to
an invalid. Suffering as she was from a painful and incurable
complaint, it was sometimes impossible for her to admit Honor to her
sick-room, and for weeks together the girl would hardly see her mother.
It was through no lack of love that Honor had failed to give that
service and tenderness which, in the circumstances, an only daughter
might so fitly have rendered; it was from sheer want of thought, and
general heedlessness. Some girls early acquire a sense of
responsibility and care for others, but in Honor these qualities were
as undeveloped as in a child of six.

Many were the governesses who had attempted to tame the young rebel,
and bring her into a state of law and order, but all had been equal
failures. She had learnt lessons when she felt inclined, and left them
undone when she was idle; and she had managed to make life in the
schoolroom such a purgatory that it had been difficult to persuade any
teacher to stay long at the Castle, and cope with so thankless a task
as her education.

It had been of little use to complain to her father, the only person in
the world whose authority she recognized; he was proud of his handsome
daughter, and, except when her temper crossed his own, was apt to
indulge her in most of her whims. Matters had at last, however, come to
a crisis. An act of more than usual assumption on Honor's part had
aroused Major Fitzgerald's utmost indignation, and had caused him
suddenly to decide that she was spoiling at home, and that the only
possible solution of the difficulty was to dispatch her to school as
soon as the necessary arrangements could be made for her departure.

The incident that led to this resolution was very characteristic of
Honor's headstrong, impulsive nature. She was passionately fond of
horses, and for some time had been anxious to possess a new pony. It
was not that she loved Pixie, her former favourite, any the less; but
he was growing old, and was now scarcely able to take a fence, or carry
her in mad career over the moors, being only fit for a sober trot on
the high road, or to draw her mother's Bath chair round the garden. To
obtain a strong, well-bred, fiery substitute for Pixie was the summit
of Honor's ambition. One day, when she was with her father at
Ballycroghan, she saw exactly the realization of her ideal. It was a
small black cob, which showed a trace of Arab blood in its arching
neck, slender limbs, and easy, springy motion. Though its bright eyes
proved its high spirit, it was nevertheless as gentle as a lamb, and
well accustomed to carrying a lady. Its owner, a local horse-dealer,
was anxious to sell it, and pressed Major Fitzgerald to take it as a
bargain. Honor simply fell in love with it on the spot. She ascertained
that its name was Firefly, and begged and besought her father to buy it
for her. But on this occasion he would not yield, even to her utmost
coaxing. He did not wish to keep another pony in the stable, and he
considered the price asked was excessive, and entirely beyond the
present limits of his purse.

"No, Honor, it can't be done," he said. "You must be content with poor
old Pixie. I have quite enough expenses just now, without running into
such an extravagance."

"But couldn't I have it instead of something else?" pleaded Honor.

"There's nothing we could knock off, dear child," replied her father.

"I could do without a governess," suggested Honor hopefully. "I'd set
myself my own lessons, and learn them too. Oh, Daddy, darling, if we
gave up Miss Bury, wouldn't you have money enough to buy Firefly?"

Major Fitzgerald laughed in spite of himself.

"I consider Miss Bury a necessity, and not a luxury," he replied. "A
governess is the very last person we could dispense with. I should like
to see you setting your own lessons! Remarkably short and easy ones
they would be! No, little woman, I'm afraid Firefly is an
impossibility, and you must just try to forget his existence."

Unfortunately, that was exactly what Honor could not do. She thought
continually about the beautiful black cob, and the more she dwelt on
her disappointment the more keenly she felt it. She considered, most
unreasonably, that her governess was the alternative of the pony, and
that if she were without the one she might possibly acquire the other.
Her behaviour had never been exemplary, but on the strength of this
grievance she grew so unruly, so disrespectful, and so absolutely
unmanageable that Miss Bury at length refused to teach her any longer,
and, after an interview with Major Fitzgerald in the library, packed
her boxes and returned home to England.

Honor viewed her exodus with keen delight. It seemed the removal of an
obstacle to her plan. She went in to luncheon determined to broach once
more the subject of Firefly, hoping this time to meet with better
success. She saw at once, however, from her father's face, that he was
not in a suitable mood to grant her any favour. He was much annoyed at
the governess's departure, for which he had the justice to blame Honor
alone; and he was worried with business matters.

"That tiresome agent has not sent the telegram I expected," he
announced. "I shall be obliged to go over to Cork, to consult my
solicitor. Tell Murphy to have the trap ready by two o'clock, and let
Holmes pack my bag. I shall probably be away until Friday evening."

As soon as her father had started for the station, Honor sauntered out
in the direction of the stables. It was one of her mother's bad days.
Mrs. Fitzgerald was confined to her room, therefore Honor, released
from Miss Bury's authority, felt herself her own mistress. Finding
Fergus, the groom, she ordered him to saddle Pixie, and make ready to
accompany her on a ride. Fergus was devoted to "Miss Honor", and would
never have dreamt of disputing any command she might give him; before
three o'clock, therefore, her pony was at the door, and, dressed in her
neat blue habit, she was ambling away in the direction of Ballycroghan.
It was a leisurely progress, for poor Pixie's gait was slow, in spite
of his best endeavours, and Honor loved him too well to urge him hard.

She was determined to call at the horse-dealer's, and to ascertain if
Firefly were still for sale. Perhaps, when her father returned home,
she might catch him at a favourable moment, and be able to cajole him
into changing his mind and buying the cob. Mr. O'Connor, the
horse-dealer, lived at a large farm on the way to the town, and, to
Honor's intense delight, the first object that met her eyes on
approaching the house was Firefly, feeding demurely in a paddock to the
left of the road. By an equally lucky chance Mr. O'Connor happened to
be at home, and came hurrying out at once when he saw "one of the
quality", as he expressed it, drawing bridle at his door.

"Good afternoon! I see you still have the black cob," began Honor
eagerly.
