
The emotions of childhood are as changeable as the shadows of the
flitting clouds.

Dot was pouting while Mel stood irresolute on the small porch, and was
sure she would never, never speak to the mean fellow again; but the
instant he peeped through the narrow window she forgot everything else,
and darted forward to take her place at his side, and find out what it
was that made him act so queerly.

Before she reached him she stopped short with the exclamation--

"Oh, Mel! here's a letter for you!"




CHAPTER TWO

AN IMPORTANT LETTER--SHUT IN


Astonished by the cry, young Clarendon turned his head and looked at his
sister, who landed at his side that moment like a fairy. She was holding
a sheet of paper in her hand. It was folded in the form of an envelope,
and pencilled on the outside in bold letters were the words--

    "Melville Clarendon.
        "In haste; read instantly."

He took the letter from his sister and trembled, as if from a chill, as
he hurriedly unfolded the paper and read--

    "MY DEAR MEL,--Leave at once! The Sioux have taken the war-path,
    and a party of their worst warriors from the Muddy Creek country
    have started out on a raid. They are sure to come this way, and
    I suppose the house will be burned, and everything on which they
    can lay hands destroyed. They are under the lead of the
    desperate Red Feather, and will spare nothing. A friendly Sioux
    stopped this morning before daylight and warned me. I gathered
    the animals together, and your mother and I set out for Barwell
    in all haste, driving the beasts before us.

    "I feel certain of either finding you and Dot at my brother's in
    the settlement or of meeting you on the way, for I suppose, of
    course, you will follow the regular trail; but, at the moment of
    starting, your mother suggests the possibility that you may take
    the upper route. To make sure, I write this letter. If the
    Indians reach the building before you, they will leave such
    traces of their presence that you will take the alarm. If you
    arrive first and see this note, re-mount Saladin, turn
    northward, and lose not a minute in galloping to the settlement.
    None of them can overtake you. Avoid the upper trail, where it
    is much easier for them to ambush you; keep as much on the open
    prairie as possible; see that your weapons are loaded; make
    Saladin do his best; and God be with you and Darling Dot.--
                                                  Your Father."

[Illustration: "He hurriedly unfolded the paper and read."]

The youth read this important message aloud to Dot, who stood at his
side, looking wistfully up in his face. She was too young to comprehend
fully its meaning, but she knew that her parents had left for the
settlement, and that her father had ordered Melville to follow at once
with her.

"The bad Indians are coming," he added, "and if we stay here they will
shoot us. I don't think," he said, glancing around, "that they are
anywhere near; but they are likely to come any minute, so we won't
wait."

"Oh, Mel!" suddenly spoke up Dot, "you know I forgot to take Susie with
me when I went away; can't I get her now?"

Susie was Dot's pet doll, and the fact that she left it behind when
making her visit to Uncle Jack's had a great deal more to do with her
home-sickness than her friends suspected. The thought of leaving it
behind again almost broke her heart.

"I am sure mother took it with her when she went off this morning,"
replied Melville, feeling a little uneasy over the request.

"I'll soon find out," said she, stepping hastily towards the door.

He could not refuse her wish, for he understood the depth of the
affection she felt for the doll, whose dress was somewhat torn, and
whose face was not always as clean as her own. Besides, it could take
only a minute or two to get the plaything, if it had been left in the
house. Although his situation prevented his seeing anything in the rear
of the building, he was sure the dreaded Indians were not yet in sight,
and he desired to make a hasty survey of the interior of the house
himself.

How familiar everything looked! There were the chairs placed against the
wall, and the deal table in the middle of the room. Melville noticed
that the pictures which had hung so long on the walls had been taken
away. They were portraits of the members of the family, and the mother
looked upon them as too precious to be allowed to run any risk of loss.
A few other valuables, including the old Bible, had been removed; but
the parents were too wise to increase their own danger by loading
themselves with goods, however much they regretted leaving them behind.

Although there was an old-fashioned fire-place, the Clarendons used a
large stove standing near it. Curiosity led Melville to examine it, and
he smiled to find it still warm. The ashes within, when stirred, showed
some embers glowing beneath. There was something in the fact which made
the youth feel as though the distance between him and his parents had
become less than a short time before.

"Strange that I took the upper trail," he said to himself, resuming his
standing position, "and thereby missed them. It's the first time I have
been over that course for a long while, and it beats me that to-day when
I shouldn't have done so I must do it; but fortunately no harm was
done."

It struck him that Dot was taking an unusually long time in the search
for her doll. Walking to the foot of the stairs, he called to her--

"It won't do to wait any longer, Dot; we must be off. If you can't find
your doll, it's because mother took it with her."

"I've found it! I've found it!" she exclaimed, dancing with delight; "I
had hid it in the bed, where mother didn't see it; bless your soul,
Susie!"

And Melville laughed as he heard a number of vigorous smacks which told
how much the child loved her pet.

"I suppose you are happy now," remarked Melville, taking her hand, while
he held his gun in the other, as they walked towards the door.

"Indeed I am," she replied, with that emphatic shake of the head by
which children of her years often give force to their words.

Melville placed his hand on the latch of the door, and, raising it, drew
the structure inward. He had lowered his arm and once more taken the
hand of his sister, and was in the act of stepping outside, when the
sharp report of a rifle broke the stillness, and he felt the whiz of the
bullet, which grazed his face and buried itself in the wall behind him.

The lad was quick-witted enough to know on the instant what it meant;
and, leaping back, he hastily closed the door, drew in the latch-string,
and, leaning his rifle against the side of the room, slipped the bar in
place.

He had hardly done so when there was a shock, as if some heavy body were
flung violently against it. Such was the fact, a Sioux warrior having
turned himself sideways at the moment of leaping, so that his shoulder
struck it with a force sufficient to carry a door off its hinges.

"What's the matter?" asked the frightened Dot; "why do you fasten the
door, Mel?"

"The bad Indians have come; they are trying to get into the house so as
to hurt us."

"And do they want Susie?" she asked Melville, hugging her doll very
closely to her breast.

"Yes, but we won't let them have her. Keep away from the window!" he
added, catching her arm, and drawing her back from the dangerous
position into which her curiosity was leading her. "Sit down there," he
said, pointing to one of the chairs which was beyond reach of any bullet
that could be fired through a window; "don't stir unless I tell you to,
or the bad Indians will take you and dolly, and you will never see
father or mother or me again."

This was terrible enough to scare the little one into the most implicit
obedience of her brother. She meekly took her seat, with Susie still
clasped in her arms, willing to do anything to save the precious one
from danger, and content to leave everything to her brother.

The youth had not time to explain matters more fully to his sister, nor
would it have been wise to do so; she had been told enough already to
distress and render her obedient to his wishes.

Following the startling shock against the door came a voice from the
outside. The words were in broken English, and were uttered by the Sioux
warrior that had made the vain effort to drive the structure inward.

"Open door--open door, brudder."

"I will not open the door," called back Melville.

"Open door--Injin won't hurt pale-face--come in--eat wid him."

"You cannot come in; we want no visitors. Go away, or I will shoot you!"

This was a brave threat, but it did not do all that the lad hoped.
Whether the assailants knew how weak the force was within the house the
youth could not say. He was not without belief that they might think
there were several armed defenders who would make an attack or siege on
the part of the Sioux too costly for them to continue it long.

The first purpose of Melville, therefore, was to learn how strong the
force was that had made such a sudden attack. It was too perilous to
attempt to look through one of the four narrow windows lighting the
large room where he stood, and which covered the entire lower part of
the building, and he decided, therefore, to got upstairs.

Before doing so, he made Dot repeat her promise to sit still where she
was. She assured him that he need have no fear whatever, and he
hurriedly made his way to the rooms above.

Advancing to one of the windows at the front, he peered out with the
utmost caution.

The first Indian whom he saw was the very one he dreaded above all
others. He recognized him at the first glance by the cluster of
eagle-feathers stuck in his crown. There were stained of a crimson red,
several of the longer ones drooping behind, so as to mingle with his
coarse black hair which streamed over his shoulders.

This was Red Feather, one of the most desperate Sioux known in the
history of the border. Years before he was a chief noted for his daring
and detestation of the white men. As the country became partly settled
he acquired most of the vices and few of the virtues of the white race.
He was fond of "firewater," was an inveterate thief, sullen and
revengeful, quarrelsome at all times; and, when under the influence of
drink, was feared almost as much by his own people as by the whites.

Red Feather was mounted on a fine-looking horse, which there is little
doubt had been stolen from some of the settlers in that part of the
country. He had brought him to a stand about a hundred yards from the
building, he and the animal facing the house.

As the Sioux chieftain held this position the lad was struck by his
resemblance to the horseman whom he and Dot noticed at the time they
halted on the other bank of the stream.

[Illustration: "Red Feather, one of the most desperate Sioux."--Page 20]

This discovery of young Clarendon suggested an explanation of the sight
which so puzzled him and his sister. The chief had descried them at the
same moment, if not before they saw him. Inasmuch as the occupants of
the building were absent, he must have thought they had gone off
together, and he could not have believed that, if such were the case,
any members of the company would return--the boy, therefore, had
ridden part way back to learn what was to be fate of the cabin and
property left behind. Red Feather had waved his blanket as a taunt, and
then rode off for his warriors, encamped near by, with the purpose of
directing them in an attack on the house.

It was a most unfortunate oversight that Melville did not make a survey
of the surrounding country before entering his own home, for had he done
so, he would have learned of his peril; but you will remember that his
first purpose was not to enter his house, and in truth it was Susie, the
little doll, that brought all the trouble.

The dismay caused by his unexpected imprisonment was not without
something in the nature of relief.

In the first place, a careful survey of his surroundings showed there
were only six Sioux warriors in the attacking party. All were mounted,
as a matter of course, fully armed, and eager to massacre the settler
and his family. You will say these were enough to frighten any lad,
however brave; but you must remember that Melville held a strong
position in the house.

Such a fine horse as Saladin could not fail to catch the eye of the
dusky scamps, and at the moment Red Feather fired his well-nigh fatal
shot at the youth three warriors were putting forth their utmost efforts
to capture the prize.

But the wise Saladin showed no liking for the red men, and would not
permit any of them to lay hands on him. It was an easy matter to do
this, for among them all there was not one that could approach him in
fleetness. He suffered them to come quite near, and then, flinging up
his head with a defiant neigh, sped beyond their reach like an arrow
darting from the bow.

Melville's eyes kindled.

"I am proud of you, Saladin," he said, "and if I dared, I would give
you a hurrah."

He watched the performance for several minutes, the rapid movement of
the horses causing him to shift his position once or twice from one side
of the house to the other. Finally, one of the Sioux saw how idle their
pursuit was, and, angered at being baffled, deliberately raised his
rifle and fired at Saladin.

[Illustration: "Saladin showed no liking for the red men."]

Whether he hit the horse or not Melville could not say, though the
animal showed no signs of being hurt: but the lad was so indignant that
he levelled his own weapon, and, pointing the muzzle out of the narrow
window, muttered--

"If you want to try that kind of business, I'm willing, and I think I
can make a better shot than you did."

Before, however, he could be sure of his aim, he was startled by a cry
from Dot--

"Come down here quick, Mel! A great big Indian is getting in the house
by the window!"




CHAPTER THREE

CAUGHT FAST--A FRIEND IN NEED


Melville Clarendon was so interested in the efforts of the three Sioux
to capture his horse, that for a minute or two he forgot that Dot was
below-stairs. Her cry, however, roused him to the situation and truth,
and he flew down the steps.

In fact, the little girl had had a stirring time. While she was too
young to realize the full danger of herself and brother, she knew there
were bad Indians trying to get into the house, and the best thing for
her to do was to obey every instruction Melville gave to her.

It will be recalled that Melville had a few words of conversation with
one of the Sioux outside the door, who asked to be admitted. After the
youth's refusal, there was silence for a minute or two, and, supposing
the Indian was gone, the lad hurried to the upper story to gain a survey
of his surroundings.

But the warrior had not left. After the departure of Melville he resumed
his knocking on the door, but so gently that no one heard him except
Dot. In her innocence she forgot the warnings given to her, and, sliding
off her chair, stepped forward, and began shoving the end of the
leathern string through, so that the Indian could raise the latch. She
had tried to raise it herself, but the pressure from the outside was so
strong that the friction prevented.

[Illustration: "Pull the string, and the door will open."]

"There!" said the little girl; "all you've got to do is to pull the
string, and the door will open."

When the Indian saw the head of the string groping its way through the
little hole in the door like a tiny serpent, he grasped the end, and
gave it such a smart jerk that the latch flew up.

But, fortunately, it was necessary to do more than draw the latch to
open the door. The massive bar was in place, and the Sioux, most likely
with a suspicion of the truth, made no effort to force the structure.

But while he was thus employed Red Feather had slipped from the back of
his pony and approached the house. He took the side opposite to that
from which Melville was looking forth, so that the youth did not notice
his action. He saw the idleness of trying to make his way through the
door, and formed another plan.

With little effort he raised the sash in the narrow window on the
right. About half-way to the top was a wooden button to hold the lower
sash in place when raised. The occupants of the house used no care in
securing the windows, since, as I have explained, they were too narrow
to allow any person, unless very thin of figure, to force his way
through them.

Red Feather seemed to forget that he had tried to take the life of one
of the white persons only a few minutes before; but, since no return
shot had come from within the building, he must have concluded the
defenders were panic-stricken, or else he showed a daring that amounted
to recklessness; for, after raising the sash, he pushed the curtain
aside, and began carefully shoving his head through the opening.

Now, the house being of logs, it was necessary for the chieftain to
force his shoulders a slight distance to allow his head fairly to enter
the room. This required great care and labor, and more risk on the part
of the Sioux than he suspected--since he should have known that it is
easier to advance under such circumstances than to retreat, and,
inasmuch as it was so hard to push on, it was likely to be still harder
to retreat.

Dot Clarendon, like her brother, was so interested in another direction
that she failed for the time to note that which was of far more
importance.

But the feeling that she and her brother were in a situation of great
danger became so strong that she felt there was only One who could save
them, and, just as she had been taught from earliest infancy, she now
asked that One to take care of them.

Sinking on her chubby knees, she folded her hands, shut her eyes and
poured out the simple prayer of faith and love to Him whose ear is
never closed to the appeal of the most helpless. Her eyes were still
closed, and her lips moving, when the noise made by Red Feather in
forcing himself through the narrow opening caused her to stop suddenly
and look around.

The sight which met her gaze was enough to startle the bravest man. The
head and shoulders of a hideous Sioux warrior were within six feet of
where she was kneeling. The Indian was still struggling but he could get
no farther, and, as it was, he was wedged very closely.

