
"Yes, it is rather sudden, Brander, but a little sooner or a little
later does not make much difference after all. Edwards told you, of
course, that I want nothing said about it."

"That is so."

"Nothing would annoy me more than to have any fuss. I shall just go on
as I have before, except that I shall give up hunting; it is just the
end of the season, and there will be but two or three more meets. I
shall drive to them and have a chat with my friends and see the hounds
throw off. I shall give out that I strained myself a bit the last time I
was out, and must give up riding for a time. Have you brought my will
over with you?"

"Yes, I thought you might want to add something to it."

"That is right, there are two or three small legacies I have thought of;
there is a list of them."

Mr. Brander took out the will and added a codicil. The legacies were
small ones of ten or twenty pounds to various old people in the village,
and the work occupied but a few minutes. The housekeeper and one of the
men were called up to witness the signature, and when they had retired
Mr. Brander sat chatting for half an hour on general topics, Mr.
Hartington avoiding any further allusion to the subject of his illness.
Mr. Brander got back in time to dress comfortably for dinner.

"Really, Mary," he said, when he went into the drawing-room where his
wife and Mary were waiting ready for him, "I do think you might dress
yourself a little more brightly when we are going to such a house as we
are to-night. I don't say that that black silk with the lace and those
white flowers are not becoming, but I think something lighter and gayer
would be more appropriate to a young girl."

"I don't like colors, father, and if it hadn't been for mamma I should
never have thought of getting these expensive flowers. I do think women
lower themselves by dressing themselves as butterflies. No wonder men
consider they think of nothing but dress and have no minds for higher
matters."

"Pooh, pooh, my dear, the first duty of a young woman is to look as
pretty as she can. According to my experience men don't trouble
themselves much about the mind, and a butterfly after all is a good deal
more admired than a bee, though the bee is much more useful in the long
run."

"If a woman is contented to look like a butterfly, father, she must be
content to be taken for one, but I must say I think it is degrading that
men should look upon it in that light. They don't dress themselves up in
all sorts of colors, why should we."

"I am sure I can't tell you why, Mary, but I suppose it is a sort of
instinct, and instincts are seldom wrong. If it had been intended that
women should dress themselves as plainly and monotonously as we do, they
would not have had the love of decorating themselves implanted almost
universally among them. You are on the wrong track, child, on the wrong
track altogether, and if you and those who think like you imagine that
you are going to upset the laws of nature and to make women rivals of
men in mind if not in manner, instead of being what they were meant to
be, wives and mothers, you are althogether mistaken."

"That is only another way of putting it, father, that because woman have
for ages been treated as inferiors they ought always to remain so."

"Well, well, my dear, we won't argue over it. I think you are altogether
wrong, but I have no objection to your going your own way and finding it
out at last for yourself, but that does not alter my opinion that on an
occasion of a set dinner-party in the county where everybody will be in
their fullest fig, that dress, which is pretty and becoming enough in
its way, I admit, can hardly be considered as appropriate."

Mary did not answer, but gave an almost imperceptible shrug of her
shoulders, expressing clearly her absolute indifference to other
people's tastes so long as she satisfied her own. Mary was indeed
decided in most of her opinions. Although essentially feminine in most
respects, she and the set to which she had belonged at Girton, had
established it as a principle to their own satisfaction, that feminine
weaknesses were to be sternly discouraged as the main cause of the
position held relatively to men. Thus they cultivated a certain
brusqueness of speech, expressed their opinion uncompromisingly, and
were distinguished by a certain plainness in the fashion of their gowns,
and by the absence of trimmings, frillings, and similar adornments.

At heart she was as fond of pretty things as other girls of her age, and
had, when she attired herself, been conscious that she felt a greater
satisfaction at her appearance than she ought to have done, and doubted
whether she had not made an undue concession to the vanities of society
in the matter of her laces and flowers. She had, however, soothed her
conscience by the consideration that she was at home but for a short
time, and while there she might well fall in with her parents' views, as
she would be soon starting for Germany to enter upon earnest work. Her
father's remarks then were in a sense satisfactory to her, as they
showed that, although she had made concessions, she had at least gone
but half-way.

The dinner passed off well. Mary was fortunate in being taken down by a
gentleman who had advanced views on the necessity of British
agriculturists adopting scientific farming if they were to hold their
own against foreign producers, and she surprised him by the interest she
exhibited in his theories. So much so, that he always spoke of her
afterwards as one of the most intelligent young women he had ever met.

Mr. Brander was in remarkably good spirits. On such occasions he
entirely dropped his profession, and showed a keen interest in all
matters connected with the land. No one would that evening have supposed
that his mind was in the smallest degree preoccupied by grave matters of
any kind.




CHAPTER II.


As his father had said, Cuthbert Harrington's tastes differed widely
from his own. Cuthbert was essentially a Londoner, and his friends would
have had difficulty in picturing him as engaged in country pursuits.
Indeed, Cuthbert Hartington, in a scarlet coat, or toiling through a
turnip field in heavy boots with a gun on his shoulder, would have been
to them an absurd anomaly.

It was not that he lacked strength; on the contrary, he was tall and
well, if loosely, built. Grace is not a common manly attribute, but he
possessed it to an eminent degree. There was a careless ease in his
manner, an unconscious picturesqueness in his poses, a turn, that would
have smacked of haughtiness had there been the slightest element of
pride in his disposition, in the curve of the neck, and well-poised
head.

His life was chiefly passed among artists, and like them as a class, he
affected loose and easy attire. He wore turn-down collars with a
carelessly-knotted necktie, and a velvet jacket. He was one of those men
whom his intimates declared to be capable of doing anything he chose,
and who chose to do nothing. He had never distinguished himself in any
way at Harrow. He had maintained a fair place in his forms as he moved
up in the school, but had done so rather from natural ability than from
study. He had never been in the eleven, although it was the general
opinion he would have certainly had a place in it had he chosen to play
regularly. As he sauntered through Harrow so he sauntered through
Cambridge; keeping just enough chapels and lectures to avoid getting
into trouble, passing the examinations without actual discredit, rowing
a little, playing cricket when the fit seized him, but preferring to
take life easily and to avoid toil, either mental or bodily.
Nevertheless he read a great deal, and on general subjects was one of
the best informed men of his college.

He spent a good deal of his time in sketching and painting, art being
his one passion. His sketches were the admiration of his friends, but
although he had had the best lessons he could obtain at the University
he lacked the application and industry to convert the sketches into
finished paintings. His vacations were spent chiefly on the Continent,
for his life at home bored him immensely, and to him a week among the
Swiss lakes, or in the galleries of Munich or Dresden, was worth more
than all the pleasures that country life could give him.

He went home for a short time after leaving the University, but his stay
there was productive of pleasure to neither his father nor himself. They
had not a single taste in common, and though Cuthbert made an effort to
take an interest in field sports and farming, it was not long before his
father himself told him that as it was evident the life was altogether
distasteful to him, and his tastes lay in another direction, he was
perfectly ready to make him an allowance that would enable him either to
travel or to live in chambers in London.

"I am sorry, of course, lad," he said, "that you could not make yourself
happy with me here, but I don't blame you, for it is after all a matter
of natural disposition. Of course you will come down here sometimes, and
at any rate I shall be happier in knowing that you are living your own
life and enjoying yourself in your own way, than I should be in seeing
you trying in vain to take to pursuits from which you would derive no
pleasure whatever."

"I am awfully sorry, father," Cuthbert had said. "I heartily wish it had
been otherwise, but I own that I would rather live in London on an
almost starvation income than settle down here. I have really tried hard
to get to like things that you do. I feel it would have been better if I
had always stayed here and had a tutor; then, no doubt, I should have
taken to field sports and so on. However, it is no use regretting that
now, and I am very thankful for your offer."

Accordingly he had gone up to London, taken chambers in Gray's Inn,
where two or three of his college friends were established, and joined a
Bohemian Club, where he made the acquaintance of several artists, and
soon became a member of their set. He had talked vaguely of taking up
art as a profession, but nothing ever came of it. There was an easel or
two in his rooms and any number of unfinished paintings; but he was
fastidious over his own work and unable from want of knowledge of
technique to carry out his ideas, and the canvases were one after
another thrown aside in disgust. His friends upbraided him bitterly with
his want of application, not altogether without effect; he took their
remonstrances in perfect good temper, but without making the slightest
effort to improve. He generally accompanied some of them on their
sketching expeditions to Normandy, Brittany, Spain, or Algiers, and his
portfolios were the subject of mingled admiration and anger among his
artist friends in St. John's Wood; admiration at the vigor and talent
that his sketches displayed, anger that he should be content to do
nothing greater.

His days were largely spent in their studios where, seated in the most
comfortable chair he could find, he would smoke lazily and watch them at
work and criticise freely. Men grumbled and laughed at his presumption,
but were ready to acknowledge the justice of his criticism. He had an
excellent eye for color and effect and for the contrast of light and
shade, and those whose pictures were hung, were often ready enough to
admit that the canvas owed much of its charm to some happy suggestion on
Cuthbert's often ready part.

Every two or three months he went home for a fortnight. He was greatly
attached to his father, and it was the one drawback to the contentment
of his life that he had been unable to carry out the Squire's wishes,
and to settle down with him at Fairclose. He would occasionally bemoan
himself over this to his friends.

"I am as bad as the prodigal son," he would say, "except that I don't
get what I deserve, and have neither to feed on husks nor to tend swine;
but though the fatted calf would be ready for me if I were to return I
can't bring myself to do so."

"I don't know about being a prodigal," Wilson, one of the oldest of his
set would grumble in reply, "but I do know you are a lazy young beggar,
and are wasting your time and opportunities; it is a thousand pities you
were born with a silver spoon in your mouth. Your father ought to have
turned you adrift with an allowance just sufficient to have kept you on
bread and butter, and have left you to provide everything else for
yourself; then you would have been an artist, sir, and would have made a
big name for yourself. You would have had no occasion to waste your time
in painting pot-boilers, but could have devoted yourself to good,
honest, serious work, which is more than most of us can do. We are
obliged to consider what will sell and to please the public by turning
out what they call pretty pictures--children playing with dogs, and
trumpery things of that sort. Bah, it is sickening to see a young fellow
wasting his life so."

But Cuthbert only laughed good-temperedly, he was accustomed to such
tirades, and was indeed of a singularly sweet and easy temper.

It was the end of the first week in May, the great artistic event of the
year was over, the Academy was opened, the pictures had been seen and
criticised, there was the usual indignation at pictures being hung
generally voted to be daubs, while others that had been considered among
the studios as certain of acceptance, had been rejected. Two or three of
Cuthbert's friends were starting at once for Cornwall to enjoy a rest
after three months' steady work and to lay in a stock of fresh sketches
for pictures for the following year.

"I will go with you," Cuthbert said when they informed him of their
intention, "it is early yet, but it is warm enough even for loafing on
the rocks, and I hate London when it's full. I will go for a fortnight
anyhow," and so with Wilson and two younger men, he started for Newquay,
on the north of Cornwall. Once established there the party met only at
meals.

"We don't want to be doing the same bits," Wilson said, "and we shall
see plenty of each other of an evening." Cuthbert was delighted with the
place, and with his usual enthusiasm speedily fixed upon a subject, and
setting up his easel and camp-stool began work on the morning after his
arrival. He had been engaged but a few hours when two young ladies came
along. They stopped close to him, and Cuthbert, who hated being
overlooked when at work, was on the point of growling an anathema under
his fair drooping mustache, when one of the girls came close and said
quietly--

"How are you, Mr. Hartington? Who would have thought of meeting you
here?"

He did not recognize her for a moment and then exclaimed--

"Why, it is Mary Brander. I beg your pardon," he went on, taking off his
soft, broad-brimmed hat, "I ought to have said Miss Brander, but having
known you so long as Mary Brander, the name slipped out. It must have
been three years since we met, and you have shot up from a girl into a
full-grown young lady. Are your father and mother here?"

"No, I came down last week to stay with my friend, Miss Treadwyn, who
was at Girton with me. Anna, this is Mr. Cuthbert Hartington. Mr.
Hartington's place is near Abchester, and he is one of my father's
clients."

Miss Treadwyn bowed and Cuthbert took off his hat.

"We have known each other ever since we were children," Mary went on,
"that is to say ever since I was a child, for he was a big boy then; he
often used to come into our house, while Mr. Hartington was going into
business matters with my father, and generally amused himself by teasing
me. He used to treat me as if I was a small sort of monkey, and
generally ended by putting me in a passion; of course that was in the
early days."

"Before you came to years of discretion, Miss Brander. You were growing
a very discreet damsel when I last saw you, and I felt rather afraid of
you. I know that you were good enough to express much disapproval of me
and my ways."

"Very likely I did, though I don't remember it. I think I was very
outspoken in those days."

"I do not think you have changed much in that respect, Mary," Miss
Treadwyn said.

"Why should one say what one does not think," Mary said, sturdily, "it
would be much better if we all did so. Do you not agree with me, Mr.
Hartington?"

"It depends upon what 'better' means; it would be awful to think of the
consequences if we all did so. Society would dissolve itself into its
component parts and every man's hand would be against his neighbor. I do
not say that people should say what they do not think, but I am sure
that the world would not be so pleasant as it is by a long way if every
one was to say exactly what he did think. Just imagine what the
sensation of authors or artists would be if critics were to state their
opinions with absolute candor!"

"I think it were better if they did so, Mr. Hartington; in that case
there would be fewer idiotic books written and fewer men wasting their
lives in trying vainly to produce good paintings."

"That is true enough," Cuthbert laughed, "but you must remember that
critics do not buy either books or paintings, and that there are plenty
of people who buy the idiotic books and are perfectly content with
pictures without a particle of artistic merit."

"I suppose so," she admitted, reluctantly, "but so much the worse, for
it causes mediocrity!"

"But we are most of us mediocre--authors like Dickens, Thackeray, and
George Eliot are the exception--and so are artists like Millais and
Landseer, but when books and paintings give pleasure they fulfil their
purpose, don't they?"

"If their purpose is to afford a livelihood to those that make them, I
suppose they do, Mr. Hartington; but they do not fulfil what ought to be
their purpose--which should, of course, be to elevate the mind or to
improve the taste."

He shook his head.

"That is too lofty an ideal altogether for me," he said. "I doubt
whether men are much happier for their minds being improved or their
tastes elevated, unless they are fortunate enough to have sufficient
means to gratify those tastes. If a man is happy and contented with the
street he lives in, the house he inhabits, the pictures on his walls,
and the books he gets from a library, is he better off when you teach
him that the street is mean and ugly, the house an outrage on
architectural taste, the wall-papers revolting, the pictures daubs, and
the books trash? Upon my word I don't think so. I am afraid I am a
Philistine."

"But you are an artist, are you not, Mr. Hartington," Miss Treadwyn
said, looking at the sketch which had already made considerable
progress.

"Unfortunately, no; I have a taste for art, but that is all. I should be
better off if I had not, for then I should be contented with doing
things like this; as it is I am in a perpetual state of grumble because
I can do no better."

"You know the Latin proverb _meliora video_, and so on, Mr. Hartington,
does it apply?"

"That is the first time I have had Latin quoted against me by a young
lady," Cuthbert said, smilingly, but with a slight flush that showed the
shaft had gone home. "I will not deny that the quotation exactly hits my
case. I can only plead that nature, which gave me the love for art, did
not give me the amount of energy and the capacity for hard work that are
requisite to its successful cultivation, and has not even given me the
stimulus of necessity, which is, I fancy, the greatest human motor."

"I should be quite content to paint as well as you do, Mr. Hartington,"
Anna Treadwyn said. "It must add immensely to the pleasure of travelling
to be able to carry home such remembrances of places one has seen."

"Yes, it does so, Miss Treadwyn. I have done a good deal of wandering
about in a small way, and have quite a pile of portfolios by whose aid I
can travel over the ground again and recall not only the scenery but
almost every incident, however slight, that occurred in connection
therewith."

"Well, Anna, I think we had better be continuing our walk."

"I suppose we had. May I ask, Mr. Hartington, where you are staying? I
am sure my mother will be very pleased if you will call upon us at
Porthalloc. There is a glorious view from the garden. I suppose you will
be at work all day, but you are sure to find us in of an evening."

"Yes, I fancy I shall live in the open air as long as there is light
enough to sketch by, Miss Treadwyn, but if your mother will be good
enough to allow me to waive ceremony, I will come up some evening after
dinner; in the meantime may I say that I shall always be found somewhere
along the shore, and will be glad to receive with due humility any
chidings that my old playmate, if she will allow me to call her so, may
choose to bestow upon me."

Anna Treadwyn nodded. "I expect we shall be here every day; the sea is
new to Mary, and at present she is wild about it."

"How could you go on so, Mary," she went on, as they continued their
walk.

"How could I?" the girl replied. "Have we not agreed that one of the
chief objects of women's lives should not only be to raise their own sex
to the level of man, but generally to urge men to higher aims, and yet
because I have very mildly shown my disapproval of Cuthbert Hartington's
laziness and waste of his talents, you ask me how I can do it!"

"Well, you see, Mary, it is one thing for us to form all sorts of
resolutions when we were sitting eight or ten of us together in your
rooms at Girton; but when it comes to putting them into execution one
sees things in rather a different light. I quite agree with our theories
and I hope to live up to them, as far as I can, but it seems to me much
easier to put the theories into practice in a general way than in
individual cases. A clergyman can denounce faults from the pulpit
without giving offence to anyone, but if he were to take one of his
congregation aside and rebuke him, I don't think the experiment would be
successful."

"Nathan said unto David, thou art the man."

"Yes, my dear, but you will excuse my saying that at present you have
scarcely attained the position of Nathan."

Mary Brander laughed.

"Well, no, but you see Cuthbert Hartington is not a stranger. I have
known him ever since I can remember, and used to like him very much,
though he did delight in teasing me; but I have been angry with him for
a long time, and though I had forgotten it, I remember I did tell him my
mind last time I saw him. You see his father is a dear old man, quite
the beau-ideal of a country squire, and there he is all alone in his big
house while his son chooses to live up in London. I have heard my father
and mother say over and over again that he ought to be at home taking
his place in the county instead of going on his own way, and I have
heard other ladies say the same."

"Perhaps mothers with marriageable daughters, Mary," Anna Treadwyn said
with a smile, "but I don't really see why you should be so severe on him
for going his own way. You are yourself doing so without, I fancy, much
deference to your parents' opinions, and besides I have heard you many a
time rail against the soullessness of the conversation and the gossip
and tittle-tattle of society in country towns, meaning in your case in
Abchester, and should, therefore, be the last to blame him for revolting
against it."

"You forget, Anna," Mary said, calmly, "that the cases are altogether
different. He goes his way with the mere selfish desire to amuse
himself. I have set, what I believe to be a great and necessary aim
before me. I don't pretend that there is any sacrifice in it, on the
contrary it is a source of pleasure and satisfaction to devote myself to
the mission of helping my sex to regain its independence, and to take up
the position which it has a right to."

"Of course we are both agreed on that, my dear, we only differ in the
best way of setting about it."
