"No, not her mother. She was, or at least she said she was, the woman
that took care of Ida before she was brought to us."

"Then you think that Ida Hardwick may be your missing sister?"

"That's what I don't know," said Jack. "If you would only describe her,
Uncle Abel, I could tell better."

"Well," said Mr. Abel Crump, thoughtfully, "I should say this little
girl might be eight or nine years old."

"Yes," said Jack, nodding; "what color were her eyes?"

"Blue."

"So are Ida's."

"A small mouth, with a very sweet expression."

"Yes."

"And I believe her dress was a light one, with a blue ribbon about
her waist. She also had a brown scarf about her neck, if I remember
rightly."

"That is exactly the way Ida was dressed when she went away. I am sure
it must be she."

"Perhaps," suggested his uncle, "this woman, though calling herself
Ida's nurse, was really her mother."

"No, it can't be," said Jack, vehemently. "What, that ugly, disagreeable
woman, Ida's mother! I won't believe it. I should just as soon expect
to see strawberries growing on a thorn-bush. There isn't the least
resemblance between them."

"You know I have not seen Mrs. Hardwick, so I cannot judge on that
point."

"No great loss," said Jack. "You wouldn't care much about seeing her
again. She is a tall, gaunt, disagreeable looking woman; while Ida is
fair, and sweet looking. I didn't fancy this Mrs. Hardwick when I first
set eyes on her. Aunt Rachel was right, for once."

"What did she think?"

"She took a dislike to her, and declared that it was only a plot to get
possession of Ida; but then, that was what we expected of Aunt Rachel."

"Still, it seems difficult to imagine any satisfactory motive on the
part of this woman, supposing she is not Ida's mother."

"Mother, or not," returned Jack, "she's got possession of Ida; and,
from all that you say, she is not the best person to bring her up. I am
determined to rescue Ida from this she-dragon. Will you help me, uncle?"

"You may count upon me, Jack, for all I can do."

"Then," said Jack, with energy, "we shall succeed. I feel sure of it.
'Where there's a will there's a way,' you know."



CHAPTER XVIII. FINESSE.



THE next thing to be done by Jack was, of course, in some way to obtain
a clew to the whereabouts of Peg, or Mrs. Hardwick, to use the name by
which he knew her. No mode of proceeding likely to secure this result
occurred to him, beyond the very obvious one of keeping in the street as
much as possible, in the hope that chance might bring him face to face
with the object of his pursuit.

Fortunately her face was accurately daguerreotyped in his memory, so
that he felt certain of recognizing her, under whatever circumstances
they might meet.

In pursuance of this, the only plan which suggested itself, Jack became
a daily promenader in Chestnut and other streets. Many wondered what
could be the object of the young man who so persistently frequented the
thoroughfares. It was observed that, while he paid no attention to young
ladies, he scrutinized the faces of all middle-aged or elderly women
whom he met, a circumstance likely to attract remark, in the case of a
well-made youth like Jack.

Several days passed, and, although he only returned to his uncle's house
at the hour of meals, he had the same report to bring on each occasion.

"I am afraid," said the baker, "it will be as hard as finding a needle
in a hay-stack, to hope to meet the one you seek, among so many faces."

"There's nothing like trying," answered Jack, courageously. "I'm not
going to give up yet awhile."

He sat down and wrote the following note, home:--

"DEAR PARENTS:

"I arrived in Philadelphia safe, and am stopping at Uncle Abel's. He
received me very kindly. I have got track of Ida, though I have
not found her yet. I have learned as much as this, that this Mrs.
Hardwick--who is a double distilled she-rascal--probably has Ida in her
clutches, and has sent her on two occasions to my uncle's. I am spending
most of my time in the streets, keeping a good lookout for her. If I
do meet her, see if I don't get Ida away from her. But it may take some
time. Don't get discouraged, therefore, but wait patiently. Whenever
anything new turns up you will receive a line from your dutiful son

"JACK."

In reply to this letter, or rather note, Jack received an intimation
that he was not to cease his efforts as long as a chance remained to
find Ida.

The very day after the reception of this letter, as Jack was sauntering
along the street, he suddenly perceived in front of him a form which at
once reminded him of Mrs. Hardwick. Full of hope that this might be
so, he bounded forward, and rapidly passed the suspected person, turned
suddenly round, and confronted Ida's nurse.

The recognition was mutual. Peg was taken aback by this unexpected
encounter.

"Her first impulse was to make off, but the young man's resolute
expression warned her that this would prove in vain.

"Mrs. Hardwick!" said Jack.

"You are right," said she, nodding, "and you, if I am not mistaken, are
John Crump, the son of my worthy friends in New York."

"Well," ejaculated Jack, internally, "if that doesn't beat all for
coolness."

"My name is Jack," he said, aloud.

"Indeed! I thought it might be a nickname."

"You can't guess what I came here for," said Jack, with an attempt at
sarcasm, which utterly failed of its effect.

"To see your sister Ida, I presume," said Peg, coolly.

"Yes," said Jack, amazed at the woman's composure.

"I thought some of you would be coming on," said Peg, whose prolific
genius had already mapped out her course.

"You did?"

"Yes, it was only natural. But what did your father and mother say to
the letter I wrote them?"

"The letter you wrote them!"

"The letter in which I wrote that Ida's mother had been so pleased with
the appearance and manners of her child, that she could not resolve to
part with her, and had determined to keep her for the present."

"You don't mean to say," said Jack, "that any such letter as that has
been written?"

"What, has it not been received?" inquired Peg, in the greatest apparent
astonishment.

"Nothing like it," answered Jack. "When was it written?"

"The second day after Ida's arrival," replied Peg, unhesitatingly.

"If that is the case," returned Jack, not knowing what to think, "it
must have miscarried."

"That is a pity. How anxious you all must have felt!" remarked Peg,
sympathizingly.

"It seemed as if half the family were gone. But how long does Ida's
mother mean to keep her?"

"A month or six weeks," was the reply.

"But," said Jack, his suspicions returning, "I have been told that Ida
has twice called at a baker's shop in this city, and, when asked what
her name was, answered Ida Hardwick.' You don't mean to say that you
pretend to be her mother?"

"Yes, I do," returned Peg, calmly.

"It's a lie," said Jack, vehemently. "She isn't your daughter."

"Young man," said Peg, with wonderful self-command, "you are exciting
yourself to no purpose. You asked me if I _pretended_ to be her mother.
I do pretend; but I admit, frankly, that it is all pretence."

"I don't understand what you mean," said Jack, mystified.

"Then I will take the trouble to explain it to you. As I informed your
father and mother, when in New York, there are circumstances which stand
in the way of Ida's real mother recognizing her as her own child. Still,
as she desires her company, in order to avert all suspicion, and prevent
embarrassing questions being asked, while she remains in Philadelphia
she is to pass as my daughter."

This explanation was tolerably plausible, and Jack was unable to
gainsay it, though it was disagreeable to him to think of even a nominal
connection between Ida and the woman before him.

"Can I see Ida?" asked Jack, at length.

To his great joy, Peg replied, "I don't think there can be any
objection. I am going to the house now. Will you come now, or appoint
some other time?"

"I will go now by all means," said Jack, eagerly. "Nothing should stand
in the way of seeing Ida."

A grim smile passed over the nurse's face.

"Follow me, then," she said. "I have no doubt Ida will be delighted to
see you."

"Dear Ida!" said Jack. "Is she well, Mrs. Hardwick?"

"Perfectly well," answered Peg. "She has never been in better health
than since she has been in Philadelphia."

"I suppose," said Jack, with a pang, "that she is so taken up with her
new friends that she has nearly forgotten her old friends in New York."

"If she did," said Peg, sustaining her part with admirable
self-possession, "she would not deserve to have friends at all. She is
quite happy here, but she will be very glad to return to New York to
those who have been so kind to her."

"Really," thought Jack; "I don't know what to make of this Mrs.
Hardwick. She talks fair enough, if her looks are against her. Perhaps I
have misjudged her, after all."



CHAPTER XIX. CAUGHT IN A TRAP.



JACK and his guide paused in front of a three-story brick building of
respectable appearance.

"Does Ida's mother live here?" interrogated Jack.

"Yes," said Peg, coolly. "Follow me up the steps."

The woman led the way, and Jack followed.

The former rang the bell. An untidy servant girl made her appearance.

"We will go up-stairs, Bridget," said Peg.

Without betraying any astonishment, the servant conducted them to an
upper room, and opened the door.

"If you will go in and take a seat," said Peg, "I will send Ida to you
immediately."

She closed the door after him, and very softly slipped the bolt which
had been placed on the outside. She then hastened downstairs, and
finding the proprietor of the house, who was a little old man with a
shrewd, twinkling eye, and a long aquiline nose, she said to this man,
who was a leading spirit among the coiners into whose employ she and her
husband had entered, "I want you to keep this lad in confinement, until
I give you notice that it will be safe to let him go."

"What has he done?" asked the old man.

"He is acquainted with a secret dangerous to both of us," answered Peg,
with intentional prevarication; for she knew that, if it were supposed
that she only had an interest in Jack's detention, they would not take
the trouble to keep him.

"Ha!" exclaimed the old man; "is that so? Then, I warrant me, he can't
get out unless he has sharp claws."

"Fairly trapped, my young bird," thought Peg, as she hastened away; "I
rather think that will put a stop to your troublesome interference for
the present. You haven't lived quite long enough to be a match for old
Peg. You'll find that out by and by. Ha, ha! won't your worthy uncle,
the baker, be puzzled to know why you don't come home to-night?"

Meanwhile Jack, wholly unsuspicious that any trick had been played upon
him, seated himself in a rocking-chair, waiting impatiently for the
coming of Ida, whom he was resolved to carry back with him to New York
if his persuasions could effect it.

Impelled by a natural curiosity he examined, attentively, the room in
which he was seated. It was furnished moderately well; that is, as well
as the sitting-room of a family in moderate circumstances. The floor
was covered with a plain carpet. There was a sofa, a mirror, and several
chairs covered with hair-cloth were standing stiffly at the windows.
There were one or two engravings, of no great artistic excellence,
hanging against the walls. On the centre-table were two or three books.
Such was the room into which Jack had been introduced.

Jack waited patiently for twenty minutes. Then he began to grow
impatient.

"Perhaps Ida is out," thought our hero; "but, if she is, Mrs. Hardwick
ought to come and let me know."

Another fifteen minutes passed, and still Ida came not.

"This is rather singular," thought Jack. "She can't have told Ida that
I am here, or I am sure she would rush up at once to see her brother
Jack."

At length, tired of waiting, and under the impression that he had been
forgotten, Jack walked to the door, and placing his hand upon the latch,
attempted to open it.

There was a greater resistance than he had anticipated.

Supposing that it must stick, he used increased exertion, but the door
perversely refused to open.
