"I mean to go out after dinner and hunt up some more girls, for you see
I shall have no candy to sell myself this afternoon, when I have given
Ann two dozen sticks."

"I hope you will not attempt to lecture them as you did her."

"Why, mother, I know all about the business and they don't know
anything."

"I doubt not you are competent to advise them; but the manner in which
you address them is more offensive than the matter. Your knowledge of
the business makes you treat them as inferiors. You must not think too
much of yourself, Katy."

"No danger of that, mother."

"I am afraid there is. Persons in authority, who are gentle and kind,
and do not act like superiors, are more promptly obeyed, and more loved
and respected, than those who are puffed up by their office, and
tyrannical in their manners."

"But I am not a person in authority, mother," laughed Katy.

"You will be, if you employ a dozen girls to sell candy for you."

After Katy had eaten her dinner, and fitted out Ann Grippen, she left
the house in search of some more assistants. She was well known to all
the boys and girls in the neighborhood; and when she stated her object
to one and another of them, she was readily understood. To help her
cause, it had begun to be known that Ann Grippen had been seen with a
clean face, selling candy in the street. She had no difficulty,
therefore, in procuring the services of half a dozen girls, who were
delighted with the plan especially when Katy informed them of Ann's
success.

On her return home, she found that Simon Sneed had called to see her,
and she immediately hastened to his house. When she knocked, he came to
the door and invited her into the parlor.

"Well, Katy, I have hit upon something," said he.

"I am glad you have."

"I went down town after I saw you, and hearing of a place in Tremont
Row, I went to apply for it."

"Did you get it?"

"Not yet, but I hope to get it. They agreed to give me three dollars a
week if everything proved satisfactory; but they wanted a
recommendation from my last employers."

"Of course they will give you one."

"No, they would not; they were offended because I left them."

"Then you asked them?"

"Yes, I went after one this afternoon, and they would not give it to
me. I did not much expect they would, and so I informed Messrs. Runn &
Reed, the firm to which I have applied for an engagement. I told them
exactly how the case stood; that I had demanded higher wages, and the
Messrs. Sands were angry with me for doing so, and for that reason
refused the testimonial. They saw through it all, and understood my
position. When I spoke to them about my friend the mayor, they looked
surprised, and said a recommendation from him would satisfy them. So
you see just how I am situated."

"Why don't you go to him at once, and ask him for the recommendation?"
said Katy wondering why he hesitated at so plain a case.

But Master Simon had some scruples about doing so. He was old enough to
know that it was rather a delicate business to ask a man in a high
official station for a testimonial on so slight an acquaintance. The
mayor was interested in Katy, though she did not presume to call him
her friend. She had twice called upon him, and she might again.

"I don't like to ask him, Katy. I feel some delicacy about doing so."

"I should just as lief ask him as not, if I were you. I am afraid you
are too proud, Master Simon."

"I am proud, Katy: that's just it. I was born to be a gentleman, but I
submit to my lot. I am willing to sell my talents and my labor for
money. If I can once get in at Runn & Reed's, I am sure they will
appreciate me, and consider it a lucky day on which they engaged me."

"If you want me to go to the mayor's house with you, I will," said
Katy, who did not clearly comprehend Simon's wishes.

"Well, I think I will not go myself," replied Simon.

"Why not?"

"I do not like to place myself in a humiliating posture before great
men. If I were mayor of Boston, I should like to do him the favor which
I ask for myself. When I am--"

"You haven't asked him, Master Simon."

"In a word, Katy, I want you to ask him for me. You will do me a great
favor."

"I will," replied Katy, promptly.

"The mayor is a very fine man, kind-hearted, and willing to help
everybody that deserves help; and if he were not my friend, I should
feel no delicacy in asking him myself. You can state the case, and
inform him who I am, and what I am; that you know me to be honest and
faithful. You can tell him, too, that I am a gentlemanly person, of
pleasing address."

"But I can't remember all that," interposed Katy.

"Tell him what you can recollect, then. He is an easy, good-natured
man, and will give you the testimonial at once."

"Suppose you write a paper, just such as you want, Master Simon. Then
he can copy it."

"Well I will do that."

Simon seated himself at a table, and, after considerable effort,
produced the following piece of elegant composition, which he read to
Katy:--


"To whom it may concern:

"This may certify that I have been for some time acquainted with my
friend Mr. Simon Sneed, and I believe him to be an honest and faithful
young man, of gentlemanly bearing, pleasing address, and polite
manners, who will be an honor and an ornament to any establishment that
may be so fortunate as to secure his valuable services; and I
cheerfully recommend him to any person to whom he may apply for a
situation. Mayor of Boston."


"I have left a blank space for his honor's signature," continued Master
Simon, when he had read the modest document. "What do you think of it,
Katy?"

"It is very fine. What a great scholar you must be! I should think
you'd write a book."

"Perhaps I may one of these days."

"I will go right up to the mayor's house now," said Katy, as she bade
him good afternoon.

Before she went, she returned home and nicely enclosed six sticks of
candy in white paper as a present for Freddie, the mayor's little son.
On her way up to Park Street she opened Simon's paper, and read it. It
sounded funny to her, with its big words and fine sentences; and then
what a puffing Master Simon had given himself! She even began to wonder
if there was not something about her gentlemanly friend which was not
all right.

She reached the mayor's house, and as it was his time to be at home,
she was conducted to the library.

"Ah, Katy, I am glad to see you," said he, taking her hand.

"Thank you, sir. I have brought this candy for Master Freddie."

"You are very good, and I suppose you are so proud that I must not
offer to pay you for it."

"If you please, don't, sir," replied Katy, unconsciously taking Master
Simon's testimonial from her pocket. "I don't want you to pay me in
money, but you may pay me in another way, if you please."

"May I? What have you in your hand?"

"A paper, sir. You remember Master Simon Sneed?"

"No, I don't."

"The young man at Sands & Co.'s."

"O, yes; the young gentleman that uses so many long words."

"He has left his place, and wants to get another."

"He has left it? Why was that?"

"He asked for more wages. He has found another place, which he can have
if he can get a testimonial."

"Let him ask Sands & Co."

"They won't give him one, because they are so angry with him for
leaving them."

"That indeed!"

"Master Simon wants you to give him one," continued Katy, who, in her
confusion was jumping at the conclusion of the matter rather too
hastily, and before she had produced a proper impression in regard to
her hero's transcendent character and ability.

"Does he, indeed," laughed the mayor. "He is very modest."

"He said, as you are his friend, you would not object to giving him
one."

"What have you in your hand, Katy? Has he written one to save me the
trouble?" laughed the mayor.

"I asked him to do so. You can copy it off, if you please, sir."

The mayor took the testimonial and proceeded to read it. Katy had
already concluded from his manner that the business was not all
correct, and she wished herself out of the scrape. He finished the
reading, and then burst into a violent fit of laughter.

"Your friend is very modest, Katy;--my friend Mr. Simon Sneed."

"I hope I haven't done anything wrong, sir?" stammered Katy.

"No, Katy; you have been imposed upon by a silly young man. You meant
to do him a kindness--in your heart you had nothing but kindness--and I
think the more of you for what you have done, and the less of Simon for
what he has done. Did he think I would recommend him, when I know
nothing about him? He is a conceited puppy, and, in my opinion, a
worthless fellow. One of these days he will be 'an honor and an
ornament' to the workhouse, if he does business in this manner."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Katy, frightened at the remarks of the mayor.

"Now, Katy, we will go to the store of the Messrs. Sands & Co., and
find out about this young man. I will meet you there at half-past four.
Good-by, Katy. Freddie thinks ever so much of you now, and in his
behalf I thank you for the candy."

Katy did not know exactly what to make of her position but at the time
fixed, she was at the store of Sands & Co., where the mayor soon joined
her.

"Now, Katy, you shall hear what his employers say of Master Simon,"
said he; and she followed him into the store.

The mayor stated his business, and inquired concerning the character of
Simon.

"He is honest, and did his work very well," replied Mr. Sands.

Katy was pleased to hear this, and the mayor confessed his surprise.

"But he was an intolerable nuisance about the store," continued Mr.
Sands. "With only a small amount of modesty, he would have done very
well; as it was, he was the biggest man in our employ. Our customers
were disgusted with him, and we had been thinking of getting rid of him
for a long time. When he asked for more wages, impudently declaring he
would leave if we did not accede to his demand, we discharged him. In a
word, I wouldn't have him round the store at any price."

"As I supposed," replied the mayor, as he showed Mr. Sands the
recommendation Simon had written.

"This sounds just like him."

Katy pitied poor Simon now that she understood him, and she went home
determined to tell him all that had passed between the mayor and
herself.



CHAPTER XV.

KATY GETS A LETTER FROM LIVERPOOL.

Master Simon Sneed sat at the window when Katy returned, and she had to
tell him all about it. She pitied him, poor fellow, and she hoped the
lesson would do him good. She did not like to tell him so many
unpleasant things, for they would wound his pride.

"Well, Katy, what did my friend the mayor say?" asked Simon, as he
joined her on the sidewalk.

"I am afraid you will not call him your friend after this," replied
Katy.

"Why? He had not the effrontery to refuse my reasonable request?"

"The what? Please to use words that I can understand," said she, for
she was not a little disgusted with Simon's big words, now she knew how
much mischief they had done him.

"Didn't he give you the paper?"

"He did not."

"I didn't think that of him. It was shabby."

"He said he did not know you. But I showed him your paper, in which you
had written down what you thought of yourself."

"Well, what did he say to that?" asked Simon, eagerly.

"I thought he would split his fat sides laughing. He didn't seem to
believe a word of it."

"He didn't? I am surprised at that."

"He said you were a conceited puppy."

"I always took the mayor for a sensible fellow; I see I have been
mistaken."

"He didn't like it because you sent me to him upon such an errand. He
said you had imposed upon me."

"Go on, Katy; I may expect anything after what you have said," replied
Simon, with all the coolness and indifference he could command.

"He said he believed you were a worthless fellow. Then he told me to
meet him at the store of the Messrs. Sands & Co., and he would inquire
about you."

"Then you went to the store?"
