"It is very serious, Sir John, and I have been in terrible anxiety since
I dropped it out, lest it should not come to hand in time. As it is,
you have till midnight to make your preparations." He then repeated the
statement made by the galley slave.

"By my faith," Sir John Kendall exclaimed, "this is a pretty plot
indeed! And had it succeeded, as it certainly would have done but for
your vigilance, it would have been a heavy blow to us. The burning of
all our galleys would have crippled us sorely, and the loss of over
a thousand slaves would have been a serious one indeed, when we so
urgently require them for completing our defences. Get rid of those
clothes at once, Sir Gervaise, and don your own. We must go straight
to the grand master. You will find your clothes and armour in the next
room. I had them taken there as soon as your token was brought me."

In a few minutes Gervaise returned in his usual attire, and with his
armour buckled on. The two knights were already in their coats of
mail, and leaving the auberge they went to the grand master's palace.
A servitor had already been sent to D'Aubusson to inform him that they
were coming, and he advanced to meet them as they entered.

"Welcome, Sir Gervaise!" he said. "Whether your news be good or bad,
whether you have found that it is a general rising of the slaves that
is intended, or a plot by which a handful of slaves may seize a boat
and escape, the gratitude of the Order is no less due to you for the
hardships and humiliations you have undergone on its behalf."

"It concerns but one prison: that of St. Pelagius."

"The largest of them," the grand master put in.

"The whole of the slaves there are to be liberated at twelve o'clock
tonight, are to seize the three water towers and to spike the guns, to
burn all the shipping in the harbour, to make off with six galleys, and
destroy the rest."

"By St. John!" D'Aubusson exclaimed, "this is indeed a serious matter.
But tell me all about it. There must be treachery indeed at work for
such a scheme to be carried out."

Gervaise now told him all the details he had learned.

"So two of the Order, though but of the inferior grade, are in the
plot?" the grand master said; "and several of the overseers? One of the
villains is, of course, the man you saw this Greek talking with. We
must get hold of the other if we can. As to the slaves, now that we have
warning, there is an end of the matter, though without such warning they
would surely have succeeded, for the plans are well laid, and they would
have been at sea before we could have gathered in any force at the port.
If it were not that it would cost the lives of many of the warders and
of the prison guards, I should say we ought to take post outside the
gate, for we should then catch the traitors who are to accompany them.
As it is, we must be beforehand with them. A hundred men will be more
than ample for our purpose. Do you take fifty of your knights, Sir John
Kendall, and I will draw fifty of those of Auvergne. At eleven o'clock
we will meet at the gate leading down into the town, and will march to
the private entrance of the governor's house. I will go in first with a
few of you, tell him what we have discovered, and post guards to prevent
any one from leaving his house. Then, having admitted the others, we
will go quietly out and place a party at each door of the overseers'
house, with orders to seize any who may come out. The rest, in small
parties, will then go round the prison, and, entering each room, show
the slaves that their plot has been discovered. This we must do to save
the lives of the guards who may be faithful to their trust. As to the
higher officials engaged in the affair, we must obtain their names from
the overseers or slaves. It is not likely that the two traitors will
quit their houses, as they will leave the matter in the hands of the
overseers, who, as you say, intend to first open the doors, and then to
accompany the slaves in their escape. Do not warn the knights until it
is nearly time to start, Sir John. The less stir made the better, for no
one can say whether they may not have suborned some of the servitors to
send instant news of any unusual movements in any of the auberges."

At half past ten Sir John Kendall went round among the knights and bade
fifty of them arm themselves quietly, and proceed, one by one, down to
the gate, and there await orders. Up to this time Gervaise had remained
in the bailiff's room, so as to avoid the questioning that would take
place, and he went down to the gate with the bailiff and Sir John
Boswell.

The knights assembled rapidly. None were aware of the reason for which
they had been called out at such an hour, and there was a buzz of talk
and conjecture until Sir John Kendall arrived. He was followed by four
of the servants, who at once lighted the torches they carried, when
he proceeded to go through the roll, and found that the muster was
complete. Many of the knights had gazed in some surprise at Gervaise,
whose dark complexion altogether concealed his identity, and it was
supposed that he must be some newly arrived knight, though none had
heard that any ship had entered the harbour that day.

Two or three minutes later fifty knights of the langue of Auvergne
came down, headed by the grand master himself, whose appearance greatly
heightened the surprise of the English knights. The torches were now
extinguished, the gate thrown open, and the party descended into the
town. Gervaise had purposely fallen in by the side of Harcourt.

"You are but newly arrived, Sir Knight?" the latter said, as they moved
off.

"Not so very newly, Ralph," Gervaise replied.

"What! is it you, Gervaise?" Harcourt exclaimed, with a start of
surprise. "Why, I did not know you, though I looked hard at you in the
torch light. What have you done with yourself? Where have you been? Do
you know what all this is about?"

"I cannot tell you now, Ralph. You must be content to know that I have
been in prison, and working in the galleys."

"The saints defend us! Why, what on earth had you done to entail such
punishment as that? It is an outrage. The grand master and the council
have the right to expel a knight from the Order after due trial and
investigation, but not to condemn him to such penalties as the galleys.
It is an outrage upon the whole Order, and I would say so to the grand
master himself."

"There was no outrage in it, Ralph. Wait until you hear the whole story.
That I have not disgraced you, you may judge from the fact that I am in
the armour and mantle of the Order, and that, as you saw, I came down
with Sir John Kendall himself."

There were no people about in the streets, though the lights still
burned on a few of the roofs. For a short distance the knights marched
down towards the port, and then turned down a street to the right. After
a few minutes' marching they halted under a high wall which all knew to
be that of the prison of St. Pelagius. Six knights were posted at the
main entrance, with orders that none should be allowed to leave the
prison, and that any persons who came up to the gate were to be at once
seized and made prisoners.

The rest marched on to a small door leading into the governor's house.
Here they were halted, and told to wait till called in; six knights of
England, and as many of Auvergne, being told off to accompany the grand
master and Sir John Kendall. A note had been sent to the governor,
informing him that the grand master intended to visit the prison at
eleven o'clock, but that the matter was to be kept an absolute secret;
and that the governor himself was to be down at the gate to admit him.



CHAPTER XI IN COMMAND OF A GALLEY


William Neave, the governor of the prison, looked astonished indeed
when, upon his opening the door, the grand master and the bailiff of
the English langue, with the twelve knights behind them, entered. He had
been puzzled when, four days before, he had received an order from
the grand master that Ahmet, a servitor in the auberge of the English
langue, should be permitted to pass the night in his house, with
authority to move freely and without question, at any hour, in the
courtyard of the gaol, and to depart at any hour, secretly and without
observation, by the private gate. Still more had he been surprised when
he received the message that the grand master would pay him a secret
visit at eleven o'clock at night.

"Let no word be spoken until we are in your apartments," D'Aubusson said
in a low voice, as he entered. "But first lead four of these knights and
post them so that none can enter the gaol from the house. If there are
more than four doors or windows on that side, you must post a larger
number. It is imperative that there shall be no communication whatever
between your servants and the gaol."

As soon as this was done, the rest of the party were taken to the
governor's rooms.

"I can now explain to you all," the grand master said, "the reason of
our presence here. I have learned that at twelve tonight there will be
a general rising of the slaves in this prison, and that, aided by
treachery, they will free themselves from their fetters, overpower and
slay such of the guards in their rooms as have not been bribed, throw
open the gates, make their way down to the port, burn all the shipping
there, and make off in the six galleys manned by them, having first
overpowered the sentries in the three forts commanding the entrance, and
spiked the guns."

Exclamations of astonishment burst from the knights, who now, for the
first time, learnt the reason of their being called out. The governor
listened with an expression of stupefaction.

"With all deference to your Highness," he said hesitatingly, "it seems
to me that some one must have been deceiving you with this tale. It is
altogether incredible that such a plot should have been hatched without
a whisper of the matter coming to my ears. It could only be possible
were there, not one but many, traitors among the officials; if this is
so, then indeed am I a dull ass, and unfit for my duty here, of which
I shall pray you to relieve me, and to order such punishment as the
council may deem just to be allotted to me for having so signally been
hoodwinked."

"My news is sure," the grand master said; "but I deem not that you are
in any way to blame in the matter. The plot has been matured, not as
a consequence of any laxity of discipline in the prison, but from
deliberate treachery, against which no mortal being can guard. The
traitors are two of the officials who, being members of the Order, none
would suspect of connivance in such a deed. With them are several--I
know not how many--under officials, warders, and guards; all these have
been bribed by an emissary from Constantinople, now in the town, and
who is doubtless furnished with large means. It is well, indeed, for the
Order, that this terrible act of treachery has been discovered in time
to prevent the plot from coming to a head, for the loss of all our
galleys, to say nothing of the disgrace of having been thus bearded by
slaves, would be a very heavy blow to it.

"Now that the house is safely guarded, William Neave, you can admit
the rest of the knights, who are waiting outside. Then you will, in the
first place, conduct a party, and post them so that they may arrest,
as they come out to perform their share of the work, all officials,
warders, and guards, of whatever rank. When you have posted knights to
carry out this--and I need not say that the operation must be performed
as silently as possible, for it is above all things necessary that
the men concerned shall have no suspicion that their plot has been
discovered--you will conduct other parties to the various rooms occupied
by the slaves. The guards on duty inside will be made prisoners. The
doors will then be locked and barred as before. The appearance of the
knights and the arrest of the guards will be sufficient to show the
slaves that their plot has been discovered, and there will be no fear of
their making any attempt to carry it into execution. I will myself post
the main body of the knights in the courtyard. The arrest of the guards
is to be carried out at once, as all those not concerned in the plot
would be killed when the hour comes for the rising. Therefore this part
of the business must be carried out immediately. I should not, however,
lead the guards away to a cell, for the less tramping of feet the
better. Therefore I shall place two knights in each room, and beg them
to remain inside in charge until the traitors outside are secured."

The knights outside were now marched up. The grand master ordered half
those of Auvergne to go round to the main gate, which would be opened
for them by the governor; they were to enter quietly, and remain in a
body close to it until they received further orders. Sir John Kendall
told off the rest of the knights to the various duties of watching the
houses occupied by the officials and warders, and of entering the prison
rooms and remaining in them on guard. The governor, with his private
servants, bearing a supply of torches, was to lead them to the various
cells, and unlock the doors. The knights were enjoined to move as
noiselessly as possible, and to avoid all clashing of arms against
armour.

The governor produced a number of cloths intended to be served out to
the slaves. Strips of these were cut off and wrapped round the feet of
the English knights, so as to deaden the sound of their boots on the
stone pavement. Then, accompanied by the grand master and Sir John
Kendall, he went the round of the cells.

In some of these the slaves were found standing up in an attitude of
eager expectation, which, as the door opened, and the light of the
torches showed a party of knights, changed into one of terror and
consternation. Scarce a word was spoken. The guard was ordered to
lay down his arms, and to take one of the torches. Two knights placed
themselves, one on each side of him, with drawn swords. The door was
again locked and barred, and the party proceeded to the next cell. In
less than a quarter of an hour this part of the work was finished,
and D'Aubusson, Sir John Kendall, and the governor, then took up their
station with a party of knights who, concealed behind a buttress, were
watching the doors of the officials' houses.

Ten minutes later one of these doors was heard to open, and five dark
figures came noiselessly out. They were allowed to go a short distance,
in order to see if any others followed; but as no others came out, the
governor stepped forward.

"Whither are you going, at this time of night?" he asked. There was a
momentary pause, a few hasty words were exchanged, then the five men
rushed towards him with bared swords or knives; but before they reached
him the knights poured out from their hiding place.

"We are betrayed," one of the men shouted in Turkish. "Fight to the
last. Better be killed than tortured and executed." With a yell of fury
and despair, they rushed upon the knights. So desperate was their attack
that the latter were forced to use their swords, which indeed, burning
with rage at the treachery of these men, they were not backward in
doing, and in less than a minute the five traitors lay, with cloven
heads, dead on the pavement.

"It is as well so," D'Aubusson said, looking sternly down upon them;
"perhaps better so, since it has saved us the scandal of their trial.
We might have learned more from them, but we have learnt enough, since,
doubtless, they have no accomplices among the warders, or they would
have been with them. Now we will deal with the arch traitors. There is
no need for further concealment; the noise of this fray will assuredly
have been heard by them, for they will be listening for the sounds that
would tell them the slaves had been liberated."

Followed by the knights, he went to the door of the house occupied
by the overseers, all of whom were members of the lower branch of the
Order. It was indeed evident that an alarm had been given there, for
lights appeared at the windows. As they opened the door and entered the
hall, several half-dressed men rushed down the stairs with drawn swords,
two of them carrying torches in their left hands. As the light fell
upon the figures of the grand master and the knights, they paused in
astonishment.

"There is treachery at work in the prison," D'Aubusson said quietly. "I
pray you to collect your comrades and to assemble here at once."

In a minute or two some twenty officials were gathered in the hall.

"Are all here?" D'Aubusson asked the governor.

The latter counted the men.

"There are two short," he said--"Pietro Romano and Karl Schumann. They
occupy the same room. Go and fetch them down, four of you."

The four men nearest to the stairs at once went up with two torches.
They returned in a minute.

"The door is fastened on the inside, and we can obtain no response."

"Fetch an axe and break it in," the grand master ordered. "Sir John
Boswell, do you, with some other knights, take post without; they may
attempt to escape by the window, though, as we hold the gates, it would
avail them little. Sir Gervaise Tresham, do you follow us."

Gervaise, who had been placed with the party watching the house,
followed the grand master and governor upstairs. A few blows with an axe
splintered the door; its fastenings gave way, and they entered the room.
The window was open, and two figures lay prostrate on the ground near
it.

"I half expected this," the grand master said. "They were listening
there. The conflict in the yard told them that the plot had been
discovered, and as they saw us approaching the house, they dared not
meet the punishment of their crimes, and have fallen by their own
daggers. Put a torch close to their faces. Sir Gervaise, do you
recognise in either of these men the official you saw in conversation
with the Greek?"

Gervaise stepped forward and examined the men's faces.

"This is the man," he said, pointing to one of them. "I marked him so
closely that I cannot be mistaken."

"That is Pietro Romano," the governor said; "he was an able officer,
but discontented with his position and given to quarrelling with his
comrades."

"Have a hole dug and bury them in the prison," D'Aubusson said; "they
have been false to their vows, and false to their religion. They have
chosen their own mode of death; let them be buried like dogs, as they
are. But let a careful search be made of their garments and of this
room. It may be that they have some documents concealed which may be of
use to us."

The grand master then descended to the hall.

"Members of the Order," he said to the overseers, "your guilty
companions have met death by their own hands, as the others concerned
in this plot have met theirs by the swords of the knights. It were well
that this matter were not spoken of outside the prison. The attempt has
been detected, and has failed; but were it talked of, it might incite
others to repeat the attempt, and possibly with better success. Now,"
he went on, turning to the governor, "our work is done here. Call up
the other warders. Let them take the men now prisoners in the rooms, and
place them in a dungeon. Let fresh men be placed on guard, and let all
the knights gather in the courtyard."

When this was done, and all the knights again assembled, D'Aubusson
said, "Our work is nearly done, brothers. The traitors are all dead, and
the revolt is at an end. It remains but to capture the author of this
attempt; but I believe he is already in our hands. I have given an
accurate description of him to Da Veschi, who has taken four knights
with him, and they probably will catch him down at the port; if not, he
will be arrested the first thing in the morning. As to the slaves, they
will be so utterly cowed by the discovery, that there will be no fear of
their repeating the attempt. I have ordered the officials of the prison
to say naught in the town of what has taken place. There can, however,
be no concealment among ourselves. I shall, of course, lay the whole
matter before the council. The fact that a strong body of knights has,
at so late an hour, started on some unknown mission is, of course,
already known in the auberges of Auvergne and England. No concealment
of the facts is therefore possible. It is the most serious attempt at a
revolt of the slaves that has ever taken place, and will be a warning
to us that more vigilance must be exercised. As it is, we have only been
saved from the loss of our galleys and slaves by the acuteness of one of
the youngest of our knights, who, in the first place, noted a suspicious
occurrence which would have been passed by without attracting a moment's
thought by ninety-nine out of a hundred men. He laid the matter before
his bailiff, Sir John Kendall, who accepted his offer to disguise
himself as a slave, to enter the prison under circumstances that would
excite no suspicions among the others, and to live and work among them
in order to ascertain whether there was any plot on hand. This task--a
painful one, as you may imagine--he carried out, and for two weeks he
rowed as a galley slave. His lot was as hard as that of the others, for,
as he had reason to believe that some of the officials were concerned in
the plot, it was necessary that all should be kept in ignorance that
he was other than he seemed to be. Thanks to his perfect knowledge of
Turkish, he was able to carry his mission through with complete success,
and to obtain full particulars of the plot we have tonight crushed.
The knight who has performed this inestimable service is Sir Gervaise
Tresham, of the English langue. The action he has performed will be
noted in the annals of the Order as an example of intelligence and of
the extreme of self sacrifice, as well as of courage; for his life would
have been assuredly forfeited had the slaves entertained the slightest
suspicion of his real character."

There was a murmur of acclamation among the knights. Not one of them but
would have freely risked his life in the service of the Order, but there
were few who would not have shrunk from the idea of living as a slave
among the slaves, sharing their tasks, and subject to the orders of men
of inferior rank and often brutal manners.

The knights now returned to their auberges. It was past midnight, but
at the English house the lamps and flambeaux were lighted in the great
hall. The servitors were called up, wine placed on the table, and the
knights discussed the incidents of the evening.

When the meal had concluded, Sir John Kendall said, "Brother knights,
when the grand master bestowed the honour of secular knighthood upon
this young comrade of ours, he predicted that he would rise to high
distinction in the Order. I think you will all agree with me that the
prediction is already in a fair way of being fulfilled, and that the
services he has rendered to the Order justify us, his comrades of the
English langue, in feeling proud of him. I drink, brothers, to his
health."

A loud shout rose from the assembled knights, for upon the return of the
party who had been away, the rest of those at the auberge had hastily
robed themselves and descended to the hall to gather the news. When the
shout had died away, and the wine cups were emptied, Gervaise, who was
sitting on Sir John Kendall's right hand, would gladly have retained his
seat, but the bailiff told him that he must say a few words, and after
standing in embarrassed silence for a minute he said, "Sir John Kendall,
and brother knights, I can only say that I am very sensible of the
kindness with which you have been pleased to regard what seems to me
after all to have been a very ordinary affair. I saw a man, whom I knew
to be a stranger in the Island, speaking surreptitiously to a slave,
and afterwards saw him conversing with a prison officer. That naturally
struck me as curious, and I followed the officer, to see to which prison
he belonged. Any one would have thought, as I did, that such a thing was
strange, if not suspicious, and the only way to find out whether there
was anything in it was to mix with the slaves; as I spoke Turkish
well enough to do so I asked Sir John Kendall's permission to disguise
myself. He gave me every assistance, and I shared their lot for a
fortnight. There was no very great hardship in that--certainly nothing
to merit the praise that Sir John Kendall has been kind enough to bestow
on me. Nevertheless, I am very glad to have gained your good opinion and
very grateful to him and to you for drinking to my health."

Then he sat down abruptly.

Sir John Kendall now rose, and the knights, following his example,
betook themselves to their dormitories.

The next morning notices were sent by the grand master to the bailiffs
of the auberges, and the knights of the grand cross who happened to
be in the Island, to assemble in council. Messages were also sent to
Gervaise, requesting him to repair at the same hour to the palace, as
the council would probably require his attendance.

"Oh dear! I wish this was all over," he said to Ralph, as the latter
assisted him to buckle on his armour.

"I don't see anything to sigh about," Ralph said. "I think that you are
the most fortunate fellow in the world. I do not say that you have not
well deserved it, because it is the tremendous way you worked at Turkish
and gave up everything else that has enabled you to do this. Still,
there was luck in your noticing that villain talking to the galley
slaves, and then to one of the officers of the prison. Of course, as the
grand master said last night, it isn't one in a thousand who would have
thought anything more about it, and I am sure I shouldn't; so that, and
all the rest, is entirely your own doing. Still, it was a piece of
luck that you noticed him talking with a slave. Don't think I envy you,
Gervaise; I don't a bit, and I feel as much as any one that you have
well deserved the honour you have obtained. Still, you know, it is a
