behind the scenes of a New York theatre," remarked Mrs. Gibson.

"I have the dearest dressing room," said Anne, with enthusiasm. "Mr. and
Miss Southard are going to carry you off to their house after the
performance to-night. I almost forgot to tell you. So don't make any
other plans."

"We are in the hands of our friends," said Hippy, with an exaggerated
bow.

"You'll be in the hands of the law if you don't mend your ways,"
prophesied Reddy. "If we get you safely into the theatre without
official assistance it will surprise me very much."

"Reddy, you amaze me," responded Hippy reproachfully. "I may make
mistakes, but I am far from lawless. Neither do I flaunt the flame
colored signal of anarchy every time I remove my hat."

There was a burst of good-natured laughter at Reddy's expense. His red
hair was as common a subject of joke as was Hippy's behavior.

"That was a fair exchange of compliments," said Tom Gray. "Now forget
it, both of you."

"Good-bye, every one, until eleven o'clock," cried Anne, who, knowing
that she would be obliged to hurry away, had brought her wraps to the
dining room with her.

David accompanied Anne to the entrance of the hotel, put her in a
taxicab and walked into the hotel, hardly knowing whether he were glad
or sorry that Anne had had greatness thrust upon her.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE THEATRE PARTY


It was a very merry party that took possession of the box that Mr.
Southard had placed at their disposal and waited with ill-concealed
impatience for the rise of the curtain.

Anne's friends had thought her the ideal "Rosalind" in the High School
production of the piece, but her powers as an actress under the constant
instruction of Everett Southard had increased tenfold. His own marvelous
work was a source of inspiration to Anne, and from the instant that she
set foot upon the stage until the final fall of the curtain she became
and was "Rosalind."

Thrilling with pride as she eagerly watched Anne's triumph, Grace was in
a maze of delight, and every round of applause that Anne received was as
music to her ears. David, too, was more deeply moved than he liked to
admit even to himself. In his own heart he had a distinct fear that in
spite of her assertions to the contrary, Anne might after all yield to
the call of her talent and seek a stage career. During the evening he
became so unusually grave and silent that Grace, having an inkling of
what was passing in his mind, leaned over and said:

"Don't worry, David, she won't. I am sure of it. Her mind is fixed upon
college."

David drew a long breath of almost relief. "I believe it if you say so,
Grace; it has worried me a lot, however. She is such a wonderful little
actress."

"Nevertheless, take my word for it, she won't," was the assuring answer.

After the play was over, the visit behind the scenes being next on the
programme, Mrs. Gibson and her charges were conducted through a long
passage to the back of the house. The boys were taken to Mr. Southard's
dressing room, and Mrs. Gibson and the five girls to Anne's.

There were many exclamations over the cosy dressing room which Anne
occupied. As is the case in most of the recently built theatres, the
star's dressing room had been comfortably furnished and was in direct
comparison to the cheerless, barn-like rooms that make life on the road
a terror to professional people.

"You see, I have had you right with me," smiled Anne, who was seated at
a dressing table taking off her make-up with cold cream. She pointed to
a photograph that the Phi Sigma Tau had had taken the previous summer.

"Only one face missing to-night," said Grace in low tones as she drew
her chair close to Anne's.

"Have you found out anything else?" asked Anne in the same guarded
tones.

"Nothing very important," replied Grace. "Marian and Henry Hammond have
had some sort of quarrel. Nora saw them pass the other day without
speaking."

"That's a step in the right direction", said Anne. "Once she has dropped
him for good and all, she'll begin to see her own folly. Then she'll
come back and be her old self again."

"I hope so," sighed Grace.

Then the conversation became general and the two girls had no further
opportunity for discussion of the subject.

Just as Anne had completed her dressing, a knock sounded on the door,
and Mr. Southard's deep voice called out:

"All aboard for the actors' retreat."

"Come in, Mr. Southard," said Anne, and the door opened to admit the
eminent actor, who looked bigger and handsomer than ever in his long
coat and soft black hat.

Then Anne presented him to Mrs. Gibson, and a general handshaking
ensued.

For the third time that night they were handed into the "uncomplaining
but over-worked taxicab," according to Nora's version, and set out for
the Southard home.

The entire party promptly fell in love with Miss Southard, who was the
counterpart of her brother, except that she was considerably older, and
she apparently returned their liking from the moment of meeting.

"I know every one of you," she said. "Anne talks of no one else to me.
Your fame has already preceded you."

The Southards proved to be hospitable entertainers, and exerted every
effort in behalf of their young guests. The time slipped by on wings,
and it was well after one o'clock before any one thought of returning to
the hotel.

"I am not a very reliable chaperon," laughed Mrs. Gibson, "to allow my
charges to keep such late hours as this."

"It's only once in a life time," remarked Nora.

"How very cruel," said Mr. Southard solemnly. "I had hoped that you
would all honor us again with your society."

"I didn't mean that," she cried, laughing a little. "I only meant that
this was a red-letter night for us. We are basking in the light of
greatness."

"Very pretty, indeed," was the actor's reply, and he gave Nora one of
his rare, beautiful smiles that caused her to afterwards aver that he
was truly the handsomest man in the whole world.

With many expressions of pleasure for the delightful hours they had
passed, the revelers bade the Southards good night and good-bye.

"I am going to give a special party to the Phi Sigma Tau and these young
men, when my season closes," announced the actor as they stood in the
wide hall for a moment before leaving. "I trust that you may be able to
again assume the role of chaperon," he added to Mrs. Gibson.

"I shall need no second invitation," replied Mrs. Gibson. "But may I not
hope to see your sister and yourself at Hawks' Nest, in the near
future?"

"You are indeed kind," responded Mr. Southard. "It would be a distinct
pleasure and perhaps I may be able to arrange it. My season is to be a
short one."

"Get your things and come with us, Anne," teased Grace. "We've loads of
things to talk of, and you can breakfast with us, and go to the train,
too. Please don't say no, because you won't see us again for three whole
weeks."

"I give you my official permission to carry her off, this one time,
Grace," laughed Mr. Southard.

"Better wear your long coat, dear. It is very cold," called Miss
Southard as Anne ran upstairs after her wraps.

Then the final good-byes were said and the party were driven back to
their hotel.

Mrs. Gibson invited Miriam to share her apartment, thus Grace and Anne
were left to themselves, and indulged in one of their old heart-to-heart
talks.

Breakfast the next morning was a late affair. After breakfast, the
entire party went for a drive, and after a one-o'clock luncheon repaired
to the station.

Mrs. Gibson, James Gardiner and the Phi Sigma Tau were to take the 2.30
train for Oakdale. The boys would leave at five o'clock. Tom and Arnold
were to travel part of the journey with David, Hippy and Reddy. Then
their ways diverged.

The girls kissed and embraced Anne tenderly, then there was a rush for
the ferry. They stood on the deck waving to her until they could
scarcely see the flutter of her handkerchief. After agreeing to meet the
boys at the ferry, David escorted Anne back to the Southard's and spent
a brief half hour with her.

"Promise me, Anne," said David earnestly, as he was leaving, "that you
won't accept any engagement that you may receive an offer of."

"Of course not, you foolish David," replied Anne. "Notwithstanding the
fact that you won't believe me, I solemnly promise to run from
prospective managers, as I would from small-pox, and there's my hand
upon it."

"I am satisfied," answered David, grasping her out-stretched hand. "I
know you will keep your word."




CHAPTER XIX

GRACE MEETS WITH A REBUFF


During the journey to Oakdale, Anne and the Southards formed the chief
topic of conversation. It was jointly agreed that Anne had been
fortunate indeed in winning the friendship of the great actor and his
charming sister.

"They treat her as though she were their own sister," remarked Eva
Allen. "They will miss her sadly when she leaves them."

"Every one misses Anne," said Miriam Nesbit. "She is so sweet and
lovable that she simply draws one's affection to her. I am frightfully
jealous of Grace."

"Yes, Grace is Anne's favorite," said Jessica. "Anne would give her life
for Grace if it were necessary."

"And Mabel Allison feels the same way toward you, Jessica," interposed
Grace.

"How I wish Mabel had been with us," sighed Jessica.

"I received a letter from Mrs. Allison, just before leaving Oakdale,"
said Mrs. Gibson. "She expects to come east in June. Mabel has set her
heart upon being here for commencement week. I shall invite the
Southards, too, and perhaps your people will lend you to me for the week
following graduation."

"We should love to go," said Grace, and her friends echoed her answer.

Before their journey ended night closed in around them. They had dinner
in the dining car, and after dinner the girls began to feel a trifle
tired and sleepy.

James Gardiner had discovered a boy friend on the train and had been
graciously granted permission by the Phi Sigma Tau to go over and
cultivate his society.

"You have been an angel, James," said Nora, "and have proved yourself
worthy of a little recreation. Don't forget to be on hand when the train
stops, however. I never saw your equal as a luggage carrier."

One by one the five girls leaned against the comfortable backs of their
seats and closed their eyes. Mrs. Gibson became absorbed in the pages of
a new book.

Grace dozed for a brief space and then opening her eyes gazed idly about
her. The seat on which she sat had been reversed in order that she and
Nora might face Mrs. Gibson and Miriam. Their seats being near to the
middle of the car, she could obtain a good view of a number of the other
passengers. She noticed that the car was very full, every seat being
occupied.

Her eye rested for a second upon a portly, well-dressed old gentleman in
the last seat of the car, who was leaning back with closed eyes, then
traveled on to the man who shared the seat.

"What a remarkable face that man has," she thought. "He looks like a
combination of a snake and a fox. I never before saw such tricky eyes.
He is rather good looking, but there is something about him that
frightens one."

Grace found herself watching, with a kind of fascination, every move
that the stranger made. Once her eyes met his and she shuddered
slightly, there was a world of refined cruelty in their depths. She
looked out of the window as the train rushed on through the darkness,
then almost against her will turned her eyes again in the direction of
the repellent stranger.

But what she saw this time caused her to stare in amazement. The
stranger under cover of a newspaper was bent on extracting the handsome
watch and chain that the elderly gentleman's open coat displayed.
Although the paper hid the movement of his hands, Grace divined by the
expression of the man's face what was taking place behind the paper
screen.

Like a flash she was out of her seat and down the aisle. But quick as
had been her movement, the thief was quicker. He straightened up, coolly
turned to his paper, looking up at her with an air of bored inquiry as
she paused before him.

Ignoring him completely, she touched the old man on the shoulder and
said in a low tone, "Please pardon me, but if you value your watch you
had better look to it. I just saw this man attempting to steal it."

The old gentleman bounded up like a rubber ball, saying excitedly, "What
do you mean, young woman?"

"Just what I say," replied Grace.

The thief gave Grace a contemptuous look, then without stirring, said
lazily, "The young lady is entirely mistaken. She must have been
dreaming."

"I repeat my accusation," said Grace firmly. "I have been watching you
for some time, and I saw you attempt it."

The old gentleman put his hand to his vest and drew out a particularly
fine old-fashioned gold watch.

"My watch is safe enough," he growled testily, "and so is my chain. Any
one who steals from me will have to be pretty smart. I guess if this man
had laid hands on my watch I'd have known it. Can't fool me."

"Certainly not," responded the tricky stranger. "If I were a thief you
would be the last person I should attempt to practice upon."

"I should say so," grumbled the old gentleman. "Young woman, you have
let your imagination run away with you. Be careful in the future or you
may get yourself into serious trouble. This gentleman has taken your
nonsense very good-naturedly."

As the two men were occupying the seat nearest the door, save for the
old gentleman's first bounce, the little scene had been so quietly
enacted that the other passengers were paying little attention to the
trio.

"You had better go back to your friends," said the man whom Grace had
accused, looking at her with cold hatred in his eyes. "That is, unless
you wish to make yourself ridiculous."

Grace turned away without speaking. There were tears of mortification in
her eyes. She had attempted to render a service and had been rudely
rebuffed. She slipped into her place beside Nora, who was dozing, and
