you're home. I couldn't go to sleep till I'd told somebody."

"Told somebody what?"

"How mis'rubul I am."

"Why are you miserable, dear?"

"'Cause I was so bad today, Anne. Oh, I was awful bad--badder'n I've
ever been yet."

"What did you do?"

"Oh, I'm afraid to tell you. You'll never like me again, Anne. I
couldn't say my prayers tonight. I couldn't tell God what I'd done. I
was 'shamed to have Him know."

"But He knew anyway, Davy."

"That's what Dora said. But I thought p'raps He mightn't have noticed
just at the time. Anyway, I'd rather tell you first."

"WHAT is it you did?"

Out it all came in a rush.

"I run away from Sunday School--and went fishing with the Cottons--and
I told ever so many whoppers to Mrs. Lynde--oh! 'most half a
dozen--and--and--I--I said a swear word, Anne--a pretty near swear word,
anyhow--and I called God names."

There was silence. Davy didn't know what to make of it. Was Anne so
shocked that she never would speak to him again?

"Anne, what are you going to do to me?" he whispered.

"Nothing, dear. You've been punished already, I think."

"No, I haven't. Nothing's been done to me."

"You've been very unhappy ever since you did wrong, haven't you?"

"You bet!" said Davy emphatically.

"That was your conscience punishing you, Davy."

"What's my conscience? I want to know."

"It's something in you, Davy, that always tells you when you are doing
wrong and makes you unhappy if you persist in doing it. Haven't you
noticed that?"

"Yes, but I didn't know what it was. I wish I didn't have it. I'd have
lots more fun. Where is my conscience, Anne? I want to know. Is it in my
stomach?"

"No, it's in your soul," answered Anne, thankful for the darkness, since
gravity must be preserved in serious matters.

"I s'pose I can't get clear of it then," said Davy with a sigh. "Are you
going to tell Marilla and Mrs. Lynde on me, Anne?"

"No, dear, I'm not going to tell any one. You are sorry you were
naughty, aren't you?"

"You bet!"

"And you'll never be bad like that again."

"No, but--" added Davy cautiously, "I might be bad some other way."

"You won't say naughty words, or run away on Sundays, or tell falsehoods
to cover up your sins?"

"No. It doesn't pay," said Davy.

"Well, Davy, just tell God you are sorry and ask Him to forgive you."

"Have YOU forgiven me, Anne?"

"Yes, dear."

"Then," said Davy joyously, "I don't care much whether God does or not."

"Davy!"

"Oh--I'll ask Him--I'll ask Him," said Davy quickly, scrambling off the
bed, convinced by Anne's tone that he must have said something dreadful.
"I don't mind asking Him, Anne.--Please, God, I'm awful sorry I behaved
bad today and I'll try to be good on Sundays always and please forgive
me.--There now, Anne."

"Well, now, run off to bed like a good boy."

"All right. Say, I don't feel mis'rubul any more. I feel fine. Good
night."

"Good night."

Anne slipped down on her pillows with a sigh of relief. Oh--how
sleepy--she was! In another second--

"Anne!" Davy was back again by her bed. Anne dragged her eyes open.

"What is it now, dear?" she asked, trying to keep a note of impatience
out of her voice.

"Anne, have you ever noticed how Mr. Harrison spits? Do you s'pose, if I
practice hard, I can learn to spit just like him?"

Anne sat up.

"Davy Keith," she said, "go straight to your bed and don't let me catch
you out of it again tonight! Go, now!"

Davy went, and stood not upon the order of his going.




Chapter XIV

The Summons


Anne was sitting with Ruby Gillis in the Gillis' garden after the day
had crept lingeringly through it and was gone. It had been a warm, smoky
summer afternoon. The world was in a splendor of out-flowering. The idle
valleys were full of hazes. The woodways were pranked with shadows and
the fields with the purple of the asters.

Anne had given up a moonlight drive to the White Sands beach that she
might spend the evening with Ruby. She had so spent many evenings
that summer, although she often wondered what good it did any one, and
sometimes went home deciding that she could not go again.

Ruby grew paler as the summer waned; the White Sands school was given
up--"her father thought it better that she shouldn't teach till New
Year's"--and the fancy work she loved oftener and oftener fell from
hands grown too weary for it. But she was always gay, always hopeful,
always chattering and whispering of her beaux, and their rivalries and
despairs. It was this that made Anne's visits hard for her. What had
once been silly or amusing was gruesome, now; it was death peering
through a wilful mask of life. Yet Ruby seemed to cling to her, and
never let her go until she had promised to come again soon. Mrs. Lynde
grumbled about Anne's frequent visits, and declared she would catch
consumption; even Marilla was dubious.

"Every time you go to see Ruby you come home looking tired out," she
said.

"It's so very sad and dreadful," said Anne in a low tone. "Ruby doesn't
seem to realize her condition in the least. And yet I somehow feel she
needs help--craves it--and I want to give it to her and can't. All the
time I'm with her I feel as if I were watching her struggle with an
invisible foe--trying to push it back with such feeble resistance as she
has. That is why I come home tired."

But tonight Anne did not feel this so keenly. Ruby was strangely quiet.
She said not a word about parties and drives and dresses and "fellows."
She lay in the hammock, with her untouched work beside her, and a
white shawl wrapped about her thin shoulders. Her long yellow braids of
hair--how Anne had envied those beautiful braids in old schooldays!--lay
on either side of her. She had taken the pins out--they made her head
ache, she said. The hectic flush was gone for the time, leaving her pale
and childlike.

The moon rose in the silvery sky, empearling the clouds around her.
Below, the pond shimmered in its hazy radiance. Just beyond the
Gillis homestead was the church, with the old graveyard beside it. The
moonlight shone on the white stones, bringing them out in clear-cut
relief against the dark trees behind.

"How strange the graveyard looks by moonlight!" said Ruby suddenly.
"How ghostly!" she shuddered. "Anne, it won't be long now before I'll
be lying over there. You and Diana and all the rest will be going about,
full of life--and I'll be there--in the old graveyard--dead!"

The surprise of it bewildered Anne. For a few moments she could not
speak.

"You know it's so, don't you?" said Ruby insistently.

"Yes, I know," answered Anne in a low tone. "Dear Ruby, I know."

"Everybody knows it," said Ruby bitterly. "I know it--I've known it all
summer, though I wouldn't give in. And, oh, Anne"--she reached out and
caught Anne's hand pleadingly, impulsively--"I don't want to die. I'm
AFRAID to die."

"Why should you be afraid, Ruby?" asked Anne quietly.

"Because--because--oh, I'm not afraid but that I'll go to heaven,
Anne. I'm a church member. But--it'll be all so different. I think--and
think--and I get so frightened--and--and--homesick. Heaven must be very
beautiful, of course, the Bible says so--but, Anne, IT WON'T BE WHAT
I'VE BEEN USED TO."

Through Anne's mind drifted an intrusive recollection of a funny story
she had heard Philippa Gordon tell--the story of some old man who had
said very much the same thing about the world to come. It had sounded
funny then--she remembered how she and Priscilla had laughed over it.
But it did not seem in the least humorous now, coming from Ruby's pale,
trembling lips. It was sad, tragic--and true! Heaven could not be what
Ruby had been used to. There had been nothing in her gay, frivolous
life, her shallow ideals and aspirations, to fit her for that great
change, or make the life to come seem to her anything but alien and
unreal and undesirable. Anne wondered helplessly what she could say
that would help her. Could she say anything? "I think, Ruby," she began
hesitatingly--for it was difficult for Anne to speak to any one of the
deepest thoughts of her heart, or the new ideas that had vaguely begun
to shape themselves in her mind, concerning the great mysteries of life
here and hereafter, superseding her old childish conceptions, and it
was hardest of all to speak of them to such as Ruby Gillis--"I think,
perhaps, we have very mistaken ideas about heaven--what it is and what
it holds for us. I don't think it can be so very different from life
here as most people seem to think. I believe we'll just go on living, a
good deal as we live here--and be OURSELVES just the same--only it will
be easier to be good and to--follow the highest. All the hindrances
and perplexities will be taken away, and we shall see clearly. Don't be
afraid, Ruby."

"I can't help it," said Ruby pitifully. "Even if what you say about
heaven is true--and you can't be sure--it may be only that imagination
of yours--it won't be JUST the same. It CAN'T be. I want to go on living
HERE. I'm so young, Anne. I haven't had my life. I've fought so hard to
live--and it isn't any use--I have to die--and leave EVERYTHING I care
for." Anne sat in a pain that was almost intolerable. She could not tell
comforting falsehoods; and all that Ruby said was so horribly true. She
WAS leaving everything she cared for. She had laid up her treasures
on earth only; she had lived solely for the little things of life--the
things that pass--forgetting the great things that go onward into
eternity, bridging the gulf between the two lives and making of death a
mere passing from one dwelling to the other--from twilight to unclouded
day. God would take care of her there--Anne believed--she would
learn--but now it was no wonder her soul clung, in blind helplessness,
to the only things she knew and loved.

Ruby raised herself on her arm and lifted up her bright, beautiful blue
eyes to the moonlit skies.

"I want to live," she said, in a trembling voice. "I want to live
like other girls. I--I want to be married, Anne--and--and--have little
children. You know I always loved babies, Anne. I couldn't say this to
any one but you. I know you understand. And then poor Herb--he--he
loves me and I love him, Anne. The others meant nothing to me, but HE
does--and if I could live I would be his wife and be so happy. Oh, Anne,
it's hard."

Ruby sank back on her pillows and sobbed convulsively. Anne pressed her
hand in an agony of sympathy--silent sympathy, which perhaps helped Ruby
more than broken, imperfect words could have done; for presently she
grew calmer and her sobs ceased.

"I'm glad I've told you this, Anne," she whispered. "It has helped me
just to say it all out. I've wanted to all summer--every time you came.
I wanted to talk it over with you--but I COULDN'T. It seemed as if it
would make death so SURE if I SAID I was going to die, or if any one
else said it or hinted it. I wouldn't say it, or even think it. In the
daytime, when people were around me and everything was cheerful, it
wasn't so hard to keep from thinking of it. But in the night, when I
couldn't sleep--it was so dreadful, Anne. I couldn't get away from
it then. Death just came and stared me in the face, until I got so
frightened I could have screamed.

"But you won't be frightened any more, Ruby, will you? You'll be brave,
and believe that all is going to be well with you."

"I'll try. I'll think over what you have said, and try to believe it.
And you'll come up as often as you can, won't you, Anne?"

"Yes, dear."

"It--it won't be very long now, Anne. I feel sure of that. And I'd
rather have you than any one else. I always liked you best of all the
girls I went to school with. You were never jealous, or mean, like some
of them were. Poor Em White was up to see me yesterday. You remember Em
and I were such chums for three years when we went to school? And then
we quarrelled the time of the school concert. We've never spoken to each
other since. Wasn't it silly? Anything like that seems silly NOW. But
Em and I made up the old quarrel yesterday. She said she'd have spoken
years ago, only she thought I wouldn't. And I never spoke to her
because I was sure she wouldn't speak to me. Isn't it strange how people
misunderstand each other, Anne?"

"Most of the trouble in life comes from misunderstanding, I think," said
Anne. "I must go now, Ruby. It's getting late--and you shouldn't be out
in the damp."

"You'll come up soon again."

"Yes, very soon. And if there's anything I can do to help you I'll be so
glad."

"I know. You HAVE helped me already. Nothing seems quite so dreadful
now. Good night, Anne."

"Good night, dear."

Anne walked home very slowly in the moonlight. The evening had changed
something for her. Life held a different meaning, a deeper purpose.
On the surface it would go on just the same; but the deeps had been
stirred. It must not be with her as with poor butterfly Ruby. When she
came to the end of one life it must not be to face the next with the
shrinking terror of something wholly different--something for which
accustomed thought and ideal and aspiration had unfitted her. The little
things of life, sweet and excellent in their place, must not be the
things lived for; the highest must be sought and followed; the life of
heaven must be begun here on earth.

That good night in the garden was for all time. Anne never saw Ruby in
