their tangled leaves.  She was picking them for Damaris when she
heard a buggy rumble over the bridge and drive up the White lane,
hidden from her sight by the alders and firs.  A few minutes
later Carl and Cynthia came hastily across their yard under the
huge balm-of-gileads.  Carl's face was flushed, and his big body
quivered with excitement.  Cynthia ran behind him, with tears
rolling down her face.

Thyra felt herself growing sick with fear.  Had anything happened
to Damaris?  A glimpse of the girl, sewing by an upper window of
the house, reassured her.

"Oh, Thyra, Thyra!" gasped Cynthia.

"Can you stand some good news, Thyra?" asked Carl, in a trembling
voice.  "Very, very good news!"

Thyra looked wildly from one to the other.

"There's but one thing you would dare to call good news to me,"
she cried.  "Is it about--about--"

"Chester!  Yes, it's about Chester!  Thyra, he is alive--he's
safe--he and Joe, both of them, thank God!  Cynthia, catch her!"

"No, I am not going to faint," said Thyra, steadying herself by
Cynthia's shoulder.  "My son alive!  How did you hear?  How did
it happen?  Where has he been?"

"I heard it down at the harbor, Thyra.  Mike McCready's vessel,
the _Nora Lee_, was just in from the Magdalens.  Ches and Joe got
capsized the night of the storm, but they hung on to their boat
somehow, and at daybreak they were picked up by the _Nora Lee_,
bound for Quebec.  But she was damaged by the storm and blown
clear out of her course.  Had to put into the Magdalens for
repairs, and has been there ever since.  The cable to the islands
was out of order, and no vessels call there this time of year for
mails.  If it hadn't been an extra open season the _Nora Lee_
wouldn't have got away, but would have had to stay there till
spring.  You never saw such rejoicing as there was this morning
at the harbor, when the _Nora Lee_ came in, flying flags at the
mast head."

"And Chester--where is he?" demanded Thyra.

Carl and Cynthia looked at each other.

"Well, Thyra," said the latter, "the fact is, he's over there in
our yard this blessed minute.  Carl brought him home from the
harbor, but I wouldn't let him come over until we had prepared
you for it.  He's waiting for you there."

Thyra made a quick step in the direction of the gate.  Then she
turned, with a little of the glow dying out of her face.

"No, there's one has a better right to go to him first.  I can
atone to him--thank God, I can atone to him!"

She went into the house and called Damaris.  As the girl came
down the stairs Thyra held out her hands with a wonderful light
of joy and renunciation on her face.

"Damaris," she said, "Chester has come back to us--the sea has
given him back to us.  He is over at Carl White's house.  Go to
him, my daughter, and bring him to me!"



XI. THE EDUCATION OF BETTY

When Sara Currie married Jack Churchill I was broken-hearted...or
believed myself to be so, which, in a boy of twenty-two, amounts
to pretty much the same thing.  Not that I took the world into my
confidence; that was never the Douglas way, and I held myself in
honor bound to live up to the family traditions.  I thought,
then, that nobody but Sara knew; but I dare say, now, that Jack
knew it also, for I don't think Sara could have helped telling
him.  If he did know, however, he did not let me see that he did,
and never insulted me by any implied sympathy; on the contrary,
he asked me to be his best man.  Jack was always a thoroughbred.

I was best man.  Jack and I had always been bosom friends, and,
although I had lost my sweetheart, I did not intend to lose my
friend into the bargain.  Sara had made a wise choice, for Jack
was twice the man I was; he had had to work for his living, which
perhaps accounts for it.

So I danced at Sara's wedding as if my heart were as light as my
heels; but, after she and Jack had settled down at Glenby I
closed The Maples and went abroad...being, as I have hinted, one
of those unfortunate mortals who need consult nothing but their
own whims in the matter of time and money.  I stayed away for ten
years, during which The Maples was given over to moths and rust,
while I enjoyed life elsewhere.  I did enjoy it hugely, but
always under protest, for I felt that a broken-hearted man ought
not to enjoy himself as I did.  It jarred on my sense of fitness,
and I tried to moderate my zest, and think more of the past than
I did.  It was no use; the present insisted on being intrusive
and pleasant; as for the future...well, there was no future.

Then Jack Churchill, poor fellow, died.  A year after his death,
I went home and again asked Sara to marry me, as in duty bound.
Sara again declined, alleging that her heart was buried in Jack's
grave, or words to that effect.  I found that it did not much
matter...of course, at thirty-two one does not take these things
to heart as at twenty-two.  I had enough to occupy me in getting
The Maples into working order, and beginning to educate Betty.

Betty was Sara's ten year-old daughter, and she had been
thoroughly spoiled.  That is to say, she had been allowed her own
way in everything and, having inherited her father's outdoor
tastes, had simply run wild.  She was a thorough tomboy, a thin,
scrawny little thing with a trace of Sara's beauty.  Betty took
after her father's dark, tall race and, on the occasion of my
first introduction to her, seemed to be all legs and neck.  There
were points about her, though, which I considered promising.  She
had fine, almond-shaped, hazel eyes, the smallest and most
shapely hands and feet I ever saw, and two enormous braids of
thick, nut-brown hair.

For Jack's sake I decided to bring his daughter up properly.
Sara couldn't do it, and didn't try.  I saw that, if somebody
didn't take Betty in hand, wisely and firmly, she would certainly
be ruined.  There seemed to be nobody except myself at all
interested in the matter, so I determined to see what an old
bachelor could do as regards bringing up a girl in the way she
should go.  I might have been her father; as it was, her father
had been my best friend.  Who had a better right to watch over
his daughter?  I determined to be a father to Betty, and do all
for her that the most devoted parent could do. It was,
self-evidently, my duty.

I told Sara I was going to take Betty in hand.  Sara sighed one
of the plaintive little sighs which I had once thought so
charming, but now, to my surprise, found faintly irritating, and
said that she would be very much obliged if I would.

"I feel that I am not able to cope with the problem of Betty's
education, Stephen," she admitted, "Betty is a strange
child...all Churchill.  Her poor father indulged her in
everything, and she has a will of her own, I assure you.  I have
really no control over her, whatever.  She does as she pleases,
and is ruining her complexion by running and galloping out of
doors the whole time.  Not that she had much complexion to start
with.  The Churchills never had, you know."...Sara cast a
complacent glance at her delicately tinted reflection in the
mirror....  "I tried to make Betty wear a sunbonnet this summer,
but I might as well have talked to the wind."

A vision of Betty in a sunbonnet presented itself to my mind, and
afforded me so much amusement that I was grateful to Sara for
having furnished it.  I rewarded her with a compliment.

"It is to be regretted that Betty has not inherited her mother's
charming color," I said, "but we must do the best we can for her
under her limitations.  She may have improved vastly by the time
she has grown up.  And, at least, we must make a lady of her; she
is a most alarming tomboy at present, but there is good material
to work upon...there must be, in the Churchill and Currie
blend.  But even the best material may be spoiled by unwise
handling.  I think I can promise you that I will not spoil it.  I
feel that Betty is my vocation; and I shall set myself up as a
rival of Wordsworth's 'nature,' of whose methods I have always
had a decided distrust, in spite of his insidious verses."

Sara did not understand me in the least; but, then, she did not
pretend to.

"I confide Betty's education entirely to you, Stephen," she said,
with another plaintive sigh.  "I feel sure I could not put it
into better hands.  You have always been a person who could be
thoroughly depended on."

Well, that was something by way of reward for a life-long
devotion.  I felt that I was satisfied with my position as
unofficial advisor-in-chief to Sara and self-appointed guardian
of Betty.  I also felt that, for the furtherance of the cause I
had taken to heart, it was a good thing that Sara had again
refused to marry me.  I had a sixth sense which informed me that
a staid old family friend might succeed with Betty where a
stepfather would have signally failed.  Betty's loyalty to her
father's memory was passionate, and vehement; she would view his
supplanter with resentment and distrust; but his old familiar
comrade was a person to be taken to her heart.

Fortunately for the success of my enterprise, Betty liked me.
She told me this with the same engaging candor she would have
used in informing me that she hated me, if she had happened to
take a bias in that direction, saying frankly:

"You are one of the very nicest old folks I know, Stephen.  Yes,
you are a ripping good fellow!"

This made my task a comparatively easy one; I sometimes shudder
to think what it might have been if Betty had not thought I was a
"ripping good fellow."  I should have stuck to it, because that
is my way; but Betty would have made my life a misery to me.  She
had startling capacities for tormenting people when she chose to
exert them; I certainly should not have liked to be numbered
among Betty's foes.

I rode over to Glenby the next morning after my paternal
interview with Sara, intending to have a frank talk with Betty
and lay the foundations of a good understanding on both sides.
Betty was a sharp child, with a disconcerting knack of seeing
straight through grindstones; she would certainly perceive and
probably resent any underhanded management.  I thought it best to
tell her plainly that I was going to look after her.

When, however, I encountered Betty, tearing madly down the beech
avenue with a couple of dogs, her loosened hair streaming behind
her like a banner of independence, and had lifted her, hatless
and breathless, up before me on my mare, I found that Sara had
saved me the trouble of an explanation.

"Mother says you are going to take charge of my education,
Stephen," said Betty, as soon as she could speak.  "I'm glad,
because I think that, for an old person, you have a good deal of
sense.  I suppose my education has to be seen to, some time or
other, and I'd rather you'd do it than anybody else I know."

"Thank you, Betty," I said gravely.  "I hope I shall deserve your
good opinion of my sense.  I shall expect you to do as I tell
you, and be guided by my advice in everything."

"Yes, I will," said Betty, "because I'm sure you won't tell me to
do anything I'd really hate to do.  You won't shut me up in a
room and make me sew, will you?  Because I won't do it."

I assured her I would not.

"Nor send me to a boarding-school," pursued Betty.  "Mother's
always threatening to send me to one.  I suppose she would have
done it before this, only she knew I'd run away.  You won't send
me to a boarding-school, will you, Stephen?  Because I won't go."

"No," I said obligingly.  "I won't.  I should never dream of
cooping a wild little thing, like you, up in a boarding-school.
You'd fret your heart out like a caged skylark."

"I know you and I are going to get along together splendidly,
Stephen," said Betty, rubbing her brown cheek chummily against my
shoulder.  "You are so good at understanding.  Very few people
are.  Even dad darling didn't understand.  He let me do just as I
wanted to, just because I wanted to, not because he really
understood that I couldn't be tame and play with dolls.  I hate
dolls!  Real live babies are jolly; but dogs and horses are ever
so much nicer than dolls."

"But you must have lessons, Betty.  I shall select your teachers
and superintend your studies, and I shall expect you to do me
credit along that line, as well as along all others."

"I'll try, honest and true, Stephen," declared Betty.  And she
kept her word.

At first I looked upon Betty's education as a duty; in a very
short time it had become a pleasure...the deepest and most
abiding interest of my life.  As I had premised, Betty was good
material, and responded to my training with gratifying
plasticity.  Day by day, week by week, month by month, her
character and temperament unfolded naturally under my watchful
eye.  It was like beholding the gradual development of some rare
flower in one's garden.  A little checking and pruning here, a
careful training of shoot and tendril there, and, lo, the reward
of grace and symmetry!

Betty grew up as I would have wished Jack Churchill's girl to
grow--spirited and proud, with the fine spirit and gracious pride
of pure womanhood, loyal and loving, with the loyalty and love of
a frank and unspoiled nature; true to her heart's core, hating
falsehood and sham--as crystal-clear a mirror of maidenhood as
ever man looked into and saw himself reflected back in such a
halo as made him ashamed of not being more worthy of it.  Betty
was kind enough to say that I had taught her everything she knew.
But what had she not taught me?  If there were a debt between us,
it was on my side.

Sara was fairly well satisfied.  It was not my fault that Betty
was not better looking, she said.  I had certainly done
everything for her mind and character that could be done.  Sara's
manner implied that these unimportant details did not count for
much, balanced against the lack of a pink-and-white skin and
dimpled elbows; but she was generous enough not to blame me.

"When Betty is twenty-five," I said patiently--I had grown used
to speaking patiently to Sara--"she will be a magnificent woman--far
handsomer than you ever were, Sara, in your pinkest and
whitest prime.  Where are your eyes, my dear lady, that you can't
see the promise of loveliness in Betty?"

"Betty is seventeen, and she is as lanky and brown as ever she
was," sighed Sara.  "When I was seventeen I was the belle of the
county and had had five proposals.  I don't believe the thought
of a lover has ever entered Betty's head."

"I hope not," I said shortly.  Somehow, I did not like the
suggestion.  "Betty is a child yet.  For pity's sake, Sara, don't
go putting nonsensical ideas into her head."

"I'm afraid I can't," mourned Sara, as if it were something to be
regretted.  "You have filled it too full of books and things like
that.  I've every confidence in your judgment, Stephen--and
really you've done wonders with Betty.  But don't you think
you've made her rather too clever?  Men don't like women who are
too clever.  Her poor father, now--he always said that a woman
who liked books better than beaux was an unnatural creature."

I didn't believe Jack had ever said anything so foolish.  Sara
imagined things.  But I resented the aspersion of
blue-stockingness cast on Betty.

"When the time comes for Betty to be interested in beaux," I said
severely, "she will probably give them all due attention.  Just
at present her head is a great deal better filled with books than
with silly premature fancies and sentimentalities.  I'm a
critical old fellow--but I'm satisfied with Betty, Sara--perfectly
satisfied."

Sara sighed.

"Oh, I dare say she is all right, Stephen.  And I'm really
grateful to you.  I'm sure I could have done nothing at all with
her.  It's not your fault, of course,--but I can't help wishing
she were a little more like other girls."

I galloped away from Glenby in a rage.  What a blessing Sara had
not married me in my absurd youth!  She would have driven me wild
with her sighs and her obtuseness and her everlasting
pink-and-whiteness.  But there--there--there--gently!  She was a
sweet, good-hearted little woman; she had made Jack happy; and
she had contrived, heaven only knew how, to bring a rare creature
like Betty into the world.  For that, much might be forgiven her.
By the time I reached The Maples and had flung myself down in an
old, kinky, comfortable chair in my library I had forgiven her
and was even paying her the compliment of thinking seriously over
what she had said.

Was Betty really unlike other girls?  That is to say, unlike them
in any respect wherein she should resemble them?  I did not wish
this; although I was a crusty old bachelor I approved of girls,
holding them the sweetest things the good God has made.  I wanted
Betty to have her full complement of girlhood in all its best and
highest manifestation.  Was there anything lacking?

I observed Betty very closely during the next week or so, riding
over to Glenby every day and riding back at night, meditating
upon my observations.  Eventually I concluded to do what I had
never thought myself in the least likely to do.  I would send
Betty to a boarding-school for a year.  It was necessary that she
should learn how to live with other girls.

I went over to Glenby the next day and found Betty under the
beeches on the lawn, just back from a canter.  She was sitting on
the dappled mare I had given her on her last birthday, and was
laughing at the antics of her rejoicing dogs around her.  I
looked at her with much pleasure; it gladdened me to see how
much, nay, how totally a child she still was, despite her
Churchill height.  Her hair, under her velvet cap, still hung
over her shoulders in the same thick plaits; her face had the
firm leanness of early youth, but its curves were very fine and
delicate.  The brown skin, that worried Sara so, was flushed
through with dusky color from her gallop; her long, dark eyes
were filled with the beautiful unconsciousness of childhood.
More than all, the soul in her was still the soul of a child.  I
found myself wishing that it could always remain so.  But I knew
it could not; the woman must blossom out some day; it was my duty
to see that the flower fulfilled the promise of the bud.

When I told Betty that she must go away to a school for a year,
she shrugged, frowned and consented.  Betty had learned that she
must consent to what I decreed, even when my decrees were opposed
to her likings, as she had once fondly believed they never would
be.  But Betty had acquired confidence in me to the beautiful
extent of acquiescing in everything I commanded.

"I'll go, of course, since you wish it, Stephen," she said.  "But
why do you want me to go?  You must have a reason--you always
have a reason for anything you do.  What is it?"

"That is for you to find out, Betty," I said.  "By the time you
come back you will have discovered it, I think.  If not, it will
not have proved itself a good reason and shall be forgotten."

When Betty went away I bade her good-by without burdening her
with any useless words of advice.

"Write to me every week, and remember that you are Betty
Churchill," I said.

Betty was standing on the steps above, among her dogs.  She came
down a step and put her arms about my neck.

"I'll remember that you are my friend and that I must live up to
you," she said.  "Good-by, Stephen."

She kissed me two or three times--good, hearty smacks! did I not
say she was still a child?--and stood waving her hand to me as I
rode away.  I looked back at the end of the avenue and saw her
standing there, short-skirted and hatless, fronting the lowering
sun with those fearless eyes of hers.  So I looked my last on the
child Betty.

That was a lonely year.  My occupation was gone and I began to
fear that I had outlived my usefulness.  Life seemed flat, stale,
and unprofitable.  Betty's weekly letters were all that lent it
any savor.  They were spicy and piquant enough.  Betty was
discovered to have unsuspected talents in the epistolary line.
At first she was dolefully homesick, and begged me to let her
come home.  When I refused--it was amazingly hard to refuse--she
sulked through three letters, then cheered up and began to enjoy
herself.  But it was nearly the end of the year when she wrote:

"I've found out why you sent me here, Stephen--and I'm glad you
did."

I had to be away from home on unavoidable business the day Betty
returned to Glenby.  But the next afternoon I went over.  I found
Betty out and Sara in.  The latter was beaming.  Betty was so
much improved, she declared delightedly.  I would hardly know
"the dear child."

This alarmed me terribly.  What on earth had they done to Betty?
I found that she had gone up to the pineland for a walk, and
thither I betook myself speedily.  When I saw her coming down a
long, golden-brown alley I stepped behind a tree to watch her--I
wished to see her, myself unseen.  As she drew near I gazed at
her with pride, and admiration and amazement--and, under it all,
a strange, dreadful, heart-sinking, which I could not understand
and which I had never in all my life experienced before--no, not
even when Sara had refused me.

Betty was a woman!  Not by virtue of the simple white dress that
clung to her tall, slender figure, revealing lines of exquisite
