Ida laughed again, and told him that he was a droll boy.

"Do you like it?" asked Dick.

"I like it pretty well, except the verbs. I can't remember them
well. Do you go to school?"

"I'm studying with a private tutor," said Dick.

"Are you? So is my cousin Dick. He's going to college this year. Are
you going to college?"

"Not this year."

"Because, if you did, you know you'd be in the same class with my
cousin. It would be funny to have two Dicks in one class."

They turned down Twenty-fourth Street, passing the Fifth Avenue
Hotel on the left, and stopped before an elegant house with a brown
stone front. The bell was rung, and the door being opened, the boys,
somewhat abashed, followed Mr. Greyson into a handsome hall. They
were told where to hang their hats, and a moment afterwards were
ushered into a comfortable dining-room, where a table was spread
for dinner.

Dick took his seat on the edge of a sofa, and was tempted to rub his
eyes to make sure that he was really awake. He could hardly believe
that he was a guest in so fine a mansion.

Ida helped to put the boys at their ease.

"Do you like pictures?" she asked.

"Very much," answered Henry.

The little girl brought a book of handsome engravings, and, seating
herself beside Dick, to whom she seemed to have taken a decided
fancy, commenced showing them to him.

"There are the Pyramids of Egypt," she said, pointing to one engraving.

"What are they for?" asked Dick, puzzled. "I don't see any winders."

"No," said Ida, "I don't believe anybody lives there. Do they, papa?"

"No, my dear. They were used for the burial of the dead. The largest
of them is said to be the loftiest building in the world with one
exception. The spire of the Cathedral of Strasburg is twenty-four
feet higher, if I remember rightly."

"Is Egypt near here?" asked Dick.

"Oh, no, it's ever so many miles off; about four or five hundred.
Didn't you know?"

"No," said Dick. "I never heard."

"You don't appear to be very accurate in your information, Ida,"
said her mother. "Four or five thousand miles would be considerably
nearer the truth."

After a little more conversation they sat down to dinner. Dick
seated himself in an embarrassed way. He was very much afraid of
doing or saying something which would be considered an impropriety,
and had the uncomfortable feeling that everybody was looking at him,
and watching his behavior.

"Where do you live, Dick?" asked Ida, familiarly.

"In Mott Street."

"Where is that?"

"More than a mile off."

"Is it a nice street?"

"Not very," said Dick. "Only poor folks live there."

"Are you poor?"

"Little girls should be seen and not heard," said her mother, gently.

"If you are," said Ida, "I'll give you the five-dollar gold-piece
aunt gave me for a birthday present."

"Dick cannot be called poor, my child," said Mrs. Greyson, "since he
earns his living by his own exertions."

"Do you earn your living?" asked Ida, who was a very inquisitive
young lady, and not easily silenced. "What do you do?"

Dick blushed violently. At such a table, and in presence of the
servant who was standing at that moment behind his chair, he did not
like to say that he was a shoe-black, although he well knew that
there was nothing dishonorable in the occupation.

Mr. Greyson perceived his feelings, and to spare them, said, "You
are too inquisitive, Ida. Sometime Dick may tell you, but you know
we don't talk of business on Sundays."

Dick in his embarrassment had swallowed a large spoonful of hot
soup, which made him turn red in the face. For the second time,
in spite of the prospect of the best dinner he had ever eaten, he
wished himself back in Mott Street. Henry Fosdick was more easy
and unembarrassed than Dick, not having led such a vagabond and
neglected life. But it was to Dick that Ida chiefly directed her
conversation, having apparently taken a fancy to his frank and
handsome face. I believe I have already said that Dick was a very
good-looking boy, especially now since he kept his face clean. He
had a frank, honest expression, which generally won its way to the
favor of those with whom he came in contact.

Dick got along pretty well at the table by dint of noticing how the
rest acted, but there was one thing he could not manage, eating with
his fork, which, by the way, he thought a very singular arrangement.

At length they arose from the table, somewhat to Dick's relief.
Again Ida devoted herself to the boys, and exhibited a profusely
illustrated Bible for their entertainment. Dick was interested in
looking at the pictures, though he knew very little of their
subjects. Henry Fosdick was much better informed, as might have
been expected.

When the boys were about to leave the house with Mr. Greyson for the
Sunday school, Ida placed her hand in Dick's, and said persuasively,
"You'll come again, Dick, won't you?"

"Thank you," said Dick, "I'd like to," and he could not help
thinking Ida the nicest girl he had ever seen.

"Yes," said Mrs. Greyson, hospitably, "we shall be glad to see you
both here again."

"Thank you very much," said Henry Fosdick, gratefully. "We shall
like very much to come."

I will not dwell upon the hour spent in Sunday school, nor upon the
remarks of Mr. Greyson to his class. He found Dick's ignorance of
religious subjects so great that he was obliged to begin at the
beginning with him. Dick was interested in hearing the children
sing, and readily promised to come again the next Sunday.

When the service was over Dick and Henry walked homewards. Dick
could not help letting his thoughts rest on the sweet little girl
who had given him so cordial a welcome, and hoping that he might
meet her again.

"Mr. Greyson is a nice man,--isn't he, Dick?" asked Henry, as they
were turning into Mott Street, and were already in sight of their
lodging-house.

"Aint he, though?" said Dick. "He treated us just as if we were
young gentlemen."

"Ida seemed to take a great fancy to you."

"She's a tip-top girl," said Dick, "but she asked so many questions
that I didn't know what to say."

He had scarcely finished speaking, when a stone whizzed by his head,
and, turning quickly, he saw Micky Maguire running round the corner
of the street which they had just passed.



CHAPTER XVIII

MICKY MAGUIRE'S SECOND DEFEAT


Dick was no coward. Nor was he in the habit of submitting passively
to an insult. When, therefore, he recognized Micky as his assailant,
he instantly turned and gave chase. Micky anticipated pursuit, and
ran at his utmost speed. It is doubtful if Dick would have overtaken
him, but Micky had the ill luck to trip just as he had entered a
narrow alley, and, falling with some violence, received a sharp blow
from the hard stones, which made him scream with pain.

"Ow!" he whined. "Don't you hit a feller when he's down."

"What made you fire that stone at me?" demanded our hero, looking
down at the fallen bully.

"Just for fun," said Micky.

"It would have been a very agreeable s'prise if it had hit me," said
Dick. "S'posin' I fire a rock at you jest for fun."

"Don't!" exclaimed Micky, in alarm.

"It seems you don't like agreeable s'prises," said Dick, "any more'n
the man did what got hooked by a cow one mornin', before breakfast.
It didn't improve his appetite much."

"I've most broke my arm," said Micky, ruefully, rubbing the affected
limb.

"If it's broke you can't fire no more stones, which is a very
cheerin' reflection," said Dick. "Ef you haven't money enough to buy
a wooden one I'll lend you a quarter. There's one good thing about
wooden ones, they aint liable to get cold in winter, which is
another cheerin' reflection."

"I don't want none of yer cheerin' reflections," said Micky,
sullenly. "Yer company aint wanted here."

"Thank you for your polite invitation to leave," said Dick, bowing
ceremoniously. "I'm willin' to go, but ef you throw any more stones
at me, Micky Maguire, I'll hurt you worse than the stones did."

The only answer made to this warning was a scowl from his fallen
opponent. It was quite evident that Dick had the best of it, and
he thought it prudent to say nothing.

"As I've got a friend waitin' outside, I shall have to tear myself
away," said Dick. "You'd better not throw any more stones, Micky
Maguire, for it don't seem to agree with your constitution."

Micky muttered something which Dick did not stay to hear. He backed
out of the alley, keeping a watchful eye on his fallen foe, and
rejoined Henry Fosdick, who was awaiting his return.

"Who was it, Dick?" he asked.

"A partic'lar friend of mine, Micky Maguire," said Dick. "He
playfully fired a rock at my head as a mark of his 'fection. He
loves me like a brother, Micky does."

"Rather a dangerous kind of a friend, I should think,"
said Fosdick. "He might have killed you."

"I've warned him not to be so 'fectionate another time," said Dick.

"I know him," said Henry Fosdick. "He's at the head of a gang of
boys living at the Five-Points. He threatened to whip me once
because a gentleman employed me to black his boots instead of him."

"He's been at the Island two or three times for stealing," said
Dick. "I guess he won't touch me again. He'd rather get hold of
small boys. If he ever does anything to you, Fosdick, just let
me know, and I'll give him a thrashing."

Dick was right. Micky Maguire was a bully, and like most bullies did
not fancy tackling boys whose strength was equal or superior to his
own. Although he hated Dick more than ever, because he thought our
hero was putting on airs, he had too lively a remembrance of his
strength and courage to venture upon another open attack. He
contented himself, therefore, whenever he met Dick, with scowling at
him. Dick took this very philosophically, remarking that, "if it was
soothin' to Micky's feelings, he might go ahead, as it didn't hurt
him much."

It will not be necessary to chronicle the events of the next few
weeks. A new life had commenced for Dick. He no longer haunted the
gallery of the Old Bowery; and even Tony Pastor's hospitable doors
had lost their old attractions. He spent two hours every evening in
study. His progress was astonishingly rapid. He was gifted with a
natural quickness; and he was stimulated by the desire to acquire a
fair education as a means of "growin' up 'spectable," as he termed
it. Much was due also to the patience and perseverance of Henry
Fosdick, who made a capital teacher.

"You're improving wonderfully, Dick," said his friend, one evening,
when Dick had read an entire paragraph without a mistake.

"Am I?" said Dick, with satisfaction.

"Yes. If you'll buy a writing-book to-morrow, we can begin writing
to-morrow evening."

"What else do you know, Henry?" asked Dick.

"Arithmetic, and geography, and grammar."

"What a lot you know!" said Dick, admiringly.

"I don't _know_ any of them," said Fosdick. "I've only studied them.
I wish I knew a great deal more."

"I'll be satisfied when I know as much as you," said Dick.

"It seems a great deal to you now, Dick, but in a few months you'll
think differently. The more you know, the more you'll want to know."

"Then there aint any end to learnin'?" said Dick.

"No."

"Well," said Dick, "I guess I'll be as much as sixty before I
know everything."

"Yes; as old as that, probably," said Fosdick, laughing.

"Anyway, you know too much to be blackin' boots. Leave that to
ignorant chaps like me."

"You won't be ignorant long, Dick."

"You'd ought to get into some office or countin'-room."

"I wish I could," said Fosdick, earnestly. "I don't succeed very
well at blacking boots. You make a great deal more than I do."

"That's cause I aint troubled with bashfulness," said Dick.
"Bashfulness aint as natural to me as it is to you. I'm always on
hand, as the cat said to the milk. You'd better give up shines,
Fosdick, and give your 'tention to mercantile pursuits."

"I've thought of trying to get a place," said Fosdick; "but no one
would take me with these clothes;" and he directed his glance to his
well-worn suit, which he kept as neat as he could, but which, in
spite of all his care, began to show decided marks of use. There
was also here and there a stain of blacking upon it, which, though
an advertisement of his profession, scarcely added to its good
appearance.

"I almost wanted to stay at home from Sunday school last Sunday," he
continued, "because I thought everybody would notice how dirty and
worn my clothes had got to be."

"If my clothes wasn't two sizes too big for you," said Dick,
generously, "I'd change. You'd look as if you'd got into your
great-uncle's suit by mistake."

"You're very kind, Dick, to think of changing," said Fosdick, "for
your suit is much better than mine; but I don't think that mine
would suit you very well. The pants would show a little more of
your ankles than is the fashion, and you couldn't eat a very hearty
dinner without bursting the buttons off the vest."

"That wouldn't be very convenient," said Dick. "I aint fond of
lacin' to show my elegant figger. But I say," he added with a
sudden thought, "how much money have we got in the savings' bank?"

Fosdick took a key from his pocket, and went to the drawer in which
the bank-books were kept, and, opening it, brought them out for
inspection.

It was found that Dick had the sum of eighteen dollars and ninety
cents placed to his credit, while Fosdick had six dollars and
forty-five cents. To explain the large difference, it must be
remembered that Dick had deposited five dollars before Henry
deposited anything, being the amount he had received as a gift
from Mr. Whitney.

"How much does that make, the lot of it?" asked Dick. "I aint much
on figgers yet, you know."

"It makes twenty-five dollars and thirty-five cents, Dick," said his
companion, who did not understand the thought which suggested the
question.

"Take it, and buy some clothes, Henry," said Dick, shortly.

"What, your money too?"

"In course."

"No, Dick, you are too generous. I couldn't think of it. Almost
three-quarters of the money is yours. You must spend it on
yourself."

"I don't need it," said Dick.

"You may not need it now, but you will some time."

"I shall have some more then."

