"I do not care to make the extent of the loss public. Were there any
marks of violence? Was the safe broken open?"

"No, sir."

"Singular; is it not?"

"If you will allow me I will join in offering a reward for the discovery
of the thief. I feel in a measure responsible."

"I will think of your offer, Mr. Gibbon."

"He suspects nothing," thought Gibbon, with a sigh of relief.



CHAPTER XXV.

STARK'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


Philip Stark went back to the hotel with the tin box under his arm.
He would like to have entered the hotel without notice, but this was
impossible, for the landlord's nephew was just closing up. Though not
late for the city, it was very late for the country, and he looked
surprised when Stark came in.

"I am out late," said Stark, with a smile.

"Yes."

"That is, late for Milford. In the city I never go to bed before
midnight."

"Have you been out walking?"

"Yes."

"You found it rather dark, did you not?"

"It is dark as a pocket."

"You couldn't have found the walk a very pleasant one."

"You are right, my friend; but I didn't walk for pleasure. The fact is,
I am rather worried about a business matter. I have learned that I am
threatened with a heavy loss--an unwise investment in the West--and I
wanted time to think it over and decide how to act."

"I see," answered the clerk, respectfully, for Stark's words led him to
think that his guest was a man of wealth.

"I wish I was rich enough to be worried by such a cause," he said,
jokingly.

"I wish you were. Some time I may be able to throw something in your
way."

"Do you think it would pay me to go to the West?" asked the clerk,
eagerly.

"I think it quite likely--if you know some one out in that section."

"But I don't know anyone."

"You know me," said Stark, significantly.

"Do you think you could help me to a place, Mr. Stark?"

"I think I could. A month from now write to me Col. Philip Stark, at
Denver, Colorado, and I will see if I can find an opening for you."

"You are very kind, Mr.--I mean Col. Stark," said the clerk, gratefully.

"Oh, never mind about the title," returned Stark, smiling
good-naturedly. "I only gave it to you just now, because everybody
in Denver knows me as a colonel, and I am afraid a letter otherwise
addressed would not reach me. By the way, I am sorry that I shall
probably have to leave you to-morrow."

"So soon?"

"Yes; it's this tiresome business. I should not wonder if I might lose
ten thousand dollars through the folly of my agent. I shall probably
have to go out to right things."

"I couldn't afford to lose ten thousand dollars," said the young man,
regarding the capitalist before him with deference.

"No, I expect not. At your age I wasn't worth ten thousand cents.
Now--but that's neither here nor there. Give me a light, please, and I
will go up to bed."

"He was about to say how much he is worth now," soliloquized the clerk.
"I wish he had not stopped short. If I can't be rich myself, I like to
talk with a rich man. There's hope for me, surely. He says that at my
age he was not worth ten thousand cents. That is only a hundred dollars,
and I am worth that. I must keep it to pay my expenses to Colorado, if
he should send for me in a few weeks."

The young man had noticed with some curiosity the rather oddly-shaped
bundle which Stark carried under his arm, but could not see his way
clear to asking any questions about it. It seemed queer that Stark
should have it with him while walking. Come to think of it, he
remembered seeing him go out in the early evening, and he was quite
confident that at that time he had no bundle with him. However, he was
influenced only by a spirit of idle curiosity. He had no idea that
the bundle was of any importance or value. The next day he changed his
opinion on that subject.

Phil Stark went up to his chamber, and setting the lamp on the bureau,
first carefully locked the door, and then removed the paper from the tin
box. He eyed it lovingly, and tried one by one the keys he had in his
pocket, but none exactly fitted.

As he was experimenting he thought with a smile of the night clerk from
whom he had just parted.

"Stark," he soliloquized, addressing himself, "you are an old humbug.
You have cleverly duped that unsophisticated young man downstairs. He
looks upon you as a man of unbounded wealth, evidently, while, as a
matter of fact, you are almost strapped. Let me see how much I have got
left."

He took out his wallet, and counted out seven dollars and thirty-eight
cents.

"That can hardly be said to constitute wealth," he reflected, "but it is
all I have over and above the contents of this box. That makes all the
difference. Gibbon is of opinion that there are four thousand dollars
in bonds inside, and he expects me to give him half. Shall I do it? Not
such a fool! I'll give him fifteen hundred and keep the balance myself.
That'll pay him handsomely, and the rest will be a good nestegg for me.
If Gibbon is only half shrewd he will pull the wool over the eyes of
that midget of an employer, and retain his place and comfortable salary.
There will be no evidence against him, and he can pose as an innocent
man. Bah! what a lot of humbug there is in the world. Well, well, Stark,
you have your share, no doubt. Otherwise how would you make a living?
To-morrow I must clear out from Milford, and give it a wide berth in
future. I suppose there will be a great hue-and-cry about the robbery
of the safe. It will be just as well for me to be somewhere else. I have
already given the clerk a good reason for my sudden departure. Confound
it, it's a great nuisance that I can't open this box! I would like to
know before I go to bed just how much boodle I have acquired. Then I can
decide how much to give Gibbon. If I dared I'd keep the whole, but he
might make trouble."

Phil Stark, or Col. Philip Stark, as he had given his name, had a large
supply of keys, but none of them seemed to fit the tin box.

"I am afraid I shall excite suspicion if I sit up any longer," thought
Stark. "I will go to bed and get up early in the morning. Then I may
succeed better in opening this plaguy box."

He removed his clothing and got into bed. The evening had been rather
an exciting one, but the excitement was a pleasurable one, for he had
succeeded in the plan which he and the bookkeeper had so ingeniously
formed and carried out, and here within reach was the rich reward
after which they had striven. Mr. Stark was not troubled with a
conscience--that he had got rid of years ago--and he was filled with
a comfortable consciousness of having retrieved his fortunes when
they were on the wane. So, in a short time he fell asleep, and slept
peacefully. Toward morning, however, he had a disquieting dream. It
seemed to him that he awoke suddenly from slumber and saw Gibbon
leaving the room with the tin box under his arm. He awoke really with
beads of perspiration upon his brow--awoke to see by the sun streaming
in at his window that the morning was well advanced, and the tin box was
still safe.

"Thank Heaven, it was but a dream!" he murmured. "I must get up and try
once more to open the box."

The keys had all been tried, and had proved not to fit. Mr. Stark was
equal to the emergency. He took from his pocket a button hook and bent
it so as to make a pick, and after a little experimenting succeeded in
turning the lock. He lifted the lid eagerly, and with distended eyes
prepared to gloat upon the stolen bonds. But over his face there came
a startling change. The ashy blue hue of disappointment succeeded the
glowing, hopeful look. He snatched at one of the folded slips of paper
and opened it. Alas! it was valueless, mere waste paper. He sank into a
chair in a limp, hopeless posture, quite overwhelmed. Then he sprang up
suddenly, and his expression changed to one of fury and menace.

"If Julius Gibbon has played this trick upon me," he said, between his
set teeth, "he shall repent it--bitterly!"



CHAPTER XXVI.

A DISAGREEABLE SURPRISE.


Philip Stark sat down to breakfast in a savage frame of mind. He wanted
to be revenged upon Gibbon, whom he suspected of having deceived him by
opening and appropriating the bonds, and then arranged to have him carry
off the box filled with waste paper.

He sat at the table but five minutes, for he had little or no appetite.

From the breakfast room he went out on the piazza, and with corrugated
brows smoked a cigar, but it failed to have the usual soothing effect.

If he had known the truth he would have left Milford without delay, but
he was far from suspecting that the deception practiced upon him had
been arranged by the man whom he wanted to rob. While there seemed
little inducement for him to stay in Milford, he was determined to seek
the bookkeeper, and ascertain whether, as he suspected, his confederate
had in his possession the bonds which he had been scheming for. If so,
he would compel him by threats to disgorge the larger portion, and then
leave town at once.

But the problem was, how to see him. He felt that it would be
venturesome to go round to the factory, as by this time the loss might
have been discovered. If only the box had been left, the discovery might
be deferred. Then a bright idea occurred to him. He must get the box out
of his own possession, as its discovery would compromise him. Why could
he not arrange to leave it somewhere on the premises of his confederate?

He resolved upon the instant to carry out the idea. He went up to his
room, wrapped the tin box in a paper, and walked round to the house of
the bookkeeper. The coast seemed to be clear, as he supposed it would
be. He slipped into the yard, and swiftly entered an outhouse. There was
a large wooden chest, or box, which had once been used to store grain.
Stark lifted the cover, dropped the box inside, and then, with a feeling
of relief, walked out of the yard. But he had been observed. Mrs. Gibbon
chanced to be looking out of a side window and saw him. She recognized
him as the stranger who had been in the habit of spending recent
evenings with her husband.

"What can he want here at this time?" she asked herself.

She deliberated whether she should go to the door and speak to Stark,
but decided not to do so.

"He will call at the door if he has anything to say," she reflected.

Phil Stark walked on till he reached the factory. He felt that he
must see Julius Gibbon, and satisfy himself as to the meaning of the
mysterious substitution of waste paper for bonds.

When he reached a point where he could see into the office, he caught
the eye of Leonard, who was sitting at the window. He beckoned for him
to come out, and Leonard was glad to do so.

"Where are you going?" asked the bookkeeper, observing the boy's
movement.

"Mr. Stark is just across the street, and he beckoned for me."

Julius Gibbon flushed painfully, and he trembled with nervous agitation,
for he feared something had happened.

"Very well, go out, but don't stay long."

Leonard crossed the street and walked up to Stark, who awaited him,
looking grim and stern.

"Your uncle is inside?" he asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Tell him I wish to see him at once--on business of importance."

"He's busy," said Leonard. "'He doesn't leave the office in business
hours."

"Tell him I must see him--do you hear? He'll come fast enough."

"I wonder what it's all about," thought Leonard, whose curiosity was
naturally excited.

"Wait a minute!" said Stark, as he turned to go. "Is Jennings in?"

"No, sir, he has gone over to the next town."

"Probably the box has not been missed, then," thought Stark. "So much
the better! I can find out how matters stand, and then leave town."

"Very well!" he said, aloud, "let your uncle understand that I must see
him."

Leonard carried in the message. Gibbon made no objection, but took his
hat and went out, leaving Leonard in charge of the office.

"Well, what is it?" he asked, hurriedly, as he reached Stark. "Is--is
the box all right?"

"Look here, Gibbon," said Stark, harshly, "have you been playing any of
your infernal tricks upon me?"

"I don't know what you mean," responded Gibbon, bewildered.

Stark eyed him sharply, but the bookkeeper was evidently sincere.

"Is there anything wrong?" continued the latter.

"Do you mean to tell me you didn't know that wretched box was filled
with waste paper?"

"You don't mean it?" exclaimed Gibbon, in dismay.

"Yes, I do. I didn't open it till this morning, and in place of
government bonds, I found only folded slips of newspaper."

By this time Gibbon was suspicious. Having no confidence in Stark, it
occurred to him that it was a ruse to deprive him of his share of the
bonds.

"I don't believe you," he said. "You want to keep all the bonds for
yourself, and cheat me out of my share."

"I wish to Heaven you were right. If there had been any bonds, I would
have acted on the square. But somebody had removed them, and substituted
paper. I suspected you."

"I am ready to swear that this has happened without my knowledge," said
Gibbon, earnestly.

"How, then, could it have occurred?" asked Stark.

"I don't know, upon my honor. Where is the box?"

"I--have disposed of it."

"You should have waited and opened it before me."

"I asked you if you had a key that would open it. I wanted to open it
last evening in the office."

"True."

"You will see after a while that I was acting on the square. You can
open it for yourself at your leisure."

"How can I? I don't know where it is."

"Then I can enlighten you," said Stark, maliciously. "When you go home,
you will find it in a chest in your woodshed."

Gibbon turned pale.

"You don't mean to say you have carried it to my house?" he exclaimed,
in dismay.

"Yes, I do. I had no further use for it, and thought you had the best
claim to it."

"But, good heavens! if it is found there I shall be suspected."

"Very probably," answered Stark, coolly. "Take my advice and put it out
of the way."

"How could you be so inconsiderate?"

"Because I suspected you of playing me a trick."

"I swear to you, I didn't."

"Then somebody has tricked both of us. Has Mr. Jennings discovered the
disappearance of the box?"

"Yes, I told him."

"When?"

"When he came to the office."

"What did he say?"

"He took the matter coolly. He didn't say much."

"Where is he?"

"Gone to Winchester on business."

"Look here! Do you think he suspects you?"

"I am quite sure not. That is why I told him about the robbery."

"He might suspect me."

"He said nothing about suspecting anybody."

"Do you think he removed the bonds and substituted paper?"

"I don't think so."

"If this were the case we should both be in a serious plight. I think I
had better get out of town. You will have to lend me ten dollars."

"I don't see how I can, Stark."

"You must!" said Stark, sternly, "or I will reveal the whole thing.
Remember, the box is on your premises."

"Heavens! what a quandary I am in," said the bookkeeper, miserably.
"That must be attended to at once. Why couldn't you put it anywhere
else?"

"I told you that I wanted to be revenged upon you."

"I wish you had never come to Milford," groaned the bookkeeper.

"I wish I hadn't myself, as things have turned out."

They prepared to start for Gibbon's house, when Mr. Jennings drove
up. With him were two tall muscular men, whom Stark and Gibbon eyed
uneasily. The two strangers jumped out of the carriage and advanced
toward the two confederates.

"Arrest those men!" said Jennings, in a quiet tone. "I charge them with
opening and robbing my safe last night about eleven o'clock."



CHAPTER XXVII.

BROUGHT TO BAY.


Phil Stark made an effort to get away, but the officer was too quick for
him. In a trice he was handcuffed.

"What is the meaning of this outrage?" demanded Stark, boldly.

"I have already explained," said the manufacturer, quietly.

"You are quite on the wrong tack," continued Stark, brazenly. "Mr.
Gibbon was just informing me that the safe had been opened and robbed.
It is the first I knew of it."

Julius Gibbon seemed quite prostrated by his arrest. He felt it
necessary to say something, and followed the lead of his companion.

"You will bear me witness, Mr. Jennings," he said, "that I was the first
to inform you of the robbery. If I had really committed the burglary, I
should have taken care to escape during the night."

"I should be glad to believe in your innocence," rejoined the
manufacturer, "but I know more about this matter than you suppose."

"I won't answer for Mr. Gibbon," said Stark, who cared nothing for his
confederate, if he could contrive to effect his own escape. "Of course
