"Go to the clerk and put the question. What can be simpler?"

"But I don't know where he is."

"Don't know where he is?" echoed Reed, in genuine surprise.

"No; James Harding--this is his name--left my employ a year since,
having, through a life of economy, secured a competence, and went
out West to join a widowed sister who had for many years made her
residence there. Now, the West is a large place, and I don't know
where this sister lives, or where James Harding is to be found."

"Yet he must be found. You must send a messenger to look for him."

"But whom shall I send? In a matter of this delicacy I don't want to
employ a professional detective. Those men sometimes betray secrets
committed to their keeping, and work up a false clue rather than
have it supposed they are not earning their money. If, now, some
gentleman in whom I had confidence--someone like yourself--would
undertake the commission, I should esteem myself fortunate."

"Thank you for the compliment, Mr. Armstrong, more especially as
you are putting confidence in a stranger, but I have important work
to do that would not permit me to leave New York at present. But I
know of someone whom I would employ, if the business were mine."

"Well?"

"Luke Larkin."

"But he is only a boy. He can't be over sixteen."

"He is a sharp boy, however, and would follow instructions."

John Armstrong thought rapidly. He was a man who decided quickly.

"I will take your advice," he said. "As I don't want to have it
supposed that he is in my employ, will you oblige me by writing to
him and preparing him for a journey? Let it be supposed that he is
occupied with a commission for you."

"I will attend to the matter at once."

The next morning Luke received the following letter:


"MY DEAR LUKE: I have some work for you which will occupy some
time and require a journey. You will be well paid. Bring a supply
of underclothing, and assure your mother that she need feel under
no apprehensions about you. Unless I am greatly mistaken, you will
be able to take care of yourself.

"Your friend,

"ROLAND REED."


Luke read the letter with excitement and pleasure. He was to go
on a journey, and to a boy of his age a journey of any sort is
delightful. He had no idea of the extent of the trip in store
for him, but thought he might possibly be sent to Boston, or
Philadelphia, and either trip he felt would yield him much pleasure.
He quieted the natural apprehensions of his mother, and, satchel in
hand, waited upon his patron in the course of a day. By him he was
taken over to the office of Mr. Armstrong, from whom he received
instructions and a supply of money.



CHAPTER XXV

MR. J. MADISON COLEMAN


Luke didn't shrink from the long trip before him. He enjoyed the
prospect of it, having always longed to travel and see distant
places. He felt flattered by Mr. Armstrong's confidence in him, and
stoutly resolved to deserve it. He would have been glad if he could
have had the company of his friend Linton, but he knew that this
was impossible. He must travel alone.

"You have a difficult and perplexing task, Luke," said the
capitalist. "You may not succeed."

"I will do my best, Mr. Armstrong."

"That is all I have a right to expect. If you succeed, you will
do me a great service, of which I shall show proper appreciation."

He gave Luke some instructions, and it was arranged that our hero
should write twice a week, and, if occasion required, oftener, so
that his employer might be kept apprised of his movements.

Luke was not to stop short of Chicago. There his search was to
begin; and there, if possible, he was to obtain information that
might guide his subsequent steps.

It is a long ride to Chicago, as Luke found. He spent a part of
the time in reading, and a part in looking out of the window at
the scenery, but still, at times, he felt lonely.

"I wish Linton Tomkins were with me," he reflected. "What a jolly
time we would have!"

But Linton didn't even know what had become of his friend. Luke's
absence was an occasion for wonder at Groveton, and many questions
were asked of his mother.

"He was sent for by Mr. Reed," answered the widow. "He is at work
for him."

"Mr. Reed is in New York, isn't he?"

"Yes."

It was concluded, therefore, that Luke was in New York, and one
or two persons proposed to call upon him there, but his mother
professed ignorance of his exact residence. She knew that he was
traveling, but even she was kept in the dark as to where he was, nor
did she know that Mr. Armstrong, and not Mr. Reed, was his employer.

Some half dozen hours before reaching Chicago, a young man of
twenty-five, or thereabouts, sauntered along the aisle, and sat
down in the vacant seat beside Luke.

"Nice day," he said, affably.

"Very nice," responded Luke.

"I suppose you are bound to Chicago?"

"Yes, I expect to stay there awhile."

"Going farther?"

"I can't tell yet."

"Going to school out there?"

"No."

"Perhaps you are traveling for some business firm, though you
look pretty young for that."

"No, I'm not a drummer, if that's what you mean. Still, I have
a commisison from a New York business man."

"A commission--of what kind?" drawled the newcomer.

"It is of a confidential character," said Luke.

"Ha! close-mouthed," thought the young man. "Well, I'll get it
out of him after awhile."

He didn't press the question, not wishing to arouse suspicion
or mistrust.

"Just so," he replied. "You are right to keep it to yourself, though
you wouldn't mind trusting me if you knew me better. Is this your
first visit to Chicago?"

"Yes, sir."

"Suppose we exchange cards. This is mine."

He handed Luke a card, bearing this name.


J. MADISON COLEMAN


At the bottom of the card he wrote in pencil, "representing
H. B. Claflin & Co."

"Of course you've heard of our firm," he said.

"Certainly."

"I don't have the firm name printed on my card, for Claflin won't
allow it. You will notice that I am called for old President
Madison. He was an old friend of my grandfather. In fact,
grandfather held a prominent office under his administration--
collector of the port of New York."

"I have no card with me," responded Luke. "But my name is
Luke Larkin."

"Good name. Do you live in New York?"

"No; a few miles in the country."

"And whom do you represent?"

"Myself for the most part," answered Luke, with a smile.

"Good! No one has a better right to. I see there's something
in you, Luke."

"You've found it out pretty quick," thought Luke.

"And I hope we will get better acquainted. If you're not permanently
employed by this party, whose name you don't give, I will get you
into the employ of Claflin & Co., if you would like it."

"Thank you," answered Luke, who thought it quite possible that he
might like to obtain a position with so eminent a firm. "How long
have you been with them?"

"Ten years--ever since I was of your age," promptly answered
Mr. Coleman.

"Is promotion rapid?" Luke asked, with interest.

"Well, that depends on a man's capacity. I have been pushed right
along. I went there as a boy, on four dollars a week; now I'm a
traveling salesman--drummer as it is called--and I make about four
thousand a year."

"That's a fine salary," said Luke, feeling that his new acquaintance
must be possessed of extra ability to occupy so desirable a position.

"Yes, but I expect next year to get five thousand--Claflin knows
I am worth it, and as he is a liberal man, I guess he will give it
sooner than let me go."

"I suppose many do not get on so well, Mr. Coleman."

"I should say so! Now, there is a young fellow went there the same
time that I did--his name is Frank Bolton. We were schoolfellows
together, and just the same age, that is, nearly--he was born in
April, and I in May. Well, we began at the same time on the same
salary. Now I get sixty dollars a week and he only twelve--and he
is glad to get that, too."

"I suppose he hasn't much business capacity."

"That's where you've struck it, Luke. He knows about enough to be
clerk in a country store--and I suppose he'll fetch up there some
day. You know what that means--selling sugar, and tea, and dried
apples to old ladies, and occasionally measuring off a yard of
calico, or selling a spool of cotton. If I couldn't do better
than that I'd hire out as a farm laborer."

Luke smiled at the enumeration of the duties of a country salesman.
It was clear that Mr. Coleman, though he looked city-bred, must
at some time in the past have lived in the country.

"Perhaps that is the way I should turn out," he said. "I might not
rise any higher than your friend Mr. Bolton."

"Oh, yes, you would. You're smart enough, I'll guarantee. You
might not get on so fast as I have, for it isn't every young man
of twenty-six that can command four thousand dollars a year, but
you would rise to a handsome income, I am sure."

"I should be satisfied with two thousand a year at your age."

"I would be willing to guarantee you that," asserted Mr. Coleman,
confidently. "By the way, where do you propose to put up in
Chicago?"

"I have not decided yet."

"You'd better go with me to the Ottawa House."

"Is it a good house?"

"They'll feed you well there, and only charge two dollars a day"

"Is it centrally located?"

"It isn't as central as the Palmer, or Sherman, or Tremont, but it
is convenient to everything."

I ought to say here that I have chosen to give a fictitious name
to the hotel designated by Mr. Coleman.

"Come, what do you say?"

"I have no objection," answered Luke, after a slight pause
for reflection.

Indeed, it was rather pleasant to him to think that he would have a
companion on his first visit to Chicago who was well acquainted with
the city, and could serve as his guide. Though he should not feel
justified in imparting to Mr. Coleman his special business, he
meant to see something of the city, and would find his new friend
a pleasant companion.

"That's good," said Coleman, well pleased. "I shall be glad to
have your company. I expected to meet a friend on the train, but
something must have delayed him, and so I should have been left
alone."

"I suppose a part of your time will be given to business?"
suggested Luke.

"Yes, but I take things easy; when I work, I work. I can accomplish
as much in a couple of hours as many would do in a whole day. You
see, I understand my customers. When soft sawder is wanted, I am
soft sawder. When I am dealing with a plain, businesslike man, I
talk in a plain, businesslike way. I study my man, and generally I
succeed in striking him for an order, even if times are hard and
he is already well stocked."

"He certainly knows how to talk," thought Luke. In fact, he was
rather disposed to accept Mr. Coleman at his own valuation,
though that was a very high one.

"Do you smoke?"

"Not at all."

"Not even a cigarette?"

"Not even a cigarette."

"I was intending to ask you to go with me into the smoking-car for
a short time. I smoke a good deal; it is my only vice. You know we
must all have some vices."

Luke didn't see the necessity, but he assented, because it seemed
to be expected.

"I won't be gone long. You'd better come along, too, and smoke
a cigarette. It is time you began to smoke. Most boys begin
much earlier."

Luke shook his head.

"I don't care to learn," he said.

"Oh, you're a good boy--one of the Sunday-school kind," said
Coleman, with a slight sneer. "You'll get over that after a
while. You'll be here when I come back?"

Luke promised that he would, and for the next half hour he was left
alone. As his friend Mr. Coleman left the car, he followed him with
his glance, and surveyed him more attentively than he had hitherto
done. The commercial traveler was attired in a suit of fashionable
plaid, wore a showy necktie, from the center of which blazed a
diamond scarfpin. A showy chain crossed his vest, and to it was
appended a large and showy watch, which looked valuable, though
appearances are sometimes deceitful.

"He must spend a good deal of money," thought Luke. "I wonder that
he should be willing to go to a two-dollar-a-day hotel."

Luke, for his own part, was quite willing to go to the Ottawa House.
He had never fared luxuriously, and he had no doubt that even at
the Ottawa House he should live better than at home.

It was nearer an hour than half an hour before Coleman came back.

"I stayed away longer than I intended," he said. "I smoked three
cigars, instead of one, seeing you wasn't with me to keep me
company. I found some social fellows, and we had a chat."

Mr. Coleman absented himself once or twice more. Finally, the
train ran into the depot, and the conductor called out, "Chicago!"

"Come along, Luke!" said Coleman.

The two left the car in company. Coleman hailed a cab--gave the
order, Ottawa House--and in less than five minutes they were
rattling over the pavements toward their hotel.



CHAPTER XXVI

THE OTTAWA HOUSE


There was one little circumstance that led Luke to think favorably
of his new companion. As the hackman closed the door of the
carriage, Luke asked: "How much is the fare?"

"Fifty cents apiece, gentlemen," answered cabby.

Luke was about to put his hand into his pocket for the money, when
Coleman touching him on the arm, said: "Never mind, Luke, I have the
money," and before our hero could expostulate he had thrust a dollar
into the cab-driver's hand.

"All right, thanks," said the driver, and slammed to the door.

"You must let me repay you my part of the fare, Mr. Coleman,"
said Luke, again feeling for his pocketbook.

"Oh, it's a mere trifle!" said Coleman. "I'll let you pay next
time, but don't be so ceremonious with a friend."

"But I would rather pay for myself," objected Luke.

"Oh, say no more about it, I beg. Claflin provides liberally
for my expenses. It's all right."

"But I don't want Claflin to pay for me."

"Then I assure you I'll get it out of you before we part. Will
that content you?"

Luke let the matter drop, but he didn't altogether like to find
himself under obligations to a stranger, notwithstanding his
assurance, which he took for a joke. He would have been surprised
and startled if he had known how thoroughly Coleman meant what he
said about getting even. The fifty cents he had with such apparent
generosity paid out for Luke he meant to get back a hundred-fold.
His object was to gain Luke's entire confidence, and remove any
suspicion he might possibly entertain. In this respect he was
successful. Luke had read about designing strangers, but he
certainly could not suspect a man who insisted on paying his
hack fare.

"I hope you will not be disappointed in the Ottawa House," observed
Mr. Coleman, as they rattled through the paved streets. "It isn't a
stylish hotel."

"I am not used to stylish living," said Luke, frankly. "I have
always been used to living in a very plain way."

"When I first went on the road I used to stop at the tip-top houses,
such as the Palmer at Chicago, the Russell House in Detroit, etc.,
