"Well, perhaps," acknowledged the Scarecrow.

The Woggle-Bug groaned.

"I can see, in my mind's eye," said he, mournfully, "the goats eating small
pieces of my dear comrade, the Tin Woodman, while my soup is being cooked on
a bonfire built of the Saw-Horse and Jack Pumpkinhead's body, and Queen
Jinjur watches me boil while she feeds the flames with my friend the
Scarecrow!"

This morbid picture cast a gloom over the entire party, making them restless
and anxious.

"It can't happen for some time," said the Tin Woodman, trying to speak
cheerfully; "for we shall be able to keep Jinjur out of the palace until she
manages to break down the doors."



184

"And in the meantime I am liable to starve to death, and so is the Woggle-
Bug," announced Tip.

"As for me," said the Woggle-Bug, "I think that I could live for some time
on Jack Pumpkinhead. Not that I prefer pumpkins for food; but I believe they
are somewhat nutritious, and Jack's head is large and plump."

"How heartless!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman, greatly shocked. "Are we
cannibals, let me ask? Or are we faithful friends?"

"I see very clearly that we cannot stay shut up in this palace," said the
Scarecrow, with decision. "So let us end this mournful talk and try to
discover a means to escape."

At this suggestion they all gathered eagerly around the throne, wherein was
seated the Scarecrow, and as Tip sat down upon a stool there fell from his
pocket a pepper-box, which rolled upon the floor.

"What is this?" asked Nick Chopper, picking up the box.

"Be careful!" cried the boy. "That's my Powder of Life. Don't spill it, for
it is nearly gone."

"And what is the Powder of Life?" enquired the Scarecrow, as Tip replaced
the box carefully in his pocket.

"It's some magical stuff old Mombi got from a



185
crooked sorcerer," explained the boy. "She brought Jack to life with it, and
afterward I used it to bring the Saw-Horse to life. I guess it will make
anything live that is sprinkled with it; but there's only about one dose
left."

"Then it is very precious," said the Tin Woodman.

"Indeed it is," agreed the Scarecrow. "It may prove our best means of escape
from our difficulties. I believe I will think for a few minutes; so I will
thank you, friend Tip, to get out your knife and rip this heavy crown from
my forehead."

Tip soon cut the stitches that had fastened the crown to the Scarecrow's
head, and the former monarch of the Emerald City removed it with a sigh of
relief and hung it on a peg beside the throne.

"That is my last memento of royalty" said he; "and I'm glad to get rid of
it. The former King of this City,

               Line-Art Drawing



186
who was named Pastoria, lost the crown to the Wonderful Wizard, who passed
it on to me. Now the girl Jinjur claims it, and I sincerely hope it will not
give her a headache."

"A kindly thought, which I greatly admire," said the Tin Woodman, nodding
approvingly.

"And now I will indulge in a quiet think," continued the Scarecrow, lying
back in the throne.

The others remained as silent and still as possible, so as not to disturb
him; for all had great confidence in the extraordinary brains of the
Scarecrow.

And, after what seemed a very long time indeed to the anxious watchers, the
thinker sat up, looked upon his friends with his most whimsical expression,
and said:

"My brains work beautifully today. I'm quite proud of them. Now, listen! If
we attempt to escape through the doors of the palace we shall surely be
captured. And, as we can't escape through the ground, there is only one
other thing to be done. We must escape through the air!"

He paused to note the effect of these words; but all his hearers seemed
puzzled and unconvinced.

"The Wonderful Wizard escaped in a balloon," he continued. "We don't know
how to make a balloon, of course; but any sort of thing that can



187
fly through the air can carry us easily. So I suggest that my friend the Tin
Woodman, who is a skillful mechanic, shall build some sort of a machine,
with good strong wings, to carry us; and our friend Tip can then bring the
Thing to life with his magical powder."

"Bravo!" cried Nick Chopper.

"What splendid brains!" murmured Jack.

"Really quite clever!" said the Educated Woggle-Bug.

"I believe it can be done," declared Tip; "that is, if the Tin Woodman is
equal to making the Thing."

"I'll do my best," said Nick, cheerily; "and, as a matter of fact, I do not
often fail in what I attempt. But the Thing will have to be built on the
roof of the palace, so it can rise comfortably into the air."

               Line-Art Drawing



188

"To be sure," said the Scarecrow.

"Then let us search through the palace," continued the Tin Woodman, "and
carry all the material we can find to the roof, where I will begin my work."

"First, however," said the Pumpkinhead, "I beg you will release me from this
horse, and make me another leg to walk with. For in my present condition I
am of no use to myself or to anyone else."

So the Tin Woodman knocked a mahogany center-table to pieces with his axe
and fitted one of the legs, which was beautifully carved, on to the body of
Jack Pumpkinhead, who was very proud of the acquisition.

"It seems strange," said he, as he watched the Tin Woodman work, "that my
left leg should be the most elegant and substantial part of me."

"That proves you are unusual," returned the Scarecrow. "and I am convinced
that the only people worthy of consideration in this world are the unusual
ones. For the common folks are like the leaves of a tree, and live and die
unnoticed."

"Spoken like a philosopher!" cried the Woggle-Bug, as he assisted the Tin
Woodman to set Jack upon his feet.

"How do you feel now?" asked Tip, watching



189
the Pumpkinhead stump around to try his new leg."

As good as new" answered Jack, Joyfully, "and quite ready to assist you all
to escape."

"Then let us get to work," said the Scarecrow, in a business-like tone.

So, glad to be doing anything that might lead to the end of their captivity,
the friends separated to wander over the palace in search of fitting
material to use in the construction of their aerial machine.

               Line-Art Drawing



190               Full page line-art drawing.



191               The Astonishing Flight of the Gump


When the adventurers reassembled upon the roof it was found that a
remarkably queer assortment of articles had been selected by the various
members of the party. No one seemed to have a very clear idea of what was
required, but all had brought something.

The Woggle-Bug had taken from its position over the mantle-piece in the
great hallway the head of a Gump, which was adorned with wide-spreading
antlers; and this, with great care and greater difficulty, the insect had
carried up the stairs to the roof. This Gump resembled an Elk's head, only
the nose turned upward in a saucy manner and there were whiskers



192
upon its chin, like those of a billy-goat. Why the Woggle-Bug selected this
article he could not have explained, except that it had aroused his
curiosity.

Tip, with the aid of the Saw-Horse, had brought a large, upholstered sofa to
the roof. It was an oldfashioned piece of furniture, with high back and
ends, and it was so heavy that even by resting the greatest weight upon the
back of the Saw-Horse, the boy found himself out of breath when at last the
clumsy sofa was dumped upon the roof.

The Pumpkinhead had brought a broom, which was the first thing he saw. The
Scarecrow arrived with a coil of clothes-lines and ropes which he had taken
from the courtyard, and in his trip up the stairs he had become so entangled
in the loose ends of the ropes that both he and his burden tumbled in a heap
upon the roof and might have rolled off if Tip had not rescued him.

The Tin Woodman appeared last. He also had been to the courtyard, where he
had cut four great, spreading leaves from a huge palm-tree that was the
pride of all the inhabitants of the Emerald City.

"My dear Nick!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, seeing what his friend had done;
"you have been guilty of the greatest crime any person can commit in the
Emerald City. If I remember rightly, the



193               Full page line-art drawing.

               ALL BROUGHT SOMETHING TO THE ROOF.



194
penalty for chopping leaves from the royal palm-tree is to be killed seven
times and afterward imprisoned for life."

"It cannot be helped now" answered the Tin Woodman, throwing down the big
leaves upon the roof. "But it may be one more reason why it is necessary for
us to escape. And now let us see what you have found for me to work with."

Many were the doubtful looks cast upon the heap of miscellaneous material
that now cluttered the roof, and finally the Scarecrow shook his head and
remarked:

"Well, if friend Nick can manufacture, from this mess of rubbish, a Thing
that will fly through the air and carry us to safety, then I will
acknowledge him to be a better mechanic than I suspected."

But the Tin Woodman seemed at first by no means sure of his powers, and only
after polishing his forehead vigorously with the chamois-leather did he
resolve to undertake the task.

"The first thing required for the machine," said he, "is a body big enough
to carry the entire party. This sofa is the biggest thing we have, and might
be used for a body. But, should the machine ever tip sideways, we would all
slide off and fall to the ground."



195

"Why not use two sofas?" asked Tip. "There's another one just like this down
stairs."

"That is a very sensible suggestion," exclaimed the Tin Woodman. "You must
fetch the other sofa at once."

So Tip and the Saw-Horse managed, with much labor, to get the second sofa to
the roof; and when the two were placed together, edge to edge, the backs and
ends formed a protecting rampart all around the seats.

"Excellent!" cried the Scarecrow. "We can ride within this snug nest quite
at our ease."

The two sofas were now bound firmly together with ropes and clothes-lines,
and then Nick Chopper fastened the Gump's head to one end.

"That will show which is the front end of the Thing," said he, greatly
pleased with the idea." And, really, if you examine it critically, the Gump
looks very well as a figure-head. These great palm-leaves, for which I have
endangered my life seven times, must serve us as wings."

"Are they strong enough?" asked the boy.

"They are as strong as anything we can get," answered the Woodman; "and
although they are not in proportion to the Thing's body, we are not in a
position to be very particular."



196

So he fastened the palm-leaves to the sofas, two on each side.

Said the Woggle-Bug, with considerable admiration:

"The Thing is now complete, and only needs to be brought to life."

"Stop a moment!" exclaimed Jack." Are you not going to use my broom?"

"What for?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Why, it can be fastened to the back end for a tail," answered the
Pumpkinhead. "Surely you would not call the Thing complete without a tail."

"Hm!" said the Tin Woodman, "I do not see the use of a tail. We are not
trying to copy a beast, or a fish, or a bird. All we ask of the Thing is to
carry us through the air.

"Perhaps, after the Thing is brought to life, it can use a tail to steer
with," suggested the Scarecrow. "For if it flies through the air it will not
be unlike a bird, and I've noticed that all birds have tails, which they use
for a rudder while flying."

"Very well," answered Nick, "the broom shall be used for a tail," and he
fastened it firmly to the back end of the sofa body.

Tip took the pepper-box from his pocket.

"The Thing looks very big," said he, anxiously;



197
"and I am not sure there is enough powder left to bring all of it to life.
But I'll make it go as far as possible."

"Put most on the wings," said Nick Chopper; "for they must be made as strong
as possible."

"And don't forget the head!" exclaimed the Woggle-Bug.

"Or the tail!" added Jack Pumpkinhead.

"Do be quiet," said Tip, nervously; "you must give me a chance to work the
magic charm in the proper manner."

Very carefully he began sprinkling the Thing with the precious powder. Each
of the four wings was first lightly covered with a layer. then the sofas
were sprinkled, and the broom given a slight coating.

"The head! The head! Don't, I beg of you, forget the head!" cried the
Woggle-Bug, excitedly.

"There's only a little of the powder left," announced Tip, looking within
the box." And it seems to me it is more important to bring the legs of the
sofas to life than the head."

"Not so," decided the Scarecrow. "Every thing must have a head to direct it;
and since this creature is to fly, and not walk, it is really unimportant
whether its legs are alive or not."

So Tip abided by this decision and sprinkled the Gump's head with the
remainder of the powder.

