one. Then they unlatched a gate and entered a street of the city, and
met no one.

"I wonder how a fat baby will taste," remarked the Tiger, as they
stalked majestically along, side by side.

"I imagine it will taste like nutmegs," said the Lion.

"No," said the Tiger, "I've an idea it will taste like gumdrops."

They turned a corner, but met no one, for the people of the Emerald City
were accustomed to take their naps at this hour of the afternoon.

"I wonder how many pieces I ought to tear a person into," said the Lion,
in a thoughtful voice.

"Sixty would be about right," suggested the Tiger.

[Illustration]

"Would that hurt any more than to tear one into about a dozen pieces?"
inquired the Lion, with a little shudder.

"Who cares whether it hurts or not?" growled the Tiger.

The Lion did not reply. They entered a side street, but met no one.

Suddenly they heard a child crying.

"Aha!" exclaimed the Tiger. "There is my meat."

He rushed around a corner, the Lion following, and came upon a nice fat
baby sitting in the middle of the street and crying as if in great
distress.

"What's the matter?" asked the Tiger, crouching before the baby.

"I--I--I-lost my m-m-mamma!" wailed the baby.

"Why, you poor little thing," said the great beast, softly stroking the
child's head with its paw. "Don't cry, my dear, for mamma can't be far
away and I'll help you to find her."

"Go on," said the Lion, who stood by.

"Go on where?" asked the Tiger, looking up.

"Go on and eat your fat baby."

"Why, you dreadful creature!" said the Tiger reproachfully; "would you
want me to eat a poor little lost baby, that doesn't know where its
mother is?" And the beast gathered the little one into its strong, hairy
arms and tried to comfort it by rocking it gently back and forth.

[Illustration]

The Lion growled low in his throat and seemed very much disappointed;
but at that moment a scream reached their ears and a woman came bounding
out of a house and into the street. Seeing her baby in the embrace of
the monster Tiger the woman screamed again and rushed forward to rescue
it, but in her haste she caught her foot in her skirt and tumbled head
over heels and heels over head, stopping with such a bump that she saw
many stars in the heavens, although it was broad daylight. And there she
lay, in a helpless manner, all tangled up and unable to stir.

With one bound and a roar like thunder the huge Lion was beside her.
With his strong jaws he grasped her dress and raised her into an upright
position.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

"Poor thing! Are you hurt?" he gently asked.

Gasping for breath the woman struggled to free herself and tried to
walk, but she limped badly and tumbled down again.

"My baby!" she said pleadingly.

"The baby is all right; don't worry," replied the Lion; and then he
added: "Keep quiet, now, and I'll carry you back to your house, and the
Hungry Tiger will carry your baby."

The Tiger, who had approached the place with the child in its arms,
asked in astonishment:

"Aren't you going to tear her into sixty pieces?"

[Illustration]

"No, nor into six pieces," answered the Lion indignantly. "I'm not
such a brute as to destroy a poor woman who has hurt herself trying to
save her lost baby. If you are so ferocious and cruel and bloodthirsty,
you may leave me and go away, for I do not care to associate with you."

"That's all right," answered the Tiger. "I'm not cruel--not in the
least--I'm only hungry. But I thought _you_ were cruel."

"Thank heaven I'm respectable," said the Lion, with dignity. He then
raised the woman and with much gentleness carried her into her house,
where he laid her upon a sofa. The Tiger followed with the baby, which
he safely deposited beside its mother. The little one liked the Hungry
Tiger and grasping the enormous beast by both ears the baby kissed the
beast's nose to show he was grateful and happy.

"Thank you very much," said the woman. "I've often heard what good
beasts you are, in spite of your power to do mischief to mankind, and
now I know that the stories are true. I do not think either of you have
ever had an evil thought."

The Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion hung their heads and did not look
into each other's eyes, for both were shamed and humbled. They crept
away and stalked back through the streets until they again entered the
palace grounds, where they retreated to the pretty, comfortable rooms
they occupied at the back of the palace. There they silently crouched in
their usual corners to think over their adventure.

[Illustration]

After a while the Tiger said sleepily:

"I don't believe fat babies taste like gumdrops. I'm quite sure they
have the flavor of raspberry tarts. My, how hungry I am for fat babies!"

The Lion grunted disdainfully.

"You're a humbug," said he.

"Am I?" retorted the Tiger, with a sneer. "Tell me, then, into how many
pieces you usually tear your victims, my bold Lion?"

The Lion impatiently thumped the floor with his tail.

"To tear anyone into pieces would soil my claws and blunt my teeth," he
said. "I'm glad I didn't muss myself up this afternoon by hurting that
poor mother."

The Tiger looked at him steadily and then yawned a wide, wide yawn.

"You're a coward," he remarked.

"Well," said the Lion, "it's better to be a coward than to do wrong."

"To be sure," answered the other. "And that reminds me that I nearly
lost my own reputation. For, had I eaten that fat baby I would not now
be the Hungry Tiger. It's better to go hungry, seems to me, than to be
cruel to a little child."

And then they dropped their heads on their paws and went to sleep.

[Illustration]




LITTLE DOROTHY AND TOTO


Dorothy was a little Kansas girl who once accidentally found the
beautiful Land of Oz and was invited to live there always. Toto was
Dorothy's small black dog, with fuzzy, curly hair and bright black eyes.
Together, when they tired of the grandeur of the Emerald City of Oz,
they would wander out into the country and all through the land,
peering into queer nooks and corners and having a good time in their own
simple way. There was a little Wizard living in Oz who was a faithful
friend of Dorothy and did not approve of her traveling alone in this
way, but the girl always laughed at the little man's fears for her and
said she was not afraid of anything that might happen.

[Illustration]

One day while on such a journey, Dorothy and Toto found themselves among
the wild wooded hills at the southeast of Oz--a place usually avoided by
travelers because so many magical things abounded there. And, as they
entered a forest path, the little girl noticed a sign tacked to a tree,
which said: "Look out for Crinklink."

Toto could not talk, as many of the animals of Oz can, for he was just
a common Kansas dog; but he looked at the sign so seriously that Dorothy
almost believed he could read it, and she knew quite well that Toto
understood every word she said to him.

"Never mind Crinklink," said she. "I don't believe anything in Oz will
