indignant.

"Mr. Smith," said Ben Platt, in a spirited tone, "no one ever suspected
me of dishonesty before."

"Nor me," said Wilkins.

"That's neither here nor there," said the principal, dogmatically. "It
stands to reason that some one took the money. Money doesn't generally
walk off itself," he added, with a sneer.

"I don't dispute that," said Ben; "but that does not prove that Wilkins
or I had anything to do with it."

"You were in the room with the money for half an hour, according to your
own confession," said Socrates.

"Yes, I was."

"And part of that time Wilkins was also present."

"Yes, sir," assented Wilkins.

"I am no lawyer," said the principal, triumphantly, "but that seems to
me a pretty good case of circumstantial evidence."

"You seem to forget, sir, that there is another person who had an
excellent chance to take the money," said Ben Platt.

"You mean Hector Roscoe? That is true. It lies between you three."

"No, Mr. Smith, I do not mean Hector Roscoe. I have as much confidence
in Roscoe as myself."

"So have I," sneered Socrates.

"And I know he would not take any money that did not belong to him. I
mean a very different person--your nephew, James Smith."

Socrates Smith frowned with anger. "There seems to be a conspiracy
against my unfortunate nephew," he said. "I don't believe a word of your
mean insinuations, and I am not deceived by your attempt to throw your
own criminality upon him. It will not injure him in my eyes. Moreover, I
shall be able to trace back the theft to the wrongdoer. The missing bill
was marked with a cross upon the back, and should either of you attempt
to pass it, your guilt will be made manifest. I advise you to restore it
to me while there is yet time."

"The bill was marked?" asked Wilkins, eagerly.

"Yes."

"Then, sir, you may have a chance to find out who took it."

"The discovery might not please you," said Socrates, with a sneer.

"It would give me the greatest pleasure, Mr. Smith. If I can in any way
help you discover the missing note, I will do so."

"You can go," said Socrates, abruptly.

When the two boys had left the presence of the principal, Ben Platt,
said, "What are you going to do about it, Wilkins?"

"First of all," answered Wilkins, promptly, "I am going to find out if
Jim took that money."

"How can you find out?"

"Did you notice that he had come out with a new ring?"

"No, I didn't observe it."

"He has bought it since that money was lost!" said Wilkins,
significantly.

"Do you think he purchased it with the missing bill?"

"I wouldn't wonder at all. At any rate, I am going to find out. He must
have bought it from Washburn, the jeweler. Will you go with me, and
ask?"

"Yes," answered Ben, eagerly. "Let us go alone. If we can only prove the
theft upon Jim, so that old Sock can't help believing that he stole the
money, we shall be cleared; though, as to that, there isn't a scholar in
school who would believe the charge against us."

"Still, we may as well do what we can to bring the guilt home to Jim
Smith."

Ten minutes later the two boys entered the shop of Mr. Washburn.

"Will you show me some rings, Mr. Washburn?" asked Wilkins.

"Certainly," answered the jeweler, politely.

"What is the price of that?" asked Wilkins, pointing to one exactly like
the one he had seen on Jim's finger.

"Three dollars and a half. It is a very pretty pattern."

"Yes, sir. There's one of our boys who has one just like it."

"You mean James Smith, the principal's nephew."

"Yes, sir."

"He bought it of me yesterday."

The two boys exchanged a quick glance.

They felt that they were on the brink of a discovery.

"Did he give you a five-dollar bill in payment?" asked Ben Platt.

"Yes," answered the jeweler, in surprise.

"Could you identify that bill?"

"What are you driving at, boys?" asked Mr. Washburn, keenly.

"I will explain to you if you will answer my questions first."

"Yes, I could identify the bill."

"Have you it in your possession still?"

"I have."

"How will you know it?"

"It seems to me, my boy, you are in training for a lawyer."

"I have a very urgent reason for asking you this question, Mr.
Washburn."

"Then I will answer you. When the note was given me, I noticed that it
was on the Park Bank of New York."

"Will you be kind enough to see if you can find it?"'

"Certainly."

The jeweler opened his money drawer, and after a brief search, produced
the bill in question.

It was a five-dollar bill on the Park Bank of New York, as he had
already told the boys.

"Now, Mr. Washburn," asked Wilkins, trying to repress his excitement,
"will you examine the back of the bill, and see if there is any mark on
it."

The jeweler did as requested, and announced, after slight examination,
that there was a cross on the back of the bill in the upper right hand
corner.

"Hurrah!" shouted Ben, impulsively.

To the wondering jeweler he explained his precise object in the inquiry
he had made, and the boys were complimented by Mr. Washburn for their
shrewdness.

"If I ever meet with a loss, I shall certainly call on you for
assistance, boys," he said.

"Thank you, Mr. Washburn," answered Wilkins, "but I do not expect to be
here to be called upon."

"You are not going to leave the institute, are you?"

"I shall write to my father in what manner I have been treated, and let
him understand how the principal manages the school, and I feel sure he
will withdraw me."

"Ditto for me!" said Ben Platt. "Old Sock's partiality for his nephew
has been carried too far, and now that the only decent teacher is
going--Mr. Crabb--I don't mean, to stay here if I can help it."

The boys, upon their return to the school, sought out the principal.

"Well, boys," he said, "have you come to confess?"

"No, sir," answered Ben, "but we have come to give you some information
about your money."

"I was sure you knew something about it," said Socrates, with a sneer.
"I am glad you have decided to make a clean breast of it."

"You are mistaken, sir."

"Well, out with your information!" said the principal, roughly.

"A five-dollar bill, marked as you have described, was paid to Mr.
Washburn, the jeweler, only yesterday."

"Ha! Well?"

"The one who offered it purchased a gold ring."

"I don't care what he bought. Who was it that offered the money?"

"Your nephew, James Smith!"

"I don't believe it," said the teacher, very much disconcerted.

"Then, sir, I advise you to question Mr. Washburn."

"How can he identify the bill? Is it the only five-dollar bill he has?"

"The only five-dollar bill on the Park Bank of New York, and he says he
noticed that this was the bank that issued the bill handed him by your
nephew."

"What of that?"

"The note, which he still has in his possession, is marked just exactly
as you have described."

"It may have been marked since it came into Mr. Washburn's hands," said
Socrates, but he was evidently very much disturbed by the intelligence.
He might not confess it, but he could not help believing that Jim was
the thief, after all.

"You can go," he said, harshly. "I will look into this improbable
story."




CHAPTER XXV. SMITH INSTITUTE GROWS UNPOPULAR.



Hector lost no time in drawing up a statement of the facts connected
with the loss of the wallet, which he got Wilkins and Ben Platt to sign.
This he put into an envelope directed to Allan Roscoe, accompanied by a
brief note, which I subjoin:

"MR. ROSCOE: I send you a statement, signed by two of my schoolmates,
showing that the charge which Mr. Smith was in such a hurry to bring
against me, in order to screen his nephew, who is the real thief, is
wholly unfounded. I am not particularly surprised that you were ready
to believe it, nor do I care enough for your good opinion to worry. I
consider that it is due to myself, however, to prove to you that I have
done nothing of which I need be ashamed. Finding the scholars here in
terror of a bully, who imposed upon his schoolfellows with impunity
because, being the principal's nephew, he was protected in so doing, I
taught him a lesson which may not do him good, but has certainly been of
benefit to his fellow-pupils. In so doing, I have incurred his enmity,
and that of his uncle, who, for more than one reason, is utterly unfit
to conduct a school of this kind.

"You threaten to remove me from school at the end of this term. I do not
wish to remain, and shall remove myself at the end of this week. I shall
not look to you for support, nor do I expect again to depend upon the
estate to which I once thought myself the heir, unless I should be
able to prove that I am the son of your brother, as I fully believe,
notwithstanding the letter you exhibit."

"HECTOR ROSCOE."

When Mr. Allan Roscoe received this letter he was very much disturbed.
As he had no affection for Hector, and did not care what became of him,
this may, perhaps, excite surprise. Could it be the last sentence which
excited his alarm?

"Is that letter from Hector?" asked Guy, who had noticed the postmark as
it lay upon his father's table.

"Yes," answered Allan Roscoe.

"Does he try to explain his theft?" asked Guy.

"He says he had nothing to do with it."

"Oh, of course!" sneered Guy. "You don't believe it, do you?"

"He sends a statement of two of the pupils to the effect that the wallet
was taken by another pupil, a nephew of the principal."

"That's too thin!"

"I don't know. It may be true. I don't like the boy, but I hardly think
it probable he would steal."

"You think better of him than I do. I suppose he wants to get into your
good graces again?"

"No; he says he shall leave school at the end of this week, and will not
again look to me for support."

"That's jolly!" exclaimed Guy, much pleased. "You're well rid of him,
papa. Let him go away and make a living as he can. He'll have to
turn newsboy, or something of that sort--perhaps he'll have to be a
bootblack. Wouldn't that be a good come down for a boy like Hector?"

Guy spoke with great glee, but his father did not seem to enjoy his
release as well as Guy. He showed that he understood the boy better when
he said:

"Hector will not have to resort to any such employment. He has a good
education, and he can get some decent position, probably. On the whole,
I am sorry he is going to leave my protection, for friends of the family
may, perhaps, blame me."

"But it isn't your fault, papa. He is taking his own course."

"To be sure. You are right there!"

Mr. Roscoe thought so much on the subject, however, that the next day he
went to Smith Institute to see Hector, without telling Guy where he was
going.

Arrived there, he asked to see Mr. Smith.

The latter did not appear to be in a happy frame of mind.

"How do you do, Mr. Roscoe?" he said.

"Very well," answered Mr. Roscoe, briefly. "Mr. Smith, I wish to see my
ward."

"I am sorry you cannot see him, Mr. Roscoe."

"Cannot see him! Why not?"

"Because he has left the institute."

Allan Roscoe frowned.

"Why has he left?" he asked.

"He has left against my will. I think he has been influenced by an usher
in my employ who has behaved very ungratefully. I took him, sir, when he
was in danger of starving, and now he leaves me at a day's notice, after
doing all he can to break up my school."

"I feel no particular interest in your usher," said Allan Roscoe,
coldly. "I wish to obtain information about the boy I placed under your
charge. Do you know where he has gone?"

"No; he did not tell me," answered the principal.

"You wrote me that he had been detected in stealing a wallet!"

"Yes," answered Socrates, embarrassed. "Appearances were very much
against him."

"Do you still think he took it?"

"I may have been mistaken," answered Mr. Smith, nervously, for he began
to see that the course he had been pursuing was a very unwise one.

"Hector has written me, inclosing a statement signed by two of his
schoolfellows, implicating your own nephew, and he charges that you made
the charge against him out of partiality for the same."

"There is considerable prejudice against my nephew," said Socrates.

"And for very good reasons, I should judge," said Allan Roscoe,
severely. "Hector describes him as an outrageous bully and tyrant. I am
surprised, Mr. Smith, that you should have taken his part."

Now, Socrates had already had a stormy interview with his nephew. Though
partial to Jim, and not caring whether or not he bullied the other
boys, as soon as he came to see that Jim's presence was endangering
the school, he reprimanded him severely. He cared more for himself--for
number one--than for anyone else in the universe. He had been
exceedingly disturbed by receiving letters from the fathers of Wilkins
and Ben Platt, and two other fathers, giving notice that they should
remove their sons at the end of the term, and demanding, in the
meantime, that his nephew should be sent away forthwith.

And now Allan Roscoe, whom he had hoped would side with him, had also
turned against him. Then he had lost the services of a competent usher,
whom he got cheaper than he could secure any suitable successor, and,
altogether, things seemed all going against him.

Moreover, Jim, who had been the occasion of all the trouble, had
answered him impudently, and Socrates felt that he had been badly used.
As to his own agency in the matter, he did not give much thought to
that.

"My nephew is going to leave the school, Mr. Roscoe," said Socrates,
half-apologetically.

"I should think it was full time, Mr. Smith."

"Perhaps so," said Smith; "but if I have stood by him, it has been
in ignorance. I cannot think him as wrong as your ward has probably
represented. Hector was jealous of him."

"Of his scholarship, I presume?"

"Well, no," answered the principal, reluctantly, "but of his physical
superiority, and--and influence in the school. I may say, in fact,
Mr. Roscoe, that till your ward entered the school it was a happy and
harmonious family. His coming stirred up strife and discontent, and
