later on." "Then I'll take the lads with me," said Hester. "You can't
do nought with them when you're all upset as you are now; and they'll
be good with me, and I'll give them summut to eat. Why Bet, my dear,
you needn't take it in that way; for if I didn't do a good turn to the
poor little chaps for their sake and your own, wouldn't I do it for
Will, as is my own cousin, and who I love better than anybody else in
the world? Don't you take on now, dear--don't you," for Bet had flung
her head down on her hands, and was giving way to the most terrible,
heartbreaking sobs.

"Oh, the poor lads!" she said--"the poor, poor, little lads--and my
promise to mother! But there-Will comes afore all. Take 'em home,
Hetty, and give 'em the best you can for to-night. No, no, boys--don't
come for to kiss me--I ain't a good sister to you no more."

The captain and the general paid no particular attention to Bet's
manner. They were sorry she was in trouble, but the delight of going
off with Hester soon made this dismal remembrance fade from their baby
minds. The little party went away, and Bet was left alone in her attic.

Her bridal night!--but what a night! Will lying lonely and forsaken in
his prison cell, and she--she, Bet Granger, the poor, but also the
honest and upright, about to be unfaithful to the most solemn vow she
had ever taken in her life Never mind; love must still be lord of all,
and Will must be saved at any price.

She wrapped her shawl about her stately head, smoothed back the fuzzy
red-gold locks, and went out into the desolate winter night. She left
Paradise Row quickly behind her, and in a very short time was once more
in Sparrow Street She stopped at the familiar door, and ran quickly up
the stairs. Her heart almost choked her as she stood for a moment
outside the door of the room where her mother had died. There was no
sound; she turned the handle and went in. The room was empty, and
looked untidy, dirty, desolate. A little fire, however, lingered in the
grate, and a paraffin lamp smoked and smelt horribly on the dirty deal
table. Bet tucked up her dress, and in a few moments transformed the
room. The fire was built up, and burned brightly; the lamp was trimmed,
the ashes were swept out of the grate, and the chairs were dusted and
put tidy. She found a dirty cloth which ought to have been white, shook
it and smoothed it out, and covered the deal table with it. She laid a
couple of horn knives and forks, a couple of cracked plates, and a
glass or two on the table. There was no food, however, in the cupboard,
and she had no money in her pocket to buy any. She sat down now by the
glowing fire, and waited. She had tossed off her shawl, and the
firelight fell on her pale, proud face; her lips were very firmly set,
and her resolute eyes looked into the fire. Inwardly she was faint and
sick, for she had not tasted food that day; but she was unconscious of
absolute hunger, all the energy within both soul and body being fixed
on one idea.

A step was heard on the stairs--a shambling step. Bet knew it. She
stood up, and when her father entered the room, confronted him with
eyes that almost blazed.

"Here I am," she said. "I have come back--you can have your way. You
didn't starve me out, but you took my heart and crushed it--you crushed
it under your foot. You're a bad man; there's only one worse than you,
and that's Isaac Dent. I have come back, and I'll stay ef you'll take
me on my own terms. Not unless--mind you that--not unless."

Granger was a little the worse for drink. He was not really tipsy, but
he had taken enough slightly to confuse his brain; and the altered
aspect of the room and the sudden apparition of his daughter almost
paralyzed him.

"Well, I never!" he exclaimed, and he sank down, an abject-looking
figure, on the nearest chair.

"Do you hear me, father?" said Bet. She came up close and stood over
him. "I ha' come back, Ef you give me my terms, I'll stay. I'll stay,
and I don't mind owning that I've been conquered. I'll do for you, and
tend you, and keep the place tidy for you, same as I did when mother
was alive, and what money I earns you shall share. I'll be as true a
daughter to you, father, as ef--as ef you was good. You want some one
to cosset you up, don't you father? You give me my way, and I'll do it.
Cosy will be no name for you, father, and snug no word for this yer
room."

Here Bet knelt down, and laid her shapely hand on Granger's arm; her
eyes looked into his, and her lips, so hard and firm a minute ago,
absolutely smiled.

"You're none so young as you were," she continued; "you're getting on
in years, and your step's a bit shaky, and your hairs are turning
white. You wants your comforts, father--course you do. Why, this
room--it was shameful when I come in, and look at it now!--it's a bit
spry, ain't it now?"

"For sure, yes; it _is_ spry," said Granger, glancing round him in a
nervous, anxious manner.

His daughter's strange demeanor and unusual gentleness by no means
reassured him.

"What are you arter, Bet?" he said, as gruffly as he could manage to
speak. "You don't bring honeyed words like them 'ere into this house
for nothing. Tell out what you wants, and don't talk flummery."

"I wants you and Dent to take the shame off Will Scarlett," said Bet.
"There's no flummery there--that's my meaning, spoke out plain. You two
ha' put shame on Will, and cast him into prison, and I want you to take
him out again, and lift the shameful lie off him. That's all--it ain't
much, and it 'ull be the better for your souls--ef you have any
souls--that you should do it."

Granger burst into a loud laugh.

"You have the cheek!" he said. "And for you to wed him, I suppose, the
werry minute as he gets his liberty! No, no, Bet--none of that. I ain't
much--for sure I ain't much; but a gel brought up in Sparrer Street
shan't wed with no thief. There--I'm going out. I know nought about
Will Scarlett. Neither Dent nor me could open his prison doors for him.
You talk rubbish, Bet, and I'm 'shamed to hear you. I'm going out--you
can set by the fire as long as you pleases, or you can go back to
Paradise Row."

Granger turned to the door. But Bet was before him. She turned the key
in the lock and put it in her pocket.

"No, no, father; you don't go out until you hear my terms," she said.




CHAPTER XIX.


All her softness had deserted her. She looked like what she was--a
wild, untamed creature brought to bay.

"You ha' got to hear my terms, father," she said. "I'll be a good
daughter to you, but I want Will out of prison. You don't suppose as I
don't know what you and Isaac Dent ha' done to my Will. You was mad as
I should be happy with Will, and Isaac Dent was mad 'cause I shouldn't
mate with he; and Isaac Dent stole the five-pound notes and the purse,
and other money besides, and he knew as the number of the notes was
took, and he was frightened, and so he give the notes to Will, and
pretended as he wanted to buy his berth in the 'Good Queen Anne.' But
Dent didn't sail in that ship, father, and Dent's in Liverpool now--I
know he is, for you axed me to meet him here some time back, and Mother
Bunch seed you and a sailor lad in the Star and Garter this week, and
she heerd you plotting and planning, and she knew--she guessed as there
wor mischief brewing. There's a case agin' you and Dent, father, and
you'd better come to my terms, or it 'ull fare worse with you. No
harm'll come to you; but Dent--he must be found, and Will must be set
free. There--you've got to do that; do you hear me?"

Granger crouched near the door. He neither liked Bet's manner nor her
words. She knew a great deal more than he had the least idea of. Mother
Bunch having overheard him and Dent as they laid their plans together
in the Star and Garter was an awkward circumstance. The whole thing
looked ugly. He wished he were out of it. More particularly as he had
never received any of Dent's promised gold.

It behoved him, howe'er, to be careful,--on no account must he betray
himself or his fears to this astute daughter.

"You needn't speak so loud, Bet--I ain't deaf. It's a queer
world,--it's a nice state, so to speak, of society when a gel takes to
bullying of her own father. You're quite mistook ef you suppose Dent is
in Liverpool. A life on the ocean wave, with its storms and its fogs
and its dangers, is poor Dent's life at present. But I don't say,"
continued Granger, lowering his voice, and trying to speak in a
seductive manner, "I don't say as I couldn't get word with him. I won't
say how, and I won't say when; and I won't say, either, but what he's
as innocent as a babe; but word with him I might be able to get
ef,--now, what's the matter, Bet?"

"Nothing, father--nothing much--only set you down by the fire and make
yourself cosy. There--you're all trembling; you're not as strong as you
ought for to be--you wants your comforts. You'd like a cup of tea now,
wouldn't you? And no one can make tea like Bet--now, can they?"

"That's true enough, my gel--you can be a comfort ef you have a mind.
No mistake on that point. Well, as I said, I might get word of
Dent,--only hark you, Bet, you'll stay at home--there'll be no larks
back to Paradise Row, and no bringing Mother Bunch to the front? You'll
stay here, and be a comfort to your father?"

"Yes, father, I said I would,--oh, I can make you real cosy, there's no
doubt on that point."

"And you'll bring the lads back, and not play no fool about them no
more? They're my lads, and you has treated me shameful in the matter.
But you'll bring 'em back, to be under the shelter of their honest
father's roof? You understand--I'll do nought about finding Dent unless
you comes back here--you and them boys." Bet's face was convulsed for a
moment.

"They shall come back," she said, then--"that's the 'greement: me and
them living here as of old, and Will let out of his prison."

"And there'll be no talk of your marrying yourself to the thief? I'll
do nought ef you give me that feller as a son-in-law. I'd rather a
sight leave him in prison--why, Bet, how white you air--I wouldn't be
doing my dooty as a father ef I seed you a flinging of your 'andsome
self away on a thief feller."

Granger was right when he said Bet's face had grown white. Her long
fast, all the anguish and agitation she had undergone, and now this
terrible last clause in the agreement she was making with her father,
proved too much for her. She did not faint, as she had done in the
morning; but she was absolutely incapable of replying. Her lips opened,
it is true, but no articulate sound came from them.

"I'm a bit weak," she managed to gasp at last; "I han't eaten nought
to-day."

Granger fetched her a little water, and then volunteered to go out to
bring in bread and tea. He was still considerably puzzled and annoyed
at Bet's knowledge of his doings; but he was glad to have the girl and
the boys once more in his power, and had great faith in Dent's
diplomacy.

Dent would soon settle things, and Bet should be his wife as quickly as
the license could be purchased.




CHAPTER XX.


The police were searching everywhere for a sailor called Dent. They set
detectives to work, and had little doubt that long before the week had
expired for which Will had been remanded they would find their man, and
establish the truth, or otherwise, of Will's story.

When it commenced it seemed quite an easy search; but the days flew
quickly, and neither about the docks, nor loafing round the quays,
could anyone least bearing Isaac Dent's description be found. His name
was not on any ship's log, and the police came to the conclusion that
Liverpool really did not contain him. They advertised--they even
offered rewards for the slightest information; but no clue could they
obtain. On the seventh day of Will's captivity they gave the matter up
as a bad job, and said that the sailor Dent was not in the city.

They were mistaken. Dent had never left his native shores. He was not
particular as to his quarters--he was clever at disguising himself; and
as there are in Liverpool courts and slums into which no policeman
cares to venture, it was not very difficult for Dent to elude these
worthies.

Granger, however, had found him out, and Granger and he had many
colloquies, but not in a place where Mother Bunch could overhear.

"I ain't afeard," said Dent. "They can do nought to me, nor to you
neither, mate. I'd like to go to the police court--and I will, too. But
it won't be to clear Will--by no means, but quite the contrairy. Only I
don't choose the police to be dragging of me forward. I'll go when I
has made terms with Bet, and not afore."

Then the men whispered together again, and laid their plans, which were
quite as deep, and quite as wicked, as the most unprincipled could
desire.

Bet lived once more in Sparrow Street, earning thereby Mother Bunch's
contempt, and a queer, puzzled look from Hester Wright, who would not
forsake her, but who certainly failed to understand either her or her
motive. She brought the boys home; and now her father's room in Sparrow
Street was kept fairly neat, and the lads resumed the life which had
been broken off at their mother's death. They shrank from their father,
who, absorbed in other things, did not trouble them much just then; and
they looked with great wonder and perplexity at Bet. She was not the
Bet of old; she took scarcely any notice of them; she never smiled when
they came near her; she said nothing at all now about their being good
boys, and never by any chance did she allude to their mother's name
before them.

She spent her whole time watching and listening,--starting and changing
color at the merest sound, looking eagerly at her father whenever he
came into the house, avoiding Hester Wright, eating next to nothing,
wearing away her sleeping hours in long, exhausting fits of weeping.
Will's week in prison was nearly over, and Bet in the time had
changed--changed so much that it almost seemed as if years had gone
over her head. Her cheeks were thin, all the color had left her face,
and her eyes looked now too bright and large for beauty.

On the day previous to Will's again appearing before the magistrates
the poor girl's restlessness became almost unbearable. Granger still
gave her to understand that Dent was not in Liverpool. He would find
him--yes, he said, he was certain to find him; but Bet did not know
that he had done so, and her terrors were proportionately great. She
could not sit still for a moment--but paced up and down, up and down
the small room where her mother had died, like a caged animal.

The captain and the general were off on expeditions of their own; hours
passed, but no one came near the unhappy girl.

At last, when her impatience had almost burst bounds, Granger arrived.

"I ha' done it, Bet," he said. "It rests with you now--Dent is found."

"Thank God!" she exclaimed, involuntarily. She fell on her knees before
her father and clasped his hands. "Feel how my heart beats," she
said--"I were nearly going mad. Father, there'll never be a better
daughter to you than me in all Christendom, from this time out. You ha'
found Isaac Dent, and he'll be in the witness-box to save Will
to-morrow. Thank God Almighty! There's hope yet in the world."

"I ha' found Dent," continued Granger, rubbing his rough sleeves across
his mouth in a furtive manner. "I told him about Will, and he's willing
to go to the police-court to-morrow--that is, ef you're agreeable."

"I agreeable, father?" Bet laughed excitedly. "You know my mind on
that; and so does Dent. Why, I could almost find it in my heart to call
him a good feller, ef he saves my lad."

"Ay, Bet--that's just it." Granger shuffled again, and would not meet
his daughter's eye. "He wants you to call him a good feller; he wants
you to be werry particular kind to him, seeing as he won't stir hand
nor foot to save Will Scarlett until you takes yer oath as you'd wed
with him. Ay, that's it, Bet--you ha' got to face it; by no other means
can you set that lad of yourn free. You ha' got to face it, and Dent
must have his answer to-night."

Bet did not speak at all for about a minute.

"I feared as this might come," she said at last In a queer voice. "I
did hope as God Almighty might have spared me. But it weren't to be.
It's miles worse nor giving up my life."

She had been kneeling by her father; now she started to her feet, and
wrapped the plaid shawl about her head and shoulders.

"I'm going to Hester," she said. "I'll give you your answer when I
comes back."




CHAPTER XXI.

