to go," the child called out on entering. "Papa told me to come to
you; I think it was because I cried all the time and he wanted me to
stop. But I won't stop, unless you promise to help me to stay at home.
I do not want to go to all the strange children. I couldn't stand it;
oh, no, I couldn't! Oh, it would be dreadful. Please help me, Martha,
help me!" The terrible fear in Cornelli's voice and the sight of her
swollen eyes went straight to Martha's heart.

"Come and sit down on your little stool the way you used to in the old
times, Cornelli," she said lovingly, "and I'll tell you something that
will help and console you. It has helped me, too, and still does when
trouble comes. You see, Cornelli, I once had to go through a terrible
sorrow just as great as yours is to-day. I had to give a child I loved
back to God. So I cried, as loudly as you are crying and even louder:
'No, I can't do it, I can't!' The more I fought against it, the more
terrible I felt, till in the end I even thought I should despair. So
I cried out in my heart: 'Can nobody help me?' And then I suddenly
knew who could do it. I knelt down and prayed to God: 'Oh, give me
help, for thou alone canst do it!'"

"Can I stay here if I pray like that, Martha? Will God help me right
away?" asked Cornelli eagerly.

"Yes, He will surely help you the way He knows is best for you,
Cornelli. If it should be good for you to go away and you ask your
Father in Heaven for help, He will bless your life away from home, so
that it won't be as hard as you have feared. If you pray to Him, you
will get the firm assurance that nothing will be hard for you, because
you have His help in everything you do. God is sure to ordain everything
in such a wise way that happiness will come to you in the end."

"Did you have to give Him your child after all?" Cornelli wanted to
know.

"Yes, God took it to Himself," Martha answered.

"And could you get happy again, Martha?"

"Yes, yes. The pain was very great, but I was consoled by the thought
of my child's peace. I knew how many ills he had been spared. God gave
me the assurance that He meant well with both of us. With that thought
I could grow happy again."

"I want to go home, now," said Cornelli, suddenly getting up. It seemed
as if something were drawing her away.

"Yes, go now, child, and think of what I told you!" said Martha,
accompanying her.

"Yes, I will," said Cornelli. She ran home quickly, because the desire
to get to her room was urging her on.

Cornelli had never prayed so earnestly and heartily as she did that
day. Kneeling beside her bed, she confided all her sorrow to her Father
in Heaven, and begged Him to make her happy once more.




CHAPTER VIII

A MOTHER



When Mr. Hellmut sat down to his coffee in the morning he always found
letters and newspapers on the breakfast table.

"Good gracious!" he exclaimed on the morning after the ladies'
departure, "what correspondents have you in town, Cornelli? Here is
a letter for you."

Cornelli, looking up from her cup, glanced incredulously at the letter.

"It is really for you. Listen! Miss Cornelli Hellmut, Iller-Stream,
Iron Foundry," the father read. "Here it is!"

Cornelli opened the letter under great suspense and read:

DEAR CORNELLI:

Only think! I am ill and have to lie in bed. The doctor has forbidden
me to read and write, so this letter will be very short. It is very
tiresome to be sick, for my sisters are in school all day. Mama always
has a lot to attend to and Mux is still a very useless little fellow.
Could you not come here and pay me a little visit? I should love to
see you and should enjoy hearing all about Iller-Stream. You could
tell me all about good old Martha, whom I love nearly as much as a
grandmother, about your little kid and Matthew, the horses and
everything else, and especially about yourself. I always had such a
good time with you that I should be terribly pleased if you came to
visit me. Please come very, very soon! Your faithful friend,

DINO.

When Cornelli was folding up the letter again, her father said: "Can
I read it, too?"

Cornelli promptly handed him her letter.

"What friend is this that wants you to come to visit him?" the father
asked with astonishment. "I expect you to cry immediately, though, for
you might have to go to town."

"Oh, no, Papa, I really would love to see him," said Cornelli. "It is
Dino, who stayed with Martha this summer."

The father put down his spoon from pure surprise and looked wonderingly
at his daughter.

"How strange you are, Cornelli!" he said finally. "Now you suddenly
want to visit a strange family. You only know this boy and you do not
hesitate about it and are not even shy about appearing in your present
condition."

"Dino knows me well and knows that I would come to see him alone. He
will arrange everything for me so that I won't have to see his mother
or his sisters. He knows everything," was Cornelli's explanation.

"That has no sense at all," the father said curtly, and gathering up
his papers he went away.

Soon afterwards he entered Martha's little house.

"Here I am again. I wonder what you will say to me?" he called to the
surprised old woman. "Here is a letter with an invitation which came
for Cornelli to-day. It is from a boy who stayed with you. Who is he?
Who are his parents?"

This question made Martha fairly overflow with praises of the boy. She
told Mr. Hellmut that she had never known a boy who was so polite and
friendly to simple folks as this boy had been; he had been well brought
up, had the most refined and charming manners, and was well educated,
and at the same time so simple and childishly devoted to old, plain
Martha. She had never read letters like the mother's letter to her
son, so beautiful, affectionate and elevating. He had always read them
to her, and she had had to cry every time from sheer emotion. She had
never before seen as beautiful linen as the boy had worn, and it had
all been his two sisters' work.

"Martha," the Director finally interrupted her, "according to your
account, it would be a great blessing for my daughter to spend even
a day in such a family."

"If you would really take her there, Director, I certainly would be
happy--ah! I would not know a greater happiness."

Martha had to wipe her eyes, she was so stirred.

"You shall know it, Martha. We'll go tomorrow, and on the same evening
you shall hear an account of all that happened." With these words the
Director seized her hand, and after shaking it heartily, departed.

"Get everything ready, Cornelli! We are going to town to-morrow," he
called to his daughter, who sat on the garden bench quietly thinking.
"Esther shall call you early, at six o'clock."

"Indeed, I shall," came Esther's voice through some open window. She
was a good sentinel, for she always seemed to know what was going on
in the house and its immediate neighborhood.

Early next morning the two shiny brown horses were trotting down the
valley. They had to go for four full hours, but that seemed a pure
pleasure to them; the longer they ran, the more spirit they seemed to
get, and Matthew had to keep them from galloping all the time.

In her corner Cornelli meditated as to how she could tell the maid at
her arrival that she wanted to visit no one but Dino, and wanted to
be taken straight to his room. She planned also to forbid Dino to call
his sisters and his mother, for she wanted to see him alone. She would
pay Dino a long visit and then steal quietly away without being noticed.
She was also reflecting about everything she wanted to tell her friend.
First of all, she had to tell him that the news had at last come out
regarding who had been standing on the sofa. She had told him all about
this deep grief she had borne for so long.

So they came to town much sooner than Cornelli had ever thought
possible. The carriage was already halting before the hotel where her
father usually stopped, and Cornelli jumped down.

"Shall I come back again in four hours, Papa?" she asked. "I can find
my way alone, for Dino has described it to me."

"Stop, stop! That is not the way; I am coming, too," the father said.

Cornelli was quite sorry not to be able to start off alone, for that
had been her plan. Now everything was quite different.

As Dino had written his exact address in his letter and the Director
knew his way about town very well, they passed quickly from street to
street till they reached a narrow little lane. Here stood the house
they had been seeking. When finally four high stairs had been climbed,
the Director stood on the highest narrow step where the door took up
half of the standing room.

"If the inhabitants correspond to their dwelling place, we shall
probably not remain here very long," he said, looking up doubtfully
at the inconvenient entrance.

"Dino does not correspond," said Cornelli quickly. She had not quite
understood her father's words, but felt them to be an attack on her
friend.

"Climb up there, Cornelli, and pull the bell-rope!" he commanded. "When
the door is open I'll probably find room to stand there, too."

Cornelli obeyed. A slender girl a good deal taller than Cornelli opened
the door and looked with surprise at the new arrivals through a pair
of dark and serious eyes. Cornelli retreated suddenly.

"Well, what I see is not very dreadful," the Director said, stepping
forward.

"How do you do, child. Is your mother at home, and can I speak to her
a moment?"

The girl who had opened the door was Nika. With great politeness she
led the gentleman to a room and informed him that she would go at once
to fetch her mother, who was with her sick brother.

Upon her polite invitation the Director followed her, and settled down
in an arm-chair. He looked about him with astonishment at the small
but scrupulously neat room, which was decorated with several charming
pictures.

When Nika neared the door, Cornelli said to her in a low voice: "I
want to visit Dino."

"Come, I'll show you the way," came a small voice from behind the door.
It was Mux, who had quickly hidden there to peep with curious eyes at
the new arrivals. He came out and seizing Cornelli's hand, pulled her
away with him. The mother had heard the stranger's voice and at this
moment entered from an adjoining chamber.

"She does not correspond, either, as Cornelli puts it," the Director
said to himself with a smile. He rose and introduced himself. "Following
your son's summons, Mrs. Halm, I have brought you my daughter," he
said. "She can stay a few hours with her sick friend, if that suits
you, and then she can join me again at my hotel."

"I am so much obliged to you for the great favor of bringing her. My
son has looked forward so much to this visit. We all know and love
Cornelli already from what he has told us about her. She has been so
kind to him and has entertained him so well when he was alone in
Iller-Stream that she has earned his and my sincere thanks. Could I
not beg of you to leave Cornelli here for a few days, or at least for
all of to-day?"

"You are very kind, Mrs. Halm," he replied, quite astonished to hear
that his shy, unfriendly child should have furnished the boy any
entertainment. "Those are just polite words," he said to himself, but
aloud he added: "I am afraid that it won't be possible, for my child
would not stay. She is very shy and has all kinds of peculiar habits,
as you probably have noticed from her looks. Your daughter certainly
looks different."

"I shall not keep Cornelli here against her will, of course, but may
I hope to have your permission if the child should want to stay?"

The rector's widow had such a pleasing manner that it was hard to
refuse her anything. The Director therefore gladly assented, for it
was his wish as well as hers.

"Certainly, Mrs. Halm, I shall joyfully give it," he assured her. "What
could please me more than to have my daughter in surroundings like
these? But I am perfectly certain that Cornelli will desire to go back
with me. Just the same, I want to thank you sincerely for your great
kindness; it will help her to spend even a single day in your charming
household."

The Director said farewell and departed. At the entrance door down
stairs a school girl, carrying her schoolbag and books, ran towards
him so violently that a collision could not be avoided, so the Director
opened his arms wide and caught Agnes in them. Agnes always approached
everything like a wind storm. She could not behave otherwise. The
Director laughed heartily and so did Agnes.

"I am sure you belong to Mrs. Halm, too," he said, looking with pleasure
at the lively face with the wide-open, bright eyes. How nice and trim
everything was about her!

"Yes, indeed," she replied quickly, and ran away.

"What a happy mother, what a happy woman!" said the Director to himself.
"And to compare my child to such children. I cannot bear it! Such
children, and mine beside them!"

Dino had told his mother about his experiences in Iller-Stream and
especially of his acquaintance with Cornelli. He had also related to
her the child's strange trouble, but she had had to give her promise
to keep it to herself. It did not seem wrong to Dino to tell his mother,
because she always knew everything he knew. When the invitation had
been sent to Cornelli, Mrs. Halm had seriously told the children not
to make any remarks about Cornelli's hair in case she should come. She
had told them not to show any surprise if Cornelli wore her hair in
a rather strange fashion and not to notice it further; that was the
way the mother wished it to be.

Little Mux was very much pleased at having a new companion. He looked
upon her as an old acquaintance, for Dino had talked so much about
her. First he took her to see the kitchen.
