Fairy-than-a-Fairy, who now saw him for the first time in his real
shape, hardly dared to gaze at him, fearing lest his appearance might
not be in keeping with the voice and language which had won her heart.
At the same time she could not help feeling rather hurt at the apparent
indifference with which she was received.

She related all the dangers and difficulties she had gone through, and
though she repeated the story twenty times in a loud clear voice, the
Prince slept on and took no heed. She then had recourse to the golden
pomegranate, and on opening it found that all the seeds were as many
little violins which flew up in the vaulted roof and at once began
playing melodiously.

The Prince was not completely roused, but he opened his eyes a little
and looked all the handsomer.

Impatient at not being recognised, Fairer-than-a-Fairy now drew out her
third present, and on opening the crystal scent-bottle a little syren
flew out, who silenced the violins and then sang close to the Prince's
ear the story of all his lady love had suffered in her search for him.
She added some gentle reproaches to her tale, but before she had got
far he was wide awake, and transported with joy threw himself at the
Princess's feet. At the same moment the walls of the room expanded and
opened out, revealing a golden throne covered with jewels. A magnificent
Court now began to assemble, and at the same time several elegant
carriages filled with ladies in magnificent dresses drove up. In the
first and most splendid of these carriages sat Prince Rainbow's mother.
She fondly embraced her son, after which she informed him that his
father had been dead for some years, that the anger of the Fairies was
at length appeased, and that he might return in peace to reign over his
people, who were longing for his presence.

The Court received the new King with joyful acclamations which would
have delighted him at any other time, but all his thoughts were full of
Fairer-than-a-Fairy. He was just about to present her to his mother and
the Court, feeling sure that her charms would win all hearts, when the
three green and white sisters appeared.

They declared the secret of Fairy-than-a-Fairy's royal birth, and the
Queen taking the two lovers in her carriage set off with them for the
capital of the kingdom.

Here they were received with tumultuous joy. The wedding was celebrated
without delay, and succeeding years diminished neither the virtues,
beauty, nor the mutual affection of King Rainbow and his Queen,
Fairer-than-a-Fairy.




 THE THREE BROTHERS(17)

(17) From the Polish. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a witch, who in the shape of a hawk used
every night to break the windows of a certain village church. In the
same village there lived three brothers, who were all determined to kill
the mischievous hawk. But in vain did the two eldest mount guard in the
church with their guns; as soon as the bird appeared high above their
heads, sleep overpowered them, and they only awoke to hear the windows
crashing in.

Then the youngest brother took his turn of guarding the windows, and to
prevent his being overcome by sleep he placed a lot of thorns under his
chin, so that if he felt drowsy and nodded his head, they would prick
him and keep him awake.

The moon was already risen, and it was as light as day, when suddenly he
heard a fearful noise, and at the same time a terrible desire to sleep
overpowered him.

His eyelids closed, and his head sank on his shoulders, but the thorns
ran into him and were so painful that he awoke at once. He saw the hawk
swooping down upon the church, and in a moment he had seized his gun
and shot at the bird. The hawk fell heavily under a big stone, severely
wounded in its right wing. The youth ran to look at it, and saw that
a huge abyss had opened below the stone. He went at once to fetch his
brothers, and with their help dragged a lot of pine-wood and ropes to
the spot. They fastened some of the burning pine-wood to the end of the
rope, and let it slowly down to the bottom of the abyss. At first it was
quite dark, and the flaming torch only lit up dirty grey stone walls.
But the youngest brother determined to explore the abyss, and letting
himself down by the rope he soon reached the bottom. Here he found a
lovely meadow full of green trees and exquisite flowers.

In the middle of the meadow stood a huge stone castle, with an iron gate
leading to it, which was wide open. Everything in the castle seemed
to be made of copper, and the only inhabitant he could discover was
a lovely girl, who was combing her golden hair; and he noticed that
whenever one of her hairs fell on the ground it rang out like pure
metal. The youth looked at her more closely, and saw that her skin was
smooth and fair, her blue eyes bright and sparkling, and her hair as
golden as the sun. He fell in love with her on the spot, and kneeling at
her feet, he implored her to become his wife.

The lovely girl accepted his proposal gladly; but at the same time she
warned him that she could never come up to the world above till her
mother, the old witch, was dead. And she went on to tell him that the
only way in which the old creature could be killed was with the sword
that hung up in the castle; but the sword was so heavy that no one could
lift it.

Then the youth went into a room in the castle where everything was made
of silver, and here he found another beautiful girl, the sister of his
bride. She was combing her silver hair, and every hair that fell on the
ground rang out like pure metal. The second girl handed him the sword,
but though he tried with all his strength he could not lift it. At last
a third sister came to him and gave him a drop of something to drink,
which she said would give him the needful strength. He drank one drop,
but still he could not lift the sword; then he drank a second, and the
sword began to move; but only after he had drunk a third drop was he
able to swing the sword over his head.

Then he hid himself in the castle and awaited the old witch's arrival.
At last as it was beginning to grow dark she appeared. She swooped down
upon a big apple-tree, and after shaking some golden apples from it, she
pounced down upon the earth. As soon as her feet touched the ground she
became transformed from a hawk into a woman. This was the moment the
youth was waiting for, and he swung his mighty sword in the air with all
his strength and the witch's head fell off, and her blood spurted up on
the walls.

Without fear of any further danger, he packed up all the treasures of
the castle into great chests, and gave his brothers a signal to pull
them up out of the abyss. First the treasures were attached to the rope
and then the three lovely girls. And now everything was up above and
only he himself remained below. But as he was a little suspicious of his
brothers, he fastened a heavy stone on to the rope and let them pull it
up. At first they heaved with a will, but when the stone was half way
up they let it drop suddenly, and it fell to the bottom broken into a
hundred pieces.

'So that's what would have happened to my bones had I trusted myself to
them,' said the youth sadly; and he began to cry bitterly, not because
of the treasures, but because of the lovely girl with her swanlike neck
and golden hair.

For a long time he wandered sadly all through the beautiful underworld,
and one day he met a magician who asked him the cause of his tears. The
youth told him all that had befallen him, and the magician said:

'Do not grieve, young man! If you will guard the children who are hidden
in the golden apple-tree, I will bring you at once up to the earth.
Another magician who lives in this land always eats my children up. It
is in vain that I have hidden them under the earth and locked them into
the castle. Now I have hidden them in the apple-tree; hide yourself
there too, and at midnight you will see my enemy.'

The youth climbed up the tree, and picked some of the beautiful golden
apples, which he ate for his supper.

At midnight the wind began to rise, and a rustling sound was heard at
the foot of the tree. The youth looked down and beheld a long thick
serpent beginning to crawl up the tree. It wound itself round the stem
and gradually got higher and higher. It stretched its huge head, in
which the eyes glittered fiercely, among the branches, searching for the
nest in which the little children lay. They trembled with terror when
they saw the hideous creature, and hid themselves beneath the leaves.

Then the youth swung his mighty sword in the air, and with one blow cut
off the serpent's head. He cut up the rest of the body into little bits
and strewed them to the four winds.

The father of the rescued children was so delighted over the death of
his enemy that he told the youth to get on his back, and in this way he
carried him up to the world above.

With what joy did he hurry now to his brothers' house! He burst into a
room where they were all assembled, but no one knew who he was. Only his
bride, who was serving as cook to her sisters, recognised her lover at
once.

His brothers, who had quite believed he was dead, yielded him up his
treasures at once, and flew into the woods in terror. But the good youth
forgave them all they had done, and divided his treasures with them.
Then he built himself a big castle with golden windows, and there he
lived happily with his golden-haired wife till the end of their lives.




 THE BOY AND THE WOLVES, OR THE BROKEN PROMISE(18)

(18) A North American Indian story.

Once upon a time an Indian hunter built himself a house in the middle
of a great forest, far away from all his tribe; for his heart was gentle
and kind, and he was weary of the treachery and cruel deeds of those
who had been his friends. So he left them, and took his wife and three
children, and they journeyed on until they found a spot near to a clear
stream, where they began to cut down trees, and to make ready their
wigwam. For many years they lived peacefully and happily in this
sheltered place, never leaving it except to hunt the wild animals, which
served them both for food and clothes. At last, however, the strong man
felt sick, and before long he knew he must die.

So he gathered his family round him, and said his last words to them.
'You, my wife, the companion of my days, will follow me ere many moons
have waned to the island of the blest. But for you, O my children, whose
lives are but newly begun, the wickedness, unkindness, and ingratitude
from which I fled are before you. Yet I shall go hence in peace, my
children, if you will promise always to love each other, and never to
forsake your youngest brother.

'Never!' they replied, holding out their hands. And the hunter died
content.

Scarcely eight moons had passed when, just as he had said, the wife went
forth, and followed her husband; but before leaving her children she
bade the two elder ones think of their promise never to forsake the
younger, for he was a child, and weak. And while the snow lay thick upon
the ground, they tended him and cherished him; but when the earth showed
green again, the heart of the young man stirred within him, and he
longed to see the wigwams of the village where his father's youth was
spent.

Therefore he opened all his heart to his sister, who answered: 'My
brother, I understand your longing for our fellow-men, whom here we
cannot see. But remember our father's words. Shall we not seek our own
pleasures, and forget the little one?'

But he would not listen, and, making no reply, he took his bow and
arrows and left the hut. The snows fell and melted, yet he never
returned; and at last the heart of the girl grew cold and hard, and her
little boy became a burden in her eyes, till one day she spoke thus to
him: 'See, there is food for many days to come. Stay here within the
shelter of the hut. I go to seek our brother, and when I have found him
I shall return hither.'

But when, after hard journeying, she reached the village where her
brother dwelt, and saw that he had a wife and was happy, and when she,
too, was sought by a young brave, then she also forgot the boy alone in
the forest, and thought only of her husband.

Now as soon as the little boy had eaten all the food which his sister
had left him, he went out into the woods, and gathered berries and dug
up roots, and while the sun shone he was contented and had his fill. But
when the snows began and the wind howled, then his stomach felt empty
and his limbs cold, and he hid in trees all the night, and only crept
out to eat what the wolves had left behind. And by-and-by, having no
other friends, he sought their company, and sat by while they devoured
their prey, and they grew to know him, and gave him food. And without
them he would have died in the snow.

But at last the snows melted, and the ice upon the great lake, and
as the wolves went down to the shore, the boy went after them. And it
happened one day that his big brother was fishing in his canoe near the
shore, and he heard the voice of a child singing in the Indian tone--

     'My brother, my brother!
      I am becoming a wolf,
      I am becoming a wolf!'

And when he had so sung he howled as wolves howl. Then the heart of
the elder sunk, and he hastened towards him, crying, 'Brother, little
brother, come to me;' but he, being half a wolf, only continued his
song. And the louder the elder called him, 'Brother, little brother,
come to me,' the swifter he fled after his brothers the wolves, and
the heavier grew his skin, till, with a long howl, he vanished into the
depths of the forest.

So, with shame and anguish in his soul, the elder brother went back to
his village, and, with his sister, mourned the little boy and the broken
promise till the end of his life.




 THE GLASS AXE(19)

(19) From the Hungarian. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a King and Queen who had everything they
could possibly wish for in this world except a child. At last, after
twelve years, the Queen gave birth to a son; but she did not live long
to enjoy her happiness, for on the following day she died. But before
her death she called her husband to her and said, 'Never let the child
put his feet on the ground, for as soon as he does so he will fall into
the power of a wicked Fairy, who will do him much harm.' And these were
the last words the poor Queen spoke.

The boy throve and grew big, and when he was too heavy for his nurse
to carry, a chair was made for him on little wheels, in which he could
wander through the palace gardens without help; at other times he was
carried about on a litter, and he was always carefully watched and
guarded for fear he should at any time put his feet to the ground.

But as this sort of life was bad for his health, the doctors ordered him
horse exercise, and he soon became a first-rate rider, and used to go
out for long excursions on horseback, accompanied always by his father's
stud-groom and a numerous retinue.

Every day he rode through the neighbouring fields and woods, and always
returned home in the evening safe and well. In this way many years
passed, and the Prince grew to manhood, and hardly anyone remembered the
Queen's warning, though precautions were still taken, more from use and
wont than for any other reason.

One day the Prince and his suite went out for a ride in a wood where his
father sometimes held a hunt. Their way led through a stream whose banks
were overgrown with thick brushwood. Just as the horsemen were about
to ford the river, a hare, startled by the sound of the horses' hoofs,
started up from the grass and ran towards the thicket. The young Prince
pursued the little creature, and had almost overtaken it, when the girth
of his saddle suddenly broke in two and he fell heavily to the ground.
No sooner had his foot touched the earth than he disappeared before the
eyes of the horrified courtiers.

They sought for him far and near, but all in vain, and they were forced
to recognise the power of the evil Fairy, against which the Queen had
warned them on her death-bed. The old King was much grieved when they
brought him the news of his son's disappearance, but as he could do
nothing to free him from his fate, he gave himself up to an old age of
grief and loneliness, cherishing at the same time the hope that some
lucky chance might one day deliver the youth out of the hands of his
enemy.

Hardly had the Prince touched the ground than he felt himself violently
seized by an unseen power, and hurried away he knew not whither. A whole
new world stretched out before him, quite unlike the one he had left.
A splendid castle surrounded by a huge lake was the abode of the Fairy,
and the only approach to it was over a bridge of clouds. On the other
side of the lake high mountains rose up, and dark woods stretched
along the banks; over all hung a thick mist, and deep silence reigned
everywhere.

No sooner had the Fairy reached her own domain than she made herself
visible, and turning to the Prince she told him that unless he obeyed
all her commands down to the minutest detail he would be severely
punished. Then she gave him an axe made of glass, and bade him cross the
bridge of clouds and go into the wood beyond and cut down all the trees
there before sunset. At the same time she cautioned him with many angry
words against speaking to a black girl he would most likely meet in the
wood.

The Prince listened to her words meekly, and when she had finished took
up the glass axe and set out for the forest. At every step he seemed to
sink into the clouds, but fear gave wings to his feet, and he crossed
the lake in safety and set to work at once.

But no sooner had he struck the first blow with his axe than it broke
into a thousand pieces against the tree. The poor youth was so terrified
he did not know what to do, for he was in mortal dread of the punishment
the wicked old Fairy would inflict on him. He wandered to and fro in the
wood, not knowing where he was going, and at last, worn out by fatigue
and misery, he sank on the ground and fell fast asleep.

He did not know how long he had slept when a sudden sound awoke him, and
opening his eyes he saw a black girl standing beside him. Mindful of
the Fairy's warning he did not dare to address her, but she on her part
greeted him in the most friendly manner, and asked him at once if he
were under the power of the wicked Fairy. The Prince nodded his head
silently in answer.

Then the black girl told him that she too was in the power of the Fairy,
who had doomed her to wander about in her present guise until some youth
should take pity on her and bear her in safety to the other side of the
river which they saw in the distance, and on the other side of which the
Fairy's domain and power ended.

The girl's words so inspired the Prince with confidence that he told her
all his tale of woe, and ended up by asking her advice as to how he was
to escape the punishment the Fairy would be sure to inflict on him when
she discovered that he had not cut down the trees in the wood and that
he had broken her axe.

'You must know,' answered the black girl, 'that the Fairy in whose power
we both are is my own mother, but you must not betray this secret, for
it would cost me my life. If you will only promise to try and free me
I will stand by you, and will accomplish for you all the tasks which my
mother sets you.'

The Prince promised joyfully all she asked; then having once more warned
him not to betray her confidence, she handed him a draught to drink
which very soon sunk his senses in a deep slumber.

His astonishment was great when he awoke to find the glass axe whole and
unbroken at his side, and all the trees of the wood lying felled around
him!

He made all haste across the bridge of clouds, and told the Fairy that
her commands were obeyed. She was much amazed when she heard that all
the wood was cut down, and saw the axe unbroken in his hand, and
since she could not believe that he had done all this by himself, she
questioned him narrowly if he had seen or spoken to the black girl. But
the Prince lied manfully, and swore he had never looked up from his work
for a moment. Seeing she could get nothing more out of him, she gave him
a little bread and water, and showing him to a small dark cupboard she
told him he might sleep there.

