"So would I."

On the right of Paul sat a man of about forty, well-dressed and
respectable in appearance, with a heavy gold chain ostentatiously
depending from his watch pocket, and with the air of a substantial
citizen. He listened to the conversation between Barry and Paul with
evident interest, and when Barry had returned the ring, he said:

"Young gentleman, would you be kind enough to let me look at your
ring? I am myself in business as a jeweler in Syracuse, and so feel an
interest in examining it."

"Certainly, sir," said Paul, the stranger's explanation of his motives
inspiring him with perfect confidence.

The jeweler from Syracuse took the ring in his hands and appeared to
examine it carefully.

"This is a handsome ring," he said, "and one of great value. How much
were you offered for it at Tiffany's?"

"Two hundred and fifty dollars."

"It is worth more."

"Yes, I suppose so," said Paul; "but he has to sell it, and make a
profit."

"He could do that, and yet make a profit. I will pay you two hundred and
seventy-five dollars, myself--that is, on one condition."

"I don't object to getting twenty-five dollars more," said Paul. "What
is the condition?"

"I have an order from a gentleman for a diamond ring for a young
lady--an engagement ring, in short. If this suits him, as I think it
will, I will pay you what I said. I can easily get three hundred and
twenty-five from him."

"How are you going to find out whether it will suit him?"

"Easily. He is stopping at the same hotel with me."

"What hotel is that?"

"Lovejoy's. If you can spare the time and will come with me now, we
can arrange matters at once. By the way, you can refer me to some
responsible citizen, who will guarantee you. Not, of course, that I have
any doubts, but we business men are forced to be cautious."

Paul mentioned Mr. Preston's name.

"Quite satisfactory," answered the jeweler. "I know Mr. Preston
personally, and as I am pressed for time, I will accept his name without
calling upon him. What is your name?"

"Paul Hoffman."

"I will note it down."

The gentleman from Syracuse drew out a memorandum book, in which he
entered Paul's name.

"When you see Mr. Preston, just mention my name; Felix Montgomery."

"I will do so."

"Say, if you please, that I would have called upon him, but, coming to
the city strictly on business, was too hurried to do so."

This also Paul promised, and counted himself fortunate in falling in
with a friend, or, at all events, acquaintance of Mr. Preston, since he
was likely to make twenty-five dollars more than he would otherwise have
done.

When he got out of the car at the Astor House, the stranger said:

"It will be half an hour before I can reach Lovejoy's, as I have a
business call to make first. Can you call there, say, in three-quarters
of an hour?"

"Yes, sir."

"Very well, then, I will expect you. Inquire for me at the desk, and ask
the servant to conduct you to my room--you remember my name?"

"Yes, sir--Mr. Felix Montgomery."

"Quite right. Good-by, then, till we meet."

Mr. Felix Montgomery went into the Astor House, and remained about five
minutes. He then came out on the steps, and, looking about him to see
if Paul was anywhere near, descended the steps, and walked across to
Lovejoy's Hotel. Going up to the desk, he inquired:

"Can you accommodate me with a room?"

"Yes, sir; please enter your name."

The stranger entered his name with a flourish, as Felix Montgomery,
Syracuse.

"Room No. 237," said the clerk; "will you go up now?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Any luggage?"

"My trunk will be brought from the St. Nicholas in the course of the
afternoon."

"We require payment in advance where there is no luggage."

"Very well. I will pay for one day. I am not sure but I shall get
through my business in time to go away to-morrow."

Here the servant appeared to conduct Mr. Montgomery to his room.

"By the way," he said, turning back, as if it were an afterthought, "I
directed a boy to call here for me in about half an hour. When he comes
you may send him up to my room."

"Very well, sir."

Mr. Montgomery followed the servant upstairs to room No. 237. It was
rather high up, but he seemed well pleased that this was the case.

"Hope you won't get tired of climbing, sir," said the servant.

"No--I've got pretty good wind."

"Most gentlemen complain of going up so far."

"It makes little difference to me."

At length they reached the room, and Mr. Montgomery entered.

"This will answer very well," he said, with a hasty glance about him.
"When my trunk comes, I want it sent up."

"Yes, sir."

"I believe that is all; you can go."

The servant retired and Mr. Felix Montgomery sat down upon the bed.

"My little plot seems likely to succeed," he said to himself. "I've been
out of luck lately, but this boy's ring will give me a lift. He can't
suspect anything. He'll be sure to come."

Probably the reader has already suspected that Mr. Felix Montgomery
was not a jeweler from Syracuse, nor had he any claim to the name under
which he at present figured. He was a noted confidence man, who lived by
preying upon the community. His appearance was in his favor, and it was
his practice to assume the dress and air of a respectable middle-aged
citizen, as in the present instance. The sight of the diamond ring had
excited his cupidity, and he had instantly formed the design of getting
possession of it, if possible. Thus far, his plan promised success.

Meanwhile, Paul loitered away the time in the City Hall Park for half
an hour or more. He did not care to go home until his negotiation was
complete, and he could report the ring sold, and carry home the money.

"Won't mother be astonished," he thought, "at the price I got for the
ring? I'm in luck this morning."

When the stipulated time had passed, Paul rose from the bench on which
he was seated, and walked to Lovejoy's Hotel, not far distant.

"Has Mr. Felix Montgomery a room here?" he asked.

"Yes," answered the clerk. "Did you wish to see him?"

"Yes, sir."

"He mentioned that a boy would call by appointment. Here, James, show
this boy up to No. 237--Mr. Montgomery's room."

A hotel servant appeared, and Paul followed him up several flights of
stairs till they stood before No. 237.

"This is the room, sir," said James. "Wait a minute, and I'll knock."

In answer to the knock, Mr. Montgomery himself opened the door.

"Come in," he said to Paul; "I was expecting you."

So Paul, not suspecting treachery, entered No. 237.



CHAPTER XVIII

A CLEVER THIEF

"Take a seat," said Mr. Montgomery. "My friend will be in directly.
Meanwhile will you let me look at the ring once more?"

Paul took it from his pocket, and handed it to the jeweler from
Syracuse, as he supposed him to be.

Mr. Montgomery took it to the window, and appeared to be examining it
carefully.

He stood with his back to Paul, but this did not excite suspicion on the
part of our hero.

"I am quite sure," he said, still standing with his back to Paul, "that
this will please my friend. From the instructions he gave me, it is
precisely what he wanted."

While uttering these words, he had drawn a sponge and a vial of
chloroform from his side pocket. He saturated the former from the vial,
and then, turning quickly, seized Paul, too much taken by surprise to
make immediate resistance, and applied the sponge to his nose. When he
realized that foul play was meditated, he began to struggle, but he
was in a firm grasp, and the chloroform was already beginning to do
its work. His head began to swim, and he was speedily in a state of
insensibility. When this was accomplished, Mr. Felix Montgomery, eyeing
the insensible boy with satisfaction, put on his hat, walked quickly
to the door, which he locked on the outside, and made his way rapidly
downstairs. Leaving the key at the desk, he left the hotel and
disappeared.

Meanwhile Paul slowly recovered consciousness. As he came to himself,
he looked about him bewildered, not at first comprehending where he was.
All at once it flashed upon him, and he jumped up eagerly and rushed to
the door. He tried in vain to open it.

"I am regularly trapped!" he thought, with a feeling of mingled anger
and vexation. "What a fool I was to let myself be swindled so easily! I
wonder how long I have been lying here insensible?"

Paul was not a boy to give up easily. He meant to get back the ring if
it was a possible thing. The first thing was, of course, to get out of
his present confinement. He was not used to hotel arrangements and never
thought of the bell, but, as the only thing he could think of, began to
pound upon the door. But it so happened that at this time there were no
servants on that floor, and his appeals for help were not heard. Every
moment that he had to wait seemed at least five, for no doubt the man
who had swindled him was improving the time to escape to a place of
safety. Finding that his blows upon the door produced no effect, he
began to jump up and down upon the floor, making, in his heavy boots, a
considerable noise.

The room directly under No. 237 was occupied by an old gentleman of a
very nervous and irascible temper, Mr. Samuel Piper, a country merchant,
who, having occasion to be in the city on business for a few days, had
put up at Lovejoy's Hotel. He had fatigued himself by some business
calls, and was now taking a little rest upon the bed, when he was
aroused from half-sleep by the pounding overhead.

"I wish people would have the decency to keep quiet," he said to
himself, peevishly. "How can I rest with such a confounded racket going
on above!"

He lay back, thinking the noise would cease, but Paul, finding the
knocking on the door ineffectual, began to jump up and down, as I have
already said. Of course this noise was heard distinctly in the room
below.

"This is getting intolerable!" exclaimed Mr. Piper, becoming more and
more excited. "The man ought to be indicted as a common nuisance.
How they can allow such goings-on in a respectable hotel, I can't
understand. I should think the fellow was splitting wood upstairs."

He took his cane, and, standing on the bed, struck it furiously against
the ceiling, intending it as signal to the man above to desist. But
Paul, catching the response, began to jump more furiously than ever,
finding that he had attracted attention.

Mr. Piper became enraged.

"The man must be a lunatic or overcome by drink," he exclaimed. "I can't
and I won't stand it."

But the noise kept on.

Mr. Piper put on his shoes and his coat, and, seizing his cane, emerged
upon the landing. He espied a female servant just coming upstairs.

"Here, you Bridget, or Nancy, or whatever your name is," he roared,
"there's a lunatic upstairs, making a tremendous row in the room over
mine. If you don't stop him I'll leave the hotel. Hear him now!"

Bridget let fall her duster in fright.

"Is it a crazy man?" she asked.

"Of course he must be. I want you to go up and stop him."

"Is it me that would go near a crazy man?" exclaimed Bridget,
horror-struck; "I wouldn't do it for a million dollars; no, I wouldn't."

"I insist upon your going up," said Mr. Piper, irritably. "He must be
stopped. Do you think I am going to stand such an infernal thumping over
my head?"

"I wouldn't do it if you'd go down on your knees to me," said Bridget,
fervently.

"Come along, I'll go with you."

But the terrified girl would not budge.

"Then you go down and tell your master there's a madman up here. If you
don't, I will."

This Bridget consented to do; and, going downstairs, gave a not very
coherent account of the disturbance. Three male servants came back with
her.

"Is that the man?" asked the first, pointing to Mr. Piper, who certainly
looked half wild with irritation.

"Yes," said Bridget, stupidly.

Immediately Mr. Piper found himself pinioned on either side by a stout
servant.

"What have you been kickin' up a row for?" demanded the first.

"Let me alone, or I'll have the law take care of you," screamed the
outraged man. "Can't you hear the fellow that's making the racket?"

Paul, tired with thumping, had desisted for a moment, but now had
recommenced with increased energy. The sounds could be distinctly heard
on the floor below.

"Excuse me, sir. I made a mistake," said the first speaker, releasing
his hold. "We'll go up and see what's the matter."

So the party went upstairs, followed at a distance by Bridget, who,
influenced alike by fear and curiosity, did not know whether to go up or
retreat.

The sounds were easily traced to room No. 237. In front of this,
therefore, the party congregated.

"What's the matter in there?" asked James, the first servant, putting
