went without her.

He took his way first to the room the princess had spoken of, and there
also were the remains of supper; but neither there nor in the kitchen
could he find a scrap of plain wholesome-looking bread.  So he returned
and told her that as soon as it was light he would go into the city for
some, and asked her for a handkerchief to tie it in.  If he could not
bring it himself, he would send it by Lina, who could keep out of sight
better than he, and as soon as all was quiet at night he would come to
her again.  He also asked her to tell the king that he was in the
house.  His hope lay in the fact that bakers everywhere go to work
early.  But it was yet much too early.  So he persuaded the princess to
lie down, promising to call her if the king should stir.



CHAPTER 21

The Loaf

His Majesty slept very quietly.  The dawn had grown almost day, and
still Curdie lingered, unwilling to disturb the princess.

At last, however, he called her, and she was in the room in a moment.
She had slept, she said, and felt quite fresh.  Delighted to find her
father still asleep, and so peacefully, she pushed her chair close to
the bed, and sat down with her hands in her lap.

Curdie got his mattock from where he had hidden it behind a great
mirror, and went to the cellar, followed by Lina.  They took some
breakfast with them as they passed through the hall, and as soon as
they had eaten it went out the back way.

At the mouth of the passage Curdie seized the rope, drew himself up,
pushed away the shutter, and entered the dungeon.  Then he swung the
end of the rope to Lina, and she caught it in her teeth. When her
master said, 'Now, Lina!' she gave a great spring, and he ran away with
the end of the rope as fast as ever he could.  And such a spring had
she made, that by the time he had to bear her weight she was within a
few feet of the hole.  The instant she got a paw through, she was all
through.

Apparently their enemies were waiting till hunger should have cowed
them, for there was no sign of any attempt having been made to open the
door.  A blow or two of Curdie's mattock drove the shattered lock clean
from it, and telling Lina to wait there till he came back, and let no
one in, he walked out into the silent street, and drew the door to
behind them.  He could hardly believe it was not yet a whole day since
he had been thrown in there with his hands tied at his back.

Down the town he went, walking in the middle of the street, that, if
any one saw him, he might see he was not afraid, and hesitate to rouse
an attack on him.  As to the dogs, ever since the death of their two
companions, a shadow that looked like a mattock was enough to make them
scamper.  As soon as he reached the archway of the city gate he turned
to reconnoitre the baker's shop, and perceiving no sign of movement,
waited there watching for the first.

After about an hour, the door opened, and the baker's man appeared with
a pail in his hand.  He went to a pump that stood in the street, and
having filled his pail returned with it into the shop. Curdie stole
after him, found the door on the latch, opened it very gently, peeped
in, saw nobody, and entered.  Remembering perfectly from what shelf the
baker's wife had taken the loaf she said was the best, and seeing just
one upon it, he seized it, laid the price of it on the counter, and
sped softly out, and up the street.  Once more in the dungeon beside
Lina, his first thought was to fasten up the door again, which would
have been easy, so many iron fragments of all sorts and sizes lay
about; but he bethought himself that if he left it as it was, and they
came to find him, they would conclude at once that they had made their
escape by it, and would look no farther so as to discover the hole.  He
therefore merely pushed the door close and left it.  Then once more
carefully arranging the earth behind the shutter, so that it should
again fall with it, he returned to the cellar.

And now he had to convey the loaf to the princess.  If he could venture
to take it himself, well; if not, he would send Lina.  He crept to the
door of the servants' hall, and found the sleepers beginning to stir.
One said it was time to go to bed; another, that he would go to the
cellar instead, and have a mug of wine to waken him up; while a third
challenged a fourth to give him his revenge at some game or other.

'Oh, hang your losses!' answered his companion; 'you'll soon pick up
twice as much about the house, if you but keep your eyes open.'

Perceiving there would be risk in attempting to pass through, and
reflecting that the porters in the great hall would probably be awake
also, Curdie went back to the cellar, took Irene's handkerchief with
the loaf in it, tied it round Lina's neck, and told her to take it to
the princess.

Using every shadow and every shelter, Lina slid through the servants
like a shapeless terror through a guilty mind, and so, by corridor and
great hall, up the stair to the king's chamber.

Irene trembled a little when she saw her glide soundless in across the
silent dusk of the morning, that filtered through the heavy drapery of
the windows, but she recovered herself at once when she saw the bundle
about her neck, for it both assured her of Curdie's safety, and gave
her hope of her father's.  She untied it with joy, and Lina stole away,
silent as she had come.  Her joy was the greater that the king had
waked up a little before, and expressed a desire for food--not that he
felt exactly hungry, he said, and yet he wanted something.  If only he
might have a piece of nice fresh bread!  Irene had no knife, but with
eager hands she broke a great piece from the loaf, and poured out a
full glass of wine. The king ate and drank, enjoyed the bread and the
wine much, and instantly fell asleep again.

It was hours before the lazy people brought their breakfast.  When it
came, Irene crumbled a little about, threw some into the fireplace, and
managed to make the tray look just as usual.

In the meantime, down below in the cellar, Curdie was lying in the
hollow between the upper sides of two of the great casks, the warmest
place he could find.  Lina was watching.  She lay at his feet, across
the two casks, and did her best so to arrange her huge tail that it
should be a warm coverlid for her master.

By and by Dr Kelman called to see his patient; and now that Irene's
eyes were opened, she saw clearly enough that he was both annoyed and
puzzled at finding His Majesty rather better.  He pretended however to
congratulate him, saying he believed he was quite fit to see the lord
chamberlain: he wanted his signature to something important; only he
must not strain his mind to understand it, whatever it might be: if His
Majesty did, he would not be answerable for the consequences.  The king
said he would see the lord chamberlain, and the doctor went.

Then Irene gave him more bread and wine, and the king ate and drank,
and smiled a feeble smile, the first real one she had seen for many a
day.  He said he felt much better, and would soon be able to take
matters into his own hands again.  He had a strange miserable feeling,
he said, that things were going terribly wrong, although he could not
tell how.  Then the princess told him that Curdie had come, and that at
night, when all was quiet for nobody in the palace must know, he would
pay His Majesty a visit.  Her great-great-grandmother had sent him, she
said.  The king looked strangely upon her, but the strange look passed
into a smile clearer than the first, and irene's heart throbbed with
delight.



CHAPTER 22

The Lord Chamberlain

At noon the lord chamberlain appeared.  With a long, low bow, and paper
in hand, he stepped softly into the room.  Greeting His Majesty with
every appearance of the profoundest respect, and congratulating him on
the evident progress he had made, he declared himself sorry to trouble
him, but there were certain papers, he said, which required his
signature--and therewith drew nearer to the king, who lay looking at
him doubtfully.  He was a lean, long, yellow man, with a small head,
bald over the top, and tufted at the back and about the ears.  He had a
very thin, prominent, hooked nose, and a quantity of loose skin under
his chin and about the throat, which came craning up out of his
neckcloth.  His eyes were very small, sharp, and glittering, and looked
black as jet.  He had hardly enough of a mouth to make a smile with.
His left hand held the paper, and the long, skinny fingers of his right
a pen just dipped in ink.

But the king, who for weeks had scarcely known what he did, was today
so much himself as to be aware that he was not quite himself; and the
moment he saw the paper, he resolved that he would not sign without
understanding and approving of it.  He requested the lord chamberlain
therefore to read it.  His Lordship commenced at once but the
difficulties he seemed to encounter, and the fits of stammering that
seized him, roused the king's suspicion tenfold. He called the princess.

'I trouble His Lordship too much,' he said to her: 'you can read print
well, my child--let me hear how you can read writing.  Take that paper
from His Lordship's hand, and read it to me from beginning to end,
while my lord drinks a glass of my favourite wine, and watches for your
blunders.'

'Pardon me, Your Majesty,' said the lord chamberlain, with as much of a
smile as he was able to extemporize, 'but it were a thousand pities to
put the attainments of Her Royal Highness to a test altogether too
severe.  Your Majesty can scarcely with justice expect the very organs
of her speech to prove capable of compassing words so long, and to her
so unintelligible.'

'I think much of my little princess and her capabilities,' returned the
king, more and more aroused.  'Pray, my lord, permit her to try.'

'Consider, Your Majesty: the thing would be altogether without
precedent.  It would be to make sport of statecraft,' said the lord
chamberlain.

'Perhaps you are right, my lord,' answered the king, with more meaning
than he intended should be manifest, while to his growing joy he felt
new life and power throbbing in heart and brain.  'So this morning we
shall read no further.  I am indeed ill able for business of such
weight.'

'Will Your Majesty please sign your royal name here?' said the lord
chamberlain, preferring the request as a matter of course, and
approaching with the feather end of the pen pointed to a spot where
there was a great red seal.

'Not today, my lord,' replied the king.

'It is of the greatest importance, Your Majesty,' softly insisted the
other.

'I descried no such importance in it,' said the king.

'Your Majesty heard but a part.'

'And I can hear no more today.'

'I trust Your Majesty has ground enough, in a case of necessity like
the present, to sign upon the representation of his loyal subject and
chamberlain?  Or shall I call the lord chancellor?' he added, rising.

'There is no need.  I have the very highest opinion of your judgement,
my lord,' answered the king; 'that is, with respect to means: we might
differ as to ends.'

The lord chamberlain made yet further attempts at persuasion; but they
grew feebler and feebler, and he was at last compelled to retire
without having gained his object.  And well might his annoyance be
keen!  For that paper was the king's will, drawn up by the
attorney-general; nor until they had the king's signature to it was
there much use in venturing farther.  But his worst sense of
discomfiture arose from finding the king with so much capacity left,
for the doctor had pledged himself so to weaken his brain that he
should be as a child in their hands, incapable of refusing anything
requested of him: His Lordship began to doubt the doctor's fidelity to
the conspiracy.

The princess was in high delight.  She had not for weeks heard so many
words, not to say words of such strength and reason, from her father's
lips: day by day he had been growing weaker and more lethargic.  He was
so much exhausted, however, after this effort, that he asked for
another piece of bread and more wine, and fell fast asleep the moment
he had taken them.

The lord chamberlain sent in a rage for Dr Kelman.  He came, and while
professing himself unable to understand the symptoms described by His
Lordship, yet pledged himself again that on the morrow the king should
do whatever was required of him.

The day went on.  When His Majesty was awake, the princess read to
him--one storybook after another; and whatever she read, the king
listened as if he had never heard anything so good before, making out
in it the wisest meanings.  Every now and then he asked for a piece of
bread and a little wine, and every time he ate and drank he slept, and
every time he woke he seemed better than the last time.  The princess
bearing her part, the loaf was eaten up and the flagon emptied before
night.  The butler took the flagon away, and brought it back filled to
the brim, but both were thirsty and hungry when Curdie came again.

Meantime he and Lina, watching and waking alternately, had plenty of
sleep.  In the afternoon, peeping from the recess, they saw several of
the servants enter hurriedly, one after the other, draw wine, drink it,
and steal out; but their business was to take care of the king, not of
his cellar, and they let them drink.  Also, when the butler came to
fill the flagon, they restrained themselves, for the villain's fate was
not yet ready for him.  He looked terribly frightened, and had brought
with him a large candle and a small terrier--which latter indeed
threatened to be troublesome, for he went roving and sniffing about
until he came to the recess where they were.  But as soon as he showed
himself, Lina opened her jaws so wide, and glared at him so horribly,
that, without even uttering a whimper, he tucked his tail between his
legs and ran to his master.  He was drawing the wicked wine at the
moment, and did not see him, else he would doubtless have run too.

When suppertime approached, Curdie took his place at the door into the
servants' hall; but after a long hour's vain watch, he began to fear he
should get nothing: there was so much idling about, as well as coming
and going.  It was hard to bear--chiefly from the attractions of a
splendid loaf, just fresh out of the oven, which he longed to secure
for the king and princess.  At length his chance did arrive: he pounced
upon the loaf and carried it away, and soon after got hold of a pie.

This time, however, both loaf and pie were missed.  The cook was
called.  He declared he had provided both.  One of themselves, he said,
must have carried them away for some friend outside the palace.  Then a
housemaid, who had not long been one of them, said she had seen someone
like a page running in the direction of the cellar with something in
his hands.  Instantly all turned upon the pages, accusing them, one
after another.  All denied, but nobody believed one of them: Where
there is no truth there can be no faith.

To the cellar they all set out to look for the missing pie and loaf.
Lina heard them coming, as well she might, for they were talking and
quarrelling loud, and gave her master warning.  They snatched up
everything, and got all signs of their presence out at the back door
before the servants entered.  When they found nothing, they all turned
on the chambermaid, and accused her, not only of lying against the
pages, but of having taken the things herself.  Their language and
behaviour so disgusted Curdie, who could hear a great part of what
passed, and he saw the danger of discovery now so much increased, that
he began to devise how best at once to rid the palace of the whole pack
of them.  That, however, would be small gain so long as the treacherous
officers of state continued in it.  They must be first dealt with.  A
thought came to him, and the longer he looked at it the better he liked
it.

As soon as the servants were gone, quarrelling and accusing all the
way, they returned and finished their supper.  Then Curdie, who had
long been satisfied that Lina understood almost every word he said,
communicated his plan to her, and knew by the wagging of her tail and
the flashing of her eyes that she comprehended it.  Until they had the
king safe through the worst part of the night, however, nothing could
be done.

They had now merely to go on waiting where they were till the household
should be asleep.  This waiting and waiting was much the hardest thing
Curdie had to do in the whole affair.  He took his mattock and, going
again into the long passage, lighted a candle end and proceeded to
examine the rock on all sides.  But this was not merely to pass the
time: he had a reason for it.  When he broke the stone in the street,
over which the baker fell, its appearance led him to pocket a fragment
for further examination; and since then he had satisfied himself that
it was the kind of stone in which gold is found, and that the yellow
particles in it were pure metal.  If such stone existed here in any
plenty, he could soon make the king rich and independent of his
ill-conditioned subjects. He was therefore now bent on an examination
