"It would be a pity to waste time, senor. I will get some torches made
to-morrow. Some of the trees have resin, and by melting this I can make
torches that would do very well. By their aid we could get the mules
down without waiting for daylight. As they have already come up the
torrent, they will have less fear in going down, for the stream will
help them instead of keeping them back. I will go first with Jose and
his mule; she is as steady as a rock, and where she goes the others
will follow; and with five torches along the line they will be able to
see well enough."

"Four torches, Dias. Your wife rode coming up, and she had better ride
going down."

"She can hold a torch as she sits; it does not matter to us if we get
wet to the waist, but it would be very uncomfortable for her. We shall
have to put the largest burdens on to the mules. One of the riding
mules could carry the two llamas, or if you think that that is too
much, we can tie each across a separate mule. They were more trouble
coming up than all the mules put together. We had pretty nearly to
carry them through the deep places, though at other points they leapt
from rock to rock cleverly enough."

"I am not going to be left behind if you are going to the fight,
senor," Donna Maria said, "if you will give me one of your pistols."

"We could manage that, I should think," Harry said. "We can put you on
one of the steadiest mules when we first go down, and with one at each
side of you we can manage it very well. Jose must go on a hundred yards
ahead to see whether any of the savages are on the watch at their end,
and if so, you must wait till we have cleared them out. You see, we
shall have no hesitation in shooting any of them if necessary, and
though that would bring the rest of them down on us, yet when our
squibs and crackers begin to fly among them, you may be sure they won't
face us for an instant."

Dias grumbled that his wife had better stay where she was till they
went back for the mules; but Harry said: "I do think, Dias, that she
had better go with us. It would be cruel to leave her now that we are
going into a fight--leave her all alone to tremble for our lives, with
a knowledge that if things should go wrong with us the savages will
soon be up here."

"Well, senor, if you think so, there is no more to be said."

"I am not going to be made a trouble of," Maria said. "I shall go down
on foot like the rest of you. I will take some other clothes with me,
so that when you all come back for the mules I can change into them."

"Perhaps that would be the best plan," Harry agreed. "Now I will go
back and take Bertie's place. It is my turn to be on watch, and he will
be wanting to hear the news."

"Well, Harry, is it all right?" Bertie asked as he heard his brother
coming up to him.

"It couldn't be better! There are sixty or seventy of them in a sort of
little ravine three hundred yards away, on the left-hand side of the
river. They don't seem to be keeping guard at all, and if they are not
more careful to-morrow night we shall take them completely by surprise.
We are going to saddle all the mules directly it gets too dark for any
of the fellows on the hills to see us, then we must set to work and
pull down enough of the barricade here to allow them to pass. We
ourselves, when we go down, will cross at that shallow place above
here, and go down the river at that side, otherwise we sha'n't be able
to cross it except at some distance beyond the other end of the
torrent. Of course the mules must go down this side, as we shall want
to turn to the right when we get off. We shall make our attack about
ten o'clock."

Bertie went off, and three hours later Dias relieved Harry. As soon as
it was light the next morning Bertie and Jose set to work to fill the
cases--there were a hundred squibs and fifty large crackers.

Donna Maria after breakfast went out and returned with a number of
flexible sticks of about half an inch in diameter; these she carried
into her tent, where she shut herself up for the forenoon. When, at one
o'clock, she came out with the result of her work, it resembled a chair
without legs and with a back about a foot wide and three feet high.

"What in the world have you got there, Donna Maria?" Bertie asked.

"Don't you know?"

"No, I have never seen a thing like it before."

"This is the thing the porters use for carrying weights, and sometimes
people, over the Cordilleras. You see that strap near the top goes
round the man's forehead, and when there is a weight in the chair these
other straps pass over his shoulders and under his arms, and then round
whatever is on the seat."

"But what is going to be on the seat?"

"I am," she laughed. "Dias is so overbearing. It had all been arranged
nicely, as you know; and then when he spoke to me afterwards he said,
'The first thing to-morrow morning, Maria, you will set to work to make
a porter's chair, and I shall carry you down the stream. No words about
it, but do as you are told.' Generally Dias lets me have my own way,
senor, but when he talks like that, I know that it is useless to argue
with him. And perhaps it is best after all, for, as he said to me
afterwards, it is a nasty place for men to get along, but for a woman,
with her petticoats dragging and trailing round her, it would be almost
impossible for her to keep her footing."

"Well, I thought the same thing myself when we were talking about it
yesterday," Bertie said. "Of course I did not say anything, but I am
sure Dias is right. I found it very hard work to keep my footing, and I
really don't believe that I could have done it if I had been dressed as
a woman. And Dias can carry you like that?"

"Carry me, senor! he could carry three times that weight. He has cut
himself a staff seven or eight feet long this morning to steady
himself, but I don't think there was any need for it. Why, it is a
common thing for people to be carried over the Cordilleras so, and Dias
is stronger a great deal than many of the men who do it. As he said, if
I had been going through on foot you would all have been bothering
about me. And it is not as if two people could go abreast, and one help
the other. There is often only room between the rocks for one to pass
through, and it is just there where the rush of the water is strongest."




CHAPTER IX

THE SIGNAL STAR


During the afternoon Dias, who had been keeping a careful look-out at
the cliffs, said to Harry: "I think, senor, that the savages are
leaving the hills. An hour ago I saw a man walking along where we
generally see them; he was going straight along as if for some fixed
purpose, and I thought at once that he might be bringing them some
message from the people below us. I lost sight of him after a bit, but
presently I could make out some men moving in the other direction. They
were keeping back from the edge, but I several times caught sight of
their heads against the sky-line when there happened to be some little
irregularity in the ground. They were not running, but seemed to me to
be going at a steady pace. Since then I have been watching carefully,
and have seen no one on the other side. I think they have all been sent
for, and will be assembled this afternoon at the mouth of the torrent."

"I am very glad to hear it, Dias; that is just what we wanted."

"In one way--yes," Dias said. "It would be a great thing for us to
catch them all together, for I have no fear that they will stand when
these fireworks begin to go off among them."

"What is the drawback, then?"

"It is, senor, that they have either been collected because they have
given up the hope of catching us at present, and are going to scatter
and hunt till we venture out, which would be the worst thing possible;
or they have made up their minds to make a rush upon us."

"Don't you think that we can beat them back?"

"Not if they are determined, senor. You see, we can't make them out
till they are within twenty or thirty yards of us. At most you and your
brother could fire four shots, then you would take up your rifles. We
shall have then only four shots left. If they continue their rush where
shall we be? There would be two of us on one wall and two on the other.
There would be four shots to fire from one side and four from the
other. Then the end would come. Two on each side would not be able to
keep back the rush of two or three score. In two minutes it would be
all over."

"Yes, Dias, I see that if they were determined to storm the place and
take us alive they could do it; but we have the fireworks."

"I did not think of that. Yes; but having once worked themselves up and
being mad with excitement, even that might not stop them, though I
should think it would. Yes, I believe we might feel assured that we
should beat them back, and if so, we should hear no more of them."

"If I knew that they would come," Harry said, "I would certainly say we
had best stay and defend ourselves; but we can't be sure that that is
their motive for assembling. They may, as you say, be going to move
off, leaving perhaps half a dozen men to watch the entrance and report
if we attempt to escape. That would be fatal, and our only chance would
be to leave everything behind and endeavour to climb up one side or the
other; and even that might not avail us, as there may be one or two men
up there to see if we make off that way. I am more inclined to think
that this is the course that they will take rather than risk a heavy
loss of life. They must have a good idea of what it would cost them to
take the place."

"What do you think we had better do, then, senor?"

"I think we had better attack them as soon as possible after nightfall.
It is likely that they will do nothing before morning; as you say, they
do not like moving at night, and if they attack it will not be until
shortly before daybreak. There is sure to be a palaver when the men who
have been on the hills come down. It will be too late then for them to
go back before night, so that I think we are pretty sure to find them
all in the ravine this evening. If, when we get there, we find the
place empty, we must come to a decision as to what our best course will
be. In that case I think we ought to climb the hills and make our way
up the mountains as rapidly as possible. We could calculate on eight or
ten hours' start, and by keeping as much as possible on the rocks,
might hope to get so high among the mountains that they would not be
able to follow our traces and overtake us before we reach a point where
they would not dare follow us. In that case, of course we should have
to give up all hope of finding the gold valley, and lose the mules with
all our belongings, which would cripple us terribly."

"Very well, senor; I think that is the best plan."

"Then we will settle to start at nine o'clock, Dias."

They then discussed the arrangements for the attack. Each was to carry
a glowing brand, and when he got there, was to sling his gun behind him
and hold twelve squibs in one hand and the brand in the other. When
they approached within throwing distance of the savages, they were to
lay their guns down beside them, and then Harry was to put the ends of
his squibs against his brand, and hurl the whole of them among the
Indians. A few seconds later Bertie was to do the same, while Harry
fired one barrel of buck-shot. Bertie was to fire as Dias threw a dozen
crackers, and then Jose was to throw his squibs. Then all were to throw
squibs and crackers as far as they could go; and the other two barrels
of buck-shot and Jose's musket were to be poured in. By this time they
calculated the savages would be in full flight, and the three rifles
could then be used.

Harry was to hand his rifle to Dias before the firing began, and he and
Bertie were to slip fresh cartridges into these guns and recap them
before sending off the last batch of their fireworks, so as to have
them in readiness either to empty their contents into the flying
Indians, or to cover their retreat should the fireworks fail to effect
the panic they hoped for. Their pistols were also to be reserved until
the Indians fled. Donna Maria was to stay by the water, and start at
once on her way back if Dias shouted to her to do so. Every step of the
plan settled upon was repeated again and again, until there was no
possibility of any mistake being made. Maria had not attended the
council; her confidence in her two white friends was unbounded, and
Bertie's invention of the fireworks had placed him on a level with his
brother in her estimation. She therefore quietly went on with her
preparations for dinner without concerning herself as to the details of
the affair.

As soon as it was dark and the meal eaten, the tents were struck, the
baggage all rolled up and packed on the animals, and the fireworks
divided. When everything was in readiness they went together and made a
breach in the breast-work wide enough for the mules to pass. At nine
o'clock Maria was seated in the carrying-chair, and strapped on to her
husband's back; then four brands were taken from the fire and the party
started. When within fifty yards of the lower end of the ravine Jose
went forward, and, returning in a few minutes, reported that no savages
were on guard. A fire was burning outside the mouth of the ravine where
he had seen them on the evening before, and from the reflection on the
rock he believed that another fire was alight inside. His report caused
a general feeling of relief, for their great fear had been that the
natives might have made off before their arrival.

When they stepped out from the water Dias set Maria down. "You
understand, Maria," he said: "the moment I call, you are to start up
the river."

"I understand," she said. "I have my knife, and if you do not rejoin me
I shall know how to use it."

"We shall rejoin you, Maria," Dias said confidently. "I believe that at
the first volley of fireworks they will be off. They must be more than
human if they are not scared, as they never can have heard of such
things before."

Keeping close to the rock wall, they went along in single file until
within forty or fifty yards of the fire; then, going down on their
hands and knees, they crawled up a slight rise, from the top of which
they could see a hundred or more natives gathered round a fire. One was
addressing the others, who were seated listening attentively. Laying
the guns down to be ready for instant action, and keeping themselves
concealed in the herbage, Harry took his bundle of squibs from his
pocket. They were but lightly tied together; slipping off the string he
applied the ends to the brand. There was a sudden roar of fire, and
waving them once round his head he hurled them into the midst of the
assembly. There was a yell of astonishment as the missiles flew hither
and thither, exploding with loud reports. The last had not exploded
when Bertie's handful flew among them; then came the parcel from Dias,
and at the same moment Harry poured a barrel of buck-shot among them,
followed by a volley of crackers, while almost simultaneously Harry
threw his squibs and Bertie fired a volley of buck-shot. For a moment
the savages were paralysed, then many of them threw themselves on their
faces in terror of these fiery demons, while others started in headlong
flight.

"Send them off as quick as you can!" Harry shouted, as he discharged
his second barrel into the flying natives. Bertie followed suit, and
then both paused to reload while Dias and Jose hurled their remaining
fireworks. By this time the last of the natives had leapt up and fled.
Jose's musket and the three rifles cracked out, and then the little
party rose to their feet and joined in a wild "Hip, hip, hurrah!"

"You can come up, Maria; they have all gone!" Dias cried out; and Maria
joined them a minute later. More than a score of natives lay dead or
badly wounded round their fire.

"What are we to do with the wounded?" Bertie asked.

"We can only leave them where they are," Harry said. "Some of the
savages may have wandered away, or not have come down from the hills,
and will return here unaware of what has happened, or one or two of the
boldest may venture back again to look after their comrades. At any
rate, we can do nothing for them."

"It would be better to shoot them, senor," Dias said.

"No, I could not bring myself to do that," Harry said. "Buck-shot,
unless they strike in a body, are not likely to kill. I expect they are
more frightened than hurt. After we have gone many of them will be able
to crawl down to the river. Savages frequently recover from wounds that
would kill white men; and even if no others come down, those who are
but slightly wounded will help the more incapable. We have cleared the
way for ourselves, which was all we wanted, and have taught them a
lesson they are not likely to forget for many years to come. Let us go
back at once and bring down the mules. I suppose you will sit down by
the stream, and wait till we come back, Maria?"

"Yes," she said, "there is nothing to be afraid of now; but you can
leave me one of your pistols in case one of these savages may be
shamming dead."

"Jose will wait with her," Dias said. "Now, Jose, you strike up a song.
You are generally at it, and as long as they hear you they will know
that some of us are still here, and will not venture to move."

"You take my gun, Jose; it is loaded," Harry said. "If any of them
should move and try to crawl away, don't fire at them; but if they look
about and seem inclined to make mischief, shoot at once."

Coming down with the animals the three men carried torches in each
hand. The mules reached the mouth of the torrent without accident, and
the llamas were then lifted off the baggage mules which had carried
them, and all were turned loose to graze on the rich grass near the
edge of the river. Jose and Dias went to the fire in the ravine, and
returned laden with burning brands, and a fire was soon blazing near
the water. Two of them kept watch by turns at the spot from which they
had fired, lest any of the wounded Indians should, on recovering, try
to avenge their loss by sending arrows down amongst the party. During
the night four of the fallen Indians, after first looking round
cautiously, crawled away, and the watchers could hear them running fast
through the bushes till they were beyond the light of the fire.

At dawn a start was made. The river was crossed at the pool where Jose
had swum over. Dias, on examination, found that the water, even in the
deepest part, was not more than breast-high. Accordingly he returned;
Maria, kneeling on one of his shoulders and one of Harry's, was carried
across without being wetted. Then they joined the animals, which were
grazing a short distance away, and set off without delay. Although they
kept a sharp look-out they saw no more of the Indians. They ascended
several more streams unobserved. Rough carvings on the face of several
of the rocks led them to carry their excursions farther than usual, but
beyond a few ounces of gold, washed from the stream, they found nothing.

"They must have been put here for some purpose," said Dias.

"I have been thinking it over, Dias, and I should not be surprised if,
as you thought, they were done to deceive searchers. You told me there
were some marks by which you would be directed in the gold valley; it
is quite likely that other marks might have been placed in the valleys
so that the real ones would not be particularly noticed."

"That is possible, senor; they would certainly do everything they could
to prevent anyone not in the secret from knowing. The mark I have to
look for first is a serpent. It is carved on a rock at the end of a
valley."

"In that case the indication of the star would not be necessary, Dias."

"That may be, senor; but the valley may be a large one, and the
hiding-place very difficult to find, so that even when the valley was
known, it would need the guidance of the star to take us to the right
place."

"That might be so, Dias, if it were a hidden treasure that we were
looking for; but as, according to your account, it is simply an
extraordinarily rich deposit in the river, I hardly see why the
guidance of the star should be necessary when once the valley was
known."

"That I cannot tell you, senor; but I am sure that it must be difficult
to find, for the Spaniards searched everywhere for gold, and although
the records of most of their discoveries still exist, there is no
mention of such a find, nor is there is any word of it among the Indian
traditions."

A week before the appointed date they found themselves in the
neighbourhood where they felt sure the cleft must lie. Mount Tinta was
twenty miles in front of them, and from that point a range of mountains
trended off almost at right angles to that which they were following.
One lofty peak some thirty miles to the south-east rose above another.

"I believe that that is the peak," Dias said.

"I don't see any signs of a cleft in it, Dias."

"No, senor; it is a very narrow one."

The next day they halted at the mouth of another valley, and as they
unloaded the mules, Harry exclaimed: "See, Dias, there is a cleft in
that peak! From here it looks as if it were a mere thread, and as if
some giant had struck a mighty sword-cut into it."

"That is right. Sure enough, senor, this must be the valley. Now, let
us look about for the serpent."

The search did not take them long. An isolated rock rose a quarter of a
mile from the mouth, and on this was a rude representation of a
serpent. The next morning they explored the valley thoroughly to a
point where, five miles higher, it ceased abruptly, the rocks closing
in on either side, and the stream coming down in a perpendicular fall
from a point some eighty feet above them. Going down the river, they
washed the gravel again and again, but without obtaining even as much
gold as they had found several times before.

"I cannot understand it," Harry said, as they sat down to their meal at
dusk. "Your tradition says nothing about hidden treasure, and yet there
does not seem to be gold in the stream."

"It may be higher up, senor. We must ascend the hills on each side of
the valley, and come down upon the river higher up."

Harry was on watch that night, and at one o'clock he roused the others
up. "See!" he exclaimed later on; "there is a bright star apparently
about a foot above the peak. I should think that must be the star. No
doubt that will rise in exact line behind the cleft on the 21st, that
is four days from now; probably it can only be seen when we are exactly
in the line with the cleft and the position of the gold. This cleft is
undoubtedly very narrow--no doubt the result of an earthquake. It
certainly goes straight through, and very likely it is some hundred
yards across, so that unless we are exactly in the line we sha'n't see
it. As soon as it is dark on the 21st we will all go some distance up
the valley, where it is only about four or five hundred yards across.
We will station ourselves fifty yards apart across it, then one of us
is sure to see the star through the cleft. We had each better take two
sticks with us. Whoever sees the star will fix one in the ground and
then go backwards for a hundred yards, keeping the star in sight, and
plant the other; then the line between those two sticks ought to lead
us to the spot."

