Ahrab adjusted their robes, and brought one end over their heads, so
that it could, if necessary, be pulled over the face at a moment's
notice.

The ranee then motioned to them to sit down upon two cushions near her;
and saying to Ahrab, "It is very hot, and they are only boys," removed
the veil from her face. "You make very pretty girls, only you are too
white," she said.

"Lady, if we had some dye we could pass as natives, I think," Ned said;
"we have done so before this, since the troubles began."

"Tell me all about it," the ranee said. "I want to know who you are,
and how you came here as if you had dropped from the skies."

Ned related their adventures since leaving Delhi, and then the ranee
insisted upon an account of their previous masquerading as natives.

"How brave you English boys are," she said. "No wonder your men have
conquered India. Now, Ahrab, tell these young sahibs what we propose."

"We dare not leave you here," Ahrab said. "You would have to be fed,
and we must trust many people. We go to Cawnpore to-morrow, and you
must go with us. My son has a garden here; we can trust him, and he
will bring a bullock-cart with him to-morrow morning. In this will be
placed some boxes, and he will start. You must wait a little way off,
and when you see him you will know him, because he will tie a piece of
red cloth to the horns of the bullock; you will come up and get in. He
will ask no questions, but will drive you to the ranee's. I will open
the door to you and take you up to a little room where you will not be
disturbed. We shall all start first. You cannot go with us, because the
other women will wonder who you are. Here is some stuff to dye your
faces and hands. I will let you out by a private door. You will see a
wood five minutes along the road. You must stop there to-night, and do
not come out till you see the ranee and her party pass. There is a
little hut, which is empty, in the wood, where you can sleep without
fear of disturbance. The ranee is sorry to turn you out to-night, but
we start at daybreak, and I should have no opportunity of slipping away
and letting you out."

Everything being now arranged, the ranee rose. Ned reiterating the
expression of the gratitude of his brother and himself, the ranee
coquettishly held out a little hand whose size and shape an
Englishwoman might have envied; and the boys kissed it--Ned
respectfully, Dick with a heartiness which made her laugh and draw it
away.

"You are a darling," Dick said in English, with the native impudence of
a midshipman, "and I wish I knew enough of your lingo to tell you."

"What does he say?" she asked of Ned.

"He is a sailor," Ned said; "and sailors say things we on shore would
not venture to say. My brother says you are the flower of his heart."

"Your brother is an impudent boy," the ranee said, laughing, "and I
have a good mind to hand him over to the Nana. Now good-by! Ahrab will
let you out."




CHAPTER X.

TREACHERY.


Of all the names connected with the Indian mutiny, Cawnpore stands out
conspicuous for its dark record of treachery, massacre, and bloodshed;
and its name will, so long as the English language continues, be
regarded as the darkest in the annals of our nation. Cawnpore is
situated on the Ganges, one hundred and twenty-three miles northwest of
Allahabad, and was at the time of our story a large straggling town,
extending nearly five miles along the river. It stands on a sandy
plain, intensely hot and dusty in summer, and possesses no fort or
other building such as proved the safety of the Europeans in Agra and
Allahabad. The force stationed there at the first outbreak of the
mutiny consisted of the First, Fifty-third, and Fifty-sixth Native
Regiments, the Second Regiment of Bengal Cavalry, and about fifty
European invalid artillerymen. When the news of the revolt at Meerut
reached Cawnpore, and it was but too probable that the mutiny would
spread to all the native regiments throughout the country, Sir Hugh
Wheeler, who was in command, at once set to work to prepare a fortified
position, in which to retire with the European residents in case of
necessity. To this end he connected with breastworks a large unfinished
building intended as a military hospital, with the church and some
other buildings, all standing near the center of the grand parade, and
surrounded the whole with an intrenchment. Within these lines he
collected ammunition, stores and provisions for a month's consumption
for a thousand persons, and having thus, as he hoped, prepared for the
worst, he awaited the event.

Although there was much uneasiness and disquietude, things went on
tolerably well up to the middle of May. Then Sir Hugh Wheeler sent to
Lucknow, forty miles distant, to ask for a company of white troops, to
enable him to disarm the Sepoys; and he also asked aid of Nana Sahib,
Rajah of Bithoor, who was looked upon as a stanch friend of the
English. On the 22d of May fifty-five Europeans of the Thirty-second
Regiment, and two hundred and forty native troopers of the Oude
irregular cavalry, arrived from Lucknow, and two guns and three hundred
men were sent in by the Rajah of Bithoor.

Nana Sahib was at this time a man of thirty-two years of age, having
been born in the year 1825. He was the son of poor parents, and had at
the age of two years and a half been adopted by the Peishwa, who had no
children of his own. In India adoption is very common, and an adopted
son has all the legal rights of a legitimate offspring. The Peishwa,
who was at one time a powerful prince, was dethroned by us for having
on several occasions joined other princes in waging war against us, but
was honorably treated, and an annuity of eighty thousand pounds a year
was assigned to him and his heirs. In 1851 the Peishwa died, leaving
Nana Dhoondu Pant, for that was the Nana's full name, his heir and
successor. The Company refused to continue the grant to Nana Sahib, and
in so doing acted in a manner at once impolitic and unjust. It was
unjust, because they had allowed the Peishwa and Nana Sahib, up to the
death of the former, to suppose that the Indian law of adoption would
be recognized here as in all other cases; it was impolitic, because as
the greater portion of the Indian princes had adopted heirs, these were
all alarmed at the refusal to recognize the Nana, and felt that a
similar blow might be dealt to them.

Thus, at this critical period of our history, the minds of the great
Indian princes were all alienated from us, by what was in their eyes at
once a breach of a solemn engagement, and a menace to every reigning
house. Nana Sahib, however, evinced no hostility to the English rule.
He had inherited the private fortune of the Peishwa, and lived in great
state at Bithoor. He affected greatly the society of the British
residents at Cawnpore, was profuse in his hospitality, and was regarded
as a jovial fellow and a stanch friend of the English. When the mutiny
broke out, it proved that he was only biding his time. Nana Sahib was
described by an officer who knew him four years before the mutiny, as
then looking at least forty years old and very fat. "His face is round,
his eyes very wild, brilliant and restless. His complexion, as is the
case with most native gentlemen, is scarcely darker than that of a dark
Spaniard, and his expression is, on the whole, of a jovial, and indeed,
somewhat rollicking character." In reality, this rollicking native
gentleman was a human tiger.

On the very night that the men of the Thirty-second came in from Oude,
there was an alarm of a rising, and the ladies and children of the
station took refuge in the fortified post prepared for them; and from
that time the sufferings of the residents commenced, although it was
not for a fortnight afterward that the mutiny took place; for the
overcrowding and the intense heat at once began to affect the health of
those huddled together in ill-ventilated rooms, and deprived of all the
luxuries which alone make existence endurable to white people in Indian
cities on the plains during the heats of summer. Scarce a day passed
without news of risings at other stations taking place, and with the
receipt of each item of intelligence the insolence displayed by the
Sepoys increased.

A few English troops arrived from Allahabad and at midnight upon the
4th of June, when the natives broke into revolt, there were in the
intrenchments of Cawnpore eighty-three officers of various regiments,
sixty men of the Eighty-fourth Regiment, and seventy of the
Thirty-second, fifteen of the First Madras Fusiliers, and a few invalid
gunners; the whole defensive force consisting of about two hundred and
forty men, and six guns. There were under their charge a large number
of ladies and children, the wives and families of the officers and
civilians at the station, sixty-four women and seventy-six children
belonging to the soldiers, with a few native servants who remained
faithful. The total number of women, children, and non-effectives
amounted to about eight hundred and seventy persons.

During the night of the 4th of June the whole of the native troops
rose, set fire to all the European residences outside the
intrenchments, and marched to Nawabgunge, a place four miles away. A
message was sent by them to Nana Sahib, to the effect that they were
marching to Delhi, and inviting him to assume the command. This he at
once assented to, and arrived at Nawabgunge a few hours later, with six
hundred troops and four guns; and his first act was to divide the
contents of the English treasury there, which had been guarded by his
own troops, among the mutineers.

Having destroyed the European buildings, the force marched to
Kulleanpore, on its way to Delhi; but on its reaching this place the
same evening, Nana Sahib called together the native officers, and
advised them to return to Cawnpore and kill all the Europeans there.
Then they would be thought much of when they arrived at Delhi. The
proposal was accepted with acclamation, and during the night the rebel
army marched back to Cawnpore, which they invested the next morning;
the last message from Sir Hugh Wheeler came through on that day,
fighting having begun at half-past ten in the morning.

The first proceeding of the mutineers was to take possession of the
native town of Cawnpore, where the houses of the peaceable and wealthy
inhabitants were at once broken open and plundered, and many
respectable natives slaughtered.

The bombardment of the British position began on the 6th, and continued
with daily increasing fury. Every attempt to carry the place by storm
was repelled, but the sufferings of the besieged were frightful. There
was but one well, in the middle of the intrenchments, and upon this by
night and by day the enemy concentrated their fire, so that it might be
said that every bucket of water cost a man's life. After four or five
days of incessant bombardment, the enemy took to firing red-hot shot,
and on the 13th the barracks were set on fire, and, a strong wind
blowing, the fire spread so rapidly that upward of fifty sick and
wounded were burned. The other buildings were so riddled with shot and
shell that they afforded scarcely any shelter. Many of the besieged
made holes in the ground or under the banks of the intrenchments; but
the deaths from sunstroke and fever were even more numerous than those
caused by the murderous and incessant fire.

In the city a reign of terror prevailed. All the native Christians were
massacred, with their wives and families; and every white prisoner
brought in--and they were many--man, woman, or child, was taken before
the Nana, and murdered by his orders.

Day by day the sufferings of the garrison in the intrenchments became
greater, and the mortality among the woman and children was terrible.
Every day saw the army of the Nana increasing, by the arrival of
mutineers from other quarters, until it reached a total of over twelve
thousand men, while the fighting force of the garrison had greatly
decreased; yet the handful of Englishmen repulsed every effort of the
great host of assailants to carry the fragile line of intrenchments.

When Ned and Dick Warrener, having carried out the instructions given
by the ranee, arrived next morning at her house at Cawnpore, Ahrab at
once led them to a small apartment.

"I have much news to tell you. The fighting is over here. The Nana sent
in a messenger to the English sahibs, to say that if they would give up
the place, with the guns and treasure, he would grant a free passage
for all; and the Nana and his Hindoo officers have sworn the sacred
oath of our religion, and the Mohammedans have sworn on the Koran, that
these conditions shall be observed. Boats are to be provided for them
all. They leave to-morrow at dawn. Her highness the ranee will shelter
you here if you like to stay; but if you wish it you can go at daybreak
and join your countrymen."

With many thanks for the ranee's offer, the boys at once decided to
join their countrymen; and accordingly next morning after a kind
farewell from their protectress, they started before daybreak under
charge of their driver of the day before, and, still in their disguises
of native women, made their way to a point on the line of route outside
the town. There were but few people here, and, just as day broke the
head of the sad procession came along. The women and children, the sick
and wounded--among the latter Sir H. Wheeler, the gallant commander of
the garrison--were in wagons provided by the Nana; the remnant of the
fighting men marched afterward. Hastily dropping their women's robes,
the boys slipped in among the troops, unnoticed by any of the guards of
Nana's troops who were escorting the procession.

A few words explained to their surprised compatriots that they were
fugitives who had been in shelter in the town, and many a word of
welcome was muttered, and furtive handshakes given. In return the boys
were able to give the news of the arrival of the British before Delhi,
and the commencement of the siege, all of which was new to the
garrison, who had been for twenty-two days without a word from the
outer world. At last the column reached the ghat, or landing-place,
fixed upon for their embarkation.

Here seventeen or eighteen boats were collected. The way down to the
river was steep, for the bank of the Ganges is here rather high, and
covered with thick jungle. At the top of the ghat is a small Hindoo
temple. The wounded and sick were carried down the bank and placed in
the boats, the ladies and children took their places, the officers and
men then followed. When all was ready, the Nana's officer suddenly
called the native boatmen to come ashore to receive their wages for the
passage down to Benares.

Then, as if by magic, from out the thick jungle on both sides of the
path to the ghat, hundreds of Sepoys rushed; while at the same moment
lines of bushes fell to the ground, and showed a number of cannon, all
placed in position. In a moment a tremendous fire was opened upon the
unhappy fugitives. Numbers of them were at once killed in the boats;
some jumped into the water, and, pushing the boats afloat, made for the
opposite shore; while others leaped into the river on the deeper side
and tried to escape by swimming. But upon the other shore were enemies
as bloodthirsty as those they left behind, for there the Sepoys of the
Seventeenth Native Regiment, who had mutinied at Azimghur, were posted,
and these cut off the retreat of the fugitives there. Then all the
boats, with the exception of two or three which had drifted down
stream, followed by bands of Sepoys with cannon on either bank, were
brought back to the starting-place, which is known, and will be known
through all time, as "the slaughter ghat." There all the men still
alive were taken on shore and shot; while the women and children, many
of them bleeding from wounds, were taken off to a house formerly
belonging to the medical department of the European troops, called the
Subada Khotee.

Dick and Ned Warrener were in one of the boats which were still ashore
when the treacherous Sepoys burst from their hiding-place. "The
scoundrels!" burst from Ned indignantly; while Dick, seeing at a glance
the hopelessness of their position, grasped his brother's arm.

"We must swim for it, Ned, Take a long dive, and go under again the
moment you have got breath."

Without an instant's delay the brothers leaped into the water, as
dozens of others were doing; and although each time their heads came up
for an instant the bullets splashed around them, they kept on untouched
until they reached the center of the stream. They were still within
musket range, but the distance was sufficient to render them pretty
safe except against an accidental shot. They looked back and saw the
Sepoys had many of them entered the river up to their shoulders, to
shoot the swimmers: others on horseback had ridden far out, and were
cutting down those who, unable to swim far, made again toward shallow
water; while cannon and muskets still poured in their fire against the
helpless crowds in the boats.

"Look, Ned, it is of no use making for the other shore," Dick said;
"there is another body of the wretches there; we must simply float down
the stream in the middle. If we keep on our backs, and sink as low as
we can, so as to show only our noses and mouths above water, they may
fire for a week without hitting us. There, give me your hand, so that
we may float together; I will look up from time to time to see that we
are floating pretty fairly in the middle, I will do it quickly, so as
not to be seen, for if we lie still on our backs they won't watch us
after a time, but will take us for two drifting dead bodies. Now, old
boy!" So saying, the lads turned on their backs, and occasionally
giving a quiet stroke with their legs, or paddling with their hands,
drifted down stream, showing so little of their faces above water that
they could scarcely have been seen from the shore.

Both the lads were good swimmers, but Dick was perfectly at home in the
water; and Ned, knowing his own inferiority in this respect, left
himself entirely in his brother's hands. Soon Dick, in his quick
glances to note their position, perceived that three boats alone of all
the number had got fairly away down stream--that their occupants had
got out oars and were quickly coming up to the swimmers; but he saw,
too, that on both banks the Sepoy guns kept abreast of them, and that a
fire of artillery and musketry was maintained. For a moment he thought
of being taken on board; but their chance of escaping the fire centered
upon them seemed hopeless, and he judged it was better to keep on in
the water. He accordingly paddled himself out of the center of the
stream, so as to give the boats a wide berth, trusting that the
attention of the enemy would be so much directed at the boats that the
floating bodies would be unnoticed. As to keeping afloat for any time,
he had no fear whatever. The water of Indian rivers in the heat of
summer is so warm that swimmers can remain in them for many hours
without any feeling of chill or discomfort.

An hour later Dick lifted his head and looked forward. The firing was
two miles ahead now. But one boat of the three still floated, and Dick
congratulated himself that he had decided not to join his fate to that
of those on board. Hour after hour passed, and still the boys floated
on, until at last the sun went down, dusk came and went, and when all
was dark they turned on their faces and swam quietly down the stream.
For many hours, alternately swimming and floating, they kept their
course down the river, until toward morning they gently paddled ashore,
crept into the thick jungle of the bank, and fell asleep almost
instantly.

It was dusk again before they awoke. They were desperately hungry, but
they agreed to spend one more night in the river before searching for
food, so as to put as much distance as possible between themselves and
Cawnpore. They had been twenty hours in the water before, and allowing
two miles an hour for the current, and something for their swimming,
they calculated that Cawnpore must be forty-six or forty-seven miles
behind. Eight hours' more steady swimming added twenty to this, and
they landed again with a hope that Nana Sahib's ferocious bands must
have been left behind, and that they had now only the ordinary danger
of travel in such times, through a hostile country, to face.

It yet wanted an hour or so of daybreak, and they struck off at right
angles to the river, and walked till it became light, when they entered
a small wood near to which was a hut. Watching this closely, they saw
only an old man come out, and at once made to it, and asked him for
food and shelter. Recovered from his first surprise, he received them
kindly, and gave them the best which his hut, in which he lived alone
with his wife, afforded. A meal of cakes and parched grain greatly
revived them, and, after a long sleep, they started again at nightfall,
with enough food for the next two days' supply. That they were not
ahead of all their foes was certain, from the fact that the peasant
said that he had heard firing on the river bank on the previous day.
They knew by this also that the one boat ahead of them had at any rate
escaped its perils of the first day.

For two more nights they walked, passing one day in a thick wood, the
other in a ruined temple, their hopes rising; for, as they knew, the
further they got from Cawnpore the loss likely the country people were
to be hostile.

The third morning they again entered a hut to ask for food.

"I will give you food," the peasant said, "but you had better go to the
rajah's, his house is over there, half an hour's walk. He has four
Englishmen there who came from the river, and he is the friend of the
Feringhees."

Delighted at the news, the boys went forward. As they entered the
courtyard of the house they were greeted with a hearty salutation in
