lads. But what are all these fine clothes lying about; they must be
nobles in disguise. We must take them down to Tyler and hear what he
has to say to them. But, first of all, let us have a kiss or two. I
will begin with this young woman," and he rudely caught hold of Aline.

Edgar's sword flashed out, and with the hilt he struck the ruffian so
terrible a blow on the top of his head that he fell dead. An instant
later he ran another through the body, shouting to the ladies: "Quick!
to the platform above! Albert, guard the stairs after they pass. I will
hold this door. None of these fellows must go out alive."

Taken by surprise for a moment, the men made a rush at him. The nearest
was cut down with a sweeping blow that caught him on the neck, and
almost severed the head from his body. Albert had drawn his sword as
soon as he saw Edgar strike the first blow, and ran one of the men
through the body, then engaged another, who made at him fiercely, while
Dame Agatha and Aline sped up the steps. There were now but three foes
left. While one engaged with Albert and pressed him hotly, the other
two attacked Edgar, who was standing with his back to the door; but
they were no match for the young swordsman, who parried their blows
without difficulty, and brought them one after the other to the ground
just as Albert rid himself of his opponent.

"Bring the ladies down, Albert, quickly. We must be out of this before
anyone else comes."

Albert ran up. The two ladies were on their knees. "Quick, mother!
There is not a moment to be lost. It is all over, and you have to go
down as speedily as possible."

Dame Agatha passed through the scene of carnage without a shudder, for
she had more than once accompanied Sir Ralph abroad, and had witnessed
several battles and sieges, but Aline clung to Albert's arm, shuddering
and sobbing. Edgar stood at the door until they had passed out. He
closed it behind him, locked it on the outside, and threw the key
through a loophole on the stair. They met with no one until they
reached the lower part of the Tower, which the rioters were now
leaving, satisfied with the vengeance that they had taken upon the
archbishop and treasurer, whom they regarded as the authors of the
obnoxious poll-tax. The party were unquestioned as they issued out into
the yard and mingled with the mob. Here they gathered that the
princess, having been roughly kissed by some of those who first entered
her apartment, had swooned with terror, and that her attendants had
been permitted to carry her down and place her in a boat, and that she
had been taken across the river.

The rioters poured out across the drawbridge with almost as much haste
as they had pressed over to enter the Tower, anxious to be away before
the king's return, when he might turn against them the whole of the
garrison. Many had intoxicated themselves by the wine in the royal
cellars, and beyond a few rough jests nothing was said to the ladies,
who were supposed to be some of the royal servants now being escorted
to their country homes by their friends. As soon as possible Edgar and
Albert edged their way out of the crowd and soon reached the door of
their lodging. As soon as the garden gate closed behind them Aline
fainted. Edgar, who was walking beside her, caught her as she fell, and
carried her into the house, where he left her for a while in the care
of her mother.

The latter said before she closed the door: "Edgar, I charge you to go
back to the Tower and speak to my lord as he enters with the king. He
will be well-nigh distraught should he find that we are missing, and go
up to our chamber to look for us. Albert, do you remain here with us."

A quarter of an hour later she came down to her son.

"Aline has recovered her senses," she said, "but will have to lie quiet
for a time. Now tell me what has happened. Have any of the Court been
killed?"

Albert told her of the murder of the archbishop, the treasurer, and
their five companions.

"'Tis terrible!" she said, "and I can well understand that Edgar was so
maddened at the sight that when one of those half-drunken wretches
insulted Aline he could contain himself no longer. But it was a rash
act thus to engage seven men."

"Well, mother, if he had not smitten that man down I should have run
him through. My sword was half out when he did so. You would not have
had me stand by quietly and see you and Aline insulted by those
wretches. But, indeed, the odds were not so great, seeing that they
were but rabble of the town, and already half-drunk. Besides the man
that he smote down, Edgar killed four of them, while I had but two to
encounter, which was a fair division considering his strength and skill
compared with mine. No half measures would have been of any use after
that first blow was struck. It is certain that we should all have been
killed had one of them escaped to give the alarm."

"I am far from blaming you, Albert. My own blood boiled at the
indignity, and had I carried a dagger I believe that I should have
stabbed that fellow myself, though I had been slain a moment
afterwards."

Looking out from the gate Edgar saw that the mob had now melted away.
Throwing off his disguise, he proceeded to the Tower. Half an hour
later the king rode up at a furious pace, followed by all who had
ridden out with him save the king's half-brothers, the Earl of Kent and
Sir John Holland, who, knowing their own unpopularity, and alarmed for
their safety, put spurs to their horses and rode away. The king threw
himself from his horse at the entrance, at which Edgar was standing.

"Is the news that has reached me true," he asked him, "that the
princess, my mother, has been grossly insulted by this foul rabble, and
that the archbishop, treasurer, and others have been murdered?"

"It is quite true, your Majesty; the princess has been carried across
the river in a swoon; the bodies of the gentlemen murdered still lie on
the hill."

With an exclamation of grief and indignation the king ascended the
steps.

"What of my dame and daughter, Edgar?" the knight asked, as the king
turned away.

"They are both safe, and at their former lodging, Sir Ralph. Dame
Agatha sent me here to acquaint you where they were to be found; she
knew that you would be very anxious as to their safety."

"I thank her for the thought," the knight said, turning his horse's
head to go there. "Where have you and Albert been for the last two
days?"

"We have slept at the lodgings, Sir Ralph, and during the day have
traversed the city in sober clothes watching what has been done."

"Then you have seen scenes which must have made you almost ashamed of
being an Englishman," Sir Ralph said, angrily. "This has been a
disgraceful business. It was bad enough to destroy John of Gaunt's
palace; for, although I love not Lancaster greatly, it was an ornament
to London and full of costly treasures. For this, however, there was
some sort of excuse, but not so for the burning of the Temple, still
less for the destruction of the great house of the Knights of St. John,
and also the manor-house of the prior of the order. I hear to-day that
great numbers of Flemings have been slain, their houses pillaged, and
in some cases burnt. Now comes the crowning disgrace. That the Tower of
London, garrisoned by 1,200 men, and which ought to have defied for
weeks the whole rabbledom of England, should have opened its gates
without a blow being struck, and the garrison remained inert on the
walls while the king's mother was being grossly insulted, and the two
highest dignitaries of the state with others massacred is enough, by my
faith, to make one forswear arms, put on a hermit's dress and take to
the woods. Here we are!"

The knight's two retainers ran up to take his horse as he entered the
gateway; and, vaulting off, he hurried into the house.

"Why, Agatha, you are strangely pale! What has happened? I have not had
time yet to question Edgar, and, indeed, have been talking so fast
myself that he has had no chance of explaining how you and Aline
managed to get here. You came by water, I suppose, and so escaped that
crowd of knaves round the Tower?"

"No, Sir Ralph, we escaped under the protection of your son and this
brave youth. Had it not been for them we should surely have suffered
indignity and perhaps death."

"What! were they in the Tower? How got they there, wife?"

"I have had no time to ask questions yet, husband, having been
attending Aline, who fainted after bearing up bravely until we got
here. She has but a few minutes since come out of her swoon, and I have
stayed with her."

"Tell me what has happened, Albert," the knight said.

"We slept here last night, sir; and upon sallying out found the rioters
assembled round the Tower. We were clad in traders' dresses Master
Gaiton had given us; and seeing that there was no chance of entering
the Tower, while it would not have been safe to have mingled with the
mob in such an attire, we knew not what to do until Edgar suggested
that we might, if we went down to the wharf, obtain disguises from one
of the vessels lying there. We were fortunate, and exchanged our
citizen clothes for those of two sailor-men. Then we came back and
mingled in the crowd. We saw the drawbridge lowered, and the king ride
off with his company, followed by the more orderly portion of the
rioters. In a few minutes, headed by Wat the Tyler, those who remained
poured across the drawbridge and were masters of the place, not a blow
being struck in its defence.

"We made our way, by back passages known to us, to the princess's
apartments, where she, with several knights and ladies, among them my
mother and sister, were waiting to see what might come. Sir Robert
Hales rushed in and prayed that no resistance be offered, as this would
inflame the passions of the mob, and cost the lives of all within the
Tower. So the princess gave orders for all to leave her save her maids,
and to scatter to their own apartments, and remain quiet there. As soon
as we reached my mother's room we besought her to put on that sombre
dress, and prayed her similarly to attire Aline, so that they might
pass with us unnoticed through the crowd. While they were doing this we
went up to the platform above, and there witnessed the murder of the
archbishop, treasurer, and priest--at least, Edgar did so, for I could
not bring myself to witness so horrible a sight.

"In a short time my mother called that she and Aline were ready. We
were about to leave the room and hurry away, when suddenly seven rough
knaves, inflamed by wine, rushed in. The leader of them said that they
saw we were people of quality, and that he would take us down before
Wat the Tyler, who would know how to deal with us; but before doing so
he and his crew would give the ladies some kisses, and thereupon he
seized Aline roughly. I was in the act of drawing my sword, when Edgar
dealt him so terrible a blow with the hilt of his that the man fell
dead. Then there was a general fight. Edgar shouted to my mother and
Aline to run up the steps to the platform above, and to me to hold the
stairs, while he placed his back to the door.

"The combat lasted but a short time, for the fellows possessed no kind
of skill. In addition to the man that Edgar had first killed he slew
four others, while I killed the other two. Then mother and Aline came
down from the platform, descended the stairs, and mingled with the mob;
they were pouring out exulting in the mischief they had done, but
plainly anxious as to the consequences to themselves. We had no
difficulty in coming hither. By the remarks we heard, it is clear that
they took the ladies for two of the princess's tirewomen, and we their
friends who were going to escort them to their homes."

"Of a truth 'tis a brave tale, Albert!" the knight exclaimed, bringing
his hand down on the lad's shoulder with hearty approbation. "By my
faith, no knights in the realm could have managed the matter more
shrewdly and bravely. Well done, Albert; I am indeed proud of my son.
As for you, Edgar, you have added a fresh obligation to those I already
owe you. 'Tis a feat, indeed, for one of your age to slay five men
single-handed, even though they were inflamed by liquor. Now, wife,
what about Aline?"

"She is here to answer for herself," the girl said, as she entered the
room. "I am better, but still feel strangely weak. I could not lie
still when I knew that you were in the house. I take great shame to
myself, father. I thought I could be brave, in case of peril, as your
daughter should be, but instead of that I swooned like a village
maiden."

"You are not to be blamed. So long as there was danger you kept up,
and, in truth, it was danger that might well drive the blood from the
face of the bravest woman; for the sight of that chamber, after the
fight was over, must, in itself, have filled a maid of your age with
horror. Why, the princess herself swooned on vastly less occasion. No,
no, girl, I am well pleased with you; as for your mother, she had seen
such sights before, but it was a rough beginning for you, and I think
that you acted bravely and well."




CHAPTER IX

DEATH OF THE TYLER


"What befell the king, my lord?" said Edgar.

"As far as he was concerned all went well. A multitude accompanied him
to Mile End Fields, and then, on his demanding that they should frankly
tell him what were their grievances, they handed to him a parchment
containing the four points that have from the first been asked for, and
all of which are reasonable enough. The king, after reading them, told
them in a loud voice that he was willing to grant their desires, and
would forthwith issue a charter bestowing these four points on the
people. The rebels set up a great shout, and forthwith marched away in
their companies, the men of Herts, Cambridge, and Suffolk, and all
those of Essex who were there. Nothing could have been better. We knew
not that the Kentish men and some of the Essex bands, together with the
rabble of the city, had remained at the Tower, and it was only as we
rode back, believing that the trouble was all over, that we heard what
had happened."

"Will the king still grant the charter, father?" Albert asked.

"I know not. Everything has been changed by the conduct of these
fellows, and the murder of the archbishop, the lord treasurer, and
others, to say nothing of the insults to the king's mother, and the
insolence of the mob in making themselves masters of the Tower. But,
indeed, the king could not himself grant such a charter. It is a matter
that must be done both by king and parliament, and when the knights of
the shires and the representatives of the great towns meet, they will
be equally indisposed to grant concessions to men who have burned
palaces, destroyed all deeds and titles wheresoever they could find
them, killed every man of law on whom they could lay hands, and
throughout all England have risen against the lords of the soil.

"If the rabble could, whenever they had the fancy, rise in arms and
enforce any claim that they chose to propose, they would soon be
masters of all. It may be that erelong serfdom will cease, and I see
not why all men should not have the right of buying and selling in open
market. As to fixing the price of land, I think not that that can be
done, seeing that some land is vastly more fertile than others, and
that the land towns is of much greater value than elsewhere. But even
in my time there have been great changes, and the condition of the
serfs is very greatly improved, while the hardships they complain of,
and the heavy taxation, are not felt by serfs only, but are common to
all.

"However, although for a time I believe that these unlawful and riotous
doings will do harm rather than good, and assuredly all those who have
taken a leading part in them will be punished, yet in the end it will
be seen that it were best that these things that they now ask for
should be granted, and that England should be content, and all classes
stand together. Undoubtedly these fellows have shown that they can bite
as well as growl, and though they would always be put down in the end,
it might be only after great effort and much heavy fighting, and after
terrible misfortunes befalling, not only towns, but all throughout the
country who dwell in houses incapable of making a long defence.

"At present we may be sure that whatever the king may promise these
varlets, parliament will grant no such charter. I myself would not that
they should do so. It would be fatal to the peace of the land for the
commons, as they call themselves, to think that they have but to rise
in arms to frighten the king and government into granting whatsoever
they may demand. And now let us eat and drink, for indeed I am both
hungry and thirsty, and I doubt not that 'tis the same with you. I told
Jenkin, as I came in, to give us something to eat, it mattered not
what, so that it were done speedily. 'Tis well that I left the two men
here, otherwise we should have found an empty larder."

"That might well have been, father," Albert said, "for our hostess and
her servants all went away yesterday, thinking that it would be safer
in the city than here, but we told Hob and Jenkin always to keep a
store of food, since there was no saying when you would all return, and
that, at any rate, even were we out all day, Edgar and I might want
supper on our return, and a good meal before leaving in the morning."

"What have you both been doing since I saw you last?" the knight asked,
when the meal was finished.

Albert told how they had seen the mayor constrained to open the bridge
gates; how the Duke of Lancaster's palace at the Savoy had been burned,
and the houses in the Temple pillaged and fired; and how the Flemings
had been murdered in great numbers, and their houses sacked and in some
cases burned.

"In faith, I am glad I was not there," Sir Ralph said, "for I think not
that I could have kept my sword in its sheath, even though it had cost
me my life."

"You charged us to take no part in broils, father," Albert said, with a
smile, "and we felt, therefore, constrained to do nothing save on one
occasion."

"Ah! ah!" the knight exclaimed in evident satisfaction, "then you did
do something. I hope that you gave a lesson to one or more of these
villains. Now that I look at you closely, it seems to me that you use
your left arm but stiffly, Albert; and you have your hair cut away in
one place, Edgar, and a strip of plaster on it. I thought it was the
result of the fray in the Tower."

"No, sir, it was in the other matter. We each got some blows--some of
them pretty hard ones--but they were of no great consequence."

"How did it come about, Albert?"

Albert gave a full account of the fray, from the time they came to the
assistance of the Flemish girl until they escaped by the secret passage.

"By St. George, wife!" the knight said, "but these young esquires shame
us altogether. While the king's knights and courtiers, his garrison of
the Tower, and the worshipful citizens of London have not among them
struck one blow at this rabbledom, they must have disposed of fully a
score between them--seven, you say, in the Tower, and, I doubt not, a
good thirteen at the door and on the stair of this Fleming's house--and
to think that we considered this boy of ours fit for nothing else than
to become a priest. This is the second time since we came up here, a
fortnight since, that they have rescued a fair lady, to say nothing of
their fathers, and without counting the saving of yourself and Aline;
the sooner they are shipped off to France the better, or they will be
causing a dearth of his Majesty's subjects. I am proud of you, lads.
Who is this Fleming? Did you learn his name?"

"Yes, sir; it was Van Voorden."

"Say you so. It seems to me that you make choice of useful men upon
whom to bestow benefits. Master Robert Gaiton is, as I learn, one of
the leading citizens of London, a wealthy man, and one who in a few
years is like to be mayor; and now you have befriended Van Voorden, who
is the richest and most influential of the Flemish merchants in London.
It is to him that the chancellor goes when he desires to raise a loan
among the Flemings, and he always manages it without difficulty, he
himself, as they say, contributing no small share of it. He is one who
may be a good friend to you indeed, and who, should fortune take you to
the Low Country, could recommend you to the greatest merchants there."

"He will be out there himself, father. He told us that he had for some
little time been thinking of returning to Flanders, and that now he
should do so at once. How was it, father, that the men-at-arms did not
defend the Tower?"

"It was not altogether their fault. When it was determined that the
king should ride out and meet the mob, the most stringent orders were
given that on no account should the archers draw a bow upon the rabble.
It is true that there were doubts whether many of them were not at
heart with the people, which was not altogether unnatural, seeing that
