
KOMATI-POORT


The four lads were no longer dressed in the guise of farmers. These
suits were carried in the packs to be resumed when they neared the
Transvaal. They now dressed in the tweeds they had worn at
Johannesburg, and either felt hats or straw. They still wore
jack-boots. The heat of the day was now great, much more so, indeed,
than they had been accustomed to, for while Maritzburg lies two
thousand two hundred feet above the sea, Johannesburg is five thousand
seven hundred. Behind them Jack led the spare horse, and the four new
men stepped lightly along with their muskets slung behind them by the
side of two strong Basuto ponies, each carrying a couple of boxes
containing half a hundredweight of dynamite. These were concealed from
view by sacks and blankets, the cooking utensils, and other light
articles. The spare horse carried the flour, paraffin, fuses, and other
stores, which brought up the weight to a hundred and twenty pounds.
This was somewhat lighter than that carried by the ponies, but they
were anxious to keep it in good condition in case one of their own gave
out.

The baggage had all been very carefully packed, so that even when going
fast it might not be displaced. They had found no difficulty in
obtaining the dynamite, as several of the stores kept it for the use of
the mines. They made no difficulty in selling it, and would not have
been sorry to part with their whole stock. In view of the possibility
of a siege, it was not an article that any sane man would care to keep
on the premises. Chris had gone round to these stores and had obtained
an offer from each, and as he said that he intended to accept the
lowest tender, it was offered to him at a price very much below what he
would ordinarily have had to give for it. The cases were sewn up in
canvas, on which was painted respectively, Tea, Sugar, Biscuits, and
Rice. Travelling five hours and halting at ten o'clock at a farmhouse
that was still tenanted, and again travelling from half-past three
until eight, they made about twenty-five miles the first day. Then they
encamped at a spot where there was a small spring and consequently good
feed for the horses, and knee-haltering them and taking off their
saddles they turned them loose.

The natives had collected fuel as they went along, and a fire was soon
made. When the kettle approached boiling, some slices of bacon, of
which they had brought thirty pounds with them, were fried. There was
no occasion to make bread, as they had enough for a two days' supply.
The natives parched some mealies (Indian corn) in the frying-pan when
the bacon was done, the fat serving as a condiment that they highly
appreciated, and they quenched their thirst from the spring.

Four days' travelling took them to the drift across the Tugela. So far
their journey had been wholly uneventful. Before crossing the next day
they had a long talk with the two Zulus. Their language differed
somewhat from that of Jack, but Chris understood them without
difficulty; for a considerable portion of the labourers in the mines at
Johannesburg were Zulus, and mixing with these, as Chris had done, he
understood them even better than he did Jack.

The different routes were discussed, and the position of kraals, at
which mealies for the five natives and the horses could be purchased,
and meat possibly obtained. This, unless they bought a sheep, would be
in the form of biltong, that is, strips of meat dried by being hung up
in the sun and wind, and similar to the jerked meat of the prairies and
pampas of America. The points at which water could be obtained were
discussed. Some were at considerable distances apart; but the Zulus
were of opinion that the late heavy rains had extended to the hills of
Zululand, and that there would be abundance of water in little dongas
and water-courses that would be dry after a spell of fine weather.
While passing through Zululand there would be no occasion whatever for
vigilance by day or a watch at night, for there perfect order reigned.
Here and there resident magistrates were stationed, and at these points
a few white traders had settled. All disputes between the natives were
ordinarily decided by their own chiefs, but in serious cases an appeal
could be made to the nearest magistrate, who at once interfered in
cases of violence or gross injustice.

At the first kraal they came to they learned that the natives were
everywhere much excited. They were most anxious to be allowed to join
in the war against their old enemies, and were greatly disappointed on
learning from the magistrates that this was only a white man's war, and
that no others must take part in it. If, however, the Boers invaded
their territory they would of course be allowed to defend themselves.

Some of the Zulus urged with reason, that though the English might wish
to make it a white man's war, the Boers did not desire it to be so, for
they knew that they had been urging the Swazis and the Basutos to join
them against the English, and that offers of many rifles and much
plunder had been made also to some of their own chiefs. To this the
magistrates could only reply, that they knew of old that the Boers'
words could not be trusted, and that they were always ready to break
any arrangement that they had made. "They would like you to join them,"
they said, "because they would take your help and afterwards turn
against you and steal your land. You know well enough that we have
always stood between you and them; but they would know that if you had
joined them against us we should be angry, and after our war with them
was over would no longer protect you." The Zulus, from their knowledge
of the Boers, felt that this would be so. But in any case no offers
made to them would have induced them to side with the Boers; and it was
the general hope that something might occur which would induce the
English to allow them to attack their enemies.

Chris and his friends had laid aside their bandoliers, retaining only
the cartridges carried in their belts, in order to assume the
appearance of Englishmen merely travelling for sport, and as they went
on they generally managed to shoot deer enough for the needs of the
whole party. Occasionally they slept in the kraals of chiefs, but
greatly preferred their own little tents as the smoke in them was often
blinding, and more than once the attacks of vermin kept them awake.
Still, it would have been a slight to refuse such invitations, and they
had to go to the kraals as it was necessary to frequently buy supplies
of mealies. At times the travelling was very rough, and with the utmost
exertions they could not make more than twelve or fourteen miles a day,
and at other times they could make five-and-twenty. Without the supply
of Indian corn, the ponies could not have continued this rate of going
without breaking down. The native horses are accustomed occasionally to
make very long journeys, and can perform from sixty to eighty miles in
a day, but after such an exertion they will need a week's rest before
making another effort. With their Basuto masters they are not called
upon to do so. When one of these makes a long journey he will leave his
pony with the person he visits and return on a fresh mount, or if he
returns to his own home after his first day's journey he will take a
fresh horse from his own stock, which may vary from five to fifty
ponies. As they rode they seldom talked of the work that was to be
done. Until they saw the country, the positions, and approach, no plans
could possibly be formed, and they therefore treated the matter as if
it were a mere sporting expedition in a new country, and enjoyed
themselves thoroughly. They had heavy work in crossing the Lebombo
range, and, travelling a day's journey farther west, turned to the
north again. They were now in Swaziland, a wild and mountainous
country. Here also they were hospitably received where they stopped,
although the Swazis were deeply aggrieved by the shameful manner in
which England had refused, after the valuable aid they had rendered in
the last war, to give them any support against the Boers. A word would
have been sufficient to have kept the latter out of Swaziland, as it
had kept them from raiding in Zululand; but that word was not given,
and the unfortunate people had been raided and plundered, their best
land taken from them, and they themselves reduced to a state of
semi-subjection. However, they were glad to see four English sportsmen
among them again, and to learn something of the war that had broken out
between their oppressors and the British.

"If you beat them we shall be free again," they said. "Last time you
were beaten, and gave over the whole country to the Boers, and left all
our people, who had fought for you, at their mercy. This time you must
not do that. If you beat them, shoot them all like dogs, or make slaves
of them as they make slaves of the natives who dwell in their land.
Only so will there be peace."

"I don't know that the English will do that," Chris said; "but you may
be sure that, when the war is over, the Boers will be no longer
masters, and there will be just law made by us, and all white men and
all natives will be protected, and no evil deeds will be allowed."

"We are no longer united among ourselves," one of the chiefs said.
"Some have been taken by the promises and gifts of the Boers, and our
queen is also, it is said, in their favour. She is afraid of them, but
most of us would take advantage of their fighting you to drive all of
them out of our land, and to win back all the territory they have taken
from us. We are very poor, our best land is gone, we can scarce grow
enough food; and we long for the time when once again we can have rich
mealie patches, and good grazing land for our oxen and our horses, and
are again a strong people, and they afraid of us. Had not the English
interfered and taken over the Boer country, we should have wasted it
from end to end; and they knew it well, and begged your Shepstone to
hoist your flag and protect them. Ah, he should have stayed there then!
The natives, our friends in the plain, still talk of that happy time
when you were masters, and the Boers dared no longer shoot them down as
if they were wild beasts and treat them as slaves, and the towns grew
up, and your people paid for work with money and not with the lash of a
whip or a bullet. All of us have mourned over the time when the English
bent their knee to the Boers, and gave them all they wanted,--the
mastery of the land, and the right to kill and enslave us at their
will."

"That was not quite so," Chris said. "They promised to give good
treatment to the natives; that was one of the conditions of the treaty."

"And you believed them!" the chief said scornfully. "Did you not know
that a Boer's oath is only good so long as a gun is pointed at him?
Perhaps it will be like this again, and when you have conquered them
you will again trust them, and march away. But they tell us, it is not
you who will conquer them, but they who will conquer you. They tell our
people that they will be masters over all the land, and that your
people will have to sail away in your ships. Runners have brought us
news that they have gathered round the place where our people go to
work digging bright stones from the ground, and that very soon they
will take all the English prisoners, and that they have also beset
Mafeking, and that they have beaten the English soldiers in Natal, and
there will soon be none left there; and more than that, that the people
of the other Boer state have joined them, and have entered the English
territory, and are being joined by all the Boers there. Therefore we,
who would like to fight against them, are afraid. We thought the
English a great people; they had beaten the Zulus, and dethroned the
great King Cetewayo. But now it seems that the Boers are much greater,
and our hearts are sore."

"You need not fear, chief," Chris said. "Our country is very many miles
away, many days' journey in ships; it will take weeks before our army
gets strong. The Boers have always said they wanted peace, and we
believed them and kept but a few soldiers here, and until the army
comes from England they will get the best of it; but we can send, if
necessary, an army many times stronger than that of the Boers, and are
sure to crush them in the end."

"But how could you believe they wanted peace?" the chief asked.
"Everyone knew that they were building great forts, and had got guns
bigger than were ever before seen, and stores full of rifles. How could
you believe their words when your eyes saw that it was not peace but
war that they meant?"

"Because we were fools, I suppose," Chris said bitterly. "It was not
from want of warnings, for people living out here had written again and
again telling what vast preparations they were making, but the people
who govern the country paid no attention. It was much easier to believe
what was pleasant than what was unpleasant; but their folly will cost
the country very dear. If they had sent over twenty thousand men a year
ago there would have been no war; now they will have to send over a
hundred thousand men, perhaps even more; and great sums of money will
be spent, and great numbers of lives lost, simply because our
government refused to believe what everyone out here knew to be the
fact. We did nothing, and allowed the Boers to complete all their
preparations, and to choose their own time for war. But though we have
made a horrible mistake, do not think, chief, that there is any doubt
about our conquering at last; the men who now govern our country are
men and not cowards, and will not, as that other government did, go on
their knees to the Boers, and even if they would do so, the people
would not sanction it."

"If what the chief has heard is correct," Chris said as they rode along
the next morning, "we must get back again as soon as we can. The Boers
may be lying, and, of course, they would make the best of things to the
Swazis. It certainly sounds as if not only at Ladysmith, but at all
other places, things are going badly at present. However, in another
couple of days we shall not be far from the bridge. The chief said that
the frontier was only a few miles away, and our own men tell us that it
is a very hilly country on the other side, just as it is here. We have
certainly come faster that we had expected. Thanks to their good
feeding, the horses have all turned out well. If it is really only two
days farther, we shall get there in just three weeks from starting."

They had not brought the same ponies all the way; as soon as one showed
signs of fatigue, it was changed for another with the arrangement that,
should they return that way, they would take it back and give the chief
a present for having seen that it was taken care of. The four natives,
although well contented with the way in which they were fed and cared
for, were much puzzled at the eagerness of their employers to push on,
and the disregard they paid to all the information obtained for them of
opportunities for sport. Several times they had said to Jack: "How is
it the baas does not stop to shoot? There are plenty of deer, and in
some places lions. There are zebras, too, though these are not easy to
get at, and very difficult to stalk. Why do you push on so fast that
the ponies have to be left behind, and others taken on? We cannot
understand it. We have been with white men who came into our country to
shoot, or to see what the land was like, but they did not travel like
this. Besides, we shall soon be in the land of the Boers, and as the
English are at war with them, they will shoot them if they find them."

Jack had only been told that his masters were going to strike a blow at
the Boers, and had not troubled himself as to its nature. He had seen
how they had defeated much larger parties than their own, and had
unbounded confidence in them. He therefore only said:

"The baas has not told me. I know that all the gentlemen are very
brave, and have no fear of the Boers. I do not think that we need fear
that any harm will happen. They shoot enough for us to eat heartily,
they buy drink for us at every kraal they stop at, and if they have
seen no game they buy a sheep. What can we want more? They have got you
guns, but you have never needed to use them; perhaps you may before you
get back. If the Boers meddle with them you will be able to fight."

The prospect of a chance of being allowed to fight against the Boers
would alone have inspired the four natives to bear any amount of
fatigue without a murmur, and each day's march farther north had
heightened their hopes that they might use their guns against their old
enemies. It was on the twenty-first day after starting that, from a
hill commanding a broad extent of country, they caught sight of a train
of waggons, and knew that their journey was just at an end. They had
debated which side of the Komati river would be the best to follow, and
had agreed to take the eastern bank.

The Boer territory extended a few miles beyond this. Komati-poort was
close to the frontier. As they knew nothing as to the construction of
the bridge beyond the fact that it was iron, and were not even sure
whether it was entirely on Boer ground, or if the eastern bank of the
river here belonged to the Portuguese, they decided that at any rate it
was better to travel as near the frontier as possible, as, were they
pursued they could ride at once across the line. Not that they believed
that the Boers would respect this, but they would not know the country
so well as that on their own side, and would not find countrymen to
join them in the pursuit.

Keeping down on the eastern side of the hills, they continued until
they could see the white line of steam that showed the direction in
which a train from the south-east was coming, and were therefore able
to calculate within half a mile where the bridge must be situated. They
camped in a dry donga, and next morning at daybreak left their horses
behind them in charge of the men and walked forward. A mile farther
they obtained a view of the bridge. It stood at the point where the
river, after running for some little distance north-west, made a sharp
curve to the south. The bridge stood at this loop. If the object had
been to render it defensible, it had been admirably chosen by these
Boers who laid out the line to the Portuguese frontier, for from the
other side of the bank the approach could be swept by cannon and even
musketry on both flanks.

Lying down, they took in all the details of the construction through
their glasses, and then, choosing their ground so that they could not
be seen by any on the bridge, they kept on until they were able to
obtain a view from a distance of a quarter of a mile. The examination
that was now made was by no means of a satisfactory nature. Near the
bridge there were sidings on which several lines of loaded trucks
stood. An engine was at work shunting. At least a score of natives were
at work under the direction of Portuguese, while several men, who were
by their dress evidently Boers, were pointing out to the officials the
trucks they desired to be first forwarded. Three or four of these
carried huge cases, two of them being each long enough to occupy two
trucks.

"There is no doubt those are guns," Chris said. "If we can do nothing
else, we can work a lot of damage here, which will be some sort of
satisfaction after our long ride. As to our main object, things don't
look well."

Half a dozen armed Boers could be made out stationed at the Portuguese
side of the bridge, and as many more at the opposite end. Two
lately-erected wooden huts, each of which could give shelter to some
fifty men, stood a short distance beyond the bridge, and it was evident
by the figures moving about, and a number of horses grazing near, that
a strong party was stationed there to furnish guards for the bridge.

"I am afraid we cannot do it," Peters said, after their glasses had all
been fixed on the bridge for several minutes; "at least, I don't see
any chance. What do you say, Chris?"

"No, I am afraid there is none. If we were to crawl up to them to-night
and shoot down all at this end of the bridge, we should be no nearer.
You see, there are a line of huts on this side, and two or three
better-class houses. No doubt the railway officials and natives all
live there; they would all turn out when they heard the firing, and the
Boers would come rushing over from the other side. It would be out of
the question for us to carry forward those four boxes to the middle of
the bridge, plant them over the centre of the girders, and light the
fuses. A quarter of an hour would be wanted for the business at the
very least, and we should not have a minute, if there is as good a
guard by night as there is by day. It is likely to be at least as
large, perhaps much more than that. The thing is impossible in that
way. However, of course we can crawl up close after dark and satisfy
ourselves about the guard.

"If it is not to be managed in that way, we must go down to the river
bank and see whether there is anything to be done with one of the
piers. If that is not possible, we must content ourselves with smashing
things up generally on this side. Several of the trucks look to me to
be full of ammunition, and there are eight with long cases which are no
doubt rifles. We all remember that terrific smash at Johannesburg, and
though I don't say we could do such awful damage as there was
there--for there were I don't know how many tons of dynamite exploded
then, I think about fifty--still, it would be a heavy blow. Any amount
of stores would be destroyed, some thousand of rifles, and, for aught I
know, all those waggons with tarpaulins over them are full of
cartridges. However, the bridge is the principal thing. We will stop
here for an hour or two and examine every foot of the ground, so as to
be able to find our way in the dark. We need not mind about the trucks
now, we can examine their position to-morrow if we have to give up the
idea of the bridge."

On returning to their horses they had a long talk. Chris was deeply
disappointed, but the others, who had never quite believed that his
scheme could be carried out, were greatly delighted at the knowledge
that at any rate they might be able to do an immense deal of damage to
the enemy. As soon as it became quite dark, they set out again; they
did not take their rifles with them, but each had his brace of
revolvers. They had no intention of fighting, except to secure a
retreat. Before starting, each had wound strips of flannel round his
boots, so that they could run noiselessly. Brown had in the first place
suggested that they should take their boots off, but Chris pointed out
that if they had to run in the dark, one or other of them was sure to
lame himself by striking against a stone or other obstacle. There were
several large fires in the shunting yard, and at each end of the
bridge, and at the Boer barracks. Crawling along on their hands and
knees they were completely in the shade, and managed to get within some
twenty or thirty yards of the Boers, who were sitting smoking and
talking. They were all evidently greatly satisfied with news that they
had heard during the day. Listening to their talk, they gathered
something of what had happened since they left Estcourt. Colenso had
been evacuated by us, an armoured train coming up from Estcourt had
been drawn off the line, and most of the soldiers with it had been
killed or captured. The last news was that the British had sallied out
from Estcourt, which was now surrounded, and had attacked the Boers
posted in a very strong position near a place called Willow Grange, but
had been repulsed, principally by the artillery, with, it was said,
immense loss. This was not pleasant hearing for the listeners. The
Boers then had a grumble at being kept so far away from the fighting.
It was not that they were so anxious to be engaged, as to get a share
of the loot, as it had been reported that something like twenty
