"But you know, Ned, where to look for strength and support. You have
fought one hard battle, my boy, and have well nigh conquered; now you
have another before you. Seek for strength, my boy, where you will
assuredly find it, and remember that this discipline is doubtless sent
you for your good, and that it will be a preparation for you for the
struggle in after life. I don't want you to be a thoughtless, careless
young officer, but a man earnest in doing his duty, and you cannot
but see that these two trials must have a great effect in forming your
character. Remember, Ned, that if the effect be not for good, it will
certainly be for evil."

"I will try, sir," Ned said; "but I know it is easy to make good
resolutions, and how it will be when he is in the house as master I
can't trust myself even to think."

"Well, let us hope the best, Ned," Mr. Porson said kindly; "things may
turn out better than you fear."

Then seeing that further talking would be useless now, he shook Ned's
hand and let him go.

The next three or four months passed slowly and heavily. Ned went about
his work again quietly and doggedly; but his high spirits seemed gone.
His mother's engagement with Mr. Mulready had been openly announced,
directly after he had first heard of it. Charlie had, to Ned's secret
indignation, taken it quietly. He knew little of Mr. Mulready, who had,
whenever he saw him, spoken kindly to him, and who now made him frequent
presents of books and other things dear to schoolboys. Little Lucy's
liking he had, however, failed to gain, although in his frequent visits
he had spared no pains to do so, seldom coming without bringing with him
cakes or papers of sweets. Lucy accepted the presents, but did not love
the donor, and confided to Abijah that his teeth were exactly like those
of the wolf who ate Little Red Riding Hood.

Ned found much more comfort in her society during those dull days than
in Charlie's. He had the good sense, however, never to encourage her
in her expressions of dislike to Mr. Mulready, and even did his best to
combat her impression, knowing how essential it was for her to get on
well with him. Ned himself did not often see Mr. Mulready during that
time. The first time that they met, Ned had, on his return from school,
gone straight up into the drawing room, not knowing that Mr. Mulready
was there. On opening the door and seeing him he paused suddenly for a
moment and then advanced. For a moment neither of them spoke, then Mr.
Mulready said in his frankest manner:

"Ned, you have heard I am going to marry your mother. I don't suppose
you quite like it; it wouldn't be natural if you did; I know I shouldn't
if I were in your place. Still you know your disliking it won't alter
it, and I hope we shall get on well together. Give me your hand, my lad,
you won't find me a bad sort of fellow."

"I hope not," Ned said quietly, taking Mr. Mulready's hand and
continuing to hold it while he went on: "I don't pretend I like it, and
I know it makes no difference whether I do or not; the principal point
is, that my mother should be happy, and if you make her happy I have
no doubt we shall, as you say, get on well together; if you don't, we
shan't."

There was no mistaking the threat conveyed in Ned's steady tones, and
Mr. Mulready, as Ned dropped his hand, felt that he should have more
trouble with the boy than he had expected. He gave a forced laugh.

"One would think, Ned, that you thought it likely I was going to be
unkind to your mother."

"No," Ned said quietly, "I don't want to think about it one way or the
other, only I promised my father I would be kind to my mother; that
means that I would look after her, and I mean to.

"Well, mother," he said in his usual tone, turning to Mrs. Sankey, "and
how are you this morning?"

"I was feeling better, Ned," she said sharply; "but your unpleasant way
of talking, and your nonsense about taking care of me, have made me feel
quite ill again. Somehow you always seem to shake my nerves. You never
seem to me like other boys. One would think I was a child instead of
being your mother. I thought after what you said to me that you were
going to behave nicely."

"I am trying to behave nicely," Ned said. "I am sure I meant quite
nicely, just as Mr. Mulready does; I think he understands me."

"I don't understand that boy," Mrs. Sankey said plaintively when Ned
had left the room, "and I never have understood him. He was dreadfully
spoiled when he was in India, as I have often told you; for in my weak
state of health I was not equal to looking after him, and his poor
father was sadly overindulgent. But he has certainly been much better
as to his temper lately, and I do hope, William, that he is not going to
cause trouble."

"Oh, no!" Mr. Mulready said lightly, "he will not cause trouble; I have
no doubt we shall get on well together. Boys will be boys, you know;
I have been one myself, and of course they look upon stepfathers as
natural enemies; but in this case, you see, we shall not have to put up
with each other long, as he will be getting his commission in a year or
so. Don't trouble yourself about it, love; in your state of health you
ought really not to worry yourself, and worry, you know, spoils the eyes
and the complexion, and I cannot allow that, for you will soon be my
property now."

The wedding was fixed for March. It was to be perfectly quiet, as Mrs.
Sankey would, up to the day, be still in mourning. A month before the
time Ned noticed that his mother was more uncertain in her temper than
usual, and Abijah confided to him in secret that she thought things were
not going on smoothly between the engaged couple.

Nor were they. Mr. Mulready had discovered, to his surprise, that,
indolent and silly as Mrs. Sankey was in many respects, she was not
altogether a fool, and was keen enough where her own interests were
concerned. He had suggested something about settlements, hoping that
she would at once say that these were wholly unnecessary; but to his
surprise she replied in a manner which showed that she had already
thought the matter over, and had very fixed ideas on the subject.

"Of course," she said, "that will be necessary. I know nothing about
business, but it was done before, and my poor husband insisted that
my little fortune should be settled so as to be entirely at my own
disposal."

But this by no means suited Mr. Mulready's views. Hitherto want of
capital had prevented his introducing the new machinery into his mills,
and the competition with the firms which had already adopted it was
injuring him seriously, and he had reckoned confidently upon the use
of Mrs. Sankey's four thousand pounds. Although he kept his temper
admirably under the circumstances, he gave her distinctly to understand,
in the pleasantest way, that an arrangement which was most admirably
suitable in every respect in the case of a lady marrying an officer in
the army, to whom her capital could be of no possible advantage, was
altogether unsuitable in the case of a manufacturer.

"You see, my love," he argued, "that it is for your benefit as well as
mine that the business should grow and flourish by the addition of the
new machinery which this little fortune of yours could purchase. The
profits could be doubled and trebled, and we could look forward ere long
to holding our heads as high as the richest manufacturers at Leeds and
Bradford--while the mere interest in this money invested in consols as
at present would be absolutely useless to us."

Mrs. Sankey acknowledged the force of his argument, but was firm in her
determination to retain her hold of her money, and so they parted, not
in anger, for Mr. Mulready altogether disclaimed the possibility of his
being vexed, but with the sense that something like a barrier had sprung
up between them.

This went on for a few days, and although the subject was not mooted,
Mrs. Sankey felt that unless some concession on her part was made it was
likely that the match would fall through. This she had not the slightest
idea of permitting, and rather than it should happen she would have
married without any settlement at all, for she really loved, in her weak
way, the man who had been so attentive and deferential to her.

So one day the subject was renewed, and at last an understanding was
arrived at. Mrs. Sankey's money was to be put into the business in her
own name. Should she not survive her husband, he was to have the option
of paying the money to her children or of allowing them the sum of
eighty pounds a year each from the business. Should he not survive her
the mill was to be settled upon any children she might have after her
marriage; should there be no children it was to be hers absolutely.

All this was only arrived at after several long discussions, in all of
which Mrs. Sankey protested that she knew nothing of business, that it
was most painful to her to be thus discussing money matters, and that it
would be far better to leave it in the hands of a solicitor to arrange
in a friendly manner with him. She nevertheless stuck to her views, and
drove a bargain as keenly and shrewdly as any solicitor could have done
for her, to the surprise and exasperation of Mr. Mulready. Had he known
that she really loved him, and would, if she had been driven to it, have
sacrificed everything rather than lose him, he could have obtained
very different terms; but having no heart to speak of, himself, he was
ignorant of the power he possessed over her.

Bankruptcy stared him in the face unless he could obtain this increase
of capital, and he dared not, by pressing the point, risk its loss. The
terms, he told himself, were not altogether unsatisfactory; it was not
likely that she would survive him. They were of about the same age; he
had never known what it was to be ill, and she, although not such an
invalid as she fancied herself, was still not strong. If she did not
survive him he would have the whole business, subject only to the paltry
annuity of two hundred and forty pounds a year to the three children.
If, the most unlikely thing in the world, she did survive him--well, it
mattered not a jot in that case who the mill went to.

So the terms were settled, the necessary deeds were drawn up by a
solicitor, and signed by both parties. Mrs. Sankey recovered her
spirits, and the preparations for the wedding went on.

Ned had intended to absent himself from the ceremony, but Mr. Porson,
guessing that such might be his intention, had talked the matter gravely
over with him. He had pointed out to Ned that his absence would in the
first place be an act of great disrespect to his mother; that in the
second place it would cause general comment, and would add to the
unfavorable impression which his mother's early remarriage had
undoubtedly created; and that, lastly, it would justify Mr. Mulready
in regarding him as hostile to the marriage, and, should trouble
subsequently arise, he would be able to point to it in self
justification, and as a proof that Ned had from the first determined to
treat him as an enemy.

So Ned was present at his mother's marriage. Quiet as the wedding
was, for only two or three acquaintances were asked to be present, the
greater part of Marsden were assembled in the church.

The marriage had created considerable comment. The death of Captain
Sankey in saving a child's life had rendered his widow an object of
general sympathy, and people felt that not only was this marriage within
eighteen months of Captain Sankey's death almost indecent, but that it
was somehow a personal wrong to them, and that they had been defrauded
in their sympathy.

Therefore the numerous spectators of the marriage were critical rather
than approving. They could find nothing to find fault with, however, in
the bride's appearance. She was dressed in a dove colored silk, and with
her fair hair and pale complexion looked quite young, and, as every one
admitted, pretty. Mr. Mulready, as usual, was smiling, and seemed to
convey by the looks which he cast round that he regarded the assemblage
as a personal compliment to himself.

Lucy and Charlie betrayed no emotion either way; they were not pleased,
but the excitement of the affair amused and interested them, and they
might be said to be passive spectators. Ned, however, although he had
brought himself to be present, could not bring himself to look as if the
ceremony had his approval or sanction. He just glared, as Abijah, who
was present, afterward confided to some of her friends, as if he could
have killed the man as he stood. His look of undisguised hostility was
indeed noticed by all who were in church, and counted heavily against
him in the days which were to come.




CHAPTER X: TROUBLES AT HOME


It was not one of the least griefs of the young Sankeys connected with
their mother's wedding that Abijah was to leave them. It was she herself
who had given notice to Mrs. Sankey, saying that she would no longer
be required. The first time that she had spoken of her intentions, Mrs.
Sankey vehemently combated the idea, saying that neither she nor Lucy
could spare her; but she did not afterward return to the subject, and
seemed to consider it a settled thing that Abijah intended to leave.
Mrs. Sankey had, in fact, spoken to Mr. Mulready on the subject, but
instead of taking the view she had expected, he had said cheerfully:

"I am glad that she has given notice. I know that she is a valuable
woman and much attached to you. At the same time these old servants
always turn out a mistake under changed circumstances. She would never
have been comfortable or contented. She has, my dear if I may say so,
been mistress too long, and as I intend you to be mistress of my house,
it is much better that she should go."

As Mrs. Sankey had certain doubts herself as to whether Abijah would
be a success in the new home, the subject was dropped, and it became an
understood thing that Abijah would leave after the wedding.

The newly married couple were absent for three weeks. Until two days
before their return Abijah remained in the old house with the young
Sankeys; then they moved into their new home, and she went off to her
native village ten miles distant away on the moors. The next day there
was a sale at the old house. A few, a very few, of the things had been
moved. Everything else was sold, to the deep indignation of Ned, who was
at once grieved and angry that all the articles of furniture which he
associated with his father should be parted with. Abijah shared the
boy's feelings in this respect, and at the sale all the furniture and
fittings of Captain Sankey's study were bought by a friendly grocer on
her behalf, and the morning after the sale a badly written letter, for
Abijah's education had been neglected, was placed in Ned's hand.

"MY DEAR MASTER NED: Knowing as it cut you to the heart that everything
should go away into the hands of strangers, I have made so bold as
to ask Mr. Willcox for to buy all the furniter and books in maister's
study. He is a-going to stow them away in a dry loft, and when so bee as
you gets a home of your own there they is for you; they are sure not to
fetch much, and when you gets a rich man you can pay me for them; not as
that matters at all one way or the other. I have been a-saving up pretty
nigh all my wages from the day as you was born, and is quite comfortable
off. Write me a letter soon, dearie, to tell me as how things is going
on. Your affectionate nurse, ABIJAH WOLF."

Although Ned was a lad of sixteen, he had a great cry over this letter,
but it did him good, and it was with a softer heart that he prepared to
receive his mother and her husband that evening. The meeting passed off
better than he had anticipated. Mrs. Mulready was really affected at
seeing her children again, and embraced them, Ned thought, with more
fondness than she had done when they went away. Mr. Mulready spoke
genially and kindly, and Ned began to hope that things would not be so
bad after all.

The next morning, to his surprise, his mother appeared at breakfast, a
thing which he could not remember that she had ever done before, and yet
the hour was an early one, as her husband wanted to be off to the mill.
During the meal Mr. Mulready spoke sharply two or three times, and it
seemed to Ned that his mother was nervously anxious to please him.

"Things are not going on so well after all," he said to himself as he
walked with his brother to school. "Mother has changed already; I
can see that she isn't a bit like herself. There she was fussing over
whether he had enough sugar with his tea, and whether the kidneys were
done enough for him; then her coming down to breakfast was wonderful. I
expect she has found already that somebody else's will besides her own
has got to be consulted; it's pretty soon for her to have begun to learn
the lesson."

It was very soon manifest that Mr. Mulready was master in his own house.
He still looked pleasant and smiled, for his smile was a habitual one;
but there was a sharpness in the ring of his voice, an impatience if
everything was not exactly as he wished. He roughly silenced Charlie and
Lucy if they spoke when he was reading his paper at breakfast, and
he spoke snappishly to his wife when she asked him a question on such
occasions. Ned felt his face burn, as with his eyes on his plate he
continued his meal. To him Mr. Mulready seldom spoke unless it was
absolutely necessary.

Ned often caught himself wondering over the change which had taken place
in his mother. All the ways and habits of an invalid had disappeared.
She not only gave directions for the management of the house, but looked
after everything herself, and was forever going upstairs and down,
seeing that everything was properly done. However sharply Mr. Mulready
spoke she never replied in the same tone. A little flush of color would
come into her cheek, but she would pass it off lightly, and at all times
she appeared nervously anxious to please him. Ned wondered much over the
change.

"He is a tyrant," he said, "and she has learned it already; but I do
think she loves him. Fancy my mother coming to be the slave of a man
like this! I suppose," he laughed bitterly, "it's the story of 'a woman,
a dog, and a walnut tree, the more you thrash them the better they will
be.' My father spent his whole life in making hers easy, and in sparing
her from every care and trouble, and I don't believe she cared half as
much for him as she does for this man who is her master."

For some months Mr. Mulready was very busy at his mill. A steam engine
was being erected, new machinery brought in, and he was away the greater
part of his time superintending it.

One day at breakfast, a short time before all was in readiness for a
start with the new plant, Mr. Mulready opened a letter directed in a
sprawling and ill written hand which lay at the top of the pile by his
plate. Ned happened to notice his face, and saw the color fade out from
it as he glanced at the contents. The mouth remained as usual, set in a
smile, but the rest of the face expressed agitation and fear. The hand
which held the letter shook. Mrs. Mulready, whose eyes seldom left her
husband's face when he was in the room, also noticed the change.

"Is anything the matter, William?"

"Oh! nothing," he said with an unnatural laugh, "only a little attempt
to frighten me."

"An attempt which has succeeded," Ned said to himself, "whatever it is."

Mr. Mulready passed the letter over to his wife. It was a rough piece of
paper; at the top was scrawled the outline of a coffin underneath which
was written:

"MR. MULREADY: Sir, this is to give you warning that if you uses the new
machinery you are a dead man. You have been a marked man for a long
time for your tyrannical ways, but as long as you didn't get the new
machinery we let you live; but we has come to the end of it now; the day
as you turns on steam we burns your mill to the ground and shoots you,
