he came under the operation of Dab Kinzer's "lower joint."

Mrs. Kinzer did her best to prevent any thing like a "scene" at the
railway-station when Ham and Miranda came out upon the platform; but
there was an immense amount of "welcome" expressed in words and hugs and
kisses, in the shortest possible space of time. There was no lingering
on the platform, however; for Ham and his wife were as anxious to get at
the "surprise" they were told was waiting for them, as their friends
were to have them come to it.

Before they were half way home, the growing light ahead of them
attracted their attention; and then they began to hear the vigorous
shouts of "Fire!" from the throats of the two boys, re-enforced now by
Mr. Foster himself, and the lawyer's voice was an uncommonly good one.
Dabney was driving the ponies, and they had to go pretty fast for the
rest of that short run.

"Surprise?" exclaimed Ham. "I should say it was! Did you light it before
you started, Dabney?"

"Don't joke, Hamilton," remarked Mrs. Kinzer. "It may be a very serious
affair for all of us. But I can't understand how in all the world that
barn should have caught fire."

"Guess it was set a-going," said Dab.





CHAPTER XVI.

DAB KINZER AND HAM MORRIS TURN INTO A FIRE-DEPARTMENT.


The Morris farm, as has been said, was a pretty large one; and the same
tendency on the part of its owners which led them to put up so extensive
and barn-like a house, had stimulated them from time to time to make the
most liberal provisions for the storage of their crops. Barns were a
family weakness with them, as furniture had been with the Kinzers. The
first barn they had put up, now the oldest and the farthest from the
house, had been a large one. It was now in a somewhat dilapidated
condition, to be sure, and was bowed a little northerly by the weight of
years that rested on it; but it had still some hope of future usefulness
if it had not been for that tramp and his box of matches.

"There isn't a bit of use in trying to save it!" exclaimed Ham, as they
were whirled in through the wide-open gate. "It's gone!"

"But, Ham," said Mrs. Kinzer, "we can save the other barns perhaps. Look
at the cinders falling on the long stable. If we could keep them off
somehow!"

"We can do it, Ham," exclaimed Dab, very earnestly. "Mother, will you
send me out a broom and a rope, while Ham and I set up the ladder?"

"You're the boy for me," said Ham. "I guess I know what you're up to."

The ladder was one the house-painters had been using, and was a pretty
heavy one; but it was quickly set up against the largest and most
valuable of the barns, and the one, too, which was nearest and most
exposed to the burning building and its flying cinders. The rope was on
hand, and the broom, by the time the ladder was in position.

"Ford," said Dab, "you and Frank help the girls bring water, till the
men from the village get here. There's plenty of pails, but every one of
our hands is away.--Now, Ham, I'm ready."

Up they went, and were quickly astride of the ridge of the roof. It
would have been perilous work for any man to have ventured farther
unassisted; but Dab tied one end of the rope firmly around his waist,
Ham tied himself to the other, and then Dab could slip down the steep
roof, in any direction, without danger of slipping off to the ground
below.

But the broom?

It was as useful as a small fire-engine. The flying cinders of burning
hay or wood, as they alighted upon the sun-dried shingles of the roof,
needed to be swept off as fast as they fell, before they had time to
fulfil their errand of mischief. Here and there they had been at work
for some minutes, and the fresh little blazes they had kindled had so
good a start, that the broom alone would have been insufficient; and
there the rapidly-arriving pails of water came into capital play.

Ford Foster had never shone out to so good an advantage in all his life
before, as he did when he took his station on the upper rounds of that
ladder, and risked his neck to hand water-pails to Ham. It was hard
work, all around, but hardest of all for the two "firemen" on the roof.
Now and then the strength and agility of Ham Morris were put to pretty
severe tests, as Dab danced around under the scorching heat, or slipped
flat upon the sloping roof. It was well for Ham that he was a man of
weight and substance.

There were scores and scores of people streaming up from the village
now, arriving in panting squads, every moment; and Mrs. Kinzer had all
she could do to keep them from "rescuing" every atom of her furniture
out of the house, and piling it up in the road.

"Wait, please," she said to them very calmly.

"If Ham and Dab save the long barn, the fire won't spread any farther.
The old barn won't be any loss to speak of, anyhow."

Fiercely as the dry old barn burned, it used itself up all the quicker
on that account; and it was less than thirty minutes from the time Ham
and Dabney got at work before roof and rafters fell in, and the worst of
the danger was over. The men and boys from the village were eager enough
to do any thing that now remained to be done; but a large share of this
was confined to standing around and watching the "bonfire" burn down to
a harmless heap of badly smelling ashes. As soon, however, as they were
no more wanted on the roof, the two "volunteer firemen" came down; and
Ham Morris's first word on reaching the ground was,--

"Dab, my boy, how you've grown!"

Not a tenth of an inch in mere stature, and yet Ham was entirely correct
about it.

He stared at Dabney for a moment; and then he turned, and stared at
every thing else. There was plenty of light just then, moon or no moon;
and Ham's eyes were very busy for a full minute. He noted rapidly the
improvements in the fences, sheds, barns, the blinds on the house, the
paint, a host of small things that had changed for the better; and then
he simply said, "Come on, Dab," and led the way into the house. Her
mother and sisters had already given Miranda a hurried look at what they
had done, but Ham was not the man to do any thing in haste. Deliberately
and silently he walked from room to room, and from cellar to garret,
hardly seeming to hear the frequent comments of his enthusiastic young
wife. That he did hear all that had been said around him as he went,
however, was at last made manifest, for he said,--

"Dab, I've seen all the other rooms. Where's yours?"

"I'm going to let you and Miranda have my room," said Dab. "I don't
think I shall board here long."

"I don't think you will either," said Ham emphatically. "You're going
away to boarding-school. Miranda, is there any reason why Dab can't have
the south-west room, up stairs, with the bay-window?"

That room had been Samantha's choice, and she looked at Dab
reproachfully; but Miranda replied,--

"No, indeed. Not if you wish him to have it."

"Now, Ham," said Dabney, "I'm not big enough to fit that room. Give me
one nearer my size. That's a little loose for even Sam, and she can't
take any tucks in it."

Samantha's look changed to one of gratitude, and she did not notice the
detested nickname.

"Well, then," said Ham, "we'll see about it. You can sleep in the spare
chamber to-night.--Mother Kinzer, I couldn't say enough about this house
business if I talked all night. It must have cost you a deal of money. I
couldn't have dared to ask it. I guess you must kiss me again."

A curious thing it was that came next,--one that nobody could have
reckoned on. Mrs. Kinzer--good soul--had set her heart on having Ham and
Miranda's house "ready for them" on their return; and now Ham seemed to
be so pleased about it, she actually began to cry. She said, too,--

"I'm so sorry about the barn!"

Ham only laughed, in his quiet way, as he kissed his portly
mother-in-law, and said,--

"Come, come, mother Kinzer, you didn't set it afire. Can't Miranda and I
have some supper? Dab must be hungry, too, after all that
roof-sweeping."

There had been a sharp strain on the nerves of all of them that day and
evening; and they were glad enough to gather around the tea-table, while
all that was now left of the old barn smouldered peaceably away with
half the boys in the village on guard.

Once or twice Ham or Dab went out to see that all was dying out rightly;
but it was plain that all the danger was over, unless a high wind should
come to scatter the cinders.

By this time the whole village had heard of Dab's adventure with the
tramp, and had at once connected the latter with the fire. There were
those, indeed, who expressed a savage wish to connect him with it
bodily; and it was well for him that he had done his running away
promptly, and had hidden himself with care, for men were out after him
in all directions, on foot and on horseback. Who would have dreamed of
so dirty a vagabond "taking to the water"?

"He's a splendid fellow, anyway!"

Odd, was it not? but Annie Foster and Jenny Walters were half a mile
apart when they both said that very thing, just before the clock in the
village church hammered out the news that it was ten, and bedtime. They
were not either of them speaking of the tramp.

It was long after that, however, before the lights were out in all the
rooms of the Morris mansion.





CHAPTER XVII.

DAB HAS A WAKING DREAM, AND HAM GETS A SNIFF OF SEA-AIR.


Sleep? One of the most excellent things in all the world, and very few
people get too much of it nowadays.

As for Dabney Kinzer, he had done his sleeping as regularly and
faithfully as even his eating, up to the very night after Ham Morris
came home to find the old barn afire. There had been a few, a very few,
exceptions. There were the nights when he was expecting to go
duck-shooting before daylight, and waked up at midnight with a strong
conviction that he was late about starting. There were, perhaps, a dozen
of "eeling" expeditions, that had kept him out late enough for a full
basket and a proper scolding. There, too, was the night when he had
stood so steadily by the tiller of "The Swallow," while she danced,
through the dark, across the rough billows of the Atlantic.

But, on the whole, Dab Kinzer had been a good sleeper all his life till
then. Once in bed, and there had been for him an end of all wakefulness.

On that particular night, for the first time, sleep refused to come,
late as was the hour when the family circle broke up.

It could not have been the excitement of Ham and Miranda's return. He
would have gotten over that by this time. No more could it have been the
fire, though the smell of smouldering hay came in pretty strongly at
times through the wide-open windows. If any one patch of that great
roomy bed was better made up for sleeping than the rest of it, Dab would
surely have found the spot; for he tumbled and rolled all over it in his
restlessness. Some fields on a farm will "grow" wheat better than
others, but no part of the bed seemed to grow any sleep. At last Dab got
wearily up, and took a chair by the window.

The night was dark, but the stars were shining; and every now and then
the wind would make a shovel of itself, and toss up the hot ashes the
fire had left, sending a dull red glare around on the house and barns
for a moment, and flooding all the neighborhood with a stronger smell of
burnt hay.

"If you're going to burn hay," soliloquized Dabney, "it won't do to take
a barn for a stove. Not that kind of a barn. But what did Ham Morris
mean by saying that I was to go to boarding-school? That's what I'd like
to know"

The secret was out.

He had kept remarkably still, for him, all the evening, and had not
asked a question; but, if his brains were ever to work over his books as
they had over Ham's remark, his future chances for sound sleep were all
gone. It had come upon him so suddenly, the very thing he thought about
that night in "The Swallow," and wished for and dreamed about during all
those walks and talks and lessons of all sorts with Ford Foster and
Frank Harley, ever since they came in from that memorable cruise.

It was a wonderful idea, and Dab had his doubts as to the way his mother
would take to it when it should be brought seriously before her. Little
he guessed the truth. Ham's remark had gone deep into other ears as well
as Dabney's; and there were reasons, therefore, why good Mrs. Kinzer was
sitting by the window of her own room, at that very moment, as little
inclined to sleep as was the boy she was thinking of. So proud of him
too, she was, and so full of bright, motherly thoughts of the man he
would make, "one of these days, when he gets his growth."

There must have been a good deal of sympathy between Dab and his mother;
for by and by, just as she began to feel drowsy, and muttered, "Well,
well, we'll have a talk about it to-morrow," Dab found himself nodding
against the window-frame, and slowly rose from his chair, remarking,--

"Guess I might as well finish that dream in bed. If I'd tumbled out o'
the window I'd have lit among Miranda's rose-bushes. They've got their
thorns all out at this time o' night."

It was necessary for them both to sleep hard, after that; for more than
half the night was gone, and they were to be up early. So indeed they
were; but what surprised Mrs. Kinzer when she went into the kitchen was
to find Miranda there before her.

"You here, my dear? That's right. I'll take a look at the milk-room.
Where's Ham?"

"Out among the stock. Dab's just gone to him."

Curious things people will do at times. Miranda had put down the
coffee-pot on the range. There was not a single one of the farm "help"
around, male or female; and there stood the blooming young bride, with
her back toward her mother, and staring out through the open door. And
then Mrs. Kinzer slipped forward, and put her arms around her daughter's
neck.

Well, it was very early in the morning for those two women to stand
there and cry; but it seemed to do them good, and Miranda remarked at
last, as she kissed her mother,--

"O mother, it is all so good and beautiful, and I'm so happy!"

And then they both laughed, in a subdued and quiet way; and Miranda
picked up the coffee-pot while Mrs. Kinzer walked away into the
milk-room. Such cream as there seemed to be on all the pans that
morning!

As for Ham Morris, his first visit on leaving the house had been to the
relics of the old barn, as a matter of course.

"Not much of a loss," he said to himself; "but it might have been, but
for Dab. There's the making of a man in him. Wonder if he'd get enough
to eat, if we sent him up yonder? On the whole, I think he would. If he
didn't, I don't believe it would be his fault. He's got to go; and his
mother'll agree to it, I know. Talk about mothers-in-law! If one of
'em's worth as much as she is, I'd like to have a dozen. Don't know
'bout that, though. I'm afraid the rest would have to take back seats as
