"Look here, Noaks," cried Jack Vance, in a fit of desperation, "what are
you going to do?  You know very well we are not thieves."

"I don't know anything of the sort," returned the tormentor, standing up
to take his bag off the rack; "all I know is just what I've told you.
See here, Mr. Vance," he continued, rounding on Jack with a sudden
snarl, "you were good enough some little time ago to make some very
caddish remarks about my father; in the future you'd better keep your
mouth shut.  I owe all three of you a dressing down for things that
happened at Chatford, and now you'd better mind your P's and Q's if you
don't want to be hauled up for housebreaking."

With this parting threat the ex-Philistine left the carriage.  Mugford,
Jack, and Diggory gazed at one another for a moment with anything but a
happy look on their faces.  One after another they slowly gathered up
their things and stepped out on to the platform.  Hardly had they done
so when they heard their names called, and turning round beheld the
small figure of "Rats" rushing forward to meet them.

"Hullo!" he exclaimed.  "Old Ally sent me down to get a paper, and I
thought you'd come by this train.  I say, there's a fine row on up at
the school--such a lark; I'll tell you about it as we go along."



CHAPTER X.


A SCREW LOOSE IN THE SIXTH.

For the time being the three friends forgot their own troubles in their
eagerness to hear "Rat's" description of certain events which had
happened during their absence from Ronleigh.

"Look sharp; out with it!" they exclaimed.  "What's happened?"

"Well," began Rathson, "it all came out through young Bayley acting the
fool and spraining his ankle.  You know we had the paper-chase this
morning, and the hares ran out to Arrow Hill, and back again round by
the canal and Birksam Church.  Just after we'd rounded the hill, young
Bayley jumped off the top of a high hedge, and twisted his foot so badly
that he couldn't stand up.  As it happened, there was a check just then,
and Carton ran forward and told Allingford what had happened.  He and
Oaks came back, and said the only thing would be to get him
to Chatton station, and so home by train.  It was awfully decent of
those chaps.  They carried Bayley all the way, and then Oaks went home
with him, and Allingford walked back, and so, of course, they missed
half the run.  Awfully brickish of them I call it, considering that it
was only a kid like Bayley."

The Triple Alliance gave a murmur of assent.

"Was that what the row's about?" asked Diggory.

"Oh, bless you, no; I haven't come to that yet.  After he'd seen Oaks
and Bayley into the train, old Ally started to walk home.  There's a
little 'pub' about half a mile out of Chatton called the Black Swan, and
he thought he'd call and ask if they'd seen the fellows pass.  You know
Thurston the prefect, that chap who came to the door when we were having
that meeting in the 'old lab.'  Well, now, if he and Mouler, and two or
three more of that sort, weren't sitting in the taproom, smoking, and
drinking beer, and having a regular high old time.  They'd lagged behind
on purpose. Of course Allingford kicked them all out, and he and
'Thirsty' had a frightful row.  They say the big chaps want to hush the
matter up as far as they can, and not report it to old Denson, for fear
he'd make it an excuse to put a stop to paper-chasing.  Ally slanged
Thurston right and left, and told him that if he chose to drink beer in
a low 'pub' with the biggest blackguards in the school, he needn't
expect that the fellows in the Sixth would have anything to do with him,
and that he ought to send in his resignation as a prefect."

On entering the school buildings, our three friends were convinced of
the truth of their comrade's story, and on their way to the schoolroom
the question was repeated at least half a dozen times--"Have you heard
about old 'Thirsty' being cobbed in the Black Swan?"  Diggory thought of
the conversation he had overheard in Acton's study, and mentioned it to
Carton.

"Yes," answered the latter.  "Big Fletcher's a beast.  I know Thurston's
very chummy with him, but I don't see that's got much to do with it.
My brother, who left last term, said that 'Thirsty' used to be rather a
jolly chap, only he's got a fearful temper when he's crossed.  Most of
the chaps like him as a prefect, because as long as you don't interfere
with him he doesn't seem to care much what any one does.  The real thing
is he's going to the dogs, and, as Allingford says, he ought to resign."

Away in one of the Sixth Form studies the subject of their conversation
was sitting with his hands in his pockets, frowning at the fire.  He was
roused from his reverie by some one putting his head round the corner of
the door and exclaiming,--

"Hullo, 'Thirsty!'"

"Hullo, Fletcher! where on earth have you been all the evening?"

The new-comer was tall and lanky; he had a sharp, foxy-looking face,
with thin, straight lips, and two deep lines which looked almost like
scars between the eyebrows.  He shut the door, and dragging forward a
chair, sat down with his feet on the fender, and commenced warming his
hands at the fire.

"Oh, I've been nowhere in particular," he answered, laughing.  "But I
say, young man, you seem to have raised a pretty good hornets' nest
about your ears along this corridor."

"Yes, I know; they've had the cheek to send me that!"

He leaned back as he spoke, and taking a piece of paper from the table,
tossed it across to his friend.  It was a letter signed by most of the
prefects, suggesting that he should send in his resignation.

"Humph!" said Fletcher; "that's a nice sort of a round robin, don't you
call it?  Well, what are you going to do?"

"Oh, I shall resign and have done with it.  I'm sick of having to
masquerade about as a good boy.  I mean to do what I like."

"Pooh!" returned the other.  "Now that you are a prefect, I wouldn't
give up all the privileges and the right to go out and come in when you
like just because a strait-laced chap like Allingford chooses to take
offence at something you do.  They can't force you to resign unless they
go to the doctor, and they won't do that.  I know what I'd do: I'd tell
them pretty straight to go and be hanged, and keep their sermonizing to
themselves."

Thurston turned on the speaker with a sudden burst of anger.

"Oh yes!" he exclaimed; "you're always saying you'd do this and do that,
but when the time comes you turn tail and sneak away.  Look here: you
were the one who proposed going into the Black Swan this morning, and
when young Mouler said Allingford was coming, you slipped out of the
back door and left us to face the shindy."

"Well," returned the other, laughing, "I thought you chaps were going to
bolt too.  I hopped over the wall at the back into the field, and waited
there for about a quarter of an hour, and then, as no one came, I made
tracks home."

"That's all very fine.  You took precious good care to save your own
bacon; you always do."

"Oh, go on!" answered Fletcher, rising from his chair; "you're in a wax
to-night.  Well, ta, ta!  Don't you resign."

This little passage of arms was not the first of the kind that had taken
place between Fletcher and Thurston, and it did not prevent a renewal of
their friendship on the morrow.

The latter, following either his own inclination or the advice of his
chum, decided not to resign his position as a prefect, and in a few
days' time the majority of the school had wellnigh forgotten the
fracas at the Black Swan.

Among those in high places, however, the affair was not so easily
overlooked.  The big fellows kept their own counsel, but it soon became
evident that Thurston was being "cut" and cold-shouldered by the other
members of the Sixth; while he, for his part, as though by way of
retaliation, began to hob-nob more freely than ever with boys lower down
in the school and of decidedly questionable character.

"It's awfully bad form of a chap who's a prefect chumming up with a
fellow like Mouler in the Upper Fourth," said Carton one afternoon.
"I wonder old 'Thirsty' isn't ashamed to do it.  And now he's hand
and glove with those chaps Hawley and Gull in the Fifth; they've both
got heaps of money, but they're frightful cads."

From the morning following their return to Ronleigh the Triple Alliance
had been kept in a continual state of uneasiness and suspense, wondering
what action Noaks would take regarding his discovery of their visit to
The Hermitage.

The days passed by, and still he made no further reference to the
matter, and took no notice of any of the three friends when he happened
to pass them in the passages.  The fact was that for the time being his
attention was turned in another direction.  Like most fellows of his
kind, Noaks was a regular toady, ready to do anything in return for the
privilege of being able to rub shoulders occasionally with some one in a
higher position than himself, and he eagerly seized the opportunity
which his friendship with Mouler afforded him of becoming intimate with
Thurston.  It was rather a fine thing for a boy in the Upper Fourth to
be accosted in a familiar manner by a prefect, and asked sometimes to
visit the latter in his study; and when such things were possible, it
was hardly worth while to spend time and attention in carrying on a feud
with youngsters in the Third Form.  But Noaks had never forgotten the
double humiliation he had suffered at Chatford--first in being sent off
the football field, and again in the disastrous ending to the attempted
raid on the Birchites' fireworks; nor had he forgiven the Triple
Alliance for the part which they had played, especially on the latter
occasion, in bringing shame and confusion on the heads of the
Philistines.

One morning, nearly a month after the half-term holiday, the three
friends were strolling arm in arm through the archway leading from the
quadrangle to the paved playground, when they came face to face with
their old enemy.  He was about to push past them without speaking; then,
seeming suddenly to change his mind, he pulled up, took something from
his pocket, and handing it to Jack Vance, said shortly,--

"There!  I thought you'd like to see that; it seems a good chance to
earn some pocket-money."

The packet turned out to be a copy of the Todderton weekly paper.

"I've marked the place," added Noaks, turning on his heel with a
sneering laugh; "you needn't give it me back."

A cross of blue chalk had been placed against a short paragraph
appearing under the heading "Local Notes." Jack read it out loud for the
edification of his two companions.

"We notice that Mr. Fossberry has offered a reward of 50 pounds for any
information which shall lead to the arrest of the thieves who entered
his house some few weeks ago, and stole a valuable collection of coins.
As yet the police have been unable to discover any further traces of the
missing property, but it is to be hoped that before long the offenders
will be discovered and brought to justice."

There was a moment's silence.

"I wish I'd told my guv'nor," muttered Jack Vance.

"Well, tell him now," said Diggory.

"Oh no, I can't now; he'd wonder why I hadn't done it sooner.  Besides,
I believe Noaks is only doing this to frighten us; he can't prove that
we stole the coins, because we didn't.  All the same, it would be very
awkward if he sent the police that jack-knife, and told them he'd seen
us climbing out of the old chap's window."

"Yes," answered Diggory; "I suppose it would look rather fishy.
Bother him! why can't he leave us alone?"



CHAPTER XI.


SHADOWS OF COMING EVENTS.

The Easter holidays came and went as rapidly as Easter  holidays always
do, and before the Alliance had recovered from the excitement connected
with their first experience of breaking up at Ronleigh, they were back
again, greeting their friends, asking new boys their names, and, in
short, commencing their second term as regular old stagers.  Up to the
present they had been content to "lie low," and had remained satisfied
with making the acquaintance of their class-mates in "The Happy Family;"
but now they began to take more interest in school matters in general,
and to notice what was going on in other circles besides their own.

In answer to the eager inquiries of his two companions, Jack Vance said
that he had seen nothing of Noaks during the holidays, except having
passed him on one or two occasions in the street.  The notice of the
fifty pounds reward still appeared in the windows of the police station;
but the robbery itself was beginning to be looked upon as a thing of the
past, and was already wellnigh forgotten.

"I wonder if Noaks has still got my knife?" said Mugford.

"Oh, I don't know," answered Jack.  "He's too much taken up with Mouler
and Gull and all that lot to think about us.  I shouldn't bother my head
about it any further; he only showed us that paper out of spite, to put
us in a funk."

It was pretty evident, to the most casual observer, that the quarrel
which the Black Swan incident had occasioned between Thurston and his
brother prefects had not yet been dismissed from the minds of either
party.  The former became more lax than ever in the discharge of his
duties, and avoiding the society of his school equals, sought the
companionship of such boys as Hawley, Gull, and Mouler, who at
length came to be known throughout the College as "Thirsty's Lot."
With the exception of Fletcher, the prefects left him severely alone.
Allingford occasionally came down on him for allowing all kinds of
misconduct to pass unchecked, but it was hardly to be expected that a
fellow who was hand and glove with some of the principal offenders
should have much influence or power in maintaining law and order; and
these interviews with the captain usually ended in an exchange of black
looks and angry words.

The consequences which resulted from this lack of harmony among those in
authority may be easily imagined.  "Old Thirsty never makes a row when
he sees a chap doing so-and-so," was the cry.  "Why should Oaks and
Rowlands and those other fellows kick up bothers, and give lines for the
same thing?"  To all these murmurers the prefects turned a deaf ear.
"I don't care what Thurston does," would be their answer; "you know the
rule, and that's sufficient."  Any further remonstrance on the part of
the offender was met with a summary "Shut up, or you'll get your head
punched," and so for a time the matter ended.

It was hardly to be expected that the light-hearted juveniles of the
Third Form should trouble their heads to take much notice of this
disagreement among the seniors.  For one thing, they knew nothing of
what was said and done in the Sixth Form studies, and even the prefects
themselves never thought for a moment that this little bit of friction
in the machinery of Ronleigh College would, figuratively speaking, lead
to "hot bearings" and a narrow shave of a general breakdown.

So the members of "The Happy Family" pursued the even tenor of their
way, getting into scrapes and scrambling out of them, feasting on pastry
and ginger-beer, turning up in force on Saturday afternoon to witness
the cricket matches, and coming to the conclusion that though Oaks and
Rowlands might be a trifle strict, and rather freehanded with lines and
"impots," yet all this could be overlooked and forgiven for the sake
