       With his sleepy eyes looked at him,
       Shot his shining quills, like arrows,
       Saying, with a drowsy murmur,
       Through the tangle of his whiskers,
       "Take my quills, O Hiawatha!"
           From the ground the quills he gathered,
       All the little shining arrows,
       Stained them red and blue and yellow,
       With the juice of roots and berries;
       Into his canoe he wrought them,
       Round its waist a shining girdle.
       Round its bows a gleaming necklace,
       On its breast two stars resplendent.
           Thus the Birch Canoe was builded
       In the valley, by the river,
       In the bosom of the forest;
       And the forest's life was in it,
       All its mystery and its magic,
       All the lightness of the birch tree,
       All the toughness of the cedar,
       All the larch's supple sinews;
       And it floated on the river,
       Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
       Like a yellow water lily.


_Longfellow._

From "Song of Hiawatha." Houghton, Mifflin & Co., Publishers.


[Illustration:]


       *       *       *       *       *


MOON OF LEAVES, month of May.

SHEER, straight up and down.

TAMARACK, the American larch tree.

FISSURE, a narrow opening; a cleft.

What does Hiawatha call the bark of the birch tree?

Where did he get the balsam and resin? What use did he put these to?

What are the drops of balsam called? Why?

NOTE.--"The bark canoe of the Indians is, perhaps, the lightest and most
beautiful model of all the water craft ever invented. It is generally
made complete with the bark of one birch tree, and so skillfully shaped
and sewed together with the roots of the tamarack, that it is
water-tight, and rides upon the water as light as a cork."


       *       *       *       *       *




_40_


pic' tures
pal' ace
four' teen
fa' mous ly
scul' lion
re past'
in hal' ing
en chant' ed
mat' tress
char' coal
land' scapes
ar' chi tect



PETER OF CORTONA.


A little shepherd boy, twelve years old, one day gave up the care of the
sheep he was tending, and betook himself to Florence, where he knew no
one but a lad of his own age, nearly as poor as himself, who had lived
in the same village, but who had gone to Florence to be scullion in the
house of Cardinal Sachetti. It was for a good motive that little Peter
desired to come to Florence: he wanted to be an artist, and he knew
there was a school for artists there. When he had seen the town well,
Peter stationed himself at the Cardinal's palace; and inhaling the odor
of the cooking, he waited patiently till his Eminence was served, that
he might speak to his old companion, Thomas. He had to wait a long time;
but at length Thomas appeared.

"You here, Peter! What have you come to Florence for?"

"I am come to learn painting."

"You had much better learn kitchen work to begin with; one is then sure
not to die of hunger."

"You have as much to eat as you want here, then?" replied Peter.

"Indeed I have," said Thomas; "I might eat till I made myself ill every
day, if I chose to do it."

"Then," said Peter, "I see we shall do very well. As you have too much
and I not enough, I will bring my appetite, and you will bring the food;
and we shall get on famously."

"Very well," said Thomas.

"Let us begin at once, then," said Peter; "for as I have eaten nothing
to-day, I should like to try the plan directly."

Thomas then took little Peter into the garret where he slept, and bade
him wait there till he brought him some fragments that he was freely
permitted to take. The repast was a merry one, for Thomas was in high
spirits, and little Peter had a famous appetite.

"Ah," cried Thomas, "here you are fed and lodged. Now the question is,
how are you going to study?"

"I shall study like all artists--with pencil and paper."

"But then, Peter, have you money to buy the paper and pencils?"

"No, I have nothing; but I said to myself, 'Thomas, who is scullion at
his lordship's, must have plenty of money!' As you are rich, it is just
the same as if I was."

Thomas scratched his head and replied, that as to broken victuals, he
had plenty of them; but that he would have to wait three years before he
should receive wages. Peter did not mind. The garret walls were white.
Thomas could give him charcoal, and so he set to draw on the walls with
that; and after a little while somebody gave Thomas a silver coin.

With joy he brought it to his friend. Pencils and paper were bought.
Early in the morning Peter went out studying the pictures in the
galleries, the statues in the streets, the landscapes in the
neighborhood; and in the evening, tired and hungry, but enchanted with
what he had seen, he crept back into the garret, where he was always
sure to find his dinner hidden under the mattress, _to keep it warm,_ as
Thomas said. Very soon the first charcoal drawings were rubbed off, and
Peter drew his best designs to ornament his friend's room.

One day Cardinal Sachetti, who was restoring his palace, came with the
architect to the very top of the house, and happened to enter the
scullion's garret. The room was empty; but both Cardinal and architect
were struck with the genius of the drawings. They thought they were
executed by Thomas, and his Eminence sent for him. When poor Thomas
heard that the Cardinal had been in the garret, and had seen what he
called Peter's daubs, he thought all was lost.

"You will no longer be a scullion," said the Cardinal to him; and
Thomas, thinking this meant banishment and disgrace, fell on his knees,
and cried, "Oh! my lord, what will become of poor Peter?"

The Cardinal made him tell his story.

"Bring him to me when he comes in to-night," said he, smiling.

But Peter did not return that night, nor the next, till at length a
fortnight had passed without a sign of him. At last came the news that
the monks of a distant convent had received and kept with them a boy of
fourteen, who had come to ask permission to copy a painting of Raphael
in the chapel of the convent. This boy was Peter. Finally, the Cardinal
sent him as a pupil to one of the first artists in Rome.

Fifty years afterwards there were two old men who lived as brothers in
one of the most beautiful houses in Florence. One said of the other, "He
is the greatest painter of our age." The other said of the first, "He is
a model for evermore of a faithful friend."


       *       *       *       *       *


PETER OF CORTONA, a great Italian painter and architect. He was
born in Cortona in the year 1596, and died in Rome, in 1669.

EMINENCE, a title of honor, applied to a cardinal.

GALLERIES, rooms or buildings where works of art are exhibited.

VICTUALS (v[)i]t' 'lz), cooked food for human beings.

FORTNIGHT (f[^o]rt' n[=i]t or n[)i]t): This word is contracted from
_fourteen nights._

Locate the cities of _Rome_ and _Florence_.

Give words that mean the opposite of the following:

ill, bade, buy, first, old, begin, empty, enter, cooked, merry, bought,
friend, inhale, patient, palace, distant, appeared, disgrace, famous,
faithful, morning, enchanted.

Recite the words--"Oh, my lord, what will become of poor Peter?"--as
Thomas uttered them. Remember he was beseeching a great _cardinal_ in
favor of a poor destitute _boy_ whom he loved as a brother. He _felt_
what he said.

Do you find any humorous passages in the selection? Read them, and tell
wherein the humor lies.


Memory Gems:


When a friend asketh, there is no to-morrow.

_Spanish Proverb._



Diligence overcomes difficulties; sloth makes them.

_From "Poor Richard's Proverbs."_



       A gift in need, though small indeed,
       Is large as earth and rich as heaven.


_Whittier_.


       *       *       *       *       *




_41_


vas' sal
roy' al ly
beg' gar y
hom' age
sen' ti nel
dif' fer ence



TO MY DOG BLANCO.[003]


       My dear, dumb friend, low lying there,
         A willing vassal at my feet,
       Glad partner of my home and fare,
         My shadow in the street.

       I look into your great brown eyes,
         Where love and loyal homage shine,
       And wonder where the difference lies
         Between your soul and mine!

       For all the good that I have found
         Within myself or human kind,
       Hath royally informed and crowned
         Your gentle heart and mind.

       I scan the whole broad earth around
         For that one heart which, leal and true,
       Bears friendship without end or bound,
         And find the prize in you.

       I trust you as I trust the stars;
         Nor cruel loss, nor scoff of pride,
       Nor beggary, nor dungeon bars,
         Can move you from my side!

       As patient under injury
         As any Christian saint of old,
       As gentle as a lamb with me,
         But with your brothers bold;

       More playful than a frolic boy,
         More watchful than a sentinel,
       By day and night your constant joy
         To guard and please me well.

       I clasp your head upon my breast--
         The while you whine and lick my hand--
       And thus our friendship is confessed,
         And thus we understand!

       Ah, Blanco! did I worship God
         As truly as you worship me,
       Or follow where my Master trod
         With your humility,--

       Did I sit fondly at His feet,
         As you, dear Blanco, sit at mine,
       And watch Him with a love as sweet,
         My life would grow divine!


_J.G. Holland_

From "The Complete Poetical Writings of J.G. Holland."

[Illustration:]

[Footnote 003: Copyright, 1879, 1881, by Charles Scribner's Sons.]


       *       *       *       *       *


LEAL (l[=e]l), loyal, faithful.

DUNGEON (d[)u]n' j[)u]n), a close, dark prison, commonly
underground.

Tell what is meant by the terms, dumb friend; willing vassal; glad
partner; my shadow; human kind; frolic boy.

What duty does Blanco teach his master?

Memorize the last two stanzas of the poem.

The three great divisions of time are _past, present, future._ Tell what
time each of the following action-words expresses:

found, find, have found, will find, bears, shall bear, has borne,
crowned, will crown, did crown, crowns.


       *       *       *       *       *




_42_
