saying, "See what is written on this tablet."

"The writing is difficult to decipher," answered the Camel.  "I do not
understand it, for I only know three words--_outini_, _ouzatini_,
_ouazakin_."

He called the Lion, and said to him, "I do not understand these
letters; I only know three words--_outini_, _ouzatini_, _ouazakin_."

"Show it to me," said the Lion.  He approached.  The Mule struck him
between the eyes and stretched him out level.

He who goes with a knave is betrayed by him.




AFRICAN FABLES

  "The world is old, they say; I don't deny it;
    But, infant still
    In taste and will,
  Whoe'er would teach, must gratify it."


AFRICAN FABLES

The Hen and the Cat

A Cat arose in her house, went to a Hen and said to her: "Let us make
friendship!"

The Hen replied to the Cat: "Dost thou like me for a friend?"

The Cat said, "Yes," and went away, and after having been at home for a
while, she sent her child to the Hen, saying, "Go and tell the Hen to
rise up early to-morrow morning, and to come and accompany me to a
neighbouring town."

The child arose, went to the Hen's house and saluted her.

The Hen arose, and asked it: "Thou child of the Cat, dost thou come to
me in peace?"

The Cat's child replied, "I come in peace; my mother has sent me to
thee."

The Hen said to the Cat's child, "Say what thy mother has sent thee
for; let me know."

After the Cat's child had told it to the Hen, it said: "I will go," and
set out and went home.

When it was gone the Hen arose, called a child of hers, and said: "Go
and ask the Cat at what time we shall go to the neighbouring town?"
When the child had already started, she called it back again, saying,
"Come back, I will tell thee something."

The child returned, and when it had come to its mother, she said to it,
"When thou goest to the Cat, open thy ears and hear well what she says,
and come and tell me."

The child went to the Cat, and saluted her, and when the Cat arose and
came out to it, the Hen's child was standing there.  The Cat asked the
Hen's child, "Why did thy mother send thee to me?"

The Hen's child said, "My mother said I must come and ask thee how
early shall we go to the neighbouring town?"

The Cat said to the Hen's child, "Go and tell thy mother to arise and
come at the cockcrowing; for what should eat her?"

The Hen's child returned to its mother, and said to her, "Behold I went
to the Cat's place where thou sentest me, and am come back."

The Hen said to her child, "What did the Cat say?  Let me hear what
word she spoke?"

Her child answered and said to her, "My mother, the word which the Cat
spoke is this: 'Go and tell thy mother to come to me when the cock
crows, that we may go; for what should eat her?'"

Its mother, the Hen, said to her child, "My child, lie down in your
house, for I have heard what the Cat said."

The child of the Hen obeyed her mother, went and lay down, and also her
mother lay down.  They slept their sleep until the cock crew, which
when the Cat heard, she arose, got ready and waited for the Hen,
thinking, "May she come that we may go!"  The cock crew the second
time, and the Cat looked out on the way whence the Hen was to come,
thinking, "May she come that we may go!"

The Hen did not get up at home and day came on.  When it became day,
the Cat arose in her house, went to the Hen's home, and said to her,
"Hen, thou sentest thy child to me, and asked at what time thou
shouldst rise up, and I said to thy child, 'Go and tell thy mother to
come when the cock crows, that we may go.'  Did it not tell thee what
it was told by me, that thou art still sitting at home although it has
become day?"

The Hen said to the Cat, "Sister Cat, if thou wishest to have me for a
friend, I must never get up in my house and come out at night."

The Cat said to the Hen, "What art thou afraid of that thou sayest, 'I
will never come out at night'?  What is there in the way?"

The Hen listened to what the Cat said, got herself ready and called her
children, saying, "Come and let us accompany the Cat to a neighbouring
town!"  All the children arose and when they had set out on their way,
the Cat went before, and having gone on a little, she seized two of the
children of the Hen; and the Hen saw that the cat was seizing two of
her children; so she said to the Cat, "Sister Cat, we have scarcely set
out on our way and dost thou seize two of my children?"

The Cat replied, "Thy two children which I took have not strength
enough to walk; therefore did I take them to my bosom that we may go
on."

The Hen said to the Cat, "If thou actest thus, I and thou must dissolve
our friendship."

The Cat replied, "If thou wilt not have a friend, I shall let thee go
home."  So, as the Hen began to go home, the Cat made a bound, and
seized the Hen's head, whereupon the Hen cried for help.  All the
people of the town heard her, arose, ran, and when they were come, the
Cat was holding the Hen's head tight.  When the Cat saw the people of
the town, she left the Hen, ran away, and entered the forest.

There the Hen was standing and the people of the town said to her:
"Foolish one, didst thou, a Hen, arise and go to befriend a Cat?  If we
had not heard thy screams, and come to thee, she would have killed thee
and carried away all thy children into her forest."

The Hen said to the people of the town: "God bless you: you have taken
me out of the Cat's mouth."

The people of the town said to her: "To-day our Lord has delivered
thee, but for the future do thou no more make friendship with the Cat.
The Cat is too cunning for thee: beware of the Cat in future!"

I have heard old people say, that on that day the cats and the fowls
dissolved their friendship.  This is finished.



The Stork and the Toad

A Stork went and laid eggs in a tree, brooded and hatched young ones.
Then she left and went to seek food for her little ones; but she did
not get any food, and all her little ones were crying for hunger.  The
Stork did not know what to do.  So she arose one day, went to her
friend, and said, "My friend, I am come to thee."

Her friend said: "What dost thou want that thou art come to me?"

She replied to her friend: "My children are hungry, and I have no food;
therefore, am I come to thee; teach me a device!"

Her friend said to her: "Arise in the morning, go to the brook, and see
whether there are Toads in it; then come back, and on the following
morning go again, and lie down by the side of the brook; stretch out
thy legs and thy wings, shut thine eyes, keep quite silent, and lie in
one place until the Toads come out in the morning, and, after seeing
thee, go home and call all their people to come, to take thee by the
wing and to drag thee away.  But do not thou speak to them--be
perfectly quiet."

She listened to what her friend said, and at night-quiet she arose, and
went to the brook, when all the Toads were singing; but as soon as they
saw her, they went and hid themselves at the bottom of the water.  So
the Stork went home and slept, and having slept she arose up early and
went back again to the brook, without being observed by the Toads; she
went softly, and lay down by the side of the water, pretending to be
dead, stretched out her legs, her wings, and her mouth, and shut her
eyes.  Thus she lay, until at break of day when one Toad arose, and,
finding that it was day, came forth and saw the Stork lying.  He went
back, and called all the Toads:

"Come, behold, I have seen something dead, lying at the door of our
house, and when I had seen it I came back to call you."

So all the Toads arose and followed him, and having come out, they all
saw a Stork lying at the door of their house; but they did not know
that the Stork was more cunning than themselves.  They returned home,
called a council together and said: "What shall we do?  Some one who
came, we do not know whence, has died before the gate of our town."
All their great men answered, and said, "Arise all of you, go out, drag
this dead body far away, and leave it there."

So they all arose, went, and, taking the Stork by its wings and legs,
dragged it away.

The Stork was cunning; she saw them without their knowing it.  They
sang, as they dragged her away:

"Drag her and leave her!  Drag her and leave her!"

The Stork did not speak to them, as they all dragged her away, although
she saw them.  Now when they had carried her far away, the Stork opened
her eyes, which when they saw they all began to run away.  As soon as
the Stork saw that the Toads had begun to run away, she arose, and
pursued them; having overtaken one, she took and swallowed it, and went
on taking and swallowing them.  The Toads kept running, but by the time
they would have got home the Stork had swallowed them all, one by one.
She had filled her bag, and then started on her way home.  As soon as
her children saw her, they all ran to their mother, saying, "Our mother
has brought us food."  When they came their mother threw all the Toads
in her bag down to her children, and her children ate them, so that
their hunger was appeased.

The Stork arose, went to her friend, and said:

"My friend, what thou toldest me yesterday is excellent: I went and lay
down by the side of the brook, and when the Toads saw me in the
morning, they thought I was dead; they came, dragged me along, and when
they had carried me far away, not knowing that I was wiser than they
and thinking that I was dead, I opened mine eyes to look at them; but
on seeing me open mine eyes, they all began to run away.  Then I arose,
pursued them, and when I had overtaken one, I took and swallowed it;
and when I had overtaken a second I took and swallowed it; so by the
time they would have reached home I had swallowed them all, and filled
my bag with them.  I brought them to my children, and when my children
were around me, I threw the Toads before them out of the bag and they
ate them, that their hunger was appeased."

She also thanked her friend, saying: "God bless thee; thou hast taught
me an excellent device."

Thus the Stork and her friend devised a plan, and thus they were able
to maintain their children while the Toads were sitting in their house.

So now, when the Toads are croaking in a brook, and they see any one
come, they are all quite silent, supposing that a Stork is coming.

This fable of the Stork and Toads, which I heard, is now finished.



The Rat and the Toad

The Toad said to the Rat, "I can do more than thou."

The Rat replied to the Toad: "Thou dost not know how to run; having
flung thyself anywhere thou stoppest there.  This is all thy run; and
wilt thou say that thou canst do more than I?"

When the Toad had heard the words of the Rat he said to him: "If,
according to thy opinion, I cannot do more than thou, thou shalt see
what I will begin to do to-morrow; and if thou beginnest and doest the
same, without anything happening to thee, thou canst do more than I."

The Rat agreed to the Toad's proposal, and went to see the Toad.

The Toad prepared himself, and when the sun reached about the middle,
between the horizon and the zenith, the great men felt its heat, and
went to sit down in the shade of a tree.  The Toad on seeing this,
arose, went to where the men were sitting, and passed through the midst
of them.  When the men observed him they said: "If you touch him, your
hand will become bitter."  So no one touched him, and the Toad passed
through and went home.

Then the Toad said to the Rat, "Didst thou see me?  Now if thou canst
do what I do, arise, and begin to do it.  I will see!"

The Rat, attending to what the toad said, got ready and the following
morning, when the sun had gained strength and the great men had stood
up and got under the shade of a tree, the Rat saw them sitting there,
and went to do what the Toad had done; but when he came to where the
men were sitting, and just went to pass through the midst of them, they
saw him, and they all took sticks, and sought to kill him: one man
attempting to kill him with a stick, struck at him, but did not hit him
well, the stick touching him only a little on the back; so he ran away
to the Toad.

On his arrival the Rat said to the Toad:

"Brother Toad, as thou wentest to where the people were sitting no one
said a word to thee, and thou camest home again with a sound skin; but
when I went, and they saw me, just as I went to pass through them they
all took sticks, and sought to kill me; and one man taking a stick and
striking at me to kill me, our Lord helped me, that the stick hit me
only a little on the back; so I ran away, and came to thee.  I disputed
with thee, thinking that I could do what thou doest: now to-day I have
experienced something; to-morrow let us begin again and when I have the
experience of to-morrow, I shall be able to give thee an answer."

The Toad said to the Rat: "The things of today are passed; to-morrow,
when the great men have gone and sat down under the tree, I will get
ready and when thou hast seen that, on observing me come to them and
pass through the midst of them, they will not say a word to me, thou
also shalt do what I did."  So the Rat then went to see the Toad.

As soon as the Toad saw the great men sitting under the tree, he again
began, saying to the Rat, "Look at me, as I go to the place where the
great men are sitting, with a sound skin: but if, on my return from
them, if thou seest the wale of a stick on any part of my body, thou
hast spoken the truth, and canst do more than I."

The Toad got ready, and on coming to where the men were sitting no one
said anything to him; so he passed through the midst of them, and went
again to the Rat, saying: "Look at me!  Look at my whole body!  Canst
thou see the wale of a stick?  If thou seest one, then tell me of it!"

When the Rat had looked at the Toad's whole body and not seen any wale
of a stick he said to the Toad:

"Brother Toad, I have looked at thy whole body, and not seen any wale
of a stick: thou art right."

The Toad said to the Rat.  "As thou disputest with me, and maintainest
that thou canst do what I do, get up again, and go to where the great
men are sitting; and if on seeing thee, these men do not say anything
to thee, so that I see thee come back to me again with a sound skin,
then I know that thou canst do more than I."

The Rat, attending to what the Toad said, arose, got himself ready, and
when he saw the great men sitting under the tree, he went toward them;
but on observing him, they said: "Here comes a Rat," and they every one
took a stick, and pursued him in order to kill him; so he ran away, and
as he ran, a man with a stick pursued him; saying, "I will not let this
Rat escape."

The Rat ran until his strength failed him.  The man pursued him with
his stick, to kill him; and having come near to him, he took his stick,
and struck at him, with the purpose of killing him; but the stick did
not hit him, and God saved him, his time being not yet arrived, by
showing him a hole into which he crept.  When the man saw that he had
gotten into the hole, he went back and returned home.  The Rat, on
seeing that the man had gone home, came again out of the hole, and went
to the Toad, saying to him:

"Brother Toad, I indeed at first disputed with thee, saying that I
could do more than thou; but, as for my disputing with thee, thou in
truth canst do more than I: when the people saw thee, they did not say
a word to thee, but when they saw me, they wished to kill me; if our
Lord had not helped me and showed me a hole, they, on seeing me, would
not have left, but killed me; thou surpassest me in greatness."

At that time the Rat entreated our Lord and he placed it in a hole, but
the Toad he placed in the open air.  The Rat does not come out by day,
before any one; as to the time when it comes out at night, it stretches
its head out of the hole, and when it does not see anybody it comes out
to seek its food.

As for the Toad, it comes out by day and by night, at any time,
whenever it likes; it comes out and goes about, not anything likes to
molest it; it is bitter, no one eats it on account of its bitterness;
