"You are not the boy who caused the capture of the bondholder?" asked
the lady, quickly.

"Yes, I am the boy, but I am afraid I had less to do with it than has
been represented."

"What is your name?"

"Frank Courtney."

"My father is very desirous of meeting you, and thanking you for what
you have done. Why have you not called before?"

"I did not know till to-day that your father had returned. Besides, I
did not like to go without an invitation."

"I will invite you," said the lady, with a pleasant smile, "and I, as
well as my father, will be glad to see you. And now let me introduce you
to my little son. Freddie, would you like to see the boy that caught the
robber?"

"Yes, mamma."

"Here he is. His name is Frank."

The little boy immediately began to ask questions of Frank, and by the
time they reached the Cooper Institute Frank and he were well
acquainted.

"Don't get out, Frank," said Freddie.

"I am going home, Freddie."

"You must come and see me soon," said the little boy.

"Now you have three invitations," said the lady.

"I will accept them all," said Frank.

And, with a bow, he left the car.




CHAPTER XXVIII

FRANK MAKES AN EVENING CALL


After supper Frank walked slowly up to Mr. Percival's residence. Now
that he knew two members of the family, he looked forward with pleasure
to the call he was about to make. His prospects seemed much brighter
than when he woke up in the morning.

On reaching the house of Mr. Percival, he saw at a glance that it was
the residence of a wealthy man, and the hall, into which he was first
admitted, was luxurious in its appearance. But Frank had been brought up
to the enjoyment of wealth, and he felt more at home here than in the
rather shabby boarding house in Clinton Place.

A colored servant opened the door.

"Is Mr. Percival at home?" he asked.

"Yas, sah."

"I should like to see him."

"What name, sah?"

"Frank Courtney."

"Step in, sah, and I will 'form Mr. Percival," said the colored servant,
in a consequential tone that amused Frank.

Frank stepped into the hall, but he was not left long without attention.
Little Freddie ran downstairs, eagerly calling out:

"Did you come to see me, Frank?"

"Yes," answered Frank, smiling; "but I came to see your grandfather,
too."

"Come, and I will show you where he is," said the little boy, taking
Frank's hand.

The two went up the staircase and into a handsomely furnished room, made
attractive by pictures and books.

In a large armchair sat a pleasant-looking elderly man, of about sixty.

"Grandpa," said the little boy, "this is Frank. He wants to see you."

Mr. Percival smiled.

"I am glad to see you, Frank," he said. "It seems, my boy, that you are
already acquainted with my daughter and grandson."

"Yes, sir. I was fortunate enough to meet them to-day."

"You relieved my daughter from some embarrassment."

"I am glad to have had the opportunity, sir."

Frank's manner was easy and self-possessed, and it was evident that Mr.
Percival was favorably impressed by him.

"Take a seat," he said, "while I ask you a few questions."

Frank bowed and obeyed.

"Let me sit in your lap, Frank," said Freddie.

Our hero took the little boy in his lap.

With Freddie, it was certainly a case of friendship at first sight.

"Won't he trouble you?" asked his grandfather.

"No, sir. I like young children."

Mr. Percival now proceeded to interrogate Frank.

"Your name is Frank Courtney. Have you been long in the city?"

"No, sir; only a few weeks."

"What led you to come here?"

"I wished to earn my living."

"What that necessary? You do not look like a poor boy."

"I was brought up to consider myself rich," said Frank.

"Indeed! Did you lose your property?"

"Perhaps I had better tell you how it happened, sir."

"If you don't object, I should be glad to hear."

Frank gave a brief statement of his position, and the circumstances that
led him to leave his home and go out into the world.

Mr. Percival listened thoughtfully.

"It is a singular story," he said, after a pause. "Your stepfather's in
Europe, then?"

"Yes, sir; at least he sailed for Europe."

"Have you heard from him?"

"No, sir."

"Do you expect to hear?"

"I think not."

"He can't feel much interest in you."

"I don't think he does," answered Frank. "Still, I can't say that he has
treated me unkindly."

"Do you suspect that your stepfather has wronged you in the matter of
the property?"

"I would rather not answer that question, sir. I might wrong Mr.
Manning, and I have no proof to offer."

"I understand you, and I applaud your discretion. It does you credit.
Some time or other the mystery may be cleared up, and the wrong, if
there is one, may be righted. I can't understand, however, how this Mr.
Manning should be willing to leave you dependent upon your own exertions
with such a scanty provision as twenty-five dollars a quarter."

"I didn't ask for any more; and, besides, Mr. Manning offered to take me
to Europe with his son Mark."

"Do you think that he was sincere in the offer?"

"I don't think he expected me to accept it, and I am sure that it would
have been very disagreeable to Mark to have me in the party."

"Have you any objections to telling me how you have succeeded in your
efforts to make a living?" asked the old gentleman, with a keen but
kindly glance.

"I have been disappointed, sir," was the candid reply.

"I am not surprised to hear it. A boy brought up as you have been cannot
rough it like a farmer's son or a street boy."

"I think I could, sir; but I should not like to."

"Precisely. Now, I am not sure that you acted wisely in undertaking a
task so difficult, since it was not necessary, and your stepfather could
hardly have refused to support you at home. However, as you have taken
the decisive step, we must consider what is best to do under the
circumstances. What work have you been doing?"

"I have been selling tea for the Great Pekin Tea Company."

"How have you succeeded?"

"I have not been able to pay expenses," Frank admitted.

"How have you made up the difference?"

"I brought about fifty dollars with me from home."

"Is it all used up?"

"I had thirty-five dollars left, sir, but a day or two since one of my
fellow boarders opened my trunk and borrowed it without leave."

"Of course you won't recover it?"

"I don't think there is much chance of it, sir."

"Then probably your money is nearly exhausted?"

Frank did not like to admit his poverty, but owned up that he had less
than two dollars.

"And yet you paid the car fares of this little boy and his mother?"

"I hope, sir, I would not refuse to assist a lady when in trouble."

Mr. Percival nodded two or three times, smiling as he did so. He was
becoming more and more favorably impressed without young hero.

"Do you mean to continue this tea agency?" he asked.

"No, sir; I have already notified my employers that I do not care to
continue it."

"Have you anything else in view?"

Frank felt that now was the time to speak.

"I came here this evening," he said, "intending to ask you if you knew
of any situation I could fill, or could recommend me to employment of
any kind by which I might make a living."

"I must consider that. Have you thought of any particular employment
which you would like?"

"No, sir; I cannot afford to be particular. I will do anything that is
honest, and at all suitable for me."

"What would you consider unsuitable?"

"I should not wish to black boots, for instance, sir. It is honest work,
but I ought to be suited to something better."

"Of course; What education have you had? Good, I suppose?"

"I am nearly ready for college."

"Then you are already fairly well educated. I will put you to a test.
Sit up to the table, and take paper and pen. I will dictate to you a
paragraph from the evening paper, which I should like to have you write
down."

Frank obeyed, though, in doing so, he was obliged to set Freddie down,
rather to the little fellow's dissatisfaction.

Mr. Percival selected a short letter, written by some public man, which
chanced to have found a place in the evening journal.

Frank wrote rapidly, and when his copy was finished submitted it to Mr.
Percival.

The old gentleman took it, and, running his eye over it, noticed that it
was plainly written, correctly spelled and properly punctuated. This
discovery evidently gave him satisfaction.

"Very creditably written," he said. "I have known boys nearly ready for
college who could not copy such a letter without blundering. I am glad
that your English education has not been neglected while you have been
studying the classics."

Frank was gratified by Mr. Percival's commendation, though he could not
see in what manner his education was likely to bring him employment. It
was desirable, however, to produce a favorable impression on Mr.
Percival, and he could not help hoping something would result to his
advantage.

At this moment Freddie's mother entered the room, and greeted Frank with
a cordial smile.

"Freddie," she said, "it is time for you to go to bed."

"I don't want to leave Frank," said Freddie.

"Frank will come and see you again."

"Will you, Frank?"

Frank made the promise, and Mrs. Gordon--for that was her name--left the
room, promising to return before Frank went away.

He was now left alone with the old gentleman.




CHAPTER XXIX

FRANK IS OFFERED A POSITION


Mr. Percival engaged Frank in conversation on general topics while Mrs.
Gordon was out of the room. His young visitor had been an extensive
reader, and displayed a good deal of general information. Moreover, he
expressed himself intelligently and modestly, and deepened the favorable
impression which he had already succeeded in making.

I should like to call the attention of my young readers to the fact that
Frank was now reaping the advantage of the time he had devoted to study
and the cultivation of his mind.

A boy who starts in life with a fair education always stands a better
chance than one who is poorly provided in that respect.

It is true that many of our prominent public men have started with a
very scanty supply of book-learning, but in most cases it has only
transferred the labor of study to their maturer years.

President Andrew Johnson did not learn to read and write until after he
had attained his majority, but he made up his early deficiencies later.

Abraham Lincoln, when nearly thirty, devoted his leisure hours to
mastering the problems in Euclid, and thus trained and strengthened his
mental faculties so that he was enabled to grapple with the difficult
problems of statesmanship in after years.

Henry Wilson commenced attending an academy after he had reached the age
of twenty-one.

The fact is, no boy or man can be too well equipped for his life-work.

I hope my boy readers will not skip the paragraphs above, for they can
learn from them a useful lesson.

When Mrs. Gordon returned, she placed in Frank's hands a small sum of
money, saying:

"Allow me to repay my debt, with many thanks."

"You are quite welcome," answered our hero.

He had too much tact to refuse the money, but quietly put it into his
pocket.

"Helen," said Mr. Percival, "I would like a word with you. We will leave
our young friend here alone for five minutes."

"Certainly, father."

The two went into an adjoining room, and Mr. Percival commenced by
asking:

"How do you like this boy, Helen?"

"Very much. He seems to have been brought up as a gentleman."

"He has. Till a short time since he supposed himself the heir to a
