
"I'm blamed if we ain't goin' to lose that cow," he said. "Come out,
will ye, Hannah, and hold the lantern? I can't do anything with my right
hand in a sling, and Bill is the stupidest critter in the country."

Everybody went out to the barn accordingly, except the doctor's wife,
who ran over to her house to see if her brother Moses had come home from
Milltown, and could come and take a hand in the exercises.

Buttercup was in a bad way; there was no doubt of it. Something, one
of the turnips, presumably, had lodged in her throat, and would move
neither way, despite her attempts to dislodge it. Her breathing was
labored, and her eyes bloodshot from straining and choking. Once or
twice they succeeded in getting her mouth partly open, but before they
could fairly discover the cause of trouble she had wrested her head
away.

"I can see a little tuft of green sticking straight up in the middle,"
said Uncle Cash, while Bill Peters and Moses held a lantern on each side
of Buttercup's head; "but, land! It's so far down, and such a mite of a
thing, I couldn't git it, even if I could use my right hand. S'pose you
try, Bill."

Bill hemmed and hawed, and confessed he didn't care to try. Buttercup's
grinders were of good size and excellent quality, and he had no fancy
for leaving his hand within her jaws. He said he was no good at that
kind of work, but that he would help Uncle Cash hold the cow's head;
that was just as necessary, and considerable safer.

Moses was more inclined to the service of humanity, and did his best,
wrapping his wrist in a cloth, and making desperate but ineffectual dabs
at the slippery green turnip-tops in the reluctantly opened throat. But
the cow tossed her head and stamped her feet and switched her tail
and wriggled from under Bill's hands, so that it seemed altogether
impossible to reach the seat of the trouble.

Uncle Cash was in despair, fuming and fretting the more because of his
own crippled hand.

"Hitch up, Bill," he said, "and, Hannah, you drive over to Milliken's
Mills for the horse-doctor. I know we can git out that turnip if we can
hit on the right tools and somebody to manage em right; but we've got to
be quick about it or the critter'll choke to death, sure! Your hand's so
clumsy, Mose, she thinks her time's come when she feels it in her mouth,
and your fingers are so big you can't ketch holt o' that green stuff
thout its slippin'!"

"Mine ain't big; let me try," said a timid voice, and turning round,
they saw little Elisha Simpson, his trousers pulled on over his
night-shirt, his curly hair ruffled, his eyes vague with sleep.

Uncle Cash gave a laugh of good-humored derision. "You--that's afraid
to drive a cow to pasture? No, sir; you hain't got sand enough for this
job, I guess!"

Buttercup just then gave a worse cough than ever, and her eyes rolled in
her head as if she were giving up the ghost.

"I'd rather do it than see her choke to death!" cried the boy, in
despair.

"Then, by ginger, you can try it, sonny!" said Uncle Cash. "Now this
time we'll tie her head up. Take it slow, and make a good job of it."

Accordingly they pried poor Buttercup's jaws open to put a wooden gag
between them, tied her head up, and kept her as still as they could
while the women held the lanterns.

"Now, sonny, strip up your sleeve and reach as fur down's you can! Wind
your little fingers in among that green stuff stickin' up there that
ain't hardly big enough to call green stuff, give it a twist, and pull
for all you're worth. Land! What a skinny little pipe stem!"

The Little Prophet had stripped up his sleeve. It was a slender thing,
his arm; but he had driven the red cow all summer, borne her tantrums,
protected her from the consequences of her own obstinacy, taking (as he
thought) a future owner's pride in her splendid flow of milk--grown fond
of her, in a word, and now she was choking to death. A skinny little
pipe stem is capable of a deal at such a time, and only a slender hand
and arm could have done the work.

Elisha trembled with nervousness, but he made a dexterous and dashing
entrance into the awful cavern of Buttercup's mouth; descended upon the
tiny clump of green spills or spikes, wound his little fingers in among
them as firmly as he could, and then gave a long, steady, determined
pull with all the strength in this body. That was not so much in itself,
to be sure, but he borrowed a good deal more from some reserve quarter,
the location of which nobody knows anything about, but upon which
everybody draws in time of need.

Such a valiant pull you would never have expected of the Little Prophet.
Such a pull it was that, to his own utter amazement, he suddenly found
himself lying flat on his back on the barn floor with a very slippery
something in his hand, and a fair-sized but rather dilapidated turnip at
the end of it.

"That's the business!" cried Moses.

"I could 'a' done it as easy as nothin' if my arm had been a leetle mite
smaller," said Bill Peters.

"You're a trump, sonny!" exclaimed Uncle Cash, as he helped Moses untie
Buttercup's head and took the gag out.

"You're a trump, Lisha, and, by ginger, the cow's your'n; only don't you
let your blessed pa drink none of her cream!"

The welcome air rushed into Buttercup's lungs and cooled her parched,
torn throat. She was pretty nearly spent, poor thing, and bent her head
(rather gently for her) over the Little Prophet's shoulder as he threw
his arms joyfully about her neck, and whispered, "You're my truly cow
now, ain't you, Buttercup?"

"Mrs. Baxter, dear," said Rebecca, as they walked home to the parsonage
together under the young harvest moon; "there are all sorts of cowards,
aren't there, and don't you think Elisha is one of the best kind."

"I don't quite know what to think about cowards, Rebecca Rowena," said
the minister's wife hesitatingly. "The Little Prophet is the third
coward I have known in my short life who turned out to be a hero when
the real testing time came. Meanwhile the heroes themselves--or the ones
that were taken for heroes--were always busy doing something, or being
somewhere, else."




Eighth Chronicle. ABNER SIMPSON'S NEW LEAF


Rebecca had now cut the bonds that bound her to the Riverboro district
school, and had been for a week a full-fledged pupil at the Wareham
Seminary, towards which goal she had been speeding ever since the
memorable day when she rode into Riverboro on the top of Uncle Jerry
Cobb's stagecoach, and told him that education was intended to be "the
making of her."

She went to and fro, with Emma Jane and the other Riverboro boys and
girls, on the morning and evening trains that ran between the academy
town and Milliken's Mills.

The six days had passed like a dream!--a dream in which she sat in
corners with her eyes cast down; flushed whenever she was addressed;
stammered whenever she answered a question, and nearly died of heart
failure when subjected to an examination of any sort. She delighted
the committee when reading at sight from "King Lear," but somewhat
discouraged them when she could not tell the capital of the United
States. She admitted that her former teacher, Miss Dearborn, might have
mentioned it, but if so she had not remembered it.

In these first weeks among strangers she passed for nothing but an
interesting-looking, timid, innocent, country child, never revealing,
even to the far-seeing Emily Maxwell, a hint of her originality,
facility, or power in any direction. Rebecca was fourteen, but so
slight, and under the paralyzing new conditions so shy, that she
would have been mistaken for twelve had it not been for her general
advancement in the school curriculum.

Growing up in the solitude of a remote farm house, transplanted to a
tiny village where she lived with two elderly spinsters, she was still
the veriest child in all but the practical duties and responsibilities
of life; in those she had long been a woman.

It was Saturday afternoon; her lessons for Monday were all learned and
she burst into the brick house sitting-room with the flushed face and
embarrassed mien that always foreshadowed a request. Requests were more
commonly answered in the negative than in the affirmative at the brick
house, a fact that accounted for the slight confusion in her demeanor.

"Aunt Miranda," she began, "the fishman says that Clara Belle Simpson
wants to see me very much, but Mrs. Fogg can't spare her long at a time,
you know, on account of the baby being no better; but Clara Belle could
walk a mile up, and I a mile down the road, and we could meet at the
pink house half way. Then we could rest and talk an hour or so, and both
be back in time for our suppers. I've fed the cat; she had no appetite,
as it's only two o'clock and she had her dinner at noon, but she'll go
back to her saucer, and it's off my mind. I could go down cellar now
and bring up the cookies and the pie and doughnuts for supper before I
start. Aunt Jane saw no objection; but we thought I'd better ask you so
as to run no risks."

Miranda Sawyer, who had been patiently waiting for the end of this
speech, laid down her knitting and raised her eyes with a half-resigned
expression that meant: Is there anything unusual in heaven or earth or
the waters under the earth that this child does not want to do? Will she
ever settle down to plain, comprehensible Sawyer ways, or will she to
the end make these sudden and radical propositions, suggesting at every
turn the irresponsible Randall ancestry?

"You know well enough, Rebecca, that I don't like you to be intimate
with Abner Simpson's young ones," she said decisively. "They ain't fit
company for anybody that's got Sawyer blood in their veins, if it's ever
so little. I don't know, I'm sure, how you're goin' to turn out! The
fish peddler seems to be your best friend, without it's Abijah Flagg
that you're everlastingly talkin' to lately. I should think you'd
rather read some improvin' book than to be chatterin' with Squire Bean's
chore-boy!"

"He isn't always going to be a chore-boy," explained Rebecca, "and
that's what we're considering. It's his career we talk about, and he
hasn't got any father or mother to advise him. Besides, Clara Belle kind
of belongs to the village now that she lives with Mrs. Fogg; and she
was always the best behaved of all the girls, either in school or
Sunday-school. Children can't help having fathers!"

"Everybody says Abner is turning over a new leaf, and if so, the
family'd ought to be encouraged every possible way," said Miss Jane,
entering the room with her mending basket in hand.

"If Abner Simpson is turnin' over a leaf, or anythin' else in creation,
it's only to see what's on the under side!" remarked Miss Miranda
promptly. "Don't talk to me about new leaves! You can't change that kind
of a man; he is what he is, and you can't make him no different!"

"The grace of God can do consid'rable," observed Jane piously.

"I ain't sayin' but it can if it sets out, but it has to begin early and
stay late on a man like Simpson."

"Now, Mirandy, Abner ain't more'n forty! I don't know what the average
age for repentance is in men-folks, but when you think of what an awful
sight of em leaves it to their deathbeds, forty seems real kind
of young. Not that I've heard Abner has experienced religion, but
everybody's surprised at the good way he's conductin' this fall."

"They'll be surprised the other way round when they come to miss their
firewood and apples and potatoes again," affirmed Miranda.

"Clara Belle don't seem to have inherited from her father," Jane
ventured again timidly. "No wonder Mrs. Fogg sets such store by the
girl. If it hadn't been for her, the baby would have been dead by now."

"Perhaps tryin' to save it was interferin' with the Lord's will," was
Miranda's retort.

"Folks can't stop to figure out just what's the Lord's will when a child
has upset a kettle of scalding water on to himself," and as she spoke
Jane darned more excitedly. "Mrs. Fogg knows well enough she hadn't
ought to have left that baby alone in the kitchen with the stove, even
if she did see Clara Belle comin' across lots. She'd ought to have
waited before drivin' off; but of course she was afraid of missing the
train, and she's too good a woman to be held accountable."

"The minister's wife says Clara Belle is a real--I can't think of the
word!" chimed in Rebecca. "What's the female of hero? Whatever it is,
that's what Mrs. Baxter called her!"

"Clara Belle's the female of Simpson; that's what she is," Miss Miranda
asserted; "but she's been brought up to use her wits, and I ain't sayin'
but she used em."

"I should say she did!" exclaimed Miss Jane; "to put that screaming,
suffering child in the baby-carriage and run all the way to the doctor's
when there wasn't a soul on hand to advise her! Two or three more such
actions would make the Simpson name sound consid'rable sweeter in this
neighborhood."

"Simpson will always sound like Simpson to me!" vouchsafed the elder
sister, "but we've talked enough about em an' to spare. You can go
along, Rebecca; but remember that a child is known by the company she
keeps."

"All right, Aunt Miranda; thank you!" cried Rebecca, leaping from the
chair on which she had been twisting nervously for five minutes. "And
how does this strike you? Would you be in favor of my taking Clara Belle
a company-tart?"

"Don't Mrs. Fogg feed the young one, now she's taken her right into the
family?"

"Oh, yes," Rebecca answered, "she has lovely things to eat, and Mrs.
Fogg won't even let her drink skim milk; but I always feel that taking
a present lets the person know you've been thinking about them and are
extra glad to see them. Besides, unless we have company soon, those
tarts will have to be eaten by the family, and a new batch made; you
remember the one I had when I was rewarding myself last week? That was
queer--but nice," she added hastily.

"Mebbe you could think of something of your own you could give away
without taking my tarts!" responded Miranda tersely; the joints of her
armor having been pierced by the fatally keen tongue of her niece, who
had insinuated that company-tarts lasted a long time in the brick house.
This was a fact; indeed, the company-tart was so named, not from any
idea that it would ever be eaten by guests, but because it was too good
for every-day use.

Rebecca's face crimsoned with shame that she had drifted into an
impolite and, what was worse, an apparently ungrateful speech.

"I didn't mean to say anything not nice, Aunt Miranda," she stammered.
"Truly the tart was splendid, but not exactly like new, that's all. And
oh! I know what I can take Clara Belle! A few chocolate drops out of the
box Mr. Ladd gave me on my birthday."

"You go down cellar and get that tart, same as I told you," commanded
Miranda, "and when you fill it don't uncover a new tumbler of jelly;
there's some dried-apple preserves open that'll do. Wear your rubbers
and your thick jacket. After runnin' all the way down there--for your
legs never seem to be rigged for walkin' like other girls'--you'll set
down on some damp stone or other and ketch your death o' cold, an' your
Aunt Jane n' I'll be kep' up nights nursin' you and luggin' your meals
upstairs to you on a waiter."

 Here Miranda leaned her head against the back of her rocking
chair, dropped her knitting and closed her eyes wearily, for when the
immovable body is opposed by the irresistible force there is a certain
amount of jar and disturbance involved in the operation.

Rebecca moved toward the side door, shooting a questioning glance at
Aunt Jane as she passed. The look was full of mysterious suggestion and
was accompanied by an almost imperceptible gesture. Miss Jane knew that
certain articles were kept in the entry closet, and by this time she had
become sufficiently expert in telegraphy to know that Rebecca's unspoken
query meant: "COULD YOU PERMIT THE HAT WITH THE RED WINGS, IT BEING
SATURDAY, FINE SETTLED WEATHER, AND A PLEASURE EXCURSION?"

These confidential requests, though fraught with embarrassment when
Miranda was in the room, gave Jane much secret joy; there was something
about them that stirred her spinster heart--they were so gay, so
appealing, so un-Sawyer-, un-Riverboro-like. The longer Rebecca lived in
the brick house the more her Aunt Jane marveled at the child. What made
her so different from everybody else. Could it be that her graceless
popinjay of a father, Lorenzo de Medici Randall, had bequeathed her some
strange combination of gifts instead of fortune? Her eyes, her brows,
the color of her lips, the shape of her face, as well as her ways and
words, proclaimed her a changeling in the Sawyer tribe; but what an
enchanting changeling; bringing wit and nonsense and color and delight
into the gray monotony of the dragging years!

There was frost in the air, but a bright cheery sun, as Rebecca walked
decorously out of the brick house yard. Emma Jane Perkins was away over
Sunday on a visit to a cousin in Moderation; Alice Robinson and Candace
Milliken were having measles, and Riverboro was very quiet. Still, life
was seldom anything but a gay adventure to Rebecca, and she started
afresh every morning to its conquest. She was not exacting; the Asmodean
feat of spinning a sand heap into twine was, poetically speaking, always
in her power, so the mile walk to the pink-house gate, and the tryst
with freckled, red-haired Clara Belle Simpson, whose face Miss Miranda
said looked like a raw pie in a brick oven, these commonplace incidents
were sufficiently exhilarating to brighten her eye and quicken her step.

As the great bare horse-chestnut near the pink-house gate loomed into
view, the red linsey-woolsey speck going down the road spied the
blue linsey-woolsey speck coming up, and both specks flew over the
intervening distance and, meeting, embraced each other ardently,
somewhat to the injury of the company-tart.

"Didn't it come out splendidly?" exclaimed Rebecca. "I was so afraid
the fishman wouldn't tell you to start exactly at two, or that one of us
would walk faster than the other; but we met at the very spot! It was a
very uncommon idea, wasn't it? Almost romantic!"

"And what do you think?" asked Clara Belle proudly. "Look at this! Mrs.
Fogg lent me her watch to come home by!"

"Oh, Clara Belle, how wonderful! Mrs. Fogg gets kinder and kinder to
you, doesn't she? You're not homesick any more, are you?"

