
"They surpass us in the matter of inns," said Willet. "They think more
about it--and take more trouble. I'm sorry we have to quarrel with the
French. They're good people, though they haven't been oversqueamish in
the use of savages against us, and they're really responsible for the
cruelties done by the painted demons."

He spoke freely of red "savages" before Tayoga, knowing that the young
Onondaga would never think of applying the word to himself. Willet had
shown too often that he considered the people of the Hodenosaunee the
equals of anybody. Then he took their three rifles, laid them together
on the grass by the side of a graveled walk and, looking at the vast
expanse of mountain, forest and river, drew a deep breath.

"It's not much like fighting for our lives back there in the gorge, is
it, Robert?" he asked. "It's a strange world here in America. We're
lying in a rocky hollow one day, shooting at people who are shooting at
us, and both sides shooting to kill, and two or three days later we're
sitting at an inn in a town, eating off silver and china."

"It's a quick and pleasant transformation," said Robert,
appreciatively.

He would have called it supper, but in Montreal it was dinner, and it
was served by Lizette and Marie. There was fish from the St. Lawrence,
chicken, beef, many vegetables, good white bread and coffee, all
prepared in the excellent manner characteristic of Monsieur Jolivet's
famous inn. Tayoga ate abundantly but delicately. He had learned the use
of knife and fork at the school in Albany, and, like Robert, he was
fastidious at the table.

Monsieur Jolivet, after his manner, gave them much of his own presence.
One must be polite to the Bostonnais at such a time. He discoursed quite
freely of Montreal, and of its advantages as a great trading post with
the Indians, who already brought there vast quantities of furs. It would
become one of the greatest and most brilliant jewels in the French
crown, second perhaps only to Paris. But for the present, the chief
glory of New France could be seen only at Quebec Ah, when the Bostonnais
arrived there they would behold great lords and great ladies!

The three listened, each interested in his own way. Robert's fancy saw
the silken splendor of a vice-regal court, and, anxious to know the
larger world, he was more glad than ever that he had come upon this
errand, dangerous though it had proved to be.

They sat a while after the dinner was over, looking down at the town and
the great view beyond, a clear moon and brilliant stars casting a silver
light which illuminated almost like the day. They saw lights gleaming
in houses, and now and then shadowy figures passing. Out in the river a
boat with a mast rocked in the current, and Robert believed it was the
_Frontenac_ of Louis de Galisonniere.

As the dusk thickened over the great river, the island, the hills and
the forest, Hochelaga seemed very small, and the inn of the excellent
Monsieur Jolivet was just a tiny point of light in all that vast
darkness. It shone, nevertheless, by contrast, and was a little island
of warmth and comfort in the sea of the wilderness. Monsieur Jolivet,
who was deeply interested in the Bostonnais and the proud young
Iroquois, talked freely. Under his light and chattering manner lay great
powers of perception, and he saw that he had guests of quality, each in
his own way. The hunter even was not an ordinary hunter, but, as
Monsieur Jolivet judged, a man of uncommon intellectual power, and also
of education. He would discover as much about them as he could, for his
own personal gratification, because he might give valuable information
to the commandant at Montreal, who was his friend, and because later on
he might speak a useful word or two in the ear of Louis de Galisonniere,
whom he knew well and whose good opinion he valued.

Robert, who was in a cheerful mood and who wished to exercise his gift
of golden speech, met him half way, and enlarged upon the splendor and
power of Britain, the great kingdom that bestrode the Atlantic, seated
immovable in Europe, and yet spreading through her colonies in America,
increasing and growing mightier all the time. It was soon a test of
eloquence between him and Monsieur Jolivet, in which each was seeking
to obtain from the other an expression of the opinion that swayed his
country. The Onondaga was silent, and the hunter spoke only a word or
two, but each listened intently to the dialogue, which, however earnest
it might be, never went beyond the bounds of good humor.

"I cannot make you see the truth," said Monsieur Jolivet, at last,
smiling and spreading his hands. "I cannot convince you that France is
the first of nations, the nation of light and learning and humanity, and
yet it is so. And seated here upon the St. Lawrence we shall build up
another France, the New France of America, which will shed light upon
you English or Bostonnais down below, and teach you the grace and beauty
of civilization."

"We should be willing to learn from any who can teach us," said Robert,
"and such a willingness I claim is a chief merit of us English who are
born in America, or Bostonnais, as you would call us."

Monsieur Jolivet once more spread out his hands in deprecation.

"We argue in vain," he said. "But now Lizette comes with the coffee,
which is one of the most glorious triumphs of my inn. Does the young
chief drink coffee?"

"Yes," replied Robert, "he learned at Albany all the white man's
habits."

After the coffee they rose from the table and mine host prepared to show
them to their room. The darkness had thickened meanwhile and glimpses of
the river and the hills were faint. The little garden was enclosed by
three walls of darkness, being lighted on the side where it joined the
inn. Yet Robert thought he saw a shifting figure blacker than the
shadows in which it moved.

Marie and Lizette took away the silver and china and Monsieur Jolivet
went ahead to show them to their room. Then something whistled in the
darkness, and an arrow buried to the head of the barb stood out in the
rear wall of the inn. The three seized their rifles, but the darker
shadow in the shadows was gone. Tayoga broke off the arrow level with
the wall, and threw the shaft into the garden.

"It was Tandakora," he said, "seeking revenge. But since the arrow has
sped wrong he will not loose another shaft tonight. If it had not been
for his wounded shoulder the arrow might have gone true. It was a
treacherous deed, worthy of the savage Ojibway."

"I hope the time will come," said Willet, "when I shall send a bullet
not through Tandakora's shoulder, but through his heart. I don't love
the shedding of blood, but the forest will be a better forest without
him. Meanwhile, say nothing, lads. Monsieur Jolivet is coming back, but
don't mention the arrow to him. He may find the head of it later on in
the wall, and then he can wonder about it as much as he pleases."

Mine host bustled back. The foul and treacherous attempt, the breaking
off of the arrow, and the comment upon it had taken less than a minute,
and, good observer though he was, he noticed nothing unusual in the
appearance of his guests. They carried their rifles in their hands, but
many visitors to Montreal did the same, and as they were beautiful
weapons they might well guard against their loss.

"Follow me, my Bostonnais," he said lightly. "I have the great room with
three beds for you, and I trust that you have enjoyed the dinner."

"We have enjoyed it greatly, all of it, Monsieur Jolivet, and especially
the dessert," replied Robert with meaning.

"Ah, the pastry," said Monsieur Jolivet, clasping his hands. "It is
Marie who made it. It is the gift that she has, and I shall tell her of
your praise."

But Robert was not thinking of the pastry. It was of the arrow that he
spoke as dessert, although the excellent Monsieur Jolivet was destined
never to know the hidden significance of his words. The room which he
showed them with so much pride was a large apartment worthy of their
praise, having a polished, shining floor of oak, with furs spread here
and there upon it, and a low ceiling crossed with mighty beams also of
oak. Robert looked at the windows, three in number, and he saw with
satisfaction that they had heavy shutters. Monsieur Jolivet's glance
followed his own, and he said:

"The shutters are for use in the winter, when the great colds come, and
the fierce winds rage. But you, messieurs, who live so much in the
forest, will, of course, prefer to keep them wide open tonight."

Robert murmured assent, but when Monsieur Jolivet departed, wishing
them a polite good night, he looked at his comrades.

"We are used to air," said Willet, "and lots of it, but those shutters
will be closed until morning. As Tayoga truly said, he will hardly dare
another arrow, but we mustn't take any risk, however small."

Tayoga nodded approval, and drawing the shutters close, they fastened
them. Then they undressed and lay down upon their beds, but each
prepared to sleep with his rifle beside him.

"The catches on those shutters are good and strong," said Willet, "and
Tandakora, even if he should come again, won't try to break them. It
wouldn't suit the purposes of the French for a warrior of a tribe allied
with them to be caught trying to murder English visitors, and, that
being the case, I expect to go to sleep soon and sleep well."

He was as good as his word. Robert, who blew out the candle, soon heard
his regular breathing. Tayoga, who was used to rooms, the Iroquois
themselves having strong log houses, quickly followed him in slumber,
but young Lennox was not able to compose his nerves for a little while.
He was perhaps more sensitive and imaginative than his comrades, or the
close air may have kept him awake. He could not help feeling that
Tandakora was outside trying the fastenings of the shutters, and at last
rising, he walked on tiptoe and listened at every window in turn. He
heard nothing without but the breathing of the gentle wind, and then,
knowing that it had been only his vivid fancy, he went back to bed and
slept soundly.

"Wake up, Robert, and breathe this air! After our having been sealed up
in a room all night the breeze is heavenly."

The shutters were thrown back, and the hunter and Tayoga, fully dressed,
stood by the windows. The air, fresh, life-giving, coming over the great
forests and the mighty river, was pouring into the room in streams, and
Tayoga and Willet were facing it, in order that they might receive it
straight upon their foreheads. Robert joined them, and soon felt as if
he had been created anew and stronger.

"I'll never again sleep in a room closed tight and hard," said Willet,
"not even to protect my life. I've roamed the free woods for so many
years that I think another such experience would make me choke to
death."

"I'm not in love with it myself," said Robert, "but it makes the world
outside look all the grander and all the more beautiful."

At their wish breakfast was served for them by Monsieur Jolivet in the
garden, Willet insisting that for the present he could not stay any
longer in a house. Robert from his seat could see the end of the broken
barb embedded in the wall, but neither mine host nor any of his
assistants had yet noticed it.

Monsieur Jolivet was pleased that they should have such a brilliant day
to begin their journey to Quebec, and he was telling them where they
could sell their canoe and buy a good boat when Louis de Galisonniere
appeared in the garden and presented them the compliments of the
morning. He looked so trim and so gay that he brought with him a
cheerful breeze, and the three felt the effect of it, although they
wondered at the nature of his errand there. Robert invited him to join
them at breakfast and he accepted their invitation, taking a roll and
butter and a cup of coffee after the French custom which even then
prevailed.

"I see that you've slept well," he said, "and that the inn of Monsieur
Jolivet is as kind to the Bostonnais as it is to the French and the
Canadians."

"Its hospitality to us could be no finer if we came from Paris itself,
instead of the Province of New York," said Robert. "Our stay in Canada
has been short, but most interesting."

Monsieur Jolivet had gone into the inn, and de Galisonniere said:

"Montreal is a fine town and I would not depreciate it in the presence
of our host, but as I have told you before, our Quebec to which you are
going is the true glory of New France. My knowledge that you're going
there is the reason why I've come here this morning."

"How is that?" asked Robert

"Because I received orders last night to depart in the _Frontenac_ for
Quebec, a journey that I undertake with great willingness, since it
takes me where I wish to go. I have also the authority of the commandant
to ask your presence as guests for the voyage on board my vessel. Until
we French and you English actually go to war we might as well be
friends."

Robert glanced at Tayoga and Willet and they nodded slightly. Then he
replied warmly that they accepted the invitation and would go with much
pleasure in the _Frontenac_. After breakfast they sold the canoe and
embarked presently, having first said goodby to Monsieur Jolivet, who
with his best napkin, waved them farewell.

Robert was more than pleased at their good luck. The _Frontenac_ offered
them a better passage than any boat they could buy and have to row
perhaps with their own strength. Moreover, they were already on
excellent terms with de Galisonniere, and it would be a good thing for
them to arrive at Quebec in his company.

A strong wind was blowing, and the _Frontenac_ moved swiftly over the
surface of the great stream which was like liquid green glass that
morning. The three had put their weapons, including Tayoga's bow and
arrows, in the cabin, and they sat on deck with de Galisonniere, who
looked with pride at the magnificent river which was the very artery of
life in the New France of the chevaliers. Robert's own heart throbbed as
he knew that this last stage of their journey would take them to famous
Quebec.

"If the St. Lawrence didn't freeze over for such a long period," said de
Galisonniere, "this region would become in time the greatest empire in
the world."

"But isn't that a huge 'if'?" asked Robert, laughing.

De Galisonniere smiled.

"It is," he said, "but New France is the chief jewel in the French
crown, nevertheless. In time the vice-regal court at Quebec will rule an
empire greater than that of France itself. Think of the huge lakes, the
great rivers, the illimitable forests, beyond them the plains over which
the buffalo herds roam in millions, and beyond them, so they say, range
on range of mountains and forests without end."

"I have been thinking of them," said Robert, "but I've been thinking of
them in a British way."

De Galisonniere laughed again and then grew serious.

"It's natural," he said, "that you should think of them in a British
way, while I think of them in a French way. I suppose we shall have war,
Mr. Lennox, but doesn't it seem strange that England and France should
fight about American territory, when there's so much of it? Here's a
continent that civilized man cannot occupy for many generations. Both
England and France could be hidden away in its forests, and it would
take explorers to find them, and yet we must fight over a claim to
regions that we cannot occupy."

Robert decided then that he liked young de Galisonniere very much. Some
such thoughts had been passing through his own mind, and he was glad
that he could talk frankly about the coming war with one who would be on
the other side, one who would be an official but not a personal enemy.
As the _Frontenac_ slid on through the tumbling green current they
talked earnestly. Willet, sitting near, glanced at them occasionally,
but he too had plenty of thoughts of his own, while Tayoga, saying
nothing, gazed at the high green southern shore. This, so the old men
said, had once been the land of the Mohawks, one of the great nations
of the Hodenosaunee, and now the children of Onontio, who had come with
firearms against bows and arrows, spoke of it as theirs since Manitou
first made the land rise from the deep. Tayoga was silent but he had
many thoughts, and they were thoughts that came to him often and stayed
long.

"De Courcelles and Jumonville, whom you met in the forest," said de
Galisonniere, at length, "arrived in Montreal early last night, and
after a stay of only two or three hours sailed in a schooner for
Quebec."

"Did you see them at all while they were in Montreal?" asked Robert, who
seemed to detect significance in the young Frenchman's tone.

"Only for a few moments," replied de Galisonniere, and Robert, judging
that he wished to avoid more talk on the subject, made no further
reference to de Courcelles. But the knowledge that he had gone on ahead
to Quebec troubled him. De Courcelles was not so young and frank as de
Galisonniere, nor did he seem to have the fine soul and chivalric spirit
of St. Luc. Robert felt the three had cause to fear him.

But the journey down the St. Lawrence continued without serious delay,
although the wind failed now and then and they took to the oars. It was
a voyage full of variety and interest to Robert. He slept that night
with his comrades on the deck of the _Frontenac_, and the next morning
he found a strong wind again blowing.

In time they approached Quebec, and saw the increasing signs of
population that betokened proximity to what was then in the eyes of
North Americans a great capital. On either shore they saw the manor
houses of the seigneurs, solid stone structures, low, steep of roof and
gabled, with clustering outhouses, and often a stone mill near by. The
churches also increased in numbers, and at one point the _Frontenac_
stopped and took on a priest, a tall strongly built man of middle years,
with a firm face. De Galisonniere introduced him as Father Philibert
Drouillard, and Robert felt his penetrating gaze upon his face. Then it
shifted to Willet and Tayoga, resting long upon the Onondaga.

Robert, knowing the great power of the church in Canada, was curious
about Father Drouillard, whom he knew at once to be no ordinary man. His
lean ascetic face seemed to show the spirit that had marked Jogues and
Goupil and those other early priests whom no danger nor Indian torture
could daunt. But he was too polite to ask questions, feeling that time
would bring him all the information he wanted, in which he was right, as
de Galisonniere said later in the day when Father Drouillard was sitting
in the little cabin out of hearing:

"A man of influence at Quebec. He has no parish, nor seems to wish any,
but he is deep in the councils of the Church. It is known, too, that he
corresponds with Rome, with the Holy Father himself, 'tis said, and
there are men high in office at Quebec who wish that he might be called
from New France back to the old land. Francois Bigot, the Intendant,
does not love him, nor does anyone of the group about Bigot, neither his
commissary general, Cadet, nor Pean, the Town Mayor of Quebec, nor
