

The American Red Cross Society, 715 Union Trust Bldg., Washington, D. C.,
issues a series of five handsomely lithographed wall charts mounted on
linen and heavy rollers. These charts are numbered as follows and may be
purchased for $2.50 for the set.

Chart I. The Skeleton;
Chart II. The Muscles;
Chart III. Scheme of Systematic Circulation;
Chart IV. Fracture and Dislocation;
Chart V. Arteries and Points' of Pressure for Controlling Hemorrhage.

These charts will make the talks doubly attractive. Honor points are given
boys for essays written upon the Health Talks. Some camps found that boys
were desirous of taking examinations in First Aid. In one camp
twenty-three boys won the Certificates of the American Red Cross Society.
For information write to the Educational Department of the International
Committee, Young Men's Christian Association, 124 East 28th Street, New
York, or the American Red Cross Society. (See address above)



CHAPTER XVI--PERSONAL HYGIENE

EATING
TEETH
HANDS
EYES
EARS
NOSE
HAIR
FEET
INTERNAL ORGANS
BATHING
SLEEP
CLOTHING

Eating

Very little thought is given by the boy to what he eats, as long as it
suits his taste, and there is an ample supply. The causes of most skin
diseases are largely traceable to diet. Chew the food slowly. Don't "bolt"
food. Your stomach is not like that of a dog. Food must be thoroughly
masticated and moistened with saliva. Hasty chewing and swallowing of food
makes masses which tend to sour and become poison. This often accounts for
the belching of gas, sense of burning and pain, and other forms of
distress after eating. Drink before or after meals. Don't overeat.
Conversation aids digestion. Eating between meals is detrimental to good
digestion. Regular meal hours should prevail. After dinner is the best
time to eat candy or sweets.

[Illustration: Camp Tooth Brush]

The Teeth

If the tooth brush gets lost make one out of a dry stick, about six inches
long, which can be frayed out at the ends like the illustration. A clean
mouth is as important as a clean body. The teeth should be cleaned twice a
day, morning and evening. Insist upon the bringing of a tooth brush to
camp. Impress upon the boys that time spent upon teeth cleansing will
prevent hours of agony upon a dentist chair. Cleansing the teeth of sticky
deposits by running fine threads between them, in addition to the use of a
brush and a simple powder, prevents deposits from becoming the starting
point of decay.

The Hands

Care of hands and nails is much neglected in camp, Nails should be
properly trimmed and the "mourning" removed from underneath the nails. The
habit of biting the finger nails is dangerous. Finger nails should be cut
once a week with sharp scissors or "clip." If the nails be neglected and a
scratch received from the infected fingers the system may be inoculated
with disease. The cleansing of the hands after using the lavatory needs
special emphasis, for in no place do more germs collect and spread. Boys
should not be permitted to use each other's towels, combs, brushes, or
soap. A towel may carry germs from one boy to another.

The Eyes

Never strain the eyes. When reading, always let the light come over the
shoulder and upon the page, the eyes being in the shadow. Do not read with
the sunlight streaming across the page. When writing have the light come
from the left side. Do not rub the eyes with the hands. Headaches and
nervousness are due largely to defective vision. "Work, play, rest and
sleep, muscular exercise, wise feeding, and regular removal of the
waste--these and all other hygienic habits help to keep the eyes sound and
strong."--Sedgewick.

The Ear

It is dangerous to put a pointed pencil or anything sharpened into the
ear. "Boxing" the ear, shouting in the ear, exploding a paper bag, may
split the drum and cause deafness. The best way to remove excess wax from
the ear is to use a soft, damp cloth over the end of the finger. Ear-wax
is a protection against insects getting in from the outside.

The Nose

Keep the nose free from obstructions, and avoid the use of dirty
handkerchiefs. Always breathe through the nose and not through the mouth.
Boys who observe this rule will not get thirsty while on a hike or get out
of breath so easily. They don't breathe in all sorts of microbes or seeds
of disease, and they don't snore at night.

The Hair

In washing the hair avoid using soap more than once a week, as it removes
the natural oil of the hair. Frequent combing and brushing adds to the
lustre, and the head gets a beneficial form of massage. Wear no hat at
camp, except to protect from sun rays or rain.

The Feet

Footwear is a matter of importance. Shoes should never be worn too tight.
They not only hinder free movements, but also hinder the blood
circulation, and cause coldness and numbness of the extremities. Sore
feet, because of ill-fitting shoes, are a detriment to happy camp life.
Have good, well-fitting, roomy shoes, and fairly stout ones. Keep the feet
dry. If they are allowed to get wet, the skin is softened and very soon
gets blistered and rubbed raw.

[Illustration: Figure 1.      Figure 2.]

Figure 1 shows a perfectly shaped foot. This is the natural shape, and if
the boy is allowed to go barefooted or wear sandals, his foot will assume
this shape. Figure 2 shows the distorted shape brought about by cramped
shoes. The best thing to wear is thick moccasins of moose hide.

Internal Organs

Constipation is a frequent camp complaint, and is usually the result of
change in diet and drinking water. The habit of having a daily movement of
the bowels is of great importance to a boy's health. The retention of
these waste products within the body for a longer period tends to produce
poisonous impurities of the blood, a muddy-looking skin, headaches, piles,
and many other evils. Eat plenty of fruit, prunes, and graham bread. Drink
plenty of water. Take plenty of exercise.

Bathing

One bath a day in fresh water is all that is necessary. Boys go into the
water too often and remain too long. This accounts for the rundown
appearance of some boys. The body gives off heat every minute it is in
cool water, and also when exposed wet to the breezes, and heat is life.
All boys should be encouraged to take a dip before breakfast with a rapid
rubdown. Then a good swim in the warm part of the day. Usually about 11:30
A.M. is a good time for the swim. If a swim is taken after supper, be
careful to dress warm afterward.

Sleep

Normal boys need nine or ten hours sleep. Sleep is a time for physical
growth. Have the tent open back and front at night to insure plenty of
fresh air. There must be a complete change of clothing on retiring.
Flannel clothing should be worn at night. Sleep alone. Nine o'clock or
nine-thirty, at latest, should find every boy in bed.

Clothing

Wear clean clothing, particularly underwear. Frequently a rash appearing
on the body is a result of wearing dirty-shirts. The wearing of belts
tends to constrict the abdomen, thus hindering the natural action of the
intestines, which is essential to good digestion. Hernia (ruptures) may
result from wearing tightly drawn belts. To dress the body too warm
lessens the power to resist cold when there happens to be a change in the
atmosphere. Put on extra clothing at sundown, without waiting to begin to
feel cold. During eating of meals it is well to have the legs and arms
covered when it is at all cool. The cooling of large surfaces of the body
while eating, even if it is not noticed, retards digestion, and taxes the
vitality. Many a boy gets a cold by neglecting to take this precaution.

GENERAL HINTS

Two flannel shirts are better than two overcoats.

Don't wring out flannels or woolens. Wash in cold water, very soapy, and
then hang them up dripping wet, and they will not shrink.

If you keep your head from getting hot, and keep your feet dry, there will
be little danger of sickness.

If your head gets too hot, put green leaves inside your hat.

If your throat is parched and you can get no water, put a pebble in your
mouth. This will start the saliva and quench the thirst.

HEALTH MAXIMS AND QUOTATIONS

"Keep thyself pure."

"Health is wealth."

"A sound mind in a sound body."

"Fresh air and sunshine are necessary to good health."

"Cleanliness is the best guard against disease."

"A clean mouth is as important as a clean body."

"Virtue never dwelt long with filth."

"Temperance, exercise, and repose
Slam the door on the doctor's nose."
--Longfellow.

"Cleanliness is next to Godliness."
"Health and cheerfulness naturally beget each other."
--Addison.

"Nor love, nor honor, wealth nor power,
Can give the heart a cheerful hour,
When health is lost. Be truly wise.
With health, all taste of pleasure flies."
--Gay.

"Health is a second blessing that we mortals are capable of:
a blessing that money cannot buy."
--Walton.

"There are three wicks, you know, to the lamp of a man's life: brain,
blood, and breath. Press the brain a little, its light goes out, followed
by both the others. Stop the heart a minute, and out go all three of the
wicks. Choke the air out of the lungs, and presently the fluid ceases to
supply the other centres of flame, and all is soon stagnation, cold, and
darkness."
--O. W. Holmes.

[Illustration: Bending the Bow--Camp Kineo]



CHAPTER XVII--ATHLETICS, CAMPUS GAMES, AQUATICS AND WATER SPORTS

PURPOSE OF GAMES
BASEBALL LEAGUE
GROUP CLASSIFICATION
WHAT TO AVOID
ATHLETIC EVENTS
AWARDS
MAKING ATHLETIC APPARATUS
CAMPUS GAMES
CIRCLE JUMPING
WOLF
ROVER ALL COME OVER
INDIAN AND WHITE MAN
GERMAN BOWLING
TETHER BALL
VOLLEY BALL
AQUATIC SPORTS
WATER GAMES
WATER BASKET BALL
WATER BASEBALL
OLD CLOTHES RACE
TILTING
CANOE TAG
WHALE HUNT
MAKING A "SHOOT-THE-CHUTE"
ARCHERY
THE TARGET
THE BOW
MAKING A BOW
MAKING ARROWS
ESSENTIAL POINTS IN
ARCHERY
BIBLIOGRAPHY


If I can teach these boys to study and play together, freely and with
fairness to one another, I shall make them fit to live and work together
in society.--Henry van Dyke.

Purpose of Games

The spirit of camping is too frequently destroyed by over-emphasis upon
competitive games. Play is necessary for the growing boy and play that
engages many participants has the most value. America today is suffering
from highly specialized, semi-professional athletics and games. "When
athletics degenerate into a mere spectacle, then is the stability of the
nation weakened. Greece led the world, while the youth of that great
country deemed it an honor to struggle for the laurel leaf, and gymnasiums
were everywhere and universally used and the people saw little good in an
education that neglected the body. It is a significant fact that the
degeneracy of Greece was synchronous with the degrading of athletics into
mere professional contests. What had been the athletics of the people
became a spectacle for the people." [1]

[Footnote 1: Emmett D. Angell in "Play," p. 19.]

Baseball League

Do not allow the athletics and games of the camp to become a mere
spectacle for the campers. Something should be planned for every boy and
every boy encouraged to participate in the program. Nothing has yet taken
the place of the good old American game of baseball. Divide the camp boys
into teams. Have a league playing a series of games. The teams may be
named after the different colleges or prominent cities or as one camp
named the league, the "Food League" after popular camp dishes, such as:
"Prunes," "Beans," "Soup," "Hash," "Mush," "Chipped Beef." It is needless
to state that the boys in the league not only had a lot of fun, but the
camp paper contained very amusing accounts of the games played.

Arrange a schedule of games and keep accurate records of all games played
either in the "Camp Log" or camp paper. A dinner given to the winning team
adds to the excitement of the league's existence. Do not neglect the
younger boys; have two "Midget" teams engage in a series for best two out
of three games. Occasionally a game between the leaders and older boys is
the exciting game of the season, especially if the leaders are defeated.

The same rule of participation should govern the athletics of the camp.
Inter-tent games help to develop group loyalty, cooperation, fair play,
and courtesy to opponents so desirable.

Groups

In some camps the boys are divided into two groups, those under five feet
in height and those over five feet. Events are planned for these two
groups. The system of grouping suggested by the School Athletic League, is
that of grouping the boys according to physiological rather than
chronological age, as follows:
  Pre-pubescent boys under 90 pounds.
  Pubescent boys or juniors, 90 to 110 pounds.
  Post-pubescent or intermediates, 110 to 130 pounds.
  Seniors, above 130 pounds.

The boys are weighed in competing costume. This system is looked upon as
being fair and practical.

What to Avoid

The following should be avoided--Marathon runs, sustained effort in and
under water and competitive long-distance running. The longest sprint race
should be, for boys, 50 yards, for juniors, 75 yards. No adolescent who is
not past the pubescent stage should run sprint races longer than 100
yards. Cross-country running is beneficial when taken at a slow pace and
without competition. Every boy should be examined for heart weakness
before entering the strenuous games.

The above is the opinion of physical directors from twenty-one different
States and may be considered authoritative. This same opinion prevails
among most of the experienced camp leaders and workers among boys.

Events

The athletics usually planned for camp are: 50 yard dash for boys; 75-yard
dash for juniors; 100 yard dash for seniors; running high jump; running
broad jump; pole vault; 8 and 12-pound shot-put; baseball throw and relay
race.

Awards

Ribbon awards presented to the winners at a special meeting of the campers
aid considerably in fostering the true spirit of clean athletics and
wholesome sport and are appreciated by the winners as souvenirs of the
good-natured contest.

Camps possessing a stereopticon[1] should secure the set of slides and
lecture accompanying from the Moral Education League of Baltimore, Md.,
entitled "The True Sportsman." Rental terms are five dollars a week and
expressage.

[Transcribers Footnote 1: stereopticon: A magic lantern, with two
projectors arranged to produce dissolving views.]

A perpetual cup for all-round proficiency, upon which is engraved the name
of each year's winner, is a good way of recording the annual athletic
meet.

A shield with the names of the winners of the season's events painted or
burned upon it and hung up in the camp lodge helps to retain the interest
of the winner in the camp after he has become a "grown-up" or alumnus.

[Illustration: Take-off; Cross-section of Take-off;  Jumping Standards;]

Apparatus

Boys who like to make things may be put to work making various pieces of
athletic apparatus. A Take-Off may be made of a plank or board, 8 inches
wide and 36 inches long, sunk flush with the earth. The outer edge of this
plank is considered the scratch line. Remove the earth to a depth of three
inches and width of twelve inches.

To make a pair of jumping standards, first saw out the bottom blocks, each
being 10 x 10 inches and 2 inches thick. In the center of each block
chisel out a hole 2 x 2 inches and about 1 inch in depth. Into these holes
fit the ends of the upright pieces, which should be 5 feet long and 2
inches square. Before securing the upright pieces, bore holes an inch
apart, into which may be inserted a piece of heavy wire or large wire nail
to hold up the cross piece or jumping stick. Be sure to space the holes
alike on both uprights, so the crosspiece will set level when the standard
is in use. Four 5-inch braces are fastened in at the lower part of the
upright. Study the diagram and you will succeed in making a pretty good
pair of standards.

Campus Games

After supper is usually a period in the camp life rather difficult of
occupation. "Campus Games" appeal to most boys. These games are designed
especially for the after-supper hour, although they may be played at any
time.

Circle Jumping

Stand the boys in a circle with all hands clasped. One of the crowd lies
down in the center with a rope as long as one-half the diameter of the
circle. To the end of the rope is tied a small weight like a sand bag. He
whirls the weight around with the full length of rope revolving with
increasing rapidity. As it approaches the players, they hop up and let it
pass under their feet. The one whose foot is touched is out of the game
and the boy who keeps out of the way of the rope the longest is the
winner.

Wolf

Here is a Japanese game full of fun and action. Place a dozen or more boys
in line, and have each fellow place his hands firmly on the shoulders of
the boy in front of him. Choose one of the fellows for the "Wolf." The
first boy at the head of the line is called the "Head" of the Serpent, and
the last fellow is the "Tail." The "Wolf" stands near the head of the
Serpent until a signal is given. Then he tries to catch the "Tail" without
touching any other part of the snake. The boys who form the body of the
Serpent protect the "Tail" by wreathing about in all sorts of twists to
prevent the "Wolf" from catching the "Tail." This must be done without
breaking the line. When the "Tail" is caught, the "Wolf" becomes the
"Head," and the "Tail" becomes the "Wolf." The last boy in line is the
"Tail." The game can be continued until every boy has been the "Wolf."

Rover, All Come Over

A line is marked dividing the campus. All the boys gather on one side. One
boy in the center endeavors to have them step over the line by calling
out, "Rover, Rover, all come over!" At the word "over" everybody is
expected to run and cross the line, while the center man endeavors to
catch one. The one caught must help him catch the others. If any one runs
over before the center man calls "over," he has to go to the aid of the
catcher. When all are caught the game begins again.

[Illustration: German Nine Pins--Camp Becket]

