
"Yes; and a dirty, little, snivelling, sneaking fellow he was too. He
never dared join us, and used to toady the bullies by offering to fag
for them, and peaching against the rest of us."

"Why wasn't he cut, then?" said East.

"Oh, toadies never get cut; they're too useful. Besides, he has no end
of great hampers from home, with wine and game in them; so he toadied
and fed himself into favour."

The quarter-to-ten bell now rang, and the small boys went off upstairs,
still consulting together, and praising their new counsellor, who
stretched himself out on the bench before the hall fire again. There
he lay, a very queer specimen of boyhood, by name Diggs, and familiarly
called "the Mucker." He was young for his size, and a very clever
fellow, nearly at the top of the fifth. His friends at home, having
regard, I suppose, to his age, and not to his size and place in the
school, hadn't put him into tails; and even his jackets were always too
small; and he had a talent for destroying clothes and making himself
look shabby. He wasn't on terms with Flashman's set, who sneered at his
dress and ways behind his back; which he knew, and revenged himself
by asking Flashman the most disagreeable questions, and treating him
familiarly whenever a crowd of boys were round him. Neither was he
intimate with any of the other bigger boys, who were warned off by
his oddnesses, for he was a very queer fellow; besides, amongst other
failings, he had that of impecuniosity in a remarkable degree. He
brought as much money as other boys to school, but got rid of it in no
time, no one knew how; and then, being also reckless, borrowed from any
one; and when his debts accumulated and creditors pressed, would have
an auction in the hall of everything he possessed in the world, selling
even his school-books, candlestick, and study table. For weeks after
one of these auctions, having rendered his study uninhabitable, he would
live about in the fifth-form room and hall, doing his verses on old
letter-backs and odd scraps of paper, and learning his lessons no one
knew how. He never meddled with any little boy, and was popular with
them, though they all looked on him with a sort of compassion, and
called him "Poor Diggs," not being able to resist appearances, or to
disregard wholly even the sneers of their enemy Flashman. However, he
seemed equally indifferent to the sneers of big boys and the pity of
small ones, and lived his own queer life with much apparent enjoyment to
himself. It is necessary to introduce Diggs thus particularly, as he not
only did Tom and East good service in their present warfare, as is about
to be told, but soon afterwards, when he got into the sixth, chose them
for his fags, and excused them from study-fagging, thereby earning unto
himself eternal gratitude from them and all who are interested in their
history.

And seldom had small boys more need of a friend, for the morning after
the siege the storm burst upon the rebels in all its violence. Flashman
laid wait, and caught Tom before second lesson, and receiving a
point-blank "No" when told to fetch his hat, seized him and twisted his
arm, and went through the other methods of torture in use. "He couldn't
make me cry, though," as Tom said triumphantly to the rest of the
rebels; "and I kicked his shins well, I know." And soon it crept
out that a lot of the fags were in league, and Flashman excited his
associates to join him in bringing the young vagabonds to their senses;
and the house was filled with constant chasings, and sieges, and
lickings of all sorts; and in return, the bullies' beds were pulled to
pieces and drenched with water, and their names written up on the walls
with every insulting epithet which the fag invention could furnish. The
war, in short, raged fiercely; but soon, as Diggs had told them, all
the better fellows in the fifth gave up trying to fag them, and public
feeling began to set against Flashman and his two or three intimates,
and they were obliged to keep their doings more secret, but being
thorough bad fellows, missed no opportunity of torturing in private.
Flashman was an adept in all ways, but above all in the power of saying
cutting and cruel things, and could often bring tears to the eyes of
boys in this way, which all the thrashings in the world wouldn't have
wrung from them.

And as his operations were being cut short in other directions, he now
devoted himself chiefly to Tom and East, who lived at his own door, and
would force himself into their study whenever he found a chance, and sit
there, sometimes alone, and sometimes with a companion, interrupting all
their work, and exulting in the evident pain which every now and then he
could see he was inflicting on one or the other.

The storm had cleared the air for the rest of the house, and a better
state of things now began than there had been since old Brooke had left;
but an angry, dark spot of thunder-cloud still hung over the end of the
passage where Flashman's study and that of East and Tom lay.

He felt that they had been the first rebels, and that the rebellion had
been to a great extent successful; but what above all stirred the
hatred and bitterness of his heart against them was that in the frequent
collisions which there had been of late they had openly called him
coward and sneak. The taunts were too true to be forgiven. While he
was in the act of thrashing them, they would roar out instances of his
funking at football, or shirking some encounter with a lout of half his
own size. These things were all well enough known in the house, but
to have his own disgrace shouted out by small boys, to feel that they
despised him, to be unable to silence them by any amount of torture, and
to see the open laugh and sneer of his own associates (who were looking
on, and took no trouble to hide their scorn from him, though they
neither interfered with his bullying nor lived a bit the less intimately
with him), made him beside himself. Come what might, he would make those
boys' lives miserable. So the strife settled down into a personal affair
between Flashman and our youngsters--a war to the knife, to be fought
out in the little cockpit at the end of the bottom passage.

Flashman, be it said, was about seventeen years old, and big and strong
of his age. He played well at all games where pluck wasn't much wanted,
and managed generally to keep up appearances where it was; and having
a bluff, off-hand manner, which passed for heartiness, and considerable
powers of being pleasant when he liked, went down with the school in
general for a good fellow enough. Even in the School-house, by dint of
his command of money, the constant supply of good things which he kept
up, and his adroit toadyism, he had managed to make himself not only
tolerated, but rather popular amongst his own contemporaries; although
young Brooke scarcely spoke to him, and one or two others of the right
sort showed their opinions of him whenever a chance offered. But the
wrong sort happened to be in the ascendant just now, and so Flashman
was a formidable enemy for small boys. This soon became plain enough.
Flashman left no slander unspoken, and no deed undone, which could in
any way hurt his victims, or isolate them from the rest of the
house. One by one most of the other rebels fell away from them, while
Flashman's cause prospered, and several other fifth-form boys began to
look black at them and ill-treat them as they passed about the house. By
keeping out of bounds, or at all events out of the house and quadrangle,
all day, and carefully barring themselves in at night, East and Tom
managed to hold on without feeling very miserable; but it was as much as
they could do. Greatly were they drawn then towards old Diggs, who, in
an uncouth way, began to take a good deal of notice of them, and once
or twice came to their study when Flashman was there, who immediately
decamped in consequence. The boys thought that Diggs must have been
watching.

When therefore, about this time, an auction was one night announced to
take place in the hall, at which, amongst the superfluities of other
boys, all Diggs's penates for the time being were going to the hammer,
East and Tom laid their heads together, and resolved to devote their
ready cash (some four shillings sterling) to redeem such articles as
that sum would cover. Accordingly, they duly attended to bid, and
Tom became the owner of two lots of Diggs's things:--Lot 1, price
one-and-threepence, consisting (as the auctioneer remarked) of a
"valuable assortment of old metals," in the shape of a mouse-trap, a
cheese-toaster without a handle, and a saucepan: Lot 2, of a
villainous dirty table-cloth and green-baize curtain; while East, for
one-and-sixpence, purchased a leather paper-case, with a lock but no
key, once handsome, but now much the worse for wear. But they had still
the point to settle of how to get Diggs to take the things without
hurting his feelings. This they solved by leaving them in his study,
which was never locked when he was out. Diggs, who had attended the
auction, remembered who had bought the lots, and came to their study
soon after, and sat silent for some time, cracking his great red
finger-joints. Then he laid hold of their verses, and began looking over
and altering them, and at last got up, and turning his back to them,
said, "You're uncommon good-hearted little beggars, you two. I value
that paper-case; my sister gave it to me last holidays. I won't
forget." And so he tumbled out into the passage, leaving them somewhat
embarrassed, but not sorry that he knew what they had done.

The next morning was Saturday, the day on which the allowances of one
shilling a week were paid--an important event to spendthrift youngsters;
and great was the disgust amongst the small fry to hear that all the
allowances had been impounded for the Derby lottery. That great event
in the English year, the Derby, was celebrated at Rugby in those days
by many lotteries. It was not an improving custom, I own, gentle reader,
and led to making books, and betting, and other objectionable results;
but when our great Houses of Palaver think it right to stop the nation's
business on that day and many of the members bet heavily themselves, can
you blame us boys for following the example of our betters? At any rate
we did follow it. First there was the great school lottery, where the
first prize was six or seven pounds; then each house had one or more
separate lotteries. These were all nominally voluntary, no boy being
compelled to put in his shilling who didn't choose to do so. But besides
Flashman, there were three or four other fast, sporting young gentlemen
in the Schoolhouse, who considered subscription a matter of duty and
necessity; and so, to make their duty come easy to the small
boys, quietly secured the allowances in a lump when given out for
distribution, and kept them. It was no use grumbling--so many fewer
tartlets and apples were eaten and fives balls bought on that Saturday;
and after locking-up, when the money would otherwise have been spent,
consolation was carried to many a small boy by the sound of the
night-fags shouting along the passages, "Gentlemen sportsmen of the
School-house; the lottery's going to be drawn in the hall." It was
pleasant to be called a gentleman sportsman, also to have a chance of
drawing a favourite horse.

The hall was full of boys, and at the head of one of the long tables
stood the sporting interest, with a hat before them, in which were the
tickets folded up. One of them then began calling out the list of the
house. Each boy as his name was called drew a ticket from the hat, and
opened it; and most of the bigger boys, after drawing, left the hall
directly to go back to their studies or the fifth-form room. The
sporting interest had all drawn blanks, and they were sulky accordingly;
neither of the favourites had yet been drawn, and it had come down to
the upper-fourth. So now, as each small boy came up and drew his ticket,
it was seized and opened by Flashman, or some other of the standers-by.
But no great favourite is drawn until it comes to the Tadpole's turn,
and he shuffles up and draws, and tries to make off, but is caught, and
his ticket is opened like the rest.

"Here you are! Wanderer--the third favourite!" shouts the opener.

"I say, just give me my ticket, please," remonstrates Tadpole.

"Hullo! don't be in a hurry," breaks in Flashman; "what'll you sell
Wanderer for now?"

"I don't want to sell," rejoins Tadpole.

"Oh, don't you! Now listen, you young fool: you don't know anything
about it; the horse is no use to you. He won't win, but I want him as a
hedge. Now, I'll give you half a crown for him." Tadpole holds out, but
between threats and cajoleries at length sells half for one shilling and
sixpence--about a fifth of its fair market value; however, he is glad to
realize anything, and, as he wisely remarks, "Wanderer mayn't win, and
the tizzy is safe anyhow."

East presently comes up and draws a blank. Soon after comes Tom's turn.
His ticket, like the others, is seized and opened. "Here you are then,"
shouts the opener, holding it up--"Harkaway!--By Jove, Flashey, your
young friend's in luck."

"Give me the ticket," says Flashman, with an oath, leaning across the
table with open hand and his face black with rage.

"Wouldn't you like it?" replies the opener, not a bad fellow at the
bottom, and no admirer of Flashman. "Here, Brown, catch hold." And he
hands the ticket to Tom, who pockets it. Whereupon Flashman makes for
the door at once, that Tom and the ticket may not escape, and there
keeps watch until the drawing is over and all the boys are gone, except
the sporting set of five or six, who stay to compare books, make bets,
and so on; Tom, who doesn't choose to move while Flashman is at the
door; and East, who stays by his friend, anticipating trouble. The
sporting set now gathered round Tom. Public opinion wouldn't allow them
actually to rob him of his ticket, but any humbug or intimidation by
which he could be driven to sell the whole or part at an undervalue was
lawful.

"Now, young Brown, come, what'll you sell me Harkaway for? I hear he
isn't going to start. I'll give you five shillings for him," begins
the boy who had opened the ticket. Tom, remembering his good deed, and
moreover in his forlorn state wishing to make a friend, is about
to accept the offer, when another cries out, "I'll give you seven
shillings." Tom hesitated and looked from one to the other.

"No, no!" said Flashman, pushing in, "leave me to deal with him; we'll
draw lots for it afterwards. Now sir, you know me: you'll sell Harkaway
to us for five shillings, or you'll repent it."

"I won't sell a bit of him," answered Tom shortly.

"You hear that now!" said Flashman, turning to the others. "He's the
coxiest young blackguard in the house. I always told you so. We're
to have all the trouble and risk of getting up the lotteries for the
benefit of such fellows as he."

Flashman forgets to explain what risk they ran, but he speaks to willing
ears. Gambling makes boys selfish and cruel as well as men.

"That's true. We always draw blanks," cried one.--"Now, sir, you shall
sell half, at any rate."

"I won't," said Tom, flushing up to his hair, and lumping them all in
his mind with his sworn enemy.

"Very well then; let's roast him," cried Flashman, and catches hold of
Tom by the collar. One or two boys hesitate, but the rest join in. East
seizes Tom's arm, and tries to pull him away, but is knocked back by
one of the boys, and Tom is dragged along struggling. His shoulders are
pushed against the mantelpiece, and he is held by main force before the
fire, Flashman drawing his trousers tight by way of extra torture. Poor
East, in more pain even than Tom, suddenly thinks of Diggs, and darts
off to find him. "Will you sell now for ten shillings?" says one boy who
is relenting.

Tom only answers by groans and struggles.

"I say, Flashey, he has had enough," says the same boy, dropping the arm
he holds.

"No, no; another turn'll do it," answers Flashman. But poor Tom is done
already, turns deadly pale, and his head falls forward on his breast,
just as Diggs, in frantic excitement, rushes into the hall with East at
his heels.

"You cowardly brutes!" is all he can say, as he catches Tom from them
and supports him to the hall table. "Good God! he's dying. Here, get
some cold water--run for the housekeeper."

Flashman and one or two others slink away; the rest, ashamed and
sorry, bend over Tom or run for water, while East darts off for the
housekeeper. Water comes, and they throw it on his hands and face, and
he begins to come to. "Mother!"--the words came feebly and slowly--"it's
very cold to-night." Poor old Diggs is blubbering like a child. "Where
am I?" goes on Tom, opening his eyes, "Ah! I remember now." And he shut
his eyes again and groaned.

"I say," is whispered, "we can't do any good, and the housekeeper will
be here in a minute." And all but one steal away. He stays with Diggs,
silent and sorrowful, and fans Tom's face.

The housekeeper comes in with strong salts, and Tom soon recovers enough
to sit up. There is a smell of burning. She examines his clothes, and
looks up inquiringly. The boys are silent.

"How did he come so?" No answer. "There's been some bad work here," she
adds, looking very serious, "and I shall speak to the Doctor about it."
Still no answer.

"Hadn't we better carry him to the sick-room?" suggests Diggs.

"Oh, I can walk now," says Tom; and, supported by East and the
housekeeper, goes to the sick-room. The boy who held his ground is soon
amongst the rest, who are all in fear of their lives. "Did he peach?"
"Does she know about it?"

"Not a word; he's a stanch little fellow." And pausing a moment, he
adds, "I'm sick of this work; what brutes we've been!"

Meantime Tom is stretched on the sofa in the housekeeper's room, with
East by his side, while she gets wine and water and other restoratives.

"Are you much hurt, dear old boy?" whispers East.

"Only the back of my legs," answers Tom. They are indeed badly scorched,
and part of his trousers burnt through. But soon he is in bed with
cold bandages. At first he feels broken, and thinks of writing home and
getting taken away; and the verse of a hymn he had learned years ago
sings through his head, and he goes to sleep, murmuring,--


"Where the wicked cease from troubling, And the weary are at rest."


But after a sound night's rest, the old boy-spirit comes back again.
East comes in, reporting that the whole house is with him; and he
forgets everything, except their old resolve never to be beaten by that
bully Flashman.

Not a word could the housekeeper extract from either of them, and though
the Doctor knew all that she knew that morning, he never knew any more.

I trust and believe that such scenes are not possible now at school,
and that lotteries and betting-books have gone out; but I am writing of
schools as they were in our time, and must give the evil with the good.



CHAPTER IX--A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS.

     "Wherein I [speak] of most disastrous chances,
     Of moving accidents by flood and field,
     Of hair-breadth 'scapes."--SHAKESPEARE.

When Tom came back into school after a couple of days in the sick-room,
he found matters much changed for the better, as East had led him to
expect. Flashman's brutality had disgusted most even of his intimate
friends, and his cowardice had once more been made plain to the house;
for Diggs had encountered him on the morning after the lottery, and
after high words on both sides, had struck him, and the blow was not
returned. However, Flashey was not unused to this sort of thing, and had
lived through as awkward affairs before, and, as Diggs had said, fed and
toadied himself back into favour again. Two or three of the boys who had
