London on Thursday night?"

"Yes," said Jack, faintly.

"Did Acton take you?"

"Yes."

"You know that if Dr. Moore hears of it he will expel you."

"Yes."

"You went to oblige Acton?"

"Yes."

"Did you ever think what pater would think if he heard about this?"

[Illustration: "CUT, YOU MISERABLE PUPPY!"]

Jack, as a matter of course, had thought many a time of what his father
would think about the business, and when Phil in that level voice of his
recalled him to this terrible point he broke down.

"Phil, do not tell pater; he'd never forgive me! Nor Corker. Cut me into
ribbons if you like, only don't let me be expelled."

"Here," said Phil, "I don't want any snivelling in my room. Cut, you
miserable puppy, to your own quarters, and when school is over keep to
them till I come. You're a contemptible little puppy."

Jack hurried out, crunching Raffles' letter in his fist. He went
straight to Acton's room, and, bursting in whilst Acton was drinking his
last cup of coffee, blurted out the dismal news. Jack was almost
hysterical in his rage against Raffles.

"Acton, I believe that filthy blackmailer meant Phil to get that letter:
he wanted to round on me and get me into trouble. Oh!" said Jack, in a
very explosion of futile rage, "if I could only pound his ugly face into
a jelly."

"Well, perhaps you'll have that pleasure one day, Jack. I hope so,
anyhow. Now, straight, Jack, you need not be frightened of your brother
saying a word. He could never risk Corker hearing of it, for he could
not bear the chance of expulsion, so he'll lie low as far as Corker is
concerned, take my word for it. He may hand you over to your father, but
that, too, I doubt. He may give you a thrashing himself, which I fancy
he will."

"I don't mind that," said Jack. "I deserve something."

"No, you don't, old man; and I'm fearfully sorry that I've got you into
this hole. But your brother will certainly interview me."

"I suppose so," said Jack, thoughtfully, even in his rage and shame. "I
hope there is no row between you;" for the idea of an open quarrel
between Phil and Acton made Jack rather qualmish.

"You'd better cut now, Jack, and lie low till you find out when the
hurricane is going to commence."

Jack went away, and as the door closed softly behind him Acton smiled
sweetly.

"Well, Raffles has managed it nicely, and carried out my orders to the
strokings of the t's. He is quite a genius in a low kind of way. And now
I'm ready for Philip Bourne, Esq. I bet I'm a sight more comfortable
than he is." Which was very true.

I, of course, knew nothing of all these occurrences at the time, and the
first intimation I had that anything was wrong was when Phil Bourne came
into my room and gave me a plain unvarnished account, _sans_ comment, of
Acton's and young Bourne's foolery in London.

"I'm awfully glad, old man, that I am able to tell you this, because,
although you're Captain of the school, you can't do anything, since
Acton is a monitor."

(It is an unwritten law at St. Amory's that one monitor can never, under
any circumstances, "peach" upon another.)

"Well, I'm jolly glad too, Bourne, since your brother's in it."

"What has to be done to Acton? Jack, of course, was only a tool in his
hands."

"Oh, of course. It is perfectly certain that our friend engineered the
whole business up to and including the letter, which _was_ meant for
you."

"Do you really think that?" said Phil.

"I'm as certain of it as I can be of anything that I don't actually know
to be true."

"Why did he do it?"

"Do you feel anything about this, old man?"

"I feel in the bluest funk that I can remember."

"Then, that's why."

"You see, I cannot put my ringer on the brute."

"He has you in a cleft stick. Who knows that better than Acton?"

"I'm going to thrash Jack, the little idiot. I distinctly told him to
give Acton a wide berth."

"Jack, of course, is an idiot; but Acton is the fellow that wants the
thrashing."

Phil pondered over this for fully five minutes.

"You're right, old man, and I'll give--I'll try to give--him the
thrashing he deserves."

"Big biz," said I. "You say you aren't as good as Hodgson; Hodgson isn't
in the same street as Acton; _ergo_, you aren't in the same parish."

"That's your beastly logic, Carr. Does a good cause count for nothing?"

"Not for much, when you're dealing with sharps."

"I see _you've_ inherited your pater's law books. The school goes home
to-morrow, doesn't it? Well, my Lord Chief Justice, in what relation do
you stand towards the school to-morrow? Are you Captain?"

"No," said I, in my best legal manner. "There is no school
to-morrow--_ergo_, there cannot be a captain of a non-existent thing.
To-morrow is a _dies non_ as far as I'm concerned. Why this thirst for
knowledge, Phil?"

"Because I want you to be my second against Acton, and I didn't want
your captaincy to aid or abet me in a thing which is against rules."

"I see," said I, warmly, "and I will sink the rules and all the rest,
and trust to a little rough justice being done on an arrant scamp."

"Thanks," said Phil. "With you as second and a good cause, I ought to
teach Acton a little genuine lesson."

"I'd rather trust in a good straight left."

"All right, then. I'll see Acton now, and bring him to the point."

"Do, and let me have the result."

Phil swung off in that cool, level-headed fashion which is peculiarly
his own. He had thought the matter out thoroughly in that five minutes'
brown study, and now that he had put his hand to the plough he would not
look back. I liked the set shoulders and his even step down the
corridor. Surely something must reach Acton now! He walked down the
street, turned in at Biffen's yard, and mounted up to Acton's room. He
knocked firmly on the partly open door, and when he heard Acton's "Come
in," walked solidly in.

Acton smiled amiably when he saw his visitor, and, with his half-foreign
politeness, drew out a chair.

"No, thanks," said Phil, icily; "but, if you've no objection, I'd like
to close your door. May I?"

"By all means."

"My opinion of you, Acton----"

"Why trouble about that, Bourne; I know it.".

----"is that you're an unmitigated cad."

"Gently, friend, gently," said Acton, half getting up.

"You, by your foul play, have disfigured poor Aspinall for life----"

"Bourne, you're a monomaniac on that subject. I've had the pleasure of
telling you once before that you were a liar."

"And you did not get your 'footer' cap for it, which seems such a paltry
punishment for so villainous a crime."

"That is stale, stale," said Acton, coolly.

"You entice my brother to London, which means expulsion for him if it is
found out by Dr. Moore."

"I believe that's the rule."

"The expulsion of Jack would bring disgrace on an honest name in the
school and give pain to an honest gentleman----"

"The pity o' 't," said Acton, with a sneer.

"And so, since you, by a kind of malicious fate, seem to escape all
proper punishment----"

"You should be a parson, Bourne."

"I'm going to try to give you your deserts myself."

"An avenging angel. Oh, ye gods!"

"Do you mind turning out at the old milling ground at seven sharp
to-morrow morning?"

"The mornings are chilly," said Acton, with a snigger. "Besides, I
don't really see what pressing obligation I'm under to turn out at that
time for the poor pleasure of knocking you down."

"I never thought you were a coward."

"How charitable!"

"But we must bring you to book somehow. Will you fight--now?"

Before he had time to avoid the blow Phil had struck him lightly on the
face. For one half second a veritable devil peeped out of Acton's eyes
as he sprung at Phil. But Phil quickly backed, and said coolly, "No--no,
sir! Let us do the thing decently and in order. You can try to do all
you wish to-morrow morning very much at your ease. I apologize for
striking you in your own room, but necessity, you know----"

"Bourne, you'll regret that blow!"

"Never," said Phil, emphatically, and with cutting contempt. "I have
asked Carr to second me. I dare say Vercoe would do the same for you. He
has the merit of being a perfectly straightforward fellow, and since he
does not go home like the rest to-morrow----"

"Thanks. Vercoe will do excellently. He is a friend of yours, too!"

"I'm glad to say he is."

"Well, you may now be pretty certain there will be no foul play,
whatever else may follow. I'll teach you wisdom on your front teeth."

"I dare say," said Phil, as he coolly stalked out, and left Acton curled
up on his chair, like a cobra balancing for its stroke.




CHAPTER XXIV

A RENEWED FRIENDSHIP


One morning Gus was much astonished to receive a letter containing a
blank sheet of notepaper enfolding a postal order for L1. This was
properly filled in, payable to A.V.R. Todd at St. Amory's Post-office,
but there was not the slightest clue as to the sender. Gus looked at the
blue and white slip in an ecstasy of astonishment. Now, Gus knew that no
one was aware of his bankrupt exchequer save Cotton, and he knew that
Jim was not likely to have said anything about it for one or two very
good reasons, and would now keep it darker than ever. If it were known
that Gus had been practically pilloried for being penniless by the
fellow who had lifted his cash, Cotton would have heard a few fancy
remarks on his own conduct which would have made his ears tingle. Gus
pondered over this problem of the sender until he felt giddy, but he
finally came to the conclusion that Cotton had regretted his polite
attentions to an old friend, and had sent the order as a kind of _amende
honorable_. Gus instantly regretted the fervent wishes about the boiling
oil and the public kicking for Jim Cotton, and he also determined to go
and thank his old patron for what he was sure was his anonymous gift.

So, after breakfast, he cashed the order and, with pockets heavier with
coin than they had been for some time, he went to Jim Cotton's room. Jim
received him with an odd mixture of anger and shame, and when Gus handed
over to him two half-crowns, Cotton in some confusion, told him to hand
them over to Philips, who had initiated the subscription for the Penfold
tablet.

"Thought you were the secretary?" said Gus.

"No! I'm out of the boat now. Philips is the man," said Cotton, sulkily.

"And, by the way, Jim, it wasn't half bad of you to send me that order.
It was no end brickish, especially after I had left you more or less in
the lurch."

"What order?" said Jim, looking curiously at Gus.

"What's the good of trying to pass it off like that, old man? It could
only be you."

"I don't know what you're driving at. You seem to be talking rot," said
Cotton, angrily, for he fancied that Gus was fooling him in some way.

"Well, I've got an order for L1 this morning, envelope stamped St.
Amory, and it could only come from some one who knew I was stumped, and
you're the only fellow who knew that, unless, indeed, you've been kind
enough to tell some of the fellows."

"I've told no one; and anyway, I didn't send the order."

"Oh, rot!"

"Thanks! I don't tell lies as a rule, and I say I know nothing whatever
about your order. I think you'd better cut now, instead of wasting my
time with this rotten foolery."

"You didn't send it?" said Gus, finally, with more than a dash of
irritation in his voice at the continued boorishness of Cotton.

"No, I tell you! Shall I get a foghorn and let you have it that way?"

"Then, look here, Cotton. If you didn't send it, your underscoring of my
name on the house list because I couldn't subscribe was the act of an
arrant cad."

Cotton winced at Gus's concise definition, but he said, "Oh, get out,
you fool!"

"Fool, or not," said Gus, becoming more angry every moment as he thought
of his wrongs, "I'm not an underbred loafer who cleans a fellow out of
his cash and then rounds on him because he can't pay his way. Why, a
Whitechapel guttersnipe----"

"Can't appreciate the allusion," said Jim; "I've never been to
Whitechapel. But anyhow, Todd, there's the door. I think you had really
better go."

"Not till I've said you're the biggest bounder in St. Amory's."

"Now you've said it you really must go, or I'll throw you out!"

Gus was too taken up with his own passion to notice that Cotton was also
at about the limit of his patience, and that Jim's lips had set into a
grim and ugly sneer. Todd was furiously trying to find some clinching
expression which would quite define Jim's conduct, when that gentleman
took one stride forward and caught him by the collar. The grip, the very
touch of Cotton's fingers maddened Gus beyond all bearing. His anger
broke loose from all control; he wrenched himself out of Cotton's grasp
and passionately struck him on the mouth.

Cotton turned grey with passion as bitter as Todd's and repaid Gus's
blow with interest. Gus dropped to the floor, bleeding villainously.
Cotton thereupon jerked him to his feet, and threw him out of the room.

Gus picked himself up from the corridor floor and went to his own room,
his face as white as a sheet and his heart as black as ink. What Gus
suffered from his passion, his shame, his hatred, and the pain of his
old friend's blow, for the next few hours words will not tell. He
attended morning school, his head in a whirl of thought. Cotton was
there too, and, could looks have killed, Jim Cotton would not have been
in the land of the living for very long. When Merishall went, Gus waited
until all the form had filed out, and, still dizzy and sick, he wearily
followed suit and turned in at his own door. As Gus came into the room
some one rose up and faced round to meet him, and Todd found himself
once more face to face with Cotton.

Now, the blow which had tumbled down Gus so heartily had, so to speak,
tumbled down the striker in his own mind just as thoroughly. Jim
Cotton's mind was not a subtle one, but the minute after he had floored
Gus and shut the door on him, his better mind told him distinctly that
he was a cad. Why? Because when he struck Gus the feeling was as though
he had struck a cripple. Gus had doubled up under the weight of his hand
as though he had been a leaf. Cotton dimly felt that for a fellow of his
build and weight to let Gus have the full benefit of both was not fair.
"That is how it must feel, I suppose, to strike a girl. My fist seems
unclean," he said, in huge disgust. "I'd give Todd his three sovs. back
if I could recall that blow. I wish I'd left the fool alone, and anyhow,
it's my opinion I don't shine much in our little squabble. Todd has been
playing the man since his Perry cropper, and I've been playing the cad
just because he was once useful to me and I did not want to let him go."
Cotton devoted the next few hours to a little honest unselfish thinking,
and the result was that he came pretty near to despising himself. "I'll
go and apologize to Gus, and if he shies the poker at my head I'm hanged
if I dodge it."

That is why Gus was received in his own room by the fellow who had so
lately knocked him down. Gus stared at Jim, his swollen lip trembling
with anger and his eyes blazing with indignation.

"I say, Gus, old man, I am an utter out-and-out cad, and I've come to
apologize."

Gus murmured something indistinctly.

"When I knocked you down I did the most blackguardly thing that even I
have ever done, and, you may believe me or not, I am now about disgusted
with myself. I felt that there was only one thing that I could do, and
that was to apologize."

Jim was so obviously cut up by remorse that Gus thereupon buried the
hatchet. He did not throw the poker at Jim's head, and you may be
surprised to hear--or you may not--that Gus and Jim Cotton took their
after-dinner coffee at Hooper's, as in the old time. The conversation
was _staccato_ at first, but interesting.

"But who sent the order?" said Gus.

"Dunno, really; but I could almost bet my boots that Taylor is the
criminal."

"Taylor! What does he know of my affairs?"

"Well, that beastly house list with your red raw agony column made him
most suspicious, and I believe he knows to a hair exactly how big a cad
I've been."

