one of those taken from the two warriors that Henry had slain, was a fine
weapon, carrying far and true, and he was perfectly satisfied with it.

Then they started, and they traveled all day northward, through a fine
rolling country, with little prairies and great quantities of game. It was
fully equal to Kentucky, but Paul knew they were in the heart of the
chosen home of the northern Indians, and it behooved them to be cautious.
But there were no signs of pursuit, and they went on all day undisturbed.

Late in the afternoon they entered a dense forest, and walked through it
about two hours, when Paul saw an opening among the trees. It was a great
flash of silver that all at once greeted his eyes. But as he looked it
turned to gold under the late sun.

"Another of those little prairies," he said.

Henry laughed.

"No, Paul," he said, "that's not a prairie. The sun and the sky together
have fooled you. It's a lake, and we're going to live in it for a little
while."

"A lake," echoed Paul, "and we're going to live in it? Come on, I want to
see it!"

Kentucky was not a country of lakes, and Paul did not know much about
them. Hence, as he hastened forward, he was thinking more of the lake
itself than of Henry's somewhat enigmatic words, "We're going to live in
it."

They soon reached its margin, and Paul uttered a little cry of delight. It
was a splendid sheet of water, shaped like a half moon, seven miles long,
perhaps, and two miles across at the center. But at the widest part stood
a gem of a wooded island, covered with giant trees. High hills, clothed
with magnificent forest, rose all around the lake.

The beauty of the scene penetrated the souls of all. Uneducated men like
Shif'less Sol and Jim Hart felt it as well as Paul. The five stood in
silence, gazing at the lake and the gem of a wooded island. The light from
the sinking sun gleamed in red and gold flame across the silver waters,
and on the wooded island the boughs of the trees seemed to be touched with
fire.

"That's where we are to stay," said Henry, pointing to the little island.
"No Indian will ever trouble us there."

"Why?" asked Paul, looking at him questioningly.

"Wait and you'll see," replied Henry.

Henry led the way along the shore, and from a dense thicket at the water's
edge he took a light canoe.

"I captured this once," he said; "brought it across the woods and hid it
here, thinking it might be useful some day, and now you see I am right.
Get in! Light as it is, it will hold us all."

Henry and Ross took the paddles, and they pushed out into the lake.
Shif'less Sol uttered a long and deep sigh of satisfaction.

"Now, this jest suits a tired man," he said. "Henry, you an' Tom can
paddle jest ez long ez you please. I'd like to do all my travelin' this
way."

"An' you'd get so lazy you'd want somebody to come an' feed you with a
spoon," said Jim Hart.

"An' it would jest suit me to have you do it. That's jest the kind uv a
job you're fit fur, Jim Hart."

"Shet up, you two," said Ross. "You hurt my ears, a-buzzin' an'
a-buzzin'."

Shif'less Sol sank back a little and closed his eyes. An expression of
heavenly luxury and ease came over his face, but it could not last long
because in a few minutes the boat reached the wooded island. Shif'less Sol
opened his eyes, to find that the sun was almost gone, and that the
shadows had come among the great trees.

"Cur'us kind o' place," he said. "Gives me a sort o' shiver."

Paul had felt the same sensation, but he said nothing. Before them lay the
little island, a solid, black blot, its trees blended together, and behind
them the lake shone somberly in the growing darkness.

"All out!" said Henry cheerfully. "This is home for a while, and we need
rest."

They sprang upon the narrow beach, and Henry and Ross dragged the canoe
into some thick bushes, where they hid it artfully. Paul meanwhile was
looking about him, and trying to keep down the ghostly feeling that would
assail him at times. The island, so far as he could judge, was perhaps two
hundred yards long, half as broad, and thickly covered with forest. But he
could see nothing of the interior.

"Come," said Henry Ware, in the same tone of cheerful confidence, as he
led the way.

The others followed, stepping lightly among the great tree trunks, and
Henry did not stop until he came to a small, open space in the very center
of the island, where a spring bubbled up among some rocks, and flowed away
in a tiny brook in a narrow channel to the lake. The open space was almost
circular, and the great trees grew so thickly around that they looked like
a wall.

"Here is the place to rest," said Henry. "There is no need for anybody to
watch."

They lay down upon the ground, disposing themselves on the softest spots
that they could find. Paul stared up for a few moments at the great
circular wall of trees, and the weird, chilly sensation came again, but he
was too tired and sleepy to think about it long. In fifteen minutes he
slumbered soundly, and so did all the others. They lay with their faces
showing but faintly in the dusk, and as they lay in the sheltered cove a
soft wind breathed gently over them.

All were up early in the morning, and Paul was surprised to see Henry
lighting a fire with flint and steel.

"Why do you do that, Henry?" he said. "Will not the smoke give warning to
our enemies that we are here?"

"We shall send up but little smoke," replied Henry; "but if they should
see it, they will not come."

He went on with the fire, and Paul, although mystified, would not ask
anything more, too proud to show ignorance, and confident that anyhow he
would soon learn the cause of these strange proceedings. The fire was
lighted, and burned brightly, but cast off little smoke. Then Henry turned
to Paul.

"Let's go up to the north end of the island," he said.

It was a walk of but a few minutes, and Henry, stopping before they
reached the margin of the lake, said:

"Look up, Paul!"

Paul did so, and saw many dark objects in the forks of trees about him, or
tied to the boughs. They looked like shapeless bundles, and he did not
know what they were.

"A burying ground," said Henry, in answer to his inquiring look.

Paul felt the same weird little shiver that had assailed him the night
before.

"A burying ground!"

"Yes, but by some old, old tribe before the Shawnees or Miamis. What you
see are only bundles of sticks and skeletons. No bodies have been left
here in a long time, and the Indians think the island is haunted by the
ghosts of those who died and were left here long, long ago. That is why we
needed to keep no watch last night. I discovered this place on a hunting
trip, and I've always kept it in mind.

"Let's go back," said Paul, who did not like to look at this burying
ground in the air.

Henry laughed a little, but he did willingly as Paul requested, and when
they returned to the fire they found that Jim Hart, falling easily into
his natural position, had already cooked the venison. Paul's spirits at
once went up with a bound. The bright fire, the pleasant odor of the
venison, the cheerful faces of his comrades, and assured safety appealed
to his vivid imagination, and made the blood leap in a sparkling torrent
through his veins.

"Graveyard or no graveyard, I'm glad I'm here," he said energetically.

They laughed, and Shif'less Sol, who, as usual, had found the softest
place and had stretched himself upon it, said, with drawling emphasis:

"You're mighty right, Paul, an' I'm a'gin' movin' from here afore cold
weather comes. I'm pow'ful comf'table."

"If you don't git up an' stir aroun', how do you expect to eat?" said Jim
Hart indignantly. "We ain't got venison enough for more'n ten more meals."

"Henry an' Tom will shoot it, an' you'll cook it fur me," said Sol
complacently.

Jim Hart growled, but Henry and Ross were already discussing this question
of a food supply, and Paul listened.

"The Indians don't come about the lake much," said Henry, "and it will be
easy enough to find deer, but we must hunt at night. We mustn't let the
savages see us, as it might break the island's spell."

"We'll take the canoe and go out to-night," said Ross.

"And this lake ought to be full of fish," said Paul. "We might draw on it,
too, for a food supply."

"Looks likely," said Ross. "But we'd best not try that, either, till
dusk."

But they worked in the course of the day at the manufacture of their rude
fishing tackle, constructed chiefly of their clothing, the hooks being
nothing more than a rough sort of pin bent to the right shape. This done,
they spent the rest of the day in loafing and lolling about, although Paul
took a half hour for the thorough exploration of the island, which
presented no unusual features beyond those that he had already seen. After
that he came back to the little cove and luxuriated, as the others were
doing. It was the keenest sort of joy now just to rest, to lie at one's
ease, and to feel the freedom from danger. The old burying ground was a
better guard about them than a thousand men.

But when night came, Henry and Ross took out the canoe again, and Paul
asked to go with them.

"All right," said Henry, "you come with us, and Sol, you and Jim Hart can
do the fishing and the quarreling, with nobody to bother you."

"Jest my luck," said Shif'less Sol, "to be left on a desert island with an
ornery cuss like Jim Hart."

Henry, setting the paddle against the bank, gave the canoe a great shove,
and it shot far out into the lake. Paul looked back. Already their island
was the solid dark blot it had been the night before, while the waters
moved darkly under a light, northern wind.

"Sit very quiet, Paul," said Henry. "Tom and I will do the paddling."

Paul was more than content to obey, and he remained very still while the
other two, with long, sweeping strokes, sent the canoe toward a point
where the enclosing bank was lowest.

"Don't you think we'd better stay in the boat, Henry?" said Ross.

"Yes; game must be thick hereabouts, and if we wait long enough we're sure
to find a deer coming down to drink."

They cruised for a while along the shore, keeping well in the darkest
shadow until they reached a point where the keen eyes of Henry Ware saw,
despite the darkness, that many hoofs had trampled.

"This is a favorite drinking place," he said. "Back us into those bushes,
Tom, and we'll wait."

Ross pushed the canoe into some bushes until it was hidden, though the
occupants could see through the leaves whatever might come to the water to
drink, and they took up their rifles. They lay a little to the north of
the drinking place, and the wind blew from the south.

"I don't think we'll have to wait long," said Henry.

Then they remained absolutely silent, but within fifteen minutes they
heard a heavy trampling in the woods. It steadily grew louder, and was
mingled with snortings and puffings. Whatever animal made it--and it was
undoubtedly a big one--was coming toward them. Paul was filled with
curiosity, but he knew too much to do more just now than breathe.

A huge bull buffalo stumbled from the trees to the edge of the lake, where
the moonlight had just begun to come. He was a monstrous fellow, and Paul
knew by his snapping red eyes that he was in no good humor. Henry shook
his head to indicate that he was no game for them, and Paul understood.
Whatever they killed they intended to put in the canoe, and then clean and
dress it on the island. The angry monster, an outcast from some herd, was
safe.

The buffalo drank, puffing and snorting between drinks, and then stamped
his way back into the forest. Still the hunters waited in ambush. Some
other animal, with a long, sinuous body, crept down to the margin and
lapped the water. Paul did not know what it was, and he could not break
the silence to ask the others; but after drinking for a few minutes it
drew its long, lithe body back through the undergrowth, and passed out of
sight. Then nothing came for a while, because this was a ferocious beast
of prey, and to the harmless creatures of the wilderness the air about the
drinking place was filled for a space with poison.

But as the wind continued to blow lightly from the south, the dread odor
passed away and the air became pure and fresh again. Back in the deeps of
the forest the timid creatures found courage once more, and they crept
down to the water's edge to slake their thirst. But they were small, and
the ambushed marksmen in the boat still waited, silent and motionless.
Paul saw them sometimes, and sometimes he did not. Then his eyes would
wander to the surface of the lake, now pale, heaving silver in the
moonlight, and to the wall of black forest that circled it round.

A heavier step came again, and a light puff! puff! Paul knew now that a
great animal was approaching, and that the timid little ones would give it
room. He looked with all his eyes, and a magnificent stag stepped into the
moonlight, antlers erect, waiting and listening for a moment before he
bowed his head to drink. Paul almost leaped up in the boat as a rifle
cracked beside him, and he saw the stag spring into the air and fall dead,
with his feet in the water.

Henry and Ross promptly shoved the boat from the bushes, and the three of
them lifted the body into it, disposing it in the center with infinite
care. Then, with food enough to last for days, they rowed back across the
lake to the haunted island. Shif'less Sol and Jim Hart, with their rude
tackle, had succeeded in catching four fish, of a species unknown to Paul,
but large and to all appearances succulent.

"We'll eat the fish to-morrow, because they won't keep," said Sol, "but
Jim Hart here kin jerk the venison. It will give him somethin' to do, an'
Jim is a sight better off when he has to work. He ain't got no time fur
foolishness."

"An' you can tan its hide," growled Jim Hart, "although your own needs
tannin' most."

A few minutes later the two were amicably dressing the body of the stag,
but Paul was already asleep. He assisted the next morning at a conference,
and then he learned what Henry and Ross intended to do. The powder for
Marlowe, as Paul had surmised, must be left for the present in its hidden
