make me believe that.

KING: Well, you know "seeing is believing." Look! here is the gold piece
for you.

BOY: But it is in _your_ hand. If I saw it in my own hand, that would be
a different matter.

KING (_laughing_): You are certainly not stupid, my boy; but you may
have it in your own hand. Here it is.

(Boy stands still, looking worried,)

KING: Well, why don't you go?

BOY: I only wish I could. But what would become of the geese while I am
away? If they strayed into the meadow over yonder, I should have to pay
trespass-money--more than the gold piece--and lose my place besides.

KING: I'll tell you what we'll do. You go for the book, and I'll herd
the geese.

BOY (_laughing_): You herd the geese--a pretty gooseherd you would make!
You are too fat and too old.

KING (_to himself, shaking with laughter_): Well, Well, "fat and old."
What next, I wonder!

BOY: Why, you couldn't mind the geese. Just look at the "court gander"
there--the one with the black head and wings. He is the ringleader
whenever there is any mischief. He would lead you a pretty dance.

KING: Never mind the geese. I'll answer for them, and I promise to pay
all damages if they get away.

BOY (_handing the king his whip_): Well, then, be careful. Watch the
"court gander."

(Boy walks on a few feet, then hurries back.)

KING: What's the matter now?

BOY: Crack the whip!

(King tries but fails.)

BOY: Just as I thought. Here, this way! Can't you see? You are stupid!

KING: Just let me try once more.

(King tries.)

BOY: Well, that did pretty well.

(Moves off muttering.)

He is as big a goose as any in the flock.


ACT II


KING (_lying on the ground and laughing so that the tears run down his
cheeks_): Oh, but this is fine! First I was fat and old. Now I am as big
a goose as any in the flock. What would my courtiers say?

(Springing up suddenly.)

Look at that "court gander"! There he goes with the whole flock.

(He dashes wildly after the geese and tries to crack the whip, but
cannot.)

Now they are in the meadow; what will the boy say?

(Boy returns and sees the geese in the meadow; the king looks ashamed.)

BOY: Just as I expected. I have found the book, but you have lost the
geese. What a time I shall have trying to find them!

KING: Never mind; I will help you get them together again.

[Illustration: The king and the boy look for the geese]

BOY: Humph! Much help you'll be. But go there by that stump and don't
let the geese pass you. Wave your arms at them and shout at them. Surely
you can do that!

KING: I'll try.


ACT III


Boy: Well, they are back again! Thanks to goodness, but none to you.
What can you do?

KING: Pray excuse me for not doing any better, but you see, I am not
used to work. I am the king.

BOY: I was a simpleton to trust you with the geese; but I am not such a
simpleton as to believe that you are the king.

KING: Just as you will. You are a good lad. Here is another gold coin as
a peace offering. Good-day.

BOY (_as king walks away_): He is a kind gentleman, whoever he may be;
but take my word for it, he will never make a gooseherd.

--OLD TALE.




DONAL AND CONAL

I


There was once in old Ireland a very fine lad by the name of Donal. He
was not only a very fine lad, but a very gay lad. He would go for miles
to a party or a wedding; and he was always welcome, for Donal knew where
to wear his smile. He wore it on his face instead of keeping it in his
pocket.

The dearest wish of Donal's heart no one knew but himself. His soul was
full of music, and he longed to have a violin.

One night Donal was going home through a dark forest when a storm came
up. He found an old hollow tree and got inside of it to keep dry. Soon
he fell asleep.

After a while Donal was awakened by a strange noise. He peeped out, and
he saw a queer sight. The storm had passed, and the moon was shining.
Many elves were dancing to strange music played by an old, old elf.

[Illustration: Donal sees the fairies dancing]

Such queer dancing it was! Donal crept out of the tree and drew nearer
and nearer. Suddenly he laughed out loud and said, "Well, that's the
worst dancing I have ever seen!"

The fairies were astonished and angry, and they all began to talk at the
same time.

"We have a man among us!" cried one.

"Let us hang him!" cried another.

"Cut his head off!" cried a third.

But the queen stepped out among them and said, "Leave him to me."

Then she called Donal to her. Now Donal was a wee bit frightened, but he
knew where to wear his smile, you remember. So he went up to the queen,
smiling and bowing.

"You say our dancing is the worst you have ever seen," she said. "Now,
show us that you can do better."

Donal smiled again and bowed low. Then he began to dance. Such dancing
the elves had never seen! They clapped their hands and made him dance
again and again. Finally, Donal was exhausted, and after making a low
bow to the queen, sat down on the ground.

The fairies crowded around him.

"Give him our silver!" cried one.

"Make it gold!" cried another.

"Diamonds!" cried a third.

But the queen said, "Leave it to me."

She went up to the old, old elf who had been playing for the dance.
Taking his violin from him, she gave it to Donal. You see, the queen
knew the dearest wish of his heart.

Then Donal was a happy lad, indeed! He thanked the queen and went home
playing on his new violin.


II


There lived near Donal's home a lad named Conal. He was not such a fine
lad as Donal, nor such a gay one. He was a greedy lad, and the dearest
wish of his heart was to be rich. And he did not know where to wear his
smile. If he had one, he kept it in his pocket.

When Conal heard what had happened to Donal, he wished to know all about
it. So he went to him and said, "Donal, man, how did you get that
beautiful violin?"

Donal told the story backward and forward, and forward and backward,
from beginning to end, until Conal knew it by heart.

Then Conal said to himself, "I will go to the hollow tree and dance for
the elves; but I shall not be so foolish as Donal. I will take their
gold and silver, and their diamonds, too."

That night Conal went to the hollow tree and waited until the elves
appeared. Then he crept out and watched them dance. And he said, just as
Donal had, "Well, that's the worst dancing I have ever seen!"

The fairies were astonished and angry again, and again they all began to
talk at once.

"Another man among us!" cried one.

"Let us hang him!" cried another.

"Cut off his head!" cried a third.

But the queen said, "Leave it to me."

Then she called Conal to her. Now Conal did not know where to wear his
smile, you remember; he always kept it in his pocket. So he went up to
the queen with a very sour face.

The queen said to him, as she had to Donal, "You say our dancing is the
worst you have ever seen. Now, show us that you can do better."

Conal began to dance, and he could dance well. The elves were delighted.
They clapped their hands and asked him to dance again, but he said
roughly, "No, that is enough. Do you expect me to dance all night?"

The elves were silent then, and the queen's face was stern. But she was
a just queen, and she said, "You have danced well. Will you have some of
our silver?"

"Yes," said Conal, without a word of thanks; and he filled his coat
pockets.

"Will you have gold?" asked the queen.

"Yes," said Conal greedily, as he filled the pockets in his trousers.

"Will you have some of our diamonds?" the queen asked, and her face was
dark with anger.

"Yes, yes," cried Conal.

"You shall not have them, you greedy lad!" cried the queen; "you shall
have nothing."

Just then a cloud passed across the moon, and the elves vanished.

"Oh, well," said Conal, "I have the gold and silver."

He plunged his hands into his pockets and lo! the gold and silver had
turned to stones. Then Conal went home a sadder and a wiser lad.

--IRISH TALE.




[Illustration: A bird singing]

WHO TOLD THE NEWS?


  Oh, the sunshine told the bluebird,
    And the bluebird told the brook,
  That the dandelions were peeping
    From the woodland's sheltered nook.

  Then the brook was blithe and happy,
    And it babbled all the way,
  As it ran to tell the river
    Of the coming of the May.

  Soon the river told the meadow,
    And the meadow told the bee,
  That the tender buds were swelling
    On the old horse-chestnut tree.

  And the bee shook off its torpor,
    And it spread each gauzy wing,
  As it flew to tell the flowers
    Of the coming of the spring.




THE BIRDS OF KILLINGWORTH

I


It was spring. The apple trees and the cherry trees were pink and white
with blossoms. They filled the air with fragrance. The maples were red,
and on the oak and poplar the buds were swelling. The brooklets were
rushing and leaping on toward the sea.

It was spring everywhere. The robin and the bluebird were piping sweetly
in the blossoming orchard. The sparrows were chirping, and hungry crows
were calling loudly for food. The farmers of Killingworth were plowing
the fields, and the broken clods, too, told of spring.

A farmer heard the cawing of the crows and the song of the birds.

He said, "Did one ever see so many birds? Why, when we plant our seeds,
these birds will take them all. When the fruit ripens, they will destroy
it. I, for one, wish there were no birds, and I say kill them all."

Another farmer said, "Yes, let us call a meeting of the people of the
village and decide what is to be done with the pests."

The meeting was called, and all came: the squire, the preacher, the
teacher, and the farmers from the country round about.

Up rose the farmer who had said he wished there were no birds.

"Friends," he said, "the crows are about to take my field of corn. I put
up scarecrows, but the birds fly by them and seem to laugh at them. The
robins are as saucy as they can be. Soon they will eat all the cherries
we have. I say kill all birds; they are a pest."

"So say I," said another farmer.

"And I," said another.

"And I," "And I," came from voices in every part of the hall.

The teacher arose and timidly said:

"My friends, you know not what you do. You would put to death the birds
that make sweet music for us in our dark hours: the thrush, the oriole,
the noisy jay, the bluebird, the meadow lark.
