regular life of the German army went on undisturbed.

"I told you that we had French messengers now and then," said Lieutenant
Schmidt, holding a glass of beer in his right hand and a sausage in his
left, "but that message was delivered nearer to us than any other in
three days. I don't think they'll fire again for a half-hour, and the
chances are a hundred to one that it will fall much further away. So why
be disturbed?"

Lieutenant Schmidt was beginning to feel happy. He had a sentimental
German soul, and all the beer he wanted brought all his benevolence to
the surface.

"I like you, Castel," he said. "Your blood is French, of course, or it
was once, but you of Lorraine have had all the benefits of German
culture and training. A German you were born, a German you have
remained, and a German you will be all your life. The time is coming
when we will extend the blessings of our German culture to all of
France, and then to England, and then maybe to the whole world."

Lieutenant Schmidt had drunk a great deal of beer, and even beer when
taken in large quantities may be heady. His tongue was loose and long.

"And to that distant and barbarous country, America, too," said John.

"Aye, and to the Americans also," said Lieutenant Schmidt. "I hear that
they don't love us, although they have much of our blood in their veins.
There are many people among them bearing German names who denounce us.
When we finish with our enemies here in Europe we'll teach the barbarous
Americans to love the Kaiser."

"A hard task," said John, with meaning.

"So it will be," said Lieutenant Schmidt, taking his meaning
differently, "but the harder the task the better we Germans love it.
And now, Castel, here comes your passport. Its little winged words will
bear you safely to the headquarters of General Osterweiler thirty miles
to the north and east, and there you'll have to get another passport, if
you can. _Auf wiedersehen,_ Jean Castel. Your forefathers were French,
but you are German, good German, and I wish you well."

Lieutenant Schmidt's cheeks were very red just then, not altogether with
the cold, and his benevolence had extended to the whole world, including
the French and English, whom he must fight regretfully.

"Oh," said John, as an afterthought, although he was keenly noting his
condition, "while I was wandering in the snow of the big storm, I heard
from a sentinel that one of our great generals and beloved princes.
Prince Karl of Auersperg, had passed this way with his train."

Perhaps if Lieutenant Schmidt had not taken so much good Munich beer
after a long fast he might have become suspicious, because it was not
the question that an ordinary peasant and cattle-herder would ask unless
the previous conversation had led directly to it. But as it was he
fairly exuded trust and kindness.

"Not here," he replied, "but at a point further toward the west and
north. So great a figure as Prince Karl of Auersperg could scarcely go
by without our hearing of it. Colonel Stratz himself spoke of it in my
presence."

"I saw him once in Metz before the war. A grand and imposing figure.
Perhaps I shall behold him there again in a few days."

"I think not. It was said that the prince was going to his estates in
the east. At least, I think I heard something of the kind, but it
probably means that he was on his way to the eastern frontier. Prince
Karl of Auersperg is not the man to withdraw from the war."

John's heart dropped suddenly. Would he be compelled to follow the
prince halfway across Europe. Oh, why had he left the Hotel de l'Europe
even for a moment? With Picard's help he might have been able to hold
off Auersperg and his followers, or a lucky shot might have disposed of
the prince. He felt it no crime to have wished for such a chance. But
strengthening his heart anew he took up the burden that had grown
heavier.

"_Auf wiedersehen,_ Lieutenant Schmidt," he said, and whistling softly
to himself he began his passage through the German lines, showing his
passport more than a dozen times before he passed the last trench and
rifle pit, and was alone among the hills behind the German lines. He
might have reached the railroad and have gone by train to Metz, but he
preferred, for the present at least, to cling to the country, even at
the risk of much physical hardship and suffering.

He still carried his blankets, and he was traveling through a region
which had been much fought over in the earlier stages of the war. Since
the German lines were still in France some peasants had returned to
their homes, but many houses were yet abandoned, their owners probably
thinking that the tide of battle would roll back upon them, and that it
was better to wait.

He turned presently from the hilly path into a good road, paved almost
like a street, and breaking from a bush a stout stick, which he used
peasant fashion as a cane, he walked briskly along the smooth surface,
now almost clear of the snow which had fallen in much smaller quantities
in the lowlands.

He met a battery of four twenty-one-centimeter guns with their numerous
crews and an escort of cavalry, advancing to the front, and he stepped
to one side of the road to let them pass. The leader of the cavalry
hailed him and John's heart gave a sudden alarming throb as he
recognized von Boehlen. But his courage came back when he saw that he
would not have known the Prussian had he remained twenty feet away. Von
Boehlen was deeply tanned and much thinner. There were lines in his face
and he had all the appearance of a man who had been through almost
unbearable hardships.

John had no doubt that a long life in the trenches and intense anxiety
had made an equal change in himself. The glass had told him that he
looked more mature, more like a man of thought and experience. Moreover,
he was in the dress of a peasant. After the first painful heartbeat he
awaited von Boehlen with confidence.

"Whence do you come?" asked the colonel of Uhlans--colonel he now was.

John pointed back over his shoulder and then produced his passport,
which Colonel von Boehlen, after reading, handed carefully back to him.

"Did you see anything of the French?" he asked glancing again at John,
but without a sign of recognition.

"No, sir," replied John in his new German with a French accent, "but I
saw a most unpleasant messenger of theirs."

"A messenger? What kind of a messenger?"

"Long, round and made of steel. It came over a mountain and then with a
loud noise divided itself into many parts near the place where I stood.
One messenger turned itself into a thousand messengers, and they were
all messengers of death. Honored sir, I left that vicinity as soon as I
could, and I have been traveling fast, directly away from there, ever
since."

Von Boehlen laughed, and then his strong jaws closed tighter. After a
moment's silence, he said:

"Many such messengers have been passing in recent months. The air has
been full of them. If you don't like battles, Castel, I don't blame you
for traveling in the direction you take."

John, who had turned his face away for precautionary measures, looked
him full in the eyes again, and he found in his heart a little liking
for the Prussian. Von Boehlen seemed to have lost something of his
haughtiness and confidence since those swaggering days in Dresden, and
the loss had improved him. John saw some signs of a civilian's sense of
justice and reason beneath the military gloss.

"May I pass on, sir?" he asked. "I wish to reach Metz, where I can
obtain more horses for the army."

"Why do you walk?"

"I sold my last horse and the automobiles and trains are not for me. I
know that the army needs all the space in them and I ask nothing."

"Fare on then," said von Boehlen. "Your papers are in good condition and
you'll have no trouble in reaching Metz. But be sure you don't lose your
passport."

The injunction was kindly and John, thanking him, took up the road. Von
Boehlen and his Uhlans rode on, and John looked back once. He caught a
single glimpse of the colonel's broad shoulders and then the long column
of horsemen rode by. There was no military pomp about them now. Their
gray uniforms were worn and stained and many of the men sagged in their
saddles with weariness. Not a few showed wounds barely healed.

The cavalry were followed by infantry, and batteries of guns so heavy
that often the wheels sank in the paved road. Sometimes the troops sang,
pouring forth the mighty rolling choruses of the German national songs
and hymns. The gay air as of sure victory just ahead that marked them in
the closing months of summer the year before had departed, but in its
place was a grim resolution that made them seem to John as formidable as
ever. The steady beat of solid German feet made a rolling sound which
the orders of officers and the creaking of wagons and artillery
scarcely disturbed. The waves of the gray sea swept steadily on toward
France.

John showed his passport twice more, but all that day he beheld marching
troops. In the afternoon it snowed a little again and the slush was
everywhere, but he trudged bravely through it. Having escaped from the
trenches he felt that he could endure anything. What were snow, a gray
sky and a cold wind to one who had lived for months on a floor of earth
and between narrow walls of half-frozen mud? He was like a prisoner who
had escaped from a steel cage.

Toward dark he turned from the road and sought refuge at a low but
rather large farmhouse, standing among trees. He modestly made his way
to the rear, and asked shelter for the night in the stable, saying that
he would pay. He learned that the place was occupied by people bearing
the German name of Gratz, which however signified little on that
borderland, which at different times had been under both German and
French rule.

Nor did the proprietor of the house himself, who came out to see him,
enlighten him concerning his sympathies. If he liked France obviously it
was no time for him to say so when he was surrounded by the German
legions. But John could sleep on the hay in the stable, and have supper
and breakfast for certain number of marks or francs which he must show
in advance. He showed them and all was well.

John, after carefully scraping all the mud and snow from his boots was
allowed to go in the big kitchen and sit on a stone bench beside the
wall, while two stout women cooked at a great furnace, and trim maids
came for the food which they took upstairs.

When he sank down upon the bench he realized that he was tired through
and through. It was no light task even for a hardened soldier to walk
all day in bad weather. One of the cooks, a stout middle-aged woman whom
the others called Johanna, gave him a glance of sympathy. She saw a
young man pale from great exertion, but with a singularly fine face, a
face that was exceedingly strong, without being coarse or rough. Johanna
thought him handsome, and so did the other cook, also stout and
middle-aged, who bore the French name of Nanine.

"Poor young man!" said one and, "Poor young man!" repeated the other.
Then they filled a plate with warm food and handed it to him. While he
ate he talked with them and the passing maids, who were full of interest
in the handsome young stranger. He told them that he was a horse-trader,
and that he had been in no battle, nor would he be in any, but he saw
that he was not believed, and secretly he was glad of it. These were
trim young maids and a young soldier likes admiration, even if it comes
from those who in the world's opinion are of a lower rank than he.

They asked him innumerable questions, and he answered as well as he
could. He told of the troops that he had seen, and they informed him
that German forces had been passing there at times all through the
winter. Princes and great generals had stopped at the farmhouse of Herr
Gratz or Monsieur Gratz, as he was indifferently called. The war had
ruined many others, but it brought profit to him, because all the guests
paid and paid well.

John in a pleased and restful state listened, and he was soothed by the
sound of their voices. He had often heard old men at home, veterans of
the Civil War, tell how grateful to them was the sight of a woman after
months of marching and fighting. Now he understood. These were only
cooks and housemaids, but their faces were not roughened like those of
soldiers, and their voices and footsteps were light and soft. Moreover,
they gave him food and drink--for which he would pay farmer Gratz,
however--and made much over him.

"We had royal guests last night," said the youngest of the maids, whom
they called Annette, a slender blond girl.

"Going to the battle front?"

"Oh, no. They were going the other way, toward Metz, and perhaps only
one was a real prince."

"Maybe this prince had seen enough of battles?"

"I cannot say. I saw him only once. He was a large man, middle-aged, and
he had a great brown beard."

John's whole body stiffened. Questions leaped to his lips, but he
compelled his muscles to relax and by a great effort he assumed a tone
of indifference.

"What was the prince's name?" he asked with apparent carelessness.

"I don't know, but the people around him were as respectful to him as
if he were a king. There were two women with him, but the master himself
served these two alone in their room."

"But you caught a glimpse of one of the women, the younger, Annette?"
said Johanna.

"So I did, but it was only a glimpse."

"What did she look like?" asked John, who was trying to keep down the
beating of his heart.

"It was only a second, but I saw a face that I will never forget. She
was very pale, but she had beautiful blue eyes like stars, and the most
lovely golden hair that ever grew in the world."

"Julie! My Julie!" groaned John under his breath.

"What did you say?"

"I was merely wondering who she was."

"I wondered, too, and so did all of us. We heard a tale that she was a
princess, a niece or a daughter, perhaps, of the great prince, with whom
she traveled, and we heard another that she and the woman with her were
French spies of the most dangerous kind who had been captured and who
were being taken into Germany. And the face of the beautiful young lady,
which I saw for only a moment, was French, not German."

John felt hot and then cold from head to foot. Julie a spy! Impossible!
Spies were shot or hanged, and sometimes women were no exceptions. How
could such a charge be brought against her? And yet anything could
happen in such a vast confused war as this. Julie, his Julie of the
starry blue eyes and the deep gold hair to be condemned and executed as
a spy! A cold shiver seized him again.

Then came sudden enlightenment. Auersperg was medieval. In his heart he
arrogated to himself the right of justice, the upper, the middle and the
low, and all other kinds, but he had ability and mingled with it an
extreme order of cunning. Julie of the Red Cross, a healer of wounds and
disease, would not be held a prisoner, but Julie, a spy, would be kept a
close captive, and her life would be in the hands of the general
commanding those who had taken her. Oh, it was cunning! So cunning that
its success seemed complete, and he thrilled in every vein with pain and
anger.

"Are you ill?" asked the good Johanna, who had noticed the sudden
deepening of his pallor.

"Not at all, thank you," he replied, forcing himself to speak in a level
tone. "I feel splendidly. All of you are too kind to me. But that was an
interesting story about the prince and the girl whom he brought with
him, who might be either a relative or a captive."

"I'm thinking she must have been his niece," said romantic Annette, "but
I'm sure she didn't love him. Perhaps she wanted to run away with some
fine young officer, and he caught her and brought her back."

"When did they leave?"

"Very early this morning. They came in automobiles, but neither when
they arrived nor when they departed was the lady in the machine with the
prince. She and the woman with her, who must have been her servant,
were in a small machine alone, except for the chauffeur."

"It's a strange tale. Which way did they go?"

"Toward Metz. We know no more. The prince did not look like a man who
would tell his intentions to everybody."

"The story has in it the elements of romance," said John. "I think with
you, Annette, that the young lady who must certainly have been of high
birth, was being carried away from some young man who loved her well."

