and wide, and lent new vigor to that blessed pibroch.

8. To our cheer of "God save the Queen," they replied by the well-known
strain that moves every Scot to tears, "Should auld acquaintance be
forgot." After that, nothing else made any impression on me. I scarcely
remember what followed. Jessie was presented to the general on his
entrance into the fort, and at the officers' banquet her health was drunk
by all present, while the pipers marched around the table playing once
more the familiar air of "Auld Lang Syne."


DEFINITIONS.--1. A-vert', to turn aside. En-gi-neer', an officer in the
army, who designs and constructs defensive and offensive works. 2. Siege,
the setting of an army around a fortified place to compel its surrender.
3. Pro-found', deep. 4. Slo'gan, the war cry or gather-ing word of a
Highland clan in Scotland. Fer'vor, intensity of feel-ing. 6. Pi'broch, a
wild, irregular species of music belonging to the Highlands of Scotland;
it is performed on a bagpipe. Sap'pers, men employed in making an approach
to a fortified place by digging. 7. Res'i-den-cy, the official dwelling of
a government officer in India. Si-mul-ta'ne-ous, happening at the same
time.


NOTES.--Lucknow, a city in the British possession of India. In 1857 there
was a mutiny of the native troops, and the British garrison of 1700 men
was besieged by 10,000 mutineers. After twelve weeks' siege, fresh British
troops forced an entrance, and the town was held until relieved three
weeks later by the arrival of Sir Colin Campbell, as above described.

1. Cawnpore, also a city of India, near Lucknow, which was besieged during
the mutiny. After surrendering, the English, two thirds of whom were women
and children, were treacherously massacred.

4. The inhabitants of the northern part of Scotland are called
Highlanders; those of the southern part, Lowlanders. The dialect of the
former is very peculiar, as shown in the language of Jessie Brown; as,
dinna for did not, a' for all, no for not, noo for now, auld for old.
Macgregor and Campbell are names of Highland clans or families.

Whittier's poem, "The Pipes at Lucknow," and Robert T. S. Lowell's "The
Relief of Lucknow," are descriptive of this same incident.



XLVIII. THE SNOWSTORM.

James Thomson (b. 1700, d.1748) was born at Ednam, in the shire of
Roxburgh, Scotland. He was educated at the University of Edinburgh, and
afterwards studied for the ministry, but in a short time changed his plans
and devoted himself to literature. His early poems are quite
insignificant, but "The Seasons," from which the following selection is
taken; and the "Castle of Indolence," are masterpieces of English poetry.

1. Through the hushed air the whitening shower descends,
   At first thin wavering; till at last the flakes
   Fall broad and wide and fast, dimming the day,
   With a continual flow. The cherished fields
   Put on their winter robe of purest white.
   'T is brightness all: save where the new snow melts
   Along the mazy current.

2.                           Low the woods
   Bow their hoar head; and ere the languid sun
   Faint from the west emits its evening ray,
   Earth's universal face, deep-hid and chill,
   Is one wild dazzling waste, that buries wide
   The works of man.

3.                           Drooping, the laborer ox
   Stands covered o'er with snow, and then demands
   The fruit of all his toil. The fowls of heaven,
   Tamed by the cruel season, crowd around
   The winnowing store, and claim the little boon
   Which Providence assigns them.

4.                           One alone,
   The Redbreast, sacred to the household gods,
   Wisely regardful of the embroiling sky,
   In joyless fields and thorny thickets leaves
   His shivering mates, and pays to trusted man
   His annual visit.

5.                           Half-afraid, he first
   Against the window beats; then, brisk, alights
   On the warm hearth; then, hopping o'er the floor,
   Eyes all the smiling family askance,
   And pecks, and starts, and wonders where he is;
   Till, more familiar grown, the table crumbs
   Attract his slender feet.

6.                           The foodless wilds
   Pour forth their brown inhabitants. The hare,
   Though timorous of heart, and hard beset
   By death in various forms, dark snares and dogs,
   And more unpitying men, the garden seeks,
   Urged on by fearless want. The bleating kind.
   Eye the bleak heaven, and next the glistening earth,
   With looks of dumb despair; then, sad dispersed,
   Dig for the withered herb through heaps of snow

7. Now, shepherds, to your helpless charge be kind,
   Baffle the raging year, and fill their pens
   With food at will; lodge them below the storm,
   And watch them strict; for from the bellowing east,
   In this dire season, oft the whirlwind's wing
   Sweeps up the burden of whole wintry plains
   In one wide waft, and o'er the hapless flocks,
   Hid in the hollow of two neighboring hills,
   The billowy tempest 'whelms; till, upward urged,
   The valley to a shining mountain swells,
   Tipped with a wreath high-curling in the sky


DEFINITIONS.--1. Ma'zy, winding. 2. Hoar, white or grayish white. E-mits',
sends forth, throws out, 3. Win'now-ing, separat-ing chaff from grain by
means of wind. Boon, a gift. 4. Em--broil'ing, throwing into disorder or
contention. 5, A-skance', side-ways. 6. Wilds, woods, forests. Be-set',
hemmed in on all sides so that escape is difficult. 7. Dire, dreadful,
terrible. Waft, a current of wind. Whelms', covers completely.


NOTE.--4. Household gods. An allusion to the belief of the ancient Romans
in the Penates--certain gods who were supposed to protect the household
and all connected with it. The idea here expressed is, that the Redbreast
was secure from harm.



XLIX. BEHIND TIME.

1. A railroad train was rushing along at almost lightning speed. A curve
was just ahead, beyond which was a station where two trains usually met.
The conductor was late,--so late that the period during which the up train
was to wait had nearly elapsed; but he hoped yet to pass the curve safely.
Suddenly a locomotive dashed into sight right ahead. In an instant there
was a collision. A shriek, a shock, and fifty souls were in eternity; and
all because an engineer had been behind time.

2. A great battle was going on. Column after column had been precipitated
for eight hours on the enemy posted along the ridge of a hill. The summer
sun was sinking in the west; reenforcements for the obstinate defenders
were already in sight; it was necessary to carry the position with one
final charge, or everything would be lost.

3. A powerful corps had been summoned from across the country, and if it
came up in season all would yet be well. The great conqueror, confident in
its arrival, formed his reserve into an attacking column, and ordered them
to charge the enemy. The whole world knows the result. Grouchy failed to
appear; the imperial guard was beaten back; and Waterloo was lost.
Napoleon died a prisoner at St. Helena because one of his marshals was
behind time.

4. A leading firm in commercial circles had long struggled against
bankruptcy. As it had large sums of money in California, it expected
remittances by a certain day, and if they arrived, its credit, its honor,
and its future prosperity would be preserved. But week after week elapsed
without bringing the gold. At last came the fatal day on which the firm
had bills maturing to large amounts. The steamer was telegraphed at
daybreak; but it was found, on inquiry, that she brought no funds, and the
house failed. The next arrival brought nearly half a million to the
insolvents, but it was too late; they were ruined because their agent, in
remitting, had been behind time.

5. A condemned man was led, out for execution. He had taken human life,
but under circumstances of the greatest provocation, and public sympathy
was active in his behalf. Thousands had signed petitions for a reprieve; a
favorable answer had been expected the night before, and though it had not
come, even the sheriff felt confident that it would yet arrive. Thus the
morning passed without the appearance of the messenger.

6. The last moment was up. The prisoner took his place, the cap was drawn
over his eyes, the bolt was drawn, and a lifeless body swung revolving in
the wind. Just at that moment a horseman came into sight, galloping down
hill, his steed covered with foam. He carried a packet in his right hand,
which he waved frantically to the crowd. He was the express rider with the
reprieve; but he came too late. A comparatively innocent man had died an
ignominious death because a watch had been five minutes too late, making
its bearer arrive behind time.

7. It is continually so in life. The best laid plans, the most important
affairs, the fortunes of individuals, the weal of nations, honor,
happiness, life itself, are daily sacrificed, because somebody is "behind
time." There are men who always fail in whatever they undertake, simply
because they are "behind time." There are others who put off reformation
year after year, till death seizes them, and they perish unrepentant,
because forever "behind time."


DEFINITIONS.--1. Col-li'sion, the act of striking together violently. 2.
Pre-cip'i-tat-ed, urged on violently. Re-en-force'ments, additional
troops. 3. Corps (pro. kor), a body of troops. Re-serve', a select body of
troops held back in case of special need for their services. 4.
Bank'rupt-cy. inability to pay all debts, insolvency. Re-mit'tanc-es,
mouey, drafts, etc., sent from a distance. Ma-tur'ing, approaching the
time fixed for payment. 5. Prov-o-ca'tion, that which causes anger. 6.
Ig-no-min'i-ous, infamous. 7. Weal, prosperity, happiness.


NOTES.--3. Emmanuel Grouchy was one of Napoleon's marshals at the battle
of Waterloo, fought in 1815 between the French under Napoleon, and the
English, Dutch, and German troops under Wellington.

Napoleon Bonaparte (b. 1769, d. 1821) was born on the island of Corsica.
At school he was "studious, well-behaved, and distinguished in
mathematical studies." In 1785 he was commissioned as a sublieutenant in
the army. From this obscure position he raised himself to the head of the
army, and in 1804 was elected emperor of the French. He is almost
universally acknowledged to have been the greatest general the world has
known.



L. THE OLD SAMPLER.

1. Out of the way, in a corner
     Of our dear old attic room,
   Where bunches of herbs from the hillside
     Shake ever a faint perfume,
   An oaken chest is standing,
     With hasp and padlock and key,
   Strong as the hands that made it
     On the other side of the sea.

2. When the winter days are dreary,
     And we're out of heart with life,
   Of its crowding cares aweary,
     And sick of its restless strife,
   We take a lesson in patience
     From the attic corner dim,
   Where the chest still holds its treasures,
     A warder faithful and grim.

3. Robes of an antique fashion,
     Linen and lace and silk,
   That time has tinted with saffron,
     Though once they were white as milk;
   Wonderful baby garments,
     'Boidered with loving care
   By fingers that felt the pleasure,
     As they wrought the ruffles fair;

4. A sword, with the red rust on it,
     That flashed in the battle tide,
   When from Lexington to Yorktown
     Sorely men's souls were tried;
   A plumed chapeau and a buckle,
     And many a relic fine,
   And, an by itself, the sampler,
     Framed in with berry and vine.

5. Faded the square of canvas,
     And dim is the silken thread,
   But I think of white hands dimpled,
     And a childish, sunny head;
   For here in cross and in tent stitch,
     In a wreath of berry and vine,
   She worked it a hundred years ago,
     "Elizabeth, Aged Nine."

6. In and out in the sunshine,
     The little needle flashed,
   And in and out on the rainy day,
     When the merry drops down plashed,
   As close she sat by her mother,
     The little Puritan maid,
   And did her piece in the sampler,
     While the other children played.

7. You are safe in the beautiful heaven,
     "Elizabeth, aged nine;"
   But before you went you had troubles
     Sharper than any of mine.
   Oh, the gold hair turned with sorrow
     White as the drifted snow.
   And your tears dropped here where I'm standing,
     On this very plumed chapeau.

8. When you put it away, its wearer
     Would need it nevermore,
   By a sword thrust learning the secrets
     God keeps on yonder shore;
   And you wore your grief like glory,
     You would not yield supine,
   Who wrought in your patient childhood,
     "Elizabeth, Aged Nine."

9. Out of the way, in a corner,
     With hasp and padlock and key,
   Stands the oaken chest of my fathers
     That came from over the sea;
   And the hillside herbs above it
     Shake odors fragrant and fine,
   And here on its lid is a garland
     To "Elizabeth, aged nine."

10. For love is of the immortal,
      And patience is sublime,
    And trouble a thing of every day,
      And touching every time;
    And childhood sweet and sunny,
      And womanly truth and grace,
    Ever call light life's darkness
      And bless earth's lowliest place.
                                      --Mrs. M. E. Sangster.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Ward'er, a keeper, a guard. 3. An-tique', old, ancient.
Saf'fron, a deep yellow. 4. Cha-peau', a hat. 8. Su-pine', listless. 10.
Im-mort'al, undying.


NOTES.--6. Puritan. The Puritans were a religious sect who fled from
persecution in England, and afterwards settled the most of New England.

A sampler is a needlework pattern; a species of fancywork formerly much in
vogue.



LI. THE GOODNESS OF GOD.

1. Bless the Lord, O my soul! O Lord, my God, thou art very great; thou
art clothed with honor and majesty: who coverest thyself with light as
with a garment; who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain; who layeth
the beams of his chambers in the waters; who maketh the clouds his
chariot; who walketh upon the wings of the wind; who maketh his angels
spirits, his ministers a flaming fire; who laid the foundations of the
earth, that it should not be removed forever.

2. Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood
above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder
they hasted away. They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys
unto the place which thou hast founded for them. Thou hast set a bound
which they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.


3. He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field; the wild asses quench their
thirst. By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which
sing among the branches. He watereth the hills from his chambers; the
earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.

4. He caused the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man, that he may bring forth food out of the earth; and wine that maketh
glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which
strengtheneth man's heart.

5. The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which he
hath planted, where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir
trees are her house. The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and
the rocks for the conies.

6. He appointed the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down. Thou
makest darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do
creep forth. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat
from God. The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them
down in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his work, and to his labor until
the evening.

7. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all:
the earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the
ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein. These
wait all upon thee, that thou mayest give them their meat in due season.

8. That thou givest them they gather; thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled; thou takest
away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth
thy Spirit, they are created; and thou renewest the face of the earth.

9. The glory of the Lord shall endure forever: the Lord shall rejoice in
his works. He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the
hills, and they smoke.

10. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men! And let them sacrifice the
sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing.

11. O give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name; make known his deeds
among the people. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his
wondrous' works. Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice
that seek the Lord. Seek the Lord, and his strength; seek his face
evermore.

12. Remember his marvelous works that he hath done; his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth. He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all
the earth. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise
to my God while I have my being.
                                                 --Extracts from the Bible.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Found'ed, built, established. 3. Hab-i-ta' tion, place of
abode. 5. Ref 'uge, shelter, protection. Co'ny, a kind of rabbit. 6.
Ap-point'ed, ordained.


NOTES.--5. Cedars of Lebanon. A species of cedar, of great magnificence,
formerly abundant in Mt. Lebanon and the Taurus Range in Asia Minor, but
now almost entirely destroyed. The wood is durable and fragrant, and was
used in the construction of costly buildings, such as the palace of David
and Solomon's Temple.

7. Leviathan. This name is applied in the Old Testament to some huge water
animal. In some cases it appears to mean the crocodile, but in others the
whale or a large sea serpent.



LII. MY MOTHER.

1. Often into folly straying,
     O, my mother! how I've grieved her!
   Oft I've heard her for me praying,
     Till the gushing tears relieved her;
   And she gently rose and smiled,
   Whispering, "God will keep my child."

2. She was youthful then, and sprightly,
     Fondly on my father leaning,
   Sweet she spoke, her eyes shone brightly,
     And her words were full of meaning;
   Now, an autumn leaf decayed;
   I, perhaps, have made it fade.

3. But, whatever ills betide thee,
     Mother, in them all I share;
   In thy sickness watch beside thee,
     And beside thee kneel in prayer.
   Best of mothers! on my breast
   Lean thy head, and sink to rest.



LIII. THE HOUR OF PRAYER.

Felicia Dorothea Hemans (b. 1794, d. 1835) was born in Liverpool, England.
Her maiden name was Browne. Her childhood was spent in Wales. Her first
volume of poems was published in 1808; her second in 1812. In 1812 she was
married to Captain Hemans, but he left her about six years after their
marriage, and they never again lived together. She went, with her five
sons, to reside with her mother, then living near St. Asaph, in North
Wales. Mrs. Hemans then resumed her literary pursuits, and wrote much and
well. Her poetry is smooth and graceful, and she excels in description.
Many of her poems are exceedingly beautiful.
