with the sword by a boy from the woods of Kaintock?"

The Spaniard frowned and narrowed his cruel blue eyes. Braxton Wyatt
murmured some words of sympathy, but in his heart he was not sorry because
of the incident. He thought that Alvarez at times had patronized him too
much, had assumed too lofty an air, and he was willing to see him suffer
mortification. Moreover, he could use the hurt pride of Alvarez as an
additional incitement against the five whom he hated.

"You told me once," said Alvarez "that the three comrades of the two, the
three whom we have not captured, are much to be dreaded, and we have had
proof of it?"

"It is so."

"But what can they do now?"

"But little," answered the renegade. "It was farther north in the great
wilderness, where they are so much at home, that they could do us harm.
Here within the fringe of the French and Spanish settlements, they will be
hampered too much."

"Yes, I should think so," said Alvarez thoughtfully. "As you perhaps
surmise, I am going to stay here indefinitely, Wyatt. This place of mine,
Beaulieu, I call it, is at a suitable distance from New Orleans and I am
an absolute monarch while I remain. Here, on the border, I am as a
military commander, practically lord of life and death, and on one excuse
or another I can hold the troops as long as I please."

"Which seems to me to be very convenient for all our plans," said Braxton
Wyatt.

The Spaniard smiled, but speedily contracted his brows again. The cut that
Paul had given him was hurting.

"I should like to punish that boy in some spectacular manner," he said. "I
should want him to be humiliated in the presence of others as I was."

Suddenly he raised his head, which he had bent in thought, and his lips
curled in laughter under his yellow mustache.

"I have it!" he exclaimed. "An idea! Since young Kaintock can use the
sword I shall give him a chance to do it again! Oh, I shall give him every
opportunity!"

Then he leaned over and spoke in lower tones to Braxton Wyatt. The
renegade's eyes lighted up with delight.

"The very thing!" he exclaimed. "I'd have it done at once!"

Paul and Long Jim Hart meanwhile were resting in their log prison. Jim's
arms had been unbound and, after rubbing them freely, he said that the
circulation was restored. Then the two turned their attention to their
prison. Paul surmised that it had been built as a tool house or store
house, but at present it was empty save for himself and his comrade, Long
Jim.

The only light came from two little windows made merely by cutting out a
section of log and quite too small to admit a human body. They tried the
door but it was so strong that they could not shake it. Then Long Jim lay
calmly down on the floor.

"Paul," he said, "I don't believe I wuz ever fastened up in sech a little
place ez this afore. Ef I stretch out my legs my feet will hit the wall
over thar, an' the place is so close an' hot I don't breathe good."

"We'll have to stand it for a while," said Paul philosophically.

"That's so," said Long Jim, "I don't s'pose they mean to murder us ez
we're not at real war with the Spaniards, so I wonder what they mean to
do."

Paul shook his head. But he understood better than Long Jim the dangers of
their situation. He knew the temper and character of Alvarez, and he knew,
too, that at this distant chateau he was omnipotent. Alvarez was bent on
making war upon the settlers in Kentucky, and nothing would stop him.

"Henry an' Sol an' Tom are free," said Long Jim. "They'll git us out,
shore."

They remained a long time undisturbed, and the air in the room was so
close and hot that both became languorous and sleepy. Nor was there any
sound except the droning of some flies overhead and this added to the
heaviness. Paul finally rose and gazed through the little windows, but he
saw only an empty field and the edge of the forest. Save for this glimpse
of green they were completely cut off from the world. He sat down again on
the floor and composed his figure as comfortably as he could.

"How long do you think we hev been in here, Paul?" asked Long Jim.

"About four hours."

"Four hours! why, I thought it wuz four months. Paul, I don't believe I
could stand this more'n a week, no matter ef they fed me upon the finest
things in the land. At the end uv a week I'd turn right over an' die, an'
when they examined me to see the cause uv my death, they'd find that my
heart wuz broke in two, right squar' down the middle."

"They say that some wild animals die in captivity, and you might call it
of a broken heart."

"I'm one uv them kind. I like lots uv room. I want it to be clean woods
an' prairie runnin' a thousan' miles from me in every direction. An' I
don't want too many people trampin' 'roun' in them woods either, save
Injuns to keep you lookin' lively, an' mebbe twenty or thirty white men
purty well scattered. I reckon I'd call that my estate, Paul, an' I'd want
it swarmin' with b'ars an' buffaler an' deer, an' all kinds uv big an'
little game. Then I'd want a couple uv good rifles, one to take the place
uv tother when it went bad, an' a couple uv huts p'raps three or four
hundred miles apart to sleep in, when the weather wuz too tarnation bad,
lots uv ammunition an', Paul, I'd be happy on that thar estate uv mine."

"Aren't you a little bit grasping, Jim?" asked Paul.

"Me, graspin'," replied Long Jim in a surprise. "What makes you ask sech a
foolish question, Paul? Why, all I ask is to range ez fur an' ez long ez I
like an' not to be bothered by no interlopers. I don't want to crowd
nobody, an' I don't want nobody to crowd me. But, Paul, ef a feller could
do that fur about a thousand years wouldn't it be a life wuth livin'? Just
think uv all the deer hunts an' buffaler hunts an' b'ar hunts you could
hev! An' the long beaver trappin' trips, you could go on? An' the new
rivers an' new mountings you could find! The Injuns has the right idea
about Heaven, Paul. They make it the happy huntin' grounds. Them huntin'
grounds o' theirs run ten million miles in every direction. You couldn't
ever come to any end. No matter how fur you went you'd see oceans uv
green trees ahead uv you, an' on one side uv you prairies covered with
buffaler herds so big that they'd be a week passin' you, an' then they'd
still be passin'."

Long Jim heaved a deep sigh and was silent for a while. Paul, too, was
silent. At last Long Jim said:

"I s'pose it don't pay, Paul, to be drawin' sech splendiferous pictures uv
what ain't. Now I've gone an' made myself onhappy, talkin' uv them
glorious huntin' grounds that stretch away without end, when here we are
in this hot box so narrer I can't straighten out my legs. Besides, I'm
gittin' pow'ful hungry. I wonder ef they mean to starve us to death.
Strikes me that's an awful mean way uv killin' a man. He not only dies but
he's so terrible hungry sech a long time."

But Long Jim's forebodings were not fulfilled. When the light that came
through the little windows began to grow dusky, the door was thrown open
and Luiz and another man entered with food and water. Luiz could not speak
English, but he could make pantomime, and in that dumb but suggestive way
he invited them to partake freely. Long Jim's good humor returned.

"Don't keer ef I do, Mr. Spaniard," he said jovially. "It's a failin' uv
mine to want to eat whenever I'm hungry, an' since you're invitin', why,
I'll jest accept."

The door was left open while Luiz and the soldier were inside, but
several other soldiers were on guard at the opening, and there was no
chance for a dash. But fresh air came in, the cooler air of the evening,
and Paul and Long Jim were greatly relieved. Yet Jim Hart cast many a
longing glance at the open door. Outside was the wide world, and his place
was there. Darkness was coming, but darkness would have no terrors for
Long Jim, if only there were no walls about him.

When hunger and thirst were satisfied, Luiz and his comrade fell back
respectfully. A tall figure, followed by a man bearing a torch, entered
the doorway.

The man was Francisco Alvarez, but neither Paul nor Long Jim rose, Paul
because he disliked the Spaniard and considered him a bitter enemy of his
people, Long Jim because he saw no reason why he should rise for anybody.

Alvarez looked down at them and the sight of the two caused him a mixture
of anger and triumph. His wound still stung, but at the bottom of his
heart was a feeling that he had deserved it. In the presence of his own
retainers, and with all the circumstances in his favor, he had sought to
humiliate a boy. But this faint feeling was not enough to induce
corresponding action. He was also something of a statesman, and he saw the
power behind these two who had come out of the woods. They were foresters,
they wore the tanned skin of the deer, but they belonged to the soil; they
were natives, while he, in all his brilliant uniform and gold lace, was a
foreigner, merely the long, extended arm of a power four thousand miles
away. The two were but a vanguard, others would come and yet others in a
volume, always increasing. The only possibility of saving Louisiana was to
cut off the stream at the fountain head, while it was yet a thin and
trickling rill, and he, Francisco Alvarez, was the man for the deed.

It was because such thoughts as these were passing through his head that
he did not speak for at least a minute, but stood steadily regarding Paul
and Long Jim. He knew instinctively that it was Paul to whom he must
speak, the boy with the thoughtful, dreamy eye, who, like himself, would
gaze far into the future.

"Where are your comrades?" he asked, "the other three who helped you to
steal my boat?"

"Captured it, you mean," replied Paul, calmly. "So long as you use the
words 'steal' and 'thief,' you can talk to the air. I've nothing to say."

"Nor me either, Paul," said Long Jim, "I can't remember another time in my
life when I felt so little like talkin'."

Long Jim leaned his head against the wall and half closed his eyes. His
manner expressed the utmost indifference. Alvarez frowned, but he
remembered that they were wholly in his power and he had plans.

"I'll change the words," he said, "but I repeat the question. Where are
your comrades?"

"I don't know," replied Paul, and feeling a sudden happy thrill of
defiance he added: "They are probably somewhere arranging the details of
our rescue."

Alvarez frowned again.

"That is impossible," he said. "Perhaps you do not know your position. You
are not at New Orleans. Here I am both the civil and military chief and
this is my own place. I can put you to death as brigands or guerillas,
caught red-handed upon Spanish soil."

"Both charges, you know, are false," said Paul, "you know, too, that we
have come to defeat, if we can, a conspiracy between you and Braxton
Wyatt, a renegade whose life is doubly forfeit to his people. He carries
plans, maps, and full information of our settlements in Kentucky, and he
expects that you will go with many soldiers and cannon to help him and the
tribes destroy us. What plans you and he have beyond this I do not know,
but these, my friends and I hope to defeat, and we feel we could not be
engaged in a greater or holier task."

Paul spoke with great fire and eloquence. His soul was revealed in his
eyes, and Alvarez felt that he was in touch with a mind of no common
order.

"Imagination!" said the Spaniard trying to laugh the impression away. "I
find in Senor Wyatt a pleasant and intelligent assistant. He understands
the rights of the King of Spain in these vast regions, and has a due
regard for them. You and your comrades are outlaws, subject to the penalty
of death and I hold you in my hand. Yet I am disposed to be generous.
Give me your oath that you and your comrade here and the three in the
woods will go back to Kaintock at once and remain there, and I will
release you."

Paul regarded him steadily. Bold man as he was, the Spaniard's eyes fell
at last.

"We can give no such promise," said Paul. "I think that the reasons why we
should go on to New Orleans are exceedingly strong."

"Ez fur me," said Long Jim, "I ain't ever been fond uv goin' back on my
own tracks until I git good an' ready."

"I merely came here to give you a chance," said Alvarez, still addressing
himself to Paul. "Do you think that a few woodsmen can stand in the path
of Spain? Do you think that a great ancient monarchy can be held back by
stray settlers?"

"You seem to be afraid of it yourself," said Paul who was regarding him
closely.

A flush, despite himself, came into the Spaniard's cheeks, and it was
partly of anger because a boy had read his mind so well. It was not a
thing to be endured.

"I repeat that I came merely to give you a chance," he said. "Whatever you
may suffer you can now bear in mind that you are the cause of it. Come,
Luiz, I have wasted too much time."

He walked out followed by the soldier, but Francisco Alvarez had known
before entering the prison that his offer would be declined. He merely
wished to clear away any light burden that might rest on his conscience,
before proceeding with another plan that he had in mind.

Paul and Jim did not say a word until the door was fastened and they were
left to the darkness. Then it was Jim who unburdened himself.

"Paul," he said, "did you ever see a panther gittin' ready to jump? Notice
how his eyes turn a yellery-green, 'cause he thinks he's goin' to git what
he wants right away? Notice how his mouth is slobberin' 'cause he thinks
he's goin' to hev his dinner on the spot. Notice how his body is drawed
up, an' his tail is slowly movin' side to side, 'cause he thinks he's
goin' to sink his claws in tender flesh the next second! Wa'al that
panther makes me think uv this here Spaniard, Alvarez. I think we kin look
fur jest about ez much kindness an' gentlin' from him ez a fawn could
expect from a hungry panther."

"You are certainly right, Jim," said Paul.

"Uv course! Ef I didn't know thar wuz so many soldiers about, I'd send a
whoop through one uv them little winders thar, an' bring Henry, Tom, an'
Sol here to let us out."

"As we can't do that, Jim," said Paul, "I think I'll go to sleep."




CHAPTER X

A BARBARIC ORDEAL


When Paul awoke the next morning just after daylight, he did not feel very
good. Accustomed all his life to fresh air and infinite spaces, the close,
hot little log house oppressed him. His head felt heavy and his lungs
choked. Jim felt likewise and made audible complaint, but the door was
soon opened, and again it was Luiz and a comrade with food.

"Luiz, you ain't no beauty an' you can't talk a real decent language,"
said Long Jim, "but I'm pow'ful glad to see you."

The words were foreign to Luiz, but he understood Long Jim's tone. He
smiled and showed his white teeth, but when his glance fell upon Paul he
became sad. Then he looked quickly away. He did not wish either Paul or
his comrade to read anything in that glance. Luiz did not have a bad heart
and he was troubled.

When they had eaten their breakfast, Luiz put his hand on Paul's shoulder,
and pointed to the door, beckoning also to Long Jim. His manner indicated
plainly that they were to leave the prison.

"All right, pardner," said Long Jim. "You won't have to git no pole to
pry me out uv this place."

Luiz led the way and the two followed gladly. The air was crisper and
fresher than usual, and to both of them it felt divine. They inhaled deep
breaths, and thought that the world had never looked so beautiful. What a
golden sunrise! What a blue sky! What magnificent green woods off there
under the horizon! They felt strength and courage rushing back in a flood.

"Which way now, Mr. Spaniard?" said Long Jim. "Has your captain repented,
an' does he want to give us the finest rooms in his house? I can't say
that we liked the tavern he made us stop at last night."

Luiz shook his head, either to signify that he did not understand or that
there was no reply, and led the way down a narrow path shut in on either
side with magnolias and cypresses. The little group of soldiers enclosed
Paul and Long Jim, but all their glances were for the boy, none for the
man.

The enclosed path led on for two or three hundred yards. Paul now and then
caught glimpses through the trees of the chateau or a passing face, and he
heard a low murmur that seemed to be the hum of many voices.

The path ended presently at a gate in a high board wall, and both gate and
wall were thick and strong Here a Spaniard dressed like a minor officer
was waiting, and began to unlock the gate.

"Now what under the sun can they be about?" asked Long Jim, to whom all
this seemed very strange. "Are they goin' to tie us up in a pen?"

The heavy gate was unlocked and swung open a foot or so. Two soldiers
suddenly seized Long Jim and pulled him back, while another thrust Paul
into the open space. The officer put in his hand a sword--the very one
with which he had wounded Alvarez, Paul's fingers closing mechanically
over the hilt. Then they shoved Paul inside, and quickly closed and locked
the gate behind him. But the last look that Luiz had bent upon the boy was
one of pity and sympathy.

Paul staggered with the force of the push that the men had given him, and
