know that each of your coils is almost two feet or two and one half
feet long.  So if you want to lasso something twenty feet away you let
go ten coils.

"As to letting go, you simply open your hand at the correct time and
the rope slips off.

"But even after you have roped your steer your work is not over.
Almost any animal can pull you from your horse, and to prevent this you
must get your rope around the horn of your saddle.  There is where you
have to be quick.  There are two ways of making this hitch that are
used ordinarily.  The one I prefer is simply to take two turns around
the horn, taking care that the second turn comes lower and overlaps the
other.  No pull in the world could make that rope slip, while I can,
simply by throwing off one turn, let it all slide off.  This other
fashion, which is really taking a 'half-inch' around the horn, holds
just as fast, but you have to push the rope through to loosen it.  You
see, in making this sudden twist, a finger is very likely to get
caught, and I have known many fingers being taken off before such a
hitch could be unfastened.

"It is often advisable to take an extra twist around anything you have
lassoed, and this is done by simply throwing a coil.  Practice again is
the only thing that can teach this.

"Now you have the whole theory of throwing a rope.

"There are four sorts of throws, but they are all made alike, only the
position of the arm being different.  They are the overthrow, the
underthrow, the sidethrow, and the backthrow."

"Backthrow?"

"Yes, backthrow--catching an object behind you--something that you need
not even see.  That sounds difficult, does it?  Well, you stand behind
me and you can see it done."

The reporter took his station twenty feet behind Mr. Ohnimus, quite out
of sight, of course.  He swung the loop around his head, and, without
turning, let it fly backward.  It circled the newspaper man exactly,
and by pulling it quickly Ohnimus had his arms pinioned to his side.

"Are there any more trick throws?" asked the reporter.

"Lots of them.  I never put myself up as a crack riata man, and I am
out of practice now, but I can lay the noose on the ground at my feet
and kick it around your neck, or pick it off the ground from my horse
and land it around you while the horse is going at full speed, and do
lots of things like that, but none of them is any good.  That backthrow
has been used by the Mexican highwaymen to considerable advantage.  You
see, in that country the traveler always looks out for danger from the
rear and is prepared for it, but when a pleasant horseman rides past
him, playing with his riata, and wishing him 'Good-day' as he passes,
he is likely to consider the danger as gone by, as well as the man.
That has caused the death of a good many.  The bandit gets the right
distance ahead and then lassoes him as I did you.  A touch of his spur
jerks his victim from the saddle and that ends it."

"How is the lasso as a weapon of defence?"

"Good.  A quick riata man can beat a fellow with a pistol at fairly
close quarters."

"How?"

"Well, here is a pistol.  Put it in your pocket and draw it on me as I
come toward you."

The reporter did as he was directed.  He had not raised the weapon when
the noose was around his hand and the pistol was jerked a dozen feet.

"Try again, and tighter," said Ohnimus.

The reporter did so.  The pistol was not jerked from his hand this
time, but before he could snap it Ohnimus had thrown a coil around his
neck and pulled his pistol hand up over his shoulder.  In another
instant a second coil was around the reporter's body, and both arms
were fastened firmly to his sides.  He could not move that pistol an
inch.  No clearer demonstration of the use of the lasso as a weapon of
defence was possible.

"What is the most difficult animal, in your opinion, to catch with the
lasso?" was asked.

"A sea lion," answered the rope thrower.  "I have caught them off the
southern coast.  They go right through a noose.  The only way to get
them is to throw the rope around his neck and back of one flipper.  A
hog is hard to catch, too.  He pulls his legs out of a noose without
half trying, and you can't hold him by the neck or body.  The only way
is to get him like the sea lion--back of one foreleg."




A WATERSPOUT.

Doubtless many of my readers have heard of the dreadful encounters of
vessels with waterspouts, when the ship escaped destruction by firing a
cannon-ball into the waterspout, thus causing it to break apart.

Now these things are by no means such terrible objects as many believe.
No doubt the vessels of the present day are larger and stronger than
formerly, and perhaps waterspouts have become smaller.  Be as it may,
the people who go down to the sea in ships need give themselves no
uneasiness about them, for really they amount to little.

The _Slavonia_, of the Hamburg line left Brunshausen, on the Elbe, on
February 26 last, under the command of Capt. H. Schmidt.  She had only
two passengers.  The weather was squally and the air full of mist when
she reached the outer Banks, 900 miles from New York, shortly after
sunrise on Sunday, March 16.  The big vessel was heading west by north,
when, at 7 o'clock, Second Mate Erichsen, who was on the bridge, saw
emerge through the mist on the starboard side of the ship, at the
distance of about a thousand feet, a towering column which united sea
and sky.  The column was in front of the ship to starboard, and was
moving in a southeasterly direction, apparently at the rate of eight
knots an hour.

Although the Slavonia was running 9 1/2 knots, the column seemed likely
to pass in front of the steamship when their paths crossed.
Accordingly Erichsen did not try to alter the course of the Slavonia;
indeed, he would not have altered it had he known ship and spout were
sure to meet, for he had encountered waterspouts before and wasn't
afraid of them.  All he did--in fact, all he had time to do--was to
call Third Mate Lorentzen, also an expert in waterspouts.

On rushed the _Slavonia_, heading west by north: nearer came the
waterspout, heading south by east.  It soon became evident that the
spout could not get by before the _Slavonia_ reached it, and it was now
too late to slow up--indeed, a collision was manifestly unavoidable
from the start.  Lorentzen had scarcely reached the bridge when the
watery Philistine was upon the Samson.  It just hit the steamer's bows
on the starboard side, as depicted in the second cut.  A rushing noise
accompanied the column, and the water foamed in its wake.  Immediately
above was a great black cloud from which clouds less dark descended to
form a funnel, or inverted cone.  The middle of the column was white,
apparently because it contained snow.

The column's narrowest diameter was about twelve feet, while it was
three times as broad as its base, which reproduced in water and
inverted the cloud-formed funnel above.  The whole column rotated with
a spiral motion.

The waterspout, when it approached, took all the wind out of the
fore-staysail of the steamship, which went blind, but the schooner-sail
still kept full, and presently the fore-staysail filled again.

The Slavonia shook under the shock caused by contact with the column of
water, but kept on her course none the worse for the collision.  A few
flakes of snow on her bow were the only evidence of the collision after
the pillar of water had passed off to port.

While the vessel was uninjured, the waterspout soon showed signs that
it had received its death-blow.  As it sailed off to the southeast it
parted in the middle, and the cone of water which formed its base and
the cone of cloud which formed its top began to grow smaller by
degrees.  The waterspout was slowly but surely ceasing to be a
waterspout when it disappeared from view in the misty distance some
fifteen minutes or more from the time it was sighted.

The _Slavonia's_ encounter with the waterspout took place in latitude
42 degrees 22 minutes north and longitude 52 degrees 35 minutes west.
This is rather far north for waterspouts so early in the year.  The
waterspout crop is generally more plentiful when thunder and lightning
are on top, which is in warmer weather.  The temperature of the air at
the time of the encounter was 37 degrees; water 54 degrees.  It had
been cold during the night, but grew warmer in the morning.  The clouds
which overspread the firmament were of the cumulus pattern.

Erichsen and Lorentzen have not only seen other waterspouts, but the
first, when on a sailing vessel in the tropics, ran into the very
middle of one with no worse result than to deluge the deck of the ship
with water as a heavy shower would have done.  He thinks an unusually
large waterspout might possibly sink a very small vessel, say a pilot
boat, but with a ship of ordinary size he considers bombarding a
waterspout with cannon a waste of powder.




AN HEROIC WOMAN.

Every boy and girl should learn to swim.  When one recalls how easily
the art is acquired, and the many occasions that are liable to arise,
we cannot but wonder that the accomplishment is so universally
neglected by the other sex.  It is pleasant to note, however, that
swimming is growing to be popular among women, and the day is not far
distant, when the majority of young ladies will become the rivals of
their brothers in their ability to keep their heads above water.

Torres Strait separates Australia from Papua or New Guinea; and
connects the Arafura Sea on the west, with the Coral Sea on the east.
Its current is swift and the waters from time immemorial have been
dangerous to navigation.  It has been the scene of many shipwrecks, and
it is only a few months since that the steamer _Quetta_ was lost in
those waters.  One hundred and sixteen persons perished on that
terrible night in the South Pacific, but among the survivors was Miss
Lacy, whose experience was not only among the most interesting and
thrilling ever recorded, but emphasizes the statement we have made at
the opening of our sketch.

Miss Lacy says she was sitting in the saloon, engaged in writing a
letter, the other ladies practicing for a concert which it was intended
to give on shipboard.  Everything was going along, merrily, and all
were in high spirits, when, without the least warning, they were
startled by a harsh, grating noise, the steamer rocked violently, and
nearly every one was thrown into the wildest panic.

The confusion and shouts above showed that some fearful disaster had
occurred.  Instantly Miss Lacy made a rush for the deck to learn what
it meant.  Quick as were her movements, she found the ship was already
sinking.  Going aft was like climbing a steep hill, but she saw that
one portion was high above water, and she struggled bravely to reach
it.  But, so rapidly did the _Quetta_ go down that she had hardly gone
forward, when the steamer was swallowed up in the furious waters.

That which followed is beyond description.  In an instant, two hundred
human beings were struggling frantically, shrieking in their terror for
the help which was nowhere to be found, clutching each other, praying
and drowning by the score.

Miss Lacy was caught in this fearful swirl, and was in imminent danger
of being dragged down by those around her, who were crazed by the one
wild, despairing hope of saving themselves, no matter at what cost.
But she was a powerful swimmer, and retaining her self-command, she
shook herself free of several who attempted to cling to her.  The
whirlpool caused by the sinking of the steamer pulled her beneath the
water, but, with the same wonderful presence of mind she had shown from
the first, she fought her way to the surface, and swam from the
dangerous spot.

Finding herself her own mistress, and fully aware that her life now
depended on her ability to swim, she removed all her superfluous
clothing and moved hither and thither in the darkness, in the hope of
coming upon some of the survivors.

It was about midnight, that she heard some one shout.  The gloom was
too powerful for her to distinguish anything, but she swam toward the
point, whence the call issued, and came upon a raft, that had been
hastily thrown together by the chief officer of the _Quetta_.  Several
persons were clinging to it, and she accepted the invitation to avail
herself of the temporary refuge and give her weary limbs a rest.

The dismal hours wore slowly away, and at last the growing light in the
eastern sky told that the longed-for day was breaking.  As soon as the
rays of the sun illumined the wild waste of waters, every eye scanned
the ocean in quest of some sail; but on every side was the vast heavy
sea, with no sign of life except on the little raft.  It was water,
water everywhere, with not a drop to drink nor a morsel of food to eat,
and with no prospect of escaping a lingering death of the most
distressing nature.

The discouraging feature of the situation to Miss Lacy was that their
rude support was making no progress at all.  They had no means of
propelling it, and, had they possessed such means, no one knew what
course to follow.  It looked as if days and nights must be passed on
the raft, until one by one the survivors succumbed or ended their
sufferings by plunging into the sea which they had striven so hard to
escape.

Far away, however, on the verge of the horizon, an object rose dimly to
view, which, after carefully studying for some time, the shipwrecked
people agreed was a small island, but, as we have stated, they were
powerless to propel their craft thither, and could only gaze and sigh
for the refuge that was as much beyond their reach, as though it were a
thousand leagues distant.

"I am going to swim to it!" exclaimed Miss Lacy.

"Are you mad?" demanded the astonished chief-officer; "it is utterly
impossible."

"I prefer to risk it rather than remain here."

"But it is much further off than it seems to be; these waters are full
of sharks and you will never live to swim half the distance.  Dismiss
the idea at once."

"Good-by!"

And the brave woman took a header into the sea, and with a long
graceful stroke, that compelled the admiration of every one of the
amazed survivors, began swimming toward the supposed refuge.

But the chief-officer knew more about the difficulties in her way than
she did.  She grievously miscalculated the distance, and, though she
was a swimmer of amazing skill and endurance, she began to believe she
had undertaken a task beyond her power of accomplishment.

She swam directly toward the island, husbanding her strength like a
wise person, but making steady progress, until before the afternoon was
half gone, she knew she had placed many a long mile behind her.  When
she looked back she could see nothing of the raft and her friends, but
as she rose on the crest of an immense swell, she plainly discerned the
island.  It still was in the verge of the horizon, and it was hard for
her to see that she was apparently no nearer to it than when she
started.

Besides this alarming fact, she was threatened by a still greater
peril.  As the chief-officer had warned her, the waters abounded with
sharks, of the man-eating species, who were liable to dart forward and
seize her at any moment; but, in recalling her extraordinary
experience, Miss Lacy says that at no time did she feel any fear of
them.  She knew they were liable to discover her at any moment, but
they did not, and fortunately indeed she escaped their ferocious jaws.

Her greatest suffering was from the blazing sun, whose rays shot
downward upon her head with pitiless power.  When she found her brain
growing dizzy, she averted the danger of sunstroke by dropping or
swimming for some distance below the surface.  This always cooled or
refreshed her, though she felt her face and neck blistering under the
fierce rays.

In striving to recall her experience, Miss Lacy is unable to remember a
large portion of the time she spent in the water.  She believes she
slept for several hours.  What an extraordinary situation!  Alone in
the midst of the vast strait in the southern Pacific, surrounded by
sharks, with no friendly sail in sight, and yet slumbering and
unconscious.

Of course she was not swimming all this time.  When she found herself
growing weary, she floated on her back for long periods, then propelled
herself first upon one side and then upon the other, and all the time
the dim misty object in the distance remained as far away as ever.
Finally, when she raised her head and looked for it, she was dismayed
at being unable to detect it at all.  It had vanished.

Then she knew that it had been an optical delusion from the first.
There was no island or land in sight.  She was alone on the vast deep.

But the heroic woman did not despair.  After she had been in the water
twenty hours altogether, and was in the last stage of exhaustion, she
was picked up by a boat belonging to the search steamer _Albatross_.
For several hours succeeding her rescue she was delirious, but it was
not long before she was entirely herself, having given a signal proof
of the value of swimming as a lady's accomplishment.




THE WRITING FOUND IN A BOTTLE.

Let me assure the readers, at the beginning of this sketch, that it is
strictly true in every particular.  I have no ambition to shine as a
writer of fiction, and, at the request of a number of friends
acquainted with the remarkable circumstances, have sat down to relate,
in a straightforward manner as is at my command; the part that I took
in the history of the famous _Buried Treasure_.

Not the least singular part of this strange business was that, of the
three individuals concerned two were boys, one being my son Frank
(named for his father) and a playmate, Arthur Newman.  The latter was
thirteen years old, while Frank was only a few months his senior.

They were inseparable playmates from early childhood; and as we lived
near a broad, deep inlet, which put in from the Atlantic, they learned
to swim at the age of ten, and soon learned to manage a yacht as well
as veterans.  I was sometimes anxious because of their venturesome
disposition, but although they frequently ventured outside, sometimes
in very nasty weather, no accident ever befell them, and the parents of
both boys gradually learned to dismiss all fear concerning them, under
the belief that, as they grew older, they became better fitted to take
care of themselves.

One day in March Frank told me that a suspicious brig had been standing
off shore for the better part of a week, and he and Arthur had come to
the conclusion that it was a pirate.  I laughed heartily at their
fancy, and assured them that the days of buccaneers and sea rovers were
long since past, and they must dismiss all such absurd ideas from their
minds.

The following week the Atlantic sea-board was devastated by one of the
fiercest storms that had been known for years.  Reports of wrecks and
disasters to shipping reached us for several days after, and Frank
remarked one evening at supper that he believed his suspected pirate
was one of the unfortunate vessels that had gone down with all on
board.  I smiled at his words, but when I learned that the beach was
strewn with wreckage, and that a great deal of it had washed into the
inlet, I thought it probable that he was right, so far as the fate of
the strange ship was concerned.

It was near the close of the month that my boy brought home a tightly
corked bottle, which he and Arthur had found while cruising in the
inlet.  When he said that there was a piece of rolled paper inside, I
felt enough curiosity to withdraw the stopper with the aid of a strong
corkscrew, and to make an examination.

Sure enough there was a small roll of thick, vellum-like paper, on
which, in a cramped hand, evidently written years before, was the
following:

"_Three feet under the Beacon Tree_."

For a minute or two I was puzzled, and then, as if by inspiration, the
whole truth burst upon me.

The Beacon Tree was the name of an immense poplar that stood near the
mouth of the inlet.  The fish-hawks had builded their nests in the
forked tops for a half century.  I remember hearing my father say it
was struck by lightning long before and although its upper branches
were shattered, and it had been as dead as a fence-post ever since, yet
its immense size, great height, and peculiar, silver-like appearance
caused it to become a prominent landmark to the vessels when
approaching the coast, and long before I was born it gained the name of
the Beacon Tree, by which title it was known to unnumbered hundreds of
sailors and sea-faring men.

"There is a treasure buried under that tree," I said to Frank,
suppressing my excitement so far as I could.  "More than likely it was
placed there by some freebooter a long time ago, and these people were
awaiting a chance to dig it up."

"Maybe Captain Kidd buried it," suggested the boy.

"Possibly he did, for there is reason to believe that he hid a great
deal of treasure along the Atlantic coast.  Now, since Arthur was with
you when you found this bottle, he has the same claim to the treasure
that you have.  We will not say anything to his father, and you must
take particular care not to give a hint to a living soul.  Go over and
tell Arthur to come here this evening.  I will furnish the shovels and
lantern, and when we are sure that no one will see us, we will slip
over to the Beacon Tree and dig."

I recall that I was never so absolutely sure of anything in my life as
I was that valuable treasure lay buried under the old poplar.  My wife,
to whom I showed the little roll of paper, expressed a doubt, and
smilingly hinted that perhaps I was too much impressed by that
brilliant sketch of Edgar A. Poe called "The Gold Bug."

"Of course," I answered, "disappointment may await us, and I know these
bottles picked up at sea are frequently frauds; but the age of the
writing and the peculiar circumstances convince me that this is
