their heads, and as fast as they bear the wounded to the rear, fresh men
supply their places in the assault. Great God! hast thou given men thine
own image that it should be thus cruelly defaced by the hands of their
brethren!" "Think not of that," replied Ivanhoe; "this is no time for such
thoughts. Who yield? Who push their way?"

"The ladders are thrown down," replied Rebecca, shuddering; "the soldiers
lie groveling under them like crushed reptiles; the besieged have the
better." "Saint George strike for us!" said the knight; "do the false
yeomen give way?" "No," exclaimed Rebecca, "they bear themselves right
yeomanly; the Black Knight approaches the postern with his huge ax; the
thundering blows which he deals, you may hear them above all the din and
shouts of the battle; stones and beams are hailed down on the brave
champion; he regards them no more than if they were thistle down and
feathers."

"Saint John of Acre!" said Ivanhoe, raising himself joyfully on his couch,
"methought there was but one man in England that might do such a deed."
"The postern gate shakes," continued Rebecca; "it crashes--it is
splintered by his powerful blows--they rush in--the outwork is won! O God!
they hurry the defenders from the battlements--they throw them into the
moat! O men, if ye be indeed men, spare them that can resist no longer!"
"The bridge--the bridge which communicates with the castle--have they won
that pass?" exclaimed Ivanhoe. "No," replied Rebecca; "the Templar has
destroyed the plank on which they crossed--few of the defenders escaped
with him into the castle--the shrieks and cries which you hear, tell the
fate of the others. Alas! I see that it is still more difficult to look
upon victory than upon battle."

"What do they now, maiden?" said Ivanhoe; "look forth yet again--this is
no time to faint at bloodshed." "It is over, for a time," said Rebecca;
"our friends strengthen themselves within the outwork which they have
mastered." "Our friends," said Ivanhoe, "will surely not abandon an
enterprise so gloriously begun, and so happily attained; Oh no! I will put
my faith in the good knight whose ax has rent heart of oak and bars of
iron. Singular," he again muttered to himself, "if there can be two who
are capable of such achievements. It is,--it must be Richard Coeur de
Lion."

"Seest thou nothing else. Rebecca, by which the Black Knight may be
distinguished?" "Nothing," said the Jewess, "all about him is as black as
the wing of the night raven. Nothing can I spy that can mark him further;
but having once seen him put forth his strength in battle, methinks I
could know him again among a thousand warriors. He rushes to the fray as
if he were summoned to a banquet. There is more than mere strength; it
seems as if the whole soul and spirit of the champion were given to every
blow which he deals upon his enemies. God forgive him the sin of
bloodshed! it is fearful, yet magnificent, to behold how the arm and heart
of one man can triumph over hundreds."
                                                          -- Walter Scott.


NOTES.--Ivanhoe, a wounded knight, and Rebecca, a Jewess, had been
imprisoned in the castle of Reginald Front de Boeuf. The friends of the
prisoners undertake their rescue. At the request of Ivanhoe, who is unable
to leave his couch, Rebecca takes her stand near a window overlooking the
approach to the castle, and details to the knight the incidents of the
contest as they take place. Front de Boeuf and his garrison were Normans;
the besiegers, Saxons.

The castles of this time (twelfth century) usually consisted of a keep, or
castle proper, surrounded at some distance by two walls, one within the
other. Each wall was encircled on its outer side by a moat, or ditch,
which was filled with water, and was crossed by means of a drawbridge.
Before the main entrance of the outer wall was an outwork called the
barbacan, which was a high wall surmounted by battlements and turrets,
built to defend the gate and drawbridge. Here, also, were placed barriers
of palisades, etc., to impede the advance of an attacking force. The
postern gate was small, and was usually some distance from the ground; it
was used for the egress of messengers during a siege;


L. MARCO BOZZARIS. (202)

Fitz-Greene Halleck, 1790--1867, was born in Guilford, Connecticut. At the
age of eighteen he entered a banking house in New York, where he remained
a long time. For many years he was bookkeeper and assistant in business
for John Jacob Astor. Nearly all his poems were written before he was
forty years old, several of them in connection with his friend Joseph
Rodman Drake. His "Young America," however, was written but a few years
before his death. Mr. Halleck's poetry is carefully finished and musical;
much of it is sportive, and some satirical. No one of his poems is better
known than "Marco Bozzaris."
###


At midnight, in his guarded tent,
  The Turk was dreaming of the hour
When Greece, her knee in suppliance bent,
  Should tremble at his power.
In dreams, through camp and court he bore
The trophies of a conqueror;
  In dreams, his song of triumph heard;
Then wore his monarch's signet ring;
Then pressed that monarch's throne--a king:
As wild his thoughts, and gay of wing,
  As Eden's garden bird.

At midnight, in the forest shades,
  Bozzaris ranged his Suliote band,
True as the steel of their tried blades,
  Heroes in heart and hand.
There had the Persian's thousands stood,
There had the glad earth drunk their blood,
  On old Plataea's day:
And now there breathed that haunted air,
The sons of sires who conquered there,
With arms to strike, and soul to dare,
  As quick, as far as they.

An hour passed on--the Turk awoke;
  That bright dream was his last:
He woke--to hear his sentries shriek,
  "To arms! they come! the Greek! the Greek!"
He woke--to die mid flame and smoke,
And shout, and groan, and saber stroke,
  And death shots falling thick and fast
As lightnings from the mountain cloud;
And heard, with voice as trumpet loud,
  Bozzaris cheer his band:
"Strike--till the last armed foe expires;
Strike--for your altars and your fires;
Strike--for the green graves of your sires;
  God--and your native land!"

They fought--like brave men, long and well;
  They piled that ground with Moslem slain;
They conquered--but Bozzaris fell,
  Bleeding at every vein.
His few surviving comrades saw
His smile, when rang their proud hurrah,
  And the red field was won:
Then saw in death his eyelids close
Calmly, as to a night's repose,
  Like flowers at set of sun.

Come to the bridal chamber, Death!
  Come to the mother, when she feels
For the first time her firstborn's breath;
  Come when the blessed seals
That close the pestilence are broke,
And crowded cities wail its stroke;
Come in consumption's ghastly form,
The earthquake's shock, the ocean storm;
Come when the heart beats high and warm
  With banquet song, and dance, and wine:
And thou art terrible--the tear,
The groan, the knell, the pall, the bier,
And all we know, or dream, or fear
  Of agony, are thine.
But to the hero, when his sword
  Has won the battle for the free,
Thy voice sounds like a prophet's word;
And in its hollow tones are heard
  The thanks of millions yet to be.

Bozzaris! with the storied brave
  Greece nurtured in her glory's time,
Rest thee--there is no prouder grave
  Even in her own proud clime.
  We tell thy doom without a sigh,
For thou art Freedom's, now, and Fame's.
One of the few, the immortal names,
  That were not born to die.


NOTES.--Marco Bozzaris (b. about 1790, d. 1823) was a famous Greek
patriot. His family were Suliotes, a people inhabiting the Suli Mountains,
and bitter enemies of the Turks. Bozzaris was engaged in war against the
latter nearly all his life, and finally fell in a night attack upon their
camp near Carpenisi. This poem, a fitting tribute to his memory, has been
translated into modern Greek.

Plataea was the scene of a great victory of the Greeks over the Persians
in the year 479 B. C.

Moslem--The followers of Mohammed are called Moslems.



LI. SONG OF THE GREEK BARD. (205)

George Gordon Byron, Lord Byron, 1788-1824. This gifted poet was the son
of a profligate father and of a fickle and passionate mother. He was
afflicted with lameness from his birth; and, although he succeeded to his
great-uncle's title at ten years of age, he inherited financial
embarrassment with it. These may be some of the reasons for the morbid and
wayward character of the youthful genius. It is certain that he was not
lacking in affection, nor in generosity. In his college days, at
Cambridge, he was willful and careless of his studies. "Hours of
Idleness," his first book, appeared in 1807. It was severely treated by
the "Edinburgh Review," which called forth his "English Bards and Scotch
Reviewers," in 1809. Soon after, he went abroad for two years; and, on his
return, published the first two cantos of "Childe Harold's Pligrimage," a
work that made him suddenly famous. He married in 1815, but separated from
his wife after one year. Soured and bitter, he now left England, purposing
never to return. He spent most of the next seven years in Italy, where
most of his poems were written. The last year of his life was spent in
Greece, aiding in her struggle for liberty against the Turks. He died at
Missolonghi. As a man, Byron was impetuous, morbid and passionate. He was
undoubtedly dissipated and immoral, but perhaps to a less degree than has
sometimes been asserted. As a poet, he possessed noble powers, and he has
written much that will last; in general, however, his poetry is not
wholesome, and his fame is less than it once was.
###


The isles of Greece! the isles of Greece!
  Where burning Sappho loved and sung,
Where grew the arts of war and peace,--
  Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!
Eternal summer gilds them yet,
But all, except their sun, is set.

The Scian and the Teian muse,
  The hero's harp, the lover's lute,
Have found the fame your shores refuse;
  Their place of birth alone is mute
To sounds which echo further west
Than your sires' "Islands of the Blest."

The mountains look on Marathon,
  And Marathon looks on the sea;
And musing there an hour alone,
  I dreamed that Greece might still be free;
For, standing on the Persian's grave,
I could not deem myself a slave.

A king sat on the rocky brow
  Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis;
And ships, by thousands, lay below,
  And men in nations,--all were his!
He counted them at break of day,--
And when the sun set, where were they?

And where are they? And where art thou,
  My country? On thy voiceless shore
The heroic lay is tuneless now,--
  The heroic bosom beats no more!
And must thy lyre, so long divine,
Degenerate into hands like mine?

Must we but weep o'er days more blest?
  Must we but blush? Our fathers bled.
Earth! render back from out thy breast
  A remnant of our Spartan dead!
Of the three hundred, grant but three,
To make a new Thermopylae!

What! silent still and silent all?
  Ah! no;--the voices of the dead
Sound like a distant torrent's fall,
  And answer, "Let one living head,
But one, arise,--we come, we come!"
'Tis but the living who are dumb!

In vain--in vain!--strike other chords;
  Fill high the cup with Samian wine!
Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,
  And shed the blood of Scio's vine!
Hark! rising to the ignoble call,
How answers each bold Bacchanal!

You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet;
  Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?
Of two such lessons, why forget
  The nobler and the manlier one?
You have the letters Cadmus gave;
Think ye he meant them for a slave?

Fill high the howl with Samian wine!
  We will not think of themes like these!
It made Anacreon's song divine:
  He served, but served Polycrates,
A tyrant; but our masters then
Were still, at least, Our countrymen.

The tyrant of the Chersonese
 Was freedom's best and bravest friend;
That tyrant was Miltiades!
Oh that the present hour would lend
Another despot of the kind!
Such chains as his were sure to bind.

Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
  Our virgins dance beneath the shade;
I see their glorious, black eyes shine;
  But gazing on each glowing maid,
My own the burning tear-drop laves,
To think such breasts must suckle slaves.

Place me on Sunium's marbled steep,
  Where nothing save the waves and I
May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;
  There, swanlike, let me sing and die:
A land of slaves shall ne'er be mine,--
Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!


NOTES.--Sappho was a Greek poetess living on the island of Lesbos, about
600 B. C. Delos is one of the Grecian Archipelago, and is of volcanic
origin. The ancient Greeks believed that it rose from the sea at a stroke
from Neptune's trident, and was moored fast to the bottom by Jupiter. It
was the supposed birthplace of Phoebus, or Apollo. The island of Chios, or
Scios, is one of the places which claim to be the birthplace of Homer.
Teios, or Teos, a city in Ionia, is the birthplace of the Greek poet
Anacreon. The Islands of the Blest, mentioned in ancient poetry, were
imaginary islands in the west, where, it was believed, the favorites of
the gods were conveyed without dying.

At Marathon. (490 B. C.), on the east coast, of Greece, 11,000 Greeks,
under the generalship of Miltiades, routed 110,000 Persians. The island of
Salamis lies very near the Greek coast: in the narrow channel between, the
Greek fleet almost destroyed (480 B.C.) that of Xerxes, the Persian king,
who witnessed the contest from a throne on the mountain side. Thermopylae
is a narrow mountain pass in Greece, where Leonidas, with 300 Spartans and
about 1,100 other Greeks, held the entire Persian army in check until
every Spartan, except one, was slain. Samos is one of the Grecian
Archipelago, noted for its cultivation of the vine and olive.

A Bacchanal was a disciple of Bacchus, the god of wine. Pyrrhus was a
Greek, and one of the greatest generals of the world. The phalanx was an
almost invincible arrangement of troops, massed in close array, with their
shields overlapping one another, and their spears projecting; this form of
military tactics was peculiar to the Greeks.

Polycrates seized the island of Samos, and made himself tyrant: he was
entrapped and crucified in 522 B. C. Chersonese is the ancient name for a
peninsula. Sunium is the name of a promontory southeast of Athens.



LII. NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS. (209)

Charles Sprague, 1791-1875, was born in Boston, and received his education
in the public schools of that city. For sixteen years he was engaged in
mercantile pursuits, as clerk and partner. In 1820 he became teller in a
bank; and, from 1825, he filled the office of cashier of the Globe Bank
for about forty years. In 1829 be gave his most famous poem, "Curiosity,"
before the Phi Beta Kappa society, in Cambridge. An active man of business
all his days, he has written but little either in prose or poetry, but
that little is excellent in quality, graceful, and pleasing.

The address from which this extract is taken, was delivered before the
citizens of Boston, July 4th, 1825.
###


Not many generations ago, where you now sit, encircled with all that
exalts and embellishes civilized life, the rank thistle nodded in the wind
and the wild fox dug his hole unscared. Here lived and loved another race
of beings. Beneath the same sun that rolls over your head, the Indian
hunter pursued the panting deer; gazing on the same moon that smiles for
you, the Indian lover wooed his dusky mate. Here the wigwam blaze beamed
on the tender and helpless, and the council fire glared on the wise and
daring. Now they dipped their noble limbs in your sedgy lakes, and now
they paddled the light canoe along your rocky shores. Here they warred;
the echoing whoop, the bloody grapple, the defying death song, all were
here; and when the tiger strife was over, here curled the smoke of peace.

Here, too, they worshiped; and from many a dark bosom went up a fervent
prayer to the Great Spirit. He had not written his laws for them on tables
of stone, but he had traced them on the tables of their hearts. The poor
child of nature knew not the God of Revelation, but the God of the
universe he acknowledged in everything around. He beheld him in the star
that sank in beauty behind his lonely dwelling; in the sacred orb that
flamed on him from his midday throne; in the flower that snapped in the
morning breeze; in the lofty pine that defied a thousand whirlwinds; in
the timid warbler that never left its native grove; in the fearless eagle,
whose untired pinion was wet in clouds; in the worm that crawled at his
feet; and in his own matchless form, glowing with a spark of that light,
to whose mysterious source he bent in humble though blind adoration.

And all this has passed away. Across the ocean came a pilgrim bark,
bearing the seeds of life and death. The former were sown for you; the
latter sprang up in the path of the simple native. Two hundred years have
changed the character of a great continent, and blotted forever from its
face a whole, peculiar people. Art has usurped the bowers of nature, and
the anointed children of education have been too powerful for the tribes
of the ignorant. Here and there a stricken few remain; but how unlike
their bold, untamable progenitors. The Indian of falcon glance and lion
bearing, the theme of the touching ballad, the hero of the pathetic tale
is gone, and his degraded offspring crawls upon the soil where he walked
in majesty, to remind us how miserable is man when the foot of the
conqueror is on his neck.

As a race they have withered from the land. Their arrows are broken, their
springs are dried up, their cabins are in the dust. Their council fire has
long since gone out on the shore, and their war cry is fast fading to the
untrodden west. Slowly and sadly they climb the distant mountains, and
read their doom in the setting sun. They are shrinking before the mighty
tide which is pressing them away; they must soon hear the roar of the last
wave which will settle over them forever. Ages hence, the inquisitive
white man, as he stands by some growing city, will ponder on the structure
of their disturbed remains, and wonder to what manner of persons they
belonged. They will live only in the songs and chronicles of their
exterminators. Let these be faithful to their rude virtues as men, and pay
due tribute to their unhappy fate as a people.



LIII. LOCHIEL'S WARNING. (211)

Thomas Campbell, 1777-1844, was a descendant of the famous clan of
Campbells, in Kirnan, Scotland, and was born at Glasgow. At the age of
thirteen he entered the university in that city, from which he graduated
with distinction, especially as a Greek scholar; his translations of Greek
tragedy were considered without parallel in the history of the university.
During the first year after graduation, he wrote several poems of minor
importance. He then removed to Edinburgh and adopted literature as his
profession; here his "Pleasures of Hope" was published in 1799, and
achieved immediate success. He traveled extensively on the continent, and
during his absence wrote "Lochiel's Warning," "Hohenlinden," and other
minor poems. In 1809 he published "Gertrude of Wyoming;" from 1820 to 1830
he edited the "New Monthly Magazine." In 1826 he was chosen lord rector of
the University of Glasgow, to which office he was twice reelected. He was
active in founding the University of London. During the last years of his
life he produced but little of note. He died at Boulogne, in France.
During most of his life he was in straitened pecuniary circumstances, and
ill-health and family afflictions cast a melancholy over his later years.
His poems were written with much care, and are uniformly smooth and
musical.
###


Seer. Lochiel! Lochiel! beware of the day
      When the Lowlands shall meet thee in battle array!
      For a field of the dead rushes red on my sight,
      And the clans of Culloden are scattered in fight.
      They rally, they bleed, for their kingdom and crown;
      Woe, woe to the riders that trample them down!
      Proud Cumberland prances, insulting the slain,
      And their hoof-beaten bosoms are trod to the plain.
      But hark! through the fast-flashing lightning of war,
      What steed to the desert flies frantic and far?
      'T is thine, O Glenullin! whose bride shall await
      Like a love-lighted watch fire all night at the gate.
      A steed comes at morning,--no rider is there,
      But its bridle is red with the sign of despair.
      Weep, Albin! to death and captivity led!
      Oh, weep! but thy tears can not number the dead:
      For a merciless sword on Culloden shall wave,--
      Culloden! that reeks with the blood of the brave.

Loch. Go preach to the coward, thou death-telling seer!
      Or, if gory Culloden so dreadful appear,
      Draw, dotard, around thy old wavering sight,
      This mantle, to cover the phantoms of fright.

Seer. Ha! laugh'st thou, Lochiel, my vision to scorn?
      Proud bird of the mountain thy plume shall be torn!
      Say, rushed the bold eagle exultingly forth
      From his home in the dark-rolling clouds of the north?
      Lo! the death shot of foemen outspeeding, he rode
      Companionless, bearing destruction abroad;
      But down let him stoop from his havoc on high!
      Ah! home let him speed, for the spoiler is nigh.
      Why flames the far summit? Why shoot to the blast
      Those embers, like stars from the firmament cast?
      'T is the fire shower of ruin, all dreadfully driven
      From his eyrie that beacons the darkness of heaven,
      O crested Lochiel! the peerless in might,
      Whose banners arise on the battlements' height,
      Heaven's fire is around thee, to blast and to burn;
      Return to thy dwelling! all lonely return!
      For the blackness of ashes shall mark where it stood,
      And a wild mother scream o'er her famishing brood.

Loch. False wizard, avaunt! I have marshaled my clan,
      Their swords are a thousand, their bosoms are one!
      They are true to the last of their blood and their breath,
      And like reapers descend to the harvest of death.
      Then welcome be Cumberland's steed to the shock!
      Let him dash his proud foam like a wave on the rock!
      But woe to his kindred, and woe to his cause,
      When Albin her claymore indignantly draws;
      When her bonneted chieftains to victory crowd,
      Clanronald the dauntless, and Moray the proud,
      All plaided and plumed in their tartan array--

Seer. --Lochiel, Lochiel, beware of the day!
      For, dark and despairing, my sight I may seal,
      But man can not cover what God would reveal:
      'T is the sunset of life gives me mystical lore,
      And coming events cast their shadows before.
      I tell thee, Culloden's dread echoes shall ring
      With the bloodhounds that bark for thy fugitive king.
      Lo! anointed by heaven with the vials of wrath,
      Behold where he flies on his desolate path!
      Now, in darkness and billows, he sweeps from my sight:
      Rise, rise! ye wild tempests, and cover his flight!
      'Tis finished. Their thunders are hushed on the moors;
      Culloden is lost, and my country deplores.
      But where is the ironbound prisoner? Where?
      For the red eye of battle is shut in despair.
      Say, mounts he the ocean wave, banished, forlorn,
      Like a limb from his country, cast bleeding and torn?
      Ah no! for a darker departure is near;
      The war drum is muffled, and black is the bier;
      His death bell is tolling; O mercy, dispel
      Yon sight that it freezes my spirit to tell!
      Life flutters convulsed in his quivering limbs,
      And his blood-streaming nostril in agony swims.
      Accursed be the fagots that blaze at his feet,
      Where his heart shall be thrown ere it ceases to beat,
      With the smoke of its ashes to poison the gale--

Loch. Down, soothless insulter! I trust not the tale:
      For never shall Albin a destiny meet
      So black with dishonor, so foul with retreat.
      Though my perishing ranks should be strewed in their gore,
      Like ocean weeds heaped on the surf-beaten shore,
      Lochiel, untainted by flight or by chains,
      While the kindling of life in his bosom remains,
      Shall victor exult, or in death be laid low,
      With his back to the field and his feet to the foe!
      And leaving in battle no blot on his name,
      Look proudly to heaven from the deathbed of fame.


NOTES.--Lochiel was a brave and influential Highland chieftain. He
espoused the cause of Charles Stuart, called the Pretender, who claimed
the British throne. In the preceding piece, he is supposed to be marching
with the warriors of his clan to join Charles's army. On his way he is met
by a Seer, who having, according to the popular superstition, the gift of
second-sight, or prophecy, forewarns him of the disastrous event of the
enterprise, and exhorts him to return home and avoid the destruction which
certainly awaits him, and which afterward fell upon him at the battle of
Culloden, in 1746. In this battle the Highlanders were commanded by
Charles in person, and the English by the Duke of Cumberland. The
Highlanders wore completely routed, and the Pretender's rebellion brought
to a close. He himself shortly afterward made a narrow escape by water
from the west of Scotland; hence the reference to the fugitive king.

Albin is the poetic name of Scotland, more particularly the Highlands. The
ironbound prisoner refers to Lochiel.



LIV. ON HAPPINESS OF TEMPER. (215)

Oliver Goldsmith, 1728-1774. This eccentric son of genius was an Irishman;
his father was a poor curate. Goldsmith received his education at several
preparatory schools, at Trinity College, Dublin, at Edinburgh, and at
Leyden. He was indolent and unruly as a student, often in disgrace with
his teachers; but his generosity, recklessness, and love of athletic
sports made him a favorite with his fellow-students. He spent some time in
wandering over the continent, often in poverty and want. In 1756 he
returned to England, and soon took up his abode in London. Here he made
the acquaintance and friendship of several notable men, among whom were
Johnson and Sir Joshua Reynolds. "The Traveler" was published in 1764, and
was soon followed by the "Vicar of Wakefield." He wrote in nearly all
departments of literature, and always with purity, grace, and fluency. His
fame as a poet is secured by the "Traveler" and the "Deserted Village;" as
a dramatist, by "She Stoops to Conquer;" as a satirist, by the "Citizen of
the World;" and as a novelist by the "Vicar of Wakefield." In his later
years his writings were the source of a large income, but his gambling,
careless generosity, and reckless extravagance always kept him in
financial difficulty, and he died heavily in debt. His monument is in
Westminster Abbey.
##


Writers of every age have endeavored to show that pleasure is in us, and
not in the objects offered for our amusement. If the soul be happily
disposed, everything becomes capable of affording entertainment, and
distress will almost want a name. Every occurrence passes in review, like
the figures of a procession; some may be awkward, others ill-dressed, but
none but a fool is on that account enraged with the master of ceremonies.

I remember to have once seen a slave, in a fortification in Flanders, who
appeared no way touched with his situation. He was maimed, deformed, and
chained; obliged to toil from the appearance of day till nightfall, and
condemned to this for life; yet, with all these circumstances of apparent
wretchedness, he sang, would have danced, but that he wanted a leg, and
appeared the merriest, happiest man of all the garrison. What a practical
philosopher was here! A happy constitution supplied philosophy, and though
seemingly destitute of wisdom he was really wise. No reading or study had
contributed to disenchant the fairyland around him. Everything furnished
him with an opportunity of mirth; and though some thought him, from his
insensibility, a fool, he was such an idiot as philosophers should wish to
imitate.

They who, like that slave, can place themselves all that side of the world
in which everything appears in a pleasant light, will find something in
