
The night-school was drawing to a close. The attendance had been good,
and the room looked cheerful. In one corner the Rector was teaching a
group of grown-up men, who (better late than never) were zealously
learning to read; in another the schoolmaster was flourishing his
stick before a map as he concluded his lesson in geography. By the
fire sat Master Arthur, the Rector's son, surrounded by his class, and
in front of him stood Beauty Bill. Master Arthur was very popular with
the people, especially with his pupils. The boys were anxious to get
into his class, and loath to leave it. They admired his great height,
his merry laugh, the variety of walking-sticks he brought with him,
and his very funny way of explaining pictures. He was not a very
methodical teacher, and was rather apt to give unexpected lessons on
subjects in which he happened just then to be interested himself; but
he had a clear simple way of explaining anything, which impressed it
on the memory, and he took a great deal of pains in his own way. Bill
was especially devoted to him. He often wished that Master Arthur
could get very rich, and take him for his man-servant; he thought he
should like to brush his clothes and take care of his sticks. He had a
great interest in the growth of his moustache and whiskers. For some
time past Master Arthur had had a trick of pulling at his upper lip
whilst he was teaching; which occasionally provoked a whisper of
"Moostarch, guvernor!" between two unruly members of his class; but
never till to-night had Bill seen anything in that line which
answered his expectations. Now, however, as he stood before the young
gentleman, the fire-light fell on such a distinct growth of hair, that
Bill's interest became absorbed to the exclusion of all but the most
perfunctory attention to the lesson on hand. Would Master Arthur grow
a beard? Would his moustache be short like the pictures of Prince
Albert, or long and pointed like that of some other great man whose
portrait he had seen in the papers? He was calculating on the probable
effect of either style, when the order was given to put away books,
and then the thought which had been for a time diverted came back
again--his walk home.

Poor Bill! his fears returned with double force from having been for
awhile forgotten. He dawdled over the books, he hunted in wrong places
for his cap and comforter, he lingered till the last boy had clattered
through the doorway, and left him with a group of elders who closed
the proceedings and locked up the school. But after this further delay
was impossible. The whole party moved out into the moonlight, and the
Rector and his son, the schoolmaster and the teachers, commenced, a
sedate parish gossip, whilst Bill trotted behind, wondering whether
any possible or impossible business would take one of them his way.
But when the turning point was reached, the Rector destroyed all his
hopes.

"None of us go your way, I think," said he, as lightly as if there
were no grievance in the case; "however, it's not far. Good-night, my
boy!"

And so with a volley of good-nights, the cheerful voices passed on up
the village. Bill stood till they had quite died away, and then when
all was silent, he turned into the lane.

The cold night-wind crept into his ears, and made uncomfortable noises
among the trees, and blew clouds over the face of the moon. He almost
wished that there were no moon. The shifting shadows under his feet,
and the sudden patches of light on unexpected objects, startled him,
and he thought he should have felt less frightened if it had been
quite dark. Once he ran for a bit, then he resolved to be brave, then
to be reasonable; he repeated scraps of lessons, hymns, and last
Sunday's Collect, to divert and compose his mind; and as this plan
seemed to answer, he determined to go through the Catechism, both
question and answer, which he hoped might carry him to the end of his
unpleasant journey. He had just asked himself a question with
considerable dignity, and was about to reply, when a sudden gleam of
moonlight lit up a round object in the ditch. Bill's heart seemed to
grow cold, and he thought his senses would have forsaken him. Could
this be the head of ----? No! on nearer inspection it proved to be
only a turnip; and when one came to think of it, that would have been
rather a conspicuous place for the murdered man's skull to have been
lost in for so many years.

My hero must not be ridiculed too much for his fears. The terrors that
visit childhood are not the less real and overpowering from being
unreasonable; and to excite them is wanton cruelty. Moreover, he was
but a little lad, and had been up and down Yew-lane both in daylight
and dark without any fears, till Bully Tom's tormenting suggestions
had alarmed him. Even now, as he reached the avenue of yews from which
the lane took its name, and passed into their gloomy shade, he tried
to be brave. He tried to think of the good GOD Who takes care of His
children, and to Whom the darkness and the light are both alike. He
thought of all he had been taught about angels, and wondered if one
were near him now, and wished that he could see him, as Abraham and
other good people had seen angels. In short, the poor lad did his best
to apply what he had been taught to the present emergency, and very
likely had he not done so he would have been worse; but as it was, he
was not a little frightened, as we shall see.

Yew-lane--cool and dark when the hottest sunshine lay beyond it--a
loitering place for lovers--the dearly-loved play-place of
generations of children on sultry summer days--looked very grim and
vault-like, with narrow streaks of moonlight peeping in at rare
intervals to make the darkness to be felt! Moreover, it was really
damp and cold, which is not favourable to courage. At a certain point
Yew-lane skirted a corner of the churchyard, and was itself crossed by
another road, thus forming a "four-want-way," where suicides were
buried in times past. This road was the old high-road, where the mail
coach ran, and along which, on such a night as this, a hundred years
ago, a horseman rode his last ride. As he passed the church on his
fatal journey did anything warn him how soon his headless body would
be buried beneath its shadow? Bill wondered. He wondered if he were
old or young--what sort of a horse he rode--whose cruel hands dragged
him into the shadow of the yews and slew him, and where his head was
hidden, and why. Did the church look just the same, and the moon shine
just as brightly, that night a century ago? Bully Tom was right. The
weathercock and moon sit still, whatever happens. The boy watched the
gleaming high road as it lay beyond the dark aisle of trees, till he
fancied he could hear the footfalls of the solitary horse--and yet,
no! The sound was not upon the hard road, but nearer; it was not the
clatter of hoofs, but something--and a rustle--and then Bill's blood
seemed to freeze in his veins, as he saw a white figure, wrapped in
what seemed to be a shroud, glide out of the shadow of the yews and
move slowly down the lane. When it reached the road it paused, raised
a long arm warningly towards him for a moment, and then vanished in
the direction of the churchyard.

What would have been the consequence of the intense fright the poor
lad experienced is more than anyone can say, if at that moment the
church clock had not begun to strike nine. The familiar sound, close
in his ears, roused him from the first shock, and before it had ceased
he contrived to make a desperate rally of his courage, flew over the
road, and crossed the two fields that now lay between him and home
without looking behind him.




CHAPTER III.

     "It was to her a real _grief of heart_, acute, as children's
     sorrows often are.

     "We beheld this from the opposite windows--and, seen thus
     from a little distance, how many of our own and of other
     people's sorrows might not seem equally trivial, and equally
     deserving of ridicule!"

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.


When Bill got home he found the household busy with a much more
practical subject than that of ghosts and haunted yew-trees. Bessy
was ill. She had felt a pain in her side all the day, which towards
night had become so violent that the doctor was sent for, who had
pronounced it pleurisy, and had sent her to bed. He was just coming
downstairs as Bill burst into the house. The mother was too much
occupied about her daughter to notice the lad's condition; but the
doctor's sharp eyes saw that something was amiss, and he at once
inquired what it was. Bill hammered and stammered, and stopped short.
The doctor was such a tall, stout, comfortable-looking man, he looked
as if he couldn't believe in ghosts. A slight frown, however, had come
over his comfortable face, and he laid two fingers on Bill's wrist as
he repeated his question.

"Please, sir," said Bill, "I've seen--"

"A mad dog?" suggested the doctor.

"No, sir."

"A mad bull?"

"No, sir," said Bill, desperately, "I've seen a ghost."

The doctor exploded into a fit of laughter, and looked more
comfortable than ever.

"And _where_ did we see the ghost?" he inquired, in a professional
voice, as he took up his coat-tails and warmed himself at the fire.

"In Yew-lane, sir; and I'm sure I did see it," said Bill, half
crying; "it was all in white, and beckoned me."

"That's to say you saw a white gravestone, or a tree in the moonlight,
or one of your classmates dressed up in a table-cloth. It was all
moonshine, depend upon it," said the doctor, with a chuckle at his own
joke; "take my advice, my boy, and don't give way to foolish fancies."

At this point the mother spoke--

"If his father knew, sir, as he'd got any such fads in his head, he'd
soon flog 'em out of him."

"His father is a very good one," said the doctor; "a little too fond
of the stick, perhaps. There," he added, good-naturedly, slipping
sixpence into Bill's hand, "get a new knife, my boy, and cut a good
thick stick, and the next ghost you meet, lay hold of him and let him
taste it."

Bill tried to thank him, but somehow his voice was choked, and the
doctor turned to his mother.

"The boy has been frightened," he said, "and is upset. Give him some
supper, and put him to bed." And the good gentleman departed.

Bill was duly feasted and sent to rest. His mother did not mention the
matter to her husband, as she knew he would be angry; and occupied
with real anxiety for her daughter, she soon forgot it herself.
Consequently, the next night-school night she sent Bill to "clean
himself," hurried on his tea, and packed him off, just as if nothing
had happened.

The boy's feelings since the night of the apparition had not been
enviable. He could neither eat nor sleep. As he lay in bed at night,
he kept his face covered with the clothes, dreading that if he peeped
out into the room the phantom of the murdered horseman would beckon to
him from the dark corners. Lying so till the dawn broke and the cocks
began to crow, he would then look cautiously forth, and seeing by the
grey light that the corners were empty, and that the figure by the
door was not the Yew-lane Ghost, but his mother's faded print dress
hanging on a nail, would drop his head and fall wearily asleep. The
day was no better, for each hour brought him nearer to the next night
school; and Bessy's illness made his mother so busy, that he never
could find the right moment to ask her sympathy for his fears, and
still less could he feel himself able to overcome them. And so the
night-school came round again, and there he sat, gulping down a few
mouthfuls of food, and wondering how he should begin to tell his
mother that he neither dare, could, nor would, go down Yew-lane again
at night. He had just opened his lips when the father came in, and
asked in a loud voice "Why Bill was not off." This effectually put a
stop to any confidences, and the boy ran out of the house. Not,
however, to school. He made one or two desperate efforts at
determination, and then gave up altogether. He _could_ not go!

He was wondering what he should do with himself, when it struck him
that he would go whilst it was daylight and look for the grave with
the odd verse of which Bessy had spoken. He had no difficulty in
finding it. It was marked by a large ugly stone, on which the
inscription was green and in some places almost effaced.

     SACRED TO THE MEMORY

     OF

     EPHRAIM GARNETT--

He had read so far when a voice close by him said--

"You'll be late for school, young chap."

Bill looked up, and to his horror beheld Bully Tom standing in the
road and kicking the churchyard wall.

"Aren't you going?" he asked, as Bill did not speak.

"Not to-night," said Bill, with crimson cheeks.

"Larking, eh?" said Bully Tom. "My eyes, won't your father give it
you!" and he began to move off.

"Stop!" shouted Bill in an agony; "don't tell him, Tom. That would be
a dirty trick. I'll go next time, I will indeed; I can't go to-night.
I'm not larking, I'm scared. You won't tell?"

"Not this time, maybe," was the reply; "but I wouldn't be in your
shoes if you play this game next night;" and off he went.

Bill thought it well to quit the churchyard at once for some place
where he was not likely to be seen; he had never played truant before,
and for the next hour or two was thoroughly miserable as he slunk
about the premises of a neighbouring farm, and finally took refuge in
a shed, and began to consider his position. He would remain hidden
till nine o'clock, and then go home. If nothing were said, well and
good; unless some accident should afterwards betray him. But if his
mother asked any questions about the school? He dared not, and he
would not, tell a lie; and yet what would be the result of the truth
coming out? There could be no doubt that his father would beat him.
Bill thought again, and decided that he could bear a thrashing, but
not the sight of the Yew-lane Ghost; so he remained where he was,
wondering how it would be, and how he should get over the next
school-night when it came. The prospect was so hopeless, and the poor
lad so wearied with anxiety and wakeful nights, that he was almost
asleep when he was startled by the church clock striking nine; and,
jumping up, he ran home. His heart beat heavily as he crossed the
threshold; but his mother was still absorbed by thoughts of Bessy, and
he went to bed unquestioned. The next day too passed over without any
awkward remarks, which was very satisfactory; but then night-school
day came again, and Bill felt that he was in a worse position than
ever. He had played truant once with success; but he was aware that it
would not do a second time. Bully Tom was spiteful, and Master Arthur
might come to "look up" his recreant pupil, and then Bill's father
would know all.

On the morning of the much-dreaded day, his mother sent him up to the
Rectory to fetch some little delicacy that had been promised for
Bessy's dinner. He generally found it rather amusing to go there. He
liked to peep at the pretty garden, to look out for Master Arthur, and
to sit in the kitchen and watch the cook, and wonder what she did with
all the dishes and bright things that decorated the walls. To-day all
was quite different. He avoided the gardens, he was afraid of being
seen by his teacher, and though cook had an unusual display of pots
and pans in operation, he sat in the corner of the kitchen indifferent
to everything but the thought of the Yew-lane Ghost. The dinner for
Bessy was put between two saucers, and as cook gave it into his hands
she asked kindly after his sister, and added--

"You don't look over-well yourself, lad! What's amiss?"

Bill answered that he was quite well, and hurried out of the house to
avoid further inquiries. He was becoming afraid of everyone! As he
passed the garden he thought of the gardener, and wondered if he would
help him. He was very young and very good-natured; he had taken of
late to coming to see Bessy, and Bill had his own ideas upon that
point; finally, he had a small class at the night-school. Bill
wondered whether if he screwed up his courage to-night to go, John
Gardener would walk back with him for the pleasure of hearing the
latest accounts of Bessy. But all hopes of this sort were cut off by
Master Arthur's voice shouting to him from the garden--

"Hi, there! I want you, Willie! Come here, I say."

Bill ran through the evergreens, and there among the flower-beds in
the sunshine he saw--first, John Gardener driving a mowing-machine
over the velvety grass under Master Arthur's very nose, so there was
no getting a private interview with him. Secondly, Master Arthur
himself, sitting on the ground with his terrier in his lap, directing
the proceedings by means of a donkey-headed stick with elaborately
carved ears; and thirdly, Master Arthur's friend.

Now little bits of gossip will fly; and it had been heard in the
dining-room, and conveyed by the parlour-maid to the kitchen, and
passed from the kitchen into the village, that Master Arthur's friend
was a very clever young gentleman; consequently Beauty Bill had been
very anxious to see him. As, however, the clever young gentleman was
lying on his back on the grass, with his hat flattened over his face
to keep out the sun, and an open book lying on its face upon his
waistcoat to keep the place, and otherwise quite immovable, and very
like other young gentlemen, Bill did not feel much the wiser for
looking at him. He had a better view of him soon, however, for Master
Arthur began to poke his friend's legs with the donkey-headed stick,
and to exhort him to get up.

"Hi! Bartram, get up! Here's my prime pupil. See what we can turn out.
You may examine him if you like. Willie: this gentleman is a very
clever gentleman, so you must keep your wits about you. _He'll_ put
questions to you, I can tell you! There's as much difference between
his head and mine, as between mine and the head of this stick." And
Master Arthur flourished his "one-legged donkey," as he called it, in
the air, and added, "Bartram! you lazy lout! _will_ you get up and
take an interest in my humble efforts for the good of my
fellow-creatures?"

Thus adjured, Mr. Bartram sat up with a jerk which threw his book on
to his boots, and his hat after it, and looked at Bill. Now Bill and
the gardener had both been grinning, as they always did at Master
Arthur's funny speeches, but when Bill found the clever gentleman
looking at him, he straightened his face very quickly. The gentleman
was not at all like his friend ("nothing near so handsome," Bill
reported at home), and he had such a large prominent forehead that he
looked as if he were bald. When he sat up, he suddenly screwed up his
eyes in a very peculiar way, pulled out a double gold eye-glass, fixed
it on his nose, and stared through it for a second; after which his
eyes unexpectedly opened to their full extent (they were not small
ones), and took a sharp survey of Bill over the top of his spectacles;
and this ended, he lay back on his elbow without speaking. Bill then
and there decided that Mr. Bartram was very proud, rather mad, and the
most disagreeable gentleman he ever saw; and he felt sure could see as
