at the verse--"Make them to be numbered with Thy saints in glory
everlasting." For my young mother was very good, and I always think
of her when the choir comes to that verse on Sundays.

"Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin." "It's too late
to ask that," thought I, with that half of my brain which was not
attending to the words of the Te Deum, "and yet there is a little bit
of the day left which will be dedicated either to good or evil."

I prayed the rest, "O Lord, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us. O
Lord, let Thy mercy lighten upon us, as our trust is in Thee. O Lord,
in Thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded!" and with the last
verse there came from my heart a very passion of desire for strength
to do the will of GOD at the sacrifice of my own. I flung myself on
the floor with inarticulate prayers that were very fully to the point
now, and they summed themselves up again in the old words, "In Thee, O
Lord, have I trusted, let me never be confounded!"

When I raised my head I caught sight of the picture, and for an
instant felt a superstitious thrill. The finely drawn face shone with
a crimson glow. But in a moment more I saw the cause, and
exclaimed--"_The sun is setting_! I must speak to Philip before it
goes down."

What should I say? Somehow, now, my judgment felt very clear and
decisive. I would not pretend that he had been in the right, but I
would acknowledge where I had been in the wrong. I _had_ been
disobliging about Mr. Clinton, and I would say so, and offer to repair
that matter. I would regret having lost my temper, and say nothing
about his. I would not offer to deprive Charles of his part, or break
my promise of the white feather; but I would make a new part for Mr.
Clinton, and he should be quite welcome to any finery in my possession
except Charles's plume. This concession was no difficulty to me. Bad
as our tempers are, I am thankful to say they are not mean ones. If I
dressed out Mr. Clinton at all, it would come natural to do it
liberally. I would do all this--_if I could_. I might break down into
passion at the mere sight of Philip and the properties, but at least I
would begin "as if I knew I should persevere."

At this moment the front door was shut with a bang which shook the
house.

It was Philip going to catch the 4.15. I bit my lips, and began to
pull on my boots, watching the red sun as it sank over the waste of
marshland which I could see from my window. I must try to overtake
him, but I could run well, and I suspected that he would not walk
fast. I did not believe that he was really pleased at the break-up of
our plans and the prospect of a public exposure of our squabbles,
though as a family we are always willing to make fools of ourselves
rather than conciliate each other.

My things were soon on, and I hurried from my room. In the window-seat
of the corridor was Alice. The sight of her reproached me. She slept
in my room, but I jealously retained full power over it, and when I
locked myself in she dared not disturb me.

"I'm afraid you've been wanting to come in," said I. "Do go in now."

"Thank you," said Alice, "I've nowhere to go to." Then tightening her
lips, she added, "Philip's gone."

"I know," said I. "I'm going to try and get him back." Alice stared in
amazement.

"You always do spoil Philip, because he's your twin," she said, at
last; "you wouldn't do it for me."

"Oh, Alice, you don't know. I'd much rather do it for you, girls are
so much less aggravating than boys. But don't try and make it harder
for me to make peace."

"I beg your pardon, Isobel. If you do, you're an angel. I couldn't, to
save my life."

At the head of the stairs I met Charles.

"He's gone," said he significantly, and bestriding the balustrades, he
shot to the foot. When I reached him he was pinching the biceps muscle
of his arm.

"Feel, Isobel," said he, "It's hard, isn't it?"

"Very, Charles, but I'm in a hurry."

"Look here," he continued, with an ugly expression on his face, "I'm
going into training. I'm going to eat bits of raw mutton, and
dumb-bell. Wait a year, wait half a year, and I shall be able to
thrash him. I'll make him remember these theatricals. I don't forget.
I haven't forgot his bursting my football out of spite."

It is not pleasant to see one's own sins reflected on other faces. I
could not speak.

By the front door was Bobby. He was by way of looking out of the
portico window, but his swollen eyes could not possibly have seen
anything.

"Oh, Isobel, Isobel!" he sobbed, "Philip's gone, and taken the
D--d--d--dragon with him, and we're all m--m--m--miserable."

"Don't cry, Bobby," said I, kissing him. "Finish your cloak, and be
doing anything you can. I'm going to try and bring Philip back."

"Oh, thank you, thank you, Isobel! If only he'll come back I don't
care what I do. Or I'll give up my parts if he wants them, and be a
scene-shifter, if you'll lend me your carpet-slippers, and make me a
paper cap."

"GOD has given you a very sweet temper, Bobby," said I,
solemnly. "I wish I had one like it."

"You're as good as gold," said Bobby. His loving hug added strength
to my resolutions, and I ran across the garden and jumped the ha-ha,
and followed Philip over the marsh. I do not know whether he heard my
steps when I came nearly up with him, but I fancy his pace slackened.
Not that he looked round. He was much too sulky.

Philip is a very good-looking boy, much handsomer than I am, though we
are alike. But the family curse disfigures his face when he is cross
more than any one's, and the back view of him is almost worse than the
front. His shoulders get so humped up, and his whole figure is stiff
with cross-grained obstinacy.

"I shall never hold out if he speaks as ungraciously as he looks,"
thought I in despair. "But I'll not give in till I can hold out no
longer."

"Philip!" I said. He turned round, and his face was no prettier to
look at than his shoulders.

"What do you want?" (in the costermonger tone.)

"I want you to come back, Philip"--(here I choked).

"I dare say," he sneered, "and you want the properties! But you've got
your play, and your amiable Charles, and your talented Alice, and your
ubiquitous Bobby. And the audience will be entertained with an
unexpected after-piece entitled--'The disobliging disobliged.'"

Oh it _was_ hard! I think if I had looked at Philip's face I must have
broken down, but I kept my eyes steadily on the crimson sun, which
loomed large through the marsh mists that lay upon the horizon, as I
answered with justifiable vehemence:

"I have a very bad temper, Philip" (I checked the disposition to
add--"and so have you"), "but I never tell a lie. I have _not_ come
after the properties. The only reason for which I have come is to try
and make peace." At this point I gathered up all my strength and
hurried on, staring at the sun till the bushes near us and the level
waste of marsh beyond seemed to vanish in the glow. "I came to say
that I am sorry for my share of the quarrel. I lost my temper, and I
beg your pardon for that. I was not very obliging about Mr. Clinton,
but you had tried me very much. However, what you did wrong, does not
excuse me, I know, and if you like to come back, I'll make a new part
as you wanted. I can't give him Charles's part, or the feather, but
anything I can do, or give up of my own, I will. It's not because of
to-night, for you know as well as I do that I do not care twopence
what happens when I'm angry, and, after all, we can only say that
you've taken the things. But I wanted us to get through these holidays
without quarrelling, and I wanted you to enjoy them, and I want to try
and be good to you, for you are my twin brother, and for my share of
the quarrel I beg your pardon--I can do no more."

Some of this speech had been about as pleasant to say as eating
cinders, and when it was done I felt a sudden sensation (very rare
with me) of unendurable fatigue. As the last words left my lips the
sun set, but my eyes were so bedazzled that I am not sure that I
should not have fallen, but for an unexpected support. What Philip had
been thinking of during my speech I do not know, for I had avoided
looking at him, but when it was done he threw the properties out of
his arms, and flung them around me with the hug of a Polar bear.

_"You_ ill-tempered!" he roared. "You've the temper of an angel, or
you would never have come after me like this. Isobel, I am a brute, I
have behaved like a brute all the week, and I beg _your_ pardon."

I retract my wishes about crying, for when I do begin, I cry in such a
very disagreeable way--no spring shower, but a perfect tempest of
tears. Philip's unexpected generosity upset me, and I sobbed till I
frightened him, and he said I was hysterical. The absurdity of this
idea set me off into fits of laughing, which, oddly enough, seemed to
distress him so much that I stopped at last, and found breath to say,
"Then you'll come home?"

"If you'll have me. And never mind about Clinton, I'll get out of it.
The truth is, Isobel, you and Alice did snub him from the first, and
that vexed me; but I _am_ disappointed in him. He does brag so, and
I've had to take that fowling-piece to the gunsmith's already, so I
know what it's worth. I did give Clinton a hint about it, and--would
you believe it?--he laughed, and said he thought he had got the best
of _that_ bargain. I said, 'I hope you have, if it isn't an even one,
for I should be very sorry to think _I_ had cheated a friend!' But he
either did not or wouldn't see it. He's a second-rate sort of fellow,
I'm sure, and I'm sorry I promised to let him act. But I'll get out of
it, you shan't be bothered by him."

"No, no," said I, "if you promised I'd much rather. It won't bother me
at all."

(It is certainly a much pleasanter kind of dispute when the struggle
is to give, and not to take!)

"You can't fit him in now?" said Philip doubtfully.

"Oh yes, I can." I felt sure that I could. I have often been short of
temper for our amusements, but never of ideas. Philip tucked the
properties under one arm, and me under the other, and as we ran
homewards over the marsh, I threaded Mr. Clinton into the plot with
perfect ease.

"We'll have a second Prince, and he shall have an enchanted shield,
which shall protect him from you--though he can't kill you--for Charles
must do that. He shall be in love with the Princess too, but just when
he and Charles are going to fight for her, the Fairy Godmother shall
sprinkle him with the Waters of Memory, and break a spell which had made
him forget his own Princess in a distant land. You know, Philip, if he
_does_ act well, he may make a capital part of it. It will be a splendid
scene. We have two real metal swords, and as they are flashing in the
air--enter the Fairy with the carved claret jug. When he is sprinkled he
must drop his sword, and put his hands to his head. He will recall the
picture of his own Princess, and draw it out and kiss it (I can lend him
my locket miniature of great-grandpapa). Charles and he must swear
eternal friendship, and then he will pick up his sword, and exit right
centre, waving the golden shield, to find his Princess. It will look
very well, and as he goes out the Princess can enter left in distraction
about the combat, and she and Charles can fall in each other's arms, and
be blessed by the Fairy."

"Capital!" said Philip. "What a head you have! But you're out of
breath? We're running too fast."

"Not a bit," said I, "it refreshes me. Do you remember when you and I
used to run hand in hand from the top to the bottom of Breakneck Hill?
Oh, Philip, I do wish we could never quarrel any more! I think we
might keep our tempers if we tried."

"_You_ might," said Philip, "because you are good. But I shall always
be a brute."

(Just what _I_ said to Aunt Isobel! Must every one learn his own
lessons for himself? I had a sort of unreasonable feeling that my
experience ought to serve for the rest of our ill-tempered family into
the bargain.)

Philip's spirits rose higher and higher. Of course he was delighted to
be out of the scrape. I am sure he was glad to be friendly again, and
he was hotter than ever for the theatricals.

So was I. I felt certain that they would be successful now. But far
above and beyond the comfort of things "coming right," and the
pleasure of anticipated fun, my heart was rocked to a higher peace. In
my small religious experiences I had never known this triumph, this
thankfulness before. Circumstances, not self-control, had helped me
out of previous quarrels; I had never really done battle, and gained a
conquest over my besetting sin. Now, however imperfectly and
awkwardly, I yet _had_ fought. If Philip had been less generous I
might have failed, but the effort had been real--and it had been
successful. Henceforth my soul should fight with the prestige of
victory, with the courage that comes of having striven and won,
trusted and not been confounded.

The first person we met after we got in was Aunt Isobel. She had
arrived in our absence. No doubt she had heard the whole affair, but
she is very good, and never _gauche_ and she only said--

"Here come the stage-managers! Now what can I do to help? I have had
some tea, and am ready to obey orders till the curtain rings up."

Boys do not carry things off well. Philip got very red, but I
said--"Oh, please come to the nursery, Aunt Isobel. There are lots of
things to do." She came, and was invaluable. I never said anything
about the row to her, and she never said anything to me. That is what
I call a friend!

The first thing Philip did was to unlock the property-box in his room
and bring the Dragon and things back. The second thing he did was to
mend the new scene by replacing the bit he had cut out, glueing canvas
on behind it, and touching up with paint where it joined.

We soon put straight what had been disarranged. Blinds were drawn,
candles lighted, seats fixed, and the theatre began to look like
itself. Aunt Isobel and I were bringing in the footlights, when we saw
Bobby at the extreme right of the stage wrapped in his cloak, and
contemplating, with apparent satisfaction, twelve old hats and six
pasteboard bandboxes which were spread before him.

"My dear Bobby, what are these?" said Aunt Isobel. Bobby
hastily--almost stammeringly--explained,

"I am Twelve Travellers, you know, Aunt Isobel."

"Dear me!" said Aunt Isobel.

"I'll show you how I am going to do it," said Bobby.

"Here are twelve old hats--I have had such work to collect them!--and
six bandboxes."

"Only six?" said Aunt Isobel with commendable gravity.

"But there are the lids," said Bobby; "six of them, and six boxes,
make twelve, you know. I've only one cloak, but it's red on one side
and blue on the other, and two kinds of buttons. Well; I come on left
for the First Traveller, with my cloak the red side out, and this
white chimney-pot hat."

"Ah!" said Aunt Isobel.

"And one of the bandboxes under my cloak. The Dragon attacks me in the
centre, and drives me off the right, where I smash up the bandbox,
which sounds like him crunching my bones. Then I roll the thunder,
turn my cloak to the blue side, put on this wideawake, and come on
again with a bandbox lid and crunch that, and roll more thunder, and
so on. I'm the Faithful Attendant and the Bereaved Father as well,"
added Bobby, with justifiable pride, "and I would have done the Dragon
if they would have let me."

But even Bobby did not outdo the rest of us in willingness. Alice's
efforts were obvious tokens of remorse; she waited on Philip, was
attentive to Mr. Clinton (who, I think, to this day believes that he
made himself especially acceptable to "the young ladies"), and
surpassed herself on the stage. Charles does not "come round" so
quickly, but at the last moment he came and offered to yield the white
plume. I confess I was rather vexed with Mr. Clinton for accepting it,
but Alice and I despoiled our best hats of their black ostrich
feathers to make it up to Charles, and he said, with some dignity,
that he should never have offered the white one if he had not meant it
to be accepted.

One thing took us by surprise. We had had more trouble over the
dressing of the new Prince than the costumes and make-up of all the
rest of the characters together cost--he was only just torn from the
big looking-glass by his "call" to the stage, and, to our amazement,
he seemed decidedly unwilling to go on.

"It's a very odd thing, Miss Alice," said he in accents so pitiable
that I did not wonder that Alice did her best to encourage him,--"it's
a most extraordinary thing, but I feel quite nervous."

"You'll be all right when you're once on," said Alice; "mind you don't
forget that it depends on you to explain that it's an invincible
shield."

"Which arm had I better wear it on?" said Mr. Clinton, shifting it
nervously from side to side.

"The left, the left!" cried Alice. "Now you ought to be on."

"Oh what shall I say?" cried our new hero.

"Say--'Devastating Monster! my arm is mortal, and my sword was forged
by human fingers, but this shield is invincible as ----'"

"Second Prince," called Charles impatiently, and Mr. Clinton was
hustled on.

He was greeted with loud applause. He said afterwards that this put
his part out of his head, that Alice had told him wrong, and that the
shield was too small for him.

As a matter of fact he hammered and stammered and got himself and the
piece into such confusion, that Philip lost patience as he lay
awaiting his cue. With a fierce bellow he emerged from his cask, and
roaring, "Avaunt, knight of the invincible shield and craven heart!"
he crossed the stage with the full clatter of his canvas joints, and
chased Mr. Clinton off at the left centre.

Once behind the scenes, he refused to go on again. He said that he had
never played without a proper part at his uncle's in Dublin, and
thought our plan quite a mistake. Besides which, he had got toothache,
and preferred to join the audience, which he did, and the play went on
without him.

I was acting as stage-manager in the intervals of my part, when I
noticed Mr. Clinton (not the ex-Prince, but his father, the surgeon)
get up, and hastily leave his place among the spectators. But just as
I was wondering at this, I was recalled to business by delay on the
part of Bobby, who ought to have been on (with the lights down) as the
Twelfth Traveller.

I found him at the left wing, with all the twelve hats fitted one over
another, the whole pile resting on a chair.

"Bob, what are you after? You ought to be on."
