Custer's Last Charge


Dead! Is it possible? He, the bold rider,
  Custer, our hero, the first in the fight,
Charming the bullets of yore to fly wider,
  Shunning our battle-king's ringlets of light!
Dead! our young chieftain, and dead all forsaken!
  No one to tell us the way of his fall!
Slain in the desert, and never to waken,
  Never, not even to victory's call!

Comrades, he's gone! but ye need not be grieving;
  No, may my death be like his when I die!
No regrets wasted on words I am leaving,
  Falling with brave men, and face to the sky.
Death's but a journey, the greatest must take it:
  Fame is eternal, and better than all;
Gold though the bowl be, 'tis fate that must break it,
  Glory can hallow the fragments that fall.

Proud for his fame that last day that he met them!
  All the night long he had been on their track,
Scorning their traps and the men that had set them,
  Wild for a charge that should never give back.
There, on the hilltop he halted and saw them--
  Lodges all loosened and ready to fly;
Hurrying scouts with the tidings to awe them,
  Told of his coming before he was nigh.

All the wide valley was full of their forces,
  Gathered to cover the lodges' retreat,--
Warriors running in haste to their horses,
  Thousands of enemies close to his feet!
Down in the valleys the ages had hollowed,
  There lay the Sitting Bull's camp for a prey!
Numbers! What recked he? What recked those who followed?
  Men who had fought ten to one ere that day?

Out swept the squadrons, the fated three hundred,
  Into the battle-line steady and full;
Then down the hillside exultingly thundered
  Into the hordes of the Old Sitting Bull!
Wild Ogalallah, Arapahoe, Cheyenne,
  Wild Horse's braves, and the rest of their crew,
Shrank from that charge like a herd from a lion.
  Then closed around the great hell of wild Sioux.

Right to their center he charged, and then, facing--
  Hark to those yells and around them, Oh, see!
Over the hilltops the devils come racing,
  Coming as fast as the waves of the sea!
Red was the circle of fire about them,
  No hope of victory, no ray of light,
Shot through that terrible black cloud about them,
  Brooding in death over Custer's last fight.

THEN DID HE BLENCH? Did he die like a craven,
  Begging those torturing fiends for his life?
Was there a soldier who carried the Seven
  Flinched like a coward or fled from the strife?
No, by the blood of our Custer, no quailing!
  There in the midst of the devils they close,
Hemmed in by thousands, but ever assailing,
  Fighting like tigers, all bayed amid foes!

Thicker and thicker the bullets came singing;
  Down go the horses and riders and all;
Swiftly the warriors round them were ringing,
  Circling like buzzards awaiting their fall.
See the wild steeds of the mountain and prairie,
  Savage eyes gleaming from forests of mane;
Quivering lances with pennons so airy;
  War-painted warriors charging amain.

Backward again and again they were driven,
  Shrinking to close with the lost little band;
Never a cap that had worn the bright Seven
  Bowed till its wearer was dead on the strand.
Closer and closer the death-circle growing,
  Even the leader's voice, clarion clear,
Rang out his words of encouragement glowing,
  "We can but die once, boys, but SELL YOUR LIVES DEAR!"

Dearly they sold them, like Berserkers raging,
  Facing the death that encircled them round;
Death's bitter pangs by their vengeance assuaging,
  Marking their tracks by their dead on the ground.
Comrades, our children shall yet tell their story,--
  Custer's last charge on the Old Sitting Bull;
And ages shall swear that the cup of his glory
  Needed but that death to render it full.

  _Frederick Whitttaker._




A Boy and His Stomach


What's the matter, stummick? Ain't I always been your friend?
Ain't I always been a pardner to you? All my pennies don't I spend
In getting nice things for you? Don't I give you lots of cake?
Say, stummick, what's the matter, You had to go an' ache?

Why, I loaded you with good things yesterday;
I gave you more corn an' chicken than you'd ever had before;
I gave you fruit an' candy, apple pie an' chocolate cake,
An' last night when I got to bed you had to go an' ache.

Say, what's the matter with you? Ain't you satisfied at all?
I gave you all you wanted; you was hard jes' like a ball,
An' you couldn't hold another bit of puddin'; yet last night
You ached most awful, stummick! That ain't treatin' me jest right.

I've been a friend to you, I have! Why ain't you a friend o' mine?
They gave me castor oil becoz you made me whine.
I'm feelin' fine this mornin'; yes it's true;
But I tell you, stummick, you better appreciate things I do for you.




On the Shores of Tennessee


"Move my arm-chair, faithful Pompey,
  In the sunshine bright and strong,
For this world is fading, Pompey--
  Massa won't be with you long;
And I fain would hear the south wind
  Bring once more the sound to me,
Of the wavelets softly breaking
  On the shores of Tennessee.

"Mournful though the ripples murmur
  As they still the story tell,
How no vessels float the banner
  That I've loved so long and well,
I shall listen to their music,
  Dreaming that again I see
Stars and Stripes on sloop and shallop
  Sailing up the Tennessee;

"And Pompey, while old Massa's waiting
  For Death's last dispatch to come,
If that exiled starry banner
  Should come proudly sailing home,
You shall greet it, slave no longer--
  Voice and hand shall both be free
That shout and point to Union colors
  On the waves of Tennessee."

"Massa's berry kind to Pompey;
  But old darkey's happy here,
Where he's tended corn and cotton
  For dese many a long-gone year.
Ober yonder, Missis' sleeping--
  No one tends her grave like me;
Mebbe she would miss the flowers
  She used to love in Tennessee.

"'Pears like, she was watching Massa--
  If Pompey should beside him stay,
Mebbe she'd remember better
  How for him she used to pray;
Telling him that way up yonder
  White as snow his soul would be,
If he served the Lord of Heaven
  While he lived in Tennessee."

Silently the tears were rolling
  Down the poor old dusky face,
As he stepped behind his master,
  In his long-accustomed place.
Then a silence fell around them,
  As they gazed on rock and tree
Pictured in the placid waters
  Of the rolling Tennessee;--

Master, dreaming of the battle
  Where he fought by Marion's side,
Where he bid the haughty Tarleton
  Stoop his lordly crest of pride:--
Man, remembering how yon sleeper
  Once he held upon his knee.
Ere she loved the gallant soldier,
  Ralph Vervair of Tennessee.

Still the south wind fondly lingers
  'Mid the veteran's silver hair;
Still the bondman, close beside him
  Stands behind the old arm-chair.
With his dark-hued hand uplifted,
  Shading eyes, he bends to see
Where the woodland, boldly jutting,
  Turns aside the Tennessee.

Thus he watches cloud-born shadows
  Glide from tree to mountain-crest,
Softly creeping, aye and ever
  To the river's yielding breast.
Ha! above the foliage yonder
  Something flutters wild and free!
"Massa! Massa! Hallelujah!
  The flag's come back to Tennessee!"

"Pompey, hold me on your shoulder,
  Help me stand on foot once more,
That I may salute the colors
  As they pass my cabin door.
Here's the paper signed that frees you,
  Give a freeman's shout with me--
'God and Union!' be our watchword
  Evermore in Tennessee!"

Then the trembling voice grew fainter,
  And the limbs refused to stand;
One prayer to Jesus--and the soldier
  Glided to the better land.
When the flag went down the river
  Man and master both were free;
While the ring-dove's note was mingled
  With the rippling Tennessee.

    _Ethel Lynn Beers._




The White-Footed Deer


It was a hundred years ago,
  When, by the woodland ways,
The traveler saw the wild deer drink,
  Or crop the birchen sprays.

Beneath a hill, whose rocky side
  O'er-browed a grassy mead,
And fenced a cottage from the wind,
  A deer was wont to feed.

She only came when on the cliffs
  The evening moonlight lay,
And no man knew the secret haunts
  In which she walked by day.

White were her feet, her forehead showed
  A spot of silvery white,
That seemed to glimmer like a star
  In autumn's hazy night.

And here, when sang the whippoorwill,
  She cropped the sprouting leaves,
And here her rustling steps were heard
  On still October eves.

But when the broad midsummer moon
  Rose o'er the grassy lawn,
Beside the silver-footed deer
  There grazed a spotted fawn.

The cottage dame forbade her son
  To aim the rifle here;
"It were a sin," she said, "to harm
  Or fright that friendly deer.

"This spot has been my pleasant home
  Ten peaceful years and more;
And ever, when the moonlight shines,
  She feeds before our door,

"The red men say that here she walked
  A thousand moons ago;
They never raise the war whoop here,
  And never twang the bow.

"I love to watch her as she feeds,
  And think that all is well
While such a gentle creature haunts
  The place in which we dwell."

The youth obeyed, and sought for game
  In forests far away,
Where, deep in silence and in moss,
  The ancient woodland lay.

But once, in autumn's golden time,
  He ranged the wild in vain,
Nor roused the pheasant nor the deer,
  And wandered home again.

The crescent moon and crimson eve
  Shone with a mingling light;
The deer, upon the grassy mead,
  Was feeding full in sight.

He raised the rifle to his eye,
  And from the cliffs around
A sudden echo, shrill and sharp,
  Gave back its deadly sound.

Away, into the neighboring wood,
  The startled creature flew,
And crimson drops at morning lay
  Amid the glimmering dew.

Next evening shone the waxing moon
  As sweetly as before;
The deer upon the grassy mead
  Was seen again no more.

But ere that crescent moon was old,
  By night the red men came,
And burnt the cottage to the ground,
  And slew the youth and dame.

Now woods have overgrown the mead,
  And hid the cliffs from sight;
There shrieks the hovering hawk at noon,
  And prowls the fox at night.

    _W.C. Bryant._




Mount Vernon's Bells


Where Potomac's stream is flowing
  Virginia's border through,
Where the white-sailed ships are going
  Sailing to the ocean blue;

Hushed the sound of mirth and singing,
  Silent every one!
While the solemn bells are ringing
  By the tomb of Washington.

Tolling and knelling,
  With a sad, sweet sound,
O'er the waves the tones are swelling
  By Mount Vernon's sacred ground.

Long ago the warrior slumbered--
  Our country's father slept;
Long among the angels numbered
  They the hero soul have kept.

But the children's children love him,
  And his name revere,
So where willows wave above him,
  Sweetly still his knell you hear.

Sail, oh ships, across the billows,
  And bear the story far;
How he sleeps beneath the willows,--
  "First in peace and first in war,"

Tell while sweet adieus are swelling,
  Till you come again,
He within the hearts is dwelling,
  Of his loving countrymen.

    _M.B.C. Slade._




Gradatim


Heaven is not reached at a single bound;
  But we build the ladder by which we rise
  From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies,
And we mount to the summit round by round,

I count this thing to be grandly true:
  That a noble deed is a step toward God,
  Lifting a soul from the common sod
To a purer air and a broader view.

We rise by things that are under our feet;
  By what we have mastered of good and gain,
  By the pride deposed and the passion slain,
And the vanquished ills that we hourly meet.

We hope, we aspire, we resolve, we trust,
  When the morning calls us to life and light;
  But our hearts grow weary, and ere he night
Our lives are trailing the sordid dust.

We hope, we resolve, we aspire, we pray,
  And we think that we mount the air on wings,
  Beyond the recall of sensual things,
While our feet still cling to the heavy clay.

Only in dreams is a ladder thrown
  From the weary earth to the sapphire walls;
  But the dreams depart, and the vision falls,
And the sleeper awakes on his pillow of stone.

Heaven is not reached at a single bound;
  But we build the ladder by which we rise
  From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies,
And we mount to the summit round by round.

    _J.G. Holland._




Mr. Finney's Turnip


Mr. Finney had a turnip
  And it grew behind the barn;
It grew there, and it grew there,
  And the turnip did no harm,

It grew and it grew,
  Till it could get no taller;
Mr. Finney pulled it up
  And put it in his cellar.

It lay there and it lay there,
  Till it began to rot;
His daughter Sallie took it up,
  And put it in the pot.

She boiled it, and she boiled it,
  As long as she was able;
His daughter Peggy fished it out.
  And put it on the table.

Mr. Finney and his wife.
  They sat down to sup,
And they ate, and they ate,
  Until they ate the turnip up.




The Village Blacksmith


Under a spreading chestnut tree
  The village smithy stands;
The smith, a mighty man is he,
  With large and sinewy hands;
And the muscles of his brawny arms
  Are strong as iron bands.

His hair is crisp, and black and long,
  His face is like the tan;
His brow is wet with honest sweat,
  He earns whate'er he can,
And looks the whole world in the face,
  For he owes not any man.

Week in, week out, from morn till night,
  You can hear his bellows blow;
You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,
  With measured beat and slow,
Like a sexton ringing the village bell,
  When the evening sun is low.

And children coming home from school
  Look in at the open door;
They love to see the flaming forge,
  And hear the bellows roar,
And catch the burning sparks that fly
  Like chaff from a threshing floor.

He goes on Sunday to the church,
  And sits among his boys;
He hears the parson pray and preach,
  He hears his daughter's voice,
Singing in the village choir,
  And it makes his heart rejoice.

It sounds to him like her mother's voice,
  Singing in Paradise!
He needs must think of her once more,
  How in the grave she lies;
And with his hard, rough hand he wipes
  A tear out of his eyes.

Toiling,--rejoicing,--sorrowing,
  Onward through life he goes;
Each morning sees some task begun,
  Each evening sees it close;
Something attempted, something done,
  Has earned a night's repose.

Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,
  For the lesson thou hast taught!
Thus at the flaming forge of life
  Our fortunes must be wrought;
Thus on its sounding anvil shaped
  Each burning deed and thought.

    _H. W. Longfellow._




You and You

_To the American Private in the Great War_


Every one of you won the war--
You and you and you--
Each one knowing what it was for,
And what was his job to do.

Every one of you won the war,
Obedient, unwearied, unknown,
Dung in the trenches, drift on the shore,
Dust to the world's end blown;
Every one of you, steady and true,
You and you and you--
Down in the pit or up in the blue,
Whether you crawled or sailed or flew,
Whether your closest comrade knew
Or you bore the brunt alone--

All of you, all of you, name after name,
Jones and Robinson, Smith and Brown,
