


THE HARP THAT ONCE THROUGH TARA'S HALLS


    The harp that once through Tara's halls
      The soul of music shed,
    Now hangs as mute on Tara's walls
      As if that soul were fled.
    So sleeps the pride of former days,
      So glory's thrill is o'er,
    And hearts that once beat high for praise,
      Now feel that pulse no more.

    No more to chiefs and ladies bright
      The harp of Tara swells;
    The chord alone, that breaks at night,
      Its tale of ruin tells.
    Thus Freedom now so seldom wakes,
      The only throb she gives,
    Is when some heart indignant breaks,
      To show that still she lives.

Moore




HUDSON STRAIT


Hudson Strait opens from the Atlantic between Resolution Island on the
north and the Button Islands on the south. From point to point, this end
of the strait is forty-five miles wide. At the other end, the west side,
between Digges' Island and Nottingham Island, is a distance of
thirty-five miles. From east to west, the straits are four hundred and
fifty miles long--wider at the east where the south side is known as
Ungava Bay, contracting at the west, to the Upper Narrows. The south
side of the strait is Labrador; the north, Baffin's Land. Both sides are
lofty, rocky, cavernous shores lashed by a tide that rises in places as
high as thirty-five feet and runs in calm weather ten miles an hour.
Pink granite islands dot the north shore in groups that afford
harbourage, but all shores present an adamant front, edges sharp as a
knife or else rounded hard to have withstood and cut the tremendous ice
jam of a floating world suddenly contracted to forty miles, which Davis
Strait pours down at the east end and Fox Channel at the west.

Seven hundred feet is considered a good-sized hill; one thousand feet, a
mountain. Both the north and the south sides of the straits rise two
thousand feet in places. Through these rock walls ice has poured and
torn and ripped a way since the ice age preceding history, cutting a
great channel to the Atlantic. Here, the iron walls suddenly break to
secluded silent valleys, moss-padded, snow-edged, lonely as the day
Earth first saw light. Down these valleys pour the clear streams of the
eternal snows, burnished as silver against the green, setting the
silence echoing with the tinkle of cataracts over some rock wall, or
filling the air with the voice of many waters at noontide thaw. One old
navigator--Coates--describes the beat of the angry tide at the rock base
and the silver voice of the mountain brooks, like the treble and bass of
some great cathedral organ sounding its diapason to the glory of God in
this peopleless wilderness.

Perhaps the kyacks of some solitary Eskimo, lashed abreast twos and
threes to prevent capsizing, may shoot out from some of these
bog-covered valleys like sea-birds; but it is only when the Eskimos
happen to be hunting here, or the ships of the whalers and fur traders
are passing up and down--that there is any sign of human habitation on
the straits.

Walrus wallow on the pink granite islands in huge herds. Polar bears
flounder from icepan to icepan. The arctic hare, white as snow but for
the great bulging black eye, bounds over the boulders. Snow buntings,
whistling swans, snow geese, ducks in myriads--flacker and clacker and
hold solemn conclave on the adjoining rocks, as though this were their
realm from the beginning and for all time.

Of a tremendous depth are the waters of the straits. Not for nothing has
the ice world been grinding through this narrow channel for billions of
years. No fear of shoals to the mariner. Fear is of another sort. When
the ice is running in a whirlpool and the incoming tide meets the ice
jam and the waters mount thirty-five feet high and a wind roars between
the high shores like a bellows--then it is that the straits roll and
pitch and funnel their waters into black troughs where the ships go
down. "Undertow," the old Hudson's Bay captains called the suck of the
tide against the ice wall; and that black hole, where the lumpy billows
seemed to part like a passage between wall of ice and wall of water, was
what the mariners feared. The other great danger was just a plain crush,
getting nipped between two icepans rearing and plunging like fighting
stallions, with the ice blocks going off like pistol shots or smashed
glass. No child's play is such navigating either for the old sailing
vessels of the fur traders or the modern ice-breakers propelled by
steam! Yet, the old sailing vessels and the whaling fleets have
navigated these straits for two hundred years.

Agnes C. Laut: "The Conquest of the Great Northwest."




    Good name in man and woman,
    Is the immediate jewel of their souls:
    Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;
    'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
    But he that filches from me my good name
    Robs me of that which not enriches him,
    And makes me poor indeed.

Shakespeare




SCOTS WHA HAE


    Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled,
    Scots, wham Bruce has aften led;
    Welcome to your gory bed,
      Or to victorie.
    Now's the day, and now's the hour;
    See the front o' battle lour:
    See approach proud Edward's power--
      Chains and slaverie!

    Wha will be a traitor knave?
    Wha can fill a coward's grave?
    Wha sae base as be a slave?
      Let him turn and flee!
    Wha for Scotland's King and law
    Freedom's sword will strongly draw,
    Free-man stand, or free-man fa',
      Let him follow me!

    By Oppression's woes and pains!
    By your sons in servile chains,
    We will drain our dearest veins,
      But they shall be free!
    Lay the proud usurpers low!
    Tyrants fall in every foe!
    Liberty's in every blow!
      Let us do, or die!

Burns




ST. AMBROSE CREW WIN THEIR FIRST RACE

(The chief characters in this sketch are Miller, the tyrannical little
cockswain of the crew; old Jervis, the captain; Tom Brown, number two,
who is rowing his first race; Hardy, a friend of Tom's and one of the
best oarsmen in the college--also Jack, the college dog. Though there
are several crews in the race the real struggle is between the boats
from St. Ambrose and Exeter Colleges. If St. Ambrose can drive the nose
of its boat against the Exeter boat--"bump it"--it wins.)


Hark!--the first gun. The report sent Tom's heart into his mouth again.
Several of the boats pushed off at once into the stream; and the crowds
of men on the bank began to be agitated, as it were, by the shadow of
the coming excitement. The St. Ambrose fingered their oars, put a last
dash of grease on their rowlocks, and settled their feet against the
stretchers.

"Shall we push her off?" asked Bow.

"No; I can give you another minute," said Miller, who was sitting, watch
in hand, in the stern; "only be smart when I give the word."

The captain turned on his seat, and looked up the boat. His face was
quiet, but full of confidence, which seemed to pass from him into the
crew. Tom felt calmer and stronger, as he met his eye. "Now mind, boys,
don't quicken," he said, cheerily; "four short strokes to get way on
her, and then, steady. Here, pass up the lemon."

And he took a sliced lemon out of his pocket, put a small piece in his
own mouth, and then handed it to Blake, who followed his example, and
passed it on. Each man took a piece; and just as Bow had secured the
end, Miller called out,--

"Now, jackets off, and get her head out steadily."

The jackets were thrown on shore, and gathered up by the boatman in
attendance. The crew poised their oars, Number Two pushing out her head,
and the captain doing the same for the stern. Miller took the
starting-rope in his hand.

"How the wind catches her stern," he said; "here, pay out the rope one
of you. No, not you--some fellow with a strong hand. Yes, you'll do," he
went on, as Hardy stepped down the bank and took hold of the rope; "let
me have it foot by foot as I want it. Not too quick; make the most of
it--that'll do. Two and Three, just dip your oars in to give her way."

The rope paid out steadily, and the boat settled to her place. But now
the wind rose again, and the stern drifted in towards the bank.

"You _must_ back her a bit, Miller, and keep her a little further out or
our oars on stroke side will catch the bank."

"So I see; curse the wind. Back her, one stroke all. Back her, I say!"
shouted Miller.

It is no easy matter to get a crew to back her an inch just now,
particularly as there are in her two men who have never rowed a race
before, except in the torpids, and one who has never rowed a race in his
life.

However, back she comes; the starting-rope slackens in Miller's left
hand, and the stroke, unshipping his oar, pushes the stern gently out
again.

There goes the second gun! one short minute more, and we are off. Short
minute, indeed! you wouldn't say so if you were in the boat, with your
heart in your mouth and trembling all over like a man with the palsy.
Those sixty seconds before the starting-gun in your first race--why,
they are a little lifetime.

"By Jove, we are drifting in again," said Miller, in horror. The captain
looked grim but said nothing; it was too late now for him to be
unshipping again. "Here, catch hold of the long boat-hook and fend her
off."

Hardy, to whom this was addressed, seized the boat-hook, and, standing
with one foot in the water, pressed the end of the boat-hook against the
gunwale, at the full stretch of his arm, and so, by main force, kept the
stern out. There was just room for stroke oars to dip, and that was all.
The starting-rope was as taut as a harp-string; will Miller's left hand
hold out?

It is an awful moment. But the coxswain, though almost dragged backwards
off his seat, is equal to the occasion. He holds his watch in his right
hand with the tiller rope. "Eight seconds more only. Look out for the
flash. Remember, all eyes in the boat."

There it comes, at last--the flash of the starting-gun. Long before the
sound of the report can roll up the river, the whole pent-up life and
energy which has been held in leash, as it were, for the last six
minutes, is loose, and breaks away with a bound and a dash which he who
has felt it will remember for his life, but the like of which, will he
ever feel again? The starting-ropes drop from the coxswains' hands, the
oars flash into the water and gleam on the feather, the spray flies from
them, and the boats leap forward.

The crowds on the bank scatter and rush along, each keeping as near as
may be to its own boat. Some of the men on the towing-path, some on the
very edge of, often in, the water; some slightly in advance, as if they
could help to drag their boat forward; some behind, where they can see
the pulling better; but all at full speed, in wild excitement, and
shouting at the top of their voices to those on whom the honour of the
college is laid.

"Well pulled, all!" "Pick her up there, Five!" "You're gaining every
stroke!" "Time in the bows!" "Bravo, St. Ambrose!"

On they rushed by the side of the boats, jostling one another,
stumbling, struggling, and panting along.

For a quarter of a mile along the bank the glorious, maddening
hurly-burly extends, and rolls up the side of the stream.

For the first ten strokes Tom was in too great fear of making a mistake
to feel or hear or see. His whole soul was glued to the back of the man
before him, his one thought to keep time and get his strength into the
stroke. But, as the crew settled down into the well-known long sweep,
what we may call consciousness returned; and, while every muscle in his
body was straining, and his chest heaved, and his heart leaped, every
nerve seemed to be gathering new life, and his senses to wake into
unwonted acuteness. He caught the scent of wild thyme in the air, and
found room in his brain to wonder how it could have got there, as he had
never seen the plant near the river, or smelt it before. Though his eye
never wandered from the back of Diogenes, he seemed to see all things at
once. The boat behind, which seemed to be gaining;--it was all he could
do to prevent himself from quickening on the stroke as he fancied
that;--the eager face of Miller, with his compressed lips, and eyes
fixed so earnestly ahead that Tom could almost feel the glance passing
over his right shoulder; the flying banks and the shouting crowd; see
them with his bodily eyes he could not, but he knew, nevertheless, that
Grey had been upset and nearly rolled down the bank into the water in
the first hundred yards, that Jack was bounding and scrambling and
barking along by the very edge of the stream; above all, he was just as
well aware as if he had been looking at it, of a stalwart form in cap
and gown, bounding along, brandishing the long boat-hook, and always
keeping just opposite the boat; and amid all the Babel of voices, and
the dash and pulse of the stroke, and the labouring of his own
breathing, he heard Hardy's voice coming to him again and again, and
clear as if there had been no other sound in the air, "Steady, Two!
steady! well pulled! steady, steady." The voice seemed to give him
strength and keep him to his work. And what work it was! he had had many
a hard pull in the last six weeks, but never aught like this.

But it can't last forever; men's muscles are not steel, or their lungs
bulls' hide, and hearts can't go on pumping a hundred miles an hour
long, without bursting. The St. Ambrose boat is well away from the boat
behind, there is a great gap between the accompanying crowds; and now,
as they near the Gut, she hangs for a moment or two in hand, though the
roar from the bank grows louder and louder, and Tom is already aware
that the St. Ambrose crowd is melting into the one ahead of them.

"We must be close to Exeter!" The thought flashes into him, and, it
would seem, into the rest of the crew at the same moment; for, all at
once, the strain seems taken off their arms again; there is no more
drag; she springs to the stroke as she did at the start; and Miller's
face, which had darkened for a few seconds, lightens up again.

Miller's face and attitude are a study. Coiled up into the smallest
possible space, his chin almost resting on his knees, his hands close to
his sides, firmly but lightly feeling the rudder, as a good horseman
handles the mouth of a free-going hunter; if a coxswain could make a
bump by his own exertions, surely he will do it. No sudden jerks of the
St. Ambrose rudder will you see, watch as you will from the bank; the
boat never hangs through fault of his, but easily and gracefully rounds
every point. "You're gaining! you're gaining!" he now and then mutters
to the captain, who responds with a wink, keeping his breath for other
matters. Isn't he grand, the captain, as he comes forward like
lightning, stroke after stroke, his back flat, his teeth set, his whole
frame working from the hips with the regularity of a machine? As the
space still narrows, the eyes of the fiery little coxswain flash with
excitement, but he is far too good a judge to hurry the final effort
before the victory is safe in his grasp.

The two crowds are mingled now, and no mistake; and the shouts come all
in a heap over the water. "Now, St. Ambrose, six strokes more." "Now,
Exeter, you're gaining; pick her up." "Mind the Gut, Exeter." "Bravo,
St. Ambrose!" The water rushes by, still eddying from the strokes of
the boat ahead. Tom fancies now he can hear their oars and the workings
of their rudder, and the voice of their coxswain. In another moment both
boats are in the Gut, and a perfect storm of shouts reaches them from
the crowd, as it rushes madly off to the left to the footbridge, amidst
which "Oh, well steered, well steered, St. Ambrose!" is the prevailing
cry. Then Miller, motionless as a statue till now, lifts his right hand
and whirls the tassel round his head. "Give it her now, boys; six
strokes and we're into them." Old Jervis lays down that great broad back
and lashes his oar through the water with the might of a giant, the crew
catch him up in another stroke, the tight new boat answers to the spurt,
and Tom feels a little shock behind him, and then a grating sound, as
Miller shouts, "Unship oars, Bow and Three!" and the nose of the St.
Ambrose boat glides quietly up the side of the Exeter till it touches
their stroke oar.

"Take care where you're coming to." It is the coxswain of the bumped
boat who speaks.

Tom finds himself within a foot or two of him when he looks round; and,
being utterly unable to contain his joy, and yet unwilling to exhibit
it before the eyes of a gallant rival, turns away towards the shore, and
begins telegraphing to Hardy.

"Now, then, what are you at there in the bows? Cast her off, quick.
Come, look alive! Push across at once out of the way of the other
boats."

"I congratulate you, Jervis," says the Exeter stroke, as the St. Ambrose
boat shoots past him. "Do it again next race and I shan't care."

Thomas Hughes: "Tom Brown at Oxford."



