
The knight sounds his whistle and instantly the falcon turns and darts
back to him for the dainty food which is given as a reward for his good
hunting. Then he is chained and hooded again till another bird rises. So
the morning passes, and many a bird do the falcons bring down before the
knights and ladies return to the castle for "noon-meat."

WILLIAM FITZSTEPHEN
(Adapted)




    And He that doth the ravens feed,
    Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
    Be comfort to my age!

SHAKESPEARE




A SONG OF CANADA


    Sing me a song of the great Dominion!
      Soul-felt words for a patriot's ear!
    Ring out boldly the well-turned measure,
      Voicing your notes that the world may hear;
    Here is no starveling--Heaven-forsaken--
      Shrinking aside where the Nations throng;
    Proud as the proudest moves she among them--
      Worthy is she of a noble song!

    Sing me the might of her giant mountains,
      Baring their brows in the dazzling blue;
    Changeless alone, where all else changes,
      Emblems of all that is grand and true:
    Free, as the eagles around them soaring;
      Fair, as they rose from their Maker's hand:
    Shout, till the snow-caps catch the chorus--
      The white-topp'd peaks of our mountain land.

    Sing me the calm of her tranquil forests,
      Silence eternal, and peace profound,
    In whose great heart's deep recesses
      Breaks no tempest, and comes no sound;
    Face to face with the deathlike stillness,
      Here, if at all, man's soul might quail:
    Nay! 'tis the love of that great peace leads us
      Thither, where solace will never fail!

    Sing me the pride of her stately rivers,
      Cleaving their way to the far-off sea;
    Glory of strength in their deep-mouth'd music--
      Glory of mirth in their tameless glee.
    Hark! 'tis the roar of the tumbling rapids;
      Deep unto deep through the dead night calls;
    Truly, I hear but the voice of Freedom
      Shouting her name from her fortress walls!

    Sing me the joy of her fertile prairies,
      League upon league of the golden grain:
    Comfort, housed in the smiling homestead--
      Plenty, throned on the lumbering wain.
    Land of Contentment! May no strife vex you,
      Never war's flag on your plains be unfurl'd;
    Only the blessings of mankind reach you--
      Finding the food for a hungry world!

    Sing me the charm of her blazing camp fires;
      Sing me the quiet of her happy homes,
    Whether afar 'neath the forest arches,
      Or in the shade of the city's domes;
    Sing me her life, her loves, her labours;
      All of a mother a son would hear;
    For when a lov'd one's praise is sounding,
      Sweet are the strains to the lover's ear.

    Sing me the worth of each Canadian,
      Roamer in wilderness--toiler in town--
    Search earth over you'll find none stancher,
      Whether his hands be white or brown;
    Come of a right good stock to start with,
      Best of the world's blood in each vein;
    Lords of ourselves, and slaves to no one,
      For us or from us, you'll find we're--MEN!

    Sing me the song, then; sing it bravely;
      Put your soul in the words you sing;
    Sing me the praise of this glorious country--
      Clear on the ear let the deep notes ring.
    Here is no starveling--Heaven-forsaken--
      Crouching apart where the Nations throng;
    Proud as the proudest moves she among them--
      Well is she worthy a noble song!

ROBERT REID




A MAD TEA PARTY


There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion,
resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. "Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse," thought Alice; "only, as it's asleep,
I suppose it doesn't mind."

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it: "No room! No room!" they cried out when they saw Alice
coming. "There's _plenty_ of room!" said Alice, indignantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

"Your hair wants cutting," said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice
for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

"You should learn not to make personal remarks," Alice said with some
severity: "it's very rude."

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he _said_
was: "Why is a raven like a writing-desk?"

"Come, we shall have some fun now!" thought Alice. "I'm glad they've
begun asking riddles--I believe I can guess that," she added aloud.

"Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?" said the
March Hare.

"Exactly so," said Alice.

"Then you should say what you mean," the March Hare went on.

"I do," Alice hastily replied; "at least--at least I mean what I
say--that's the same thing, you know."

"Not the same thing a bit!" said the Hatter. "Why, you might just as
well say that 'I see what I eat' is the same thing as 'I eat what I
see'!"

"You might just as well say," added the March Hare, "that 'I like what I
get' is the same thing as 'I get what I like'!"

"You might just as well say," added the Dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in its sleep, "that 'I breathe when I sleep' is the same thing
as 'I sleep when I breathe'!"

"It _is_ the same thing with you," said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,
which wasn't much.

"Have you guessed the riddle yet?" the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

"No, I give it up," Alice replied: "what's the answer?"

"I haven't the slightest idea," said the Hatter.

"Nor I," said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. "I think you might do something better with the
time," she said, "than wasting it in asking riddles that have no
answers."

"Suppose we change the subject," the March Hare interrupted, yawning.
"I'm getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story."

"I'm afraid I don't know one," said Alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

"Then the Dormouse shall!" they both cried.

"Wake up, Dormouse!" And they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened its eyes. "I wasn't asleep," it said in a
hoarse, feeble voice, "I heard every word you fellows were saying."

"Tell us a story!" said the March Hare.

"Yes, please do!" pleaded Alice.

"And be quick about it," added the Hatter, "or you'll be asleep again
before it's done."

"Once upon a time there were three little sisters," the Dormouse began
in a great hurry, "and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well--"

"What did they live on?" said Alice, who always took a great interest in
questions of eating and drinking.

"They lived on treacle," said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

"They couldn't have done that, you know," Alice gently remarked: "they'd
have been ill."

"So they were," said the Dormouse, "_very_ ill."

Alice tried a little to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary way
of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on:
"But why did they live at the bottom of a well?"

"Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

"I've had nothing yet," Alice replied in an offended tone, "so I can't
take more."

"You mean you can't take _less_," said the Hatter: "It's very easy to
take _more_ than nothing."

"Nobody asked _your_ opinion," said Alice.

"Who's making personal remarks now?" the Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to
some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
repeated her question. "Why did they live at the bottom of a well?"

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said: "It was a treacle-well."

"There's no such thing!" Alice was beginning very angrily, but the
Hatter and the March Hare went "Sh! Sh!" and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked: "If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the story for
yourself."

"No, please go on!" Alice said, very humbly, "I won't interrupt you
again. I dare say there may be _one_."

"One, indeed!" said the Dormouse, indignantly. However it consented to
go on. "And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw,
you know--"

"What did they draw?" said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

"Treacle," said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

"I want a clean cup," interrupted the Hatter, "let's all move one place
on."

He moved as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice, rather unwillingly, took the
place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: "But I don't understand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?"

"You can draw water out of a water-well," said the Hatter; "so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh stupid?"

"But they were _in_ the well," Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing
to notice this last remark.

"Of course they were," said the Dormouse,--"well in."

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

"They were learning to draw," the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; "and they drew all manner of
things--everything that begins with an M--"

"Why with an M?" said Alice.

"Why not?" said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a
doze, but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a
little shriek, and went on, "--that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say
things are 'much of a muchness'--did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?"

"Really, now you ask me," said Alice, very much confused, "I don't
think--"

"Then you shouldn't talk," said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off: the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.

LEWIS CARROLL: "The Adventures of Alice in Wonderland."




THE SLAVE'S DREAM


    Beside the ungathered rice he lay,
      His sickle in his hand;
    His breast was bare, his matted hair
      Was buried in the sand.
    Again, in the mist and shadow of sleep,
      He saw his Native Land.

    Wide through the landscape of his dreams
      The lordly Niger flowed;
    Beneath the palm trees on the plain
      Once more a king he strode;
    And heard the tinkling caravans
      Descend the mountain road.

    He saw once more his dark-eyed queen
      Among her children stand;
    They clasped his neck, they kissed his cheeks,
      They held him by the hand!--
    A tear burst from the sleeper's lids
      And fell into the sand.

    And then at furious speed he rode
      Along the Niger's bank;
