"Did she?"

"To be sure she did."

"You didn't say so before."

"I can't tell all I know in a minute."

"If I thought your mother consented to your coming, I wouldn't say
another word."

"Well, she did; you may bet your life on that."

"And your mother gave you ten dollars?"

"Who said she gave me _ten_ dollars?" asked Tom, a little
sharply.

That was just the sum his father had lost, and Bobby had unwittingly
hinted his suspicion.

"You must have had as much as that if you paid eight on your
books. Your fare to Boston and your steamboat fare must be two dollars
more."

"I know that; but look here, Bob;" and Tom took from his pocket five
half dollars and exhibited them to his companion. "She gave me
thirteen dollars."

Notwithstanding this argument, Bobby felt almost sure that the lost
ten dollars was a part of his capital.

"I will tell you my story now, Bob, if you like. You condemned me
without a hearing, as Jim Guthrie said when they sent him to the House
of Correction for getting drunk."

"Go ahead."

The substance of Tom's story was, that his father drank so hard, and
was such a tyrant in the house, that he could endure it no longer.
His father and mother did not agree, as any one might have
suspected. His mother, encouraged by the success of Bobby, thought
that Tom might do something of the kind, and she had provided him the
money to buy his stock of books.

Bobby had not much confidence in this story. He had been deceived
once; besides, it was not consistent with his previous narrative, and
he had not before hinted that he had obtained his mother's
consent. But Tom was eloquent, and protested that he had reformed, and
meant to do well. He declared, by all that was good and great, Bobby
should never have reason to be ashamed of him.

Our little merchant was troubled. He could not now get rid of Tom
without actually quarrelling with him, or running away from him. He
did not wish to do the former, and it was not an easy matter to do the
latter. Besides, there was hope that the runaway would do well; and if
he did, when he carried the profits of his trade home, his father
would forgive him. One thing was certain; if he returned to Riverdale
he would be what he had been before.

For these reasons Bobby finally, but very reluctantly, consented that
Tom should remain with him, resolving, however, that, if he did not
behave himself, he would leave him at once.

Before morning he had another reason. When the steamer got out into
the open bay, Bobby was seasick. He retired to his berth with a
dreadful headache; as he described it afterwards, it seemed just as
though that great walking beam was smashing up and down right in the
midst of his brains. He had never felt so ill before in his life, and
was very sure, in his inexperience, that something worse than mere
seasickness ailed him.

He told Tom, who was not in the least affected, how he felt; whereupon
the runaway blustered round, got the steward and the captain into the
cabin, and was very sure that Bobby would die before morning, if we
may judge by the fuss he made.

The captain was angry at being called from the pilot house for
nothing, and threatened to throw Tom overboard if he didn't stop his
noise. The steward, however, was a kind-hearted man, and assured
Bobby that passengers were often a great deal sicker than he was; but
he promised to do something for his relief, and Tom went with him to
his state room for the desired remedy.

The potion was nothing more nor less than a table spoonful of brandy,
which Bobby, who had conscientious scruples about drinking ardent
spirits, at first refused to take. Then Tom argued the point, and the
sick boy yielded. The dose made him sicker yet, and nature came to his
relief, and in a little while he felt better.

Tom behaved like a good nurse; he staid by his friend till he went to
sleep, and then "turned in" upon a settee beneath his berth. The boat
pitched and tumbled about so in the heavy sea that Bobby did not sleep
long, and when he woke he found Tom ready to assist him. But our hero
felt better, and entreated Tom to go to sleep again. He made the best
of his unpleasant situation. Sleep was not to be wooed, and he tried
to pass away the dreary hours in thinking of Riverdale and the dear
ones there. His mother was asleep, and Annie was asleep; that was
about all the excitement he could get up even on the home question. He
could not build castles in the air, for seasickness and castle
building do not agree. The gold and purple clouds would be black in
spite of him, and the aerial structure he essayed to build would pitch
and tumble about, for all the world, just like a steamboat in a heavy
sea. As often as he got fairly into it, he was violently rolled out,
and in a twinkling found himself in his narrow berth, awfully seasick.

He went to sleep again at last, and the long night passed away. When
he woke in the morning, he felt tolerably well, and was thankful that
he had got out of that scrape. But before he could dress himself, he
heard a terrible racket on deck. The steam whistle was shrieking, the
bell was banging, and he heard the hoarse bellowing of the captain. It
was certain that something had happened, or was about to happen.

Then the boat stopped, rolling heavily in the sea. Tom was not there;
he had gone on deck. Bobby was beginning to consider what a dreadful
thing a wreck was, when Tom appeared.

"What's the matter?" asked Bobby, with some appearance of alarm.

"Fog," replied Tom. "It is so thick you can cut it with a hatchet."

"Is that all?"

"That's enough."

"Where are we?"

"That is just what the pilot would like to know. They can't see ahead
a bit, and don't know where we are."

Bobby went on deck. The ocean rolled beneath them, but there was
nothing but fog to be seen above and around them. The lead was heaved
every few moments, and the steamer crept slowly along till it was
found the water shoaled rapidly, when the captain ordered the men to
let go the anchor.

There they were; the fog was as obstinate as a mule, and would not
"lift." Hour after hour they waited, for the captain was a prudent
man, and would not risk the life of those on board to save a few
hours' time. After breakfast, the passengers began to display their
uneasiness, and some of them called the captain very hard names,
because he would not go on. Almost everybody grumbled, and made
themselves miserable.

"Nothing to do and nothing to read," growled a nicely-dressed
gentleman, as he yawned and stretched himself to manifest his
sensation of _ennui_.

"Nothing to read, eh?" thought Bobby. "We will soon supply that want."

Calling Tom, they went down to the main deck where the baggage had
been placed.

"Now's our time," said he, as he proceeded to unlock one of the trunks
that contained his books. "Now or never."

"I am with you," replied Tom, catching the idea.

The books of the latter were in a box, and he was obliged to get a
hammer to open it; but with Bobby's assistance he soon got at them.

"Buy 'The Wayfarer,'" said Bobby, when he returned to the saloon, and
placed a volume in the hands of the yawning gentleman. "Best book of
the season; only one dollar."

"That I will, and glad of the chance," replied the gentleman. "I would
give five dollars for anything, if it were only the 'Comic Almanac.'"

Others were of the same mind. There was no present prospect that the
fog would lift, and before dinner time our merchant had sold fifty
copies of "The Wayfarer." Tom, whose books were of an inferior
description, and who was inexperienced as a salesman, disposed of
twenty, which was more than half of his stock. The fog was a godsend
to both of them, and they reaped a rich harvest from the occasion, for
almost all the passengers seemed willing to spend their money freely
for the means of occupying the heavy hours and driving away that
dreadful _ennui_ which reigns supreme in a fog-bound steamer.

About the middle of the afternoon, the fog blew over, and the boat
proceeded on her voyage, and before sunset our young merchants were
safely landed at Bath.




CHAPTER XVII

IN WHICH TOM HAS A GOOD TIME, AND BOBBY MEETS WITH A TERRIBLE
MISFORTUNE


Bath afforded our young merchants an excellent market for their wares,
and they remained there the rest of the week. They then proceeded to
Brunswick, where their success was equally flattering.

Thus far Tom had done very well, though Bobby had frequent occasion to
remind him of the pledges he had given to conduct himself in a proper
manner. He would swear now and then, from the force of habit; but
invariably, when Bobby checked him, he promised to do better.

At Brunswick Tom sold the last of his books, and was in possession of
about thirty dollars, twelve of which he owed the publisher who had
furnished his stock. This money seemed to burn in his pocket. He had
the means of having a good time, and it went hard with him to plod
along as Bobby did, careful to save every penny he could.

"Come, Bob, let's get a horse and chaise and have a ride--what do you
say?" proposed Tom, on the day he finished selling his books.

"I can't spare the time or the money," replied Bobby, decidedly.

"What is the use of having money if we can't spend it? It is a first
rate day, and we should have a good time."

"I can't afford it. I have a great many books to sell."

"About a hundred; you can sell them fast enough."

"I don't spend my money foolishly."

"It wouldn't be foolishly. I have sold out, and I am bound to have a
little fun now."

"You never will succeed if you do business in that way."

"Why not?"

"You will spend your money as fast as you get it."

"Pooh! we can get a horse and chaise for the afternoon for two
dollars. That is not much."

"Considerable, I should say. But if you begin, there is no knowing
where to leave off. I make it a rule not to spend a single cent
foolishly, and if I don't begin, I shall never do it."

"I don't mean to spend all I get; only a little now and then,"
persisted Tom.

"Don't spend the first dollar for nonsense, and then you won't spend
the second. Besides, when I have any money to spare, I mean to buy
books with it for my library."

"Humbug! Your library!"

"Yes, my library; I mean to have a library one of these days."

"I don't want any library, and I mean to spend some of my money in
having a good time; and if you won't go with me, I shall go
alone--that's all."

"You can do as you please, of course; but I advise you to keep your
money. You will want it to buy another stock of books."

"I shall have enough for that. What do you say? will you go with me or
not?"

"No, I will not."

"Enough said; then I shall go alone, or get some fellow to go with
me."

"Consider well before you go," pleaded Bobby, who had sense enough to
see that Tom's proposed "good time" would put back, if not entirely
prevent, the reform he was working out.

He then proceeded to reason with him in a very earnest and feeling
manner, telling him he would not only spend all his money, but
completely unfit himself for business. What he proposed to do was
nothing more nor less than extravagance, and it would lead him to
dissipation and ruin.

"To-day I am going to send one hundred dollars to Mr. Bayard,"
continued Bobby; "for I am afraid to have so much money with me. I
advise you to send your money to your employer."

"Humph! Catch me doing that! I am bound to have a good time, anyhow."

"At least, send the money you owe him."

"I'll bet I won't."

"Well, do as you please; I have said all I have to say."

"You are a fool, Bob!" exclaimed Tom, who had evidently used Bobby as
much as he wished, and no longer cared to speak soft words to him.

"Perhaps I am; but I know better than to spend my money upon fast
horses. If you will go, I can't help it. I am sorry you are going
astray."

"What do you mean by that, you young monkey?" said Tom, angrily.

This was Tom Spicer, the bully. It sounded like him; and with a
feeling of sorrow Bobby resigned the hopes he had cherished of making
a good boy of him.

"We had better part now," added our hero, sadly.

"I'm willing."

"I shall leave Brunswick this afternoon for the towns up the river. I
hope no harm will befall you. Good by, Tom."

"Go it! I have heard your preaching about long enough, and I am more
glad to get rid of you than you are to get rid of me."

Bobby walked away towards the house where he had left the trunk
containing his books, while Tom made his way towards a livery
stable. The boys had been in the place for several days, and had made
some acquaintances; so Tom had no difficulty in procuring a companion
for his proposed ride.

Our hero wrote a letter that afternoon to Mr. Bayard, in which he
narrated all the particulars of his journey, his relations with Tom
Spicer, and the success that had attended his labors. At the bank he
procured a hundred dollar note for his small bills, and enclosed it in
the letter.

He felt sad about Tom. The runaway had done so well, had been so
industrious, and shown such a tractable spirit, that he had been very
much encouraged about him. But if he meant to be wild again,--for it
was plain that the ride was only "the beginning of sorrows,"--it was
well that they should part.

By the afternoon stage our hero proceeded to Gardiner, passing through
several smaller towns, which did not promise a very abundant harvest.
His usual success attended him; for wherever he went, people seemed to
be pleased with him, as Squire Lee had declared they would be. His
pleasant, honest face was a capital recommendation, and his eloquence
seldom failed to achieve the result which eloquence has ever achieved
from Demosthenes down to the present day.

Our limits do not permit us to follow him in all his peregrinations
from town to town, and from house to house; so we pass over the next
fortnight, at the end of which time we find him at Augusta. He had
sold all his books but twenty, and had that day remitted eighty
dollars more to Mr. Bayard. It was Wednesday, and he hoped to sell out
so as to be able to take the next steamer for Boston, which was
advertised to sail on the following day.

He had heard nothing from Tom since their parting, and had given up
all expectation of meeting him again; but that bad penny maxim proved
true once more, for, as he was walking through one of the streets of
Augusta, he had the misfortune to meet him--and this time it was
indeed a misfortune.

"Hallo, Bobby!" shouted the runaway, as familiarly as though nothing
had happened to disturb the harmony of their relations.

"Ah, Tom, I didn't expect to see you again," replied Bobby, not very
much rejoiced to meet his late companion.
