Being fifty thousand in number, the former would appear to be the
natural course for a general to adopt; as Frederick had with him
but twenty-three thousand men. Of this fact, however, Soubise would
be ignorant, and might only have heard that the Prussian army was
marching to annihilate him.

Before long baggage waggons began to clatter through the streets.
They were being driven westward, and it was in the same direction
that the regiments made their way.

Fergus followed them to the plain outside the town. The tents had
already been struck; the troops, as they arrived from the town and
camp, were marshalled in order; a long train of baggage waggons
were already making their way westward; and there was no longer any
grounds for doubt that Soubise was retreating.

It was just eleven o'clock when Fergus returned to the cathedral.
The peasant was awaiting him.

"They all seem on the move," the latter said. "I have heard much
about them."

"It does not matter, now," Fergus replied. "I must get back to your
place, as quickly as I can."

Not a word was spoken, until they had left the town.

"They must be going up into Hanover, to join the French army
there," the peasant said.

"They are running away. Frederick will be here tomorrow night, or
at any rate next day."

"The news seems too good to be true, master. How have you learnt
it?"

"I have learnt it from no one here. I am one of the king's
officers, and I came on here to find out whether the enemy would be
likely to come out and fight, or would bolt when they heard of his
advance."

"The Lord be praised!" the man said piously, taking off his hat as
he spoke. "I thought, sir, that there was something curious in your
having such a horse; and still more so, in your wanting to find out
all about the force of the enemy here. But it was no business of
mine; and I felt that you must be a friend for, had you been
Austrian or French, you would have ridden boldly into the town."

As they went along the road they were met by several troops of
cavalry, riding at full speed.

"Is the way we came this morning the shortest?"

"Yes, sir, by a good mile."

"Then we will return by it," said Fergus.

As soon as they left the main road they went at a run for some
distance, and then broke into a fast walk. In an hour from the time
of leaving Erfurt, they arrived at the hut.

"I will run along and fetch your horse, sir," the peasant said.

"No, I will go myself. He does not know you, and might refuse to
let you come near him."

In a few minutes, Fergus returned with his horse. The saddle,
bridle, and wallets were quickly put on. Fergus dropped his pistols
into his saddlebags, and buckled on the sword he had brought with
him. It was not his own, but one he had bought at starting--a good
piece of steel, but with a battered and rusty sheath that showed
that it had been lying for weeks, possibly for months, on some
field of battle before being picked up.

Then, with a word of adieu and thanks to the peasant and his wife,
and slipping a crown piece into the hand of the latter, he mounted
and rode off.



Chapter 10: Rossbach.


Fergus knew that there were several cavalry posts ahead, and
thought it likely that some of these might be left to give warning
of the Prussian approach. He therefore rode across the country for
some miles. He had begun to think that he must have gone beyond the
limit of their outposts, when he saw a hussar pacing across the
line in front of him, his beat evidently being between two small
woods three or four hundred yards apart.

He checked his horse, as he saw Fergus approaching. He was a
good-tempered looking fellow, and nodded to Fergus as much as to
say that, if he could speak his language, he should like a chat
with him. The latter at once checked his horse, and said good day,
in French.

"Ah, you speak our language!" the soldier said. "I am glad to
exchange a word with someone. It is hot here, especially when one's
time is up, and one ought to have been relieved, an hour ago."

"Yes, I can understand that. I expect you have been forgotten."

"Well, it does not make much difference. I shall get off my next
guard, in consequence."

"You will have to wait some time before you are relieved, if you
stop here."

"What do you mean?" the soldier asked.

"I mean that when I left Erfurt your army was all moving west, and
as I rode along I met several troops of cavalry, galloping to join
them."

"That is strange news. Nothing whatever was known, when I came out
here."

"No, the news only arrived at Erfurt, this morning, that
Frederick's army is within a day's march; and I saw the troops
march out, and the baggage waggons on their way before I started. I
don't say that your troop may have gone. They may have stopped to
form a post of observation."

"Well, at any rate I shall go into the village and see. I ought to
have been relieved an hour ago; and if they had such news as that,
and had remained there, they would have been sure to have sent, to
order all videttes to use special vigilance. We have only been
posted here as a sort of practice, for we did not think that there
was an enemy within a hundred and fifty miles; and now, if the news
is true, we may have the Prussian cavalry coming along at any
moment.

"Well, thank you for warning me," and turning his horse, he went
off at a gallop.

As the outposts would not have been set, except by the party most
in advance, Fergus knew that there was now no more risk of falling
in with the enemy; unless a cavalry force had been sent forward, to
endeavour to get an idea of the force of the Prussians. But as the
generals had so precipitately decided upon a retreat, it was not
likely that they would have ordered any reconnaissance of this kind
to be made.

He therefore presently regained the main road and, riding fast,
arrived at the place where the Prussians had pitched their camp,
thirty miles from Erfurt, having made a twenty-miles march that
day. He dismounted at the house where Keith had established his
quarters.

"I have bad news for you, sir," he said. "Word of your coming
reached Erfurt, at eight o'clock this morning; and by eleven the
whole army were on their march westward, bag and baggage."

"That is bad news, Fergus. You could hardly have brought worse. The
king had hoped to have struck a heavy blow, and then to be off
again to face the Austrians. What strength were they?"

"About fifty thousand."

"How did they get the news of our coming?"

"That I cannot say, sir. I had gone into Erfurt soon after five,
and had already picked up a good deal of news, from the talk of a
party of French non-commissioned officers who were taking breakfast
at a small inn; and who, not imagining that I could understand
them, talked very freely over affairs. They sat over their meal
some time, and I did not go out until they had left.

"Just as I did so, a mounted officer galloped past, at a speed that
showed he was the bearer of an important despatch. I followed him
to Soubise's headquarters. While there, I noticed several mounted
officers rode out in great haste. A quarter of an hour later,
several general officers arrived. There was a consultation for half
an hour, and then officers rode off in all directions; and in a few
minutes trumpets were sounding, and drums beating, all over the
town.

"In a very short time a movement began towards the western gate. By
ten o'clock the tents were all struck round the town, the waggons
loaded, and they were on their way west. An hour later, and the
whole force was in movement in that direction; and as I issued from
the town on this side, I met the cavalry that had been scattered
among the villages, galloping in. I don't think that there is, at
the present moment, an enemy within ten miles of Erfurt."

"You were in no danger, yourself?"

"None at all, sir. I passed the night at a friendly peasant's hut,
five miles this side of the town, inside their advanced posts. I
left my horse in a wood, and my peasant guided me by bypaths to the
town. I did not exchange a word with anyone, except the landlord of
the hotel where I breakfasted. He was bitterly hostile to the
enemy.

"I also spoke to a solitary French vidette who had, in the hurry of
their retreat, been left behind; and told him that he had best be
off, as the whole army was in full march for the west."

"Well, if you breakfasted at six this morning, you must be hungry.
My dinner will be ready in half an hour, and you had better share
it with me. I must go now, and tell the king the news that you have
brought. I said nothing to him about my having sent you."

In twenty minutes the marshal returned.

"The king wishes to see you, Fergus. Of course he is vexed, but he
always takes bad news well, unless it is the result of the blunder
of one of the officers. He does not say much, even then; but it is
very bad for that officer when he sees him. Frederick never
forgives a blunder."

"Well, Captain Drummond, so you have been playing the spy for us?"

"I have been doing my best, your majesty."

"And the French are gone, bag and baggage?"

"Yes, sire, they have gone off west."

"To perch themselves somewhere among the mountains, I suppose.
Perhaps they will get bolder, presently, when they hear that they
are more than double my strength. Did you learn anything more than
what Marshal Keith has told me?"

"I heard a great deal of talk among a party of French
non-commissioned officers, sire. They expressed great
dissatisfaction with their general, and at the long delays. They
also spoke with absolute contempt of the Confederacy army, both
officers and men; and said that, if it had not been for the
drilling by the Austrian non-commissioned officers, they would be
nothing better than a rabble."

"I daresay Soubise is of the same opinion," the king said, "and
wants them to have a few weeks' more drill before he sets them in
line of battle. However, I have no doubt we shall manage to bring
him to book, before we return.

"Well, I am obliged to you for your zeal, Captain Drummond; and
although Keith tells me that you got in without being questioned,
such business is always dangerous. Mayhap next time you will have a
better opportunity for distinguishing yourself. As you managed to
pass so freely among them, after you made your escape from prison,
you can clearly be trusted on work of this kind."

Fergus saluted, and retired.

The next morning the troops started, as usual, at daybreak. They
were to make but a short march, for they had no longer any occasion
for speed, and they had made the hundred and fifty miles at a very
rapid pace; but when they halted, Frederick with the cavalry rode
straight on into Erfurt.

"Don't wait to put on your uniform now," Keith said to Fergus, on
his return from the royal quarters; "dinner is waiting; and I am
ready, if you are not. Lindsay is going to dine with me, too."

"Well, Lindsay," the marshal said, as the latter entered, "you see
the advantages of this young fellow being able to speak German
well. If you had been taken prisoner at Lobositz, you would have
been fast in Spielberg at present; and you see he is now able to
undertake perilous missions, and peril means promotion."

"I quite see that, marshal," Lindsay said with a smile; "but though
I can get on with French fairly enough, my tongue doesn't seem to
be able to form these crack-jaw German words; and you see, marshal,
it is not the only one that does not. I think, sir, that bad as my
German is, it is not much worse than your own, and you have been
here much longer than I have."

The marshal laughed.

"You are right. I cannot say half a dozen German words; but you see
I have not had your motive for acquiring it, and cannot very well
get promotion. And again, it would not do for me to speak better
German than the King of Prussia; who, beyond a few words necessary
for animating his troops on occasion, knows very little German
himself. For general work here French is amply sufficient, because
every officer speaks it; but as you see, German is very useful,
too, to a young officer who wishes to push himself forward, and is
willing to undertake special work of this kind."

"But even then, marshal, he would have no advantage over a Prussian
officer who speaks French."

"It depends a good deal upon the Prussian officer. The greater
portion of them are mere machines--splendid fighting machines, no
doubt; but of no great use outside their own work. Anyone could
detect, with half an eye, nineteen out of twenty of them; dress
them how you would, disguise them as you like. They step the
regulation length, bring their foot down in the regulation way, are
as stiff as if they had swallowed a ramrod. They have neither
suppleness nor adaptability. They are so accustomed to obey that
they have almost lost the power of originating, and would be taken
and shot before they were in the enemy's lines ten minutes. Now,
Fergus has the advantage of knowing both languages, and of being
quick-witted and sharp."

The next two months were passed in marches to and fro. Seidlitz,
with some cavalry, took possession of Gotha, to the great
satisfaction of the duke and duchess; and the king himself rode
over and dined with them.

While Seidlitz remained there as governor, with a couple of
regiments of horse, a strong body of French and Austrian hussars,
grenadiers, and artillery marched against Gotha. Seidlitz, having
so few men to oppose them, evacuated the place, and the enemy
marched into it in triumphant procession. The duke and duchess made
the best of matters, and invited all the principal officers to a
banquet.

Just as they were sitting down to this, Seidlitz with his Prussians
reappeared; his men being so artfully scattered about that they
appeared a great deal stronger than they were. The enemy were
seized with panic. Soubise and his generals mounted in great haste,
and in a few minutes the whole were retreating at top speed;
Seidlitz pursuing for some distance, killing thirty and taking
sixty prisoners, with a large amount of baggage and plunder, and
then returning to Gotha to eat the dinner prepared for the enemy.

Ferdinand of Brunswick, with his division, had been sent off to
check, if possible, the movements of the French army under
Richelieu, near Magdeburg.

In October came the startling news that Berlin itself was
threatened, and that a force, said to be fifteen thousand strong,
under General Haddick, was in rapid motion towards it. Prince
Maurice was ordered to hasten to its defence, and the king also
moved in that direction.

The invading force was but four thousand strong. Their numbers,
however, were so magnified by rumour that the governor of Berlin,
who had but four thousand troops, did not venture to oppose them,
but sent the royal family and archives away under a strong escort.
Haddick occupied a suburb of the city, but knowing that as soon as
his real force was known he would be hotly opposed, and receiving
news that Prince Maurice was rapidly approaching, demanded a ransom
of 45,000 pounds; and finally accepted 27,000 pounds, and then
hurried away. Prince Maurice arrived twenty-four hours later.

The consequences of this little success--magnified by report into
"Berlin captured, Prussian royal family in flight."--turned out
very advantageous to Frederick. The enthusiasm in Paris and Vienna
was enormous, and orders were despatched to the armies to set to,
without further delay, and finish the work. Fifteen thousand men
were sent from Richelieu's army to reinforce Soubise, who thereupon
issued from his mountain stronghold and marched against Leipzig.

Frederick, however, arrived there first, Ferdinand and Maurice
joining him a day or two later; and while waiting there, Frederick
received the joyful news that England requested him to appoint Duke
Ferdinand, of Brunswick, commander-in-chief of the army until now
commanded by the Duke of Cumberland, who had just sailed for
England.

Pitt had now risen to almost absolute power in England, and was
busied in reforming the abuses in the army and navy, dismissing
incapable officials, and preparing to render some efficient aid to
its hard-pressed ally. The proposal that Prince Ferdinand should
assume the command of the army--whose efforts had hitherto been
rendered nugatory by the utter incompetence of the Duke of
Cumberland who, although personally as brave as a lion, was
absolutely ignorant of war--afforded immense satisfaction to the
king.

No better choice could have been made. Ferdinand was related to the
royal families both of England and Prussia. He was a capable
general, prudent and at the same time enterprising, firm under
difficulties, ready to seize opportunities; and under his command
there was no doubt that the northern army, which had hitherto been
useless, and had only been saved from absolute destruction by the
incompetence of the French generals, would now play a useful part.

On October 30th Soubise, in spite of his orders to fight, and the
fact that he had double the strength of the Prussians, fell back
before them. Soubise himself felt no confidence in his troops, but
upon the other hand his officers and those of the Confederate army
were puffed up with vanity, and remonstrated hotly against retreat.

The next day Frederick came in sight of Soubise's army, which was
camped on a height near the town of Weissenfels. Frederick had but
one-half of his force with him, the other half, under Keith, being
still detached. Five thousand men garrisoned Weissenfels, but
Frederick made short work of the place. His cannon burst down the
gates, and his troops rushed forward with all speed; but the
garrison fled across the bridge over the Saale, which had already
been prepared for burning; and they set it on fire in such haste
that four hundred were unable to cross, and were made prisoners.
The fugitives joined their army on the other side of the Elbe, and
its guns opened upon the burning bridge, to prevent the Prussians
from trying to extinguish the flames.

The Prussians returned the fire, and the artillery duel was kept up
until three o'clock, by which time the bridge was consumed.
Frederick had already fixed upon a spot suitable for the erection
of another, and during the night, while the enemy were falling back
to take up a fresh position upon higher ground, the engineers,
working diligently, succeeded in throwing a bridge across.

Keith arrived at Merseburg the next morning. A strong force lay
opposite, ready to dispute the passage; but when Soubise found that
the king was crossing by his new bridge, he called in all his
detachments and marched away, to a strong position, and there set
himself in array ready to receive an attack. Keith's bridges were
finished on the 3rd of November, and that afternoon he crossed and
joined Frederick.

On the 4th the army was on the move by two o'clock in the morning.
A bright moon was shining and, by its light, it was discovered that
the enemy had shifted his position for one much stronger, with
approaches protected by patches of wood and bog. The Prussian army
therefore marched back to their camp, the king hoping that, being
so far from their base of supplies, the enemy would be forced ere
long to make some movement that would afford him a chance of
attacking them under better circumstances.

The ground from Weissenfels rises, very gradually, to a height of a
hundred and twenty feet or so; which in so flat a country is
regarded as a hill. On this slight swelling are several small
villages. Of these Rossbach is the principal, standing high up on
its crest. Here Frederick's right wing was posted, while his left
was at Bedra. The king took up his quarters at a large house in
Rossbach; and from its roof, at eight o'clock on the morning of the
5th, he saw that the enemy were getting into motion and moving away
towards their left.

The movement had begun much earlier. Half an hour later they had
passed through the village of Grost, and were apparently making
their way to Freiburg, where they had some magazines. Hoping to
have a chance of attacking their rear, Frederick ordered the
cavalry to saddle, and the whole army to be in readiness, and then
sat down to dinner with his officers at noon. Little did he dream,
at the time, that the slow and clumsy movement that he was watching
was intended, by the enemy, to end in a flank attack on himself.

On the previous day Soubise, with his generals, looking down on the
Prussian camp, had reckoned their force at ten thousand. In reality
they had seen only a portion of their camp, the site being hidden
by a dip of the ground. Even Soubise thought that, with the odds of
over five to one in his favour, he could fight a battle with a
certainty of success; and planned a masterly march, by which he
would place himself on Frederick's left and rear, drive him into
the bend made by the Saale, and annihilate his army. In his
enthusiasm at this happy idea, he sent off a courier to carry the
news, to Versailles, that he was about to annihilate the Prussian
army, and take the king prisoner.

Frederick's dinner was prolonged. There was nothing to be done, and
patience was one of the king's strong points. At two o'clock an
officer, who had remained on watch on the housetop, hurried down
with news that the enemy had suddenly turned to the left. The king
went up to the roof with his officers, and at once divined the
intention of his foes.

It was a glorious moment for him. At last, after three weary
months, he was to meet them in battle. Instantly his orders were
given, and in half an hour the Prussian army was all in movement,
with the exception of some irregular corps which were left to
occupy the attention of the enemy's horse, which had been posted as
if to threaten Rossbach. By the line taken, the Prussians were at
once hidden behind the crest of the hill from the enemy; and so
Soubise thought that the Prussians, being afraid of his attack,
were marching away with all speed for Keith's bridge at Merseburg.
He accordingly hurried on his cavalry, and ordered the infantry to
go at a double, for the purpose of capturing the runaway Prussians.

In the meantime Seidlitz, with four thousand horse, trotted briskly
along until he reached, still concealed from the enemy's sight, the
spot towards which they were hurrying, in two great columns headed
by seven thousand cavalry. He allowed them to move forward until he
was on their flank, and then dashed over the crest of the hill, and
charged like a thunderbolt upon them.

Taken completely by surprise, the enemy's cavalry had scarce time
to form. Two Austrian regiments and two French were alone able to
do so. But there was no withstanding the impetus of the Prussian
charge. They rode right through the disordered cavalry; turned,
formed, and recharged, and four times cut their way through them,
until they broke away in headlong flight; and were pursued by
Seidlitz until out of sight from the hill, when he turned and
waited, to see where he could find an opportunity of striking
