General Maurice, who had ridden up in advance of his horsemen.

"There"--he pointed down the hill toward the dark masses of the Russian
right--"there's your chance, General."

The Comte de Vivonne needed but the word.  Turning in his saddle he
raised his sword.  His cavalry had been waiting with unconcealed
impatience during the morning.  Eagerly they responded to the command.
Dashing down the hill they fell on the puzzled Russian infantry around
Epine-aux-Bois.  Ricard's men opened to give them way.  What had been a
triumphant advance was turned into a retreat.  The retreat bade fair to
be a disaster, but the Russians, as has been noted, were splendid
defensive soldiers.  They formed squares.  Although regiment after
regiment had been ridden over and beaten to pieces, those who remained
fought stubbornly.

Sacken perceived now that his only hope was to effect a junction with
Yorck.  He withdrew his men under cover of his artillery to
Vieux-Maisons, and began to lead them by the left flank, at the same
time sending frantic messages to Yorck, imploring him to hasten.  But
Yorck's guns were mired.  He had only the teams attached to them.  He
could get no other horses.  He was unaccountably delayed.  He had faced
about at the sound of the firing, but the movements of his main body
were slow, deliberate.  Nansouty, who had opened the battle, was now
sent in by Napoleon to deliver the _coup-de-grace_.  With
characteristic gallantry he fell upon the Russian columns.

Sacken was driven from the field.  In killed, wounded, and prisoners he
had lost half his force and all of his guns.  His troops streamed
westward through roads and woods in wild confusion.  He would have been
annihilated then and there but for the arrival of Yorck.  The Prussian
at last fell on Mortier's weak corps and the Guard on the northern
road.  Mortier's men were outnumbered four to one.  They made a
desperate resistance, but it was not until Napoleon ordered up the
other division of the Guard, which had only been lightly engaged, and
Maurice's cavalry, that Yorck's advance was checked.

The short day had drawn to a close.  Preparations were made to pass the
night on the field and in the town.  All of Sacken's baggage train and
provisions had fallen into Napoleon's hands.  Montmirail had been a
more decisive victory than Champaubert.  Twenty thousand men had been
eliminated from calculations for the time being.  Sending couriers to
Macdonald to move down the banks of the Marne with all possible speed,
to get in the rear of Yorck, with whom he purposed to deal on the
morrow, Napoleon, in high spirits, made preparations for the next day's
battle.

The next morning, the thirteenth, leaving a heavy force to check any
possible attack by Sacken, who had, with incredible energy and labor,
partially at least reorganized his shattered troops, but who was too
weak to do anything more than lead them away from any possible touch
with Napoleon's troops, the Emperor advanced toward the little village
of Chateau-Thierry.  Yorck, by this time, had learned the full details
of the disaster to Sacken.  Indeed, several of Sacken's brigades had
joined him, considerably augmenting his force.  But he was now no match
for Napoleon.  To stay meant annihilation.  He hastily made his
disposition for a rear guard defense and a withdrawal.  He made a
stubborn rear guard battle of it during the day, and, although he lost
heavily in men, guns and supplies, he finally succeeded in crossing the
Marne and breaking the bridges behind him.

Macdonald had moved tardily.  If he had shown half the enterprise of
the Emperor he would have been at the crossing of the Marne in good
time and Yorck would have been caught in a trap whence he could not
have extricated himself.  As it was, Napoleon added largely to the
number of prisoners taken and the number of enemies killed.  Altogether
he had put twenty-five thousand men out of action, in killed, wounded
and prisoners.  He had taken one hundred and twenty guns--so many that
he had to tumble them into the creeks and rivers, because he could not
transport them all.  He had rearmed and reclothed and provided for his
gallant little army at the expense of the enemy.  It was an exploit of
which even he could be proud.  On the other hand, in these operations
the French had lost some four thousand men killed and wounded, and, as
their army was so small, they could ill afford such a diminution of
their forces.

Meantime, Bluecher, apprised of these disasters, and at last awakened to
his peril, bravely marched westward.  He had come in touch with
Marmont, and had driven him out of Champaubert after a desperate
resistance.  The day after the elimination of Yorck, the fourteenth,
Napoleon headed his tired but triumphant troops back over the road to
Champaubert, sending word to Marmont to hold the Prussians in check as
long as possible, to dispute every rod of the way, but not to throw
away his precious men or bring on a general engagement until the
Emperor arrived.

The morning after that Napoleon fell on Bluecher, who clearly
outnumbered the French.  But the allies were dismayed and disheartened.
The name of the Emperor whom they had defeated and driven across Europe
was again full of terror to them.  The French were accordingly elated.
They would not be denied.  Marmont's men, intoxicated with the news of
the success of the other divisions of the army, just as soon as they
were given the word, which was just as soon as Napoleon could bring up
their comrades, fell on Bluecher like a storm.  They came in battle
contact in the village of Vauchamps.  The fighting was of the most
desperate character.  The battle was harder than all of the others put
together.  Bavarians, Prussians, and Russians, fighting under the eye
of brave old Bluecher himself, who recklessly exposed his person on the
field, were tenacious and courageous to the highest degree, but the
tactics and dispositions of Napoleon, the spirit of his men, his own
equally reckless exposure of his person under fire, and a cavalry dash
at the allied rear at Janvilliers, finally turned the wavering tide of
battle.  The allies began to retreat, the French followed.

The French pursued relentlessly, but with splendid skill and
determination Bluecher himself in command of the rearguard fought them
off.  Napoleon had foreseen this.  He had massed all the cavalry under
Grouchy and had sent them on a long round-about march across country to
get in Bluecher's rear.  Just beyond Champaubert, in a dense wood in
front of the village of Etoges, the retreating allies found the road
barred by the cavalry.  Grouchy had been provided with sufficient
artillery to enable him to hold the retreat in check; but the mud still
prevailed, many horses had been shot and killed, the peasants' horses
drawing the guns had been unable to keep pace with the necessarily
rapid movements of the cavalry, and the batteries had not come up.  Nor
was there any supporting infantry.  Indeed, the retreat of the
Prussians had been so sudden and so rapid that Grouchy's horse had been
hard put to it to intercept them.

The regiments leading the allied retreat were formed in squares, and
with musketry and cannon animated with the courage of despair, they
forced a passage through the charging, barring masses of the French
cavalry, not, however, without losing several of the squares in the
process.  It was their only possible way to safety.  As it was, Bluecher
himself narrowly escaped capture.

Napoleon's soldiers had fought five pitched battles in four days.  As a
preparation, they had marched thirty miles, night and day, over
incredible roads.  They were now utterly exhausted.  They could do no
more.  They must have a good rest.  Bluecher's forces had been
scattered, eliminated, defeated in detail.  There was now nothing for
the Field Marshal to do but to retreat and rally his men.  The success
of the Emperor had been brilliant in the extreme.

The fighting was not over, however, for thirty miles to the southward
lay the vast army of Schwarzenberg.  Napoleon might have pursued
Bluecher to the bitter end.  Military critics say he should have done
so.  To him, however, on the spot, it seemed proper to leave Bluecher
for the time being and endeavor to repeat on Schwarzenberg the
marvelous tactics of the five days' fight.

The next morning, the fifteenth, he started back to Nogent whence he
had come.  Victor and Oudinot had been fighting hard with
Schwarzenberg, but the news of Napoleon's victories had finally caused
the cautious Austrian to stop.  He began the recall and concentration
of his own scattered divisions.  He, at least, would not be caught
napping.  As usual the enemy learned something, even in defeat.

Speed was still essential to Napoleon.  His men had had twenty-four
hours of rest.  His horses were comparatively fresh.  The weather had
changed, the roads were frozen, horribly rough, but still much more
passable than before.  Once again the Emperor resorted to the
peasantry.  They, too, had been intoxicated with the news of his
victories, many of which they had witnessed and, in the plunder
resulting, had shared.  They brought their horses which they had hidden
in ravines and forests when the country was overrun by the enemy.  This
time, instead of attaching them to the guns which their own
teams--recruited from the captures--could draw on the hard roads,
Napoleon had them hitched to the big farm wagons.  Into the wagons he
loaded his infantry.  And at the highest speed of the horses the whole
force made its way to the southward.  To other victories--to
defeats--to what?

The Emperor began once again to dream of an empire whose boundaries
would be the Vistula instead of the Rhine.




BOOK II

THE EAGLE'S FLIGHT


CHAPTER XV

THE BRIDGE AT ARCIS

The long journey was at last over.  The last Alp had been surmounted,
the last pass traversed.  Behind them rose the snowy summit of mighty
Mont Blanc itself.  Before them lay their wearying journey's end.  It
was cold even in sunny Southern France on that morning in early spring.
Marteau, his uniform worn, frayed, travel-stained, and dusty, his
close-wrapped precious parcel held to his breast under his shabby great
coat, his face pale and haggard from hardship and heartbreak, his body
weak and wasted from long illness and long captivity, stood on the top
of a ridge of the hill called Mont Rachais, overlooking the walled town
of Grenoble, on the right bank of the Isere.  The Fifth-of-the-Line had
been stationed there before in one of the infrequent periods of peace
during the Napoleonic era.  He was familiar with the place and he knew
exactly where to look for what he expected to see.

More ragged and tattered, more travel-stained indeed, and with only the
semblance of a uniform left, was the young lad who stood by the
soldier's side.  But the boy was in good health and looked strong and
sturdy.

"There," said the officer.  "You see that square bulk of buildings
against the wall beyond the Cathedral church-tower and over the Palais
de Justice?"

"I see them, my officer," answered the other, shading his hand and
staring over the roofs and walls and spires of the compact little town.

"The barracks will be there unless the regiment has moved.  That will
be the end of our journey."

"The building with the flag, you mean, monsieur?" asked Pierre.

"That one."

Alas! the flag was no longer the tricolor but the white flag of ancient
royal France.  Marteau heaved a deep sigh as he stared at it with sad
eyes and sadder face.

The unexpected, that is, from the young soldier's point of view, had
happened.  The empire was no more.  The allies had triumphed.  The
Emperor has been beaten.  He had abdicated and gone.  He was
practically a prisoner on the little island of Elba, adjacent to that
greater island of Corsica, where he had been born.  The great circle of
his life had been completed.  And all the achievements were to be
comprehended between those two little islands in the blue
Mediterranean--from Corsica to Elba, the phrase ran.  Was that all?

Much water had flowed under the bridges of Europe since that mad ride
of the infantry in the farm wagons to face Schwarzenberg after their
smashing and successful attacks upon Bluecher, although the intervening
time had been short.  A year had scarcely elapsed, but that twelve
months had been crowded with incident, excitement, and vivid interest
almost unparalleled by any similar period in modern history.  The
Emperor had, indeed, fought hard for his throne and against heavy odds.
He had fought against indifference, against carelessness, against
negligence, last of all against treachery.  For in the end it was
treachery that had undone him and France.  Still, it may be that even
had Marmont and Mortier remained loyal the end would have been the same.

The odds were too heavy, in fine.  The Emperor did not realize their
preponderance until it was too late.  If he had assembled every
soldier, abandoning everything else but the defense of France, and if
he had shown with such an army as he could have gathered under those
conditions the same spirit of generalship which he had exhibited in
that marvelous campaign against Bluecher, he might have saved France,
his throne, his wife, his little son, his prestige, everything.  As it
was, he lost all.  But not without fighting.  Stubborn, determined,
magnificently defiant he had been to the last.

Marteau had often thrilled to the recollection during the long hours he
spent in captivity in Austria, and even in the delirium and fever of
his long and wasting illness, begot of the foul prison, he had
remembered it.  In all the hard fighting and hard marching of those
mournful if splendid days the young man had faithfully and well borne
his important if humble part.  There was a great dearth of officers,
staff officers as well as the others.  He had been very near to the
Emperor during those last days.

He remembered the smashing attack upon the van of the allies at
Montereau.  He could feel once more the thrill of the army, as the
circumspect Schwarzenberg stopped his advance, retired, concentrated
his columns.  He remembered the long, swift march back across the
country, after further demonstrations to keep Schwarzenberg in his
cautious mood, against the rear of the reorganized and advancing army
of Bluecher; the desperate, bloody, fruitless battles of Laon and
Craonne, rendered necessary by treachery.

He could recall again the furious rage of Napoleon, the almost despair
that filled the Emperor's heart, when the news came of the cowardly
surrender of the fort at Soissons by its incapable commandant, which
rendered useless Napoleon's cunning plans, and all the hard marching
and harder fighting of his heroic soldiery.

He recalled the escape of hard-pressed Bluecher again, the return of the
French to face the overwhelming main army of the allies, slowly but
surely moving toward its goal whenever the withdrawal of the Emperor
left it free to advance, the detachment of Marmont and Mortier to
defend Paris, the fierce two-day battle at Arcis-sur-Aube, the dash of
Maurice's and Sebastiani's gallant cavalry upon the whole Austrian
army, the deadly conflict before the bridge, the picture of the retreat
that bade fair to become a rout.

He could see again the Emperor, riding down, sword in hand, into the
midst of the fugitives crossing the bridge, and, amid a storm of
bullets, ordering and beseeching and imploring the men to rally.  He
had been there on that mad March morning.  He would never forget the
sight of that figure, the words the Emperor said.  It reminded him of
the dash of the "little corporal" with the flag on the bridge of Lodi,
of which old Bullet-Stopper had often told him and the other young men
over the camp-fires.

The Fifth-of-the-Line had immortalized itself that day, adding to the
fame it had gained upon a hundred fields, an imperishable crown.
Napoleon saw that the battle was lost, that the whole Austrian army had
blundered upon that first French division and that, unless their steady
advance could be checked, the division itself would be cut to pieces.
Men had grown more precious to the Emperor every hour.  What would he
not have given for those he had spent so recklessly years before?  And
here was a whole division about to be annihilated, to say nothing of
the cavalry, which had performed prodigies of valor.

"What regiment is that?" he had asked Marteau, who was riding at his
heels in the midst of the fugitives, and doing his best to second the
Emperor's frantic efforts to restore order and bring the men to a stand.

"The Fifth-of-the-Line, Sire."

"Your old regiment?"

"The same, Sire."

"It still stands."

"And it will stand."

"Good!  Go to it.  Tell them that I, the Emperor, devote them to death,
for me and for the army.  They must hold the Austrians in check and
cover the retreat."

"Farewell, Sire," the young soldier had said, saluting.

"What mean you?"

"I shall not come back with the remainder."

"Adieu," said the Emperor, acknowledging the salute and understanding
all.

How well Marteau remembered that frightful conflict.  The
Fifth-of-the-Line had not waited to be attacked.  It had gone forward.
The Colonel had been shot down.  Officer after officer had fallen.  The
advancing line had wavered, hesitated, halted.  The Eagle-bearer fell.
Eager hands caught the staff.  The Austrian fire was concentrated upon
it.  The color guard was shot to pieces.  The Eagle itself had the tip
of its right wing shot away.  Mortal men could do no more.  The
regiment began to give back.

It was Marteau who sprang to the front, he and young Pierre, who had
attached himself to the officer in a sort of unofficial way.  It was
Marteau who seized the Eagle; it was he who rallied the line.  The new
men formed up like veterans, the old men settled in their places, cool
and ready.  They returned the Austrian fire, they checked the Austrian
advance, they stood ready while the troops behind them ran for their
lives.  Napoleon, whose eye nothing escaped, saw it all.  He even
recognized Marteau carrying the Eagle.

The Fifth-of-the-Line made good that defense until the time came for
the retreat.  Then it retired slowly, fighting every step of the way
down the low hill to the bridge.  The men dropped by scores.  The
Austrians, seeing victory in reach, pressed closer.  A charge at the
last minute by the cuirassiers of the Emperor Francis' guard almost
completed the annihilation of the first battalion of the regiment.  The
survivors sought to form a square, under a withering gun fire, to meet
the uplifted sabers of the heavy cavalry.  There were not enough of
them left.  They were ridden down.  Two hundred and fifty of the four
hundred who went into that fight lay dead on that field.  Of the
