
"There, what did I tell you? Now the house will be burnt to the ground
sure!"

"Lively with that water!" shouted Jack, ignoring him completely. And as
the pails and buckets came up in a stream, he dashed the contents where
they would do the most good.

It was perilous work, for the smoke rolled all around him, and more than
once he was in danger of suffocation. But the water now did much good,
and soon the flames began to go down.

"Hurrah! we have the fire under control!" shouted Larry.

It was true, and inside of quarter of an hour the last spark was put
out. Then Jack crawled to the ground, almost too weak to stand.

"Is it out?" asked Mrs. Ruthven anxiously.

"Yes," answered our hero.

"Oh, I am so glad!" and she caught Jack warmly by the hand. At heart she
was a true woman, and could appreciate what our hero had done for her.

St. John stood by in silence, hardly knowing what to say. At last he
shuffled into the house.

"The water has made an awful mess," he declared, later, to his mother.
"They needn't have drowned out the whole house like this."

"Don't say another word, St. John," answered his mother severely. "I am
thankful the fire is out, even if you are not." And then she turned away
to direct the servants in clearing away the muss that had been made.

The tide of battle had swept off in the direction of Jack's home, and
anxious to know how Marion and his foster mother were faring, our hero
soon after left Mrs. Mary Ruthven's plantation, and with him went Larry
Wilson and three others of the Guard.

From a distance came the constant cracking of rifles and the booming of
cannon.

"Let us take the short cut," suggested Jack, as he pushed across the
fields. "There can be no time to spare."

"It is hard to tell who is winning to-day," returned Larry. "At first I
thought the Yankees were in retreat."

"So did I, Larry. Well, we'll know how matters stand by night."

As they came in sight of our hero's home a Federal battery dashed into
sight, drawn by horses covered with foam. The battery was followed by a
regiment of infantry.

"Colonel Stanton's regiment!" cried Jack.

"They are in retreat!" answered Larry. "Look! our soldiers are coming
down the hill after them like mad!"

"There is Colonel Stanton on horseback," went on Jack, straining his
eyes. "What a fine figure he cuts!"

"Ba, Jack! how can you say that of a Yankee? I have half a mind to shoot
him."

As Larry spoke he raised his gun, but Jack pulled it down.

"Don't, Larry!"

"Why not? We are at war, and he is our enemy."

"I know, but----"

"But what? Are you too tender-hearted to be a real soldier?"

"It isn't that, Larry. Colonel Stanton is such a fine man----"

"Those Yankees killed Colonel Ruthven, don't forget that," went on Larry
earnestly. "We ought to bring down every one of them--if we can."

"Perhaps, but I would like to see Colonel Stanton spared--I cannot tell
why."

On swept the soldiers, and for the moment the Federals were hidden by
the smoke of gun fire. Then, as they reappeared, Jack set up a cry, half
of alarm.

"What is it?" queried Larry.

"Colonel Stanton is shot!"

"Shot? You are sure?"

"Yes. See, he has fallen over the neck of his horse and several soldiers
are running toward him. How sad! I wonder if he is dead?"

"If he is, it but serves him right, Jack."

"Perhaps; but I hope he isn't dead," answered Jack, with a peculiar look
in his anxious face. As the Federal colonel disappeared from view he
gave something of a groan, he could not tell why.




CHAPTER XXII.

AFTER THE BATTLE.


The Federal battery had gained a hill behind the Ruthven plantation, and
from this point began to fire rapidly at the advancing Confederates.

Shot and shell sped over the homestead, and the inmates were,
consequently, much alarmed.

"We will do well if we escape this murderous fire," said Mrs. Alice
Ruthven to Marion.

"I wish Jack was here," answered the girl. "Where can he be keeping
himself?"

"He remained behind to protect the property in town."

The tide of battle grew fiercer, and presently, just as Marion had gone
to the kitchen to get something for the invalid soldiers, a heavy shot
passed through the sitting room of the house, tearing down the plaster
of two walls and damaging much of the furniture.

Of course all in the mansion were much alarmed. The negroes, especially,
were panic-stricken, and ran forth in all directions.

"We is gwine ter be murdered," shrieked one. "Da is gwine ter shoot us
all ter pieces!"

"Marion, are you hurt?" came from Mrs. Ruthven, who was in the front
hallway at the time.

"No, mother. Were you hit?"

"No, Marion."

"Where did the shot strike?"

"Through the sitting room, I believe."

Both ran to investigate, and in the sitting room a sight met their gaze
calculated to stun the stoutest heart.

Plaster and splinters lay in all directions, and the wounded soldiers
were crying for aid and for mercy, thinking the enemy close at hand.

Under a mass of wreckage on the floor lay George Walden, senseless, and
with the blood flowing from a wound in his temple.

"Oh, Mr. Walden is hurt, mamma!" shrieked Marion, and ran to raise him
up.

They carried the wounded soldier to another part of the house and laid
him on a fresh cot. Then, while Marion cared for him, Mrs. Ruthven went
back to aid the others. In the meantime Old Ben was instructed to hoist
the hospital flag to a higher point on the mansion.

The shot appeared to be about the last fired in that vicinity, and soon
the shooting came from a distance, as Federals and Confederates withdrew
in the direction of the mountains.

"Mother! Marion! are you safe?" It was the cry from Jack as he came up,
almost out of breath from running.

"Yes, thank Heaven, we are safe so far," answered Mrs. Ruthven. "Where
have you been--at the town?"

"No, I was over to St. John's place," answered our hero, and in a few
words told about the fire.

"We, too, have suffered," said Mrs. Ruthven. "A solid shot passed
through the sitting room."

"Did it hurt anybody?"

"One of the wounded soldiers was knocked senseless. The others were more
frightened than hurt."

"It has been a hot fight all around. And, oh, mother! what do you think?
I saw Colonel Stanton shot down!"

"Is that true, Jack?"

"Yes, I saw the whole thing as plain as day. It's too bad. He was such a
nice gentleman, even if he was a Yankee."

"You are right. Jack; he was indeed a gentleman. I felt perfectly safe
while he was in the vicinity."

It was not long before Jack went upstairs to see how Marion was faring.
He found his sister working over George Walden, trying to restore the
hurt soldier to his senses.

"He is pretty badly off," said Marion. "I wish we had a doctor."

"Where is that surgeon who was here?"

"Gone to the battlefield."

"I don't know of any doctor to get just now, Marion."

"Then we must do the best we can ourselves. And by the way, Jack, this
soldier knows Dr. Mackey."

"What?"

"Yes, and he said that Dr. Mackey is more or less of a fraud, and never
was married."

"Oh, Marion! if he could only prove that."

"He thinks he can. He told me that the doctor came from Philadelphia,
and Cousin Harry told me the same thing."

"We must follow up this man's record. I am now certain he is not my
father."

"The soldier thought that perhaps there was property coming to you, and
that Dr. Mackey wanted to get hold of it."

"I don't think he'd be above such a scheme, Marion. I never liked his
looks from the first time I met him, at the bridge."

"I know that, Jack."

There was no time to say more, for there was too much to do. Marion
continued her work around the sick rooms, and Jack went out to see how
matters were faring at the stable and the barns.

He had hardly gained the vicinity of the stable when he heard a
commotion going on within. Old Ben and two of the Home Guard boys were
having a fight with three guerrillas, who were bent upon stealing
several horses.

"Let go dem hosses!" Jack heard Old Ben cry. "Dem is private prop'ty;
don't yo' know dat?"

"Git out o' the way, nigger!" cried the leader of the guerrillas. "We
want these hosses, an' we are bound to have 'em!"

"If you touch the horses I'll fire at you!" came from one of the Home
Guard boys, but scarcely had he spoken when one of the guerrillas raised
his pistol and fired on the lad, wounding him in the shoulder.

This cowardly action made Jack's blood boil, and not stopping to think
twice, he raised the gun he carried and blazed away. His aim took the
guerrilla in the breast, and he sank down seriously, though not
mortally, wounded.

A yell went up from the other guerrillas, and they fired at random, but
did no damage to anybody but Old Ben, who was shot through the left
shoulder. Then the other boys fired, and the guerrillas who could do so
took to their heels.

"Ben, are you badly hurt?" asked Jack, when the encounter was over.

"Not wery, Massah Jack," answered the faithful old colored man, and went
to the house to bind up his wound.

In the meantime the guerrilla who had been shot lay on the floor, raving
and cursing in a frightful manner.

"Stop your swearing, or we'll do nothing for you," said Jack sharply,
and then the fellow became more reasonable. He begged to have a doctor
care for his wounds.

"We have no doctor here, but we'll care for you as best we can," said
our hero, and this was done, although the guerrilla was kept at the
stable, on a bed of straw.

At nightfall the fighting came to an end, and all became quiet around
the plantation. It had been more or less of a drawn battle, and it was
expected that the contest would be renewed at daybreak.

"Are you going to bed, Jack?" asked Mrs. Ruthven, a little after ten
o'clock.

"No, mother; I think it best that I remain on guard," he answered. "Some
of those guerrillas may come back, you know."

"But you must be tired out."

"I am; but I reckon I can stay up during the night without falling
asleep at my post," he said, smiling faintly.

"Do as you think best, Jack; you and Marion must be my mainstays now,"
and she kissed him affectionately.

Hour after hour of the night wore along and nothing of moment happened.
Jack spent the most of the time around the house, but toward daybreak
made the rounds of the stable and barns.

He found the guerrilla groaning dismally.

"Give me sum terbacker, will yer?" asked the man presently.

Not wishing to appear too unkind, Jack procured a twist of tobacco for
him, which he began to chew savagely.

"I'm in a putty bad fix, I reckon," said the guerrilla, after chewing in
silence for several minutes.

"If you are, you have only yourself to thank for it," returned Jack
coldly.

"Oh, I aint complainin', sonny. It's the fortunes o' war--as them poets
call it, I reckon."

"You might be in better business than stealing horses."

"So I might, sonny--an' then agin' I might do wuss--yes, a heap wuss. I
was gwine ter turn them hosses over to the Confed'rate government--they
need hoss-flesh."

"You were going to do nothing of the kind. You are not a soldier, you
are a common thief."

"Now, don't be hard on me, sonny. I fit on the right side, I did,"
drawled the guerrilla anxiously.

"You fought only for your own good."

"Taint so, sonny; I fit fer the glorious Stars an' Bars. Wot are ye
calkerlatin' ter do with me, sonny?"

"I don't know yet. I reckon you'll stay where you are for the present."

"That's so too--I can't move nohow. Hullo, who's thet?"

At this question Jack turned suddenly--to find himself confronted by Dr.
Mackey and two soldiers in Confederate uniform!




CHAPTER XXIII.

DR. MACKEY'S BOLD MOVE.


It must be confessed that Jack was startled, for he had not heard the
approach of the surgeon and his companions, who had come up noiselessly
and on foot.

"Hullo, you here?" asked Dr. Mackey, as he gazed at Jack in some
astonishment.

"What brings you here, Dr. Mackey?" demanded our hero.

"I am looking for the dead or wounded in this neighborhood," was the
answer. "Whom have you here?"

"A guerrilla we shot down."

"Ha! who shot him?"

"I did. He was trying to steal our horses."

"Dr. Mackey, don't you know me?" came from the guerrilla.

"Pete Gendron!" muttered the surgeon. "I never expected to see you
here."

"Nor did I calkerlate to see you, doc. But I'm mighty glad yer come. Ye
kin git me out o' this fix."

As he spoke, the guerrilla eyed Dr. Mackey sharply. On more than one
occasion he had been the doctor's tool, and now he thought it no more
than fair that the medical man should stand by him.

"Evidently you know this guerrilla," said Jack slowly.

"I do," answered the doctor slowly. He hardly knew how to proceed.

"I aint no guerrilla, an' Dr. Mackey kin prove it," cried Pete Gendron.
The coming of the medical man had raised his spirits wonderfully.

"You are a guerrilla."

"I aint. Dr. Mackey will prove my words. He's a friend o' mine. Aint ye,
doc?"

There was a peculiar emphasis to the guerrilla's words which made the
surgeon shift uneasily from one foot to the other.

"If I don't humor Gendron, he may expose me," thought the surgeon
dismally. "He knows too much to be made an enemy of."

"Is he your friend?" asked Jack.

"Not exactly my friend, Jack, but I know him pretty well," answered Dr.
Mackey slowly, as if trying to feel his way.

"I aint a guerrilla, am I?" put in Pete Gendron eagerly.

"N--no, he is not a--a guerrilla," stammered the surgeon. "There must be
some mistake."

"I want to be taken to the Confed'rate hospital," went on Pete Gendron.

"But he and his comrades were trying to steal our horses," said Jack
firmly.

"As I said before, my dear Jack, there must be some mistake," returned
the surgeon smoothly. Suddenly his face brightened. "Gendron, you made a
mistake by leaving the hospital so soon. Your fighting in to-day's
battle must have made you light-headed. You probably came here by
mistake."
