
"Oh," cried Corny, as soon as she saw me. "We have something to talk to
you about! Let's go and sit down. I wish there was some kind of an
umbrella or straw hat that people could wear under their chins to keep
the glare of these white roads out of their eyes. Let's go up into the
silk-cotton tree."

I proposed that I should go to my room and clean up a little first, but
Corny couldn't wait. As her father had said, she wasn't good at waiting;
and so we all went up into the silk-cotton tree. This was an enormous
tree, with roots like the partitions between horse-stalls; it stood at
the bottom of the hotel grounds, and had a large platform built up among
the branches, with a flight of steps leading to it. There were seats up
here, and room enough for a dozen people.

"Well," said I, when we were seated, "what have you to tell? Anything
wonderful? If it isn't, you'd better let me tell you about my fish."

"Fish!" exclaimed Rectus, not very respectfully.

"Fish, indeed!" said Corny. "_We_ have seen a _queen_!"

"Queen of what?" said I.

"Queen of Africa," replied Corny. "At least a part of it,--she would be,
I mean, if she had stayed there. We went over that way, out to the very
edge of the town, and there we found a whole colony of real native
Africans,--just the kind Livingstone and Stanley discovered,--only they
wear clothes like us."

"Oh, my!" exclaimed Rectus.

"I don't mean exactly that," said Corny; "but coats and trousers and
frocks, awfully old and patched. And nearly all the grown-up people
there were born in Africa, and rescued by an English man-of-war from a
slave-ship that was taking them into slavery, and were brought here and
set free. And here they are, and they talk their own language,--only
some of them know English, for they've been here over thirty years,--and
they all keep together, and have a governor of their own, with a
flag-pole before his house, and among them is a real queen, of royal
blood!"

"How did you find out that?" I asked.

"Oh, we heard about the African settlement this morning, at the hotel,
and we went down there, right after dinner. We went into two or three of
the houses and talked to the people, and they all told us the same
thing, and one woman took us to see the queen."

"In her palace?" said I.

"No," said Corny, "she don't live in a palace. She lives in one of the
funniest little huts you ever saw, with only two rooms. And it's too
bad; they all know she's a queen, and yet they don't pay her one bit of
honor. The African governor knows it, but he lives in his house with his
flag-pole in front of it, and rules her people, while she sits on a
stone in front of her door and sells red peppers and bits of
sugar-cane."

"Shameful!" said I; "you don't mean that?"

"Yes, she does," put in Rectus. "We saw her, and bought some sugar-cane.
She didn't think we knew her rank, for she put her things away when the
women told her, in African, why we came to see her."

"What did she say to you?" I asked, beginning to be a good deal
interested in this royal colored person.

"Nothing at all," said Corny; "she can't talk a word of English. If she
could, she might get along better. I suppose her people want somebody
over them who can talk English. And so they've just left her to sell
peppers, and get along as well as she can."

"It's a good deal of a come-down, I must say," said I. "I wonder how she
likes it?"

"Judging from her looks," said Rectus, "I don't believe she likes it at
all."

"No, indeed!" added Corny. "She looks woe-begone, and I don't see why
she shouldn't. To be taken captive with her people--may be she was
trying to save them--and then to have them almost cut her acquaintance
after they all get rescued and settled down!"

"Perhaps," said I, "as they are all living under Queen Victoria, they
don't want any other queen."

"That's nothing," said Corny, quickly. "There's a governor of this whole
island, and what do they want with another governor? If Queen Victoria
and the governor of this island were Africans, of course they wouldn't
want anybody else. But as it is, they do, don't you see?"

"They don't appear to want another queen," I said, "for they wont take
one that is right under their noses."

Corny looked provoked, and Rectus asked me how I knew that.

"I tell you," said Corny, "it don't make any difference whether they
want her or not, they haven't any right to make a born queen sit on a
stone and sell red-peppers. Do you know what Rectus and I have made up
our minds to do?"

"What is it?" I asked.

Corny looked around to see that no one was standing or walking near the
tree, and then she leaned toward me and said:

"We are going to seat her on her throne!"

"You?" I exclaimed, and began to laugh.

"Yes, we are," said Rectus; "at least, we're going to try to."

"You needn't laugh," said Corny. "You're to join."

"In an insurrection,--a conspiracy," said I. "I can't go into that
business."

"You must!" cried Corny and Rectus, almost in a breath.

"You've made a promise," said Corny.

"And are bound to stick to it," said Rectus, looking at Corny.

Then, both together, as if they had settled it all beforehand, they held
up their gray sea-beans, and said, in vigorous tones:

"Obey the bean!"

I didn't hesitate a moment. I held up my bean, and we clicked beans all
around.

I became a conspirator!




CHAPTER XI.

REGAL PROJECTS.


The next morning, we all went around to see the queen, and on the way we
tried to arrange our affair. I was only sorry that my old school-fellows
were not there, to go into the thing with us. There couldn't have been
better fun for our boys, than to get up a revolution and set up a
dethroned queen. But they were not there, and I determined to act as
their representative as well as I could.

We three--Corny, Rectus and I--were agreed that the re-enthronement--we
could think of no better word for the business--should be done as
quietly and peacefully as possible. It was of no use, we thought, to
make a great fuss about what we were going to do. We would see that this
African ex-sovereigness was placed in a suitable regal station, and then
we would call upon her countrymen to acknowledge her rank.

"It isn't really necessary for her to do any governing," said Rectus.
"Queens do very little of that. Look at Queen Victoria! Her Prime
Minister and Parliament run the country. If the African governor here is
a good man, the queen can take him for a Prime Minister. Then he can
just go along and do what he always did. If she is acknowledged to be
the queen, that's all she need want."

"That's so," said Corny. "And, above all, there must be no blood shed."

"None of yours, any way," said I; and Rectus tapped his bean,
significantly.

Rectus had been chosen captain of this revolutionary coalition, because
Corny, who held the controlling vote, said that she was afraid I had not
gone into the undertaking heart and soul, as Rectus had. Otherwise, she
would have voted for me, as the oldest of the party. I did not make any
objections, and was elected Treasurer. Corny said that the only office
she had ever held was that of Librarian, in a girls' society, but as we
did not expect to need a Librarian in this undertaking, we made her
Secretary and Manager of Restoration, which, we thought, would give her
all the work that she could stand under.

I suggested that there was one sub-officer, or employe, that we should
be sure to need, and who should be appointed before we commenced
operations. This was an emissary. Proper communications between
ourselves and the populace would be difficult, unless we obtained the
service of some intelligent and whole-souled darkey. My
fellow-revolutionists agreed with me, and, after a moment of reflection,
Corny shouted that she had thought of the very person.

"It's a girl!" she cried. "And it's Priscilla!"

We all knew Priscilla. It would have been impossible to be at the hotel
for a week and not know her. After breakfast, and after dinner, there
was always a regular market at the entrance of the hotel, under the
great arched porch, where the boarders sat and made themselves
comfortable after meals. The dealers were negroes of every age,--men,
women, boys, and girls, and they brought everything they could scrape
up, that they thought visitors might buy,--fruit, shells, sponges,
flowers, straw hats, canes, and more traps than I can remember. Some of
them had very nice things, and others would have closed out their stock
for seven cents. The liveliest and brightest of all these was a tall,
slim, black, elastic, smooth-tongued young girl, named Priscilla. She
nearly always wore shoes, which distinguished her from her
fellow-countrywomen. Her eyes sparkled like a fire-cracker of a dark
night, and she had a mind as sharp as a fish-hook. The moment Corny
mentioned her she was elected emissary.

We determined, however, to be very cautious in disclosing our plans to
her. We would sound her, first, and make a regular engagement with her.

"It will be a first-rate thing for me," said Corny, "to have a girl to
go about with me, for mother said, yesterday, that it wouldn't do for me
to be so much with boys. It looked tomboyish, she said, though she
thought you two were very good for boys."

"Are you going to tell your father and mother about this?" asked
Rectus.

"I think I'll tell mother," said Corny, "because I ought to, and I don't
believe she'll object, if I have a girl along with me. But I don't think
I'll say anything to father just yet. I'm afraid he'd join."

Rectus and I agreed that it might be better to postpone saying anything
to Mr. Chipperton.

It was very true that the queen did not live in a palace. Her house was
nearly large enough to hold an old-fashioned four-posted bedstead, such
as they have at my Aunt Sarah's. The little room that was cut off from
the main apartment was really too small to count. The queen was hard at
work, sitting on her door-stone by the side of her bits of sugar-cane
and pepper-pods. There were no customers. She was a good-looking old
body, about sixty, perhaps, but tall and straight enough for all queenly
purposes.

She arose and shook hands with us, and then stepped into her door-way
and courtesied. The effect was very fine.

"This is dreadful!" said Corny. "She ought to give up this pepper-pod
business right away. If I could only talk to her, I'd make her
understand. But I must go get somebody for an interpreter."

And she ran off to one of the neighboring huts.

"If this thing works," said Rectus, "we ought to hire a regular
interpreter."

"It wont do to have too many paid officials," said I, "but we'll see
about that."

Corny soon returned with a pleasant-faced woman, who undertook to
superintend our conversation with the queen.

"What's her name--to begin with?" asked Corny, of the woman.

"Her African name is Poqua-dilla, but here they call her Jane Henderson,
when they talk of her. She knows that name, too. We all has to have
English names."

"Well, we don't want any Jane Henderson," said Corny. "Poqua-dilla!
that's a good name for a queen. But what we first want is to have her
stop selling things at the front door. We'll do better for her than
that."

"Is you goin' to sen' her to the 'sylum?" asked the woman.

"The asylum!" exclaimed Corny. "No, indeed! You'll see. She's to live
here, but she's not to sell pepper-pods, or anything else."

"Well, young missy," said the woman, "you better buy 'em of her. I
reckon she'll sell out for 'bout fourpence."

This was a sensible proposition, and, as treasurer, I bought the stock,
the queen having signified her willingness to the treaty by a dignified
nod and a courtesy. She was very much given to style, which encouraged
us a good deal.

"Now, then," said Rectus, who thought it was about time that the captain
should have something to say, "you must tell her that she isn't to lay
in any more stock. This is to be the end of her mercantile life."

I don't believe the woman translated all of this speech, but the queen
gave another nod and courtesy, and I pocketed the peppers to keep as
trophies. The other things we kept, to give to the children and make
ourselves popular.

"How much do you think it would cost," asked Corny of me, "to make this
place a little more like a palace?"

I made a rough sort of a calculation, and came to the conclusion that
the room could be made a little more like a palace for about eight
dollars.

"That's cheap enough," said Rectus to me. "You and I will each give four
dollars."

"No, indeed!" said Corny. "I'm going to give some. How much is three
into eight?"

"Two and two-thirds," said I, "or, in this case, two dollars, sixty-six
cents and some sixes over."

"All right!" said Corny; "I'll ask father for three dollars. There ought
to be something for extras. I'll tell mother what I want it for, and
