seats, and for halls and bedrooms.  There are all kinds of green
vegetables, especially onions, leeks, garlic, watercresses, nasturtium,
borage, sorel, artichokes, and golden thistle-fruits also of numerous
descriptions, amongst which are cherries and plums, similar to those in
Spain; honey and wax from bees, and from the stalks of maize, which are
as sweet as the sugar-cane; honey is also extracted from the plant
called maguey,[2] which is superior to sweet or new wine; from the same
plant they extract sugar and wine, which they also sell.  Different
kinds of cotton thread {151} of all colors in skeins are exposed for
sale in one quarter of the market, which has the appearance of the silk
market at Granada, although the former is supplied more abundantly.
Painter's colors, as numerous as can be found in Spain, and as fine
shades; deer-skins dressed and undressed, dyed different colors;
earthenware of a large size and excellent quality; large and small
jars, jugs, pots, bricks, and an endless variety of vessels, all made
of fine clay, and all or most of them glazed and painted; maize or
Indian corn, in the grain, and in the form of bread, preferred in the
grain for its flavor to that of the other islands and terra firma;
pates of birds and fish; great quantities of fish, fresh, salt, cooked
and uncooked; the eggs of hens, geese and of all the other birds I have
mentioned, in great abundance, and cakes made of eggs; finally,
everything that can be found throughout the whole country is sold in
the markets, comprising articles so numerous that, to avoid prolixity
and because their names are not retained in my memory, or are unknown
to me, I shall not attempt to enumerate them.  Every kind of
merchandise is sold in a particular street or quarter assigned to it
exclusively, and thus the best order is preserved.  They sell
everything by number or measure; at least, so far we have not observed
them to sell anything by weight.  There is a building in the great
square that is used as an audience house, where ten or twelve persons,
who are magistrates, sit and decide all controversies that arise in the
market, and order delinquents to be punished.  In the same square there
are other persons who go constantly about among the people observing
what is sold, and the measures used in selling; and they have been seen
to break measures that were not true.

{152}

This great city contains a large number of temples[3] or houses for
their idols, very handsome edifices, which are situated in the
different districts and the suburbs; in the principal ones religious
persons of each particular sect are constantly residing, for whose use,
beside the houses containing the idols, there are other convenient
habitations.  All these persons dress in black and never cut or comb
their hair from the time they enter the priesthood until they leave it;
and all the sons of the principal inhabitants, both nobles and
respectable citizens, are placed in the temples and wear the same dress
from the age of seven or eight years until they are taken out to be
married; which occurs more frequently with the firstborn, who inherits
estates, than with the others.  The priests are debarred from female
society, nor is any woman permitted to enter the religious houses.
They also abstain from eating certain kinds of food, more at some
seasons of the year than others.  Among these temples there is one
which far surpasses all the rest, whose grandeur of architectural
details no human tongue is able to describe; for within its precincts,
surrounded by a lofty wall, there is room for a town of five hundred
families.  Around the interior of this enclosure there are handsome
edifices, containing large halls and corridors, in which the religious
persons attached to the temple reside.  There are full forty towers,
which are lofty and well built, the largest of which has fifty steps
leading to its main body, and is higher than the tower of the principal
church at Seville.  The stone and wood of which they are constructed
are so well wrought {153} in every part, that nothing could be better
done, for the interior of the chapels containing the idols consists of
curious imagery, wrought in stone, with plaster ceilings, and woodwork
carved in relief, and painted with figures of monsters and other
objects.  All these towers are the burial places of the nobles, and
every chapel of them is dedicated to a particular idol, to which they
pay their devotions.

There are three halls in this grand temple, which contain the principal
idols; these are of wonderful extent and height, and admirable
workmanship, adorned with figures sculptured in stone and wood; leading
from the halls are chapels with very small doors, to which the light is
not admitted, nor are any persons except the priests, and not all of
them.  In these chapels are the images or idols, although, as I have
before said, many of them are also found on the outside; the principal
ones, in which the people have greatest faith and confidence, I
precipitated from their pedestals, and cast them down the steps of the
temple, purifying the chapels in which they stood, as they were all
polluted with human blood, shed in the sacrifices.  In the place of
these I put images of Our Lady and the Saints, which excited not a
little feeling in Muteczuma and the inhabitants, who at first
remonstrated, declaring that if my proceedings were known throughout
the country, the people would rise against me; for they believed that
their idols bestowed upon them all temporal good, and if they permitted
them to be ill-treated, they would be angry and withhold their gifts,
and by this means the people would be deprived of the fruits of the
earth and die of famine.  I answered, through the interpreters, that
they were deceived in expecting any favors from idols, the work of
their own {154} hands, formed of unclean things; and that they must
learn there was but one God, the universal Lord of all, who had created
the heavens and the earth, and all things else, and had made them and
us; that He was without beginning and immortal, and that they were
bound to adore and believe Him, and no other creature or thing.  I said
everything to them I could to divert them from their idolatries, and
draw them to a knowledge of God our Lord.  Muteczuma replied, the
others assenting to what he said: "That they had already informed me
that they were not the aborigines of the country, but that their
ancestors had emigrated to it many years ago; and they fully believed,
after so long an absence from their native land, they might have fallen
into some errors; that I, having been recently arrived, must know
better than themselves what they ought to believe; and that if I would
instruct them in these matters, and make them understand the true
faith, they would follow my directions, as being for the best."
Afterward Muteczuma and many of the principal citizens remained with me
until I had removed the idols, purified the chapels, and placed images
in them, manifesting apparent pleasure; and I forbade them sacrificing
human beings to their idols, as they had been accustomed to do;
because, besides being abhorrent in the sight of God, your sacred
Majesty had prohibited it by law and commanded to put to death whoever
should take the life of another.  Thus, from that time, they refrained
from the practice, and during the whole period of my abode in that
city, they were never seen to kill or sacrifice a human being.

The figures of the idols in which these people believe surpass in
stature a person of more than the ordinary {155} size; some of them are
composed of a mass of seeds and leguminous plants, such as are used for
food, ground and mixed together, and kneaded with the blood of human
hearts taken from the breasts of living persons, from which a paste is
formed in a sufficient quantity to form large statues.  When these are
completed they make them offerings of the hearts of other victims,
which they sacrifice to them, and besmear their faces with the blood.
For everything they have an idol, consecrated by the use of the nations
that in ancient times honored the same gods.  Thus they have an idol
that they petition for victory in war; another for success in their
labors; and so for everything in which they seek or desire prosperity,
they have their idols, which they honor and serve.

This noble city contains many fine and magnificent houses; which may be
accounted for from the fact that all the nobility of the country, who
are the vassals of Muteczuma, have houses in the city, in which they
reside a certain part of the year; and besides, there are numerous
wealthy citizens who also possess fine houses.  All these persons, in
addition to the large and spacious apartments for ordinary purposes,
have others, both upper and lower, that contain conservatories of
flowers.  Along one of the causeways that lead into the city are laid
two pipes, constructed of masonry, each of which is two paces in width,
and about five feet in height.  An abundant supply of excellent water,
forming a volume equal in bulk to the human body, is conveyed by one of
these pipes, and distributed about the city, where it is used by the
inhabitants for drinking and other purposes.  The other pipe, in the
meantime, is kept empty until the former requires to be cleansed, when
the water is let into it; and continues to be used {156} until the
cleansing is finished.  As the water is necessarily carried over
bridges on account of the salt water crossing its route, reservoirs
resembling canals are constructed on the bridges, through which the
fresh water is conveyed.  These reservoirs are of the breadth of the
body of an ox, and of the same length as the bridges.  The whole city
is thus served with water, which they carry in canoes through all the
streets for sale, taking it from the aqueduct in the following manner:
the canoes pass under the bridges on which the reservoirs are placed,
when men stationed above fill them with water, for which service they
are paid.  At all the entrances of the city, and in those parts where
the canoes are discharged, that is, where the greatest quantity of
provisions is brought in, huts are erected and persons stationed as
guards, who receive a _certum quid_ for everything that enters.  I know
not whether the sovereign receives this duty or the city, as I have not
yet been informed; but I believe that it appertains to the sovereign,
as in the markets of other provinces a tax is collected for the benefit
of their cacique.  In all the markets and public places of this city
are seen daily many laborers and persons of various employments waiting
for some one to hire them.  The inhabitants of this city pay a greater
regard to style in their mode of living, and are more attentive to
elegance of dress and politeness of manners, than those of the other
provinces and cities; since as the Cacique[4] Muteczuma has his
residence in the capital, and all {157} the nobility, his vassals, are
in the constant habit of meeting there, a general courtesy of demeanour
necessarily prevails.  But not to be prolix in describing what relates
to the affairs of this great city, although it is with difficulty that
I refrain from proceeding.  I will say no more than that the manners of
the people, as shown in their intercourse with one another, are marked
by as great an attention to the proprieties of life as in Spain, and
good order is equally well observed; and considering that they are a
barbarous people, without the knowledge of God, having no intercourse
with civilized nations, these traits of character are worthy of
admiration.

In regard to the domestic appointments of Muteczuma, and the wonderful
grandeur and state he maintains, there is so much to be told, that I
assure your Majesty I do not know where to begin my relation, so as to
be able to finish any part of it.  For, as I have already stated, what
can be more wonderful, than that a barbarous monarch, as he is, should
have every object found in his dominions, imitated in gold, silver,
precious stones and feathers?--the gold and silver being wrought so
naturally as not to be surpassed by any smith in the world; the stone
work executed with such perfection that is it difficult to conceive
what instruments could have been used; and the feather work superior to
the finest productions in wax and embroidery.  The extent of
Muteczuma's dominions has not been ascertained, since to whatever point
he despatched his messengers, even two hundred leagues from his
capital, his commands were obeyed, although some of his provinces were
in the midst of countries with which he was at war.  But as nearly as I
have been able to learn, his territories are equal in extent {158} to
Spain itself, for he sent messengers to the inhabitants of a city
called Cumatan (requiring them to become subjects of Your Majesty),
which is sixty leagues beyond that part of Putunchan watered by the
river Grijalva, and two hundred and thirty leagues distant from the
great city; and I sent some of our people a distance of one hundred and
fifty leagues in the same direction.  All the principal chiefs of these
provinces, especially those in the vicinity of the capital, reside, as
I have already stated, the greater part of the year in that great city,
and all or most of them have their oldest sons in the service of
Muteczuma.  There are fortified places in all the provinces, garrisoned
with his own men, where are also stationed his governors and collectors
of the rent and tribute, rendered him by every province; and an account
is kept of what each is obliged to pay, as they have characters and
figures made on paper that are used for this purpose.  Each province
renders a tribute of its own particular productions, so that the
sovereign receives a great variety of articles from different quarters.
No prince was ever more feared by his subjects, both in his presence
and absence.  He possessed out of the city as well as within, numerous
villas, each of which had its peculiar sources of amusement, and all
were constructed in the best possible manner for the use of a great
prince and lord.  Within the city his palaces were so wonderful that it
is hardly possible to describe their beauty and extent; I can only say
that in Spain there is nothing to equal them.

There was one palace somewhat inferior to the rest, attached to which
was a beautiful garden with balconies extending over it, supported by
marble columns, and having a floor formed of jasper elegantly {159}
laid.  There were apartments in this palace sufficient to lodge two
princes of the highest rank with their retinues.  There were likewise
belonging to it ten pools of water, in which were kept the different
species of water birds found in this country, of which there is a great
variety, all of which are domesticated; for the sea birds there were
pools of salt water, and for the river birds, of fresh water.  The
water is let off at certain times to keep it pure, and is replenished
by means of pipes.  Each species of bird is supplied with the food
natural to it, which it feeds upon when wild.  Thus fish is given to
birds that usually eat it; worms, maize and the finer seeds, to such as
prefer them.  And I assure Your Highness, that to the birds accustomed
to eat fish, there is given the enormous quantity of ten arrobas[5]
every day, taken in the salt lake.  The emperor has three hundred men
whose sole employment is to take care of these birds; and there are
others whose only business is to attend to the birds that are in bad
health.

Over the pools for the birds there are corridors and galleries to which
Muteczuma resorts, and from which he can look out and amuse himself
with the sight of them.  There is an apartment in the same palace, in
which are men, women, and children, whose faces, bodies, hair,
eyebrows, and eyelashes are white from birth.  The cacique has another
very beautiful palace, with a large courtyard, paved with handsome
flags, in the style of a chess-board.  There were also cages, about
nine feet in height and six paces square, each of which was half
covered with a roof of tiles, and the other half had over it a wooden
grate, skilfully made.  Every cage contains a bird of prey, of all the
species {160} found in Spain, from the kestrel to the eagle, and many
unknown there.  There were a great number of each kind, and in the
covered part of the cages there was a perch, and another on the outside
of the grating, the former of which the birds used in the night-time,
and when it rained; and the other enabled them to enjoy the sun and
air.  To all these birds fowl were daily given for food, and nothing
else.  There were in the same palace several large halls on the ground
floor, filled with immense cages built of heavy pieces of timber, well
put together, in all or most of which were kept lions, tigers, wolves,
foxes and a variety of animals of the cat tribe, in great numbers,
which were also fed on fowls.  The care of these animals and birds was
assigned to three hundred men.  There was another palace that contained
a number of men and women of monstrous size, and also dwarfs, and
crooked and ill-formed persons, each of which had their separate
apartments.  These also had their respective keepers.  As to the other
remarkable things that the ruler had in his city for amusement, I can
only say that they were numerous and of various kinds.

He was served in the following manner.  Every day as soon as it was
light, six hundred nobles and men of rank were in attendance at the
palace, who either sat or walked about the halls and galleries, and
passed their time in conversation, but without entering the apartment
where his person was.  The servants and attendants of these nobles
remained in the courtyards, of which there were two or three of great
extent, and in the adjoining street, which was also spacious.  They all
remained in attendance from morning until night; and when his meals
were served, the nobles were likewise served with equal profusion, and
their {161} servants and secretaries also had their allowance.  Daily
his larder and wine-cellar were open to all who wished to eat and
drink.  The meals were served by three or four hundred youths, who
brought on an infinite variety of dishes; indeed, whenever he dined or
supped the table was loaded with every kind of flesh, fish, fruit, and
vegetables that the country provided.  As the climate is cold, they put
a chafing-dish with live coals under every plate and dish to keep them
warm.  The meals were served in a large hall where Muteczuma was
accustomed to eat, and the dishes quite filled the room, which was
covered with mats and kept very clean.  He sat on small cushions
curiously wrought in leather.  During the meals there were present, at
a little distance from him, five or six elderly caciques, to whom he
presented some of the food.  And there was constantly in attendance one
of the servants, who arranged and handed the dishes, and who received
from others whatever was wanted for the supply of the table.  Both at
the beginning and end of every meal, they furnished water for the
hands, and the napkins used on these occasions were never used a second
time; this was the case also with the plates and dishes, which were not
brought again, but new ones in place of them; it was also the same with
the chafing-dishes.  He is also dressed every day in four different
suits, entirely new, which he never wears a second time.  None of the
caciques ever enter his palace with their feet covered, and when those
for whom he sends enter his presence, they incline their heads and look
down, bending their bodies; and when they address him they do not look
in his face; this arises from excessive modesty and reverence.
Whenever Muteczuma appeared in public, which was seldom the case, all
those who {162} accompanied him or whom he accidentally met in the
streets, turned away without looking toward him, and others prostrated
themselves until he passed.  One of the nobles always preceded him on
these occasions, carrying three slender rods erect, which I suppose was
to give notice of the approach of his person.  And when they descended
from the litters, he took one of them in his hands, and held it until
he reached the places where he was going.  So many and various were the
ceremonies and customs observed by those in the service of Muteczuma,
that more space than I can spare would be required for the details, as
well as a better memory than I have to recollect them; since no sultan
or other infidel lord, of whom any knowledge now exists, ever had so
much ceremonial in their courts.


VII. The Meeting with Montezuma

It was early in the morning of November the 8th, 1519, when Cortes, at
the head of his little army, rode over one of the long causeways and
into the city to his first meeting with Montezuma.  As no one can tell
better than he what happened, I here insert his own account of the
episode:

"The next day after my arrival at this city, I departed on my route,
and having proceeded half a league, I entered upon a causeway that
extends two leagues through the centre of the salt lake, until it
reaches the great city of Temixtitan (Mexico), which is built in the
middle of the lake. . . .

"I pursued my course over the above-mentioned causeway, and having
proceeded half a league before arriving at the body of the city of
Temixtitan, I found {163} at its intersection with another causeway,
which extends from this point to terra firma, a very strong fortress
with two towers, surrounded by a double wall, twelve feet in height,
with an embattled parapet, which commands the two causeways, and has
only two gates, one for the entering and the other for departure.
There came to meet me at this place nearly a thousand of the principal
inhabitants of the great city, all uniformly dressed according to their
custom in very rich costumes; and as soon as they had come within
