minute before used, haled him off to gaol till the last farthing should
be paid.

He was bad enough; but the wolf in Aesop's fable was still worse.  The
poor lamb there owed nothing; it only chanced to be drinking of the same
stream.

"What do you mean by polluting my water?" growls the wolf.

"I am drinking lower down than you," replies the innocent, "and so that
cannot be."

"Never mind, you called me names a year ago."

"Please, sir, a year ago I wasn't born."

"Well, then, it was your father, and it's all the same thing; and,
what's more, you need not think I'm going to be done out of my breakfast
by your talk--so here goes!"  And we all know what became of the poor
lamb.  A gentleman cannot be a bully, and a bully cannot be a gentleman.
By gentleman I mean not the vulgar use of the word.  The rich snob who
keeps his carriages, and counts his income with five or six figures, and
considers that sufficient title to the name, may be, and often is, a
bully.  His servants may lead the lives of dogs, his tradesmen dread the
sound of his voice, and his dependants shake in their shoes before him.
But a gentleman--a man (or boy) of honour, kindliness, modesty, and
sense--could no more be a bully than black could be white.

Bullying is essentially vulgar, and stamps the person who indulges in it
as ill-conditioned and stupid.  He tries to pass off his lack of brains
with bluster, and to make up by tyranny for the contempt which his ill-
bred manners would naturally secure for him.  But he deceives nobody but
himself.  The youngsters tremble before him; but they despise him; in a
year or two they will laugh at him, and after that--thrash him.

Yes; I am sorry to counsel that physic for anybody, but really it is the
only one which can possibly cure the bully.  The time must come when the
little boy will find himself grown up and possessed of a muscle, and
then the bully will find, to his astonishment, that he has tried his art
once too often.

So it was with Bob Bangs.  He found himself on his back one day with a
small army of youngsters executing a war dance round him.  He got
roughly used, poor fellow, and at last changed his tune from threats to
whines, and eventually, with the aid of a few parting kicks, was
permitted to depart in peace.  And he never tried on bullying with us
again, except indeed when he was fortunate enough to get hold of one of
us singly in a lonely comer.  And even then he generally heard of it
afterwards.

But, boys, mind this.  There's nothing more likely than that in your
struggle for independence you will, if victorious, be tempted to become
bullies yourselves.  In your anxiety to "pay out" your old enemy, you
may forget that you are yourselves falling into the very transgression
for which you have chastised him.  That would be sad indeed.  A boy that
can bear malice, and refuse quarter to a fallen foe, is very little
different from a bully himself.

Rather be careful to show yourselves Christians and gentlemen, even in
the way you rid yourselves of bullies.  It is one thing, in self-
defence, to right yourself, and it is another to return evil for evil.
The best revenge you can have is, instead of dancing on his prostrate
body, to set him an example of forbearance and self-control in your own
conduct, which shall point him out a surer road to respect and authority
than all the bullying in the world could ever give him.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

WILLIAM THE ATHELING; OR, THE WRECK OF THE "WHITE SHIP."

The eager crowd thronged the little Norman seaport of Barfleur.  Knights
in armour, gay ladies and merry children mingled in the narrow streets
which led down to the bustling harbour, in which lay at anchor a gay
fleet of ships, decked with pennons and all the marks of festivity and
rejoicing.  One man's name was on every lip, and in expectation of that
man's arrival this brave company lined the seashore and its approaches.
Presently was heard a distant trumpet note, and then a clatter of many
horses.

"He comes!" shouted the crowd.  "Long live our Duke Henry!"  And at the
shout there appeared the royal troop, with King Henry of England at its
head, followed by his sons and daughter and nobles, amid the plaudits of
the loyal crowd.

"All bids fair," said the king to one who was near him, as he rode
slowly towards the harbour; "the sea is calm and the wind is propitious;
an emblem of the happy peace we have concluded with France, and the
prosperous years that he before us."

"Long live Henry of England!" shouted the crowd again.  With that the
troop reached the sunny harbour.

Here ensued all the bustle and confusion of an embarkation.  Baggage and
horses and armour were transferred speedily from the shore to shipboard.
Henry himself inspected the vessel which was to convey him and his
household across the sea, while the loyal Norman crowd pressed round,
eager to bid their liege good speed on his voyage.

The afternoon was advancing, and the order had already been given to
embark, when, through the crowd which thronged King Henry, there
struggled forward a man dressed in sailor guise, who advanced and fell
on one knee before his sovereign.

"My liege," said he, "a boon for me!"

"Who art thou?" inquired the king.

"My lord duke, Stephen, my father, served thy father, William of
Normandy, all his life.  He it was who steered the vessel which carried
the duke to the conquest of England.  Permit me, my lord, a like honour.
See where my `White Ship' waits to receive her captain's noble
sovereign."

Henry looked in the direction pointed, and saw the gallant vessel,
gleaming like silver with its white poop and oars and sails in the sun;
surely as fair a ship as ever crossed the sea.

"Brave son of a brave father," replied the king, "but that my word has
been given, and my baggage is already embarked on another's vessel, thy
request should not have been in vain.  But, to show that I hold thy
father's son worthy of his name, see, I entrust to thee my son William,
heir to my throne, in all confidence that thou wilt conduct him safely
over.  Let him go with thee, while I myself do set sail in the vessel I
had chosen."

Fitz-Stephen bowed low, and the young Prince William, a lad of eighteen
years, stepped forward gaily towards him, and cried--

"Come, comrade! thou shalt find a king's son as good company as his
father.  In token of which, bid thy brave men feast at my charge with as
much to eat and drink as they have a fancy to.  Then, when that is done,
we will start on our merry voyage."

Almost immediately afterwards King Henry embarked, leaving the Prince
William, and two other of his children, Richard and Adela, to follow
that same night in the "White Ship."

"Farewell, my father!" shouted the young prince, as the oars of the
king's vessel struck the water; "perchance I shall be on the farther
side before thee!"

So the king started.

It was late before the merrymakers on board the "White Ship" set their
faces seaward.  The prince himself had honoured the feast, and bidden
every man to fill his cup and drink deep and long.  So when about
midnight they addressed themselves to the voyage, the rowers splashed
wildly with their oars, and the crew pulled at the ropes with unsteady
hands.

Far across the calm waters might have been heard the song and the
laughter of the two hundred voyagers.  In a few hours, thought they, we
shall be across, and then will we renew our feast in England.

"Fitz-Stephen!" cried the prince, flushed with wine himself, and in a
tone of excitement--"Fitz-Stephen, how far say you is my father's ship
before ours?"

"Five leagues," replied the sailor, "or more."

"Then may we not overtake him before the night is past?  You know this
coast; can we not steer closer in, and so gain on them?"

"My lord," said Fitz-Stephen, "there are many sunken rocks on this
coast, which the mariner always avoids by keeping out to sea."

"Talk not to me of rocks on a night when the sea is calm and the wind so
gentle it scarce fills the sails, and the moon so clear we can see a
mile before us!  What say you, my men?  Shall we overtake the king?
Fitz-Stephen," he added, "thou earnest a king's son to-night.  If thou
and thy men can set me on English ground before my father, I will never
sail more, as long as I live, save in thy ship."

The sailor yielded, and turned his helm nearer to the coast, and the
crew, clamouring loudly with excitement, pulled wildly at the oars,
while the prince and the nobles, with song and laughter, made the quiet
night to resound.  So they went for two hours.  Then the prince's sister
Adela, Countess of Perche, stepped up to him timidly, and said--

"My brother, what sound is that, like the roar of distant thunder?"

"It is nothing, my sister; go down again and sleep."

"It sounds like the breaking of wares on the rocks."

"How can that be, when the sea is scarcely ruffled?"

"I fear me we run a risk, sailing so close to shore," said the maiden.
"I myself heard Fitz-Stephen say that the currents ran strong along this
coast of Normandy."

"Be easy, sister; no danger can befall a night like this."

Louder and louder rose the shouting and the revelry.  The rowers sang as
they rowed.  And the knights and nobles, who made merry always when the
prince made merry, sang too.

But all the while the maiden, as she lay, heard the roar of the breakers
sound nearer and nearer, and was ill at ease, fearing some evil.

"Now, my merry men," shouted the prince, "row hard, for the night is
getting on!"

Fitz-Stephen at that instant uttered an exclamation of horror, and
wildly flung round his helm.  There was a sudden roar ahead, and a gleam
of long lines of broken water.

"Pull for your lives!" shouted the captain, "or we shall be on the Ras
de Catte!"

It was too late.  The treacherous current swept them on to the reef.
There was a sudden tossing of the "White Ship," then a great shock as
she struck--then a cry of terror from two hundred lips.

King Henry in his vessel, three leagues away, heard that sudden awful
cry across the still waters.  But little guessed he that it was the
death cry of his own beloved children.

Every man on board the "White Ship" was startled by that shock into
instant sobriety.  The brave Fitz-Stephen left the now useless helm, and
rushed to where the prince, entrusted to his care, was clinging to the
mast of the fast-filling vessel.  With his own hand he cut loose the
small boat which she carried, and by sheer force placed William in it,
and a few of the crew.

"Row for the shore!" he shouted to the men, waving his hand; "lose not
a moment!"

William, stupefied and bewildered, sat motionless and speechless.

The men had already dipped their oars, and the frail boat was already
clear of the sinking vessel, when there fell on the prince's ear the
piercing shriek of a girl.

Looking behind him, he saw his poor sister clinging to the deck of the
doomed ship, and stretching a hand appealingly in the direction of his
boat.

In an instant his senses returned to him.

"Put back, men!" he cried, frantically.

"It is certain death!" cried one of the crew.

"Must William the Atheling order a thing twice?" thundered the prince,
in a tone so terrible, that the men immediately turned and made for the
wreck.

"My sister!" shouted William, as they came under the spot where Adela
clung; "throw yourself into my arms!"

She did so; but, alas! at the same moment, fifty more, in the
desperation of terror, jumped too, and the little boat, with all that
were in her, turned over, and was seen no more.

Then the waters poured over the "White Ship," and with a great plunge
that gallant vessel went down.

With her went down all the souls she carried save three.  One of these
was the brave Fitz-Stephen.  Rising to the surface, he saw the two
others clinging to a spar.  Eagerly he swam towards them.

"Is the prince saved?" he asked.

"We have seen nothing of him," replied they.

"Then woe is me!" exclaimed he, as he turned in the water and sank
beneath it.

Of the other two, one only, a butcher, survived to carry the dreadful
news to England.

For many days, Henry, impatient for his son's arrival, waited in
ignorance of his sad fate.

Then went to him a little child, who, instructed what to say, told him
in his own artless way the whole story; and King Henry the First, so
they say, after he had heard it, was never seen to smile again.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

JOHN PLANTAGENET, THE BOY WHO BROKE HIS FATHER'S HEART.

A youth was pacing restlessly to and fro in a wood bordering on the old
town of Tours, in France.  He was scarcely twenty years of age, and of a
forbidding countenance.  Cruelty and cunning were stamped on his
features, and as he strode aimlessly among the trees, muttering to
himself, and striking often with his sheathed sword at the bushes and
twigs in his path, he seemed to be the victim of an evil passion, with
nothing to make a man love him or desire his acquaintance.

His muttering not unfrequently rose to the pitch of talking aloud, when
one might have heard sentences like these.

"Why should I longer delay?  Am not I John, the son of Henry of England,
a man? and shall I submit to be treated for ever as a child?  Are my
brothers, who have rebelled against their father, to have ah the spoil,
and I, who have remained obedient, to go portionless and penniless?
What means my father's meeting here with the King of France, who has
espoused the cause of Richard, my brother, in his rebellion, if it be
not to yield to the traitor the kingdoms _I_ have earned by my
obedience?  But I will delay no longer.  I have been obedient too long!
Henceforth this sword shall be my obedience!"

And as he spoke he unsheathed his weapon, and struck savagely at the
graceful branch of a fir tree before him, and brought it down crashing
at his feet.  At the same instant there appeared coming towards him a
man of middle age, clad like a soldier, who saluted respectfully the
young prince.

"Whence come you, Ralph Leroche?" inquired John.

"From the meeting of the Kings of France and England."

"And what went forward there?" asked the prince, leading his companion
in among the trees.

"I know only what I am told," said the knight, "for the meeting of your
father and King Philip was secret."

"And what have you been told?" inquired John, impatiently, and with
clouding brows.

"I have been told that the King of France demanded that your father
should do him homage, and should acknowledge your brother Richard as
King of England."

"And what said my father?" broke in John.

"He said that Richard, by his conduct, deserved only the death of a
traitor, but--"

John's brow darkened as he seized Ralph's arm, and ejaculated, "But
what? did he yield?  Speak!"

"But for the sake of peace he would receive him back to the heart which
he by his disobedience had wellnigh broken, and make him heir to his
crown."

"He said so, did he?" almost shouted the prince, his face livid with
fury.

"I am told so by one who knows," replied the other.

"And did he say more?"

"He blessed heaven before them all that he had one son left him who was
true to him, and in whose love he might end the shattered remnant of his
life."

Loud and cruelly laughed Prince John at those words, till the woods
echoed again.  "Is it thus you comfort yourself, my father?" he
exclaimed.  "Ralph," added he, in tones thick with passion, "all my life
till now I served my father, and never failed in my duty to him.  Henry,
my brother, rebelled, and died in his rebellion while I was a child.
Geoffrey rebelled too, and is dead.  Richard for years has been in arms
against his parent.  I, of all his sons, have never lifted hand against
him.  Had not I a right to look for my reward?  Had not I a right to
count upon the crown which my brothers' disobedience had forfeited?  Had
not--"

He stopped, unable from the vehemence of his passion to proceed, and
Ralph Leroche answered calmly: "Obedience is its own reward, and worth
more than a kingdom.  It is not obedience that calculates on profit.
But you know not, prince, what your father may yet have in store for
you."

"Speak not to me of my father," exclaimed John; "I hate him!"

"Heaven forgive you that word!" replied the fearless knight.  "Be
advised, I entreat; and repent--"

"Dotard!" exclaimed the prince, as in blind rage he struck him in the
mouth with his clenched fist.  "Keep thy advice for dogs, and not for
princes!"

How the scene would have ended, one cannot say.  At that moment a
flourish of trumpets raised the echoes of the wood, and a gay procession
passed down the forest road towards Tours.

Alas, for Prince John!  He recognised in the two men who rode at its
head, Philip of France, his father's enemy, and Richard, his own rebel
elder brother.  Goaded by passion, burning with resentment towards his
father for the supposed injustice he had suffered, he rushed recklessly
into the arms of this sudden temptation.  Striding through the thickets,
and heedless of the warnings of the loyal Ralph, he emerged on to the
road in front of the cavalcade.

The leaders halted their horses in sudden surprise.

