neighbourhood; they were from a particularly good strain, and ten out
of the dozen had hatched and thrived. She watched over them with more
than ordinary zeal, leaving manifold instructions with Nellie for
their diet during her absence at school, and visiting them the very
first after her return each afternoon. On the evenings when she took
the choir practice at church she entrusted them solely to Gwen's
charge.

"Give them a last feed of 'Chikko', and see that they've got clean
water, and don't let Jingles go near them, because the old hen gets
excited, and stamps about and treads on them," urged Winnie one
Wednesday as she started off with a roll of music in her hand. "Be
sure you shut them up early, because Nellie says she saw a rat last
night, and I noticed something had been burrowing near the shed."

Gwen promised complete accordance with all directions, and then went
off to finish her Latin translation. It was a particularly stiff piece
of Virgil, and she puzzled over it so long that she utterly forgot all
about the chickens, and it was only the call of an owl waking up on
the ivy-covered ash tree at the bottom of the garden that reminded her
of her henwife's duties.

"Gracious! It's nearly dark!" she exclaimed, flinging down Virgil and
making a rush for the hen-yard. "I hope to goodness those chicks are
all right! What an idiot I am! Winnie will be ready to slay me if
anything's happened to them."

It was growing very dusk indeed, and though none of the doors were yet
shut, the feathered flock had all gone to roost. As Gwen crossed the
hen-yard she suddenly saw something dark and shadowy creep from behind
the shed and dart stealthily in the direction of the coops. It
disappeared inside the very one where the cherished Partridge
Wyandottes were cuddling under their foster-mother's wings. Gwen's
heart almost stood still. She well knew the cunning and daring of
rats, and how they would snatch the chicks or young ducklings from the
wariest and most warlike hen. To leave this in the coop for even a
minute while she went to call help would certainly result in the loss
of one or more of Winnie's favourites.

Very cautiously she peered inside. The hen, who knew her well, clucked
softly, and the chickens popped their little speckly heads out from
the mass of encircling feathers and "peeped" gently. They were not yet
aware of danger. Where was the rat? It appeared to have vanished into
thin air. It certainly could not have left the coop. At the opposite
end from where the hen was sitting there was a billet of wood, and on
looking at this closely she saw a long tail dangling out underneath.
Without doubt her enemy had taken refuge there and was hiding in the
corner.

"These precious chicks have got to be saved somehow or Winnie'll never
forgive me," muttered Gwen, clenching her teeth to brace her nerves.

Then she did a thing from which her whole spirit shrank. She took her
handkerchief in her hand to give her a firmer grip and seized hold of
the tail. She dragged the rat out of the coop and bore it off, hanging
head downwards and whirling round and round in vain effort to escape,
while it squeaked with wrath and indignation. Fortunately it could not
raise its head sufficiently to bite her or she might have suffered a
nasty wound. Gwen rushed towards the back door, shouting loudly for
Nellie, but when that worthy domestic saw what she carried she uttered
a yell of terror instead of offering help.

"Throw it down, Miss Gwen, it'll bite you!" she shrieked. "Oh!
gracious goodness! throw it down!"

"Bring the poker! Where's Jingles?" screamed Gwen. Then, realizing
that she could hold her wriggling burden no longer, she dropped the
rat into the water-butt, and catching up the yard brush which lay
handily near, held down the victim till it was drowned.

"Miss Gwen! How did you dare!" shivered Nellie.

"Ugh! It's a hateful, horrid, barbarous thing to have to do. I feel as
if I'd committed a murder. It's made me quite sick," said Gwen.
"Nellie, do go and shut up those chickens before any more rats get
into the coop. I don't feel equal to catching another." Then she sat
down on the pump-trough to recover.

"You're a heroine!" declared Winnie when she came back from the choir
practice and viewed the interesting corpse. "I shouldn't have dared!
No, nothing in this world would have induced me to seize the creature
by its tail. It's a huge one too, with such wicked-looking teeth. What
a wonder you weren't bitten! You shall have one of those Partridge
Wyandottes for your very own. Choose whichever you like and I'll call
it yours."

"I wish you'd help me to finish my Virgil," said Gwen. "I'm only
halfway through and it's almost bedtime!"

"You're as good as a terrier, Gwen!" said Dick, when he heard the
exciting story the next Saturday. "I wish you'd come ratting in our
stable at home. I'd undertake to find you some sport."

"Don't be detestable! You talk as if I'd enjoyed it. I had to bury the
thing afterwards, for Winnie wouldn't touch it. I made a mull of my
Virgil in class next day, and I couldn't tell Miss Douglas the
reason."

"You might have put the episode into Latin. It sounds quite Homeric.
Did you keep the tail as a trophy? If we want to excite you we'll just
say 'Rats'. Please let us know when you're on the warpath again and
we'll come to see the fun;" and Dick dodged round an apple tree and
fled.

"You've got to be here early next Saturday, mind, and help us to take
things to the Agricultural Show!" Gwen shouted after him. "You may
come to breakfast if you'll behave yourself."

"Right-o! I'll act beast of burden provided it's hens I'm to
carry--not rats! Ta-ta!"

The Agricultural Show was the great event in the year at Skelwick. It
was held in the big field beside the mill, and all the villagers for
miles round made holiday to attend it. For days beforehand men were
busy putting up pens and erecting a tent where eggs and butter and
dressed fowls could be exhibited, while a few travelling caravans
arrived with shooting galleries or cheap bazaars and set up a kind of
fair in an opposite field.

There were many classes for poultry, so Winnie decided to send some of
her best cockerels, a selection of Buff Orpington chickens, and a pair
of big white Aylesbury ducks. She and Gwen got up very early on the
Saturday morning to take a final review of their exhibits. They were
determined to give the ducks a washing in order that they might show
them with their plumage in an absolutely spotless condition. Armed
with a tin bath, a can of warm water, some soap and a sponge, they
shut themselves in a disused pig sty and commenced operations. It is
no easy task to wash a large, struggling, flapping, protesting duck,
and though Gwen held their wings down while Winnie did the scrubbing,
both girls were splashed all over and drenched with water before they
had finished.

"But the Aylesburys look gorgeous," said Gwen, flinging her
dishevelled hair from her hot face. "They're clean to the very tips of
their beaks. The drake looks as if you'd curled his tail feather with
the curling tongs. They're fearfully upset and angry, poor dears; they
think they've been half killed. Winnie, how are we going to get them
to the Show?"

"That's what's puzzling me. We don't possess a basket big enough for
them. I believe we shall have to carry them."

"In our arms? Yes, that'll be by far the best way. They'd knock their
feathers about in a hamper and get dirty again. They've had one
breakfast already, but I think they deserve a little scrap of Indian
corn as a reward for what they've gone through."

All exhibits had to be delivered at the Show field by nine o'clock,
and precisely at half-past eight a procession set off from the
Parsonage: Lesbia carefully carrying a dozen beautiful brown eggs in a
basket, the three boys with small hampers of chickens, Dick holding a
little wooden crate containing Black Minorca cockerels, and finally
Winnie and Gwen, each clasping a huge white Aylesbury in her arms.
Dick had offered gallantly to be duck bearer, but the girls preferred
to transport their own pets.

"They know us so well, you see," said Gwen, "so they won't struggle
like they would with a stranger. Besides, we know just the dodge of
holding down their wings so that they can't flap."

They decided to take the short cut to the mill, through two meadows,
across a small stream, and over a stile that led them direct into the
Show ground. Gwen and Winnie got on very well with Dick and the boys
to open gates: it was rather perilous work crossing the stream on a
single plank, but they accomplished that in safety, and Winnie, with
infinite caution, climbed over the stile into the mill meadow, still
hugging her burden. Gwen essayed to follow with equal skill, but the
stile was a very steep and awkward one, and she needed both hands to
hold the drake. She was stepping carefully over the top bar when
somehow her foot caught and she stumbled; she put out one hand to
save herself, and the cunning drake, quick to seize his opportunity,
wriggled himself free and made a dash for liberty.

Off he went over the Show ground, flapping and fluttering like a white
whirlwind and quacking his loudest, and the Gascoyne family, popping
down hampers and baskets, followed hard behind; Winnie, much
encumbered by her duck, shouting frantic directions. It was Dick who
caught the runaway, and pinioned him cleverly until Gwen secured him,
then with much triumph they shut him up with his agitated mate in the
wire pen marked "No. 207".

"I thought we'd lost him," panted Winnie. "Oh, dear! It's no joke
bringing one's beasties to a show. I'm glad we decided not to exhibit
the pigs! Martin, you're not to open that hamper. We shall be having
the chickens escaping next! Stop him, Stumps! I feel like the 'Old
Woman who lived in a Shoe'. Gwen, you take charge of the cockerels
while I find where the Black Minorcas have to go to."

The public was not allowed in the field while the judging was in
process; so until twelve o'clock the Gascoynes were obliged to wait
with what patience they could muster. As soon as the gates were opened
they trooped into the Show.

"Hurrah! First Prize for White Aylesburys!" exclaimed Winnie
ecstatically, gazing with rapture at the large pink card that
decorated No. 207 pen. "It was worth washing them. The darlings! How
nice they look!"

"And the chickens have got a third!" yelled the boys, who had taken a
hasty round of the exhibits.

"The eggs haven't won anything, but the cockerels have 'commended'.
Mrs. Hodges' have got the first."

"We haven't done badly," said Winnie, "considering I can't devote all
my time to it like the farmers' wives. Gwen, you've helped loyally,
and I'm going to give you half a crown out of the prize money. I shall
save the rest to buy some really good White Leghorns; Mrs. Hodges says
they lay better than any others in the winter. Oh, here's Father! We
must go and tell him of our success."




CHAPTER XIII

The Shoe Pinches


The very first thing which Gwen did, when Winnie had given her the
promised half-crown out of the prize money, was to go straight to the
post office and buy a postal order for that amount and a penny stamp.
She possessed a few odd coppers, but otherwise no funds had come her
way for a long time, and she had been growing very uneasy about the
bill which she still owed to Parker's for the broken china. She now
sent them the postal order, with a note saying that she hoped very
soon to settle the remainder of the account, and begging them to wait
a little longer. She also asked them to return her a receipt addressed
"c/o Miss Netta Goodwin, The Thorns, Manor Road, Stedburgh".

"I dare say Netta'll be angry, and call it cheek on my part, but I
can't help it," thought Gwen. "I daren't get another letter sent to
school after the rowing Miss Roscoe gave me, and if it comes home,
Beatrice will want to know who's been writing to me. It's only fair
that Netta should take a little of the bother on her own shoulders.
She's certainly had the best of it in this affair. Oh, dear, I still
owe Parker's ten shillings. I haven't the ghost of a notion how I'm to
pay it!"

Gwen could not forgive Netta for appropriating her prize essay. She
still felt indignant whenever she thought about it, especially as
there was always an uneasy sensation of guilt on her own part. She
knew it was not a straight transaction, and poor Gwen, with all her
faults, loved straightness. For lack of other friendships at school
she was forced into companionship with Netta, but she never
whole-heartedly liked her. Lately, especially, Netta had taken a
rather high-handed tone, and was apt to order her chum about in a
manner that Gwen's independent spirit greatly resented. The friction
between the two was sometimes hot, but neither cared to risk a
quarrel, for each knew that the other, if turned into an enemy, might
come out with some decidedly awkward revelations. So they went on in
the old way, squabbling continually over trifles and making it up
again, but on the whole ready to stand up for each other against the
rest of the Form. Yes, alack!--the rest of the Form, for Gwen, in
spite of her well-meant efforts, had not yet won popularity in the
Fifth. She had tried to be genial and sociable, but nobody seemed to
want her. If she joined in a conversation, Rachel Hunter or Edith
Arnold would stare at her as if they thought it great impertinence on
her part to intrude herself into their concerns. They never asked her
opinion, or consulted her about anything, but simply ignored her, and
left her to her own devices. Nearly all the girls lived in Stedburgh,
and their talk was often of Stedburgh affairs, concerts, amateur
dramatic performances, and entertainments in which Gwen, living far
away at Skelwick, could have no possible part. Though she sometimes
got in a word about school matters, her remarks were never well
received, and she was always more or less conscious of being an alien
and an outsider in her Form.

She tried to pretend that she did not care about the opinion of the
others, but it was hard, all the same. Most of us like popularity,
especially when we believe we have done nothing to deserve the
reverse.

"If I'd been as pretty as Lesbia, they'd have made ever such a fuss
over me," thought Gwen. "She's the pet of her form, and the darling of
all the big girls. I'd have been a beauty if I could! They never even
give me a chance to be nice to them--they just leave me alone. Yes,
it's hard!"

But all the while, Father's New Year motto hung over the dressing
table in her bedroom, and every morning she could not help looking at
it. It seemed a stern gospel to pray for strength instead of ease, and
yet it attracted her. After all, was it not a nobler conception of
life to work away and not mind what people thought of you, than to be
always caring whether you were popular? There was a certain joy in
overcoming difficulties, and surmounting obstacles. She was already
succeeding in mastering the lessons that had baffled her at first.
Could she ever win a place for herself in the Form? It would
undoubtedly seem almost a miracle if she did.

"I wonder if I should be happier at another school?" she sometimes
thought. "Dad spoke once of the possibility of sending me to one of
the Clergy Daughters' Schools; he said I might get a scholarship. But
oh, dear! That would mean leaving home, and being a boarder! Suppose
I didn't like it any better than Rodenhurst; then it would be
perfectly awful to have to spend the whole term without once seeing
Dad or any of the others. No, I won't suggest it. I'd better stick
where I am, and peg along as best I can."

Gwen was a great home-bird. On the few occasions in her childhood,
when she had paid visits at relations' houses, she had, after a few
days, grown so intolerably homesick, and wept so hopelessly and
inconsolably, that she had had to be packed back, rather in disgrace;
and though she was now old enough to behave herself, she had not been
asked again, nor was she very enthusiastic to receive invitations. She
felt bashful, awkward, and badly dressed under the critical eyes of
Aunt Violet or Aunt Christina, and much preferred the atmosphere of
the Parsonage, and the society of her own family. To come back every
evening from school, and spend Saturday and Sunday at home, seemed
