upon his brow!

The sentinel stopped just as Mariano was preparing to spring upon and
endeavour to strangle him.  He looked earnestly and long in the
direction of the dead man's head, as if in meditation on its owner's
untimely fate, or, possibly, on the unusual length and solidity of the
shadow that tailed away from it!

Fortunately he advanced no further, but, turning on his heel, walked
slowly away.  Just then the moon shot forth a ray of light from the
midst of the cloud that had covered it, as if to cheer the fugitive on
his desperate adventure.  Instead of cheering, however, it alarmed him,
and expedited his movements.

In a moment Mariano put a loop of his rope over the head and drew it
tight on the spike close to the masonry.  Another moment and he was over
the parapet, down the wall, and into the ditch.  Here again unusual
caution was needful, but the youth's cat-like activity enabled him to
overcome all obstacles.  In a few minutes he was speeding over the Sahel
hills in the direction of Frais Vallon.

We need scarcely say that wind and muscle were tried to their uttermost
that night.  In an incredibly short space of time he reached the gate of
the consul's garden, which stood open, and darted in.

Now it chanced that night that the stout British seaman, Ted Flaggan,
lay in a hammock suspended between two trees in a retired part of the
consul's garden, the weather being so warm that not only he but several
of the other domestics had forsaken their dwellings during the night,
and lay about the grounds in various contrivances more or less
convenient, according to the fancy or mechanical aptitude of the makers
thereof.

Flaggan had, out of pure good-will, slung a primitive hammock similar to
his own between two trees near him for his friend Rais Ali, in which the
valiant Moor lay sound asleep, with his prominent brown nose pointing
upwards to the sky, and his long brown legs hanging over the sides.  Ted
himself lay in a wakeful mood.  He had fought unsuccessfully for some
hours against a whole army of mosquitoes, and now, having given in,
allowed the savage insects to devour him unchecked.

But the poor victim found it difficult to lie awake and suffer without
occupation of any kind; he therefore arose and cut from a neighbouring
hedge a light reed which was long enough to reach from his own hammock
to that of his friend.  With the delicate end of this, while reclining
at his ease, he gently tickled Rais Ali's nose.

After making several sleepy efforts to kill the supposed insect that
troubled him, and giving vent to three or four violent sneezes, the
interpreter awoke, and, growling something in Arabic, opened his eyes,
which act enabled him to observe that his neighbour was awake and
smiling at him.

"Ha! yous not be for sleep, hey?  Mos' troubelzum brutes dem muskitoes."

"Och! it's little I mind 'em," said Flaggan.

"W'y you no for sleep, den?" demanded Rais.

"'Cos I likes to meditate, young man, specially w'en I've got sitch a
splendid subjic' of contemplation before me as a slumberin' Moor!  Won't
ye go in for a little moor slumberin', eh?"

Rais turned his back on his friend with an indignant growl.  He was
evidently indisposed for jesting.

In a few seconds, being indifferent to real mosquitoes, the Moor was
again sound asleep.  It was soon clear, however, that he was not
indifferent to Ted's artificial insect.  Being unable now to reach his
nose, the restless son of Erin thrust the feathery point of the reed
into his friend's ear.  The result was that Rais Ali gave himself a
sounding slap on the side of the head, to Ted's inexpressible delight.
When Rais indicated that he was "off" again, he received another touch,
which resulted in a second slap and a savage growl, as the unfortunate
man sat up and yawned.

"They seems wuss than ornar," said Flaggan gravely.

"Wuss?  I nebber know'd noting wusser," replied Rais, with a look of
sleepy exasperation.  "Beats ebberyting.  Been five-an'-twenty 'eer in
de kontry, an' _nebber_ seed de like."

"_Seed_ the like!" echoed the seaman.  "Did ye saw 'em when ye was
aslape?"

"Feel um, then," replied the other sulkily; "yoos too purtikler."

"Suppose we goes an' has a whiff?" suggested Flaggan, leaping to the
ground.  "It's a fine night entirely, tho' a dark 'un.  Come, I'll trate
ye to a taste o' me cavendish, which is better than growlin' in yer
hammock at the muskaities, poor things, as don't know no better."

Feeling that the advice was good, or perhaps tempted by the offer of a
"taste" of his friend's peculiarly good tobacco, the interpreter arose,
calmly made a paper cigarette, while Flaggan loaded his "cutty," and
then accompanied him in a saunter down the road leading to the gate.

"Ally," began the seaman, making a stopper of the end of his little
finger--"by the way, you ain't related, are you, to the famous Ally
Babby as was capting of the forty thieves?"

"No, nuffin ob de sort," replied Ali, shaking his head.

"Well, no matter, you deserve to be; but that's neither here nor there.
What I was agoing to say is, that it's my opinion that fellow Seedy
Hassan ain't all fair an' above board."

Ted glanced keenly at his companion, for he had made the remark as a
sort of feeler.

"W'at de matter wid um?" asked Rais carelessly.

"Oh, nothin'--I only thought you might know somethin' about him.  _I_
doesn't, only I'm a dab at what's called in Ireland fizzyognomy, an?  I
don't like the looks of him.  Why, bless ye, I knows a feller by the cut
of his jib directly.  I could have taken my davy, now, that you were a
sly, clever sort o' chap, even before I was introduced to 'ee, d'ee
see?"

Whether he saw or not remains to this day an uncertainty, for it was at
that moment that, as before stated, Mariano rushed in at the gate, and,
unintentionally, into the arms of Rais Ali, who uttered a loud cry and
flung him off with a kick that unfortunately took effect on the youth's
shin.

Supposing that he was intercepted, afraid lest his mission should
miscarry, and angered by the pain, Mariano lost the power of
self-restraint which he had hitherto exercised so well that night.  He
rushed at the interpreter and hit him a blow on the forehead that caused
him to tumble backwards violently.

The act was scarcely done when the youth found himself in the embrace of
Ted Flaggan, and, strong though he was, he found it impossible to throw
off, or to free himself from, that sturdy tar.  Still he struggled
fiercely, and there is no saying what might have been the result, had
not Rais, recovering from the blow, hastened to his friend's aid.

Between them they succeeded in securing Mariano, and, with a
handkerchief tied his hands behind him.

"Now then, young feller," said Flaggan, taking the youth by the arm,
"you'll have to go before the British couns'l an' give an account of
yerself.  So come along."

Of course when Mariano was taken into the presence of Colonel Langley,
and had whispered a few words in his ear, the seaman and his friend Rais
Ali were dismissed with the assurance that all was right--an assurance,
by the way, which was not quite satisfactory to the latter, when he
reflected on and tenderly stroked the bump, about as large as a pigeon's
egg, which ornamented the space between his eyes!

"Never mind, Ally Babby," was his friend's consolatory remark as they
left the house and returned to their hammocks; "it can't damage your
good looks, an' 'll prove a mighty source of amazement to the
muskaities."

Meanwhile the consul accompanied Mariano a short way on his return to
town, so that the latter might not be delayed.

"I hope there is no fear of an outbreak occurring before I can get into
town to-morrow," said the consul, as they were about to part.  "It is
impossible that I can demand an audience of the Dey before breakfast
without creating suspicion.  Tell Bacri, however, that he may depend on
my doing my utmost without delay to avert the evil.  And now, how do you
mean to return to him--for it occurs to me that although you may scale
the walls easily enough, you won't be able to retrace your way to the
house of the Jew who favoured your escape?"

"Bacri had foreseen that," replied the youth, "and has arranged to meet
and guide me from a street leading south from the Bagnio, which is known
to both of us."

"He runs great risk in doing this," said the consul; "however, he knows
the outs and ins of the city well.  Good-bye, and God speed you on your
way."

Mariano, who was impatient to return, at once darted away like a deer,
and was soon lost to view among the aloes and cactuses that clothed the
slopes of the Sahel hills.

Not long afterwards the grey light of day began to tip the domes and
minarets of the pirate city, and with it began the soft hum of a general
awakening--for Mohammedans are early risers, and even pirates deemed it
consistent with their calling to commence the day with formal--not to
say ostentatious--prayers.  Any one traversing the streets at that early
hour might have seen men at the fountains busy with their prescribed
ablutions, while elsewhere others were standing, kneeling, or
prostrating themselves, with their faces turned carefully in the
direction of Mecca, their holy city.

It must not be supposed, however, as we have already remarked, that all
the men of the town were pirates.  That the town existed by means of
piracy, and that all its chief men from the Dey downwards were pure and
simple robbers, is quite consistent with the fact that there were many
honest enough traders and workmen whose lot had been cast there, and
whose prayers were probably very heartfelt and genuine--some of them,
perchance, being an appeal for deliverance from the wretches who ruled
them with a rod of iron--indeed, we might almost say, a rod of red-hot
iron.  Whatever the nature of their prayers, however, they were early in
presenting, and remarkably particular in not omitting, them.

Down at the Marina there was a group of Christian slaves who were not
behind their task-masters in this respect.  In an angle of the
fortifications the Padre Giovanni was kneeling by the side of a dying
slave.  The man had been crushed accidentally under a large piece of the
rock with which the bulwarks of the harbour were being strengthened.  He
had been carried to the spot where he lay, and would have been left to
die uncared for if Blindi Bobi had not chanced to pass that way.  After
administering such consolation as lay in a little weak wine and water
from his flask, the eccentric but kind-hearted man had gone off in
search of the Padre, who was always ready to hasten at a moment's notice
to minister to the necessity of slaves in sickness.  Too often the good
man's services were of little avail, because the sick slaves were
frequently kept at work until the near approach of death rendered their
labours worthless; so that, when Giovanni came to comfort them, they
were almost, if not quite, indifferent to all things.

On the present occasion he was too late to do more than pray that the
dying man might be enabled, by the Holy Spirit, to trust in the
salvation wrought out--and freely offered to sinners, even the chief--by
Jesus Christ.

While the spirit of the poor slave was passing away, Sidi Omar
approached the spot.  Blindi Bobi, remembering a former and somewhat
similar occasion, at once glided behind a projection of the walls and
made off.

"He is past your help now, Giovanni," said Omar to the old man, for whom
he, in common with nearly all the people of the town, entertained great
respect, despite his Christianity, for the Padre had spent the greater
part of a long life among them, in the exercise of such pure, humble
philanthropy, that even his enemies, if he had any, were at peace with
him.

"His spirit is with God who gave it," replied the old man, rising and
contemplating sadly the poor crushed form that lay at his feet.

"His spirit won't give us any more trouble, then," returned Omar, as he
regarded the dead man with a stern glance; "he was one of the most
turbulent of our slaves."

"And one of the most severely tried," said Giovanni, looking gently in
the face of the Minister of Marine.

"He had all the advantages and comforts of other slaves; I know not what
you mean by `tried,'" retorted Omar, with a grim smile.

"He was wrenched, with his family, from home and friends and earthly
hope, twenty years ago; he saw his children perish one by one under
cruel treatment; he saw his wife sold into slavery, though he did not
see her die--as I did--of a broken heart, and he suffered all the
torments that ingenuity could devise before his spirit was set free."

Giovanni said this slowly and very gently, but two bright red spots on
his pale careworn cheeks showed that he spoke with strong emotion.

"Well, well," returned Omar, with a sinister smile, "that gives him all
the better chance in the next life; for, according to the faith of you
Christians, his sufferings here go to make weight in the matter of his
salvation.  Is it not so?"

"Men who call themselves Christians," said the Padre, "do not all hold
the same faith.  There are those who appear to me to wrest Scripture to
their own destruction; they find in one part thereof a description of
true faith as distinguished from a dead, false, or spurious faith, which
reveals its worthlessness by the absence of `works,' and, founding on
that, they refuse to accept the other portion of Scripture which saith
that `by the works of the law shall no man living be justified.'  I,
with many others, hold that there is no merit in our simply suffering.
The sufferings and the obedience of Jesus Christ in our stead is all the
merit on which we rest our hopes of salvation."

"It may be so, Giovanni," returned Omar carelessly, "but I profess not
to understand such matters.  The slave is dead, and thou hast one less
to care for."

With this sentiment, accompanied by a smile of pity and a shake of his
head, the Minister of Marine left the Padre, and directed his steps
towards the town.  On his way he met the court story-teller or jester.

"Thou art early astir, Hadji Babi," he said.  "Is there aught in the
wind?"

"There is much in the wind," answered the jester gravely; "there is
oxygen and nitrogen, if philosophers be right--which is an open
question--and there is something lately discovered which they call
ozone.  Discoveries in time past give ground for expectation of
discoveries in time to come.  There is much in the wind, methinks."

"True, true," rejoined Omar, with an approving nod; "and what sayest
thou as to the atmosphere of the palace?"

The jester, who had strong suspicions as to the good-faith of Omar, yet
was not sufficiently in the confidence of the Dey to know exactly how
matters stood, replied with caution--

"It is serene, as usual; not disturbed by untoward elements, as the air
of a palace ought to be."

"That is well, Hadji Baba," returned Omar, in a confidential tone;
"nevertheless thou knowest that the atmosphere in palaces is not always
serene.--By the way, hast seen Sidi Hamet of late?"

"Not I," replied the other carelessly.

"He is no friend of thine, it would seem," said Omar.

"No," answered the jester shortly.

"Nor of mine," added Omar.

Each eyed the other narrowly as this was said.

"Wouldst do him a service if you could?" asked Omar.

"No," said Baba.

"Nor I," returned Omar.

"I owe service to no one save the Dey," rejoined Baba.  "If it were
possible, I would for his sake put a bow-string round the neck of a
certain Aga--"

"Ha!" interrupted Omar; "hast thou then seen aught to justify such
strong measures?  Come, Hadji Baba, thou knowest me to be thy master's
true friend.  Tell me all.  It shall be well for thee.  It _might_ be
ill for thee, if thou didst decline; but fear not.  I am thy friend, and
the friend of Achmet.  It behoves friends to aid each other in straits."

The jester felt that he had committed himself, but at the same time
conceived that he was justified in trusting one who had always been the
intimate friend and adviser of his master.  He therefore revealed all
that he knew of the plot which was hatching, and of which he knew a
great deal more than the Minister of Marine had expected, in consequence
of his having been kept well informed by a negro girl, called Zooloo,
whose capacity for eavesdropping was almost equal to a certain "bird of
the air" which has been in all ages accredited with the powers of an
electric telegraph.

In consequence of the information thus received, Sidi Omar made instant
