Miss Mott staring through her spectacles--the girls all saying they are
sorry, and the--the Record Wall, where I wanted to see my name!  I
_can't_ bear it, it's no use."

"But you will _have_ to bear it, Rhoda.  It is a fact, and nothing that
you can do will alter it now.  You will have to bear it; but you can
bear it in two ways, as you make up your mind to-day.  You can cry and
fret, and make yourself ill, and everyone else miserable, or you can
brace yourself up to bear it bravely, and make everyone love and admire
you more than they have ever done before.  Which are you going to do?"

"I am going to be cross and horrid.  I couldn't be good if I tried.  I'm
soured for life!" said Rhoda stoutly, but even as she spoke a smile
struggled with her tears, and Evie laughed aloud--her sweet, ringing
laugh.

"Poor, dear old thing!  She looks so like it!  I know better, and am not
a bit afraid of you.  You will be good and plucky, and rejoice
unaffectedly in Kathleen's success."

"Has Kathleen--Oh!  Is Kathleen first?"

"She has won the Scholarship.  Yes, it will be such a joy.  She needed
it so badly, and has worked so hard."

"I hate her!"

"She was always kind to you.  I remember the very first day she took you
round the grounds.  You were very good friends."

"I hate her, I tell you!  I detest her name."

"I am sure you will write and congratulate her.  Imagine if _your_
parents were poor, and you saw them harassed and anxious, how thankful
you would feel to be able to help!  Kathleen had a harder time than any
of you, for she could take none of the nice, interesting `Extras.'  I
think all her friends will be glad that she has won."

"I shall be glad, too, in about ten years.  If I said I was glad now I
should be a hypocrite, for I wanted it myself.  I suppose Irene is all
right, and Bertha, and all the Head girls?  Has--has Dorothy--"

"Yes, Dorothy has passed too."

Rhoda cried aloud in bitter distress.

"Oh, Evie--oh!  Dorothy passed, and I have failed!  Oh it is cruel--
unjust.  I am cleverer than she!  You can't deny it.  I worked harder.
I was before her always, in every class, in every exam.  Oh, it's mean,
it's mean that they should have put her before me!"

The tears streamed down her face, for this was perhaps the bitterest
moment she had known.  To be beaten by Kathleen, and Irene, was
bearable, but--Dorothy!  Easy-going, mediocre Dorothy, who had so little
ambition that she could laugh at her own shortcomings, and contentedly
call herself a "tortoise."  Well, the tortoise had come off victor once
more, and the poor, beaten hare sat quivering with mortified grief.
Miss Everett looked at her with perplexed, anxious eyes.

"You will probably find when the full report comes out that you have
done better in most respects, but that it is the preliminaries which
have caused your failure.  But Rhoda, Rhoda, how would it help you to
know that another poor girl had failed, and was as miserable as
yourself?  Would you be _glad_ to hear that Dorothy was sitting crying
at home, and Kathleen bearing her parents' grief as well as her own?
You could not possibly be so selfish.  I know you too well.  You are far
too kind and generous."

"I'm a pig!" said Rhoda contritely, and the tears trickled dismally off
the end of her nose, and splashed on to the wooden table.  "I should
like to be a saint, and resigned, and rejoice in the good fortunes of my
companions like the girls in books, but I can't.  I just feel sore, and
mad, and aching, and as if they were all in conspiracy against me to
make my failure more bitter.  You had better give it up, Evie, and leave
me to fight it out alone.  I'll come to my senses in time, and write
pretty, gushing letters to say how charmed I am--and make funny little
jokes at the end about my own collapse.  This is Monday--perhaps by
Wednesday or Thursday--"

"I expect it will be Tuesday, and not an hour later.  You are letting
off such an amount of steam that you will calm down more quickly than
you think.  And now, hadn't we better go indoors, and bathe those poor
red eyes before lunch?  Your mother will think I have been scolding you,
and I don't want to be looked upon as a dragon when I'm out of harness,
and posing as an innocent, unprofessional visitor.  Come, dear, and
we'll talk no more of the horrid old exam., but try to forget it and
enjoy ourselves!"

Rhoda's sigh was sepulchral in its intensity, for, of course, happiness
must henceforth be a thing of the past, so far as she was concerned; but
as she did not appreciate the idea of appearing at lunch with a tear-
stained face, she followed meekly to the house, and entering by a side
door, led the way upstairs to her own luxurious bedroom.

Half an hour of chastened enjoyment followed as she sat sponging her
eyes, while Evie strolled round the room, exclaiming with admiration at
the sight of each fresh treasure, and showing the keenest interest in
the jugs and their histories.  She admired Rhoda's possessions, and
Rhoda admired her, watching the graceful figure reflected in the
mirrors; the pretty dress, so simple, yet so becoming; the dark hair
waving so softly round the winsome face.  Evie was certainly one of the
prettiest of creatures, and Rhoda felt a sort of reflected glory in
taking her downstairs and exhibiting her to her family.

If the tear marks had not altogether disappeared, no one appeared to
notice them, and despite her own silence, lunch was a cheery meal.  Evie
chattered away in her gayest manner; Mrs Chester agreed with every word
she said, and called her "dear" as if she were a friend of years'
standing.  Mr Chester beamed upon her with undisguised, fatherly
admiration, and Harold looked more animated than Rhoda had seen him for
many a long day.  The brisk, bright way in which Evie took up his
drawling sentences, and put him right when he was mistaken in a
statement, would have made him withdraw into his shell if attempted by a
member of the household, but he did not seem in the least annoyed with
Evie.  He only smiled to himself in amused fashion, and watched her
narrowly out of the corners of his eyes.

When dessert was put upon the table, Mrs Chester looked wistfully at
Rhoda's white face, lighted into a feeble smile by one of her friend's
sallies, and was seized with a longing to keep this comforter at hand.

"I suppose you must go back to D-- this afternoon, dear," she said, "but
couldn't we persuade you to come back and pay us a visit before you
leave this part of the world?  It would be a great pleasure to Rhoda,
and to us all, and any time would suit us.  Just fix your own day,
and--"

"Oh, Evie, do!" cried Rhoda eagerly, and both the men joined in with
murmurs of entreaty; but Miss Everett shook her head, and said
regretfully:

"I'm so sorry, but it's impossible.  I have already been away longer
than I intended, and cannot spend another day away from home.  My mother
is busier than usual, for a sister who used to teach has had a bad
illness and is staying with us for six months, to rest and be nursed up.
It would not be fair to stay away any longer."

"I should think you might be allowed to rest in your holidays.  You work
hard enough for the rest of the year, and I need you more than the old
aunt, I'm sure I do.  You must come, if only for a week!"

"I wish I could, Rhoda, but it is not possible.  I'll tell you, however,
who I believe _could_ come, and who would do you more good than I, and
that is Tom Bolderston!  She is in no hurry to return home, and as it is
decided that she is not to come back to Hurst Manor, but go on straight
to Newnham, it will be your last opportunity of seeing her for some
time.  You would enjoy having Tom, wouldn't you, Rhoda?"

Rhoda lifted her eyebrows with a comical expression.  Tom here; Tom in
Erley Chase!  Tom sitting opposite to Harold and blinking at him with
her little fish eyes--the thought was so comical that she laughed in
spite of herself.

"I think I should.  It would be very funny.  If I may ask her, mother--"

"Of course, of course, darling!  Ask whom you will, for as long as you
like," cried the fond mother instantly.  From what she had heard of Tom
she had come to the conclusion that she was a very strange, and not
entirely sane, young woman; but Rhoda wished it, Rhoda had laughed at
the suggestion, and said it would be "funny," and that settled the
question.

A letter of invitation was duly written and given into Miss Everett's
hand when the time came for departure, and brother and sister escorted
her to the station.  Rhoda was insistent in her regrets at parting, and,
wonderful to relate, Harold condescended to make still another plea.  If
it were impossible to arrange a visit, could not Miss Everett spare a
few hours at least, come down by an early train, and spend a day on the
river with himself and his sister?  He urged the project so warmly that
Evie flushed with mingled pleasure and embarrassment.

"Don't tempt me!  I should love it, but we are here only for four days,
and I have been away for one already.  It would not be courteous."

"She is so horribly conscientious, that's the worst of her!" said Rhoda,
as she and Harold retraced their steps across the Park.  "She is always
thinking about other people.  A day on the river would have been
lovely."

"Yes, it's a pity.  I thought we would ask Ella, and take up lunch and
tea."

"Yes, of course, a very good idea.  Then we should have been four, and I
could have had Evie to myself--"

"Y-es!" drawled Harold slowly.  Two minutes later Rhoda happened to look
at his face, and wondered why in the world he was smiling to himself in
that funny, amused fashion!



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

TOM ARRIVES.

Tom wrote by return to state that she considered Rhoda "a brick" for
sending her such a "ripping" invitation; that it would be "great sport"
to see her at home, and that she would arrive by the twelve o'clock
train on the next Monday.

"She isn't pretty," Rhoda explained anxiously to Harold, the fastidious;
"in fact, she's plain, very plain indeed.  I'm afraid you won't like
her, but she likes _you_.  She saw you on the platform at Euston, and
said you were a `bee-ootiful young man,' and that she was broken-hearted
that she couldn't stay to make your acquaintance."

"Good taste, evidently, though unattractive!" said Harold, smiling.
"I'm sorry she's not good-looking, but it can't be helped.  No doubt she
makes up for it in moral worth."

"Well, she does, that's perfectly true.  I loathed and detested her at
first, but I'm devoted to her now.  She's just, and kind, and awfully
clever, and so funny that you simply can't be in low spirits when she's
about.  All the girls adore her, but you won't.  She says herself that
men can't appreciate her, so she's going to devote her life to women,
out of revenge.  Men never care for women unless they are pretty and
taking," cried Rhoda, with an air, and Harold protested sententiously.

"I'm the exception to the rule!  I look beyond the mere exterior, to the
nobility of character which lies behind.  Dear Tom's lack of beauty is
nothing to me.  I am prepared for it, and shall suffer no disillusion."

He changed his mind, however, when at the appointed time "dear Tom"
arrived, and stepped from the carriage on to the platform of the little
station.  When his eye first fell upon her, in response to Rhoda's
excited, "There she is!" he felt a momentary dizzy conviction that there
must be a mistake.  This extraordinary apparition could never be his
sister's friend, but yes! it was even so, for already the girls were
greeting each other, and glancing expectantly in his direction.  He went
through the introduction with immovable countenance, saw the two friends
comfortably seated in the pony carriage, and called to mind a message in
the village which would prevent him from joining them as he had
intended.  He required a few minutes' breathing time to recover his
self-possession, and the girls drove off alone, not at all sorry, if the
truth were told, to be deprived of his company.

"Well, Fuzzy!" cried Tom.

"Well, Tom!" cried Rhoda, and stared with wondering eyes at the
unaccustomed grandeur of her friend's attire.  Thomasina had done honour
to the occasion by putting on her very best coat and skirt, of a shade
of fawn accurately matching her complexion, while on her head was
perched that garment unknown at Hurst, "a trimmed hat."  Fawn straw,
fawn wings sticking out at right angles, bows of fawn-coloured ribbon
wired into ferocious stiffness--such was the work of art; and
complacent, indeed, was the smile of its owner as she met her
companion's scrutiny.

"Got 'em _all_ on, haven't I?" she enquired genially.  "Must do honour
to the occasion, you know, and here's yourself all a-blowing, all a-
growing, looking as fresh as a daisy, in your grand white clothes!"

"Indeed, then, I feel nothing of the kind, or it must be a very dejected
daisy.  You have heard the news, of course, and know that I am--"

"Plucked!" concluded Tom, pronouncing the awful word without a quiver.
"Yes.  Thought you would be; you were so cheap that arithmetic morning.
You can't do sums when you are on the point of fainting every second
minute...  Very good results on the whole."

"Yes, but--isn't it awful for me?  Don't you pity me?  I never in my
life had such a blow."

"Bit of a jar, certainly, but it's over now, and can't be helped.  No
use whining!" said Tom calmly, and Rhoda gave a little jump in her seat.
After all, can anyone minister to a youthful sufferer like a friend of
her own age?  Tom's remarks would hardly have been considered comforting
by an outsider, yet by one short word she had helped Rhoda more than any
elderly comforter had been able to do.  It was interesting and
praiseworthy to grieve over such a disappointment as she had
experienced, to be sorrowful, even heart-broken, but _to whine_!  That
put an entirely different aspect on her grief!  To whine was feeble,
childish, and undignified, a thing to which no self-respecting girl
could stoop.  As Rhoda recalled her tears and repinings, a flush of
shame came to her cheeks, and she resolved that, whatever she might have
to suffer in the future, she would, at least, keep it to herself, and
not proclaim her trouble on the house-tops.

When the Chase was reached, Tom was taken into the drawing-room and
introduced to Mrs Chester, who poured out tea in unusual silence,
glancing askance at the fawn-coloured visitor who sat bolt upright on
her chair, nibbling at her cake with a propriety which was as
disconcerting to the kindly hostess as it was apparently diverting to
her daughter.  Rhoda had been accustomed to see Tom play a hundred sly
tricks over this sociable meal, a favourite one being to balance a large
morsel on the back of her right hand, and with an adroit little tap from
the left send it flying into the mouth stretched wide to receive it, and
it tickled her immensely to witness this sudden fit of decorum.  She sat
and chuckled, and Mrs Chester sat and wondered, until Tom politely
declined a third cup of tea, and was dragged into the garden, with
entreaties to behave properly, and be a little like herself, "I thought
I was charming," she declared.  "I tried to copy Evie, and look exactly
as she does when she is doing the agreeable.  Didn't you notice the
smile?  And I didn't stare a bit, though I was longing to all the time.
You _do_ live in marble halls, Fuzzy, and no mistake!  We could get the
whole of our little crib into that one room, and we don't go in for any
ornaments or fal-lals.  A comfortable bed to sleep in, and lots of
books--that's all my old dad and I trouble about."

Rhoda thought of the dismal little study at Hurst Manor, with the broken
chairs, and the gloves on the chimney-piece, and could quite imagine the
kind of home from which the owner came; but she murmured little
incredulities, as in politeness bound, as she led the way in the
direction best calculated to impress a stranger.  Tom did not pay much
attention to the grounds themselves, but she raved over the horses, and
made friends with all the dogs, even old Lion, the calf-like mastiff,
who was kept chained up in the stable-yard because of his violent
antipathy to strangers.  When he beheld this daring young woman walking
up to his very side, and making affectionate overtures for his favour,
he showed his teeth in an alarming scowl, but next moment he changed his
mind, and presently Tom was pinching and punching, and stroking his
ears, with the ease of an old acquaintance.

"I've never met the dog yet that I couldn't master!" she announced
proudly.  "That old fellow would follow me all round the grounds as
meekly as a lamb, if he had the chance!"

"We won't try him, thank you; he might meet a messenger-boy _en route_,
and we should have to pay the damages.  Come along now, and I will show
you--" but at this opportune moment Harold came in view, sauntering
round the corner of the stable, and Rhoda called to him eagerly, glad to
be able to impress him with a sense of Tom's powers.

"Harold, look here!  See what friends Tom has made with Lion already.
He lets her do anything that she likes.  Isn't it wonderful?"

"By Jove!" exclaimed Harold, and looked unaffectedly surprised to see
his gruff old friend submitting meekly to the stranger's advances.
"Tastes differ!" was the mental comment, but aloud he said suavely,
"Lion is a good judge of character.  He knows when he has found a
friend."

"Yes, they all recognise me.  I was a bulldog in my last incarnation,"
said Tom calmly, and by some extraordinary power which she possessed of
drawing her mobile features into any shape which she chose, certain it
is that she looked marvellously like a bulldog at that moment: twinkling
eyes set far apart, heavy mouth, small, impertinent nose, all complete!
Harold was so taken aback that he did not know what to say, but Rhoda
dragged laughingly at her friend's arm and cried,--

"Come along!  Come along!  It will soon be time to go indoors and dress
for dinner, and we haven't done half our round.  I was going to take Tom
to the links, Harold.  She is a great golfer, and will be interested in
seeing them.  You'll come too, won't you?"

"With pleasure.  They are just our own tame little links, Miss
Bolderston, which we have faked up in the park.  You won't think much of
them if you are a player, but they give an opportunity for private
practice, and we have some good sport there occasionally."

"Ah, yes!  How many holes?" enquired Tom, sticking one thumb between the
buttonholes of her coat, and tilting her head at him with such a
businesslike air that he felt embarrassed to be obliged to reply.

"Nine, with a little crossing about; some of the distances are very
short, I'm afraid.  Still, it has its points, and I've played on larger
links with less enjoyment.  We will take a short cut across here to the
first hole.  We start here, as you see, and a good full cleek shot
should land you on the green.  There are only two holes which really
give a chance for a driver.  Now you can see the second green, but it's
not so easy a hole as it looks from here, for the grass is tussocky, and
one almost always gets a bad lie for the approach."

"Yes, but why not drive for the green?"
