was, therefore, of tested and approved capacity, which at length
resulted in the granting to it of a charter by Henry VIII in 1514.

From this date the history proper of the Corporation of Trinity House of
Deptford Strond begins.  In the charter referred to it is first so
named, and is described as "The Guild or Fraternity of the most glorious
and undividable Trinity of Saint Clement."  The subsequent charter of
James I, and all later charters, are granted to "The Master, Wardens,
and Assistants of the Guild, Fraternity, or Brotherhood of the most
glorious and undivided Trinity, and of Saint Clement, in the parish of
Deptford, in the county of Kent."  The grant of Arms to the Corporation
is dated 1573, and includes the motto, _Trinitas in Unitate_.

No reason can now be assigned for the application of its distinctive
title.  The mere fact that the constitution of the guild included
provision for the maintenance of a chaplain, and for the conduct of
divine service in the parish church, is not, we think, sufficient to
account for it.

In the house or hall at Deptford, adjoining the almshouses, the business
of the Corporation was first conducted.  Afterwards, for the sake of
convenient intercourse with shipowners and others, in a house in
Ratcliffe; next at Stepney, and then in Water Lane, Tower Street.  The
tenement there falling into decay--after having been twice burnt and
restored--was forsaken, and an estate was purchased on Tower Hill, on
which the present Trinity House was built, from designs by Wyatt, in
1798.

A good idea of the _relative_ antiquity of the Corporation may be
gathered from the fact that about the year 1520--six years after the
date of the first charter--the formation of the Admiralty and Navy
Boards was begun, and "on the consequent establishment of dockyards and
arsenals, the Deptford building-yard was confided to the direction of
the Trinity House, together with the superintendence of all navy stores
and provisions.  So closely, indeed, were the services related, that the
first Master of the Corporation, under the charter, was Sir Thomas
Spert, commander of the `Henry Grace-a-Dieu,' (our first man-of-war),
and sometime Controller of the Navy.  The Corporation thus became, as it
were, the civil branch of the English Maritime Service, with a naval
element which it preserves to this day."

Government records show that the Trinity Brethren exercised considerable
powers, at an early period, in manning and outfitting the navy; that
they reported on ships to be purchased, regulated the dimensions of
those to be built, and determined the proper complement of sailors for
each, as well as the armament and stores.  Besides performing its
peaceful duties, the Corporation was bound to render service at sea if
required, but, in consideration of such liability, the Brethren and
their subordinates were exempted from land service of every kind.  They
have been frequently called upon to render service afloat, "and notably
upon two occasions--during the mutiny at the Nore in 1797, when the
Elder Brethren, almost in view of the mutinous fleet, removed or
destroyed every beacon and buoy that could guide its passage out to sea;
and again in 1803, when a French invasion was imminent, they undertook
and carried out the defences of the entrance to the Thames by manning
and personally officering a cordon of fully-armed ships, moored across
the river below Gravesend, with an adequate force of trustworthy seamen,
for destruction, if necessary, of all channel marks that might guide an
approaching enemy."

We cannot afford space to enter fully into the history of the Trinity
Corporation.  Suffice it to say that it has naturally been the object of
a good deal of jealousy, and has undergone many searching
investigations, from all of which it has emerged triumphantly.  Its
usefulness having steadily advanced with all its opportunities for
extension, it received in 1836 "the culminating recognition of an Act of
Parliament, empowering its executive to purchase of the Crown, and to
redeem from private proprietors, their interests in all the coast-lights
of England, thus bringing all within its own control.  By Crown patents,
granted from time to time, the Corporation was enabled to raise, through
levy of tolls, the funds necessary for erection and maintenance of these
national blessings; ... and all surplus of revenue over expenditure was
applied to the relief of indigent and aged mariners, their wives,
widows, and orphans."  About 1853, the allowance to out-pensioners alone
amounted to upwards of 30,000 pounds per annum, and nearly half as much
more of income, derived from property held in trust for charitable
purposes, was applied to the maintenance of the almshouses at Deptford
and Mile-end, and to other charitable uses for the benefit of the
maritime community.

The court or governing body of the Corporation is now composed of
thirty-one members, namely, the Master, four Wardens, eight Assistants,
and eighteen Elder Brethren.  The latter are elected out of those of the
class of younger Brethren who volunteer, and are approved as candidates
for the office.  Eleven members of this court of thirty-one are men of
distinction--members of the Royal Family, Ministers of State, naval
officers of high rank, and the like.  The remainder--called Acting
Brethren--are chiefly officers of the mercantile marine, with a very
few--usually three--officers of Her Majesty's navy.  The younger
Brethren--whose number is unlimited--are admissible at the pleasure of
the court.  They have no share in the management, but are entitled to
vote in the election of Master and Wardens.

The duties of the Corporation, as described in their charters generally,
were to "treat and conclude upon all and singular articles anywise
concerning the science or art of mariners."  A pretty wide and somewhat
indefinite range!  At the present time these duties are, as follows:--

To maintain in perfect working order all the lighthouses, floating
lights, and fog-signal stations on the coasts of England; and to lay
down, maintain, renew, and modify all the buoys, beacons, and
sea-signals; to regulate the supply of stores, the appointment of
keepers, and constantly to inspect the stations--a service which entails
unremitting attention upon the members, some of whom are always on duty,
either afloat in the steam-vessels or on land journeys.

To examine and license pilots for a large portion of our coasts; and to
investigate generally into all matters relative to pilotage.

To act as nautical advisers with the Judge of the High Court of
Admiralty, a duty which frequently engages some of the Brethren for
considerable periods of time on intricate causes of the greatest
importance.

To survey and inspect the channels of the Thames and the shoals of the
North Sea, and other points of the coast at which shifting, scouring,
growth or waste of sand may affect the navigation, and require to be
watched and notified.

To supply shipping in the Thames with ballast.

The Elder Brethren have also to perform the duty of attending the
Sovereign on sea-voyages.

In addition to all this, it has to superintend the distribution of its
extensive charities, founded on various munificent gifts and legacies,
nearly all given or left for the benefit of "poor Jack" and his
relatives; and to manage the almshouses; also the affairs of the House
on Tower Hill, and the engineering department, with its superintendence
of new works, plans, drawings, lanterns, optical apparatus, etcetera--
the whole involving, as will be obvious to men who are acquainted with
"business," a mass of detail which must be almost as varied as it is
enormous.

The good influence of the operations of the Trinity louse might be shown
by many interesting instances.  Here is one specimen; it has reference
to ballast-heaving:--

"Formerly the ballast, when laid in barge or lighter alongside the ship
to be supplied, was heaved on board by men who were hired and paid by
various waterside contractors, and subjected to great hardships, not
only from the greed of their employers, but from a demoralising system
of payment through publicans and local harpies.  These evils were
altogether removed by the establishment of a Heavers' Office under
control of the Trinity House, where men could attend for employment, and
where their wages could be paid with regularity, and free from
extortionate deduction."

Many more examples might be given, but were we to indulge in this strain
our chapter would far exceed its proper limits.

The light-vessels belonging to the Corporation are 43 in number: 38 in
position and 5 in reserve to meet casualties.  [See note 2.] Of
lighthouses there are 76; sixty-one of which, built of brick, stone, or
timber, are on shore; eleven, of granite, are on outlying rocks; and
four, on iron piles, are on sandbanks.  There are 452 buoys of all
shapes and sizes on the coast, and half as many more in reserve, besides
about 60 beacons of various kinds, and 21 storehouses in connection with
them.  Also 6 steam-vessels and 7 sailing tenders maintained for
effecting the periodical relief of crews and keepers, shifting and
laying buoys, etcetera.

The working staff which keeps the whole complex machinery in order,
consists of 7 district superintendents, 11 local agents, 8 buoy-keepers,
21 storekeepers, watchmen, etcetera; 177 lighthouse-keepers, 427 crews
of floating lights, 143 crews of steam and sailing vessels, and 6
fog-signal attendants--a total of 800 men.

Among the great and royal personages who have filled the office of
Master of the Corporation of Trinity House, we find, besides a goodly
list of dukes and earls--the names of (in 1837) the Duke of Wellington,
(1852) H.R.H. Prince Albert, (1862) Viscount Palmerston, and (1866)
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh.  The last still holds office, and H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales heads the list of a long roll of titled and
celebrated honorary Brethren of the Corporation.

We make no apology for the interpolation of this chapter, because if the
reader has skipped it no apology is due, and if he has not skipped it,
we are confident that no apology will be required.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The service which the Corporation of Trinity House renders to
the coasts of England, is rendered to those of Scotland by the
Commissioners of Northern Lights, and to those of Ireland by the
Commissioners of Irish Lights--both, to some extent, under the
supervision of the Trinity House.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The floating lights of England are illuminated by means of lamps with
metallic reflectors, on what is styled the catoptric system.  The
dioptric system, in which the rays of light are transmitted through
glass, has been introduced into the floating lights of India by the
Messrs. Stevenson, C.E., of Edinburgh.  The first floating light on this
system in India was shown on the Hoogly in 1865.  Since then, several
more dioptric lights have been sent to the same region, and also to
Japan in 1869, and all reports agree in describing these lights as being
eminently successful.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

STRANGE SIGHTS AND SCENES ON LAND AND SEA.

The river Hoogly.  Off Calcutta.  Tropical vegetation on the shore.
Glittering sunshine on the water.  Blue sky and fleecy clouds overhead.
Equally blue sky and fleecy clouds down below.  A world of sky and
water, with ships and boats, resting on their own inverted images, in
the midst.  Sweltering heat everywhere.  Black men revelling in the
sunshine.  White men melting in the shade.  The general impression such,
that one might almost entertain the belief that the world has become
white-hot, and the end of time is about to be ushered in with a general
conflagration.

Such is the scene, reader, to which we purpose to convey you.

The day was yet young when a large vessel shook out her topsails, and
made other nautical demonstrations of an intention to quit the solid
land ere long, and escape if possible from the threatened conflagration.

"I wonder when those brutes will be sent off," said the first mate of
the ship to the surgeon, who stood on the poop beside him.

"What brutes do you refer to?" asked the surgeon, who was no other than
our young friend Stanley Hall.

"Why, the wild beasts, to be sure.  Have you not heard that we are to
have as passengers on the voyage home two leopards, an elephant, and a
rhinoceros?"

"Pleasant company!  I wonder what Neptune will say to that?" said
Stanley, with a laugh, as he walked forward to ask the opinion of the
owner of the said Neptune.  "I say, Welton, we are to have an elephant,
a rhinoceros, and two leopards, on this voyage."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, what will Neptune say to it?"

"Oh, he won't mind, sir," replied Jim, patting the head of the large
Newfoundland dog with grey paws which stood beside him.

Jim and Stanley had taken a fancy to each other when on board the Nora.
The former had carried out a plan of going to sea, in order to be out of
the way if he should happen to be wanted as a witness at the trial of
Morley Jones, which event he felt certain must take place soon.  He had
made application to Stanley, who spoke to Mr Durant about him,--the
result being that Jim obtained a berth on board the ship Wellington,
which stood A1 at Lloyds.  Hence we find him in the Hoogly.

"Neptune is a wise dog, sir," continued Jim; "he don't feel much put out
by curious company, and is first-rate at taking care of himself.
Besides, there is no jealousy in his nature.  I suppose he feels that
nobody can cut him out when he has once fairly established a friendship.
I don't grudge the dive off the bulwarks of the old Gull, when I saved
Neptune, I assure you."

"He was worth saving," remarked Stanley, stooping to pat the meek head
of the dog.

"Yes, I heard last night of the expected passengers," pursued Jim, "and
am now rigging up tackle to hoist 'em on board.  I meant to have told
you of 'em last night, but we got into that stiff argument about
teetotalism, which put it completely out of my head."

"Ah, Welton, you'll never convince me that teetotalism is right," said
Stanley, with a good-humoured laugh.  "Not that I care much about wine
or spirits myself, but as long as a man uses them in moderation they can
do him no harm."

"So I thought once, sir," returned Jim, "but I have seen cause to change
my mind.  A healthy man can't use them in moderation, because _use_ is
_abuse_.  Stimulants are only fit for weaklings and sick folk.  As well
might a stout man use crutches to help him to walk, as beer or brandy to
help him to work; yet there are some strong young men so helpless that
they can't get on at all without their beer or grog!"

"Come, I'll join issue with you on that point," said Stanley, eagerly,
for he was very fond of an argument with Jim, who never lost his temper,
and who always paid his opponent the compliment of listening attentively
to what he had to say.

"Not just now," replied Jim, pointing towards the shore; "for yonder
comes a boat with some of the passengers we were talking of."

"Is that tackle rigged, Welton?" shouted the mate.

"It is, sir," replied Jim.

"Then stand by, some of you, to hoist these leopards aboard."

When the little boat or dinghy came alongside, it was observed that the
animals were confined in a large wooden cage, through the bars of which
they glared savagely at the half-dozen black fellows who conveyed them
away from their native land.  They seemed to be uncommonly irate.
Perhaps the injustice done them in thus removing them against their will
had something to do with it.  Possibly the motion of the boat had
deranged their systems.  Whatever the cause, they glared and growled
tremendously.

"Are you sure that cage is strong enough?" asked the mate, casting a
dubious look over the side.

"Oh yes, massa--plenty strong.  Hould a Bengal tiger," said one of the
black fellows, looking up with a grin which displayed a splendid double
row of glittering teeth.

"Very well, get the slings on, Welton, and look sharp, bo's'n, for more
company of the same kind is expected," said the mate.

The bo's'n--a broad, short, burly man, as a boatswain always is and
always ought to be, with, of course, a terrific bass voice, a body
outrageously long, and legs ridiculously short--replied, "Ay, ay, sir,"
and gave some directions to his mates, who stood by the hoisting
tackles.

At the first hoist the appearance of the cage justified the mate's
suspicions, for the slings bent it in so much that some of the bars
dropped out.

"Avast heaving," roared the boatswain.  "Lower!"  Down went the cage
into the dinghy.  The bars were promptly replaced, and the slings
fastened in better position.

"Try it again, bo's'n," said the mate.

The order to hoist was repeated, and up went the cage a second time, but
it bent as before, so that several bars again slipped out, leaving the
leopards sufficient space to jump through if they chose.

"Lower!" yelled the mate.

The men obeyed promptly--rather too promptly!  The cage went down by the
run into the boat, and with a crash fell asunder.

"Cut the rope!" cried the mate.

Jim Welton jumped into the chains, cut the painter, and the boat was
swept away by the tide, which was running strong past the ship.  At the
same moment the black fellows went over the sides into the water like
