"Well, does the thought of your respective wives an' children prevent
your shooting or sticking each other when you get the chance?"

"Of course it don't!" returned Armstrong, with a laugh as he resumed his
pencil.  "What would be the use o' comin' here if we didn't do that?
But I haven't time to argue with you just now, Hall.  All I know is that
it's my duty to write to my wife, an' I won't let the chance slip when
I've got it."

"Bah!" exclaimed the cynic, relighting his pipe, which in the heat of
debate he had allowed to go out.

Several of the other men, having been reminded of the mail by the
conversation, also betook themselves to pen and pencil, though their
hands were more familiar with rifle and bayonet.  Among these was Miles
Milton.  Mindful of his recent thoughts, and re-impressed with the word
_Duty_, which his friend had just emphasised, he sat down and wrote a
distinctly self-condemnatory letter home.  There was not a word of
excuse, explanation, or palliation in it from beginning to end.  In
short, it expressed one idea throughout, and that was--Guilty! and of
course this was followed by his asking forgiveness.  He had
forgiveness--though he knew it not--long before he asked it.  His
broken-hearted father and his ever-hopeful mother had forgiven him in
their hearts long before--even before they received that treasured
fragment from Portsmouth, which began and ended with:

"Dearest Mother, I am sorry--"

After finishing and despatching the letter, Miles went out with a
feeling of lightness about his heart that he had not felt since that
wretched day when he forsook his father's house.

As it was still early in the afternoon he resolved to take a ramble in
the town, but, seeing Sergeant Gilroy and another man busy with the
Gardner gun on the roof of the redoubt, he turned aside to ask the
sergeant to accompany him; for Gilroy was a very genial Christian, and
Miles had lately begun to relish his earnest, intelligent talk, dashed
as it was with many a touch of humour.

The gun they were working with at the time had been used the day before
in ascertaining the exact range of several objects on the ground in
front.

"I'll be happy to go with you, Miles, after I've given this gun a
clean-out," said Gilroy.  "Turn the handle, Sutherland."

"I'll turn the handle if it's a' richt," said the cautious Scot, with
some hesitation.

"It is all right," returned the sergeant.  "We ran the feeder out last
night, you know, and I want to have the barrels cleaned.  Turn away."

Thus ordered a second time, Sutherland obeyed and turned the handle.
The gun went off, and its contents passed through the sergeant's groin,
making a hole through which a man could have passed his arm.

He dropped at once, and while some ran for the doctor, and some for
water, others brought a stretcher to carry the poor fellow to hospital.
Meanwhile Miles, going down on his knees beside him, raised his head and
moistened his pale lips with water.  He could hardly speak, but a smile
passed over his face as he said faintly, "She'll get my presents by this
mail.  Write, Miles--break it to her--we'll meet again--by the side of
Jesus--God be praised!"

He ceased, and never spoke again.

Gilroy was a married man, with five children.  Just before the accident
he had written to his wife enclosing gifts for his little ones, and
telling, in a thankful spirit, of continued health and safety.  Before
the mail-steamer with his letter on board was out of sight he was dead!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

DESCRIBES SOME OF OSMAN DIGNA'S ECCENTRICITIES AND OTHER MATTERS.

One day Miles and his friend Armstrong went to have a ramble in the town
of Suakim, and were proceeding through the bazaar when they encountered
Simkin hurrying towards them with a much too serious expression on his
face!

"Have you heard the n-news?" he asked, on coming up.

"No; what's up?"

"The old shep-shepherd's bin killed; all the c-cattle c-captured, an'
the Egyptian c-cavalry's bin sent out after them."

"Nonsense!  You're dreaming, or you've bin drinking," said Miles.

"Neither dreamin' nor drinkin'," returned Simkin, with indignation, as
he suddenly delivered a blow at our hero's face.  Miles stopped it,
however, gave him a playful punch in the chest, and passed on.

At first Simkin seemed inclined to resent this, but, while he swayed
about in frowning indecision, his comrades left him; shaking his head,
therefore, with intense gravity, he walked away muttering, "Not a bad
fellow Miles, after all, if he w-wasn't so fond o' the b-bottle!"

Miles was at the same moment making the same remark to his friend in
reference to Simkin, and with greater truth.

"But I don't wonder that the men who drink, go in for it harder than
ever here," continued Miles.  "There is such hard work, and constant
exposure, and so little recreation of any sort.  Yet it is a pity that
men should give way to it, for too many of our comrades are on the
sick-list because of it, and some under the sod."

"It is far more than a pity," returned Armstrong, with unwonted energy.
"Drink with its attendant evils is one of the great curses of the army.
I have been told, and I can well believe it, that drink causes more loss
to an army than war, the dangers of foreign service, and unhealthy
climates, all put together."

"That's a strong statement, Willie, and would need to be founded on good
authority.  Who told you?"

"Our new parson told me, and he is in my opinion a good authority,
because he is a Christian, if ever a man was; and he is an elderly man,
besides being uncommonly clever and well informed.  He told us a great
many strong facts at the temperance meeting we held last night.  I wish
you had been there, Miles.  It would have warmed your heart, I think."

"Have you joined them, Willie?"

"Yes, I have; and, God helping me, I mean to stick by them!"

"I would have gone to the meeting myself," said Miles thoughtfully, "if
I had been asked."

"Strange," returned Armstrong, "that Sergeant Hardy said to me he
thought of asking you to accompany us, but had an idea that you wouldn't
care to go.  Now, just look at that lot there beside the grog-shop door.
What a commentary on the evils of drink!"

The lot to which he referred consisted of a group of miserable loungers
in filthy garments and fez-caps, who, in monkey-like excitement, or
solemn stupidity, stood squabbling in front of one of the many Greek
drinking-shops, with which the town was cursed.

Passing by at the moment, with the stately contempt engendered by a
splendid physique and a red coat, strode a trooper--one of the defenders
of the town.  His gait was steady enough, but there was that
unmistakable something in the expression of his face which told that he
was in the grip of the same fiend that had captured the men round the
grog-shop door.  He was well-known to both Armstrong and Miles.

"Hallo!  Johnson," cried the latter.  "Is there any truth in the--"

He stopped, and looked steadily in the trooper's eyes without speaking.

"Oh yes, I know what you mean," said Johnson, with a reckless air.  "I
know that I'm drunk."

"I wouldn't say exactly that of you," returned Miles; "but--"

"Well, well, I say it of myself," continued the trooper.  "It's no use
humbuggin' about it.  I'm swimmin' wi' the current.  Goin' to the dogs
like a runaway locomotive.  Of course I see well enough that men like
Sergeant Hardy, an' Stevenson of the Marines, who have been temperance
men all their lives, enjoy good health--would to God I was like 'em!
And I know that drinkers are dyin' off like sheep, but that makes it all
the worse for me, for, to tell you the honest truth, boys--an' I don't
care who knows it--I _can't_ leave off drinkin'.  It's killin' me by
inches.  I know, likewise, that all the old hard drinkers here are soon
sent home ruined for life--such of 'em at least as don't leave their
miserable bones in the sand, and I know that I'm on the road to
destruction, but I can't--I _won't_ give it up!"

"Ha!  Johnson," said Armstrong, "these are the very words quoted by the
new parson at the temperance meetin' last night--an' he's a splendid
fellow with his tongue.  `Hard drinker,' says he, `you are humbuggin'
yourself.  You say you _can't_ give up the drink.  The real truth is, my
man, that you _won't_ give it up.  If only I could persuade you, in
God's strength, to say "I _will_," you'd soon come all right.'  Now,
Johnson, if you'll come with me to the next meetin'--"

"What! _me_ go to a temperance meetin'?" cried the trooper with
something of scorn in his laugh.  "You might as well ask the devil to go
to church!  No, no, Armstrong, I'm past prayin' for--thank you all the
same for invitin' me.  But what was you askin' about news bein' true?
What news?"

"Why, that the old shepherd has been killed, and all our cattle are
captured, and the Egyptian cavalry sent after them."

"You don't say so!" cried the trooper, with the air of a man who
suddenly shakes off a heavy burden.  "If that's so, they'll be wantin'
us also, no doubt."

Without another word he turned and strode away as fast as his long legs
could carry him.

Although there might possibly be a call for infantry to follow, Miles
and his friend did not see that it was needful to make for their fort at
more than their ordinary pace.

It was a curious and crowded scene they had to traverse.  Besides the
grog-shops already mentioned there were numerous coffee-houses, where,
from diminutive cups, natives of temperate habits slaked their thirst
and discussed the news--of which, by the way, there was no lack at the
time; for, besides the activity of Osman Digna and his hordes, there
were frequent arrivals of mails, and sometimes of reinforcements, from
Lower Egypt.  In the side-streets were many smithies, where lance-heads
and knives were being forged by men who had not the most distant belief
that such weapons would ever be turned into pruning-hooks.  There were
also workers in leather, who sewed up passages of the Koran in leathern
cases and sold them as amulets to be worn on necks and arms.  Elsewhere,
hairdressers were busy greasing and powdering with the dust of red-wood
the bushy locks of Hadendoa dandies.  In short, all the activities of
Eastern city life were being carried on as energetically as if the place
were in perfect security, though the only bulwark that preserved it,
hour by hour, from being swept by the innumerable hordes of Soudan
savagery, consisted of a few hundreds of British and Egyptian soldiers!

Arrived at the Sphinx Fort, the friends found that the news was only too
true.

The stolen cattle belonged to the people of Suakim.  Every morning at
six o'clock it was the custom of the shepherds to go out with their
herds and flocks to graze, there being no forage in or near the town.
All had to be back by sunset, when the gates were locked, and no one was
allowed out or in till six the next morning.  The women, who carried all
the water used in the waterless town, had of course to conform to the
same rule.  Like most men who are constantly exposed to danger, the
shepherds became careless or foolhardy, and wandered rather far with
their herds.  Osman was too astute to neglect his opportunities.  On
this occasion an old shepherd, who was well-known at Sphinx Redoubt, had
strayed too far.  The Soudanese swept down, cut off his retreat, killed
him, and, as we have said, carried off his cattle.

It was to retrieve, if possible, or avenge this disaster that the
Egyptian cavalry sallied forth.  They were seen galloping after the foe
when Miles reached the roof of the redoubt, where some of his comrades
were on duty, while Captain Lacey and several officers were looking on
with field-glasses.

"They are too late, I fear, to do much good," remarked one of the
officers.

"Don't I wish I was goin' wid them!" whispered Corporal Flynn to a
comrade.

"Ye wad be a queer objec' on the ootside o' a horse," remarked Macleod
cynically.

"Why, Mac, ye wouldn't have me go _inside_ of a horse, would ye?"

"It wad be much the same which way ye went," returned the Scot.

"Ah, thin, the horse wouldn't think so, unless he was a donkey!"

"Well done!" exclaimed Captain Lacey at that moment, as the cavalry cut
off and succeeded in recapturing a few of the cattle, and gave the enemy
several volleys, which caused them to beat a hasty retreat.  This,
however, turned out to be a _ruse_ on the part of Osman, who had his men
concealed in strong force there.  He tried to draw the cavalry away from
Suakim, and was very nearly successful.  In the ardour of pursuit the
Egyptians failed to observe that the Soudanese were creeping round their
rear to cut off retreat.  On discovering their mistake, and finding that
their small force of two hundred men was being surrounded by thousands
of Arab warriors, it was almost too late.  Turning at once, they
galloped back, and could be seen, through the field-glasses, turning now
and then gallantly to engage the pursuing foe.

No help could be rendered them at first, as they were beyond the range
of all the forts; nevertheless, they got in safely, with little injury
to man or beast, and driving before them the animals that had been
recovered.

Next day the body of the poor old shepherd was brought in and buried,
without a coffin, by his relations.

Miles, being off duty at the time, went to see the funeral, and found
that Eastern and Western ideas on this point, as on many others, are
wide as the poles asunder.  No doubt the grief of the near relations was
as real as it was demonstrative, but it required more credulity than he
possessed to enable him to believe that the howling, shouting, and
singing of many mourners was indicative of genuine feeling.  The
creation of noise, indeed, seemed to be their chief method of paying
respect to the dead.

As deaths in Suakim were very numerous at this time, owing to much
sickness among natives as well as troops, the sounds of mourning,
whether by volley or voice, became so frequent that orders were at last
given to cease firing over the soldiers' graves when they were buried.

Just ahead of the shepherd's body came some poor women, who were
weeping, falling down at intervals, and kissing the ground.  On reaching
the wall round the land side of the town these women stopped, formed a
circle, and kneeled on the sand while the body was passing them, then
they leaned forward and kissed the ground, continuing in that position
till all the procession had passed.  There the women remained, not being
allowed to go to the grave, and the singing and shouting were continued
by boys, who kept running round the bier as it was borne along.  On
reaching the grave the body was put in with the face toward the east,
and covered up with stones and mortar.  Then the grave was filled up
with sand, a brief prayer was offered--the mourners kneeling--after
which the people went home.

Sad thoughts filled the mind of our young soldier as he returned to the
fort, but the sadness was soon turned to indignation when he got there.

For some time past a Soudanese youth of about seventeen or eighteen
years of age had been coming about the Sphinx Redoubt and ingratiating
himself with the men, who took a great fancy to him, because he was
amiable in disposition, somewhat humorous as well as lively, and
handsome, though black!  They used to give him something to eat every
time he came, and made quite a pet of him.  One day while he was out in
the open country, Osman's men captured this youth and took him at once
before their leader, who, probably regarding him as a deserter, ordered
both his hands to be cut off close to the wrists.  The cruel deed was
done, and the poor lad was sent back to Suakim.  It was this that roused
the wrath of Miles as well as that of his comrades.  When they saw the
raw stumps and the haggard look of the poor fellow, who had suffered
much from loss of blood, they got into a state of mind that would have
made them ready to sally forth, if so required, and assault the entire
Soudan in arms!

"Och! av I only had 'im here," said Flynn, clenching his teeth and fists
at the same time.  "It's--it's--it's--"

"Mince-meat you'd make of him," said Moses.

"No--it's _cat's_ mate--the baste!"

The others were equally angry, though not quite so emphatic, but they
did not waste their time in useless regrets.  They hurried the young
Soudanese to the doctor, who carefully dressed his wounds, and every
care was thereafter taken of him by the men, until completely restored
to health.

It may interest the reader to know that this poor fellow was afterwards
well looked after.  Some sort of employment in the garrison was obtained
for him, and he was found to be a useful and willing servant, despite
the absence of his hands.

That night a furious sand-storm burst upon the town, accompanied by
oppressive heat.

"It always seems to me," said Miles to Gaspard Redgrave, who lay next
him, "that mosquitoes and sand-flies, cats and dogs, and in fact the
whole brute creation, becomes more lively when the weather is unusually
hot.  Just listen to these cats!"

"Like a colony of small children being murdered," said Gaspard.

"It's awfu'," observed Saunders, in a kind of solemn astonishment as a
frightful caterwaul burst upon their ears.  "I wadna like to hear
teegers in the same state o' mind."

"Or elephants," murmured Moses Pyne, who was more than half asleep.

The cats were indeed a great nuisance, for, not satisfied with getting
on the flat roofs of the houses at nights, and keeping up a species of
war-dance there, they invaded the soldiers' quarters, upsetting things
in the dark--thus demonstrating the absurdity of the proverb that cats
see best in the dark--stealing whatever they could lay hold of, and
inducing half-slumbering men to fling boots and shoes, or whatever came
most handy, at them.

Rats also were innumerable, and, to the great surprise--not to say
indignation--of the men, neither dogs nor cats paid the least attention
