CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

ADVENTURE WITH AN OSTRICH.

Time passed rapidly, and the settlers, both highland and lowland, struck
their roots deeper and deeper into the soil of their adoption--watched
and criticised more or less amiably by their predecessors, the few
Dutch-African farmers who up to that time had struggled on the frontier
all alone.

One day Hans Marais was riding with Charlie Considine on the karroo, not
far from the farm-house.  They had been conversing on the condition and
prospects of the land, and the trials and difficulties of the British
settlers.  Suddenly they came on an ostrich sitting on its eggs under a
bush.  The bird rose and ran on seeing the horsemen.

"I daresay the cock-bird is not far off," observed Hans, riding up to
the nest, which was merely a slight hollow scraped in the sandy soil,
and contained a dozen eggs.  "He is a gallant bird; guards his wife most
faithfully, and shares her duties."

"I've sometimes thought," said Considine musingly, "that the ostrich
might be tamed and bred on your farms.  With such valuable feathers it
would be worth while to try."

"You are not the first who has suggested that, Charlie.  My own mother
has more than once spoken of it."

"Stay a minute," said Considine; "I shall take one of the eggs home to
her."

"Not fit to eat.  Probably half hatched," said Hans.

"No matter," returned the other, dismounting.

"Well, I'll ride to the ridge and see if the papa is within hail."

Hans did but bare justice to the cock ostrich when he said he was a
gallant bird.  It is within the mark to say that he is not only a
pattern husband, but a most exemplary father, for, besides guarding his
wife and her nest most jealously by day, he relieves her at night, and
sits himself on the nest, while his better-half takes food and
relaxation.

While Hans rode forward a few hundred yards, the cock, which chanced to
be out feeding on the plain, observed his wife running excitedly among
the bushes, and at the same moment caught a glimpse of the Dutchman.

Seven-league boots could not have aided that ostrich!  With mighty
strides and outstretched wings the giant bird rushed in furious rage to
defend its nest.  Hans saw it, and, instantly putting spurs to his
horse, also made for the nest, but the ostrich beat him.

"Look out, Charlie!" shouted Hans.

Charlie did look out, somewhat anxiously too, turning his head nervously
from side to side, for while the thunder of hoofs and the warning cry of
Hans assailed him on one side, a rushing and hissing sound was heard on
the other.  The suspense did not last long.  A few seconds later, and
the ostrich appeared, bearing down on him with railway speed.  He raised
his gun and fired, but in the haste of the moment missed.  The cap of
the second barrel snapped.  He clubbed his gun, but, before he could
raise it, the ferocious bird was on him.  Towering high over his head,
it must have been between eight and nine feet in height.  One kick of
its great two-toed foot sufficed.  The ostrich kicks forward, as a man
might when he wishes to burst in a door with his foot, and no
prize-fighter can hit out with greater celerity, no horse can kick with
greater force.  If the blow had taken full effect it would probably have
been fatal, but Considine leaped back.  It reached him, however--on the
chest,--and knocked him flat on the nest, where he lay stunned amid a
wreck of eggs.

The vicious bird was about to follow up its victory by dancing on its
prostrate foe, when Hans galloped up.  The bird turned on him at once,
with a hiss and a furious rush.  The terrified horse reared and wheeled
round with such force as almost to throw Hans, who dropped his gun in
trying to keep his seat.  Jumping into the air, and bringing its foot
down with a resounding smack, the bird sent its two formidable nails
deep into the steed's flank, from which blood flowed copiously.  The
horse took the bit in its teeth, and ran.

Hans Marais was very strong, but fear was stronger.  The horse fairly
ran off, and the ostrich pursued.  Being fleeter than the horse, it not
only kept up with ease, but managed ever and anon to give it another
kick on flank, sides, or limbs.  Hans vainly tried to grasp his
assailant by the neck.  If he succeeded in this he knew that he could
easily have choked it, for the ostrich's weak point is its long slender
neck--its strong point being its tremendous leg, the thigh of which,
blue-black, and destitute of feathers, resembles a leg of mutton in
shape and size.

At last Hans bethought him of his stirrup.  Unbuckling it, he swung it
by the leather round his head, and succeeded, after one or two attempts,
in hitting his enemy on the head with the iron.  The ostrich dropped at
once and never rose again.

Returning to the nest with his vanquished foe strapped to his saddle, he
found Considine sitting somewhat confused among the egg-debris, much of
which consisted of flattened young ones, for the eggs were in an
advanced state of incubation.

"Why, Charlie, are you going to try your hand at hatching?" cried Hans,
laughing in spite of himself.

Considine smiled rather ruefully.  "I believe my breast-bone is knocked
in.  Just help me to examine; but first catch my horse, like a good
fellow."

It was found on examination that no bones were broken, and that, beyond
a bruise, Considine was none the worse of his adventure.

One egg was found to have survived the general destruction.  This was
taken to the farm and handed to Mrs Marais, and that amiable lady
adopted and hatched it!  We do not mean to assert that she sat upon it,
but having discovered, from mysterious sounds inside, that the young
ostrich contained in it was still alive, and, being a woman of an
experimental tendency, she resolved to become a mother to it.  She
prepared a box, by lining it with a warm feather pillow, above which she
spread several skin karosses or blankets, and into this she put the egg.
Every morning and every evening she visited the nest, felt the egg to
ascertain its temperature, and added or removed a blanket according to
circumstances.  How the good woman knew the proper temperature is a
mystery which no one could explain, but certain it is that she
succeeded, for in a few days the little one became so lively in its
prison as to suggest the idea that it wanted out.  Mrs Marais then
listened attentively to the sounds, and, having come to a decision as to
which end of the egg contained the head of the bird, she cracked the
shell at that point and returned it to the nest.

Thus aided, the infant ostrich, whose head and feet lay in
juxtaposition, began life most appropriately with its strongest point--
put its best foot foremost; drove out the end of its prison with a kick,
and looked astonished.  One or two more kicks and it was out.  Next time
its foster-mother visited the nest she found the little one free,--but
subdued, as if it knew it had been naughty,--and with that "well--what--
next?" expression of countenance which is peculiar to very young birds
in general.

When born, this little creature was about the size of a small barn-door
hen, but it was exceeding weak as well as long in the legs, and its
first efforts at walking were a mere burlesque.

The feeding of this foundling was in keeping with its antecedents.  Mrs
Marais was a thoroughgoing but incomprehensible woman.  One would have
thought that boiled sheep's liver, chopped fine, and hens' eggs boiled
hard, were about the most violently opposed to probability in the way of
food for an ostrich, old or young.  Yet that is the food which she gave
this baby.  The manner of giving it, too, was in accordance with the
gift.

Sitting down on a low stool, she placed the patient--so to speak--on its
back, between her knees, and held it fast; then she rammed the liver and
egg down its throat with her fingers as far as they would reach, after
which she set it on its legs and left it for a few minutes to
contemplation.  Hitching it suddenly on its back again, she repeated the
operation until it had had enough.  In regard to quantity, she regulated
herself by feeling its stomach.  In the matter of drink she was more
pronounced than a teetotaler, for she gave it none at all.

Thus she continued perseveringly to act until the young ostrich was old
enough to go out in charge of a little Hottentot girl named Hreikie, who
became a very sister to it, and whose life thence-forward was spent
either in going to sleep under bushes, on the understanding that she was
taking care of baby, or in laughing at the singular way in which her
charge waltzed when in a facetious mood.

There is no doubt that this ostrich would have reached a healthy
maturity if its career had not been cut short by a hyena.

Not until many years after this did "ostrich-farming" and
feather-exporting become, as it still continues, one of the most
important branches of commercial enterprise in the Cape Colony; but we
cannot avoid the conclusion, that, as Watt gave the first impulse to the
steam-engine when he sat and watched the boiling kettle, so Mrs Marais
opened the door to a great colonial industry when she held that infant
ostrich between her knees, and stuffed it with minced eggs and liver.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE BERGENAARS.

"So you like the study of French?" said Charlie Considine, as he sat one
morning beside Bertha Marais in the porch of her father's dwelling.

"Yes, very much," answered the girl.  She said no more, but she thought,
"Especially when I am taught it by such a kind, painstaking teacher as
you."

"And you like to live in the wild karroo?" asked the youth.

"Of course I do," was the reply, with a look of surprise.

"Of course.  It was a stupid question, Bertha; I did not think at the
moment that it is _home_ to you, and that you have known no other since
you were a little child.  But to my mind it would be a dull sort of life
to live here always."

"Do you find it so dull?" asked Bertha, with a sad look.

"No, not in the least," replied the youth, quickly.  "How _could_ I,
living as I do with such pleasant people, like one of their own kith and
kin, hunting with the sons and teaching the daughters--to say nothing of
scolding them and playing chess, and singing and riding.  Oh no!  I'm
anything but dull, but I was talking _generally_ of life in the karroo.
If I lived alone, for instance, like poor Horley, or with a disagreeable
family like that of Jan Smit--by the way, that reminds me that we have
heard news of the three runaways, Ruyter, Jemalee, and Booby."

"Oh!  I'm so glad," cried Bertha, her fair face brightening up with
pleasure, "for I am very fond of Ruyter.  He was so kind to me that time
he found me lying near Smit's house, when my pony ran away and threw me,
and I felt so miserable when I heard that his master was cruel and often
beat him with a sjambok.  Often and often since he ran away--and it must
be nearly a year now--I have prayed God that he might come back, and
that Jan Smit might become good to him--What have you heard?"

Considine's face wore a troubled look.  "I fear," he said, "the news
will distress you, for what I heard was that the three men, driven to
desperation by the harsh treatment received from their master, have
joined one of the fiercest of these gangs of robbers, called the
Bergenaars--the gang led, I believe, by Dragoener.  It was Lucas Van
Dyk, the hunter, who told me, and he is said to be generally correct in
his statements."

Bertha's nether lip quivered, and she hid her face in her hands for a
few moments in silence.

"Oh!  I'm so sorry--so sorry," she said at length, looking up.  "He was
so gentle, so kind.  I can't imagine Ruyter becoming one of those
dreadful Bergenaars, about whose ferocious cruelty we hear so much--his
nature was so different.  I can't believe it."

"I fear," rejoined Considine gently, "that it is true.  You know it is
said that oppression will drive even a wise man mad, and a man will take
to anything when he is mad."

"It could not drive a Christian to such a life," returned the girl
sadly.  "Oh!  I _wish_ he had become a Christian when Stephen Orpin
spoke to him, but he wouldn't."

"When did Orpin speak to him, and what did he say?" asked Considine,
whose own ideas as to Christianity were by no means fixed or clear.

"It was just after that time," rejoined Bertha, "when Jan Smit had had
him tied to a cart-wheel, and flogged so terribly that he could not walk
for some days.  Orpin happened to arrive at the time with his waggon--
you know he has taken to going about as a trader,--and he spoke a great
deal to Ruyter about his soul, and about Jesus coming to save men from
sin, and enabling them to forgive their enemies; but when Ruyter heard
about forgiving his enemies he wouldn't listen any more.  Pointing to
his wounds, he said, `Do you think I can forgive Jan Smit?'"

"I don't wonder," said Considine; "it is too much to expect a black
fellow smarting under the sjambok to forgive the man who applies it--
especially when it is applied unjustly, and with savage cruelty."

Bertha was not gifted with an argumentative spirit.  She looked
anxiously in the face of her companion, and murmured some broken
sentences about the Lord's Prayer and the Golden Rule, and wound up by
saying hesitatingly, "How can we ask forgiveness if we do not forgive?"

"You are right, Bertha," was Considine's rejoinder, uttered gravely;
"but, truly, a man must be more than a man to act on such principles.
Think, now of the state of things at the present time with regard to the
settlers.  The `rust,' as they call that strange disease which has
totally ruined the first year's crop of wheat, has thrown the most of
them into difficulties, and in the midst of this almost overwhelming
calamity down came the Kafirs on the Albany District, and the
Bergenaars, of whom we have just been speaking, not, like men, to fight
openly--that were endurable,--but like sly thieves in the dead of night,
to carry off sheep and cattle from many of the farms--in some cases even
killing the herdsmen.  Now, what think you must be the feelings of the
settlers towards these Kafirs and runaway robbers?--can _they_ forgive?"

Bertha didn't know.  She thought their feelings must be very harsh.
Diverging from the question, however, she returned to the first regret--
namely, that her friend Ruyter had joined the Bergenaars.

"Hallo!  Considine, hi! where are you?" came the sonorous voice of
Conrad Marais in the distance, interrupting the conversation.  Next
moment the hearty countenance of the farmer followed his voice round the
corner of the house.

"Come, get your gun, my boy!" he cried in some excitement.  "These
villains have been down last night and carried off two spans of my best
oxen, besides killing and devouring several sheep."

Considine started up at once.

"We shall be off in half an hour," continued the farmer; "Hans is away
gathering one or two neighbours, and the people are almost ready."

"Do you accompany them?" asked Considine.

"Of course I do.  Come along."

The youth required no urging.  In a few minutes he was armed and
mounted, galloping in company with a score of horsemen--black, brown,
and white--towards the cattle-kraals.  Here was already assembled by
Hans a troop of mounted men, among whom were Jan Smit and his three
sons, David, Jacob, and Hendrik, also the hunter Van Dyk.  After a brief
consultation, in which Van Dyk took a prominent part, they rode off at a
smart gallop.

We change the scene now to a large and dark cavern up among the wild
heights of the Winterberg mountains.

It was evening, but the sun had still a considerable distance to descend
before finding its bed on the western horizon.  A faint gleam of day
entered the cave, which was further illuminated by three fires, over
which a band of savage-looking dark-skinned men were roasting chops and
marrow-bones.  Abdul Jemalee the Malay slave and Booby the Bushman were
there, assisting at the feast.  At the inner end of the cave, seated
beside two men, was Ruyter the Hottentot.  He was a good deal changed
from the rough but careless and jolly fellow whom we first introduced to
the reader.  There was a stern severity on his countenance, coupled with
a touch of sadness when in repose, but when called into action, or even
when conversing, the softer feeling vanished, and nothing remained but
the lines indicative of a stern settled purpose.  Most of the robbers
around him had like himself fled from harsh masters, and become hardened
in a career of crime.  The expression of almost every countenance was
vindictive, sensual, coarse.  Ruyter's was not so.  Unyielding sternness
alone marked his features, which, we have elsewhere remarked, were
unusually good for a Hottentot.  Being a man of superior power he had
become the leader of this robber-band.  It was only one of many that
existed at that time among the almost inaccessible heights of the
mountain-ranges bordering on the colony.  His companions recognised the
difference between themselves and their captain, and did not love him
for it, though they feared him.  They also felt that he was irrevocably
one of themselves, having imbrued his hands in white man's blood more
than once, and already made his name terrible on that part of the
frontier.

"They should be here by this time," said Ruyter, in Dutch, to one of the
men at his side.  "Why did you send them off before I returned?"

He said this with a look of annoyance.  The man replied that he had
acted according to the best of his judgment and had been particular in
impressing the leader of the party that he was not to touch the flocks
of old Marais, but to devote himself entirely to those of Jan Smit.

To this Ruyter observed with a growl that it was not likely they would
attend to such orders if Marais' herds chanced to be handy, but the
robber to whom he spoke only replied with a sly smile, showing that he
was of the same opinion.

Just then a man rushed into the cave announcing the fact that their
