going through the pantomime with the wounded man.  At last Karlsefin
appeared to agree to their proposal.

"Now, Heika and Hake," said he, "nothing remains to be done but to try
the plan I have described to you.  Up, and bring the wounded chief
hither without delay."

The two men obeyed, and in a few minutes were seen re-issuing from the
fortress bearing a litter between them, on which lay the wounded chief
with a blanket thrown over him, only his head being visible.  Carrying
him towards the row of natives, the brothers laid the burden at their
feet as they sat still on the ground looking on with great interest.
Karlsefin removed the blanket, and revealed the chief bound hand and
foot.  Something covered by another blanket lay at his side.  Karlsefin
took hold of this.  As he did so the Norsemen rose.  The blanket was
cast off, and ten naked swords were revealed, which were instantly
grasped by ten stalwart arms, and flashed with the speed of light over
the ten native heads!

Taken thus by surprise they remained seated, and, supposing that to move
would be the signal for instant death, they were perfectly motionless,
though the colour of their countenances revealed to some extent the
state of their feelings.

A terrific yell from the distant heights told that the deed had been
noticed and understood.  It was answered by a shout from the Norsemen as
they issued from their fortress, secured their prisoners, and carried
them within the defences.  In a few minutes thereafter not a man was to
be seen on the heights, and the region became as silent and apparently
as deserted as it had been before the advent of the savages.

"Now then, Biarne, get the things ready.  Is the kettle boiling?" said
Karlsefin.

"All is prepared," answered Biarne.

"'Tis well.  We must carry out our plan as quickly as may be," rejoined
Karlsefin.  "We may be sure that these fellows have only retired behind
the heights to hold a council of war, and, in their present humour, it
won't be long before they come on to make an effort to retaliate upon us
for our supposed treachery."

The ten men were conveyed to the largest house in the hamlet, and there
ranged in a row against the wall.  They looked very grave, but were firm
and stern.  Evidently they imagined that death by torture was to be
their doom, and had braced themselves up to die like brave men in the
presence of their foes.

Karlsefin hastened to relieve them from this state of mind as quickly as
possible.  He placed before them ten plates of splendid boiled salmon.
They regarded this proceeding with some surprise, but shook their heads
and refused to eat.  Doubtless their appetites were not good at the
time!

"Fetch the wounded chief hither," said Karlsefin, "and tell Bertha that
she is wanted."

When the wounded man was carried in and seated opposite to his comrades,
a box being placed for him to lean against, Karlsefin said to
Bertha--"Now, lass, do thy best to induce the chief to show his friends
how to eat.  He has had some experience of you, and will doubtless
understand."

With a winning smile that would have compelled any susceptible man to
eat or drink, or do anything else that he was bid whether inclined or
not, Bertha put a plate of salmon before the chief and made signs to him
to eat.  He smiled in return, and began at once.  Then Bertha patted him
on the shoulder, pointed to the ten prisoners, and made signs again.
The chief smiled intelligently, and spoke to his companions.  He
evidently said more than was necessary to order them to eat, for their
faces brightened perceptibly, and they commenced dinner in these
peculiar circumstances without delay.

It was clear that their appetites had not been much impaired by alarm,
for the salmon disappeared in a twinkling.  Then Karlsefin ordered ten
plates of fried venison to be placed before them, which was done, and
they applied themselves to the consumption of this with equal relish.
Having concluded the repast, each man received a can of warm water and
milk, highly sweetened with sugar.  At first they took a doubtful sip of
this, and looked at each other in surprise.  It was a new sensation!
One of them smacked his lips; the rest said "Waugh!" nodded their heads,
and drained their cans to the bottom at a single draught; after which,
observing that there was some sediment left, they scraped it out with
their fingers and sucked them.

"So far that is satisfactory," said Karlsefin, with a smile.  "Now,
Biarne--the gifts."

A wooden tray was now brought, on which lay a variety of silver
brooches, rings, and other baubles.  These were distributed to the
prisoners.  Last of all, each received a yard of bright-coloured cloth,
and then they were ordered by signs to rise.

They obeyed with alacrity, and were led out of the house, at the door of
which they found a litter similar to the one which they had seen before.
It was simply a blanket fastened to two long poles, and rolled round
them so as to form a couch of about a yard in width.  On this the
wounded chief was laid, and two of the natives were ordered to grasp the
ends of the poles and raise him.  They did so, and were conducted by the
Norsemen in single file out into the forest.  Here, to their intense
surprise, Karlsefin shook hands with them all very kindly, and then,
going back with his men to the fortress, left them to return to their
kindred!

Karlsefin remarked quietly to Biarne, as he went along, that one of the
precepts of the new religion, which he had remembered well, because it
seemed to him so very wise, was, that men should always try to "overcome
evil with good."

Thus was established a warm friendship between the natives of Vinland
and the Norsemen; a friendship which might have lasted for ever--to the
great modification, no doubt, of American history--had not unfortunate
circumstances intervened to break it up.  As it was, it lasted for a
considerable time.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE FIRST AMERICAN FUR TRADERS--STRANGE DEVICES--ANXIOUS TIMES AND
PLEASANT DISCOVERIES.

The business of the colony progressed admirably after this.  A large
house was erected, with a central hall and numerous sleeping-rooms or
closets off it, where all the chief people dwelt together, and a number
of the men messed daily.  Grass was found in abundance, and a large
quantity of this was cut and stacked for winter use, although there was
good reason to believe that the winter would be so mild that the cattle
might be left out to forage for themselves.  Salmon were also caught in
great numbers, not only in Little River but in the main stream, and in
the lake at their very doors.  What they did not consume was dried,
smoked, and stored.  Besides this, a large quantity of fine timber was
felled, squared, cut into lengths, and made suitable for exportation.
Eggs were found on the islands offshore, and feathers collected, so that
early in the summer they had more than enough wherewith to load the
ship.  Among other discoveries they found grain growing wild.  The
Saga-writers have called it wheat, but it is open to question whether it
was not wild rice, of which large quantities grow in the uninhabited
parts of America at the present time.  They also found a beautiful kind
of wood, called massurwood, of which samples were sent to Greenland and
Norway; but what this wood really was we cannot tell.

Meanwhile an extensive traffic in valuable furs was commenced with the
natives, who were more than satisfied with the scraps of bright cloth,
beads, and other trifling ornaments they received in exchange for them.
Some of the natives wanted to purchase weapons with their furs, but
Karlsefin would not allow this.  At first the Norsemen gave their cloth
and other wares in exchange with liberal hand, cutting the bright cloth
into stripes of three or four inches in breadth; but they soon found
that at this rate their supplies would become exhausted too early in the
year.  They therefore reduced their prices, and began to give stripes of
cloth only two inches in width, and at last reduced the measure to one
inch, for furs that had previously fetched four.  But the
unsophisticated natives were quite content with the change, and appeared
to enjoy nothing so much as to twist these stripes of cloth into their
long black hair.

One day Karlsefin said to Gudrid that he had a new plan in his head.

"What is that?" said she.

"I think that our goods are going away too fast, so I mean to try if
these Skraelingers will give their furs for dairy produce.  We have a
good deal of that, and can spare some."

"I don't know how Astrid will like that," she said, laughing.  "You know
she has charge of the dairy, and is very proud of it."

"That is well, Gudrid, for Astrid will be all the more pleased to have
her produce turned to such good account.  Milk is pleasant to the
throat, and cream delights the tongue.  Methinks these fellows will be
tempted by it."

"Would they not like beer better?"

"Beer!" cried Karlsefin, with a shout of laughter.  "You should have
seen the faces they made, and the way they spat it out, the only time
they were asked to taste it.  Biarne was very keen to let them try it,
and I did not object, for I partly expected some such result.  No, no, a
man must _learn_ to like beer.  Nature teaches him to like milk.  But
go, tell Astrid to fill twenty cans with milk, and twenty small cups
with good cream.  Let her also set out twenty cakes, with a pat of fresh
butter and a lump of cheese on each.  Let her spread all on the table in
the great hall, and see that she does it speedily.  I will go and fetch
the company to this feast."

He left the room as he spoke, and in less than an hour his orders had
been executed.  When he entered the hall a short time afterwards,
followed by twenty natives, he found everything prepared according to
his directions.

That he was correct in his expectation was clearly proved ere many
minutes had passed, for the twenty natives raised their forty eyes, and
looked on each other with rapturous delight when they tasted the good
things.  They finished them in a twinkling, and then wished for more;
but it is only justice to their good-breeding and self-restraint to add
that they did not _ask_ for more!  From that day nothing would please
them but that they should have dairy produce for their furs.

Some time after this Karlsefin was walking, one afternoon, on the shores
of the lake with Thorward.  He suddenly asked him how he should like to
take a trip to Greenland.

"I should like it well," replied Thorward.

"Then if you will go in charge of the _Snake_ I should be pleased," said
the other, "for we have collected more than enough of merchandise to
fill her, and if you set sail at once you will have time to bring back a
cargo of such things as we need before autumn comes to an end."

"I will go," said Thorward, "to-morrow, if you choose."

"Nay, not quite so fast.  The ship is only half loaded yet; but in a day
or two she will be ready.  There are two things I am anxious you should
manage.  One is to persuade Leif Ericsson to come and visit us,--if he
will not come to stay with us.  The other is to tempt as many married
men as you can to come over and join us--especially those men who chance
to have a good many daughters, for we would be the better of a few more
busy little hands, fair faces, and silvery tones in this beautiful
Vinland of ours."

"I will do what I can," replied Thorward, "and I would advise that Olaf
should go with me, that his glowing descriptions may tempt his father to
come."

"Nay; that would spoil all," objected Karlsefin, "for, having had a
sight of his son he would be content to let him come back alone.  No,
no; we will keep Olaf here as a bait to tempt him.  But go now and make
your arrangements, for you set sail as soon as the ship is ready."

Not long after that the _Snake_ left her anchorage with a full cargo,
rowed down the river, hoisted sail, and bore away for Greenland.

While she was gone an event of deep and absorbing interest occurred in
Vinland.

One fine morning in autumn the heart of the entire hamlet was moved by
the sound of a new voice!  It was not a musical voice--rather squawky,
indeed, than otherwise--and it was a feeble voice, that told of utter
helplessness.  In short, a son had been born to Karlsefin and Gudrid,
and they called him Snorro.  We record it with regret--for it went a
long way to prove that, in regard to sweet sounds, Karlsefin and his
wife were destitute of taste.  It is our business, however, to record
facts rather than to carp at them, therefore we let Snorro pass without
further comment.

The little body that was attached to the little voice, although far from
beautiful at first, was an object of intense affection to the parents,
and of regard, almost amounting to veneration, to the rugged men by whom
it was surrounded.  Bertha declared enthusiastically that it was
"perfectly lovely," although it was obvious to all unprejudiced eyes
that it resembled nothing so much as a piece of wrinkled beef of bad
colour!  Astrid declared that it had "such a wise look," despite the
evident fact that its expression was little short of idiotical!
Karlsefin said nothing, but he smiled a good deal, and chucked it under
the place where its chin ought to have been with his great forefinger in
a timid way.

But when Snorro was deemed sufficiently far advanced in life to be
handed out for public exhibition, then it was that the greatest number
of falsehoods were uttered, with the quietest deliberation, although, to
say truth, the greater number of the men said nothing, but contented
themselves with taking the infant in their big rough hands as delicately
as if they thought it was a bubble, and feared that it might burst and
leave nothing to be handed back to Thora, who acted the part of nurse.
Others merely ventured to look at it silently with their hairy lips
parted and their huge eyes gazing in blank admiration.

Perhaps Krake made the most original remark in reference to the
newcomer.  "Ah," said he quite seriously, touching its cheek as softly
as though he half feared it would bite, "only to think that myself was
like _that_ once!"

This was received with a shout of laughter, so loud that little Snorro
was startled.

"Ah, then," cried Krake, with a look of great alarm, "what is it going
to do?"

This question was occasioned by the sudden change on the infant's
countenance, which became, if possible, redder than before, and puckered
up into such a complicated series of wrinkles that all semblance to
humanity was well-nigh lost.  Suddenly a hole opened on the surface and
a feeble squall came forth!

"Oh, you wicked men!" cried Thora, snatching the infant indignantly from
them and hurrying back into the house.

"'Tis a sweet child," observed Swend tenderly, as he and his comrades
sauntered away.

"You must have a good opinion of yourself, Krake," said Tyrker, "to
fancy that you were once like it."

"So I have," replied Krake.  "It's what my father had before me.  It
lies in the family, you see, and with good reason too, for we were the
best of company, not to mention fighting.  It was always said that we
were uncommonly fine infants, though a trifle big and noisy for the
peace of our neighbourhood--quite like Turks in that way, I believe!"

"I doubt it not, Krake," said Biarne, who came up in time to hear the
concluding remark; "and since you are such a noisy fellow I am going to
send you on an expedition in search of these vines, that seem to me to
have rooted themselves out of the land and fled, from mere spite, since
Leif named it Vinland.  There is but one quarter that I can think of now
which has not yet been explored; you may take a party of men, and let
Tyrker go too; as he discovered them on his first visit, the stupid
fellow ought to have re-discovered them long before now.  You can
discuss by the way the little matter you have in hand,--only see that
you don't fall out about it."

Thus instructed, Krake organised a party, and set off to search for the
celebrated vines, which, as Biarne said, had not up to that time been
found.

That day they searched far and wide without success.  Then they sat down
to rest and eat.  While thus engaged, Krake and Tyrker returned to the
subject of the reported noisiness of Turks, and the former became so
caustic in his jests that the irascible little Tyrker lost temper, much
to the amusement of his comrades.

After refreshing themselves, the explorers again set out and came to a
part of the country which was broken up and beautifully diversified by
rocky eminences crowned with trees, and shady hollows carpeted with
wild-flowers.  It was difficult here to decide as to which of the
innumerable valleys or hollows they should traverse; they therefore sat
down again for a little to consult, but the consultation soon became a
discussion, and Krake, whose spirit of fun had got the better of him,
gradually edged the talk round until it came again, quite in a natural
way, to the Turks.  At last Tyrker became so angry that he started up,
declared he would follow the party no longer, plunged into a thicket and
disappeared.

He was followed by a shout of laughter, and then the others, rising,
resumed their search, not doubting that their irate companion would ere
long rejoin them.

But Tyrker did not join them, and when evening drew on apace they became
anxious, gave up the search for vines, and went about looking for him.
At last it became too dark for them to continue the search, and they
were obliged to return home without their comrade.

On leaving them Tyrker had no definite idea what he meant to do or where
he meant to go.  He just walked straight before him in high dudgeon,
taking no notice of the route by which he journeyed, or the flight of
time.  At length he awoke from his absent condition of mind and looked
up.  A vast amphitheatre of wooded hills surrounded him, and there, in
