very heavens seemed to fight against the unfortunate Jews, for a
terrific tempest suddenly broke upon the city. So furious was the
wind that the Jews could no longer stand on the edge of the crag,
or oppose the progress of the enemy; while the Romans, sheltered
from the wind by the rock, itself, were able to press upwards.

The platform once gained, they rushed upon the Jews, slaying all
they met, men, women, and children. Vast numbers of the Jews, in
their despair, threw themselves headlong, with their wives and
children, over the precipices and, when the butchery was complete,
five thousand bodies were found at the foot of the rocks. Four
thousand lay dead on the platform above. Of all those in Gamala
when the Romans entered, two women, alone, escaped. They were the
sisters of Philip, a general in Agrippa's army. They managed to
conceal themselves until the carnage was over, and the fury of the
Romans had subsided; and then showed themselves, and proclaimed who
they were.

Gischala now, alone of the cities of Galilee, defied the Roman
arms. The people themselves were, for the most part, tillers of the
soil, and were anxious to make their submission; but John--the
rival and bitter enemy of Josephus--with the robber band he had
collected, was master of the town, and refused to allow any talk of
submission. The city had none of the natural strength of Jotapata
and Gamala, and Vespasian sent Titus against it with a thousand
horse; while he ordered the Tenth Legion to take up its winter
quarters at Scythopolis; and himself moved, with the other two
legions, to Caesarea.

Titus, on his arrival before Gischala, saw that the city could be
easily taken by assault but, desirous of avoiding any more shedding
of blood, and learning that the inhabitants were desirous of
surrendering, he sent an officer before it to offer terms of
capitulation. The troops of John of Gischala manned the walls and,
when the summons of Titus was proclaimed, John answered that the
garrison accepted willingly the generous terms that were offered;
but that, the day being the Sabbath, nothing could be concluded,
without an infringement of the law, until the next day.

Titus at once granted the delay, and drew off his troops to a
neighboring town. In the night, John of Gischala marched away with
all his armed men; followed by many of the inhabitants, with their
wives and children--fearing to remain in the city, exposed to the
anger of Titus, when he found he had been duped. The women and
children soon began to drop behind; but the men pressed on, leaving
the helpless and despairing women behind them.

In the morning, when Titus appeared before the town, it opened its
gates to him at once; the people hailing him as their deliverer
from the oppression they had so long suffered, at the hands of John
and his bands of ruffians. Titus entered Gischala amidst the
acclamations of the people; and behaved with great moderation,
injuring no one, and contenting himself with throwing down a
portion of the walls; and warning the inhabitants that, if they
again rose in rebellion, the same mercy would not be extended to
them.

He had at once dispatched a troop of horse in pursuit of the
fugitives. They overtook them, and slew six thousand of the men,
and brought three thousand women and children back into the city.
John himself, with the strongest of his band, were not overtaken,
but made their way to Jerusalem.

The fame of the successful exploit, of the destruction of the Roman
camp, brought large numbers of young men flocking to the hills, as
soon as the Romans retired from Gamala, all eager to join the band;
and John could have recruited his numbers to any extent but, now
that all Galilee had fallen, and the Romans retired to their winter
quarters, he did not see that there was anything to be done, until
the spring. It would be madness to attack either of the great Roman
camps, at Scythopolis or Caesarea; and although, doubtless, the
garrisons left in Tiberias, Tarichea, and other towns might have
been driven out, this would only have brought upon those cities the
anger of the Romans, and involved them in ruin and destruction.

Still less would it have been of any advantage to go down, at
present, into Judea. That province was suffering woes, as great as
the Romans could inflict upon it, from the action of the factions.
Under the pretense of punishing all who were supposed to be
favorable to making terms with Rome, bands of armed men pervaded
the whole country, plundering and slaying the wretched inhabitants.

Law and order were at an end. Those in Jerusalem who claimed, for
themselves, the chief authority in the country had done nothing to
assist their countrymen, in the north, in their struggle with the
Romans. Not a man had been dispatched to Galilee. The leaders were
occupied in their own desperate feuds, and battles took place in
the streets of the city. The peaceful inhabitants were plundered
and ill treated, and the condition of those within the walls was as
terrible as was that of those without. Anarchy, plunder, and
carnage extended throughout Judea and, while the destruction of
Jerusalem was threatened by the Roman army in the north, the Jews
made no preparation, whatever, for its defense, but spent their
whole time and energy in civil strife.

When, therefore, the numerous band who had now gathered round him
urged him to lead them down to Jerusalem, John refused to do so.
Getting upon an elevated spot, where his voice could be heard by
them all, he said:

"My friends, you have heard, as well as I, what is taking place in
Jerusalem and the country round it. Did we go down there, what good
could we do? We should be drawn into the strife, on one side or
another; and the swords which should be kept for the defense of the
Temple against the Romans would be stained with Jewish blood.
Moreover, we should aid to consume the food stored away in the
granaries.

"Nor can we, through the winter, attempt any enterprise against the
Romans here. The woes of Galilee are over. Tens of thousands have
fallen, but those that survive can go about their business and till
their fields in peace. Were we to renew the war, here, we should
bring upon them a fresh outburst of the Roman vengeance.

"Therefore, there is naught for us to do, now; but in the spring,
when the Romans get into motion against Jerusalem, we will march to
its defense. We have naught to do with the evil deeds that are being
performed there; we have but to do our duty, and the first duty of
every Jew is to die, if need be, in the defense of the Temple.
Therefore, let us now disperse to our homes. When the first news
comes that the Romans are stirring, those of you who are disposed
to follow me, and obey my orders, can assemble here.

"But let only such come. Let the rest make their way, singly, to
Jerusalem. I am resolved to have only such with me who will follow
me as one man. You know how the factions rage in the city. A
compact body of men, true to themselves and their leader, can
maintain themselves aloof from the strife, and make themselves
respected by both parties; but single men must take sides with one
faction or other, or be ill treated by both.

"We are wanted, at home. The fields are lying untilled, for want of
hands; therefore let us lay aside our arms until the spring, and do
our duty to our families until we are called upon to aid in the
defense of the Temple. When the hour comes, I shall be ready to
lead, if you are ready to follow."

John's address received general approval, and the gathering
dispersed; all vowing that they would assemble in the spring, and
follow John wherever he chose to lead them--for he was already
regarded with an almost superstitious admiration in the country
around. His deliverance at Jotapata and the success that he, alone
of the Jewish leaders, had gained over the Romans, marked him in
their eyes as one specially chosen by God to lead them to victory;
and in a few hours the hill above Gamala was deserted, and John and
his followers were all on their way towards their homes.



Chapter 10: Captives.


John was received with great joy by his father; who had already
heard the story brought by the injured member of the band from
Gamala, and was filled with pride that his son should so have
distinguished himself. He at once agreed to John's proposal that he
should start, on the following day, to fetch the women from Neve,
as there was no longer any fear of trouble from the Romans. Galilee
was completely subdued and, whatever events might take place in
Judea, those in the north would be unaffected by them.

The day after his return, then, John set out with Jonas for Neve.
John charged his companion on no account to say anything of their
doings at the siege of Gamala; and as communication was difficult,
and they had not heard from Simon since John had left him, his
friends at Neve were not aware that he had been absent from the
farm. Martha and Mary were delighted to see him, and to hear that
all was well at home. They had been greatly alarmed at the news of
the slaughter of the fishermen on the lake, fearing that John might
have gone across to Tarichea with some of his friends in the
village. Their fears on this head, however, abated as time passed
on and they did not hear from Simon; who, they felt assured, would
have brought the news to Martha, had aught happened to their son.

They had mourned over the siege and massacre of Gamala, and had
been filled with joy when the news had arrived, three days before,
that the Roman army had marched away to take up its quarters for
the winter; and they had looked for the summons, which John
brought, for their return home.

"And does your father think, John, that there will be trouble again
in the spring? Shall we have to leave home again, as soon as the
winter is past?"

"He hopes not, mother. Gamala was the only town on this side of the
Jordan that resisted the Roman authority and, as all the
territories of Agrippa are now peaceful, there is no reason why the
Romans should enter these again; and indeed, all Galilee has now
surrendered. As Vespasian moved towards the sea, deputies came to
him from every town and village; and I think, now, that there will
be no more trouble there."

"It has been terrible enough, my son. What tens of thousands of men
have perished, what destruction has been wrought! We have been
mourning, for months now, for the woes which have fallen upon our
people."

"It has been most terrible, mother; and yet, it might have been
worse. Nigh a hundred and fifty thousand have fallen, at Gadara,
Jotapata, Japha, Tarichea, and Gamala; besides those who were slain
in the villages that had been sacked, and destroyed. Still,
considering all things, it might have been worse and, were it all
over now--did no more dangers threaten our nation--we might even
rejoice that no greater evils have befallen us, for our revolt
against Rome. But what has been done is but a preparation for the
siege of Jerusalem.

"However, do not let us begin to mourn over the future. The storm
has, for the present, passed away from us and, whatever misfortunes
have befallen our countrymen, we have happily escaped. The farm
stands uninjured, and no harm has come to any of us."

"And all the villagers have escaped, John? Did none of our
neighbors go out in their boats to Tarichea? We feared, when we
heard of the sea fight, that some must have fallen."

"No, mother. Fortunately, they listened to the counsels of my
father, who implored them not to put out on the lake for that, did
they do so, they would only bring misfortune and ruin upon
themselves."

"And have you heard, John," Mary asked, "anything of the champion
who they say has arisen? We have heard all sorts of tales of
him--how he harassed the Romans before Gamala and, with his
followers, burned their camp one night and well nigh destroyed
them; and how, when he goes into the fight, the Roman javelins drop
off without harming him; and how, when he strikes, the Romans fall
before his blows like wheat before a sickle."

John burst into a laugh.

"I wonder, Mary, that the reports didn't say also that he could fly
through the air when he chose; could render himself invisible to
the enemy; and could, by a wave of his hand, destroy them as the
hosts of Sennacherib were destroyed. The Romans were harassed
somewhat, at Gamala, by John and his followers, who crept into
their camp at night and set it on fire, and had a few skirmishes
with their working parties; but when you have said that, you have
said all that there is to say about it."

"That is not like you, John," Mary said, indignantly, for the tales
that had circulated through the province had fired her imagination.
"Everyone is talking of what he has done. He, alone of all our
leaders, has checked the Romans; and has shown wisdom, as well as
valor, in fighting. I should have thought you would have been one
of the first to praise him. Everyone is talking about him and,
since we heard of what he has been doing, mother and I pray for
him, daily, as we pray for you and your father; and now you want to
make out he has done nothing."

"I do not want to make out that he has done nothing, Mary, for
doubtless the Lord has been with him, and has enabled him to give
some trouble to the Romans; but I was laughing at the fables you
have heard about him, and at the reports which had converted his
skirmishes with the Romans into all sorts of marvelous actions."

"I believe they were marvelous actions," Mary said. "Why should
what people say be all wrong?

"We believe in him, don't we, mother?"

"Yes, Mary. It is true that the tales we have heard may be, as John
says, exaggerated; but assuredly this new champion of our people
must be a man of wisdom and valor, and I see not why, as God raised
up champions for Israel in the old time, he should not do so now,
when our need is so great."

"There is no reason, mother," John said, more quietly, "but I fear
that the champion of Israel is not yet forthcoming. We have heard
of the doings of this John and, as I said, he has merely had some
skirmishes with the Romans--his band being too small to admit of
any regular fighting. He interrupted their work, and gave them some
trouble; and his men, creeping down into the camp, set it on fire,
and so caused them a good deal of loss; but more than this cannot
be said of him."

"At any rate," Mary said disdainfully, "he has done more than your
Josephus, John--for he brought ruin on all who took his advice, and
went into the cities he had fortified. It may please you to make
little of what this champion has done. Others do not think so.
Everywhere he is talked of, and praised--the old men are talking of
him, the Jewish maidens are singing songs in his honor. I heard
them, yesterday, gathered round a well near Neve. His father must
rejoice, and his mother be proud of him, if they are alive.

"What do they say down by the lake, Jonas, of this captain? Are not
the tales we have heard believed, there?"

"I have heard nothing about the Roman javelins not harming him,"
Jonas said; "but he certainly got safely out of the hands of the
Romans, when they had well-nigh taken him; and all say that he is
brave and prudent, and men have great confidence and trust in him."

"Ridiculous, Jonas!" John exclaimed angrily, and Mary and his
mother looked at him in surprise.

"Truly, John," his mother said, "what Mary said is just. This is
not like you. I should have thought you would have been one of the
first to admire this new leader, seeing that he is fighting in the
way I have heard you advocate as being that in which the Romans
should be fought, instead of the Jews being shut up in the cities."

"Quite so, mother! No doubt he is adopting the proper way of
fighting, and therefore has naturally had some success. I am only
saying that he has done nothing wonderful; but has given the Romans
some trouble by refusing to fight, and by merely trying to harass
them. If there were a thousand men who would gather small bands
together, and harass the Romans night and day in the same manner,
they would render it well-nigh impossible for them to make any
progress. As it was, he merely aided in delaying the fall of Gamala
by a day or two.

"And now, let us talk of something else. Our father has succeeded
in getting in the principal part of the harvest, but I fear that
this year you will be short of fruit. We have had no time to gather
in the figs, and they have all fallen from the trees; and although
we have made enough wine for our own use, there will be but little
to sell."

"It matters not at all," Martha said. "God has been very merciful
towards us and, so that we have but bread to eat and water to
drink, until next harvest, we shall have nothing to repine about,
when ruin and destruction have fallen upon so many."

That evening, when Mary and Martha had retired to their apartments,
the former, who had been very silent all the evening, said:

"I cannot understand, mother, why John speaks so coldly of the
doings of this brave leader; and why he was almost angry at our
praises of him. It seems altogether unlike him."

"It is unlike him, Mary; but you must never be surprised at men,
they do not like to hear each other praised; and though I should
have thought, from what I know of my son, that he was above the
feeling of jealousy, I cannot but think that he showed some signs
of that feeling today."

"But it seems absurd, mother. I can understand John being jealous
of any one his own age who surpassed him in any exercises--though I
never saw him so for, when in rowing on the lake, or in shooting
with bows and arrows, or in other sports, some of our neighbors'
sons have surpassed him, he never seemed to mind at all; and it
seems almost absurd to think that he could be jealous of a great
leader, who has done brave deeds for our people."

"It does seem so, Mary, and I wonder myself; but it has been ever
one of our national faults to be jealous of our leaders. From the
time the people vexed Moses and Aaron, in the wilderness, it has
ever been the same. I grieve to see it in John, who has
distinguished himself greatly for his age, and of whom we are
proud; but no one is perfect, my child, and you must not trouble
because you find that your betrothed husband is not free from all
weaknesses."

"I don't expect him to be free from all weaknesses, mother; but
this is one of the last weaknesses I should have expected to find
in him, and it troubles me. When everything seemed so dark, it was
a pleasure to think that a hero, perhaps a deliverer, had arisen;
and now John seems to say that he has done nothing."

"My dear child," Martha said, "something may have occurred to vex
John on the way and, when men are put out, they will often show it
in the strangest manner. Probably John will, another time, speak
just as warmly in praise of our new leader as you would, yourself."

"Perhaps it may be so, mother," Mary assented. "I can hardly
believe that John is jealous--it does seem so unlike himself."

"I would not speak on the subject again, Mary, if I were you;
unless he, himself, brings it up. A wise woman keeps silence on
subjects which may lead to disagreement. You will learn, when you
have married, that this is the easiest and best way."

"I suppose so, mother," Mary said, in a tone of disappointment;
"but somehow it never seemed to me, before, that John and I could
have any subject on which there would be disagreement."

"My dear Mary," Martha said, smiling, "John and you are both
mortal; and although you may truly love each other--and will, I
trust, be very happy as husband and wife--subjects will occur upon
which you will differ; and then, as you know, the wisest plan is
for the wife to be silent. It is the wife's duty always to give way
to the husband."

Mary gave a little shrug of her shoulders, as if to intimate that
she did not regard altogether favorably this view of a wife's
duties; however, she said no more, but kissed Martha, and retired
to bed.

The next morning they started early, and journeyed to Capitolias,
where they stayed at the house of some friends. In the evening, the
talk again turned upon the new leader, who had burned the Roman
camp. When they did so, John at once made some excuse, and went
out. He regretted, now, that he had not at once told his mother
what he had been doing. He had intended, in the first place, to
give her a little surprise; but had no idea of the exaggerated
reports that had been spread about and, when Mary broke out into
praise of the unknown leader, it seemed to him that it would have
been absurd to say that he, himself, was the person of whom she had
formed so fantastically exalted an opinion. Not having said so at
first, he did not see how he could say so, afterwards; and so left
the matter as it stood, until they should return home.

While John was out, he heard news which caused him some uneasiness.
It was said that parties of Roman horse, from Scythopolis, had been
scouring the country; burning many villages--under the pretext that
some Roman soldiers, who had straggled away marauding on their own
account, had been killed by the peasants--slaughtering the people,
and carrying off as slaves such young women and men as were likely
to fetch good prices.

He told his mother what he had heard; and asked her whether she did
not think that it would be better to stay where they were, for a
time, or return to Neve. But Martha was anxious to be at home,
again; and the friend with whom they were stopping said that these
reports were a week old, and that doubtless the Romans had returned
to their camp. She determined, therefore, that she and Mary would
continue their journey; but that the maids should remain with their
friend, at Capitolias, until the Roman excursions ceased.

They accordingly set out in the morning, as before--the two women
riding, and John and Jonas walking by the side of the donkeys.
Following the road by the side of the Hieromax they kept on,
without meeting anything to cause alarm, until they reached the
angle of the stream, where the road to Hippos branched off from
that which followed the river down to Tarichea. They had gone but a
short distance, when they saw a cloud of dust rising along the road
in front of them, and the sparkle of arms in the sun.

"Turn aside, mother," John exclaimed. "Those must be the Romans
ahead."

Turning aside, they rode towards some gardens and orchards at no
great distance but, before they reached them, two Roman soldiers
separated themselves from the rest, and galloped after them.

"Fly, John!" Martha said, hurriedly. "You and Jonas can escape."

"It would only ensure evil to you if we did, mother. No, we will
keep together."

The Roman soldiers rode up, and roughly ordered the party to
accompany them back to the main body, which consisted of fifty men.
The leader, a young officer whose garments and armor showed that he
belonged to a family of importance, rode forward a few paces to
