hadn't I taken Mrs Nash's advice, and had that unlucky dish hot?

"What will you take?"  I said to Flanagan.

"Oh, I don't mind," replied he, in a resigned manner; "I'll take a
shrimp or two."

"Have something more than that.  Have some lobster?"  I said.

"No, thanks," he replied.

Evidently my good things were not in favour; why, I could not say.
Nobody seemed to be taking anything, and Crow was most conspicuously
_smelling_ my lobster.

The meal dragged on heavily, with more talk than eating.  Every dish
came in for its share of criticism; the eel-pie remained uncut, the
lobster had lost one claw, but more than half the contents of that was
left on Abel's plate.  My penny buns all vanished, that was one ray of
comfort.

"Ring the bell for more buns," said Doubleday, as if he was presiding at
his own table.

What was I to do?  There were no more, and it was hardly likely Mrs
Nash would go for more.  Before I could make up my mind, Whipcord had
rung a loud peal on the bell, and Mrs Nash in due time appeared.

"More buns, and look sharp, old woman," said Doubleday.

"I'll old woman you if I've much of your imperence, my young dandy!" was
the somewhat startling rejoinder.  "I'll bundle the pack of you out of
the house, that I will, if you can't keep a civil tongue in your heads."

"I say, Batchelor," said Doubleday, laughing, "your aunt has got a
temper, I fancy.  I'm always sorry to see it in one so young.  What will
it be when--"

"Oh, please don't, Doubleday," I said; "you can see she doesn't like it.
It doesn't matter, Mrs Nash, thank you," I added.

"Oh, don't it matter?" retorted the irate Mrs Nash, "that's all; we'll
settle that pretty soon, my beauty.  I'll teach you if it don't matter
that a pack of puppies comes into my house, and drinks tea out of my
cups, and calls me names before my face and behind my back; I'll teach
you!"  And she bounced from the room.

I thought that meal would never end, although no one took anything.  In
time even the fun and laughter, which had at first helped to keep the
thing going, died away, and the fellows lolled back in the chairs in a
listless, bored way.  It was vain for me to try to lead the talk; I
could not have done it even if I had had the spirit, and there was
precious little spirit left now!

Doubleday began to look at his watch.

"Half-past seven.  I say," said he, "time I was going.  I've a
particular engagement at eight."

"Well, I'll go with you," said Whipcord; "I want to get something to
eat, and we can have supper together."

"Sorry we've got to go," said Doubleday.  "Jolly evening, wasn't it,
Crow?"

I was too much humiliated and disgusted to notice their departure.  To
have my grand entertainment sneered at and made fun of was bad enough,
but for two of my guests to leave my table for the avowed purpose of
getting something to eat was a little too much.  I could barely be civil
to the rest and ask them to remain, and it was a real relief when they
one and all began to make some excuse for leaving.

So ended my famous supper-party, after which, for a season, I prudently
retired into private life.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

HOW MY FRIEND SMITH CAME BACK, AND TOLD ME A GREAT SECRET.

My grand evening party was over, but I had still my accounts for that
entertainment to square.  And the result of that operation was
appalling.  It was a fortnight since my salary had been raised, but so
far I had not a penny saved.  The extra money had gone, I couldn't
exactly say how, in sundry "trifling expenditures," such as pomatum, a
scarf-pin, and a steel chain for my waistcoat, all of which it had
seemed no harm to indulge in, especially as they were very cheap, under
my altered circumstances.

On the strength of my new riches also I was already six shillings in
debt to the Oxford-shirt man, and four shillings in debt to the Twins,
who had paid my share in the boating expedition up the river.  And now,
when I came to reckon up my liabilities for the supper, I found I owed
as much as eight shillings to the pastrycook and five shillings to the
grocer, besides having already paid two shillings for the unlucky
lobster (which to my horror and shame I found out after every one had
left had _not_ been fresh), one shilling for eggs, sixpence for shrimps,
and one-and-sixpence for the hire of the cups and saucers.

The ingenious reader will be able to arrive at a true estimate of my
financial position from these figures, and will see that so far, at any
rate, my increase of riches had not made me a wealthier man than when I
had lived within my income on eight shillings a week.

Nor had it made me either better or happier I made a few more good
resolutions after the party to be a fool no longer.  I could see plainly
enough that all my so-called friends had been amusing themselves at my
expense, and were certainly not worth my running myself head over ears
in debt to retain.  I could see too, when I came to reflect, that all my
efforts to pass myself off as "one of them" had ended pitifully for me,
if not ridiculously.  Yes, it was time I gave it up.  Alas! for the
vanity of youth!  The very day that witnessed the forming of my
resolutions witnessed also the breaking of them.

"Hullo, young 'un!" cried Doubleday, as I put in my appearance at the
office; "here you are!  How are you after it all?"

"I'm quite well," said I, in what I intended to be a chilly voice.

"That's right.  Very brickish of you to have us up.  We all thought so,
didn't we, Crow?"

"Rather," replied Crow.

"I'm afraid some of the fellows were rather rude," continued Doubleday.
"Those Twins are awfully underbred beggars.  I believe, you know, their
mother never knew which of the two it was that wanted whopping, and so
she let them both grow up anyhow.  If I'd been her, I'd have licked them
both regularly, wouldn't you, Crow?"

Without setting much store by Doubleday's moral disquisition on the duty
of the parents of Twins, I felt mollified by the half apology implied in
his reference to yesterday's entertainment, and to the manner of his
behaviour towards me now.  It was clear he felt rather ashamed of
himself and his cronies for their behaviour.  Who could tell whether, if
they had given me a fair chance, my supper might not have been a success
after all?  At any rate, I didn't feel quite so downhearted about it as
I had done.

"How's that festive old lady," proceeded Doubleday, "this morning?  I
pity you with an old dragon like her to look after you.  That's the
worst of those boarding-houses.  A fellow can't do the civil to his
friends but he's sure to be interfered with by somebody or other."

He was actually making excuses for me!

Yes; if it hadn't been for the rudeness of some of the fellows and the
aggravating behaviour of Mrs Nash, my supper would have gone off quite
well.  I was quite thankful to Doubleday for the comfort he gave me, and
cheerfully accepted an invitation to go up to his lodgings "to meet just
the usual lot" next evening.

Which I did, and found the "usual lot" in their usual good spirits.  No
one seemed to bear a grudge against me for that cold eel-pie, and one or
two assured me that they had enjoyed themselves immensely.

Nothing could speak more for my greenness and vanity than the fact that
I believed what they said, and felt more convinced than ever that my
party, however it had _seemed_ to go off, had really been a success.

On my return to Beadle Square that evening I found a letter waiting for
me, and to my joy and surprise it was in Jack Smith's own handwriting.
It said:

"Dear Fred,--You'll be glad to hear I'm off the sick list at last, and
have been turned out a perfect cure.  Mrs Shield, my sister's nurse and
friend, insists on my taking it easy another week, and then I shall come
up to town, and mean to work like a nigger to make up for lost time.
I'll tell you all the news when I come.  I'm afraid you've been having a
slow time.--Yours ever, Jack.

"P.S.--I've written to M., B., and Company, to tell them I'll be up on
Monday next."

It seemed almost too good to be true that I should so soon see my friend
again.  Ah! how different it would all be when he came back!  For the
next week I could think of nothing else.  What a lot I should have to
tell him!  How he would laugh over my adventures and misfortunes, and
how he would scold me for my extravagances and follies!  Well, these
would be over at last, that was a comfort.

So, during the week, in view of giving up my extravagances, I bought a
new suit of ready-made clothes that only half fitted me, and went on the
Saturday afternoon with Whipcord and the Twins to see a steeplechase,
where I was tempted to put two half-crowns, which I borrowed from the
Twins, into a sweepstake, and lost them both.  This was a good finish up
to my little "fling" and no mistake; so much so that I began to think it
was a pity Jack had not come last Monday instead of next.

"He would have kept me out of all this mischief," said I to myself.  Ah!
I had yet to learn that if one wants to keep out of mischief one must
not depend altogether upon one's friends, or even oneself, for the
blessing.  Strength must be sought from a higher Power and a better
Friend!

At last the long-looked-for Monday arrived, and I went down to the
station in the evening to meet Jack's train.

I could scarcely have said what feeling it was which prompted me to
wear, not my new stripe suit, but my old clothes, shabby as they were,
or why, instead of wearing my coloured Oxford-shirt, I preferred to
array myself in one of the old flannel shirts with its time-honoured
paper collar.

Somehow I had no ambition to "make an impression" on my friend Smith.

There was his head out of the window and his hand waving long before the
train pulled up.  The face was the same I had always known, pale and
solemn, with its big black eyes and clusters of black hair.  His illness
had left neither mark nor change on him; still less had it altered his
tone and manner, as he sprang from the carriage and seizing me by the
arm, said, "Well, old fellow, here we are again, at last!"

What a happy evening that was!  We walked to Beadle Square, carrying
Jack's bag between us, and talking all the way.  The dull old place
appeared quite bright now he was back; and the meal we had together in
the parlour that evening before the other fellows came home seemed
positively sumptuous, although it consisted only of weak tea and bread-
and-butter.

Then we turned out for a long walk, anywhere, and having no bag to catch
hold of this time, we caught hold of one another's arms, which was quite
as comfortable.

"Well, old man," began Jack, "what have you been up to all the time?
You never told me in your letters."

"There wasn't much to tell," I said.  "It was awfully slow when you
left, I can assure you."

"But you soon got over that?" said Jack, laughing.

He wasn't far wrong, as the reader knows, but somehow I would have
preferred him to believe otherwise.  I replied, "There would have been
simply nothing to do of an evening if Doubleday--who is a very decent
fellow at bottom, Jack--hadn't asked me up to his lodgings once or twice
to supper."

I said this in as off-hand a way as I could.  I don't know why I had
fancied Jack would not be pleased with the intelligence, for Doubleday
had never been very friendly to him.

"Did he?" said Jack.  "That was rather brickish of him."

"Yes; he knew it would be dull while you were away, and I was very glad
to go."

"Rather!  I expect he gave you rather better suppers than we get up at
Beadle Square, eh?"

"Yes.  And then, you know, when I was there I heard where Flanagan was
living, and found him out.  Do you remember our hunt after him that
night, Jack?"

"Don't I!  By the way, Fred, has there been any news of the boy?"

"The young thief?  I should fancy you'd had enough of him, old man, for
a good while to come.  But I have seen him."

"Where?" asked Jack, with an interest that quite amused me.

"One would think that after giving you smallpox, and robbing you of your
money, you were really under an obligation to the young beggar, and
wanted to thank him personally.  If you are so very anxious to pay your
respects, it's ten to one we shall run across him at the top of Style
Street--that's where his place of business is."

"Place of business?  What do you mean?"

"I mean that he has spent the money he stole from us in buying a
shoeblack's apparatus, and seems to think it's something to be proud of,
too," I replied.

Jack laughed.  "He might have done worse.  My boots want blacking, Fred;
let's go round by Style Street."

The young vagabond was there, engaged, as we approached him, in walking
round and round his box on the palms of his hands with his feet in the
air.

At the sight of us he dropped suddenly into a human posture, and, with a
very broad grin on his face, said, "Shine 'e boots, governor?  Why, if
it ain't t'other flat come back?  Shine 'e boots?"

"Yes; I want my boots cleaned," said Jack, solemnly, planting one foot
on the box.

The boy dropped briskly on his knees and went to work, making Jack's
boot shine as it had never shone before.  In the middle of the operation
he stopped short, and, looking up, said, "You _was_ a flat that there
night, you was!"

I could only laugh at this frank piece of information.

"I think you were the flat!" said Jack, putting up his other foot on the
box.

"Me?  _I_ ain't no flat, no error!" replied the boy, with a grin.  "I'm
a sharp 'un, that's what I are!"

"I think you were worse than a flat to steal my money, and my friend's."

The boy looked perplexed.  "Ga on!" said he.

"What's your name?" asked Jack, changing the subject.

"Billy," replied the boy.

"Billy what?"

"Ga on!  What do you mean by `what'?  Ain't Billy enough?"

"Where do you live?"

"Live? where I can; that's where I live!"

"Then you don't live with your mother in that court any longer?"

"The old gal--she ain't no concern of yourn!" said the youth, firing up.

"I know that," said Jack, evidently at a loss, as I had been, how to
pursue the conversation with this queer boy.  "I say, Billy," he added,
"where are you going to sleep to-night?"

"Ain't a-goin' to sleep nowheres!" was the prompt reply.

"Would you like to come and sleep with me?"

"No fear!" was the complimentary reply.

"What are you going to do, then?"

"'Tain't no concern o' yourn; so it ain't."

"Will you be here to-morrow?"

"In corse I shall!"

"Well, I expect I'll want my boots done again to-morrow evening.  Here's
a penny for this time."

The boy took the penny and held it in the palm of his hand.

"Isn't it enough?" asked Jack.

"You're 'avin' a lark with me," said the boy.  "This 'ere brown--"

"What's wrong?  It's a good one, isn't it?"

"Oh, ain't you funny?  I don't want yer brown!" and to my amazement he
tossed the coin back.

Jack solemnly picked it up and put it back into his pocket.  "Good-
night, Billy," said he.  "Mind you are here to-morrow."

"No fear!" said Billy, who was once more resuming his gymnastic
exercises.

And so we left him.

My friend Smith was certainly a queer fellow.  He seemed more interested
during the remainder of our walk with the little dishonest shoeblack we
had just left than with my half-candid story of my life in London during
his absence.

"Depend upon it, that's his way of making amends," said he; "there's
some good in the young scamp after all."

"It's precious hard to discover," said I.  "He appears to me to be a
graceless young reprobate, who knows well enough that it's wicked to
steal, and seems rather proud of it than otherwise.  I say, Jack, I'd
advise you not to have too much to do with him.  He's done you harm
enough as it is."

When we returned to Beadle Square we found our amiable fellow-lodgers
evidently expecting our arrival.  It was so long since I had taken
supper at Mrs Nash's that I seemed quite as much a stranger as Jack.

"Here they come," said Horncastle, who always shone on occasions like
this.  "Here comes the two smallpoxes.  Hold your noses, you fellows."

In this flattering manner we were received as we proceeded to seat
ourselves in our accustomed place at the table.

"They seem as cheerful and merry as ever," said Jack, solemnly, to me,
looking round him.

"I say, Jones," cried Horncastle, in an audible voice to a friend,
"wonderful how Batchelor turns up here now the other's come home!  Got
to stop going out every night now, and coming home drunk at two in the
morning, eh?  Going to behave now, eh?  But he does go it, don't he,
when his keeper's back's turned, eh?"

All this, ridiculous as it was, was not very pleasant for me.  To Jack,
however, it was highly amusing.

"I suppose they mean that for you," said he.  "I feel quite flattered to
be called your keeper."

"It's all a lie," I said angrily, "about my coming home drunk, and all
that."

"I should rather hope it was," said my friend with a smile.

I was sufficiently uncomfortable, however, by the turn my fellow-
lodgers' wit was taking.  Without meaning to deceive, I had somehow, in
my story to Jack, omitted all reference to my own extravagances, and
represented my dissipations more as contrivances to pass the time in my
friend's absence than congenial pleasures.

"Rum thing, too," continued Horncastle, who evidently saw I was not
liking it--"rum thing he's dropped those new ready-made togs of his and
his flash watch-chain.  I wonder why--"

"Because they're not paid for," said another.  "I know that, because I
was in Shoddy's shop to-day, and he asked me to tell Batchelor the
things were sold for ready money and no tick.  Do you hear that,
Batchelor? that's what he says, and you'd better attend to it, I can
tell you."

Why need I have got myself into a rage over a suit of ready-made
clothes?  It was surely no crime to possess them; and if I was owing the
amount it didn't follow I had anything to be ashamed of, as long as I
paid in the end.  But I flushed up dreadfully, in a manner which Jack
could not help noticing, and replied, "You mind your own business--I'll
mind mine!"

"You'd better, my boy," was the reply.  "Pyman, the pastrycook, was
asking most affectionately after you too.  He says he hopes you won't
move without letting him know, as he'd like to call and--"

"Come on, Jack!"  I cried, taking Jack's arm; "it's enough to make one
sick the way they talk."

And amid much laughter, and in no very amiable frame of mind, I quitted
my persecutors.

I made sure Jack would read me a lecture, or at any rate refer to the
subject which had caused me so much annoyance.  He did neither.

"Lively lot they are," said he.  "It's a wonder where they pick up all
their notions."

"They want to make you believe I've been up to all sorts of mischief
since you went away," I said.

Jack laughed.

"And they expect me to believe it," said he.  "The best way with them is
to let them say what they like, and take no notice."

We went upstairs to bed, as the only place where we could enjoy one
another's society undisturbed.

As we were undressing.  Jack took from his pocket a photograph, which he
showed to me.

"Fred," said he, "would you like to see a portrait of Mary?"

"Your sister?" said I, taking the picture.  "Yes."

It was a pretty little girl of about twelve or thirteen, with dark eyes
and hair like Jack's; but, unlike him, with a merry, sunny face, which
even under the eye of a photographer could not be made to look solemn.

"How jolly!" was my exclamation.

Jack looked as delighted with this unsentimental comment as if I had
broken out into all sorts of poetic raptures, and replied, in his
peculiar, solemn way, "Yes, she is jolly."

"Is she your only sister?"  I asked, giving him back the portrait.

"Yes," said he.

"Was she very ill when you got down?"

"Yes; we hardly thought she was going to live," he replied.

"I heard how you were both getting on now and then from Mrs Shield.
She seems a very kind person."

"She's our old nurse, you know," Jack said, "and like a mother to Mary
and me."

He had never spoken like this about home before.  Whenever we had
approached the topic he had nervously changed the conversation.  Now,
however, he seemed almost glad to talk to some one, and there was quite
a tremble in his voice as he spoke of his sister and Mrs Shield.

"Then your own mother's not alive?"  I asked.  I had asked the same
question once at Stonebridge House, I remembered, and then he had almost
resented it.

"No, she died when Mary was born, fourteen years ago.  I cannot remember
her at all."

"Just like me," I said.  "I never saw my mother that I know of.  I say,
Jack, let's look at that portrait again."

He was delighted to show it to me, and I was glad once more to get a
glimpse of that merry face.

"And your father," I inquired, presently, "is he dead too?"

"No!" said Jack, with a sudden return of his old abruptness.

I was perplexed, but it was no use, evidently, pumping my friend with
further questions in that direction.  So we proceeded to undress in
silence, and were soon in bed.

Presently the other lodgers came up, and then there was no chance of
renewing our talk, even if Jack had been so inclined.  But he seemed
evidently in no humour for pursuing it.

In due time all was quiet once more, and then, just as I was beginning
to feel drowsy, and was lying half awake, half asleep, fancying myself
back again at Stonebridge House in the old dormitory, I felt a hand on
my arm and heard Jack's voice whisper, "Fred, are you asleep?"

"No," I replied, moving over to make room for him as he slipped in
beside me.

"Fred," he whispered, "I'm afraid you think me a brute."

"No, I don't," replied I, astonished; "why ever should I?"

"Why, I offended you just now, when you meant to be kind."

"No you didn't," said I.  "I know there are some things you don't like
to talk about, and I--I've no right to ask you about them."

Jack lay silent for some minutes.  Then he whispered--

"Old man, you can keep a secret, can't you?"

"Yes," I said, wondering what was coming.

"I've never told it to anybody yet; but somehow it's awful having no one
to talk to," he said.

"What is it, Jack?"  I asked.  "I won't tell a soul."

He crept closer to me, and his voice dropped to a lower whisper as he
said, "Fred--_my father is a convict_!"

I was too bewildered and shocked to speak.  All I could do was to take
the hand which lay on my arm and hold it in mine.  This then was Jack's
mystery.  This explained his nervous avoidance of all references to
home, his sudden changes of manner both at Stonebridge House and in
London.  Poor Jack!

We neither of us spoke for some time; then, as if in answer to the
questions I longed to ask, he continued, "I hardly ever saw him.  When
mother died he went nearly mad and took to drinking, so Mrs Shield told
me, and left home.  No one heard of him again till it was discovered he
had forged on his employers.  I remember their coming and looking for
him at M--, where we then lived.  He wasn't there, but they found him in
London, and,"--here Jack groaned--"he was transported."

"Poor Jack!" was all I could say.  "How dreadful for you all!"

We said no more that night, but as we lay arm in arm, and presently fell
asleep, I think we both felt we were bound together that night by a
stronger tie than ever.

Yet, had I known what was to come, I would sooner have rushed from that
house than allow my friend Smith to tell me his secret.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

HOW HAWKESBURY PUT IN AN APPEARANCE AT HAWK STREET.

When I woke in the morning and called to mind Jack's confidence of the
night before, I could hardly believe I had not dreamt it.
