
The question was put to the Indian boy, who seemed much amused by
something he saw up among the trees.

Looking up they saw at least a dozen red monkeys grinning at them, and
one of these--a small one--was hanging on by its father's tail.

"Oh! shoot! shoot!" cried Quashy to Lawrence, opening his great eyes
eagerly.  "Dey's _so_ good to eat!"

"No, Quash, I won't shoot.  We have shot enough of fat ducks to feed us
all for one or two days at least.  Besides, I can't bear to kill
monkeys.  It feels so like committing murder."

While he was yet speaking, Leetle Cub had taken up the long lance-like
stick before mentioned and pointed it at the monkeys.  It was a
blow-pipe.  Before Lawrence could interfere, the short arrow with which
it was charged had sped on its mission with deadly aim, and the smallest
monkey, relaxing its hold of the paternal tail, fell without even a cry
into the water--shot through the heart.

Lawrence said nothing, but, resolving that if the boy should attempt
such another shot, he would disturb his aim, he dipped his paddle
vigorously, and pushed up the river.

Coming at last to an open space where the stream widened into something
like a little pond, they observed an erection of timber on the bank
which aroused their curiosity.  It also seemed to arouse the Cub's
interest, for he made somewhat excited signs that he wished to land
there.  Willing to humour him, they ran the canoe on the beach.  Leetle
Cub jumped out at once, and, taking up the anchor-like piece of wood
before mentioned, went with it towards the timber erection.

"I do believe it is an alligator-hook," said Lawrence.

"Das a fact," said Quashy, "we'll washum," (by which he meant, "we'll
watch him!")

It was indeed interesting to watch that little fellow--who was evidently
in all respects a thorough chip of the old block--as he went about his
work, quietly, yet with an undercurrent of excitement which he was not
entirely able to conceal.  He took his bow and arrows, as well as the
blow-pipe, on shore, and laid them at his side, so as to be ready at
hand in case of emergency, while he baited the alligator-hook with the
dead monkey.

The hook was simple.  It consisted of four pieces of tough hard wood,
about a foot long, and the thickness of a man's thumb.  These were tied
to the end of a stout rope made of raw hide, and so arranged that their
points were directed backwards, and curved somewhat outwards--thus
forming as it were four huge barbs.  The dead monkey was placed on and
around this horrible hook--if we may so term it.  The delicate morsel
was then attached to the end of a pole which stretched over the stream,
so that the bait, when fixed, remained suspended just above the water.
The slack of the rope was then made fast to a tree.  Thus the
arrangement was such as to compel the alligator to raise himself well
out of the water to obtain his mouthful.

While Leetle Cub was engaged in erecting this cumbrous machine, a young
alligator, about a foot long, crawled out from under some leaves on the
bank close to him.  The urchin saw it instantly, seized his bow, and in
a moment transfixed it with an arrow.  The fury of the little creature,
infant though it was, seemed tremendous.  It turned round, snapping
viciously at the arrow, and would probably have escaped with it into the
water if another shot from the same unerring hand had not terminated its
career.

After setting his line, the Cub carried the little alligator to the
canoe, and put it carefully therein.

"Das what dey make de soup ob," said Quashy.

"The ragout, you mean."

"Dun' know what's a ragoo, massa.  We calls it soup.  Anyhow, it's bery
good."

"Yes, Quash, it's not bad.  But look there, our daring and expert young
hunter evidently wants us to land, for he is pointing to the bush.
Shall we go?"

"P'r'aps it's as well, massa.  Ob course no alligator's sitch a fool as
swaller dat little mout'ful when we's a-lookin' at it.  I s'pose Leetle
Cub wants us to go away, an' gib 'em a chance."

Having made up their minds to gratify the little fellow, they landed and
accompanied him into the woods.  He seemed quite to expect that they
would do so and follow his lead.  He set off at a smart pace in advance
of them, carrying his bow on his shoulder.  Lawrence was well repaid by
this walk, because it led him into and through scenery of a more
striking and beautiful character than he had yet seen of its kind.  In
many places the trees formed long aisles and vaulted colonnades and
arches so regular that it seemed as though they had been planted by the
hand of man.  Elsewhere the chaos of tree and shrub, flower and fern and
twining root was so indescribable, that it seemed as if chance and
haphazard had originated it all; but the mind of our hero was cast, if
we may say so, in too logical a mould to accept such an absurd origin
for anything.

"My Father made it all," he said, mentally, with a glow of enthusiasm;
"and although, like a little child gazing at an intricate machine, I see
not the order or arrangement, certain am I that both _must_ be there."

Between the tree-stems they saw ant-hills fully five or six feet high.
From the trees hung thousands of orchids of various colours, and so
attractive was the aspect of things overhead, that Lawrence was more
than once tripped up by the long tangled grasses through which, in some
parts, they had to push their way.  Of course, there were plenty of
parrots and monkeys and other creatures to make the forest lively.
Indeed, in some parts there seemed a prospect of its becoming still more
lively, for their little guide pointed out in soft places the footprints
of tapirs and jaguars, which seemed to be quite fresh.  Lizards
innumerable crossed their path at every point; snakes were seen gliding
out of their way--a fortunate tendency on the part of most snakes!--and
the woods resounded with the singing of the yapu, a bird something like
a blackbird, with yellow tips to its wings, and somewhat like the
mocking-bird in that it imitated every other bird in the forest.
Whether there is jealousy between the yapu and the parrot we have not
been able to ascertain, but if birds are like men in their sentiments,
we fear it is more than probable.  Unlike man, however, the yapu prefers
to sing upside-down, swinging the while from the branch of a tree, and
ruffling its plumage.

"Hallo! massa.  Look dar!" said Quashy, pointing with intense surprise
at a neighbouring tree-stem.  "Did you ebber see a crab climbin' up a
tree?"

"I certainly never did," replied Lawrence, as he looked in the direction
indicated, where he saw, not a crab indeed, but a monstrous hairy spider
as large as a goodly-sized crab.  Stepping forward to examine the
creature, he was surprised to have his hat twitched off his head, and
found that it was the web of the said spider which had done it!
Afterwards he learned that the spider in question subsists by catching
little birds, and that its bite is not so venomous as that of a smaller
kind which abounds in the woods there.  Not being desirous of testing
the creature's power in that way at the time, he contented himself with
inspecting it, and listening to a learned dissertation on spiders in
general from Quashy, as he afterwards walked on.

Good fortune seemed to smile on them that day, for they had not advanced
a hundred yards further when two large jaguars crossed their path.  It
is probable that they did not see the hunters, for they did not look up,
but, gliding cat-like into the jungle, quickly disappeared.

Perhaps it was fortunate that Lawrence and his man recovered their
presence of mind when too late, for if they had fired hastily and only
wounded the creatures, it might have brought to an abrupt end their
terrestrial career.  As it was.  Quashy recovered with a gasp, drew his
two double-barrelled pistols, which in his eagerness he neglected to
cock, and, with one in each hand, rushed yelling after the jaguars.
Lawrence cocked his gun and followed at a smart, though more sedate,
pace.  Leetle Cub, who probably thought them both fools, ran after them
with a broad grin on his dingy countenance.

We need scarcely say that the pursuit was useless.  Quashy returned in a
few minutes with labouring breath, and streaming at every pore.
Lawrence, scarcely less blown, sat down on a fallen tree and laughed
when his lungs permitted.  Of course he was joined by the sympathetic
black, echoed by the small boy, and imitated--not badly--by a number of
parrots which wisely availed themselves of the rare opportunity to learn
a lesson from man!

As they advanced the path became more encumbered and difficult to
traverse, so they determined to return.  Their little guide, however,
seemed to object very strongly, and made wonderful gesticulations in his
efforts to induce them to go on.  Lawrence, however, remained firm.
Seeing at last that his followers had determined to rebel, the Cub gave
up trying to influence them, scooped a quantity of wild honey out of a
hole in a tree, and, sitting down in a half-sulky mood, sought to
console himself by eating the same.

"Come, we'll follow you in that, at all events," said Lawrence, seating
himself beside the child and regaling himself with the sweet food.
Quashy followed his example with right good-will.

When their modest meal was over they returned to the river.  The little
boy, on nearing it, ran anxiously forward in advance, and soon they
perceived by his frantic gesticulations and shouts that something of
interest awaited them there.

"He's cotched!" cried Quashy, and darted off as if shot from a catapult.

Lawrence followed, using his long legs to such advantage that he was not
far behind his man; for although gifted with greater powers of
self-restraint than Quashy, our hero was not a whit behind him in strong
enthusiasm.

They found that an alligator--not, indeed, of the largest size, but
nevertheless about six or seven feet long--had swallowed the monkey, and
was tugging at the rope like a mad thing--turning round and round in its
rage, and smacking the water with its resounding tail.

Instantly they all laid hold of the rope, and began to drag it towards
the bank.

"How shall we manage to kill it?" said Lawrence, as the monster came
close in.

"Stick 'im! shot 'im! hang 'im.  Nebber mind dat.  Git 'im fust,--kill
'im arter," gasped the negro, as he strained at the rope, ably seconded
by his comrades.

It was a hard tussle, and might have been unsuccessful if Lawrence and
Quashy had not possessed more than average physical strength.  As it
was, they pulled the monstrous animal just near enough to get his head
clear of the water, and then, putting several balls into him, killed him
outright.

"Plenty ragoo now, massa!" exclaimed the negro, with a broad grin, after
they had stowed the carcass in the canoe.

"Yes, Quash, more than enough."

Leetle Cub seemed to have his mind running in the same direction, for he
eyed the alligator with longing looks, and licked his lips expressively
as they re-entered the canoe, shoved off, and directed the bow homeward.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

AN UNEXPECTED ATTACK AND AN UNLOOKED-FOR ARRIVAL.

Thus excitingly, and, we presume, pleasantly, passed the time at Tiger's
hut during three days.

In that period the Indian hunter quite recovered from his wounds, and
his little girl, Manca by name, began to show decided signs of amendment
under Manuela's careful nursing.  During that period, also, Spotted
Tiger conducted his visitors to many scenes of beauty, where the young
doctor not only shot a variety of game, large and small, feathered and
furred, but made acquaintance with many quite new species of plants.  He
collected and preserved a few of the rarest of these, but owing to the
style of travelling, both past and prospective, he had to deny himself
much in that respect.

Likewise, during those three days, he made acquaintance with the
numerous pets of Tiger's household--not the human pets, (although he
became a great favourite with these also), but the lower-animal pets--
the turtle, and the noisy parrot already mentioned, a fat little
guinea-pig, a most melancholy red monkey, a young jaguar, a very
juvenile tapir, a flamingo, and other creatures.

The tapir was about the size of a six months' old pig.  Instead of the
blackish brown hair peculiar to the adult tapir, its coat was striped
longitudinally with black, grey, and yellow, and was so brilliant in
colour that the animal was quite a dazzling pet! besides which, it was
an affectionate little thing, and particularly susceptible to the
pleasure of being tickled.

The tame jaguar, however, was a very different style of animal.  It did
indeed like to be caressed, but it had gradually grown too large to be a
safe plaything, and there was an occasional gleam in its eye which
rendered Lawrence uneasy when he saw the Indian children playing with
it.  It was about the size of a small Newfoundland dog, but had grown up
so gradually with the family that they appeared not to realise the
danger attending its great strength.  Spotted Tiger himself had indeed
perceived something of it, for at the time we write of he had tied the
animal to a stake with a stout rope, which was long enough to permit of
his ranging in a wide circle.

Little did Lawrence dream of the part that peculiar pet was to play
before the period of three days closed.

It was on the evening of the third day.  They were all seated round a
fire at supper, in front of the hut.  Lawrence sat beside Manuela, as
usual, and was taking much pains to teach her the correct pronunciation
of an English word, of which she made a wonderful bungle, and seemed to
derive much amusement from the fact, to judge from her occasional peals
of silvery laughter.  We use the word advisedly, in deference to the
feelings of our hero, who thought and called the laughter silvery!

Tiger sat on the girl's other side, and Quashy was seated opposite, with
Little Cub and several of the lesser cubs beside him.  The pet jaguar
crouched close to its stake, glaring at them.  There was nothing unusual
either in the attitude or the glare to cause anxiety, yet Lawrence did
not like it, and while engaged in imparting the difficult lesson
referred to, kept his eye on the brute.

Suddenly, without warning or roar, the dangerous pet sprang at Manuela!
Why it selected her we cannot imagine, unless it was that, being a brute
of good taste, it chose her as the tenderest of the party.  The strong
cord by which it was fastened snapped like a piece of thread, but
Lawrence threw himself in front of the girl, caught the animal by the
throat, and held him with both hands, as if in a vice.  Instantly every
claw of the four paws was buried in the flesh of his legs and arms, and
he would certainly have been fearfully rent by his powerful antagonist
if Tiger had not, with lightning stroke, buried his long keen knife in
the animal's heart.

So swiftly and effectually was the deed done, that the jaguar next
moment hung limp and dead in our hero's grasp.  Dropping it on the
ground, he turned up his sleeves to examine the wounds.

"Deep enough, but not lacerated, thank God," he said.  "They won't give
me much trouble.  Come, Quash, into the bush, and help me to look at the
other scratches and dress them.  I must appoint you assistant-surgeon
for the occasion!"

Manuela murmured her thanks in a deep, tremulous voice that said much
for her power of gratitude, and, timidly taking the youth's hand as he
passed, humbly touched it with her lips.

The wounds were soon dressed, and, thanks to Tiger's promptitude, they
did not afterwards give much trouble.

That night, as they were about to retire to their several hammocks,
Lawrence went up to the Indian girl, and, for the first time, held out
his hand for a shake in the white man's fashion.

"I'm glad, Manuela," he said, as she frankly grasped it, "that it has
pleased God to make me the instrument of--of--protecting you."

"Twice," replied the girl quickly, and then paused, with a confused
look,--"how you say, twice--or two times?"

"Say which you like," replied Lawrence, with a hearty laugh; "the words
will sound equally well from _your_ lips, but `twice' is the right way."

"Well, twice you have save me.  I am gratitude.  My father will be
gratitude."

"Tell me, Manuela," returned Lawrence, earnestly, "is your father a
chief?"

"Yes,--a great chief."

There was a peculiar smile on the girl's lips as she said this that
disconcerted him.  We have said that he was naturally shy.  He had
intended to follow up his first question by asking if her father was
descended from the Incas, but the peculiar smile checked him.  He bade
her good-night, and turned abruptly away.

While he was sitting by the fire meditating on this matter, he heard a
step in the bushes.  Tiger, who had already retired to his hammock, also
heard it, and bounded to his feet.  Next instant Pedro glided into the
circle of light and saluted them.

He appeared to be worn out with exhaustion, for, flinging himself on the
ground beside the fire, he rested his head in silence for a few minutes
on a poncho.  Then, observing a piece of manioca cake that had been
dropped by some one at supper, he took it up and ate it almost
ravenously.

"Why, you seem to be starving, Pedro," said Lawrence, earnestly

"Not so bad as that," returned Pedro with a faint smile.  "A man can
scarcely be said to starve with so many of the fruits of the earth
around him.  But I've been hard pressed since early morning, and--"

"Stay," interrupted Lawrence, "before you say another word, I will go
and fetch you some food."

"No need, senhor.  My old friend Spotted Tiger has forestalled you."

This was true.  The Indian, having seen at a glance how matters stood,
had gone up to the hut without speaking.  He now returned with a bowl of
boiled maize, a bunch of bananas, and a jar of water.

While his friend was busy with these, he asked a few questions, which
Pedro answered briefly.

From the expression of the Indian's face, Lawrence gathered that these
replies caused him some anxiety.  As the guide's appetite became
gradually appeased his loquacity increased, but he made few remarks to
Lawrence until the meal was finished.  Then, turning to him with a sigh
of contentment, he said--

"I've been slightly wounded, senhor, but I doubt not that you can soon
put me all right."

Taking off his poncho as he spoke, and pushing aside his light cotton
shirt, he revealed the fact that his left breast was bound with a piece
