that she received no damage at all beyond a fright.  I'm going to pay
her a visit to-day in reference to that very thing."

"That's all right; then I won't detain you longer.  Good-bye, Mr
Sharp," said Tipps, putting on his hat and quitting the office.

Not long afterwards, Mr Sharp knocked at the door of a small house in
one of the suburbs of Clatterby, and was ushered into the presence of
Mrs Podge.  That amiable lady was seated by the fire knitting a
stocking.

"Good afternoon, Mrs Podge," said Mr Sharp, bowing and speaking in his
blandest tones.  "I hope I see you quite well?"

Mrs Podge, charmed with the stranger's urbanity, wished him good
afternoon, admitted that she was quite well, and begged him to be
seated.

"Thank you, Mrs Podge," said Mr Sharp, complying.  "I have taken the
liberty of calling in regard to a small matter of business--but pardon
me," he added, rising and shutting the door, "I inadvertently left the
door open, which is quite inexcusable in me, considering your delicate
state of health.  I trust that--"

"My delicate state of health!" exclaimed Mrs Podge, who was as fat as a
prize pig, and rather piqued herself on her good looks and vigour of
body.

"Yes," continued Mr Sharp, in a commiserating tone; "I have understood,
that since the accident on the railway your--"

"Oh, as to that," laughed Mrs Podge, "I'm not much the worse of--but,
sir," she said, becoming suddenly grave, "you said you had called on
business?"

"I did.  My business is to ask," said Mr Sharp, with a very earnest
glance of his penetrating eyes, "on what ground you claim compensation
from the Grand National Trunk Railway?"

Instantly Mrs Podge's colour changed.  She became languid, and sighed.

"Oh, sir--damages--yes--my nerves!  I did not indeed suffer much damage
in the way of cuts or bruises, though there _was_ a good piece of skin
torn off my elbow, which I could show you if it were proper to--but my
nerves received a _terrible_ shock.  They have not yet recovered.
Indeed, your abrupt way of putting it has quite--thrown a--"

As Mrs Podge exhibited some symptoms of a hysterical nature at this
point Mr Sharp assumed a very severe expression of countenance, and
said--

"Now, Mrs Podge, do you really think it fair or just, to claim damages
from a company, from whom you have absolutely received _no_ damage?"

"But sir," said Mrs Podge, recovering, "my nerves _did_ receive
damage."

"I do not doubt it Mrs Podge, but we cannot compensate you for that.
If you had been laid up, money could have repaid you for lost time, or,
if your goods had been damaged, it might have compensated for that but
money cannot restore shocked nerves.  Did you require medical
attendance?"

"N-no!" said Mrs Podge, reddening.  "A friend did indeed insist on my
seeing a doctor, to whom, at his suggestion, I gave a fee of five
shillings, but to say truth I did not require him."

"Ha! was it the same friend who advised you to claim compensation?"

"Ye-es!" replied Mrs Podge, a little confused.

"Well, Mrs Podge, from your own admission I rather think that there
seems something like a fraudulent attempt to obtain money here.  I do
not for a moment hint that you are guilty of a fraudulent _intention_,
but you must know, ma'am, that the law takes no notice of intentions--
only of facts."

"But _have_ I not a right to expect compensation for the shock to my
nervous system?" pleaded Mrs Podge, still unwilling to give in.

"Certainly not, ma'am, if the shock did not interfere with your ordinary
course of life or cause you pecuniary loss.  And does it not seem hard
on railways, if you can view the subject candidly, to be so severely
punished for accidents which are in many eases absolutely unavoidable?
Perfection is not to be attained in a moment.  We are rapidly decreasing
our risks and increasing our safeguards.  We do our best for the safety
and accommodation of the public, and as directors and officials travel
by our trains as frequently as do the public, concern for our own lives
insures that we work the line in good faith.  Why, ma'am, I was myself
near the train at the time of the accident at Langrye, and _my_ nerves
were considerably shaken.  Moreover, there was a director with his
daughter in the train, both of whom were severely shaken, but they do
not dream of claiming damages on that account.  If you could have shown,
Mrs Podge, that you had suffered loss of any kind, we should have
_offered_ you compensation promptly, but as things stand--"

"Well, well," exclaimed Mrs Podge, testily.  "I suppose I must give it
up, but I don't see why railway companies should be allowed to shock my
nerves and then refuse to give me any compensation!"

"But we do not absolutely refuse _all_ compensation," said Mr Sharp,
drawing out his purse; "if a sovereign will pay the five shilling fee of
your doctor, and any other little expenses that you may have incurred,
you are welcome to it."

Mrs Podge extended her hand, Mr Sharp dropped the piece of gold into
it, and then, wishing her good afternoon, quitted the house.

The superintendent of police meditated, as he walked smartly away from
Mrs Podge, on the wonderful differences that were to be met with in
mankind, as to the matter of acquisitiveness, and his mind reverted to a
visit he had paid some time before, to another of the passengers in the
train to which the accident occurred.  This was the commercial traveller
who had one of his legs rather severely injured.  He willingly showed
his injured limb to our superintendent, when asked to do so, but
positively declined to accept of any compensation whatever, although it
was offered, and appeared to think himself handsomely treated when a few
free passes were sent to him by the manager.

Contrasting Mrs Podge unfavourably with this rare variety of the
injured human race, Mr Sharp continued his walk until he reached a part
of the line, not far from the station, where a large number of vans and
waggons were shunted on to sidings,--some empty, others loaded,--waiting
to be made up into trains and forwarded to their several destinations.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

SHARP PRACTICE--CONTINUED.

Mr Sharp had several peculiarities, which, at first sight, might have
puzzled a stranger.  He was peculiar in his choice of routes by which to
reach a given spot appearing frequently to prefer devious, difficult,
and unfrequented paths to straight and easy roads.  In the time of his
visits to various places, too, he was peculiarly irregular, and seemed
rather to enjoy taking people by surprise.

On the present occasion his chief peculiarity appeared to be a desire to
approach the station by a round-about road.  In carrying out his plans
he went round the corner of a house, from which point of view he
observed a goods train standing near a goods-shed with an engine
attached.  In order to reach it he had the choice of two routes.  One of
these was through a little wicket-gate, near to which a night-watchman
was stationed--for the shades of evening were by that time descending on
the scene, the other was through a back yard, round by a narrow lane and
over a paling, which it required more than an average measure of
strength and agility to leap.  Mr Sharp chose the latter route.  What
were palings and narrow lanes and insecure footing in deepening gloom to
him!  Why, he rejoiced in such conditions!  He didn't like easy work.
He abhorred a bed of roses--not that he had ever tried one, although it
is probable that he had often enjoyed a couch of grass, straw, or
nettles.  Rugged circumstances were his glory.  It was as needful for
him to encounter such--in his winnowing processes--as it is for the
harrow to encounter stones in preparing the cultivated field.  Moving
quietly but swiftly round by the route before mentioned Mr Sharp came
suddenly on the night-watchman.

"Good-evening, Jim."

"Evenin', sir."

"Keep your eyes open to-night, Jim.  We _must_ find out who it is that
has taken such a fancy to apples of late."

"I will, sir; I'll keep a sharp look-out."

It was Jim's duty to watch that locality of the line, where large
quantities of goods of all descriptions were unavoidably left to wait
for a few hours on sidings.  Such watchmen are numerous on all lines;
and very necessary, as well as valuable, men most of them are--fellows
who hold the idea of going to rest at regular hours in quiet contempt;
men who sleep at any time of the night or day that chances to be most
convenient, and who think no more of a hand-to-hand scuffle with a big
thief or a burglar than they do of eating supper.  Nevertheless, like
every other class of men in this wicked world, there are black sheep
amongst them too.

"Is that train going up to the station just now, Jim?" asked Mr Sharp,
pointing to the engine, whose gentle simmering told of latent energy
ready for immediate use.

"I believe so, sir."

"I'll go up with her.  Good-night."

Mr Sharp crossed the line, and going towards the engine found that the
driver and fireman were not upon it.  He knew, however, that they could
not be far off--probably looking after something connected with their
train--and that they would be back immediately; he climbed up to the
foot-plate and sat down on the rail.  He there became reflective, and
recalled, with some degree of amusement as well as satisfaction, some of
the more recent incidents of his vocation.  He smiled as he remembered
how, not very far from where he sat, he had on a cloudy evening got into
a horse-box, and boring a hole in it with a gimlet, applied his eye
thereto,--his satellite David Blunt doing the same in another end of the
same horse-box, and how, having thus obtained a clear view of a truck in
which several casks of wine were placed, he beheld one of the servants
on the line in company with one of his friends who was _not_ a servant
on the line, coolly bore a hole in one of the wine casks and insert a
straw, and, by that means, obtain a prolonged and evidently satisfactory
draught--which accounted at once for the fact that wine had been leaking
in that locality for some time past, and that the said servant had been
seen more than once in a condition that was deemed suspicious.

Mr Sharp also reflected complacently--and he had time to reflect, for
the driver and fireman were rather long of coming--on another case in
which the thieves were so wary that for a long time he could make
nothing of them, although their depredations were confined to a train
that passed along the line at a certain hour, but at last were caught in
consequence of his hitting on a plan of having a van specially prepared
for himself.  He smiled again--almost laughed when he thought of this
van--how it was regularly locked and labelled on a quiet siding; how a
plank was loosened in the bottom of it, by which means he got into it,
and was then shunted out, and attached to the train, so that neither
guard, nor driver, nor fireman, had any idea of what was inside; how he
thereafter bored several small gimlet holes in the various sides of the
van and kept a sharp look-out from station to station as they went
along; how at last he came to the particular place--not a station, but a
place where a short pause was made--where the wary thieves were; how he
saw them--two stout fellows--approach in the gloom of evening and begin
their wicked work of cutting tarpaulings and abstracting goods; how he
thereupon lifted his plank and dropped out on the line, and how he
powerfully astonished them by laying his hands on their collars and
taking them both in the very act!

At last Mr Sharp's entertaining reflections were interrupted by the
approach of the driver of the engine, who carried a top-coat over his
left arm.

As he drew near and observed who stood upon his engine, the man gave an
involuntary and scarcely perceptible start.

There must have been something peculiarly savage and ungenerous in the
breast of Mr Sharp, one would have thought, to induce him to suspect a
man whose character was blameless.  But he did suspect that man on the
faith of that almost imperceptible touch of discomposure, and his
suspicion did not dissipate although the man came boldly and
respectfully forward.

"Ho-ho!" thought Mr Sharp, "there is more chaff here to be winnowed
than I had bargained for."  His only remark, however, was--

"Good-evening; I suppose you start for the station in a few minutes?"

"Yes, sir," said the man, moving towards the rear of the tender.

"You'd better get up at once, then," said Mr Sharp, descending
quickly--"what have you got there, my good man?"

"My top-coat sir," said the driver, with a confused look.

"Ah, let us see--eh! what's all this?  A salmon! a brace of grouse! and
a pair of rabbits!  Well, you seem to have provided a good supper for
to-night.  There don't appear to be very stringent game-laws where you
come from!"

The man was so taken aback that he could not reply.  As the fireman came
out of the neighbouring goods-shed at that moment, Mr Sharp ordered the
driver to mount to his place, and then waiting beside the engine
received the fireman with an amiable "Good-night."

This man also had a top-coat over his arm, betrayed the same uneasiness
on observing Mr Sharp, went though precisely the same examination, and
was found to have made an identically similar provision for his supper.

Almost immediately after him the guard issued from the shed, also
burdened with a top-coat!  Mr Sharp muttered something about, "birds of
a feather," and was about to advance to meet the guard when that
individual's eyes fell on him.  He turned back at once, not in a hurry,
but quietly as though he had forgotten something.  The superintendent
sprang through the open door, but was too late.  The guard had managed
to drop his booty.  Thereupon Mr Sharp returned to the engine, ordered
the steam to be turned on, and the driver drove himself and his friends
to the station and to condign punishment.

Having disposed of this little incidental case, Mr Sharp--after hearing
and commenting upon several matters related to him by the members of his
corps, and having ordered David Blunt to await him in the office as he
had a job for him that night,--returned towards the locality which he
had so recently quitted.  In doing this he took advantage of another
goods train, from which he dropped at a certain hole-and-corner spot,
while it was slowly passing the goods-shed before mentioned.  From this
spot he took an observation and saw the pipe of Jim, the night-watchman,
glowing in the dark distance like a star of the first magnitude.

"Ha!" thought Mr Sharp, "smoking!  You'll have to clear your eyes of
smoke if you hope to catch thieves to-night, my fine fellow; but I shall
try to render you some able assistance."

So thinking, he moved quietly about among the vans and trucks, stooping
and climbing as occasion required, and doing it all so noiselessly that,
had the night permitted him to be visible at all, he might have been
mistaken for a stout shadow or a ghost.  He went about somewhat like a
retriever snuffing the air for game.  At last he reached a truck, not
very far from the place where Jim paced slowly to and fro, watching, no
doubt, for thieves.  Little did he think how near he was to a thief at
that moment!

The truck beside which Mr Sharp stood sent forth a delicious odour of
American apples.  The superintendent of police smelt them.  Worse than
that--he undid a corner of the thick covering of the track, raised it
and smelt again--he put in a hand.  Evidently his powers of resistance
to temptation were small, for both hands went in--he stooped his head,
and then, slowly but surely, his whole body went in under the cover and
disappeared.  Infatuated superintendent!  While he lay there gorging
himself, no doubt with the dainty fruit, _honest_ Jim paced slowly to
and fro until, a very dark and quiet hour of the night having arrived,
he deemed it time to act, put out his pipe, and moved with stealthy
tread towards the apple-truck.  There were no thieves about as far as he
could see.  He was placed there for the express purpose of catching
thieves.  Ridiculous waste of time and energy--he would _make_ a thief!
He would become one; he would detect and catch himself; repay himself
with apples for his trouble, and enjoy himself consumedly!  Noble idea!
No sooner thought than carried into effect.  He drew out a large
clasp-knife, which opened and locked with a click, and cut a tremendous
slash about two feet long in the cover of the truck--passing, in so
doing, within an inch of the demoralised superintendent's nose.
Thieves, you see, are not particular, unless, indeed, we may regard them
as particularly indifferent to the injuries they inflict on their
fellow-men--but, what did we say? their fellow-men?--a railway is not a
fellow-man.  Surely Jim's sin in robbing a railway must be regarded as a
venial one.  _Honest_ men do that every day and appear to think nothing
of it!  Nobody appears to think anything of it.  A railway would seem to
be the one great unpardonable outlaw of the land, which does good to
nobody, and is deemed fair game by everybody who can catch it--napping.
But it is not easily caught napping.  Neither was Mr Superintendent
Sharp.

Jim's hand came through the hole in the covering and entered some sort
