Joe, and even in the matter of strength, though he's not so strong, I'm
very sure that with his pugilistic powers he could keep order quite as
well.  Besides, all the people had made up their minds, as a matter of
course, that Dom was to be premier, and then--he's a gentleman."

"I'm thankful that you are not one of the Privy Council, Otto," returned
Pauline, with a laugh.  "You put several questions, and a string of
commentary and suggestion in the same breath!  Let me answer you in
detail, beginning with your last remark.  Joe is a gentleman in the
highest sense of that word.  He is gentle as a lamb by nature, and a
_man_ every inch of him.  But, more than this, I have noticed that he is
a peculiarly wise man, with a calm, pool head on all occasions, and not
too ready to use his great physical power in the settlement of disputes.
I have observed, too, that when asked for his advice, he usually thinks
well before he gives it, and when his advice is followed things almost
always go well.  Still further, Joe has the thorough confidence of the
people, and I am not so sure that Dom has.  Besides, if I had appointed
Dom, some of the ungenerous among them might have said it was done from
mere favouritism.  Then as to the people making up their minds that I
would appoint Dom," continued Pauline, "what have I to do with _that_?"

"Why, everything to do with it," returned Otto, with a surprised look.
"Were you not made queen for the purpose of carrying out their wishes?"

"Certainly not," answered Pauline; "I was made queen for the purpose of
ruling.  They told me they had confidence in my judgment, not in my
readiness to carry out their wishes.  If my judgment, coupled with that
of my advisers, does not suit them, it is open to them to unmake me as
they made me, and appoint a king or a president, but my judgment I
cannot alter."

Otto listened to these gravely stated opinions of the new queen with
increasing astonishment.

"Then, you awful despot," he said, "do you mean to tell me that you are
going to have no regard for the will of the people?"

"No, I don't mean to tell you that, you presumptuous little subject.  I
intend always to have the utmost regard for the will of my people, and
to weigh it well, and consult with my advisers about it; and when our
united judgment says that their will is good, I will act in accordance
with it; when we think it bad, I will reject it.  I have been made queen
to rule, and I _mean_ to rule!  That's fair, isn't it?  If they don't
like my ruling they can dethrone me.  That's also fair, isn't it?  You
wouldn't have me become a mere puppet--a jumping Jack or Jinnie--would
you, for the people to pull the string of?"

"Well, I never!" exclaimed Otto, gazing with distended eyes at the soft
fair face and at the pretty little innocent mouth that gave vent to
these vigorous sentiments.  "And what may it be your majesty's pleasure
to do next?"

"It is my pleasure that you, sir, shall go down to the beach and prepare
the dinghy for immediate service.  I have already directed the prime
minister, in conjunction with Dom and our Court physician, to draw up a
constitution and code of laws; while they are thus employed you and I
will go a-fishing."

"Very good; I suppose I'm bound to obey, but I thought your majesty
preferred to go a-sketching."

"We will do both.  Be off, sirrah!"

Otto was not long in launching and getting ready the little punt, or
dinghy, belonging to the wreck, which, being too small for carrying
goods to the island, had been made over to Pauline as a royal barge for
her special amusement, and already had she and her little brother
enjoyed several charming expeditions among the sheltered islets of the
lagoon, when Otto devoted himself chiefly to rowing and fishing, while
his sister sketched with pencil and water-colours.  Being expert with
both, she took great pleasure therein.

"It _is_ so pleasant and so very engrossing," she murmured, busying
herself with a sketch of Otto as he rowed gently towards one of the
smaller islets.  "I can't tell you how much I delight--turn your head a
little more to the left--so--and do keep your nose quiet if you can."

"Impossible," said Otto.  "There's a little fly that has made up its
mind to go into my nose.  I can neither drive it away nor catch it while
both hands are engaged with the oars, so there's no resource left but to
screw my nose about.  But what were you going to say you delighted in?"

"In--in drawing," replied the queen very slowly, while her pretty little
head went up and down as she glanced alternately at her sitter and the
sketch-book on her knee; "it--it takes one's mind--so--off--"

"The cares of state?" said Otto.  "Yes, I can easily understand what
a-re-re-ha! hk-sh!" he gave way to a convulsive sneeze; "there, it went
up at last, and that little fly's doom is sealed!"

"I should think it was," said Pauline laughingly.  "To be blown from a
cannon's mouth must be nothing to that.  Now, do keep still, just for
one minute."

For considerably more than a minute she went on sketching busily, while
her brother pulled along very gently, as if unwilling to break the
pleasant silence.  Everything around was calculated to foster a dreamy,
languid, peaceful state of mind.  The weather was pleasantly cool--just
cool enough to render the brilliant sunshine most enjoyable.  Not a
zephyr disturbed the glassy surface of the sea outside or the lagoon
within, or broke the perfect reflections of the islets among which they
moved.  The silence would have been even oppressive had it not been for
the soft, plaintive cries of wildfowl and the occasional whistling of
wings as they hurried to and fro, and the solemn boom of the great
breakers as they fell at slow regular intervals on the reef.  "Doesn't
it sound," said Pauline, looking up from her sketch with a flush of
delight, "like the deep soft voice of the ocean speaking peace to all
mankind?"

"What, the breakers?" asked Otto.

"Yes, dropping with a soft deep roar as they do in the midst of the
universal silence."

"Well, it doesn't quite strike me in that light, Pina.  My imagination
isn't so lively as yours.  Seems to me more like the snoring of a
sleeping giant, whom it is best to let lie still like a sleeping dog,
for he's apt to do considerable damage when roused."

The soft influences around soon reduced the pair to silence again.
After a time it was broken by Pauline.

"What are you thinking of, Otto?"

"I was thinking, your majesty, that it seems unfair, after making Joe
prime minister, Dom a privy councillor, the doctor Court physician and
general humbug, that you should give me no definite position in the
royal household."

"What would you say to being commander of the forces?" asked Pauline
dreamily, as she put in a few finishing touches, "for then, you see, you
might adopt the title which you have unfairly bestowed on the doctor--
General Humbug."

Otto shook his head.  "Wouldn't do, my dear queen.  Not being a correct
description, your bestowing it would compromise your majesty's
well-known character for truthfulness.  What d'you say to make me a
page--page in waiting?"

"You'll have to turn over a new leaf if I do, for a page is supposed to
be quiet, respectful, polite, obedient, ready--"

"No use to go further, Pina.  I'm not cut out for a page.  Will you land
on this islet?"

They were gliding softly past one of the most picturesque and verdant
gems of the lagoon at the time.

"No, I've taken a fancy to make a sketch from that one nearer to the
shore of Big Island.  You see, there is not only a very picturesque
group of trees on it just at that place, but the background happens to
be filled up by a distant view of the prettiest part of our settlement,
where Joe Binney's garden lies, close to Mrs Lynch's garden, with its
wonderfully shaped and curious hut, (no wonder, built by herself!) and a
corner of the palace rising just behind the new schoolhouse."

"Mind your eye, queen, else you go souse overboard when we strike," said
Otto, not without reason, for next moment the dinghy's keel grated on
the sand of the islet, and Pauline, having risen in her eagerness to go
to work, almost fulfilled the boy's prediction.

"But tell me, Pina, what do you mean to do with that schoolhouse when it
is built?" asked Otto, as he walked beside his sister to the picturesque
spot above referred to.

"To teach in it, of course."

"What--yourself?"

"Well, yes, to some extent.  Of course I cannot do much in that way--"

"I understand--the affairs of state!" said Otto, "will not permit,
etcetera."

"Put it so if you please," returned Pauline, laughing.  "Here, sit down;
help me to arrange my things, and I'll explain.  You cannot fail to have
been impressed with the fact that the children of the settlers are
dreadfully ignorant."

"H'm!  I suppose you are right; but I have been more deeply impressed
with the fact that they are dreadfully dirty, and desperately
quarrelsome, and deplorably mischievous."

"Just so," resumed Pauline.  "Now, I intend to get your friend Redding,
who was once a schoolmaster, to take these children in hand when the
schoolroom is finished, and teach them what he can, superintended by Dr
Marsh, who volunteered his services the moment I mentioned the school.
In the evenings I will take the mothers in hand, and teach them their
duties to their children and the community--"

"Being yourself such an old and experienced mother," said Otto.

"Silence, sir! you ought to remember that we have a dear, darling mother
at home, whose character is engraven on my memory, and whom I can hold
up as a model."

"True, Pina!  The dear old mother!" returned Otto, a burst of
home-feeling interfering for a moment with his levity.  "Just you paint
her portrait fair and true, and if they come anything within a hundred
miles o' the mark yours will be a kingd---queendom, I mean--of amazin'
mothers.  I sometimes fear," continued the boy, becoming grave, "it may
be a long time before we set eyes on mother again."

"I used to fear the same," said Pauline, "but I have become more hopeful
on that point since Dr Marsh said he was determined to have a small
schooner built out of the wreck, and attempt with a few sailors to reach
England in her, and report our condition here."

"Why, that would do you out of your kingdom, Pina!"

"It does not follow.  And what if it did?"

"It would be a pity.  Not pleasant you know, to be dethroned.  But to
return to mother.  D'you think the old cat will have learned to speak by
this time?"

To this Pauline replied that she feared not; that, although the cat
might have mastered the consonants, it could never have managed the
vowels.  "Dear mother," she added, in a more earnest tone, "I am quite
sure that though the cat may not speak to her, she will not have ceased
to speak to the cat.  Now, go away, Otto, you're beginning to make me
talk nonsense."

"But what about the schoolhouse?" persisted the boy, while the girl
began to sketch the view.  "You have not finished that subject."

"True--well, besides teaching the mothers I have great hopes of inducing
Dom to set up a Sunday-school, in which those who feel inclined might be
taught out of the Bible, and that might in time lead to our making a
church of it on Sundays, and having regular services, for there are some
earnest Christians among the men, who I feel quite sure would be ready
to help in the work.  Then as to an army--"

"An army!" echoed Otto, "what do we want with an army? who have we to
fight against?"

Little did Otto or Pauline think that at the very time they were
conversing thus pleasantly on that beautiful islet, the presence of a
friendly army was urgently required, for there in the bushes close
behind them listening to every sentence, but understanding never a word,
lay a group of tattooed and armed savages!

In the prosecution of evil designs, the nature of which was best known
to themselves, these savages had arrived at Refuge Islands the night
before.  Instantly they became aware of the presence of the white men,
and took measures to observe them closely without being themselves
observed.  Carrying their war-canoe over the reef in the dark, and
launching it on the lagoon, they advanced as near to the settlement as
possible, landed a small party on an islet, and then retired with the
canoe.  It was this party which lay in ambush so near to our little hero
and heroine.  They had been watching the settlers since daybreak, and
were not a little surprised, as well as gratified, by the unexpected
arrival of the little boat.

The savage who lay there grinning like a Cheshire cat, and peeping
through the long grass not ten feet from where the brother and sister
sat, was a huge man, tattooed all over, so that his face resembled
carved mahogany, his most prominent feature being a great flat nose,
with a blue spot on the point of it.

Suddenly Otto caught sight of the glitter of this man's eyes and teeth.

Now, the power of self-restraint was a prominent feature in Otto's
character, at least in circumstances of danger, though in the matter of
fun and mischief he was rather weak.  No sign did Otto give of his
discovery, although his heart seemed to jump into his mouth.  He did not
even check or alter the tone of his conversation, but he changed the
subject with surprising abruptness.  He had brought up one of the
dinghy's oars on his shoulder as a sort of plaything or vaulting-pole.
Suddenly, asking Pauline if she had ever seen him balance an oar on his
chin, he proceeded to perform the feat, much to her amusement.  In doing
so he turned his back completely on the savage in ambush, whose cattish
grin increased as the boy staggered about.

But there was purpose in Otto's staggering.  He gradually lessened the
distance between himself and the savage.  When near enough for his
purpose, he grasped the oar with both hands, wheeled sharply round, and
brought the heavy handle of it down with such a whack on the bridge of
the savage's blue-spotted nose that he suddenly ceased to grin, and
dropped his proboscis in the dust!

At the same instant, to the horror and surprise of the brother and
sister, up sprang half a dozen hideous natives, who seized them, placed
their black hands on their mouths, and bore them swiftly away.  The
war-canoe, putting off from its concealment, received the party along
with the fallen leader, and made for the reef.

High on the cliffs of Big Island Dr John Marsh had been smilingly
watching the proceedings of the queen and her brother in the dinghy.
When he witnessed the last act of the play, however, the smile vanished.
With a bound that would have done credit to a kangaroo, and a roar that
would have shamed a lion, he sprang over the cliffs, ran towards the
beach, and was followed--yelling--by all the men at hand--some armed,
and some not.  They leaped into the largest boat on the shore, put out
the ten oars, bent to them with a will, and skimmed over the lagoon in
fierce pursuit.

Soon the savages gained the reef, carried their canoe swiftly over, and
launched on the open sea, cutting through the great rollers like a
rocket or a fish-torpedo.

Heavy timbers and stout planks could not be treated thus; nevertheless,
the white men were so wild and strong, that when the boat finally gained
the open sea it was not very far behind the canoe.



CHAPTER TEN.

DESCRIBES A RESCUE, A CONSPIRACY, AND A TRIAL.

Proverbially a stern chase is a long one.  Happily, there are exceptions
to proverbs as well as rules.  The chase of the war-canoe, however, with
the captured queen on board, did not promise to be exceptional at first,
for the canoe was light and sharp, and powerfully manned, so that the
savages could relieve each other frequently, whereas the settlers' boat
was heavy and blunt, and not by any means too full of men.  It soon
became apparent that the latter was no match for the former under oars.
The distance between the two visibly increased.

Dr Marsh steered.  He was deadly pale, and there was a peculiarly
intense expression of anxiety in the steady gaze, with which he watched
the ever-diminishing canoe.

"No chance?" muttered Jabez Jenkins, who happened to form one of the
crew and pulled the bow oar.

"No chance?" repeated Dominick, who also pulled one of the oars.
"There's _every_ chance.  We're sure to tire them out.  Ho! lads, give
way with a will!"

Although labouring already with all his might, indignation at Jenkins's
remark enabled him to put on a spurt, which the others imitated.  Still
the distance between boat and canoe increased.

"They are three to one," growled Malines, who, up to that time, had been
doing his best.

"Silence!" thundered the doctor, drawing a revolver from his pocket and
cocking it.

Beads of perspiration stood on the doctor's brow, and there was
something so terrible in the look of his white face that no one ventured
to utter another word, but all pulled as if for their lives.

