intended), but, then, consider what we have to do."

"We have to guard and keep in order the population of the biggest city
in the world; a population greater than that of the whole of Scotland."

"Oh! of course, you are sure to go to Scotland for your illustrations,
as if there was no such place as England in the world," quietly remarked
Molly, with a curl of her pretty lip.

"Ah!  Molly, dear, you are unjust.  It is true I go to Scotland for an
illustration, but didn't I come to England for a wife?  Now, don't go
frowning at that hole as if it couldn't be bridged over."

"It is the worst hole you ever made," said the despairing wife, holding
it up to view.

"You make a worsted hole of it then, Moll, and it'll be all right.
Besides, you don't speak truth, for I once made a worse hole in your
heart."

"You never did, sir.  Go on with your stupid illustrations," said Molly.

"Well, then, let me see--where was I?"

"In Scotland, of course!"

"Ah, yes.  The population of all Scotland is under four millions, and
that of London--that is, of the area embraced in the Metropolitan Police
District, is estimated at above four million seven hundred thousand--in
round numbers.  Of course I give it you all in round numbers."

"I don't mind how round the numbers are, Giles, so long as they're all
square," remarked the little wife with much simplicity.

"Well, just think of that number for our army to watch over; and that
population--not all of it, you know, but part of it--succeeds--in spite
of us in committing, during one year, no fewer than 25,000 `Principal'
offences such as murders, burglaries, robberies, thefts, and such-like.
What they would accomplish if we were not ever on the watch I leave you
to guess.

"Last year, for instance, 470 burglaries, as we style house-breaking by
night, were committed in London.  The wonder is that there are not more,
when you consider the fact that the number of doors and windows found
open by us at night during the twelve months was nearly 26,000.  The
total loss of property by theft during the year is estimated at about
100,000 pounds.  Besides endeavouring to check crime of such magnitude,
we had to search after above 15,000 persons who were reported lost and
missing during the year, about 12,000 of whom were children."

"Oh! the _poor_ darlings," said Molly, twisting her sympathetic
eyebrows.

"Ay, and we found 7523 of these darlings," continued the practical
Giles, "and 720 of the adults.  Of the rest some returned home or were
found by their friends, but 154 adults and 23 children have been lost
altogether.  Then, we found within the twelve months 54 dead bodies
which we had to take care of and have photographed for identification.
During the same period, (and remember that the record of every twelve
months is much the same), we seized over 17,000 stray dogs and returned
them to their owners or sent them to the Dogs' Home.  We arrested over
18,000 persons for being drunk and disorderly.  We inspected all the
public vehicles and horses in London.  We attended to 3527 accidents
which occurred in the streets, 127 of which were fatal.  We looked after
more than 17,000 articles varying in value from 0 pence to 1500 pounds
which were lost by a heedless public during the year, about 10,000 of
which articles were restored to the owners.  We had to regulate the
street traffic; inspect common lodging-houses; attend the police and
other courts to give evidence, and many other things which it would take
me much too long to enumerate, and puzzle your pretty little head to
take in."

"No, it wouldn't," said Molly, looking up with a bright expression; "I
have a wonderful head for figures--especially for handsome manly
figures!  Go on, Giles."

"Then, look at what is expected of us," continued Number 666, not
noticing the last remark.  "We are told to exercise the greatest
civility and affability towards every one--high and low, rich and poor.
We are expected to show the utmost forbearance under all circumstances;
to take as much abuse and as many blows as we can stand, without
inflicting any in return; to be capable of answering almost every
question that an ignorant--not to say arrogant--public may choose to put
to us; to be ready, single-handed and armed only with our truncheons and
the majesty of the law, to encounter burglars furnished with knives and
revolvers; to plunge into the midst of drunken maddened crowds and make
arrests in the teeth of tremendous odds; to keep an eye upon strangers
whose presence may seem to be less desirable than their absence; to
stand any amount of unjust and ungenerous criticism without a word of
reply; to submit quietly to the abhorrence and chaff of boys, labourers,
cabmen, omnibus drivers, tramps, and fast young men; to have a fair
knowledge of the `three Rs' and a smattering of law, so as to conduct
ourselves with propriety at fires, fairs, fights, and races, besides
acting wisely as to mad dogs, German bands, (which are apt to produce
mad _men_), organ-grinders, furious drivers, and all other nuisances.
In addition to all which we must be men of good character, good
standing--as to inches--good proportions, physically, and good sense.
In short, we are expected to be--and blamed if we are not--as near to a
state of perfection as it is possible for mortal man to attain on this
side the grave, and all for the modest sum which you are but too well
aware is the extent of our income."

"Is one of the things expected of you," asked Molly, "to have an
exceedingly high estimate of yourselves?"

"Nay, Molly, don't you join the ranks of those who are against us.  It
will be more than criminal if you do.  You are aware that I am giving
the opinion expressed by men of position who ought to know everything
about the force.  That we fulfil the conditions required of us not so
badly is proved by the fact that last year, out of the whole 12,000
there were 215 officers and 1225 men who obtained rewards for zeal and
activity, while only one man was discharged, and four men were fined or
imprisoned.  I speak not of number one--or, I should say Number 666.
For myself I am ready to admit that I am the most insignificant of the
force."

"O Giles! what a barefaced display of mock modesty!"

"Nay, Molly, I can prove it.  Everything in this world goes by contrast,
doesn't it? then, is there a man in the whole force except myself, I
ask, whose wife is so bright and beautiful and good and sweet that she
reduces him to mere insignificance by contrast?"

"There's something in that, Giles," replied Molly with gravity, "but go
on with your lecture."

"I've nothing more to say about the force," returned Giles; "if I have
not said enough to convince you of our importance, and of the debt of
gratitude that you and the public of London owe to us, you are past
conviction, and--"

"You are wrong, Giles, as usual; I am never past conviction; you have
only to take me before the police court in the morning, and any
magistrate will at once convict me of stupidity for having married a
Scotchman and a policeman!"

"I think it must be time to go on my beat, for you beat me hollow," said
Number 666, consulting his watch.

"No, no, Giles, please sit still.  It is not every day that I have such
a chance of a chat with you."

"Such a chance of pitching into me, you mean," returned Giles.
"However, before I go I would like to tell you just one or two facts
regarding this great London itself, which needs so much guarding and
such an army of guardians.  You know that the Metropolitan District
comprises all the parishes any portion of which are within 15 miles of
Charing Cross--this area being 688 square miles.  The rateable value of
it is over twenty-six million eight hundred thousand pounds sterling.
See, as you say you've a good head for _figures_, there's the sum on a
bit of paper for you--26,800,000 pounds.  During last year 26,170 new
houses were built, forming 556 new streets and four new squares--the
whole covering a length of 86 miles.  The total number of new houses
built during the last _ten_ years within this area has been 162,525,
extending over 500 miles of streets and squares!"

"Stay, I can't stand it!" cried Molly, dropping her sock and putting her
fingers in her ears.

"Why not, old girl?"

"Because it is too much for me; why, even _your_ figure is a mere
nothing to such sums!"

"Then," returned Giles, "you've only got to stick me on to the end of
them to make my information ten times more valuable."

"But are you quite sure that what you tell me is true, Giles?"

"Quite sure, my girl--at least as sure as I am of the veracity of
Colonel Henderson, who wrote the last Police Report."

At this point the chat was interrupted by the juvenile policeman in the
crib under Sir Robert Peel.  Whether it was the astounding information
uttered in his sleepy presence, or the arduous nature of the duty
required of him in dreams, we cannot tell, but certain it is that when
Number 666 uttered the word "Report" there came a crash like the report
of a great gun, and Number 2 of the A Division, having fallen overboard,
was seen on the floor pommelling some imaginary criminal who stoutly
refused to be captured.

Giles ran forward to the assistance of Number 2, as was his duty, and
took him up in his arms.  But Number 2 had awakened to the fact that he
had hurt himself, and, notwithstanding the blandishments of his father,
who swayed him about and put him on his broad shoulders, and raised his
curly head to the ceiling, he refused for a long time to be comforted.
At last he was subdued, and returned to the crib and the land of dreams.

"Now, Molly, I must really go," said Giles, putting on his uniform.  "I
hope Number 2 won't disturb you again.  Good-bye, lass, for a few
hours," he added, buckling his belt.  "Here, look, do you see that
little spot on the ceiling?"

"Yes,--well?" said Molly, looking up.

Giles took unfair advantage of her, stooped, and kissed the pretty
little face, received a resounding slap on the back, and went out, to
attend to his professional duties, with the profound gravity of an
incapable magistrate.

There was a bright intelligent little street-Arab on the opposite side
of the way, who observed Giles with mingled feelings of admiration,
envy, and hatred, as he strode sedately along the street like an
imperturbable pillar.  He knew Number 666 personally; had seen him under
many and varied circumstance, and had imagined him under many others--
not unfrequently as hanging by the neck from a lamp-post--but never,
even in the most daring flights of his juvenile fancy, had he seen him
as he has been seen by the reader in the bosom of his poor but happy
home.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

MRS. FROG SINKS DEEPER AND DEEPER.

"Nobody cares," said poor Mrs Frog, one raw afternoon in November, as
she entered her miserable dwelling, where the main pieces of furniture
were a rickety table, a broken chair, and a heap of straw, while the
minor pieces were so insignificant as to be unworthy of mention.  There
was no fire in the grate, no bread in the cupboard, little fresh air in
the room and less light, though there was a broken unlighted candle
stuck in the mouth of a quart bottle which gave promise of light in the
future--light enough at least to penetrate the November fog which had
filled the room as if it had been endued with a pitying desire to throw
a veil over such degradation and misery.

We say degradation, for Mrs Frog had of late taken to "the bottle" as a
last solace in her extreme misery, and the expression of her face, as
she cowered on a low stool beside the empty grate and drew the shred of
tartan shawl round her shivering form, showed all too clearly that she
was at that time under its influence.  She had been down to the river
again, more than once, and had gazed into its dark waters until she had
very nearly made up her mind to take the desperate leap, but God in
mercy had hitherto interposed.  At one time a policeman had passed with
his weary "move on"--though sometimes he had not the heart to enforce
his order.  More frequently a little baby-face had looked up from the
river with a smile, and sent her away to the well-known street where she
would sit in the familiar door-step watching the shadows on the
window-blind until cold and sorrow drove her to the gin-palace to seek
for the miserable comfort to be found there.

Whatever that comfort might amount to, it did not last long, for, on the
night of which we write, she had been to the palace, had got all the
comfort that was to be had out of it, and returned to her desolate home
more wretched than ever, to sit down, as we have seen, and murmur,
almost fiercely, "Nobody cares."

For a time she sat silent and motionless, while the deepening shadows
gathered round her, as if they had united with all the rest to intensify
the poor creature's woe.

Presently she began to mutter to herself aloud--

"What's the use o' your religion when it comes to this?  What sort of
religion is in the hearts of these," (she pursed her lips, and paused
for an expressive word, but found none), "these rich folk in their silks
and satins and broadcloth, with more than they can use, an' feedin'
their pampered cats and dogs on what would be wealth to the likes o' me!
Religion! bah!"

She stopped, for a Voice within her said as plainly as if it had spoken
out: "Who gave you the sixpence the other day, and looked after you with
a tender, pitying glance as you hurried away to the gin-shop without so
much as stopping to say `Thank you'?  She wore silks, didn't she?"

"Ah, but there's not many like that," replied the poor woman, mentally,
for the powers of good and evil were fighting fiercely within her just
then.

"How do you know there are not many like that?" demanded the Voice.

"Well, but _all_ the rich are not like that," said Mrs Frog.

The Voice made no reply to that!

Again she sat silent for some time, save that a low moan escaped her
occasionally, for she was very cold and very hungry, having spent the
last few pence, which might have given her a meal, in drink; and the
re-action of the poison helped to depress her.  The evil spirit seemed
to gain the mastery at this point, to judge from her muttered words.

"Nothing to eat, nothing to drink, no work to be got, Hetty laid up in
hospital, Ned in prison, Bobby gone to the bad again instead of goin' to
Canada, and--nobody cares--"

"What about baby?" asked the Voice.

This time it was Mrs Frog's turn to make no reply! in a few minutes she
seemed to become desperate, for, rising hastily, she went out, shut the
door with a bang, locked it, and set out on the familiar journey to the
gin-shop.

She had not far to go.  It was at the corner.  If it had not been at
that corner, there was one to be found at the next--and the next--and
the next again, and so on all round; so that, rushing past, as people
sometimes do when endeavouring to avoid a danger, would have been of
little or no avail in this case.  But there was a very potent influence
of a negative kind in her favour.  She had no money!  Recollecting this
when she had nearly reached the door, she turned aside, and ran swiftly
to the old door-step, where she sat down and hid her face in her hands.

A heavy footstep sounded at her side the next moment.  She looked
quickly up.  It was a policeman.  He did not apply the expected
words--"move on."  He was a man under whose blue uniform beat a tender
and sympathetic heart.  In fact, he was Number 666--changed from some
cause that we cannot explain, and do not understand--from the
Metropolitan to the City Police Force.  His number also had been
changed, but we refuse to be trammelled by police regulations.  Number
666 he was and shall remain in this tale to the end of the chapter!

Instead of ordering the poor woman to go away, Giles was searching his
pockets for a penny, when to his intense surprise he received a blow on
the chest, and then a slap on the face!

Poor Mrs Frog, misjudging his intentions, and roused to a fit of
temporary insanity by her wrongs and sorrows, sprang at her supposed foe
like a wildcat.  She was naturally a strong woman, and violent passion
lent her unusual strength.

Oh! it was pitiful to witness the struggle that ensued!--to see a woman,
forgetful of sex and everything else, striving with all her might to
bite, scratch, and kick, while her hair tumbled down, and her bonnet and
shawl falling off made more apparent the insufficiency of the rags with
which she was covered.

Strong as he was, Giles received several ugly scratches and bites before
he could effectually restrain her.  Fortunately, there were no
passers-by in the quiet street, and, therefore, no crowd assembled.

"My poor woman," said Giles, when he had her fast, "do keep quiet.  I'm
going to do you no harm.  God help you, I was goin' to give you a copper
when you flew at me so.  Come, you'd better go with me to the station,
for you're not fit to take care of yourself."

Whether it was the tender tone of Giles's voice, or the words that he
uttered, or the strength of his grasp that subdued Mrs Frog, we cannot
tell, but she gave in suddenly, hung down her head, and allowed her
captor to do as he pleased.  Seeing this, he carefully replaced her
bonnet on her head, drew the old shawl quite tenderly over her
shoulders, and led her gently away.

Before they had got the length of the main thoroughfare, however, a
female of a quiet, respectable appearance met them.

"Mrs Frog!" she exclaimed, in amazement, stopping suddenly before them.

"If you know her, ma'am, perhaps you may direct me to her home."

"I know her well," said the female, who was none other than the
Bible-nurse who visited the sick of that district; "if you have not
arrested her for--for--"

"Oh no, madam," interrupted Giles, "I have not arrested her at all, but
she seems to be unwell, and I was merely assisting her."

"Oh! then give her over to me, please.  I know where she lives, and will
take care of her."

Giles politely handed his charge over, and went on his way, sincerely
hoping that the next to demand his care would be a man.

The Bible-woman drew the arm of poor Mrs Frog through her own, and in a
few minutes stood beside her in the desolate home.

"Nobody cares," muttered the wretched woman as she sank in apathy on her
stool and leaned her head against the wall.

"You are wrong, dear Mrs Frog.  _I_ care, for one, else I should not be
here.  Many other Christian people would care, too, if they knew of your
sufferings; but, above all, God cares.  Have you carried your troubles
to Him?"

"Why should I?  He has long ago forsaken me."

"Is it not, dear friend, that you have forsaken Him?  Jesus says, as
