their Dogs, and two new ones were slipped--two fresh Hounds; surely
they could end the race. But they did not. The first two were
vanquished--gasping--out of it, but the next two were racing near. The
Warhorse put forth all his strength. He left the first two far
behind--was nearly to the Haven when the second two came up.

Nothing but dodging could save him now. His ears were sinking, his
heart was pattering on his ribs, but his spirit was strong. He flung
himself in wildest zigzags. The Hounds tumbled over each other. Again
and again they thought they had him. One of them snapped off the end of
his long black tail, yet he escaped; but he could not get to the Haven.
The luck was against him. He was forced nearer to the Grand Stand. A
thousand ladies were watching. The time limit was up. The second Dogs
were suffering, when Mickey came running, yelling like a
madman--words--imprecations--crazy sounds:

"Ye blackguard hoodlums! Ye dhirty, cowardly bastes!" and he rushed
furiously at the Dogs, intent to do them bodily harm.

Officers came running and shouting, and Mickey, shrieking hatred and
defiance, was dragged from the field, reviling Dogs and men with every
horrid, insulting name he could think of or invent.

"Fair play! Whayer's yer fair play, ye liars, ye dhirty cheats, ye
bloody cowards!" And they drove him from the arena. The last he saw of
it was the four foaming Dogs feebly dodging after a weak and worn-out
Jack-rabbit, and the judge on his Horse beckoning to the man with the
gun.

The gate closed behind him, and Mickey heard a bang-bang, an unusual
uproar mixed with yelps of Dogs, and he knew that Little Jack Warhorse
had been served with finish No. 4.

All his life he had loved Dogs, but his sense of fair play was
outraged. He could not get in, nor see in from where he was. He raced
along the lane to the Haven, where he might get a good view, and
arrived in time to see--Little Jack Warhorse with his half-masted ears
limp into the Haven; and he realized at once that the man with the gun
had missed, had hit the wrong runner, for there was the crowd at the
Stand watching two men who were carrying a wounded Greyhound, while a
veterinary surgeon was ministering to another that was panting on the
ground.

Mickey looked about, seized a little shipping-box, put it at the angle
of the Haven, carefully drove the tired thing into it, closed the lid,
then, with the box under his arm, he scaled the fence unseen in the
confusion and was gone.

'It didn't matter; he had lost his job anyway.' He tramped away from
the city. He took the train at the nearest station and travelled some
hours, and now he was in Rabbit country again. The sun had long gone
down; the night with its stars was over the plain when among the farms,
the Osage and alfalfa, Mickey Doo opened the box and gently put the
Warhorse out.

Grinning as he did so, he said: "Shure an' it's ould Oireland thot's
proud to set the thirteen stars at liberty wance moore."

For a moment the Little Warhorse gazed in doubt, then took three or
four long leaps and a spy-hop to get his bearings. Now spreading his
national colors and his honor-marked ears, he bounded into his hard-won
freedom, strong as ever, and melted into the night of his native plain.

He has been seen many times in Kaskado, and there have been many Rabbit
drives in that region, but he seems to know some means of baffling them
now, for, in all the thousands that have been trapped and corralled,
they have never since seen the star-spangled ears of Little jack
Warhorse.




SNAP

THE STORY OF A BULL-TERRIER

I

It was dusk on Hallowe'en when first I saw him. Early in the morning I
had received a telegram from my college chum Jack: "Lest we forget. Am
sending you a remarkable pup. Be polite to him; it's safer." It would
have been just like Jack to have sent an infernal machine or a Skunk
rampant and called it a pup, so I awaited the hamper with curiosity.
When it arrived I saw it was marked "Dangerous," and there came from
within a high-pitched snarl at every slight provocation. On peering
through the wire netting I saw it was not a baby Tiger but a small
white Bull-terrier. He snapped at me and at any one or anything that
seemed too abrupt or too near for proper respect, and his snarling
growl was unpleasantly frequent. Dogs have two growls: one
deep-rumbled, and chesty; that is polite warning--the retort courteous;
the other mouthy and much higher in pitch: this is the last word before
actual onslaught. The Terrier's growls were all of the latter kind. I
was a dog-man and thought I knew all about Dogs, so, dismissing the
porter, I got out my all-round
jackknife--toothpick--nailhammer-hatchet-toolbox-fire-shovel, a
specialty of our firm, and lifted the netting. Oh, yes, I knew all
about Dogs. The little fury had been growling out a whole-souled growl
for every tap of the tool, and when I turned the box on its side, he
made a dash straight for my legs. Had not his foot gone through the
wire netting and held him, I might have been hurt, for his heart was
evidently in his work; but I stepped on the table out of reach and
tried to reason with him. I have always believed in talking to animals.
I maintain that they gather something of our intention at least, even
if they do not understand our words; but the Dog evidently put me down
for a hypocrite and scorned my approaches. At first he took his post
under the table and kept up a circular watch for a leg trying to get
down. I felt sure I could have controlled him with my eye, but I could
not bring it to bear where I was, or rather where he was; thus I was
left a prisoner. I am a very cool person, I flatter myself; in fact, I
represent a hardware firm, and, in coolness, we are not excelled by any
but perhaps the nosy gentlemen that sell wearing-apparel. I got out a
cigar and smoked tailor-style on the table, while my little tyrant
below kept watch for legs. I got out the telegram and read it:
"Remarkable pup. Be polite to him; it's safer." I think it was my
coolness rather than my politeness that did it, for in half an hour the
growling ceased. In an hour he no longer jumped at a newspaper
cautiously pushed over the edge to test his humor; possibly the
irritation of the cage was wearing off, and by the time I had lit my
third cigar, he waddled out to the fire and lay down; not ignoring me,
however, I had no reason to complain of that kind of contempt. He kept
one eye on me, and I kept both eyes, not on him, but on his stumpy
tail. If that tail should swing sidewise once I should feel I was
winning; but it did not swing. I got a book and put in time on that
table till my legs were cramped and the fire burned low. About 10 P.M.
it was chilly, and at half-past ten the fire was out. My Hallowe'en
present got up, yawned and stretched, then walked under my bed, where
he found a fur rug. By stepping lightly from the table to the dresser,
and then on to the mantel-shelf, I also reached bed, and, very quietly
undressing, got in without provoking any criticism from my master. I
had not yet fallen asleep when I heard a slight scrambling and felt
"thump-thump" on the bed, then over my feet and legs; Snap evidently
had found it too cool down below, and proposed to have the best my
house afforded.

He curled up on my feet in such a way that I was very uncomfortable and
tried to readjust matters, but the slightest wriggle of my toe was
enough to make him snap at it so fiercely that nothing but thick
woollen bedclothes saved me from being maimed for life.

I was an hour moving my feet--a hair's-breadth at a time--till they
were so that I could sleep in comfort; and I was awakened several times
during the night by angry snarls from the Dog--I suppose because I
dared to move a toe without his approval, though once I believe he did
it simply because I was snoring.

In the morning I was ready to get up before Snap was. You see, I call
him Snap-Ginger-snap in full. Some Dogs are hard to name, and some do
not seem to need it--they name themselves.

I was ready to rise at seven. Snap was not ready till eight, so we rose
at eight. He had little to say to the man who made the fire. He allowed
me to dress without doing it on the table. As I left the room to get
breakfast, I remarked:

"Snap, my friend, some men would whip you into a different way, but I
think I know a better plan. The doctors nowadays favor the
'no-breakfast cure.' I shall try that."

It seemed cruel, but I left him without food all day. It cost me
something to repaint the door where he scratched it, but at night he
was quite ready to accept a little food at my hands.

In a week we were very good friends. He would sleep on my bed now and
allow me to move my feet without snapping at them, intent to do me
serious bodily harm. The no-breakfast cure had worked wonders; in three
months we were--well, simply man and Dog, and he amply justified the
telegram he came with.

He seemed to be without fear. If a small Dog came near, he would take
not the slightest notice; if a medium-sized Dog, he would stick his
stub of a tail rigidly up in the air, then walk around him, scratching
contemptuously with his hind feet, and looking at the sky, the
distance, the ground, anything but the Dog, and noting his presence
only by frequent high-pitched growls. If the stranger did not move on
at once, the battle began, and then the stranger usually moved on very
rapidly. Snap sometimes got worsted, but no amount of sad experience
could ever inspire him with a grain of caution. Once, while riding in a
cab during the Dog Show, Snap caught sight of an elephantine St.
Bernard taking an airing. Its size aroused such enthusiasm in the Pup's
little breast that he leaped from the cab window to do battle, and
broke his leg.

Evidently fear had been left out of his make-up and its place supplied
with an extra amount of ginger, which was the reason of his full name.
He differed from all other Dogs I have ever known. For example, if a
boy threw a stone at him, he ran, not away, but toward the boy, and if
the crime was repeated, Snap took the law into his own hands; thus he
was at least respected by all. Only myself and the porter at the office
seemed to realize his good points, and we only were admitted to the
high honor of personal friendship, an honor which I appreciated more as
months went on, and by midsummer not Carnegie, Vanderbilt, and Astor
together could have raised money enough to buy a quarter of a share in
my little Dog Snap.


II

Though not a regular traveller, I was ordered out on the road in the
autumn, and then Snap and the landlady were left together, with
unfortunate developments. Contempt on his part--fear on hers; and hate
on both.

I was placing a lot of barb-wire in the northern tier of States. My
letters were forwarded once a week, and I got several complaints from
the landlady about Snap.

Arrived at Mendoza, in North Dakota, I found a fine market for wire. Of
course my dealings were with the big storekeepers, but I went about
among the ranchmen to get their practical views on the different
styles, and thus I met the Penroof Brothers' Cow-outfit.

One cannot be long in Cow country now without hearing a great deal
about the depredations of the ever wily and destructive Gray-wolf. The
day has gone by when they can be poisoned wholesale, and they are a
serious drain on the rancher's profits. The Penroof Brothers, like most
live cattle-men, had given up all attempts at poisoning and trapping,
and were trying various breeds of Dogs as Wolf-hunters, hoping to get a
little sport out of the necessary work of destroying the pests.

Foxhounds had failed--they were too soft for fighting; Great Danes were
too clumsy, and Greyhounds could not follow the game unless they could
see it. Each breed had some fatal defect, but the cow-men hoped to
succeed with a mixed pack, and the day when I was invited to join in a
Mendoza Wolf-hunt, I was amused by the variety of Dogs that followed.
There were several mongrels, but there were also a few highly bred
Dogs--in particular, some Russian Wolfhounds that must have cost a lot
of money.

Hilton Penroof, the oldest boy, "The Master of Hounds," was unusually
proud of them, and expected them to do great things.

"Greyhounds are too thin-skinned to fight a Wolf, Danes are too slow,
but you'll see the fur fly when the Russians take a hand."

Thus the Greyhounds were there as runners, the Danes as heavy backers,
and the Russians to do the important fighting. There were also two or
three Foxhounds, whose fine noses were relied on to follow the trail if
the game got out of view.

It was a fine sight as we rode away among the Badland Buttes that
October day. The air was bright and crisp, and though so late, there
was neither snow nor frost. The Horses were fresh, and once or twice
showed me how a Cow-pony tries to get rid of his rider.

The Dogs were keen for sport, and we did start one or two gray spots in
the plain that Hilton said were Wolves or Coyotes. The Dogs trailed
away at full cry, but at night, beyond the fact that one of the
Greyhounds had a wound on his shoulder, there was nothing to show that
any of them had been on a Wolf-hunt.

"It's my opinion yer fancy Russians is no good, Hilt," said Garvin, the
younger brother. "I'll back that little black Dane against the lot,
mongrel an' all as he is."

"I don't unnerstan' it," growled Hilton. "There ain't a Coyote, let
alone a Gray-wolf, kin run away from them Greyhounds; them Foxhounds
kin folly a trail three days old, an' the Danes could lick a Grizzly."

"I reckon," said the father, "they kin run, an' they kin track, an'
they kin lick a Grizzly, maybe, but the fac' is they don't want to
tackle a Gray-wolf. The hull darn pack is scairt--an' I wish we had our
money out o' them."

Thus the men grumbled and discussed as I drove away and left them.

There seemed only one solution of the failure. The Hounds were swift
and strong, but a Gray-wolf seems to terrorize all Dogs. They have not
the nerve to face him, and so, each time he gets away, and my thoughts
flew back to the fearless little Dog that had shared my bed for the
last year. How I wished he was out here, then these lubberly giants of
Hounds would find a leader whose nerve would not fail at the moment of
trial.

At Baroka, my next stop, I got a batch of mail including two letters
from the landlady; the first to say that "that beast of a Dog was
acting up scandalous in my room," and the other still more forcible,
demanding his immediate removal. "Why not have him expressed to
Mendoza?" I thought. "It's only twenty hours; they'll be glad to have
him. I can take him home with me when I go through."


III

My next meeting with Gingersnap was not as different from the first as
one might have expected. He jumped on me, made much vigorous pretense
to bite, and growled frequently, but it was a deep-chested growl and
his stump waggled hard.

The Penroofs had had a number of Wolf-hunts since I was with them, and
were much disgusted at having no better success than before. The Dogs
could find a Wolf nearly every time they went out, but they could not
kill him, and the men were not near enough at the finish to learn why.

Old Penroof was satisfied that "thar wasn't one of the hull miserable
gang that had the grit of a Jack-rabbit."

We were off at dawn the next day--the same procession of fine Horses
and superb riders; the big blue Dogs, the yellow Dogs, the spotted
Dogs, as before; but there was a new feature, a little white Dog that
stayed close by me, and not only any Dogs, but Horses that came too
near were apt to get a surprise from his teeth. I think he quarrelled
with every man, Horse, and Dog in the country, with the exception of a
