"Do you know, Aunt Jane, I've been thinking of taking a trip to the
West," he went on, after a pause.

"So you said before."

"I'd go in a minute if I had the money."

"How much do you want?"

"Two or three hundred dollars at least."

"Is the money gone that I let you have last month?"

"Yes, I had to pay some back bills with that."

"You are very extravagant, Rufus."

"Oh, a young man must spend something."

"But not as much as you spend."

"I don't spend any more than the rest of the fellows in my set. I have
got to keep up appearances, you know."

"Your set is altogether too fast a one to suit me."

"Will you let me have the money?"

"How long do you expect to be gone?"

"That depends upon what you will give me. If you'll let me have five
hundred dollars, I'll make a trip of two or three months."

Mrs. Parloe thought for a moment, and at last consented to give her
nephew the five hundred. She had her check book handy, and soon the
check was passed over to the nephew.

"When shall you start?" she asked.

"I don't know. I've a good notion to start to-night. But if you want me
to do anything for you before I go----"

"There is nothing, Rufus. Only, if you want to please me, don't get into
any bad habits while you are gone."

"Oh, I'm going to turn over a new leaf when I leave Brooklyn," said the
hypocrite. "Then, I can leave to-night?"

"Yes."

"In that case, I'll pack my trunk at once," said Rufus Cameron; and a
little later he did so. Then he had the trunk taken away, bid his aunt
good-by, and was off.

"That was easy," he said to himself, when away from the house. "Now to
see Shanley and to arrange for keeping out of sight, in case John
Garwell kicks up a fuss."




CHAPTER XXI

A MISSING DOCUMENT OF VALUE


As soon as Nat returned to the office he sought out Mr. Garwell, and
handed him the document in the envelope.

"Did you have any trouble getting Mrs. Parloe's signature?" asked the
real estate broker.

"I had no trouble getting the signature, but I had trouble getting away
from the house," answered Nat.

"Trouble getting away? What do you mean?"

"I was stopped by her nephew, a man named Rufus Cameron. He handled me
rather roughly."

"Did he try to get the document away from you?" And now John Garwell was
all attention.

"He hauled me in the parlor, and demanded that I let him look at the
paper. I refused, and then he threatened me."

"And what happened after that?"

"He put his hand in my pocket and brought out a diamond ring. He said I
had stolen it."

"Of course you hadn't, Nat?"

"I had never seen the ring before. But that wasn't the worst of it. He
picked up a sea shell and hit me with it and knocked me senseless."

After that our hero told his story in detail, relating also what Rufus
Cameron had said on assisting him to the street car. The real estate
broker listened with keen interest.

"That man is a scoundrel!" he exclaimed, when Nat had concluded his
story. "I pity Mrs. Parloe. He is doing his best to get all her money
from her."

"It was a mean trick to say I took the ring," declared Nat.

"He did that thinking to get you in his power, my boy. Are you sure he
didn't look at the document?"

"I can't say what he did while I was senseless, Mr. Garwell."

"I'll take a look at the paper and see if he made any alterations in the
text."

John Garwell looked at the document and began to read it.

"Why, this is not the paper I gave you, Nat," he ejaculated.

"Not the same?"

"No. It's some old thing that I know nothing about."

"If that's the case, Mr. Cameron substituted this paper for the real
one!" exclaimed our hero. "He could easily have done that during the
time I was knocked out."

"I'll see about this without delay," said John Garwell, decisively. "I
will show that fellow that he can't carry matters with quite such a high
hand."

"What can he do with that paper, Mr. Garwell?"

"He can cause me a great deal of trouble. The paper refers to a piece of
property in which Mrs. Parloe held an interest. I have been trying to
get a free and clear title to the land for a client of mine, and another
real estate dealer named Andrew Shanley has been trying to get the land
for another party. It is a mixed-up affair, but I hoped the signing of
that paper would help to straighten out matters."

The real estate broker was as good as his word, but he was exceedingly
busy, and it was not until two in the afternoon that he could get away.
Then he went to Brooklyn, taking Nat with him.

"I would like to see Mr. Cameron," said he to the girl at Mrs. Parloe's
home.

"Mr. Cameron has gone away, sir," was the unexpected answer.

"Do you know when he will be back?"

"I'll ask Mrs. Parloe," said the girl.

She went upstairs, leaving them in the parlor below. Soon she came back.

"He has gone out west, Mrs. Parloe says, and she doesn't expect him back
for two or three months."

"Gone west," cried Nat. "When did he go?"

"He went away about noon."

"Did he take any baggage?" asked John Garwell.

"Yes, sir, a dress-suit case, and he sent an expressman around for his
trunk, too."

"Then I won't bother you any more," said the real estate broker, and
left the house, followed by Nat.

"Don't you want to ask Mrs. Parloe about this?" queried our hero.

"It would be useless to do so, Nat. It would only upset the old lady."

"She might be able to tell us just where her nephew had gone to?"

"It is not likely. He intends to keep out of the way, that is certain."

"Maybe he didn't go west at all!" said our hero, suddenly.

"Such a thing is possible."

"Did you say he was in league with this other real estate broker?"

"I don't know about that, although I know he and this Shanley are
friends."

"I wonder if it wouldn't be a good idea for me to watch around this
Shanley's office for him?"

"Ha! That is an idea." John Garwell smiled broadly. "Nat, you are
growing clever."

"Even if I couldn't get the paper, I could prove that he had not gone
west, as he told his aunt, and I could follow him, and find out where he
was stopping."

"Well, you can do the watching if you wish. I will give you Andrew V.
Shanley's address. His place of business is between here and the
Bridge."

"Shall I go there at once?"

"If you wish."

The address was written on a slip of paper, and a little later Nat and
his employer separated. John Garwell gazed after our hero curiously.

"He is improving wonderfully," he mused. "He isn't half as green as when
I first met him."

Nat had been told what car to take, and ten minutes sufficed to bring
him to the block upon which Andrew Shanley's office was located, on the
third floor of a large office building. He went upstairs, and managed to
get a peep into the office, and found Rufus Cameron was not there.

"Of course he may have been here already," he told himself. "But I've
got to take my chances about that. I'll stay here until the place shuts
up."

Going below again, he took a station across the street and began to wait
patiently for the appearance of Rufus Cameron.

As luck would have it, he had waited less than half an hour when he saw
Mrs. Parloe's nephew step from a car at the corner, and approach the
office building.

"Mr. Cameron, I want to see you!" he exclaimed, coming forward, and
confronting the man.

Rufus Cameron had not expected to meet Nat again so soon, and for the
moment he was dumfounded.

"Wha--what do you want?" he stammered, halting.

"You know well enough what I want," answered our hero, sharply. "I want
that document you stole from me."

"Stole from you!"

"That is what I said, Rufus Cameron."

"I--I don't know what you are talking about."

"You do know, and unless you give up the paper I am going to have you
arrested right now."

At these words Rufus Cameron turned pale. As said before, he was a good
deal of a coward, and being caught so unexpectedly threw him somewhat
from his mental balance.

"You--you can't have me arrested!"

"Yes, I can."

"How did you come to look for me here?"

"Mr. Garwell sent me here. He is up to your tricks."

"Did he tell you to--to have me arrested?"

"Never mind what he told me. I want that paper, and I want it right
now."

"I--I haven't got any paper. I--I don't know what you are talking
about."

"Yes, you have got that paper. You took it from me after you knocked me
down in your aunt's parlor. Isn't that so?"

As Nat finished he nodded, as if talking to somebody behind Rufus
Cameron. At once the guilty fellow turned his head to learn who was
listening to the conversation. As he did this, Nat thrust his hand in
the rascal's breast pocket, and brought forth the document which had
caused all the trouble.




CHAPTER XXII

AT THE ELEVATED STATION


"Hi, stop that!" roared Rufus Cameron, making a clutch for the document.
But before he could reach it Nat was at a safe distance. Our hero
glanced at the paper, to make certain that it was the right one, and
then put it in his pocket, and buttoned up his jacket.

"Now, Mr. Rufus Cameron, I guess we are square," said Nat, in something
a tone of triumph.

"You young thief, give me back that document," cried the man, savagely.

"Not much! I am going to give it to Mr. Garwell."

"That isn't his document."

"Yes, it is."

"I say it isn't. If you don't give me the paper, I'll call a policeman."

"Do it, and I'll have you arrested for knocking me over with the sea
shell and robbing me."

Rufus Cameron glared at our hero. He was baffled and did not know what
to do next. Presently a crafty look came into his eyes.

"See here, you're a pretty smart boy," he said, in a calmer tone.

"Thank you for nothing."

"What is John Garwell going to give you for getting that paper?"

"Nothing--at least I don't expect anything."

"You're a fool to work for nothing," sneered Rufus Cameron. "You'll
never get rich doing that."

"If I don't it will be my own affair."

"Do you understand this business at all, boy?"

"I understand some of it."

"Don't you know that John Garwell is trying to defraud my aunt out of a
lot of money?"

"I certainly know nothing of the kind."

"It's a fact. I am only trying to protect my aunt's interests. She is
rather queer in her head at times, and doesn't know what she is doing."

"She wasn't queer when she signed this paper."

"Yes, she was. But we will let that pass. Give me the paper, and I'll
pay you handsomely for it. You can tell Garwell that you couldn't locate
me."

"How much will you give?" asked Nat, although he had no intention of
accepting the rascal's offer.

"I'll give you--five dollars."

"That isn't much. The paper is worth more."

"No, it isn't."

"I won't give it up for five dollars."

"Well, we'll make it ten dollars. Come, hand the paper over. It's easy
money for you."

"The paper is worth every bit of a hundred dollars," said our hero, just
to draw the rascal out, and learn if possible how valuable Rufus Cameron
really considered the document.

"A hundred dollars! Nonsense! But I'll tell you what I'll do. I'm sorry
I knocked you down at my aunt's house. I'll give you twenty-five
dollars."

"When will you pay me?"

"Now," and Rufus Cameron brought forth a roll of bills.

"You can keep your money, Rufus Cameron."

"Eh?"

"I wouldn't touch a penny of it. Do you know what I think? I think you
are a first-class scoundrel."

"What! This to me?" stormed the fellow, shoving his money back into his
pocket.

"Yes, that to you. I am sorry Mrs. Parloe has such a rascal for a
relative. Now, I am going to bid you good-day." And Nat began to move
away.

"Come back here, you young villain!" cried Rufus Cameron.

He made a dash for our hero, but Nat was too quick for him. The boy ran
across the street and around a corner, and in a moment more was out of
sight. Rufus Cameron shook his fist in impotent rage.

"The jig's up!" he muttered. "What a mess! I thought I'd get a thousand
dollars out of Shanley for that paper!"

Nat did not slacken his pace until he had reached the river. Then he ran
aboard a ferry boat, and journeyed thus to New York, thinking that
possibly his enemy would watch the cars.

When our hero reached the office he found that the regular force of
clerks had already left, but his employer was still at his desk,
finishing up some business of importance.
