Meanwhile the circus performance terminated, and preparations were
commenced for the journey to the next town. The canvas men swarmed
around the tents and swiftly took them down and conveyed them to the
freight cars, where they assisted the razorbacks to pack them in small
compass.

Harry Thorne, who had his berth next to Kit, turned in rather late. He
looked into Kit's bed, and to his surprise found it unoccupied.

"What can have become of the boy?" he asked himself.

He went outside, and espying Achilles Henderson, he said: "Have you seen
anything of Kit Watson?"

"Isn't he in his berth?" asked Mr. Henderson, surprised.

"No."

Inquiry developed the fact that Kit had not been seen by any one since
the conclusion of his act.

"I am afraid the boy has come to harm," said Achilles. "This is a rough
place, and there are plenty of tough characters about, as our experience
this afternoon showed."

"What shall we do? The cars will soon be starting, and we must leave him
behind."

"If he doesn't show up before that time, I will stay behind and hunt him
up. He is too good a boy to be left to his fate."




CHAPTER XXVII.

A MINER'S CABIN.


Kit's principal captor was known as Dick Hayden. He was an Englishman,
and a leader in every kind of mischief. If there was any disturbance
between the miners and their employers, he was generally found to be at
the bottom of it. A naturally quarrelsome disposition was intensified by
intemperance. In the attack upon the circus tents he found himself in
his element. His ignominious defeat made him ugly and revengeful.

His wife was dead, but he had one child, Janet, a girl of thirteen, who
cooked for him and took care of his cabin. The poor girl had a hard time
of it, but she endeavored so far as possible to avoid trouble with her
brutal parent.

It was near ten o'clock when Hayden came home after locking Kit in the
deserted cabin. He had gone away without supper, but late as it was,
Janet had something hot ready for him on the stove.

"Well, Janet, child, have you my supper ready?" he said, not
unpleasantly, for his victory over Kit and the meditated revenge of the
next day had put him in good humor.

"Yes, father; it's on the stove and ready to dish up."

"Lay the table, then, for I'm main tired and hungry."

The little girl quickly spread the cloth, and Dick Hayden ate like a
voracious animal.

When supper was over he sat back in his chair and lit a pipe. A
comfortable supper made him loquacious.

"Well, Janet, you don't ask where I've been."

"Was it to the circus, father?"

"Yes."

"How did you like the show?"

"I didn't see it," he growled, a frown gathering upon his brow.

"And why not, father?"

"Because we had a fight to get in free, and got the worst of it."

"They must be main strong, then, those circus men."

"Strong!" repeated Hayden, scornfully. "Well, mayhap they are, but we'd
have bested them but for the giant."

"The giant! Is it the big man I saw in the parade?"

"Yes; he's as strong as three men. He flung me down as easily as I'd
throw a boy."

"Then he must have been strong, for you're a powerful man, father."

"There isn't a man as works in the mine'll compare with me, lass," said
Hayden, proudly; "but all the same I'm no match for a monster."

"Tell me about it, father," said Janet, with natural curiosity.

Dick Hayden went on to describe the fight around the ticket stand, and
how he had slipped away, intending to cut the ropes of the tent and let
it down on the heads of the spectators gathered inside.

"I'd have done it, too," he added, "but for a kid."

"I thought just now you said it was the giant."

"And I stick to it, lass; but this boy saw what I was doing, and brought
the giant to the spot. I could do nothing after that. He threw me down,
so that for a few minutes I was stunned."

"And how did the fight come out at the ticket stand, father?"

"Our men had almost overpowered the circus men, when the giant rushed
into the midst, and, seizing a club from Bob Stubbs, laid about him,
till half a dozen of our strongest men lay on the ground with broken
heads."

What puzzled Janet was, that her father should have come home in such
good humor after so disastrous a defeat. It was contrary to her
experience of him. She would naturally have expected that he would be
surly and quarrelsome. The mystery was soon made clear.

"But we've got even with them!" chuckled Hayden directly after.

"How is that, father?"

"We caught the kid."

"You have?"

"Yes; he was goin' to the circus cars to turn in when Stubbs and I
caught him."

"You--you didn't kill him, father?" asked Janet in alarm.

"No, not yet."

"Where is he?"

"Do you mind the deserted cabin on Knob Hill?"

"Yes, father."

"He's locked up in that, tied hand and foot."

"How long do you mean to keep him there?" asked Janet, anxiously.

"Till to-morrow, and then----" Dick paused ominously.

"Well, and then?"

"He'll be lucky if he gets off with a whole skin," growled her father.
"But for him I'd have brought down the tent about the ears of the people
that sat inside, and we'd have had a fine revenge on the showmen."

"You don't mean to kill the boy, do you, father?"

"What is it to you, lass? You'd best mind your own business. You've got
nothing to do with it."

"How does the boy look? Was it the one that drove the first chariot,
father?"

"Like enough, lass! Did you see him?"

"Yes; I saw the parade. Everybody was out in the streets then."

"And you took partic'lar notice of the boy? That's like a lass,"
chuckled Hayden.

"But it was his duty, father, to stand by the show, seein' he belongs to
it."

"I don't trouble myself about that. He brought that monster on me, and
I'm sore yet with the fall he gave me. I'll take it out of the kid."

"But it seems to me, father, it would be better to lay for the giant."

"What folly is that, lass? I'd be main glad to give the giant a dose of
what he gave me, but he'll leave town to-night, and I ain't big enough
to tackle him, even if I had the chance. So I'll revenge myself on his
friend, the boy. The kid may be his son, for aught I know."

"And what will you do for him, father?" asked Janet, pertinaciously.
"You won't kill him?"

"Well, I won't go so far as that, for I've no mind to put my neck in a
noose, but I'll flog him within an inch of his life. I'll teach him to
mind his own business for the future."

Janet knew her father's strength and brutality, and she shuddered at the
idea of the boy being exposed to it. She knew very well it would be of
no use to make a protest. She would only get herself into trouble. Yet
she couldn't reconcile herself to the thought of poor Kit being cruelly
punished. She asked herself what she could do to prevent it.

There was one thing in favor of a rescue. She knew where Kit was
confined. If it were not so late she would steal out, and going to the
cabin relieve him from captivity. But it was too late, and too dark for
that. Besides, she could not leave her father's cabin without
observation.

"I will wait till to-morrow morning," she said to herself.

It so chanced that on account of some slight repairs the mine in which
her father was employed was shut down for a few days. This was
favorable, for he would lie in bed till eight o'clock at least, and
there would be a chance to get out without observation.

The next morning, about five o'clock, Janet rose from her bed, hastily
dressed herself, and crept to the door of her father's chamber. He was
sound asleep, and breathing heavily. There was small chance of his
awakening before seven o'clock.

Janet took a little meat and bread in a tin pail, for she thought the
captive might be in need of breakfast, and then, putting a sharp knife
in her pocket to cut the ropes that bound him, she left the house and
took her way over the hill to the deserted cabin which served as Kit's
prison.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

KIT RESCUED BY A GIRL.


Kit had succeeded in getting a little sleep during the night, but his
position was necessarily constrained and he was but very slightly
refreshed. Moreover he was a prey to anxiety, for he did not know what
fate awaited him on the succeeding day.

At four o'clock in the morning a little light found its way into the
cabin through a small window at the rear. The other windows were boarded
up.

Kit, appreciating the desirability of escaping before a visit should be
made him by his captors, tried hard to work himself out of his bonds,
but only succeeded in confining himself more closely than before.

"What will they do to me?" he asked himself anxiously.

He had heard from some of the circus men accounts of the roughness and
brutality of the miners, or at least of a certain class of them, for
some were quiet and peaceable men, and he knew that there was no extreme
of which they were not capable. Life is sweet, and to a boy of sixteen,
in good health and strength, it is especially dear. Suppose he should
lose his life in this region? Probably none of his friends would ever
learn what had become of him, and his uncle and cousin would not
scruple to spread rumors to his discredit.

It was certainly tantalizing that he should be tied hand and foot,
utterly unable to help himself.

More and more light crept in at the window, and there was every
indication of its being a glorious day. But this prospect brought no
pleasure to poor Kit.

"Before this time the circus people must have found out my absence," he
thought. "Will they take the trouble to look for me?"

Kit was on good terms with his comrades, indeed he was popular with them
all, as a bright boy is apt to be, and he did not like to think that no
effort would be made to find him. Still, as he could not help owning to
himself, they had no clew that was likely to lead to success. He had
given no one notice where he was going, and his capture was not likely
to have been observed by any one.

While he was indulging in these sorrowful reflections, his attention was
drawn to a noise at the window.

"They can't have come back so early," he said to himself in surprise.

He twisted himself round to catch a glimpse, if possible, of the early
visitor, and to his delight, he caught a partial view of Janet's dress.
Suppose she should prove a deliverer, he said to himself with beating
heart.

The visitor, whoever it was, was evidently trying to peer into the
cabin. Kit was so placed in a corner as to be almost out of sight in the
dark interior. He felt that he must attract attention.

"Hallo, there!" he cried in a loud clear voice.

"He's there!" thought Janet, "just as father said."

"Let me out!" cried Kit, eagerly. "Draw out the bolt, and open the
door!"

"Will she do it, or will she be frightened away?" he asked himself, with
his heart filled with suspense.

He did not have long to wait for an answer, and a favorable one. He
heard the bolt withdrawn, then the door was opened, and the girl's face
appeared. Janet Hayden was small, not especially pretty, and rather
old-fashioned in looks, but to poor Kit she seemed like an angel.

"Are you the circus boy?" she asked timidly.

"Yes; I am tied here. Have you got a knife to cut this rope?"

"Yes; I brought one with me."

"Then you knew I was here?" Kit asked in surprise.

"Yes; it was my father that locked you up here--my father and another
man."

"Will you cut the rope and let me go, then?"

"Yes; that is what I came for."

The little maid went up to the captive, bent over, and with considerable
sawing, for the knife she had with her was a dull case knife, succeeded
in severing the rope, and Kit was able to rise and stand upon his feet.
It was a perfect luxury to feel himself once more free and unshackled.

"I'm very much obliged to you," he said, gratefully. "You can't imagine
how stiff I am."

"I should think you would be," said Janet, sympathetically.

"When did your father tell you that I was here?"

"After he got home last night. It was after he had eaten his supper."

"And where is he now?"

"At home and asleep."

"Does he get up early?" asked Kit, in some anxiety.

"Yes, when he is at work; but the mine is shut down for a few days, so
he lies abed longer."

"Did he say anything about coming here to-day?"

"Yes, he meant to come--he and the other man--and I was afraid he would
do you some harm."

"He would have done so, I am sure," said Kit, shuddering. "I don't see
how such a rough father should have so good a daughter."

Janet blushed, and seemed pleased with the compliment.

"I think I take after my mother," she said.

"Is your mother alive?"

"No, she died two years ago," answered Janet, sorrowfully. "She was
Scotch, and that is why I am called by a Scotch name."

"What is your name, if you don't mind telling me?"

"Janet. I am Janet Hayden."

"I shall always remember it, for you have done me a great service."

"What is your name?" asked Janet, feeling less timid than at first.

"Kit Watson."

"That is a funny name--Kit, I mean."

"My right name is Christopher, but my friends call me Kit. Can you
direct me to the next town--Groveton, where the circus shows to-day."

"Yes, if you will come outside, I will point out which way it is."

Kit emerged from the cabin, nothing loath, and Janet pointed in a
westerly direction.

"You go over the hill," she said, "and you will come to a road. You will
know it, for near the stile there is a red house."

"Thank you. How far is it to the next town?"

"Eight miles, I believe."

"That would be a long walk. Do you think I could get any one to take me
over in a wagon?"

"I think the man who lives in the red house, Mr. Stover, would take you
over, if you pay him."

"I shall be glad to pay him, and----" Kit paused, for he felt rather
delicate about offering any money to Janet, though he knew she had
rendered him most valuable service. "Will you let me offer you a little
present?"

He took a five dollar bill from his pocket, and offered it to Janet.

"What is that?" she asked.

"It is a five dollar bill."

"You must be rich," she said, for this seemed to her a great deal of
money.

"Oh, no! but will you take it?"

"No," answered Janet, shrinking back, "I didn't come here for money."

"I am sure you didn't, but I should like to give you something."

"No, I would rather not. Besides, if father knew I had money, he would
suspect something, and beat me."

"Like the brute that he is," thought Kit.
