Well, they had held many happy, happy hours for Ted, at least. Never
had he dreamed of such pleasures. He had enjoyed his work, constant
though it had been, and had come to cherish as much pride in the
gardens of Aldercliffe and Pine Lea, in the vast crops of hay that
bulged from the barn lofts, as if they had been his own. And when
working hours were over there was Laurie Fernald and the new and
pleasant friendship that existed between them.

As Ted began to drag out from beneath his bunk the empty wooden boxes
he purposed to pack his books in, his heart sank. Soon the cosy house
in which he had passed so many perfect hours would be quite denuded.
Frosts would nip the flowers nodding in a final glory of color outside
the windows; the telephone would be disconnected; his belongings would
once more be crowded into the stuffy little flat at home; and the door
of the camp on the river's edge would be tightly locked on a deserted
paradise.

Of course, everything had to come to an end some time and often when he
had been weeding long, and what seemed interminable rows of seedlings
and had been making only feeble progress at the task, the thought that
termination of his task was an ultimate certainty had been a
consolation mighty and sustaining. Such an uninteresting undertaking
could not last forever, he told himself over and over again; nothing
ever did. And now with ironic conformity to law, his philosophy had
turned on him, demonstrating beyond cavil that not only did the things
one longed to be free of come to a sure finality but so did those one
pined to have linger.

Although night was approaching, too intent had he been on his reveries
to notice that the room was in darkness. How still everything was! That
was the way the little hut would be after he was gone,--cold, dark, and
silent. He wondered as he sat there whether he should ever come back.
Would the Fernalds want him next season and again offer him the
boathouse for a home? They had said nothing about it but if he thought
he was to return another summer it would not be so hard to go now. It
was leaving forever that saddened him.

He must have remained immovable there in the twilight for a much longer
time than he realized; and perhaps he would have sat there even longer
had not a sound startled him into breathless attention. It was the
rhythmic stroke of a canoe paddle and as it came nearer it was
intermingled with the whispers of muffled voices. Possibly he might
have thought nothing of the happening had there not been a note of
tense caution in the words that came to his ear.

Who could be navigating the river at this hour of the night? Surely not
pleasure-seekers, for it was very cold and an approaching storm had
clouded in the sky until it had become a dome of velvet blackness.
Whoever was venturing out upon the river must either know the stream
very well or be reckless of his own safety.

Ted did not move but listened intently.

"Let's take a chance and land," he heard a thick voice murmur. "The boy
has evidently either gone to bed or he isn't here. Whichever the case,
he can do us no harm and I'm not for risking the river any farther.
It's black as midnight. We might get into the current and have
trouble."

"What's the sense of running our heads into a noose by landing?"
objected a second speaker. "We can't talk here--that's nonsense."

"I tell you the boy isn't in the hut," retorted his comrade. "I
remember now that I heard he was going back to the Falls to school.
Likely he has gone already. In any case we can try the door and examine
the windows; if the place is locked, we shall be sure he is not here.
And should it prove to be inhabited, we can easy hatch up some excuse
for coming. He'll be none the wiser. Even if he should be here," added
the man after a pause, "he is probably asleep. After a hard day's work
a boy his age sleeps like a log. There'll be no waking him, so don't
fret. Come! Let's steer for the float."

"But I----"

"Great Heavens, Cronin! We've got to take some chances. You're not
getting cold feet so soon, are you?" burst out the other scornfully.

"N--o! Of course not," his companion declared with forced bravado. "But
I don't like taking needless risks. The boy might be awake and hear
us."

"What if he does? Haven't I told you I will invent some yarn to put him
off the scent? He wouldn't be suspecting mischief, anyhow. I tell you
I'm not going drifting round this river in the dark any longer. Next
thing we know we may hit a snag and upset."

"But you insisted on coming."

"I know I did," snapped the sharp voice. "What chance had we to talk in
a crowded boarding-house whose very walls had ears? Or on the village
streets? I knew the river would have no listeners and you see I was
right; it hasn't. But I did expect there would be a trifle more light.
It is like ink, isn't it? You can't see your hand before your face."

"I don't believe we could find the float even if we tried for it,"
piped his friend with malicious satisfaction.

"Find it? Of course we can. I've traveled this river too many times to
get lost on it. I know every inch of the stream."

"But aren't there boats at the landing?"

"Oh, they've been hauled in for the season long ago. I know that to be
a fact."

"Then I guess young Turner must have gone."

"That's what I've been trying to tell you for the last half-hour,"
asserted the other voice with high-pitched irritation. "Why waste all
this time? Let's land, talk things over, lay our plans, and be getting
back to Freeman's Falls. We mustn't be seen returning to the town
together too late for it might arouse suspicion."

"You're right there."

"Then go ahead and paddle for the landing. I'll steer. Just have your
hand out so we won't bump."

The lapping of the paddles came nearer and nearer. Then there was a
crash as the nose of the canoe struck the float.

"You darned idiot, Cronin! Why didn't you fend her off as I told you
to?"

"I couldn't see. I----"

"Hush!"

A moment of breathless silence followed and then there was a derisive
laugh.

"I told you the boy wasn't here," one of the men declared aloud. "If he
had been he would have had his head out the window by now. We've made
noise enough to wake the dead."

"But he may be here for all that," cautioned the other speaker. "Don't
talk so loud."

"Nonsense!" his comrade retorted without lowering his tone. "I tell you
the boy has gone back home and the hut is as empty as a last year's
bird's nest. I'll stake my oath on it. The place is shut and locked
tight as a drum. You'll see I'm right presently."

Instantly Ted's brain was alert. The door was locked, that he knew, for
when he came in he had bolted it for the night. One window, however,
was open and he dared not attempt to close it lest he make some
betraying sound; and even were he able to shut it noiselessly he
reflected that the procedure would be an unwise one since it would cut
him off from hearing the conversation. No, he must keep perfectly still
and trust that his nocturnal visitors would not make too thorough an
investigation of the premises.

To judge from the scuffling of feet outside, both of them had now
alighted from the canoe and were approaching the door. Soon he heard a
hand fumbling with the latch and afterward came a heavy knock.

Slipping breathlessly from his chair he crouched upon the floor, great
beads of perspiration starting out on his forehead.

"The door is locked, as I told you," he heard some one mutter.

"He may be asleep."

"We can soon make sure. Ah, there! Turner! Turner!"

Once more a series of blows descended upon the wooden panel.

"Does that convince you, Cronin?"

"Y--e--s," owned Cronin reluctantly. "I guess he's gone."

"Of course he's gone! Come, brace up, can't you?" urged his companion.
"Where's your backbone?"

"I'm not afraid."

"Tell that to the marines! You're timid and jumpy as a girl. How are we
ever to put this thing over if you don't pull yourself together? I
might as well have a baby to help me," sneered the gruff voice.

"Don't be so hard on me, Alf," whined his comrade. "I ain't done
nothin'. Ain't I right here and ready?"

"You're here, all right," snarled the first speaker, "but whether
you're ready or not is another matter. Now I'm going to give you a last
chance to pull out. Do you want to go ahead or don't you? It's no good
for us to be laying plans if you are going to be weak-kneed at the end
and balk at carrying them out. Do you mean to stand by me and see this
thing to a finish or don't you?"

"I--sure I do!"

"Cross your heart?"

"Cross my heart!" This time the words echoed with more positiveness.

"You're not going to back out or squeal?" his pal persisted.

"Why, Alf, how can you----"

"Because I've got to be sure before I stir another inch."

"But ain't I told you over and over again that I----"

"I don't trust you."

"What makes you so hard on a feller, Alf?" whimpered Cronin. "I haven't
been mixed up in as many of these jobs as you have and is it surprising
that I'm a mite nervous? It's no sign that I'm crawling."

"You're ready to stick it out, then?"

"Sure!"

There was another pause.

"Well, let me just tell you this, Jim Cronin. If you swear to stand by
me and don't do it, your miserable life won't be worth a
farthing--understand? I'll wring your neck, wring it good and thorough.
I'm not afraid to do it and I will. You know that, don't you?"

"Yes."

The terror-stricken monosyllable made it perfectly apparent that Cronin
did know.

"Then suppose we get down to hard tacks," asserted his companion, the
note of fierceness suddenly dying out of his tone. "Come and sit down
and we'll plan the thing from start to finish. We may as well be
comfortable while we talk. There's no extra charge for sitting."

As Ted bent to put his ear to the crack of the door, the thud of a
heavy body jarred the shack.

"Jove!" he heard Cronin cry. "The ground is some way down, ain't it?"

"And it's none to soft at that," came grimly from his comrade, as a
second person slumped upon the planks outside.

Somebody drew a long breath and while the men were making themselves
more comfortable on the float Ted waited expectantly in the darkness.




CHAPTER XIII

WHAT TED HEARD


"Now the question is which way are we going to get the biggest results,"
Alf began, when they were both comfortably settled with their backs to
the door. "That must be the thing that governs us--that, and the
sacrifice of as few lives as possible. Not _their_ lives, of course. I
don't care a curse for the Fernalds; the more of them that go sky-high
the better, in my estimation. It's the men I mean, our own people. Some
of them will have to die, I know that. It's unavoidable, since the
factories are never empty. Even when no night shifts are working, there
are always watchmen and engineers on the job. But fortunately just now,
owing to the dull season, there are no night gangs on duty. If we
decide on the mills it can be done at night; if on the Fernalds
themselves, why we can set the bombs when we are sure that they are in
their houses."

Ted bit his lips to suppress the sudden exclamation of horror that rose
to them. He must not cry out, he told himself. Terrible as were the
words he heard, unbelievable as they seemed, if he were to be of any
help at all he must know the entire plot. Therefore he listened dumbly,
struggling to still the beating of his heart.

For a moment there was no response from Cronin.

"Come, Jim, don't sit there like a graven image!" the leader of the
proposed expedition exclaimed impatiently. "Haven't you a tongue in
your head? What's your idea? Out with it. I'm not going to shoulder all
the job."

The man called Cronin cleared his throat.

"As I see it, we gain nothing by blowing up the Fernald houses,"
answered he deliberately. "So long as the mills remain, their income is
sure. After they're gone, the young one will just rebuild and go on
wringing money out of the people as his father and grandfather are
doing."

"But we mean to get him, too."

A murmured protest came from Cronin.

"I'm not for injuring that poor, unlucky lad," asserted he. "He's
nothing but a cripple who can't help himself. It would be like killing
a baby."

"Nonsense! What a sentimental milksop you are, Jim!" Alf cut in. "You
can't go letting your feelings run away with you like that, old man.
I'm sorry for the young chap, too. He's the most decent one of the lot.
But that isn't the point. He's a Fernald and because he is----"

"But he isn't to blame for that, is he?"

"You make me tired, Cronin, with all this cry-baby stuff!" Alf
ejaculated. "You've simply got to cut it out--shut your ears to it--if
