with the permission of your elder, to lead your thoughts Godward, in
dependence on the Holy Spirit.  Let us pray."

The jealous ears of the rigorously orthodox heard him thus far without
being able to detect absolute heresy, though they were sensitively alive
to the unusual style and very unclerical tone of the speaker's voice.
The same ears listened reverently to the prayer which followed, for it
was, after the pattern of the Lord's Prayer, almost startlingly short;
still it was very earnest, extremely simple, and, all things considered,
undeniably orthodox.

Relieved in their minds, therefore, the people prepared themselves for
more, and the precentor, with the brazen but tuneful voice, sang the
first line of the psalm which the young preacher gave out--"I to the
hills will lift mine eyes"--with rasping energy.  At the second line the
congregation joined in, and sang praise with reverent good-will, so
that, when a chapter of the Word had been read and another psalm sung,
they were brought to a state of hopeful expectancy.  The text still
further pleased them, when, in a quiet voice, while turning over the
leaves of the well-used Bible, Jackman said, "In all thy ways
acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths."

Laying down his little Bible, and looking at the people earnestly and in
silence for a few moments, the preacher said--

"I have travelled in Italy, France, Germany, Switzerland, and other
places, and I never yet went in these countries without a guide-book.
More than that, never in all my experience have I seen men or women
travelling in these countries without a guide-book.  The travellers
always carried their guide-books in their hands, or in their pockets,
and consulted them as they went along.  In the evenings, round the
tables or on the sofas of the salons, they would sometimes sit poring
over the pages of their guide-books, considering distances and the best
routes, and the cost of travelling and board.  Any man who would have
travelled without a guide-book, or who, having one, neglected to use it,
would have been considered weak-minded at the least.  Still further, I
have noted that such travellers _believed_ in their guide-books, and
usually acted on the advice and directions therein given.

"But one journey I can tell of in which all this seems to be reversed--
the journey from earth towards heaven.  And here is our guide-book for
that journey," said the preacher, holding up the little Bible.  "How do
we treat it?  I do not ask scoffers, who profess not to believe in the
Bible.  I ask those who _call themselves_ Christians, and who would be
highly offended if we ventured to doubt their Christianity.  Is it not
true that many of us consult our Guide-book very much as a matter of
form and habit, without much real belief that it will serve us in all
the minute details of life?  We all wish to get on in life.  The most
obstinate and contradictory man on earth admits that.  Even if he denies
it with his lips, all his actions prove that he admits it.  Well, what
says our Guide-book in regard to what is called `getting on'?  `In all
thy ways acknowledge Him, and He will direct thy paths.'  Now, what
could be simpler--we might even say, what could be easier--than this?
Him whom we have to acknowledge is defined in the previous verse as `the
Lord'--that is, Jesus, Immanuel, or God with us."

From this point the sunburnt preacher diverged into illustration,
leaning over the desk in a free-and-easy, confidential way, and
thrilling his audience with incidents in his own adventurous career,
which bore directly on the great truth that, as regards the Great End of
life, success and blessedness result from acknowledging the Lord, and
that failure and disaster inevitably await those who ignore Him.

While Jackman proceeded with his discourse, the sky had become overcast,
dark thunderclouds had been gathering in the nor'-east, rain had also
begun to descend; yet so intently were the people listening to this
unusual style of preacher, that few of them observed the change until a
distant thunder-clap awoke them to it.

Quietly, but promptly, Jackman drew his discourse to a close, and
stepped out of the desk, remarking, in the very same voice with which he
had preached, that he feared he had kept them too long, and that he
hoped none of the congregation had far to go.

"We hev that, sir," said the old elder, shaking him warmly by the hand;
"but we don't heed that, an' we are fery glad that we came, what-e-ver."

As the wind had also risen, and it seemed as if the weather was not
likely to improve, the laird hurried his party down to the boat.
Waterproofs were put on, umbrellas were put up, the sails were hoisted,
and the boat put off.

"I fear the sea is very rough," remarked Milly Moss, drawing close to
Aggy Anderson, so as to shelter her somewhat from the driving rain.

"Oo, ay; it iss a wee rough," assented Ian, who now took the helm; "but
we wull soon rin ower.  Haud you the main sheet, Mr Mabberly, an' pe
ready to let co when I tell ye.  It iss a wee thing squally."

It was indeed a little more than a "wee thing squally," for just then a
vivid flash of lightning was seen to glitter among the distant crags of
the Eagle Cliff.  This was followed by a loud clap of thunder, which,
leaping from cliff to crag, reverberated among the mountains with a
succession of crashes that died away in ominous mutterings.  At the same
time a blue line towards the nor'-east indicated an approaching squall.

"Had we not better take in a reef, Ian?" asked the laird anxiously.

"We had petter weather the pint first," said the boatman; "efter that
the wund wul pe in oor favour, an'--but, ye're richt.  Tak in a reef,
Roderick an' Tonal'.  Mind the sheet, Mr Mabberly, an' sit low in the
poat, poys."

These orders were promptly obeyed, for the squall was rushing down the
loch very rapidly.  When it burst on them the boat leaned over till her
lee gunwale almost ran under water, but Ian was a skilful boatman, and
managed to weather the point in safety.

After that, as he had said, the wind was more favourable, enabling them
to run before it.  Still, they were not out of danger, for a wide
stretch of foaming sea lay between them and the shores of Kinlossie,
while a gathering storm was darkening the sky behind them.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

STIRRING EVENTS OF MORE KINDS THAN ONE.

The squall which blew the Kinlossie boat round the Eagle Point was but
the precursor of a succession of heavy squalls which quickly changed
into a furious gale, compelling Ian Anderson to close reef his sails.
Even when this was done, the boat rushed through the foaming water with
tremendous velocity, and exhibited that tendency to drinking, to which
reference has already been made; for every time she plunged into the
trough of the sea, a little water came over the bow.

Of course, going as they were at such a rate, the traversing of six or
eight miles of water occupied but little time, and they were soon close
to the bay, at the head of which Kinlossie House nestled among its
trees.

"Come aft, poys," shouted Ian, whose voice, strong though it was, could
scarcely be heard in the bow owing to the roaring of the gale; "she's
trinkin' too much; come aft, an' look sherp!"

The three boys obeyed with alacrity, being well accustomed to boats, and
aware of the necessity of prompt obedience in circumstances of danger.

Thus lightened, the boat ceased drinking at the bow, but, being rather
overweighted at the stern, she now and then took in a little water
there.

Unfortunately the point of rocks which formed the southern end of
Kinlossie Bay obliged Ian to change his course a little in order to
weather them.  This was a critical operation.  Even the girls had some
sort of idea of that, as their looks bore witness.  John Barret felt a
strong inclination to slip his arm round Milly's waist and whisper,
"Don't be afraid, beloved, _I'll_ take care of you!" but want of
courage--to say nothing of a sense of propriety--kept his lips silent
and his arm still.

"Noo, keep stiddy, all of ye," said Ian, as he shifted the helm a
little.

An irrepressible shriek burst from Aggy Anderson, for the boat lay over
so much that the hissing water rippled almost into her, and seemed about
to swallow them up.

"Tak anither haul o' the sheet, Maister Mabberly," cried Ian.

Assisted by Jackman, Mabberly obeyed, and the boat went, as Quin said,
"snorin'" past the rocks, which were now close under her lee, with the
waves bursting wildly over them.  Another minute and the outermost rock
was under their port bow.  To the eyes of the girls it seemed as if
destruction were inevitable.  To make matters worse, at that moment a
vivid flash was succeeded by a loud thunder-clap, which, mingling with
the gale, seemed to intensify its fury, while a deluge of rain came
down.  But Ian knew what he was about.  With a firm hand on the tiller
he steered past the point, yet so closely that it seemed as if an active
man might have leaped upon the outermost rock, which rose, black and
solid, amid the surging foam.

Another moment and the boat swept safely round into the bay, and was
again put before the wind.

"We're a' richt noo, what-e-ver," said Ian with a grunt of satisfaction.

Never before did a self-sufficient boatman have his words more
effectually or promptly falsified than on that occasion.  The distance
between boat and shore at that moment was only a few hundred yards; but
the water all the way was deep, and the waves, in consequence, were
large and wild.  There were great possibilities within the brief space
of distance and time that lay before them!

"Tak an oar, Maister Quin, an' help Rodereek to fend off," cried the
boatman.  "Hold ticht to the sheet, sir, an' pe ready to let co the
moment I tell ye.  Are ye ready wi' the halyards, Muster Airchie?"

"All right, Ian," replied the boy, who stood ready to lower the sail.

They could see that several men were standing on the beach, ready to
render assistance, among them Duncan, the butler, and Ivor, the
gamekeeper.  The latter, who had evidently recovered himself, was
standing waist-deep in the foam, as if anxious to grasp the boat when it
grounded.

"Ivor is unusually keen to help us to-day," remarked the laird, with a
peculiar look; but no one was sufficiently disengaged to listen to or
answer him.

At that critical moment Junkie took it into his unaccountable head to
scramble to the fore part of the boat, in order, as he said, to lend a
hand with a rope.  On reaching the bow he stumbled; the boat plunged
heavily, as if to accommodate him, and he went overboard with a suddenly
checked yell, that rose high and sharp above the roaring gale!

Of course every man near him sprang to the side and made a wild grasp at
him.  The gunwale went down, the sea rushed in, and, in a space of time
brief as the lightning-flash, all the occupants of the boat were
struggling in the waves!

A great cry arose from the shore, and Ivor, plunging into the surf, was
seen to breast the billows with the force of a Hercules.  In the moment
of upsetting, John Barret's cowardice and scruples vanished.  He seized
Milly by the arm, and held her up when they rose from the plunge.

And now, for the first time in his life, our hero found the advantage of
having trained himself, not only in all manly exercises, but in the
noble art of rescuing life from the water.  Instead of rising to the
wild discovery of helpless ignorance, as to what was the best way of
using his great strength, he rose with the comfortable knowledge, first,
that he was a powerful swimmer, and second, that he knew exactly what to
do--at least to attempt.  Instead, therefore, of allowing himself to be
hugged, and probably drowned, by the girl he loved, he held her off at
arm's length until he managed to grasp her by both arms close to the
shoulders, and with her back towards him--treading water while doing so.
Then, swimming on his own back, he gently drew her upon his breast, so
that her head rested close to his chin.  Thus the girl's face was turned
upwards and held well out of the water, and the youth was able to say
almost in her ear, "Trust in God, dearest, He will save us!" while he
struck out vigorously with his legs.  Thus, swimming on his back, he
headed for the shore.

Lest the reader should fancy that we are here merely inventing a mode of
action, it may be well to state that we have conversed with a man styled
"the Rescue," whose duty it was to watch the boys of Aberdeen while
bathing on the dangerous coast there, and who told us that he had saved
some hundreds of lives--many of them in the manner above described.

Every one in the boat was fortunately able to swim, more or less, except
Milly and Aggie Anderson.  With the utmost anxiety to save the latter,
her Uncle Ian made a desperate plunge when the boat upset, at the spot
where, in the confusion, he thought he saw her go down.  He grasped
something under water, which clutched him violently in return.  Rising
to the surface he found that he had got hold of Giles Jackman, who,
animated by the same desire to rescue the same girl, had also made a
plunge at her.  Flinging each other off almost angrily, they swam wildly
about in search of her, for Giles had observed that Barret was
sufficiently intent on Milly.

But poor Aggie was in even better hands.  Ivor Donaldson had kept his
eyes on her from the moment that he could distinguish faces in the
approaching boat.  He was a splendid swimmer.  Even against wind and
waves he made rapid headway, and in a few seconds caught the girl by the
hair.  In his case the absence of a plan of rescue was to some extent
remedied by sheer strength of body, coupled with determination.  The
poor girl did her best to choke him, as drowning people will, but,
happily, she was too weak for the purpose and he too strong!  He
suffered her to do her worst, and, with the arm which she left free made
his way gallantly to the beach, where Duncan and all the domestics were
ready to receive them.

Barret and Milly had landed just before them.  Immediately after Archie
and Eddie were swept in amid the foam, and Junkie himself--who, like his
brothers, could swim like a cork--came careering in on the top of a
wave, like a very water-imp!  With all the energy of his nature he
turned, the moment his feet touched ground, to lend a hand to his friend
Tonal', who was not far behind him.

Thus, one by one, the whole party got safely to land, for the laird,
although old, was still vigorous, and, like the others, able to swim.
MacRummle came in last, and they had some difficulty in getting him out
of the water, for he was rather sluggish, as well as heavy; but he was
none the worse for his immersion, and to the anxieties afterwards
expressed by his friends, he replied quietly that he had become pretty
well used to the water by that time.  It was a trying experience,
however, for all of them, and, in the opinion of Ian Anderson, as he
gave it to his wife when they met, "it was a queer way o' feenishin' off
a fery extraor'nar Sawbath tay--what-e-ver!"

One morning, not long after this incident, the gentlemen made up a
shooting party to try the summit of the hill for mountain hares--their
hostess having twitted them with their inability to keep the household
supplied with hare soup.

"I will accompany you, gentlemen, to the shoulder of the first hill,"
observed their host, as he finished his breakfast, "but not farther, for
I am not so young as I once was, and cannot be expected to keep pace
with a `Woods and Forester.'"

"That is not a good reason for your stopping short, laird," retorted
Jackman, with a smile, "because it is quite possible for the `Woods and
Forester' to regulate his pace to that of the Western Isles."

"Well, we shall see," returned his host.  "And what does my reckless
Milly intend to do with herself?"

"I mean to have a little picnic--all by myself," said Milly; "that is to
say with nobody but me and Aggy Anderson."

"D'you think that quite safe, so soon after her ducking?" asked Mrs
Gordon.

"Quite safe, auntie, for she has not felt a bit the worse for that
ducking; indeed, she seems much the better for it, and I am quite sure
that hill air is good for her."

"Oh! then, you mean to have your very select picnic on the hills?" said
the laird.

"Yes, but no one shall know to what part we are going, for, as I have
said, we mean to have a day of it all to ourselves; only we will take
Junkie to protect us, and carry our provisions."

There were two of the gentlemen who declined the shooting expedition.
John Barret said he would start with them, but would at a certain point
drop behind and botanise.  MacRummle also preferred to make _one more_
effort to catch that grilse which had risen so often to him of late, but
was still at large in the big pool under the fall.  The result of the
morning's discussion was that only Mabberly and Jackman proceeded to
assault the hares on the mountain-top, accompanied by Archie and Eddie,
with Ivor Donaldson to guide them.

Up in the nursery--that devastated region which suggested the idea of an
hospital for broken furniture and toys--poor little neglected Flo sat
down on the floor, and, propping her favourite doll up against the
remnant of a drum, asked that sable friend what she would like to do.
Receiving no answer, she said, in a cheery, confidential tone, which she
had acquired from her mother, "I'll tell you what, Miss Blackie, you an'
I will go for a picnic too.  Zere's plenty places for you an' me, as
well as for Cuzn Miwy to go to, an' we will let muzzer go wid us--if
she's dood.  So go, like a dood chile', an' get your things on."

As the day was particularly bright and warm, this minor picnic was
splendidly carried into effect, in a little coppice close to the house.
There Mrs Gordon knitted and sometimes read, and behaved altogether
like a particularly "dood chile," while Flo and Blackie carried on high
jinks around her.

The Eagle Cliff was the spot which Milly Moss had fixed on for her
select little picnic with the niece of the fisherman.  Strange to say,
and without the slightest knowledge or suspicion of this fact (so he
said), John Barret had selected the very same spot for his botanical
ramble.  It must be remembered, however, that it was a wide spot.

Seated in a secluded nook, not long after noon, Milly and Aggy, with
Junkie, enjoyed the good things which were spread on a mass of flat rock
in front of them.

"Now I call this jolly!" said Junkie, as well as he could, with a mass
of jam-tart stopping the way.

"It is indeed," returned Milly; "but I don't feel quite sure whether you
refer to the splendour of the scenery or the goodness of the tart."

"To both," returned the boy, inarticulately.

"Do you think you could eat any more?" asked Milly with a grave, earnest
look that made Aggy giggle--for Aggy was a facile giggler!

"No, I don't," said Junkie.  "I'm stuffed!"

"Well, then, you are at leisure to fill the cup again at the spring; so
run, like a good boy, and do it."

"How hard you are on a fellow, Cousin Milly," grumbled the youngster,
rising to do as he was bid; but the expression of his jammy face showed
that he was no unwilling slave.

"How old are you, Aggy?" asked Milly when he was gone.

"Sixteen last birthday," returned the girl.

"Ah! how I wish I was sixteen again!" said Milly, with a profound sigh,
as she gazed over the rim of a tartlet she happened to be eating, at the
glittering sea and the far-off horizon.  She was evidently recalling
some very sad and ancient memories.

"Why?" asked her companion, who exhibited a very slight tendency to
laugh.

"Because I was so light-hearted and happy at that age."

"How old are you now, Miss Milly?" asked Aggy, in a tone of increased
respect.

"Nineteen," replied the other with a sigh.

Again Aggy's pretty round face was rippled by a suppressed giggle, and
it is highly probable that she would have given way altogether if Junkie
had not returned at the moment and rescued her.

"Here's the water, Milly.  Now, Aggy, have you had enough?"

"Yes, quite enough," laughed the highly convalescent invalid.

"Well, then, come along wi' me and I'll show you the place where Cousin
Milly fell down.  You needn't come, Milly.  I want to show it to Aggy
all by herself, an' we won't be long away."

"Very well, Junkie, as you please.  I daresay I shall manage to pass the
time pleasantly enough till you return."

She leant back on a thick heather bush as she spoke, and indulged
herself in that most enjoyable and restful of occupations, on a bright
warm day, namely, looking straight up into the sunny sky and
contemplating the soft fleecy clouds that float there, changing their
forms slowly but continually.

Now it so happened that John Barret, in his botanical wanderings about
the Eagle Cliff, in quest of the "rare specimens" that Milly loved,
discovered Milly herself!  This was not such a matter-of-course
discovery as the reader may suppose, for the Eagle Cliff occupied a vast
space of the mountain-side, among the rugged ramparts and knolls of
which several persons might have wandered for hours without much chance
of observing each other, unless they were to shout or discharge the
echo-disturbing gun.

Whether it was the mysterious attraction or the occult discernment of
love that drew him, we cannot tell, but certain it is that when Barret,
standing on the upper edge of the cliff, glanced from the eagle--which
was watching him suspiciously--downward to the base of the cliff, where
the sheep appeared like little buff spots on the green grass, his
startled eyes alighted on Milly, lying on her back, contemplating the
heavens!

At that distance she might have been a mole or a rabbit, as far as
regards Barret's power to discern her face or figure or occupation went;
