"I don't see why," grumbled Mullins.

"Come," said Ralston, soothingly, "you are out of sorts, and can't see
things in their right light. I'll lend you fifty dollars more, making
the debt two hundred dollars."

"I don't see how that will help me."

"I'll tell you. You must win the money to pay your debt at the gaming
table. Why, two hundred dollars is a trifle. You might win it in one
evening."

"Or lose as much more."

"There's no such word as fail! Shall I tell you what I did once?"

"Yes," answered Mullins, in some curiosity.

"I was in Nashville--dead broke! I was younger then, and losses
affected me more. I was even half inclined--you will laugh, I know--to
blow my brains out or to throw myself into the river, when a stranger
offered to lend me ten dollars to try my luck again. Well, I thought as
you did, that it was of little use. I would lose it, and so make
matters worse.

"But desperation led me to accept. It was one chance, not a very good
one, but still a chance. From motives of prudence I only risked five
dollars at first. I lost. Savagely I threw down the remaining five and
won twenty-five. Then I got excited, and kept on for an hour. At the
end of that time, how do you think I stood?"

"How?" asked Mullins, eagerly.

"I had won eight hundred and sixty-five dollars," answered Dick
Ralston, coolly. "I paid back the ten dollars, and went out of the
gambling house a rich man, comparatively speaking."

Now, all this story was a clever fiction, but David Mullins did not
know this. He accepted it as plain matter of fact, and his heart beat
quickly as he fancied himself winning as large a sum.

"But such cases must be rare," he ventured.

"Not at all. I could tell you more wonderful stories about friends of
mine, though it was the luckiest thing that ever happened to me. Now,
will you take the fifty dollars I offered you?"

"Yes, but I don't want to play again to-night. I feel nervous."

"Very good. Meet me to-morrow evening at the gambling house, and the
money shall be ready for you."

Then they parted, and the bookkeeper, who had a headache, went home and
to bed. He had that evening lost fifty dollars to Dick Ralston, and so
increased his debt from one hundred to one hundred and fifty dollars.

But his heart was filled with feverish excitement. The story told by
Ralston had its effect upon him, and he decided to keep on in the
dangerous path upon which he had entered. Why pinch himself for five
months to pay his debt, when a single evening's luck would clear him
from every obligation? If Dick Ralston and others could be lucky, why
not he? This was the way Mullins reasoned. He never stopped to consider
what would be the result if things did not turn out as he hoped--if he
lost instead of won.

Some weeks passed. The bookkeeper met with varying success at the
gaming table. Sometimes he won, sometimes he lost, but on the whole his
debt to Dick Ralston didn't increase. There were reasons why the
gambler decided to go slow. He was playing with Mullins as a cat plays
with a mouse.

But our chief concern is with Chester Rand. He found a comfortable room
on Twelfth Street, not far from the office, which, with board, only
cost him five dollars per week. This, to be sure, took all his salary,
but he was earning something outside.

On account of so much time being taken up by his work for the
professor, he did little for the comic weeklies. But occasionally,
through his friend, the artist, a five or ten-dollar bill came into his
hands. He bought himself a new suit, and some other articles which he
found he needed, and wrote home to ask his mother if she wished any
assistance.

"Thank you for your offer," she replied, "but the money Miss Dolby pays
me defrays all my housekeeping expenses and a little more. She is
certainly peculiar, but is good-natured, and never finds fault. She is
a good deal of company for me. Of course, I miss you very much, but it
cheers me to think you are doing well, and are happy, with good
prospects for the future. There is nothing for you in Wyncombe, as I
very well know; that is, nothing you would be willing to accept.

"That reminds me to say that Mr. Tripp is having a hard time with boys.
He discharged Abel Wood soon after you went to New York. He has tried
two boys since, but doesn't seem to get suited. When I was in the store
yesterday, he inquired after you. 'Tell him,' he said, 'that if he gets
tired of New York, he can come back to the store, and I will pay him
three dollars a week!" He said this with an air of a man who is making
a magnificent offer. I told him you were satisfied with your position
in the city. I must tell you of one mean thing he has done.

"He has been trying to induce Miss Dolby to leave me and take board
with him, offering to take her for two dollars a week less. She told me
of this herself. 'I wouldn't go there if he'd take me for nothing,' she
said, and I believe she meant it. She is not mean, and is willing to
pay a fair, even a liberal, price, where she is suited. You see,
therefore, that neither you nor I need borrow any trouble on this
point!"

This letter relieved Chester of all anxiety. All things seemed bright
to him. What he did for the comic weeklies, added to his work for Prof.
Hazlitt, brought him in ten dollars a week on an average. This, added
to the five dollars a week from Mr. Fairchild, gave him an aggregate
salary of fifteen dollars a week, so that he was always amply provided
with money.

"Cousin David," said Felix to the bookkeeper one day, "I don't see how
it happens that Chester is so well supplied with cash."

"Is he?" asked Mullins.

"Yes; he has just bought a new suit, a new hat and new shoes. They must
have cost him altogether as much as thirty dollars. How much wages do
you pay him?"

"Five dollars a week."

"And he pays all that for board, for he told me so."

"It does seem a little mysterious. Perhaps his friend the artist helps
him."

"No, he doesn't. I intimated as much one day, but he said no, that he
paid his own way. One evening last week, I saw him going into Daly's
Theatre with a young fellow handsomely dressed--quite a young swell.
They had two-dollar seats, and I learned that Chester paid for them. He
doesn't have any chance to pick up any money in this office, does he?"
asked Felix, significantly.

"I can't say as to that. I haven't missed any."

"I wish he would help himself. Of course, he would be discharged, and
then you might find a place for me."

"I may do so yet."

"Is there any chance of it?" asked Felix, eagerly.

"In about two weeks, Mr. Fairchild is going West on business. He will
be gone for a month, probably. In his absence, I shall run the office."

"I see."

"And I shall probably find some reason for discharging Chester Rand,"
added the bookkeeper, significantly. "In that case, you will hold
yourself ready to slip into his place."

"Bully for you, Cousin David," exclaimed Felix, in exultation.




CHAPTER XIX.

MR. FAIRCHILD LEAVES THE CITY.


About ten days later, Chester found himself alone in the office with
his employer, the bookkeeper having gone out to call upon a man who had
commissioned the broker to buy him a house.

"Chester," said Mr. Fairchild, "has Mr. Mullins mentioned to you that I
start next Monday on a Western trip?"

"I heard him say so to a gentleman in here on business."

"I shall have to leave Mr. Mullins to take charge of the office and run
the business. The time was when I would have done so with confidence,
but the affair of James Long has made me distrustful. He thoroughly
understands my business, and it would be difficult for me to supply his
place. For the present, therefore, I feel obliged to retain him. During
my absence, however, I wish, if you see anything wrong, that you would
apprise me of it by letter. You may direct letters to Palmer's Hotel,
Chicago, and they will be forwarded to me from there. What is your
address?"

Chester gave it, and Mr. Fairchild wrote it down.

"It is rather unusual," continued Mr. Fairchild, "for a man in my
position to make a confidant of his office boy, but I have observed you
carefully, and I believe that you are not only intelligent, but are
faithful to my interests."

"Thank you, sir," said Chester, with genuine gratification. "I think I
can promise you that you will not be disappointed in me."

"Of course Mr. Mullins must not know of the understanding between us.
Don't breathe a hint of what I have said."

"No, sir, I will not."

"In case you think it necessary you may telegraph to me. I hope,
however, that no such emergency will arise."

Chester asked himself whether it was his duty to apprise Mr. Fairchild
of his seeing Mullins in intimate companionship with a gambler, but, on
the whole, decided not to do so. He did not wish needlessly to
prejudice his employer against the bookkeeper.

On Monday morning Mr. Fairchild left the office and took the Sixth
Avenue Elevated train to Cortlandt Street station, from which it is
only five minutes' walk to the ferry connecting with the train on the
Pennsylvania Railroad.

"How long shall you be away, Mr. Fairchild?" asked the bookkeeper.

"I cannot yet tell. It will depend on the success I meet with in my
business. I am afraid I may be absent four weeks."

"Don't hurry back," said Mullins. "I will keep things running."

"I rely upon your fidelity," said the broker, not without significance.

"You may be assured of that. I have been in your employ for over five
years."

"And of course understand all the details of my business. That is true.
Continue faithful to me and you will have no cause to repent it."

"Thank you, sir. You need have no anxiety."

"Chester," said Mr. Fairchild, "you may go with me as far as the
station and carry my grip."

When they were outside, the broker said:

"I could have carried the grip myself, but I wished to have a parting
word with you. Mr. Mullins is thoroughly acquainted with my business,
but within the last six months I found myself distrusting him. In four
weeks, for I shall be likely to be away that length of time, something
may occur detrimental to my interests, and I heartily wish I had some
one else in charge. I may rely upon you bearing in mind what I told you
the other day?"

"Yes, sir; I won't forget."

"I know that you are faithful, and I only wish you understood the
business well enough to be placed in charge."

"I wish so, too," said Chester, frankly.

"I think, however," Mr. Fairchild added, with a smile, "that it would
be hardly prudent to trust my business to an office boy."

"You are already trusting me very much, Mr. Fairchild."

"Yes; I feel safe in doing so."

Chester took the grip up the Elevated stairway and parted with Mr.
Fairchild at the ticket office.

As he went down to the street he reflected that his own position during
the broker's absence might not be very comfortable. Still he had his
employer's confidence, and that gave him much pleasure.

He had reached Harris' large store on his way home when a
rakish-looking figure, springing from he knew not where, overtook and
touched him on the arm. Chester immediately recognized him as the
gambler with whom he had seen the bookkeeper walking on the evening of
his first visit to the house of Prof. Hazlitt.

"I say, boy," said Ralston, "you're employed by Fairchild, the real
estate man, ain't you?"

"Yes, sir," answered Chester, coldly.

"Didn't I see him going to the Elevated station with you just now?"

"Yes, sir."

"With a grip in his hand?"

"Yes."

"Is he off for a journey?"

"He has started for the West."

"So? I had business with him, but I suppose I can transact it with
Mullins just as well."

"You will find him in the office."

"All right! I'll go there."

Chester turned his glance upon Dick Ralston and rapidly took note of
his appearance. He was rather a stocky man, with a red, pimpled face, a
broad nose, small, twinkling eyes and intensely black hair. He wore a
"loud," striped sack suit, and on one of his pudgy fingers was a
diamond ring. It was really a diamond, and he had often found it
serviceable. When he was in very bad luck he pawned it for a
comfortable sum, but invariably redeemed it when fortune smiled upon
him again.

He followed Chester into the broker's office. Mullins sat on a stool at
the desk, picking his teeth. He looked like a man of leisure, with
little upon his mind.

"Hello, Mullins, old boy!" said Dick, pushing forward with extended
hand. "So you're promoted to boss?"

"Yes," answered the bookkeeper, showing his teeth in a complacent
smile. "Can I sell you a house this morning?"

"Well, not exactly. I'm not quite up to that in the present state of my
funds. If you have on your list a one-story shanty on the rocks near
Central Park I may invest."

"Cash down, or do you want to have part of the purchase money on
mortgage?"

Then both laughed, and Ralston made a playful dig at Mullins' ribs.

Chester could not help hearing the conversation. He saw in it a proof
of the friendly relations between the two. This, so far as he knew, was
the first visit made by Ralston to Mr. Mullins. It was clear that the
bookkeeper felt that such a caller would injure him in the eyes of Mr.
Fairchild.

"I am glad old Fairchild is gone," said Dick Ralston, lowering his
tone. "Now I can come in freely."

