win any prizes. Give me a stiff boat before a fast one."

"I should like to have mine both stiff and fast."

"Look at the Christabel. She went round the course with a reef in the
fore and main sails, and was beaten at that," added Norwood. "Here comes
the head boat. It is the Skylark, as sure as you live."

"Not much, Frank. Do you see her figure-head? Is it a bird?" demanded
Rodman, triumphantly.

"It isn't; that's a fact."

"That's the Sea Foam fast enough."

This was exciting news, and Sam Rodman walked rapidly to the
companion-way of the Penobscot.

"Yachts in sight!" shouted he to the people below.

"Which is ahead?" asked Mr. Montague.

"The Sea Foam," replied Rodman.

"I'm so glad!" exclaimed Miss Nellie Patterdale.

Mr. Montague and Captain Patterdale only laughed, but they were
sufficiently interested to go on deck in spite of the pouring rain, and
they were followed by many others.

"Time!" shouted Sam Rodman, as the gun was fired.

"Four, thirty-two, ten," added Frank Norwood; and the figures were
entered upon the schedule.

The Sea Foam passed the judges' yacht, came about, and went under her
stern.

"The Sea Foam," shouted Donald.

Though the spectators were not all satisfied with the result, they gave
three cheers to the victorious yacht, magnanimously led off by Mr.
Montague himself.

"Time!" called Sam, as the Skylark came into the range of the chimney on
shore.

"Four, thirty-six, twelve," said Norwood.

The Skylark came about, and passed under the stern of the Penobscot,
reporting her name. The judges went below, and figured out the result,
by which it appeared that the Sea Foam had beaten the Skylark, after the
correction for the three inches' difference in length, by three minutes
fifty-nine and four tenths seconds.

Donald was the first to come on board of the Penobscot, and was
generously congratulated on his decisive victory, especially by Mr.
Montague, the father of the commodore. Robert followed him soon after,
and every one was curious to know what he would say and do.

"Don John, you have beaten me," exclaimed he, grasping the hand of
Donald. "You have done it fairly and handsomely, and I am ready to give
up the first prize to the Sea Foam."

The party in the cabin of the Penobscot heartily applauded the conduct
of the commodore.

"You are very kind and generous, Bob," replied Donald, deeply moved by
the magnanimity of the commodore.

"When I am whipped, I know it as well as the next man. The silver vase
belongs to the Sea Foam."

"Not at all," protested Donald. "This last race was not for the vase,
and you won the first one fairly."

"Of course the vase belongs to the commodore," added Rodman. "The judges
have already awarded and presented the prizes."

This was the unanimous sentiment of all concerned, and Robert consented
to retain the first prize.

"I say, Don John," continued the commodore, removing his wet coat and
cap, "I want to have an understanding about the affair. While I own that
the Skylark has been beaten, I am not so clear that the Sea Foam is the
faster boat of the two."

"I think she is, commodore," laughed Donald; "though I believe I
understand your position."

"We made an even thing of it till we came up with Turtle Head--didn't
we?"

"Yes, that's so. If either gained anything for the moment, he lost it
again," replied Donald.

"Then, if we made exactly the same time to Turtle Head, it seems to me
the merits of the two boats are about the same."

"Not exactly, commodore. You forgot that the Skylark has to give time to
the Sea Foam--one and three-tenths seconds per mile; or about eight
seconds from here to the Head."

"That's next to nothing," laughed Robert. "But I was a length ahead of
you."

"I let you gain that, so that I could go to windward of you."

"You made your first point by running nearer to the rocks than I like to
go, by which you cut off a little of the distance; and inches counted in
so close a race."

"That's part of the game in sailing a race."

"I know that, and it's all perfectly fair. I lost half my time when the
squall came. I thought it was going to be heavier than it proved to be."

"I threw the Sea Foam up into the wind when it came," said Donald.

"But you didn't drop your peak, and I lost two minutes in doing it. Now,
Don John, I can put my finger on the four minutes by which you beat me;
and I don't think there is any difference between the two yachts."

"You forget the allowance."

"That's nothing. In all future regattas the result will depend more upon
the sailing than upon the boats."

"I think you are quite right, Bob; and the fellow who makes the most
mistakes will lose the race. But when the Maud is done she is going to
beat you right along, if she has anything like fair play," laughed
Donald.

"She may if she can," replied Robert.

The reputation of Ramsay & Son, boat builders, was greatly increased by
the result of the race. If Edward Patterdale was a little mortified to
have it demonstrated that the Sea Foam had lost the first prize by his
own want of skill and tact in sailing her, he was consoled by the fact
that Commodore Montague, who had the credit of being the best skipper in
Belfast, had been beaten by his yacht. When the shower was over the
party went on shore, and Donald hastened to the shop to attend to
business. He found that his men had done a good day's work in his
absence, and he related to Kennedy all the particulars of the two
races.

"It would have been a bad egg for you if you had not been present," said
Kennedy, much interested in the story. "In these regattas the sailing of
the yacht is half the battle, and these young fellows may ruin your
reputation as a boat-builder, if you don't look out for them."

"When I heard Ned Patterdale say he was disappointed in the Sea Foam, I
felt that our business was nearly ruined. I think I have done a good
thing for our firm to-day."

"So you have, Donald; and when the Maud is finished, I hope you will
sail her yourself in the first race she enters."

"I will, if Sam Rodman consents."

Donald paid off his men that night from the money received from Mr.
Rodman. The next week he employed another hand, and worked diligently
himself. Every day his mother came out to see how the work progressed,
as she began to have some hope herself of the success of the firm of
Ramsay & Son. Donald paid her all the fees he received for measuring
yachts, and thus far this had been enough to support the family. She
did not inquire very closely into the financial affairs of the concern,
and the active member of it was not very communicative; but she had
unbounded confidence in him, and while he was hopeful she was satisfied.

It would be tedious to follow the young builder through all the details
of his business. The frame of the Maud was all set up in due time, and
then planked. By the first of August, when the vacation at the High
School commenced, she was ready to be launched. All the joiner work on
deck and in the cabin was completed, and had received two coats of
paint. Mr. Rodman had paid a hundred dollars every week on account,
which was more than Donald needed to carry on the work, and the affairs
of Ramsay & Son were in a very prosperous condition.

On the day of the launch, the Yacht Club attended in a body, and all the
young ladies of the High School were present. Miss Maud Rodman, with a
bottle in her hand, had consented formally to give her own name to the
beautiful craft. Nellie Patterdale was to be on deck with her, attended
by Donald and Sam Rodman. The boarding at the end of the shop had been
removed, to allow the passage of the yacht into her future element. The
ways had been laid down into the water, and well slushed. It was high
tide at ten o'clock, and this hour had been chosen for the great event.

"Are you all ready, Mr. Kennedy?" asked Donald.

"All ready," replied the workman.

"Let her slide!" shouted the boat-builder.

A few smart blows with the hammers removed the dog-shores and the
wedges, and the Maud began to move very slowly at first. Those on deck
were obliged to stoop until the hull had passed out of the shop.

"Now stand up," said Donald, as the yacht passed the end of the shop;
and he thrust a long pole, with a flag attached to the end, into the
mast hole.

The boat increased her speed as she advanced, and soon struck the water
with a splash.

"Now break the bottle, Maud," added Donald.

"I give this yacht the name of Maud," said Miss Rodman, in a loud tone,
as she broke the bottle upon the heel of the bowsprit.

"Won't she tip over, Don John?" asked Nellie.

"Not at all; nearly all her ballast has been put into her, and she will
stand up like a queen on the water," answered Donald, proudly, as he
realized that the launch was a perfect success.

Loud cheers from the crowd on shore greeted the yacht as she went into
the embrace of her chosen element. The ladies waved their handkerchiefs,
and the gentlemen their hats. Maud and Nellie returned the salute, and
so did Sam Rodman; but Donald was too busy, just then, even to enjoy his
triumph. As the hull slid off into the deep water, the boat-builder
threw over the anchor, and veered out the cable till her headway was
checked. The Maud rested on the water as gracefully as a swan, and the
work of the day was done.

Hardly had the yacht brought up at her cable, when the Juno, in which
Laud Cavendish had been laying off and on where he could see the launch,
ran alongside of her.

"Keep off!" shouted Donald; "you will scrape her sides."

"No; hold on, Don John; I have a cork fender," replied Laud, as he threw
his painter on board of the Maud. "Catch a turn--will you?"

"Don't let him come on board, if you can help it," whispered Nellie
Patterdale. "He is a terrible bore."

"I can help it," replied Donald, as, with a boat-hook he shoved off the
bow of the Juno.

Then, for the first time, he observed that Laud had a passenger, a man
whom he remembered to have seen before, though he did not think where.

"What are you about, Don John?" demanded Laud.

"Keep off, then," replied Donald. "We don't want any visitors on board
yet. We are going to haul her up to the wharf at once."

"But I came off to offer the ladies a passage to the shore," said Laud.

"They don't want any passage to the shore."

"Good morning, Miss Patterdale," added Laud, as Nellie went to the rail
near the Juno. "Allow me to offer you a place in this boat to convey you
to the shore."

"Thank you, Mr. Cavendish; I intend to remain where I am," replied she,
rather haughtily.

"I shall be happy to take you out to sail, if you will do me the honor
to accompany me; and Miss Rodman, too, if she will go."

"No, I thank you; I am otherwise engaged," answered Nellie, as she
retreated to the other side of the yacht.

"I say, Donald, let me come on board," asked Laud, who was desperately
bent upon improving his acquaintance with Nellie Patterdale.

"Not now; you can come on board at the wharf."

Donald was resolute, and Laud, angry at his rebuff, filed away.

"Here is a man that wants to see you, Don John," shouted Laud, as he ran
his boat up to the Maud again.

"I can't see him now," replied Donald.

Kennedy now came alongside in the skiff, bringing a warp-line from the
shore, by which the Maud was hauled up to the wharf. The spectators went
on board, and examined the work. Many of them crawled into the cabin and
cook-room, and all of them were enthusiastic in their praise, though a
few seasoned it with wholesome criticism. Some thought the cabin ought
to be longer, evidently believing that it was possible to put a quart of
water into a pint bottle; others thought she ought to be rigged as a
schooner instead of a sloop, which was a matter of fancy with the owner;
but all agreed that she was a beautiful yacht. In honor of the event,
and to please the young people, Mr. Rodman had prepared a collation at
his house, to which the members of the Yacht Club and others were
cordially invited. Kennedy and the other men who worked on the Maud were
included in the invitation, and the afternoon was to be a holiday. Laud
Cavendish, who had moored the Juno and come on shore, liberally
interpreted the invitation to include himself, and joined the party,
though he was not a member of the club. Some people have a certain
exuberance on the side of their faces, which enables them to do things
which others cannot do.

"I want to see you, Don John," said Laud, as the party began to move
from the wharf towards the mansion of Mr. Rodman.

"I'll see you this evening," replied Donald, who was anxious to gain a
position at the side of Miss Nellie Patterdale.

"That will be too late. You saw the man in the Juno with me--didn't
you?" continued Laud, proceeding to open his business.

