
The colour flushed into Janie's thin cheeks. Her lack of physical
prowess was sometimes rather a sore subject to her. Though she did not
enjoy games, she would, nevertheless, have dearly liked the credit of
excelling in them. For a moment or two she did not reply. She was
considering hard, and making up her mind on a difficult point. When she
spoke, it was with a touch of diffidence and hesitation in her voice.

"Suppose I could win the 'Atalanta', would you think it possible to be
what Miss Maitland wants you?"

"Indeed, I'd think anything possible!" replied Honor, with more truth
than politeness.

"Then shall we make it a bargain--if I win the race, you're going to
try your very hardest?"

"Turn over a new leaf, in fact?"

"Yes."

"All right; I've no objection. I should like to see you flying round
the quad!"

"And I should like to see you doing other things! Will you promise,
then?"

"On my honour, if you want."

"Very well. Give me something as a pledge."

"You can have this small compass," said Honor, rummaging in her pocket.
"It's rather a treasure. Brian brought it me from Switzerland, and it's
made of agate."

"All the better, because you'll want to have it back. I'll give you my
silver fruit-knife, which I'm equally loath to part with. We must each
keep each other's token until after the sports."

"And then?"

"Ah! that remains to be seen," said Janie, as she rose and strolled
leisurely away.

All the Chaddites agreed that the visit to Baldurstone was one of the
most interesting excursions they had ever taken, and that the ruins
were the most picturesque in the neighbourhood, far exceeding Weyland
Castle, favoured by the Hilaryites; and Clayton House, the destination
of St. Bride's. The memory of their delightful day was sufficient to
carry them through the ordeal of recapitulation that always preceded
the examinations, necessitating an extra half-hour of preparation in
the evenings, and, as Lettice described it, "concentrating one's
unfortunate brains to absolute splitting point".

Whether Lettice's mental exertions were sufficient to bring her to such
an unhappy crisis was a question on which her class mistress might have
expressed some doubt, though she herself thought she had proof
conclusive one afternoon during the week following the picnic. She ran
in from the grounds in quite a state of excitement, and hailed a group
of friends assembled in the recreation room.

"Girls!" she exclaimed, "I've seen a vision, a most extraordinary and
peculiar sight! You wouldn't believe what it was! I happened to be at
the bottom of the garden, and in that quiet path behind the laundry I
actually saw Janie Henderson tearing up and down, as if she were doing
the last spurt of a Marathon."

"Janie Henderson! Impossible!" cried everybody.

"Just what I said. I rubbed my eyes, and came to the conclusion that
I'd been overstudying, and must be suffering from a delusion. Do I look
queer?"

"Not in the least; your cheeks are as red as peonies."

"Well, my eyesight must be defective, then, for I certainly thought I
saw her."

"You've been dreaming!"

"It's about as likely as seeing Miss Cavendish performing with a
skipping rope."

"Yes, it's absurd on the face of it. It must have been somebody else."

"A case of mistaken identity."

"There are heaps of girls the same height, and with long, light hair."

"No doubt. I was a fairly good distance off too. And yet," added
Lettice to herself, as she went to change her cricket shoes, "I verily
believe it was Janie Henderson, after all!"




CHAPTER XIII

Miss Maitland's Window


While the weather continued to be so hot and close, Miss Maitland
allowed the girls to spend their evening recreation in the garden, so
that they might have a blow of fresh, cool air before they went to bed.
They enjoyed sitting under the trees with books or fancy work, though
as a rule their tongues wagged so fast that there was little display of
industry with their needles.

"I hate sewing," confessed Honor, "and it's no use pretending I like
it."

"This piece of embroidery has lasted me three terms, and it isn't
finished yet," said Maisie Talbot, leisurely snipping off a thread, and
pausing before she chose another piece of silk.

"I don't have to look at my knitting," said Chatty Burns; "but then,
I'm Scotch, and every Scotchwoman knits."

"You're getting on so fast, it will do for me as well," said Honor,
lying comfortably on the grass with her hands clasped under her head,
and watching Chatty's rapidly growing stocking. "It's a 'work of
supererogation', and that always leaves a little virtue over, to count
for somebody else."

"I didn't say I'd hand the extra merit on to you," retorted Chatty.

"You can't help it. If there's so much to spare it must go somewhere,
and I'm the idlest person; it will naturally fly to make up my
deficiencies."

"What a fallacious argument!" declared Maisie.

"Do you know," interrupted Ruth Latimer, "that it's exactly a fortnight
on Friday to the end of the term?"

"Know! I should think we do know!" replied Lettice. "I expect each one
of us is counting the days, and longing for the time to come, if I'm
any sample of the rest of the school. I say, 'One more day gone', every
night when I get into bed."

"It's glorious to think the breaking-up is so near," said Pauline
Reynolds. "What are you all going to do in the holidays?"

"We're starting for the Tyrol at the beginning of August," said Ruth.
"We want to have a walking tour. We shall leave our heavy luggage at
Botzen, and then tramp off up the mountains with just a few things in
knapsacks on our backs, and stop at chalets and little inns
('guest-houses', as they are called there) on the way. We shall feel
most delightfully free, because we can go any distance we like, and
shall not be bound to arrive at any special place by any special time.
That's the beauty of a walking tour."

"How far can you go in a day?" asked Honor.

"It just depends. If one is in the hot valleys, quite a short distance
knocks one up; but when one gets the real mountain air, one can march
along without feeling the least scrap tired. I once did twenty miles in
Switzerland, but that's my record."

"And a pretty good one," said Pauline, "particularly as one oughtn't to
reckon miles in Switzerland; one counts mountain climbing in hours."

"Yes, I've sometimes been deer-stalking at home," said Chatty, "and
it's a very different affair toiling uphill over the heather from
walking on a flat road. We're not going away this summer. Father has
taken some extra shooting, and we're to have a big house-party instead.
It's great fun! I like helping to carry the lunch in the little pony
trap on to the moors; and we have jolly times in the evening--games,
and music, and dancing. Have your people settled any plans yet,
Pauline?"

"They talk of Norway. It would be glorious to see the midnight sun, and
the lovely pine forests. I've wanted to go ever since I read _Feats
on the Fiord_."

"You won't find it so romantic as that," laughed Ruth Latimer. "Things
have changed since the time Harriet Martineau wrote about it. There are
no pirates nowadays, to try to kidnap bishops and burn farms. You
might, perhaps, find Rolf's wonderful cave, but I'm sure there isn't a
peasant left who believes in the water sprite, and the Mountain Demon,
and Nipen, and all the rest of the spirits of which Erica was so
afraid."

"Perhaps not; but the country's just as beautiful, and I shall see the
fiords, if I haven't any adventures there. I didn't say I wanted to
meet pirates among the islands; on the whole, I should prefer their
room to their company."

"Well, I wish you just one adventure, to keep up the element of
romance. Perhaps your boatman will row you into the middle of the
fiord, and demand your purse before he consents to take you back to the
vessel; or you may be shipwrecked on a sunken rock, and left stranded
in the Arctic Circle, dependent on the hospitality of the Laplanders!"

"No, thanks! I believe their tents are disgustingly dirty. I hope I may
see a Lapp settlement, all the same, and also a few seals. I'm afraid a
whale, or an iceberg, is too much to expect."

"Where are you going, Lettice?" enquired Chatty.

"Nowhere in particular, unless Maisie and I are asked to our aunt's.
But we shall have jolly fun at golf and tennis. When one has been at
school the whole term, one likes to be at one's own home, and to meet
all one's friends again. It feels such ages since one saw them."

"Yes; the middle part of the term always seems to drag dreadfully, and
then the last comes with a rush, and the exams. are on before one knows
what one is doing."

"Don't talk of exams!" cried Pauline. "I expect I shall fail in every
single one. I'm completely mixed up in chemistry, and I never can
remember dates and names properly. My history paper will be a series of
dashes: 'War with France was renewed in ----, when the English gained
the decisive battle of ----, in which the Prince ---- was slain and the
Duke of ---- taken prisoner. By the Treaty of ---- a truce was
concluded', &c."

"Perhaps Miss Farrar will think it's a guessing competition," remarked
Honor.

"I dare say she will. I wish we needn't have exams., or marks, or any
horrid things, to show whether we've done well or badly."

"I can get on tolerably with facts," said Lettice, "but I'm always
marked 'weak' for composition. Miss Farrar says I use tautology and
repeat myself, and that my grammar is shaky and my general style poor.
She told me to take Macaulay as a model, but I can no more copy other
people's ways of writing than I could improve my features by staring at
the Venus de Medici."

"Poor old Salad! You're not cut out for an authoress."

"I'm certainly not; I'd rather be a charwoman! I don't aspire to be
editress of the school magazine, I assure you, nor even a contributor.
By the way, Honor, why don't you send something? I'm sure you could."

"I did think of it," replied Honor. "I was going to make a nice little
series of acrostics on all of your names. I did one about Chatty, and
showed it to Janie; but she said that it was far too slangy, and Vivian
would never pass it, so I tore it up, and felt too squashed to go on."

"Oh! what was it?" exclaimed the girls. "Can't you remember it?"

"I'll try. I believe it went this way:

    "C hatty Burns is just a ripper!
     H air's the colour of a kipper;
     A nd her face so round and red is
     T hat you'd think her cheeks were cherries.
     T hough we often call her 'Fatty',
     Y ou depend we're nuts on Chatty."

"What a shame!" cried the indignant original of the acrostic. "My
hair's auburn, it's not the colour of a kipper!"

"We certainly call you 'Fatty', though," laughed Lettice. "I think the
poem is lovely!"

"It's a good thing you tore it up, all the same," said Ruth. "Vivian
would have been simply horrified. We have a crusade against slang at
Chessington, and 'ripper' is one of the words absolutely vetoed. We
only say 'jolly' by stealth."

"I'm sure 'jolly' ought to be allowable. I saw it in a book in the
library: 'as jolly as a sandboy', was the expression."

"What is a sandboy?" asked Lettice. "The phrase is always quoted as the
high-water mark of bliss."

"I've never been able to find out," said Ruth. "I suppose it's either
one of those wretched little urchins who dive for pennies, or an
ordinary donkey boy. But this is what Miss Farrar calls 'a digression
from the subject'. I want to hear if Honor has written any more
acrostics."

"I made one on Lillie Harper," replied Honor. "It had an illustration,
too, done very badly, in just a few crooked strokes, like little
children draw:

    "L illie is a dab at cricket;
     I depict her at the wicket.
     L ook how tight her bat she's grasping,
     L eaving all the fielders gasping!
     I have done this sketch in woggles,
     E specially to show her goggles.

"It ought to have the picture to really explain it," said Honor
regretfully; "I'm sorry now that I tore it up. I began a piece on the
exams. too; it was a parody of 'The boy stood on the burning deck', but
I can't get beyond the first verse:

    "The girl sat at the hard, bare desk,
    Whence all but she had fled;
    Her fingers they were stained with ink,
    And aching was her head."

"Oh, go on! It would be so nice!"

"It's impossible to think of any more."

    "The time rolled on, she could not go
    Without her teacher's word,"

improvised Ruth.

    "That teacher, taking tea below,
    Her sighs no longer heard,"

finished Honor. "Only, Miss Farrar wouldn't be taking tea in the middle
of an exam. No, it can't be done!"

"Then we must put 'To be continued'," said Ruth.

"Make another acrostic, Paddy!" urged Lettice.

"Acrostics are too hard, because one is hampered by keeping to the
letters of the girls' names," objected Honor. "Limericks are much
easier. How would this do for Vivian Holmes?--

    "There was a head girl of St. Chad's,
    Who was subject to fancies and fads;
        When we tried to talk slang,
        She declared it was wrong,
    And said she considered us cads."

"Good!" laughed Ruth. "Only, of course, Vivian wouldn't dream of using
such a word as 'cad'. Now, I've got one about you:

    "There's a girl at our house we call 'Paddy':
    She's not 'goody-goody', but 'baddy';
        She loves practical jokes,
        Or to play us a hoax,
    Though we tell her such tricks are not 'Chaddy'."

"Very well, Miss Ruth Latimer! I'll return the compliment," said Honor.
"How do you like this?--

    "There's a girl at our house who's called Ruth:
    She is fond of an unpleasant truth;
        She says she is seeking
        To practise plain speaking,
    But we think she is merely uncouth."

"I don't mind in the least," declared Ruth; "in fact, I'm rather
flattered than otherwise."

"Make one about Maisie or me," implored Lettice. "You can say as nasty
things as you want."

"Nothing could possibly rhyme with Lettice," announced Honor after a
moment's cogitation, "or with Salad either. I might do better with
Maisie. Let me see--crazy, hazy, daisy, lazy--I think those are all.
Will this suit you?--

    "There's a girl in this garden called Maisie;
    At lessons she's horribly lazy,
        But she's splendid at sports,
        And at games of all sorts,
    While o'er cricket she waxes quite crazy."

"What are you all laughing at?" enquired Flossie Taylor, sauntering up
to join the group, and taking a seat on the grass.

"Limericks. Honor is winding them off by the yard. Now, Paddy, let us
have one about Flossie! Quick, while your genius is burning!"

"It's only flickering," laughed Honor, "but I'll try:

    "There's a girl at St. Chad's who's named Flossie;
    She tries to be terribly 'bossy',
        She sets us all straight
        (Which is just what we hate),
    And makes us exceedingly cross(y)."

"Oh, what a fearfully lame rhyme!" said Lettice.

"I know it is, but I couldn't think of any other word. If you're
offended, Flossie, you can go away."

"I'm not silly enough to care about such trifles," replied Flossie
loftily.

"You've quite left out Janie," said Lettice, "and there she is sewing
all the time, and as usual never offering a single remark. Janie
Henderson, why don't you talk?"

"You don't give me a chance to put in a word," protested Janie.
"Perhaps I'm like the proverbial parrot, which couldn't talk, but
thought all the more."

"You mean that I do the talking, and not the thinking?"

"I didn't say so."

"But you implied it. You deserve a horrid Limerick, and I shall make
one myself. Wait a moment, while I rack my brains. Oh, now I've got
it!--

    "Miss Henderson, otherwise Jane,
    May think very hard with her brain,
        But it never comes out,
        So she leaves us in doubt
    If there are any thoughts to explain.

"There! You can't retaliate, because, as Honor says, there isn't a rhyme
for Lettice."

"It's a good thing, for we might get too personal," interposed Chatty.
"I think we've been over the margin of politeness as it is. Suppose we
change the subject. Do you know, the honey dew is dropping from this
lime tree overhead and making my knitting needles quite sticky!"

"It would be a lovely tree to climb, the boughs are so regular," said
Honor, gazing into the green heights above.

"I don't believe I could go up a tree if a mad bull were after me,"
asserted Pauline. "I should just collapse at the bottom, and be gored
to death, I know I should!"

"It isn't difficult," declared Honor. "You've only to catch hold of the
branches, and keep swinging yourself a little higher. I've climbed ever
so many trees in our garden at home."

"I should like to see you do it here, then."

"Very well! I'll show you, if you don't believe me."

The lime tree in question stood close to the house--so near, in fact,
that some of its boughs brushed the windows. Miss Cavendish had several
