Mrs. Blossom saw him on the floor, she rushed towards him with outspread
arms; but the Milesian warded off the assault, and took her right hand.

"Don't hug me, Aunty, for the snake swallowed me clothes and all, and
you may get some of the poison on you," said he.

For some time longer there was a general handshaking, and Louis was
kissed by the Princess Zuleima.




CHAPTER XVIII

LOUIS'S DOUBLE-DINNER ARGUMENT


After the welcome of the Bornean hunters had spent itself in kissing and
handshaking, the question came up as to why the "Big Four" had abandoned
their explorations after one week in the island instead of three, the
time arranged for them to remain there; and they had fixed the time
themselves.

"I thought three weeks was a rather long time for you to be in the
island," said Captain Ringgold after the question had been opened for
discussion.

"We fixed the time before we knew anything about the island," replied
Louis. "But I want to say, in order to counteract the impression which
appears to prevail in this company, that our trip was not a failure; for
we had a fine time, and enjoyed our trips on the rivers."

"If you had a good time, why did you cut it short by two-thirds of the
period allotted to the excursions?" asked Uncle Moses.

"We went up the Sarawak, the Sadong, and the Simujan, up the last to the
mountains, passing through Lake Padang, and we have shot an
orang-outang, and might have killed more of them, to say nothing of
other game," replied Louis, whom Scott had requested to do the talking.
"We visited three Dyak villages, sailed the Blanchita through a forest,
and killed a good many crocodiles."

"You seem to have had sport enough," added Uncle Moses. "Why did you
give it up in the cream of the thing?"

"I believe you like a good dinner, Uncle Moses; such a dinner as you
always have on board of the Guardian-Mother," continued Louis, who was
evidently pluming himself to make a point.

"I do like a good dinner, and enjoy one very much," replied the worthy
trustee of the young millionaire. "But I doubt if I am any more devoted
to such a banquet as we get every day than my beloved friend, Brother
Adipose Tissue, and all the rest of the voyagers all over the world."

"I plead guilty to the charge of Brother Avoirdupois; and I acknowledge
myself to be a worshipper at the shrine of Mr. Melancthon Sage, and I
invoke a blessing upon the head of Monsieur Odervie, the chief cook. Our
life on the ocean wave is a constant promotive of the appetite. If the
proof of the pudding is not in the eating of the bag, it is in the
eating of the dinners; and I think we pay an abundant tribute to the
talent of Mr. Sage, the prince of stewards, in the quantity of the
well-cooked food he causes to be placed before us."

"We get through dinner about seven o'clock. I see that the accomplished
chief steward is standing at the door," continued Louis. "Now, Mr.
Sage, would it be possible and convenient for you to have another
dinner on the table, say at eight o'clock, an hour after the first feast
had been finished?"

"Quite possible, and even convenient; the only persons to complain of
such an arrangement would be the cooks and stewards," replied Mr. Sage.

"Captain Ringgold, might I so far presume upon any influence I may have
with you as the owner of the Guardian-Mother to request you to order a
second dinner to be served at eight in the evening, beginning, say, with
to-morrow evening?" asked the young millionaire, looking as serious as
though he was about to preach a sermon, though the party were generally
laughing.

"As I have always told you, I take my orders from the owner; and if you
desire such a dinner, I shall certainly give Mr. Sage an order to that
effect," replied the commander.

"But who is to eat the dinner after it is provided, an hour after the
passengers have gorged themselves at the table?" demanded Dr. Hawkes.
"Is this a conspiracy to make more work for the surgeon?"

"Not at all," protested Louis. "It is to give the gentlemen who question
so closely an opportunity to have an abundance of a good thing."

"But we could not eat the dinner," said Uncle Moses. "We are not hogs."

"Oh, you are not!" chuckled the owner.

"But what has all this to do with hunting and exploring in Borneo?"
inquired Mr. Woolridge.

"Well, sir, after we had taken a full dinner in Borneo, Uncle Moses and
the commander ask us why we did not eat another dinner immediately on
the top of it, as I observe that they are not disposed to do on board of
the ship," returned Louis.

Some of the party had penetrated to the conclusion of Louis's argument,
but most of them did not see the point of his illustration till he made
his last remark; then Mr. Woolridge began to clap his hands, and the
whole company applauded vigorously.

"I suppose the interpretation of the whole matter is, that the hunters
in Borneo were gorged with hunting," said Captain Ringgold; "and that
when they stipulated for three weeks of the sport, they overdid the
matter."

"That was precisely the situation, Mr. Commander; and if you had been
with us on the waters of Padang Lake, you could not have defined it
better," replied Louis.

"But it is almost incredible that a quartet of such Nimrods should have
become disgusted with their favorite sport in a single week," added
Captain Ringgold.

"We are not hogs, as Uncle Moses gently suggested, and we could not eat
a second dinner on top of the first so soon. If we had gone to Borneo a
second time, after a reasonable interval, I am confident we should have
enjoyed a second week of hunting, even along the muddy rivers and
inundated jungles," Louis explained.

"In other words, you bit off a bigger mouthful than you could swallow,"
said the commander with a hearty laugh; for he had predicted that three
weeks of hunting at one time was too much. "But we understand the
situation now up to the time of the departure of the Nimrods from their
happy hunting-ground. It was a rather daring enterprise to make a voyage
of nine hundred miles in an open boat; and I should like to ask who was
the originator of the idea."

"If there is any blame for this trip, we were all in the same boat, and
we share the responsibility," answered Louis. "Captain Achang Bakir was
with us; and he has sailed in all the seas of the Archipelago in an open
boat, and we had his advice. Then we sailed all the way to the entrance
of the Gulf of Siam in company with the steamer Delhi, whose captain
agreed to stand by us, and to supply us with coal if we came short."

"That puts a new face on the matter."

"It was in the head waters of the Simujan that the plan was discussed,
and Captain Scott was the originator of the idea," continued Louis. "I
was in favor of it first because it would save the Guardian-Mother the
voyage from Saigon back to Kuching, about a thousand miles."

"Where is Kuching?" asked Dr. Hawkes.

"It is the native name for Sarawak."

"I am heartily glad you have come to us, Louis, for the reason you have
given," added the commander.

"How did the steam-yacht work, Mr. Belgrave?" asked the rajah.

"Exceedingly well, sir; nothing could have done any better; but Mr.
Scott can answer you better than I can, sir."

The third officer of the ship, late captain of the Blanchita, described
the working of the yacht, and gave her liberal praise. He related in
what manner she had beaten the Delhi in the race, and that he had
carried sail all the way nearly from the start. He gave the party the
routine of the boat,--how they had taken their meals, and how they had
slept on board.

"But I think it is time for us to return to the Blanche," interposed
Captain Sharp, as the clock struck eleven.

"I must make an announcement before you go," said Captain Ringgold. "We
shall not be able to sail for Saigon to-morrow morning, as arranged
before. We have to clean the Blanchita in the morning, and she has to be
put on the upper deck of the Blanche. As the Nimrods have come to
Bangkok, I wish to give them a day on shore to see the temples, and call
on the king if they are so disposed. We will sail on Tuesday morning on
the early tide."

"But we have not had any account of the adventures of the Nimrods in
Borneo," suggested Uncle Moses.

"We shall do so at eight o'clock in the morning; and you will all
assemble for the purpose at that time. The lecture on Siam and Cambodia
has been postponed till all hands could hear it; and if General Noury
is ready, that shall follow the adventures," replied the captain.

"I will be here at the time stated, for we all desire to know what the
Nimrods have been doing," replied the general, as the party from the
Blanche retired from the music-room.

The rest of the company went to their staterooms, while the commander
gave his orders for the work of the morning. All hands were called at
daylight; and the young adventurers shook hands with the officers they
found on deck, and spoke a pleasant word to the seamen on duty. The
latter were hoisting the coal, provisions, and stores of the Blanchita
on board of the ship; and by breakfast-time the yacht was as clean as a
Dutch chamber.

At the appointed time the company, including the party from the Blanche,
were seated in the arm-chairs of Conference Hall; and Louis went through
his narrative of the adventures of the Nimrods in Borneo. During the
morning, Achang had placed the stuffed orang-outang on a shelf the
carpenter had erected at the head of the platform, with the proboscis
monkey on one side, and the argus-pheasant on the other. The Bornean had
had some experience as a taxidermist, and Dr. Hawkes declared that he
had done his work well.

Louis explained these specimens, and gave the measurements of the orang.
The proboscis monkey and the bird were also described. When he said he
had not been disposed to shoot monkeys and other harmless animals for
the fun of it, the audience applauded. He had killed a specimen of
several animals, and several pigs, deer, and one bear, most of the
latter for food. The cook had packed the last of the fish in the ice, so
that it had kept well, and it had been served for breakfast that
morning. Everybody had praised it. The surgeon called it the gourami,
and said that some successful attempts had been made to introduce the
fish in American waters.

The audience laughed heartily when Louis related in what manner they had
killed and sold one hundred and eight feet of crocodile for about forty
dollars. He told what he had learned about the Dyaks, and described the
long-house they had visited, and the head-house, and gave the story in
full of Rajah Brooke, and their visits to his nephew and successor, the
present rajah. He might have gone on with his narrative till lunch-time
if he had not known that General Noury was waiting for him to finish his
account.

"Did you see the Dyak women, Louis?" asked his mother.

"Plenty of them. The older ones reminded me of the French women; for
when they begin to grow old, they wrinkle and dry up. The morality of
the Dyaks is much higher in tone, even among the laboring-classes, men
and women, than in civilized countries. They are all honest; and they
steal nothing, even in Kuching, though the Malays and Chinamen do it for
them."

"Were the young women pretty, Mr. Belgrave?" inquired Mrs. Woolridge.

"To a Dyak gentleman I suppose they are; but I was not fascinated with
them, though I saw some on the Simujan who were not bad looking. The
prettiest one I saw was at a village near the mountains. But the general
is waiting for me to finish, and I must answer no more questions at
present," replied the speaker, as he bowed, and hastened from the
rostrum.

Then it was found that Mr. Gaskette had not hung up the map of Cochin
China, for Achang and the carpenter had taken up the space before
appropriated to it. Mr. Stevens, the carpenter, suggested a way to get
over the difficulty; but it would take him half an hour to put up a
frame in front of the orang.

"I shall not be able to get half through Cochin China before
lunch-time," said General Noury, consulting his watch.

"I am afraid your audience will be scatterbrained, General, there is so
much going on about the decks. Perhaps we had better postpone the
lecture till after we have sailed to-morrow morning, especially as the
Nimrods will be on shore this afternoon," suggested the commander.

"I approve the suggestion; let it be adopted."

The Blanche party lunched on board, and spent the afternoon there.




CHAPTER XIX

A HASTY GLANCE AT BANGKOK


While the carpenter and the second officer were busy making a place for
the large map of Cochin China, the returned hunters from Borneo were
invited to the cabin of the commander. They were pleased with the change
of scene from the mud and water of their week in Borneo; though they
felt that they would like to go there for another week--not more than
that--at another time.

"After lunch you will visit the city of Bangkok, and spend the afternoon
there; for you ought to see the place, as you are here," said Captain
Ringgold. "It is a large city."

"How large is it, Captain?" asked Louis.

"That is more than anybody in Siam, or anywhere else, can tell you. In
these Oriental countries, when they count the people, they do not
include the females in the enumeration, so that we get but half an idea
of the whole number. Chambers puts it at 300,000; the 'Year Book' does
not give it at all; Bradshaw puts it down at 500,000; Lippincott the
same. Probably the larger number is the nearer correct, and the
authorities quoted are issued the present year."

"I see no end of Chinamen flitting about the river," said Scott.

"They compose about one-half of the population of the city; and most of
the trade of the place is in their hands, as you have found it to be,
though to a less degree, in other cities you have visited in the East.
The Celestials are taxed three dollars when they come into Siam, and pay
the same amount every three years. But there is the lunch-bell. If you
have no objection, Professor Giroud will go on shore with you."

"I should be delighted to have his company," replied Louis; and the
others said the same thing.

The conversation at the table related more to Borneo than to anything
else, and the Nimrods had all the questions they could answer put to
them; and some of the ladies wished they had remained there a few days.

"If I had supposed the Nimrods would stay there only a week, I should
have been quite willing to remain at Sarawak that time," added the
commander.

"We fixed the time at three weeks because we thought it would take you
all of that time to see Siam and Cambodia, and get back to Sarawak,"
replied Scott.

"I think it would have been delightful to sail on those rivers, and see
the uncivilized people of the island," added Mrs. Belgrave. "But I
suppose we should have been in the way of the hunters."

"Not at all, madam," answered Scott. "We had a sampan, in which we
could have done our hunting, while you were examining the long-houses
and the head-houses. I don't know but that we should have wished to
remain the whole three weeks if the ladies had been with us."

"Gallant Captain Scott!" exclaimed the lady.

"We did not go up the Rajang River as we intended, and we should have
done that if you had been with us. I am very sure the Dyak ladies would
have been delighted to see you, more than you would have been to see
them," replied Scott.

"The steam-yacht must have been very delightful on the rivers and lakes;
but the crocodiles, the snakes, and the savage orang-outangs would not
have been pleasant to us."

"But with eleven Winchester repeating-rifles ready for use, you would
have had nothing to fear."

Captain Ringgold rose from the table; and this terminated the
conversation, and the party went on deck.

"Captain Ringgold said you had offered to go on shore with us, Professor
Giroud," said Louis, as he joined the instructor. "We shall be delighted
with your company."

"Thank you, Mr. Belgrave. I have been on shore every day, with or
without the party, and have learned something about Bangkok. I may be of
service to you," replied the professor.

"I am sure you will," said Scott.

The first cutter was in the water when they reached the gangway, with
the crew in their places. They went on board, and the bowman shoved off.
Stoody, the coxswain, gave the orders, and the boat was immediately
under way. She was steered towards the shore till she came abreast of
the various craft moored there, and then headed up the river.

"Where are you going, Stoody?" asked Scott.

"Captain Ringgold told me to take the party up the river, to show them
the boats and houses," replied the coxswain.

"That is a good idea, Mr. Scott," added the professor.

"The houses here are all afloat," said Morris. "They are three or four
deep."
