question. A little thought will soon make it clear why this should be
the case. A partial eclipse of the Sun results from the visible body of
the Sun being in part concealed from us by the solid body of the Moon,
and so in a total eclipse there is total concealment of the one object
by the other.

But when we come to deal with partial and total eclipses of the Moon,
the situation, is materially different. The Moon becomes invisible by
passing into the dark shadow cast by the Earth into space.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--THEORY OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE MOON.]

Fig. 13 will make this clear without the necessity of much verbal
explanation. S represents the Sun, E the Earth, and _mn_ the orbit of
the Moon. It is obvious that whilst the Moon is moving from _m_ to _n_
it becomes immersed in the Earth's shadow. But before actually reaching
the shadow the Moon passes through a point in its orbit at which it
begins to lose the full light of the Sun. This is the entrance into the
"penumbra" (or "Partial shade"). Similarly, after the eclipse, when the
Moon has emerged from the full shadow it does not all at once come into
full sunshine, but again passes through the stage of penumbral
illumination,[112] and under such circumstances (to speak in the style
of Old "Oireland") the invisible Moon is very often not invisible, and
the part partially eclipsed is often not eclipsed, and when the Moon is
totally eclipsed it is frequently still visible. Of course the general
idea involved in all cases of a body passing into the shadow of another
body is that the body which so passes disappears, because all direct
light is cut off from it. In the case, however, of a lunar eclipse this
state of things is not always literally accomplished, and very often
some residual light reaches the Moon (of course from the Sun) with the
result that traces of the Moon may often be discerned. The laws which
govern this matter are very ill-understood. The fact remains that if we
examine a series of reports of observed eclipses of the Moon extending
over many centuries (and records exist which enable us to do this) we
shall find that in some instances when the Moon was "totally" eclipsed
in the technical sense of that word, it was still perfectly visible,
whilst during other eclipses it absolutely and entirely disappeared from
view. Such eclipses are sometimes spoken of as "black" eclipses of the
Moon, but the phrase is not a happy one. Many instances of both kinds
will be found mentioned in the chapter on historical lunar
eclipses.[113]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--CONDITIONS OF ECLIPSES OF THE MOON.]

The different conditions of eclipses of the Moon are illustrated by Fig.
14 which must be studied with the aid of the remarks made in a former
chapter concerning the apparent movements of the Sun and Moon and their
nodal passages. Suffice it to state here that in Fig. 14 AB represents
the ecliptic, and CD the Moon's path. The three black circles are
imaginary sections of the Earth's shadow as cast when the Earth is in
three successive positions in the ecliptic. If when the Earth's shadow
is near A the Moon should be at E, and in Conjunction with the Earth
the Moon will escape eclipse; if the Conjunction takes place with both
the Earth's shadow and the Moon a little further forward, say at F, the
Moon will be partially obscured; but if the Moon is at or very near its
node, as at G, it will be wholly involved in the Earth's shadow and a
total eclipse will be the result. In the case contemplated at G in the
diagram, the Moon is concentrically placed with respect to the shadow,
but the eclipse will equally be total even though the two bodies are not
concentrically disposed, so long as the Moon is wholly within the cone
of the Earth's shadow.[114]

Just as in the case of the Sun so with the Moon there are certain limits
on the ecliptic within which eclipses of the Moon _may_ take place,
other (narrower) limits within which they _must_ take place, and again
other limits beyond which they _cannot_ take place. Reverting to what
has been said on a previous page[115] with respect to these matters when
an eclipse of the Sun is in question it is only necessary to substitute
for the word "Conjunction," the word "Opposition"; and for 181/2 deg. and 151/4 deg.
of longitude the figures 121/2 deg. and 91/4 deg.. The limits in latitude will be
1 deg. 3' and 0 deg. 52' instead of 1 deg. 34' and 1 deg. 23'. These substitutions
made, the general ideas and facts stated with regard to the conditions
of an eclipse of the Sun will apply also to the one of the Moon.

It is to be noted that whereas eclipses of the Sun always begin on the
W. side of the Sun, eclipses of the Moon begin on the E. side of the
Moon. This difference arises from the fact that the Sun's movement in
the ecliptic is only apparent (it being the Earth which really moves),
whilst the Moon's movement is real.

Eclipses of the Moon, though more often and more widely visible than
eclipses of the Sun, do not offer by any means the same variety of
interesting or striking phenomena to the mere star-gazer, and it was
long thought that they were in a certain sense of no use to science.
Now, however, astronomers are inclined to utilise them for determining
the diameter of the Moon by noting occultations[116] of stars by the
Moon, the duration of a star's invisibility behind an eclipsed Moon
being a measure of the lunar diameter when such an observation is
properly transformed and "reduced." Observations of the heat radiated
(or rather reflected) by an eclipsed Moon have also been made with the
interesting result of showing that during an eclipse the Moon's power to
reflect solar heat to the Earth sensibly declines.

The duration of an eclipse of the Moon is dependent on its magnitude.
Where the eclipse is total the darkness, or what counts for such, may
last for nearly 4 hours, though this is an extreme limit rarely
attained. An eclipse of from 6 to 12 digits (to use the old-fashioned
nomenclature which has been already explained) will continue from 21/2 to
31/2 hours. An eclipse of 3 to 6 digits will last 2 or 3 hours, and a
smaller eclipse only 1 or 2 hours. The visual observations to be made in
connection with partial or total eclipses of the Moon chiefly relate to
the appearances presented by our satellite when immersed in the Earth's
shadow. On such occasions, as has been already stated, it frequently
happens that the Moon does not wholly disappear, but may be detected
either with a telescope or even without one. It may exhibit either a
dull grey appearance, or more commonly a pinkish-red hue to which the
designation "coppery" is generally applied. Perhaps the most remarkable
instance of this was the eclipse of March 19, 1848.

Mr. Forster who observed the phenomenon at Bruges thus describes[117]
what he saw:--"I wish to call your attention to the fact which I have
clearly ascertained, that during the whole of the late eclipse of March
19 the shaded surface presented a luminosity quite unusual, probably
about three times the intensity of the mean illumination of the eclipsed
lunar disc. The light was of a deep red colour. During the totality of
the eclipse the light and dark places on the face of the Moon could be
almost as well made out as on an ordinary dull moonlight night, and the
deep red colour where the sky was clearer was very remarkable from the
contrasted whiteness of the stars. My observations were made with
different telescopes, but all presented the same appearance, and the
remarkable luminosity struck everyone. The British Consul at Ghent, _who
did not know there was an eclipse_, wrote to me for an explanation of
the blood-red colour[118] of the Moon at 9 o'clock."

In striking contrast to this stands the total eclipse of Oct. 4, 1884,
which is described by Mr. E. J. Stone[119] as "much the darkest that I
have ever seen, and just before the instant of totality it appeared as
if the Moon's surface would be invisible to the naked eye during
totality; but such was not the case, for with the last appearance of the
bright reflected sunlight there appeared a dim circle of light around
the Moon's disc, and the whole surface became faintly visible, and
continued so until the end of totality."

A total eclipse of the Moon which happened on January 28, 1888, was
observed in many places under exceptionally favourable circumstances as
regards weather. The familiar copper colour is spoken of by many
observers. The Rev. S. J. Perry makes mention[120] of patches of colour
even as bright as "brick red, almost orange in the brighter parts," and
this, 20 minutes before the total phase began. Mr. Perry conducted on
this occasion spectroscopic observations for the first time on an
eclipsed Moon, but no special results were obtained.

Various explanations have been offered for these diversities of
appearance. Undoubtedly they depend upon differences in the condition of
the Earth's atmosphere, such as the unusual presence or unusual absence
of aqueous vapour; but it cannot be said that the laws which control
these diversities are by any means capable of being plainly enunciated,
notwithstanding that the explanation generally in vogue dates from as
far back as the time of Kepler. He suggested that the coppery hue was a
result of the refraction of the Earth's atmosphere which had the effect
of bending the solar rays passing through it, so that they impinged upon
the Moon even when the Earth was actually interposed between the Sun and
the Moon. That the outstanding rays which became visible are red may be
considered due to the fact that the blue rays are absorbed in passing
through the terrestrial atmosphere, just as both the eastern and western
skies are frequently seen to assume a ruddy hue when illuminated in the
morning or evening by the solar rays at or near sunrise or sunset.

Owing to the variable meteorological condition of our atmosphere, the
actual quantity of light transmitted through it is liable to
considerable fluctuations, and no wonder therefore that variations occur
in the appearances presented by the Moon during her immersion in the
Earth's shadow.

It has been suggested that if the portion of the Earth's atmosphere
through which the Sun's rays have to pass is tolerably free from aqueous
vapour, the red rays will be almost wholly absorbed, but not the blue
rays; and the resulting illumination will either only render the Moon's
surface visible with a greyish blue tinge, or not visible at all. This
will yield the "black eclipse"--to recall the phrase quoted elsewhere.
If, on the other hand, the region of the Earth's atmosphere through
which the Sun's rays pass be highly saturated, it will be the blue rays
which suffer absorption, whilst the red rays will be transmitted and
will impart a ruddy hue to the Moon. Finally, if the Earth's atmosphere
is in a different condition in different places, saturated in some parts
and not in others, a piebald sort of effect will be the result, and some
portions of the Moon's disc will be invisible, whilst others will be
more or less illuminated. Further illustrations of all these three
alternatives will be found amongst the eclipses of the Moon recorded in
the chapter[121] devoted to historical matters.

A few instances are on record of a curious spectacle connected with
eclipses of the Moon which must have a word of mention. I refer to the
simultaneous visibility of the Sun and the Moon above the horizon, the
Moon at the time being eclipsed. At the first blush of the thing this
would seem to be an impossibility, remembering that it is a cardinal
principle of eclipses, both of the Sun and of the Moon, that the three
bodies must be in the same straight line in order to constitute an
eclipse. The anomalous spectacle just referred to is simply the result
of the refraction exercised by the Earth's atmosphere. The setting Sun
which has actually set has apparently not done so, but is displaced
upwards by refraction. On the other hand, the rising Moon which has not
actually risen is displaced upwards by refraction and so becomes, as it
were, prematurely visible. In other words, refraction retards the
apparent setting of one body, the Sun, and accelerates the apparent
rising of the other body, the Moon. The effect of these two
displacements will be to bring the two bodies closer by more than 1 deg. of
a great circle than they really are, this being the conjoint amount of
the double displacements due to refraction.

Amateur observers of eclipses of the Moon will find some pleasure, and
profit as well, in having before them on the occasion of an eclipse a
picture of the Moon's surface in diagrammatic form with a few of the
principal mountains marked thereon; and then watching from time to time
(say by quarters of an hour) the successive encroachments of the Earth's
shadow on the Moon's surface and the gradual covering up of the larger
mountains as the shadow moves forward. The curved lines represent the
gradual progress of the shadow during the eclipse named. This diagram,
ignoring the curved lines actually marked on it, may be used over and
over again for any number of eclipses, simply noting from the _Nautical
Almanac_ or other suitable ephemerides the points on the Moon's disc at
which the shadow first touches the disc as it comes on, and last touches
the disc as it goes off. The _Almanac_ indicates these points by
stating that the eclipse begins, or ends, as the case may be, at a point
which is so many degrees from the N. point of the Moon measured round
the Moon's circumference by the E. or by the W. as the case may be.

One other point and we have disposed of eclipses of the Moon. The shadow
which we see creeping over the Moon during an eclipse is, as we know,
the shadow cast by the Earth. If we notice it attentively we shall see
that its outline is curved, and that it is in fact a complete segment of
a circle. Moreover that the circularity of this shadow is maintained
from first to last so far as we are able to follow it. What is this,
then, but a proof of the rotundity of the earth? This shape of the
Earth's shadow on the Moon during a lunar eclipse was suggested as a
proof of the rotundity of the Earth by two old Greek astronomers,
Manilius and Cleomedes, who lived about 2000 years ago, and is one more
illustration of the great powers of observation and the general
acuteness of the natural philosophers of antiquity.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 112: The time occupied by the Moon in passing through the
    penumbra, before and after a lunar eclipse, will generally run to
    about an hour for each passage. It will occasionally happen that the
    Moon gets immersed in a penumbra but escapes the dark shadow. Such
    an event will not be announced in the almanacs under the head of
    "Eclipses."]

    [Footnote 113: See p. 197 (_post_).]

    [Footnote 114: The shadow is spoken of as being in the form of a
    cone because it is necessarily such on account of the light-giving
    disc of the Sun being so enormously larger in diameter than the
    light-receiving sphere of the Moon. This idea can be pursued by any
    reader with the aid of a lamp enclosed in a glass globe and an
    opaque sphere such as a cricket ball.]

    [Footnote 115: See p. 19 (_ante_).]

    [Footnote 116: As to occultations see chap. xxi. (_post_).]

    [Footnote 117: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. viii. p. 132. March,
    1848.]

    [Footnote 118: A very striking chromolithograph of the lunar
    eclipses of Oct. 4, 1884, and Jan. 28, 1888, showing the contrast
    of--(1) an almost invisible grey Moon, and (2) a reddish-pink Moon,
    will be found in the German astronomical monthly, _Sirius_, vol.
    xxi. p. 241. Nov. 1888.]

    [Footnote 119: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xlv. p. 35.]

    [Footnote 120: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xlviii. p. 227. March
    1888.]

    [Footnote 121: p. 197 (_post_).]




                             CHAPTER XVI.

              ECLIPSES OF THE MOON MENTIONED IN HISTORY.


We saw in a previous chapter that we owe to the Chinese the first record
of an eclipse of the Sun. It must now be stated that the same remark
applies to the first recorded eclipse of the Moon, and Prof. S. M.
Russell is again our authority. He refers to a book called the
_Chou-Shu_ or book of the Chou Dynasty, said to have been found in 280
A.D. in the tomb of an Emperor who lived many centuries previously. In
this book it is stated that in the 35th year of Wen-Wang on the day
Ping-Tzu there was an eclipse of the Moon. Russell finds that this event
may be assigned to January 29, 1136 B.C., and that the eclipse was
total.

Next after this Chinese eclipse, in point of time, come several eclipses
recorded by Ptolemy, on the authority of records collected or examined
by himself. The three earliest of these came from Chaldaean sources.

The first of these eclipses was observed at Babylon, in the 27th year of
the era of Nabonassar, the 1st of the reign of Mardokempadius, on the
29th of the Egyptian month Thoth, answering to March 19, 721 B.C. The
eclipse began before moonrise, and the middle of the totality appears to
have occurred at 9h. 30m. p.m. The other two eclipses, also observed at
Babylon, occurred on March 8, 720 B.C., and September 1, in the same
year, respectively.

Three other lunar eclipses, recorded by Ptolemy, assisted Sir I. Newton
in fixing the _Terminus a quo_ from which the "70 weeks" of years were
to run which the prophet Daniel[122] predicted were to elapse before the
death of Christ. This _Terminus a quo_ dates from the Restoration of the
Jews under Artaxerxes, 457 B.C. The three eclipses which Newton made
use of were those of July 16, 523, November 19, 502, and April 25, 491
B.C.

Aristophanes, in "The Clouds" (lines 561-66), makes an allusion to which
has been supposed (but probably without adequate warrant, in Spanheim's
opinion), to refer to an eclipse of the Moon. The eclipse, October 9,
425 B.C., has, moreover, been suggested as that referred to, but the
whole idea seems to me too shadowy.

An eclipse of the Moon took place in the 4th year of the 91st Olympiad,
answering to August 27, 413 B.C., which produced very disastrous
consequences to an Athenian army, owing to the ignorance and incapacity
of Nicias, the commander. The army was in Sicily, confronted by a
Syracusan army, and having failed, more or less, and sickness having
broken out, it was decided that the Athenians should embark and quit the
island. Plutarch, in his _Life of Nicias_, says:--"Everything accordingly
was prepared for embarkation, and the enemy paid no attention to these
movements, because they did not expect them. But in the night there
happened an eclipse of the Moon, at which Nicias and all the rest were
struck with a great panic, either through ignorance or superstition. As
for an eclipse of the Sun, which happens at the Conjunction, even the
common people had some idea of its being caused by the interposition of
the Moon; but they could not easily form a conception, by the
interposition of what body the Moon, when at the full, should suddenly
lose her light, and assume such a variety of colours. They looked upon
it therefore as a strange and preternatural phenomenon, a sign by which
the gods announced some great calamity." And the calamity came to pass,
but only indirectly was it caused by the Moon!

Plutarch and Pliny both mention that eleven days before the victory of
Alexander over Darius, at Arbela in Assyria, there was an eclipse of the
Moon. Plutarch's words (_Life of Alexander_) are, that "there happened
an eclipse of the Moon, about the beginning of the festival of the great
mysteries at Athens. The eleventh night after that eclipse, the two
armies being in view of each other, Darius kept his men under arms, and
took a general review of his troops by torch-light." This seems to have
led to a great deal of disorderly tumult in the Assyrian camp, a fact
which was noticed by Alexander. Several of his friends urged him to make
a night attack on the enemy's camp, but he preferred that his
Macedonians should have a good night's rest, and it was then that he
uttered the celebrated answer, "I will not steal a victory." Plutarch
enters upon some rather interesting moral reflections connected with
this answer, but which of course are foreign to the subject of this
volume. This eclipse happened on September 20, 331 B.C., and was total,
the middle of the eclipse being at about 8.15 p.m. It follows therefore,
that the celebrated battle of Arbela was fought on October 1, 331 B.C.

In 219 B.C. an eclipse of the Moon was seen in Mysia, according to
Polybius.[123] The date of September 1 has been assigned for this
eclipse which is said to have so greatly alarmed some Gaulish Mercenary
troops in the service of Attalus, King of Pergamos, that he had to get
rid of them as soon as he could--make terms with them to go home.

On the eve of the battle of Pydna when Perseus, King of Macedonia, was
conquered by Paulus AEmilius, there happened an eclipse of the Moon.
Plutarch in his _Life of Paulus AEmilius_, speaking of his army having
settled down in a camp, says:--"When they had supped and were thinking of
nothing but going to rest, on a sudden the Moon, which was then at full
and very high, began to be darkened, and after changing into various
colours, was at last totally eclipsed. The Romans, according to their
custom, made a great noise by striking upon vessels of brass and held up
lighted faggots and torches in the air in order to recall her light; but
the Macedonians did no such thing; horror and astonishment seized their
whole camp, and a whisper passed among the multitude that this
appearance portended the fall of the king. As for AEmilius, he was not
entirely unacquainted with this matter; he had heard of the ecliptic
inequalities which bring the Moon at certain periods under the shadow of
the Earth and darken her till she has passed that quarter of obscurity
and receives light from the Sun again. Nevertheless, as he was wont to
ascribe most events to the Deity, was a religious observer of sacrifices
and of the art of divination, he offered up to the Moon 11 heifers as
soon as he saw her regain her former lustre. At break of day he also
