"We must keep on our work clothes, for our life is not done; but your
clothes are for holiday, because your tasks are over."

Just then, a little puff of wind came, and the leaf let go without
thinking of it, and the wind took it up, and turned it over and over,
and whirled it like a spark of fire in the air and then it fell gently
down under the edge of the fence among hundreds of leaves, and fell into
a dream and never waked up to tell what it dreamed about!



250

        Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), more than any
        other American, has emphasized for us the value
        of proverbial sayings and the significance of
        the symbolic story. This account of how one may
        pay too much for a whistle was written in 1779
        while Franklin was representing the colonies at
        Paris, and addressed to his friend Madame
        Brillon. The making of apologues seemed to be a
        favorite sort of game in the circle in which
        Franklin moved, and his plain common sense is
        always uppermost in whatever he produces. The
        lesson of the whistle is always needed; we are
        prone to put aside the essential thing for the
        temporary and showy. More than a century ago
        Noah Webster put this story in his
        school-reader, and most school-readers since
        have contained it. The selection is here
        reprinted complete. Teachers usually omit some
        of the opening and closing paragraphs.


THE WHISTLE

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

I am charmed with your description of Paradise, and with your plan of
living there; and I approve much of your conclusion, that, in the mean
time, we should draw all the good we can from this world. In my opinion,
we might all draw more good than we do, and suffer less evil, if we
would take care not to give too much for _whistles_. For to me it seems
that most of the unhappy people we meet with are become so by neglect of
that caution.

You ask what I mean? You love stories, and will excuse my telling one of
myself.

When I was a child of seven years old, my friends, on a holiday, filled
my pockets with coppers. I went directly to a shop where they sold toys
for children; and being charmed with the sound of a _whistle_, that I
met by the way in the hands of another boy, I voluntarily offered and
gave all my money for one. I then came home, and went whistling all over
the house, much pleased with my _whistle_, but disturbing all the
family. My brothers, and sisters, and cousins, understanding the bargain
I had made, told me I had given four times as much for it as it was
worth; put me in mind what good things I might have bought with the rest
of the money; and laughed at me so much for my folly, that I cried with
vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the _whistle_
gave me pleasure.

This, however, was afterward of use to me, the impression continuing on
my mind; so that often, when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary
thing, I said to myself, _Don't give too much for the whistle_; and I
saved my money.

As I grew up I thought I met with many, very many, who _gave too much
for the whistle_.

When I saw one too ambitious of court favor, sacrificing his time, his
repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps his friends, to attain it,
I have said to myself, _This man gives too much for his whistle._

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself in
political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by that
neglect, _He pays, indeed_, said I, _too much for his whistle._

If I knew a miser, who gave up every kind of comfortable living, all the
pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his fellow-citizens,
and the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake of accumulating
wealth, _Poor man_, said I, _you pay too much for your whistle._

When I met with a man of pleasure, sacrificing every laudable
improvement of the mind, or of his fortune, to mere corporal sensations,
and ruining his health in their pursuit, _Mistaken man_, said I, _you
are providing pain for yourself, instead of pleasure; you give too much
for your whistle._

If I see one fond of appearance, or fine clothes, fine houses, fine
furniture, fine equipages, all above his fortune, for which he contracts
debts, and ends his career in a prison, _Alas!_ say I, _he has paid
dear, very dear, for his whistle._

When I see a beautiful, sweet-tempered girl married to an ill-natured
brute of a husband, _What a pity_, say I, _that she should pay so much
for a whistle!_

In short, I conceive that great part of the miseries of mankind are
brought upon them by the false estimates they have made of the value of
things, and by their _giving too much for their whistles_.

Yet I ought to have charity for these unhappy people, when I consider
that, with all this wisdom of which I am boasting, there are certain
things in the world so tempting, for example, the apples of King John,
which happily are not to be bought; for if they were put to sale by
auction, I might very easily be led to ruin myself in the purchase, and
find that I had once more given too much for the _whistle_.



251

        "The Ephemera" was also addressed to Madame
        Brillon, the "amiable Brillante" of the final
        sentence. It is an allegorical story
        emphasizing the relative shortness of human
        life. Franklin's "Alas! art is long and life is
        short!" anticipates Longfellow's "Art is long
        and time is fleeting." But hundreds of writers
        had preceded both of them in calling attention
        to this at the same time commonplace and
        significant fact. At the end, Franklin's quiet
        acceptance of the rather gloomy outlook
        suggested by the ephemeral nature of life is
        noteworthy, and is characteristic of his
        general temper.


THE EPHEMERA

_An Emblem of Human Life_

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

You may remember, my dear friend, that when we lately spent that happy
day in the delightful garden and sweet society of the Moulin Joly, I
stopped a little in one of our walks, and stayed some time behind the
company. We had been shown numberless skeletons of a kind of little fly,
called an ephemera, whose successive generations, we were told, were
bred and expired within the day. I happened to see a living company of
them on a leaf, who appeared to be engaged in conversation. You know I
understand all the inferior animal tongues. My too great application to
the study of them is the best excuse I can give for the little progress
I have made in your charming language. I listened through curiosity to
the discourse of these little creatures; but as they, in their national
vivacity, spoke three or four together, I could make but little of their
conversation. I found, however, by some broken expressions that I heard
now and then, they were disputing warmly on the merit of two foreign
musicians, one a _cousin_, the other a _moscheto_; in which dispute they
spent their time, seemingly as regardless of the shortness of life as if
they had been sure of living a month. Happy people! thought I; you live
certainly under a wise, just, and mild government, since you have no
public grievances to complain of, nor any subject of contention but the
perfections and imperfections of foreign music. I turned my head from
them to an old grey-headed one, who was single on another leaf, and
talking to himself. Being amused with his soliloquy, I put it down in
writing, in hopes it will likewise amuse her to whom I am so much
indebted for the most pleasing of all amusements, her delicious company
and heavenly harmony.

"It was," said he, "the opinion of learned philosophers of our race, who
lived and flourished long before my time, that this vast world, the
Moulin Joly, could not itself subsist more than eighteen hours; and I
think there was some foundation for that opinion, since, by the apparent
motion of the great luminary that gives life to all nature, and which in
my time has evidently declined considerably towards the ocean at the end
of our earth, it must then finish its course, be extinguished in the
waters that surround us, and leave the world in cold and darkness,
necessarily producing universal death and destruction. I have lived
seven of those hours, a great age, being no less than four hundred and
twenty minutes of time. How very few of us continue so long! I have seen
generations born, flourish, and expire. My present friends are the
children and grandchildren of the friends of my youth, who are now,
also, no more! And I must soon follow them; for, by the course of
nature, though still in health, I cannot expect to live above seven or
eight minutes longer. What now avails all my toil and labor in amassing
honey-dew on this leaf, which I cannot live to enjoy! What the political
struggles I have been engaged in, for the good of my compatriot
inhabitants of this bush, or my philosophical studies for the benefit of
our race in general! for, in politics, what can laws do without morals?
Our present race of ephemerae will in a course of minutes become
corrupt, like those of other and older bushes, and consequently as
wretched. And in philosophy how small is our progress! Alas! art is
long, and life is short! My friends would comfort me with the idea of a
name, they say, I shall leave behind me; and they tell me I have lived
long enough to nature and to glory. But what will fame be to an ephemera
who no longer exists? And what will become of all history in the
eighteenth hour, when the world itself, even the whole Moulin Joly,
shall come to its end, and be buried in universal ruin?"

To me, after all my eager pursuits, no solid pleasures now remain, but
the reflection of a long life spent in meaning well, the sensible
conversation of a few good lady ephemerae, and now and then a kind smile
and a tune from the ever amiable _Brillante_.



252

        The brief allegory that follows is very
        generally regarded as the finest and noblest
        specimen of its type. It is here reprinted
        approximately in the form of its first
        appearance, now more than two hundred years
        ago, as more in keeping with its spirit than a
        modern dress would be. The world of recent
        times is not so much given to this kind of
        writing as the eighteenth century was. Like
        Franklin's "Ephemera," Addison's vision grows
        out of "profound contemplation on the vanity of
        human life." The key to the symbolism is found
        in the "threescore and ten arches" of the
        bridge, representing the scriptural limit of
        physical existence, with some broken arches for
        any excess of that limit. The fact that "the
        bridge consisted at first of a thousand arches"
        is a reference to the great number of years
        assigned to some of the patriarchs. The
        splendid concluding vision in which Mirzah sees
        the compensations for the ills of this life
        suggests a very different type of mind from
        that of the "this-worldly" closing paragraph in
        Franklin's apologue. "The Vision of Mirzah" is
        No. 159 of the _Spectator_ (September 1, 1711).


THE VISION OF MIRZAH

JOSEPH ADDISON

When I was at Grand Cairo I picked up several oriental manuscripts,
which I have still by me. Among others I met with one entitled The
Visions of Mirzah, which I have read over with great pleasure. I intend
to give it to the public when I have no other entertainment for them;
and I shall begin with the first vision, which I have translated word
for word as follows:

On the fifth day of the moon, which according to the custom of my
forefathers I always kept holy, after having washed myself, and offered
up my morning devotions, I ascended the high hills of Bagdat, in order
to pass the rest of the day in meditation and prayer. As I was here
airing myself on the tops of the mountains, I fell into profound
contemplation on the vanity of human life; and passing from one thought
to another, surely, said I, man is but a shadow and life a dream. Whilst
I was thus musing, I cast my eyes towards the summit of a rock that was
not far from me, where I discovered one in the habit of a shepherd, with
a musical instrument in his hand. As I looked upon him he applied it to
his lips, and began to play upon it. The sound of it was exceeding
sweet, and wrought into a variety of tunes that were inexpressibly
melodious, and altogether different from anything I had ever heard. They
put me in mind of those heavenly airs that are played to the departed
souls of good men upon their first arrival in paradise to wear out the
impressions of their last agonies, and qualify them for the pleasures of
that happy place. My heart melted away in secret raptures.

I had been often told that the rock before me was the haunt of a genius;
and that several had been entertained with music who had passed by it,
but never heard that the musician had before made himself visible. When
he had raised my thoughts by those transporting airs which he played, to
taste the pleasure of his conversation, as I looked upon him like one
astonished, he beckoned to me, and by the waving of his hand directed me
to approach the place where he sat. I drew near with that reverence
which is due to a superior nature: and as my heart was entirely subdued
by the captivating strains I had heard, I fell down at his feet and
wept. The genius smiled upon me with a look of compassion and affability
that familiarized him to my imagination, and at once dispelled all the
fears and apprehensions with which I approached him. He lifted me from
the ground, and taking me by the hand, Mirzah, said he, I have heard
thee in thy soliloquies: follow me.

He then led me to the highest pinnacle of the rock, and placed me on the
top of it. Cast thy eyes eastward, said he, and tell me what thou seest.
I see, said I, a huge valley and a prodigious tide of water rolling
through it. The valley that thou seest, said he, is the vale of misery,
and the tide of water that thou seest is part of the great tide of
eternity. What is the reason, said I, that the tide I see rises out of a
thick mist at one end, and again loses itself in a thick mist at the
other? What thou seest, says he, is that portion of eternity which is
called time, measured out by the sun, and reaching from the beginning of
the world to its consummation. Examine now, said he, this sea that is
thus bounded with darkness at both ends, and tell me what thou
discoverest in it. I see a bridge, said I, standing in the midst of the
tide. The bridge thou seest, said he, is human life; consider it
attentively. Upon a more leisurely survey of it, I found that it
consisted of threescore and ten entire arches, with several broken
arches, which added to those that were entire, made up the number about
an hundred. As I was counting the arches the genius told me that the
bridge consisted at first of a thousand arches; but that a great flood
swept away the rest, and left the bridge in the ruinous condition I now
beheld it. But tell me further, said he, what thou discoverest on it. I
see multitudes of people passing over it, said I, and a black cloud
hanging on each end of it. As I looked more attentively, I saw several
of the passengers dropping through the bridge, into the great tide that
flowed underneath it; and upon further examination, perceived there were
innumerable trap-doors that lay concealed in the bridge which the
passengers no sooner trod upon, but they fell through them into the tide
and immediately disappeared. These hidden pit-falls were set very thick
at the entrance of the bridge, so that the throngs of people no sooner
broke through the cloud, but many of them fell into them. They grew
thinner towards the middle, but multiplied and lay closer together
towards the end of the arches that were entire.

There were indeed some persons, but their number was very small, that
continued a kind of hobbling march on the broken arches, but fell
through one after another, being quite tired and spent with so long a
walk.

I passed some time in the contemplation of this wonderful structure, and
the great variety of objects which it presented. My heart was filled
with a deep melancholy to see several dropping unexpectedly in the midst
of mirth and jollity, and catching at everything that stood by them to
save themselves. Some were looking up towards the heavens in a
thoughtful posture, and in the midst of a speculation stumbled and fell
out of sight. Multitudes were very busy in the pursuit of baubles that
glittered in their eyes and danced before them, but often when they
thought themselves within the reach of them, their footing failed and
down they sank. In this confusion of objects, I observed some with
scimetars in their hands, who ran to and fro upon the bridge, thrusting
several persons upon trap-doors which did not seem to lie in their way,
and which they might have escaped, had they not been thus forced upon
them.

The genius seeing me indulge myself in this melancholy prospect, told me
I had dwelt long enough upon it: take thine eyes off the bridge, said
he, and tell me if thou seest anything thou dost not comprehend. Upon
looking up, what mean, said I, those great flights of birds that are
perpetually hovering about the bridge, and settling upon it from time to
time? I see vultures, harpies, ravens, cormorants, and among many other
feathered creatures several little winged boys, that perch in great
numbers upon the middle arches. These, said the genius, are envy,
avarice, superstition, despair, love, with the like cares and passions
that infect human life.

I here fetched a deep sigh; alas, said I, man was made in vain! How is
he given away to misery and mortality! tortured in life, and swallowed
up in death! The genius, being moved with compassion towards me, bid me
quit so uncomfortable a prospect. Look no more, said he, on a man in the
first stage of his existence, in his setting out for eternity; but cast
thine eye on that thick mist into which the tide bears the several
generations of mortals that fall into it. I directed my sight as was
ordered, and (whether or no the good genius strengthened it with any
supernatural force, or dissipated part of the mist that was before too
thick for the eye to penetrate) I saw the valley opening at the farther
end, and spreading forth into an immense ocean that had a huge rock of
adamant running through the midst of it, and dividing it into two equal
parts. The clouds still rested on one-half of it, insomuch that I could
discover nothing in it; but the other appeared to me a vast ocean
planted with innumerable islands, that were covered with fruits and
flowers, and interwoven with a thousand little shining seas that ran
among them. I could see persons dressed in glorious habits with garlands
upon their heads, passing among the trees, lying down by the sides of
the fountains, or resting on beds of flowers; and could hear a confused
harmony of singing birds, falling waters, human voices, and musical
instruments. Gladness grew in me upon the discovery of so delightful a
scene. I wished for the wings of an eagle, that I might fly away to
those happy seats; but the genius told me there was no passage to them
except through the gates of death that I saw opening every moment upon
the bridge. The islands, said he, that lie so fresh and green before
thee, and with which the whole face of the ocean appears spotted as far
as thou canst see, are more in number than the sands of the sea-shore;
there are myriads of islands behind those which thou here discoverest,
reaching farther than thy eyes, or even than thine imagination, can
extend itself. These are the mansions of good men after death, who,
according to the degree and kinds of virtue in which they excelled, are
distributed among these several islands, which abound with pleasures of
different kinds and degrees, suitable to the relishes and perfections of
those who are settled in them; every island is a paradise, accommodated
to its respective inhabitants. Are not these, O Mirzah, habitations
worth contending for? Does life appear miserable that gives the
opportunities of earning such a reward? Is death to be feared that will
convey thee to so happy an existence? Think not a man was made in vain
who has such an eternity reserved for him. I gazed with inexpressible
pleasure on these happy islands. At length, said I, Show me now, I
beseech thee, the secrets that lie hid under those dark clouds which
cover the ocean on the other side of the rock of adamant. The genius
making me no answer, I turned about to address myself to him a second
time, but I found that he had left me. I then turned again to the vision
which I had been so long contemplating, but, instead of the rolling
tide, the arched bridge, and the happy islands, I saw nothing but the
long hollow valley of Bagdat, with oxen, sheep, and camels grazing upon
the sides of it.



253

        "The Discontented Pendulum" was one of
        seventy-nine brief prose selections by Jane
        Taylor (1783-1824) which appeared first in a
        paper for young people and were, after the
        author's death, gathered together and published
        as _Contributions of Q. Q._ (1826). This one
        selection only from that volume still lives, is
        reprinted often in school-readers, and by
        virtue of its cleverness and point deserves its
        happy fate. The author attached to it a "Moral"
        almost as long as the story itself, and that
        has long since fallen by the wayside. Perhaps
        that is because the story is too clear to need
        the "Moral." Here are a few sentences from it:
        "The _present_ is all we have to manage: the
        past is irrecoverable; the future is uncertain;
        nor is it fair to burden one moment with the
        weight of the next. Sufficient unto the
        _moment_ is the trouble thereof. . . . One moment
        comes laden with its own _little_ burden, then
        flies, and is succeeded by another no heavier
        than the last; if _one_ could be sustained, so
        can another, and another. . . . Let any one
        resolve to do right _now_, leaving _then_ to do
        as it can, and if he were to live to the age of
        Methuselah, he would never err. . . . Let us then,
        'whatever our hands find to do, do it with all
        our might, recollecting that _now_ is the
        proper and the accepted time.'"


THE DISCONTENTED PENDULUM

JANE TAYLOR

An old clock that had stood for fifty years in a farmer's kitchen
without giving its owner any cause of complaint, early one summer's
morning, before the family was stirring, suddenly stopped.

Upon this, the dial-plate (if we may credit the fable) changed
countenance with alarm: the hands made an ineffectual effort to continue
their course; the wheels remained motionless with surprise; the weights
hung speechless; each member felt disposed to lay the blame on the
others. At length the dial instituted a formal inquiry as to the cause
of the stagnation; when hands, wheels, weights, with one voice,
protested their innocence. But now a faint tick was heard below, from
the pendulum, who thus spoke:

"I confess myself to be the sole cause of the present stoppage; and am
willing, for the general satisfaction, to assign my reasons. The truth
is that I am tired of ticking." Upon hearing this, the old clock became
so enraged that it was on the point of _striking_.

"Lazy wire!" exclaimed the dial-plate, holding up its hands.

"Very good!" replied the pendulum, "it is vastly easy for you, Mistress
Dial, who have always, as everybody knows, set yourself up above me--it
is vastly easy for you, I say, to accuse other people of laziness! You,
who have had nothing to do all the days of your life but to stare people
in the face, and to amuse yourself with watching all that goes on in the
kitchen! Think, I beseech you, how you would like to be shut up for life
in this dark closet, and wag backwards and forwards, year after year, as
I do."

"As to that," said the dial, "is there not a window in your house on
purpose for you to look through?"

"For all that," resumed the pendulum, "it is very dark here; and
although there is a window, I dare not stop, even for an instant, to
look out. Besides, I am really weary of my way of life; and if you
please, I'll tell you how I took this disgust at my employment. This
morning I happened to be calculating how many times I should have to
tick in the course only of the next twenty-four hours: perhaps some of
you, above there, can give me the exact sum."

The minute hand, being _quick at figures_, instantly replied,
"Eighty-six thousand four hundred times."

"Exactly so," replied the pendulum: "well, I appeal to you all, if the
thought of this was not enough to fatigue one? And when I began to
multiply the stroke of one day by those of months and years, really it
is no wonder if I felt discouraged at the prospect; so after a great
deal of reasoning and hesitation, thinks I to myself--I'll stop."

The dial could scarcely keep its countenance during this harangue; but,
resuming its gravity, thus replied:

"Dear Mr. Pendulum, I am really astonished that such a useful,
industrious person as yourself should have been overcome by this sudden
suggestion. It is true you have done a great deal of work in your time.
So we have all, and are likely to do; and although this may fatigue us
to _think_ of, the question is, whether it it will fatigue us to _do_:
would you now do me the favor to give about half a dozen strokes to
illustrate my argument?"

The pendulum complied, and ticked six times at its usual pace. "Now,"
resumed the dial, "may I be allowed to inquire if that exertion was at
all fatiguing or disagreeable to you?"

"Not in the least," replied the pendulum;--"It is not of six strokes
that I complain, nor of sixty, but of _millions_."

"Very good," replied the dial, "but recollect that although you may
_think_ of a million strokes in an instant, you are required to
_execute_ but one; and that however often you may hereafter have to
swing, a moment will always be given you to swing in."

"That consideration staggers me, I confess," said the pendulum.

"Then I hope," resumed the dial-plate, "we shall all immediately return
to our duty; for the maids will lie in bed till noon if we stand idling
thus."

Upon this, the weights, who had never been accused of _light_ conduct,
used all their influence in urging him to proceed; when, as with one
consent, the wheels began to turn, the hands began to move, the pendulum
began to wag, and, to its credit, ticked as loud as ever; while a beam
of the rising sun that streamed through a hole in the kitchen shutter,
shining full upon the dial-plate, it brightened up as if nothing had
been the matter.

When the farmer came down to breakfast that morning, upon looking at the
clock he declared that his watch had gained half an hour in the night.



254

        Count Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910) was a Russian
        novelist, poet, and social reformer; author,
        among other important works, of _War and Peace_
        and _Anna Karenina_. He wrote many short
        stories and sketches, a number of which are
        markedly symbolic in character. The one that
        follows is a good illustration of a type of
        such tales pleasing to modern minds. We no
        longer produce the formal fable or allegory. In
        Tolstoy's story are two historical characters
        of so pronounced individuality that their names
        always suggest definite ideas--Croesus, riches
        and worldly greatness; Solon, wisdom and
        worldly poverty and lowliness. These ideas are
        brought into conflict, and the outcome allows
        us to see which is the basic one in Tolstoy's
        theory of life. Who is the happy warrior? One
        would merely have to quote some words from the
        story to have an answer. And if the reader
        feels the force of the answer, as Tolstoy
        evidently hoped he would, it means a new or at
        least a more distinctly held ideal of living.


CROESUS AND SOLON

LEO TOLSTOY

In olden times--long, long before the coming of Christ--there reigned
over a certain country a great king called Croesus. He had much gold and
silver, and many precious stones, as well as numberless soldiers and
slaves. Indeed, he thought that in all the world there could be no
happier man than himself.

But one day there chanced to visit the country which Croesus ruled a
Greek philosopher named Solon. Far and wide was Solon famed as a wise
man and a just; and, inasmuch as his fame had reached Croesus also, the
king commanded that he should be conducted to his presence.

Seated upon his throne, and robed in his most gorgeous apparel, Croesus
asked of Solon: "Have you ever seen aught more splendid than this?"

"Of a surety have I," replied Solon. "Peacocks, cocks, and pheasants
glitter with colors so diverse and so brilliant that no art can compare
with them."

Croesus was silent as he thought to himself: "Since this is not enough,
I must show him something more, to surprise him."

So he exhibited the whole of his riches before Solon's eyes, as well as
boasted of the number of foes he had slain, and the number of
territories he had conquered. Then he said to the philosopher:

"You have lived long in the world, and have visited many countries. Tell
me whom you consider to be the happiest man living?"

"The happiest man living I consider to be a certain poor man who lives
in Athens," replied Solon.

The king was surprised at this answer, for he had made certain that
Solon would name him himself; yet, for all that, the philosopher had
named a perfectly obscure individual!

"Why do you say that?" asked Croesus.

"Because," replied Solon, "the man of whom I speak has worked hard all
his life, has been content with little, has reared fine children, has
served his city honorably, and has achieved a noble reputation."

When Croesus heard this he exclaimed:

"And do you reckon my happiness as nothing, and consider that I am not
fit to be compared with the man of whom you speak?"

To this Solon replied:

"Often it befalls that a poor man is happier than a rich man. Call no
man happy until he is dead."

The king dismissed Solon, for he was not pleased at his words, and had
no belief in him.

"A fig for melancholy!" he thought. "While a man lives he should live
for pleasure."

So he forgot about Solon entirely.

Not long afterwards the king's son went hunting, but wounded himself by
a mischance, and died of the wound. Next, it was told to Croesus that
the powerful Emperor Cyrus was coming to make war upon him.

So Croesus went out against Cyrus with a great army, but the enemy
proved the stronger, and, having won the battle and shattered Croesus'
forces, penetrated to the capital.

Then the foreign soldiers began to pillage all King Croesus' riches, and
to slay the inhabitants, and to sack and fire the city. One soldier
seized Croesus himself, and was just about to stab him, when the king's
son darted forward to defend his father, and cried aloud:

"Do not touch him! That is Croesus, the king!"

So the soldiers bound Croesus, and carried him away to the Emperor; but
Cyrus was celebrating his victory at a banquet, and could not speak with
the captive, so orders were sent out for Croesus to be executed.

In the middle of the city square the soldiers built a great
burning-pile, and upon the top of it they placed King Croesus, bound him
to a stake, and set fire to the pile.

Croesus gazed around him, upon his city and upon his palace. Then he
remembered the words of the Greek philosopher, and, bursting into tears,
could only say:

"Ah, Solon, Solon!"

The soldiers were closing in about the pile when the Emperor Cyrus
arrived in person to view the execution. As he did so he caught these
words uttered by Croesus, but could not understand them.

So he commanded Croesus to be taken from the pile, and inquired of him
what he had just said. Croesus answered:

"I was but naming the name of a wise man--of one who told me a great
truth--a truth that is of greater worth than all earthly riches, than
all our kingly glory."

And Croesus related to Cyrus his conversation with Solon. The story
touched the heart of the Emperor, for he bethought him that he too was
but a man, that he too knew not what Fate might have in store for him.
So in the end he had mercy upon Croesus, and became his friend.




SECTION VI

MYTHS




BIBLIOGRAPHY


I. GENERAL HANDBOOKS

  Bulfinch, Thomas, _Mythology: The Age of Fable_.

  Gayley, Charles Mills, _Classic Myths in English Literature and
      in Art_.


II. GREEK AND ROMAN

  Baker, Emilie Kip, _Stories of Old Greece and Rome_.

  Baldwin, James, _Old Greek Stories_.

  Francillon, R. E., _Gods and Heroes, or the Kingdom of Jupiter_.

  Guerber, H. A., _Myths of Greece and Rome_.

  Hawthorne, Nathaniel, _A Wonder-Book for Boys and Girls_.

  Hawthorne, Nathaniel, _Tanglewood Tales: A Second Wonder-Book_.

  Kingsley, Charles, _Greek Heroes_.

  Kupfer, Grace H., _Stories of Long Ago_.

  Peabody, Josephine P., _Old Greek Folk Stories_.


III. NORTHERN MYTHS

  Anderson, R. B., _Norse Mythology, or The Religion of Our
      Forefathers_.

  Baker, Emilie Kip, _Stories of Northern Myths_.

  Boult, Katherine F., _Heroes of the Northland_.

  Brown, Abbie Farwell, _In the Days of the Giants_.

  Colum, Padraic, _The Children of Odin_.

  Guerber, H. A., _Myths of Northern Lands_.

  Keary, Anna and Eliza, _The Heroes of Asgard_.

  Mabie, Hamilton Wright, _Norse Stories_.

  Wilmot-Buxton, E. M., _Stories of Norse Heroes_.



IV. NATURE MYTHS ("POURQUOI" STORIES)

  Cook, Flora J., _Nature Myths_.

  Holbrook, Florence, _The Book of Nature Myths_.


V. CRITICAL WORKS

  Cox, Sir G. W., _Mythology of the Aryan Nations_. 2 vols.

  Fiske, John, _Myths and Myth-Makers_.

  Frazer, J. G., _The Golden Bough_. 12 vols.

  Hartland, E. S., _The Legend of Perseus_. 3 vols.

  Lang, Andrew, _Myth, Ritual, and Religion_. 2 vols.

  Mueller, Max, _Contributions to the Science of Mythology_.

  Ruskin, John, _Athena, Queen of the Air_.

  Spencer, Herbert, _Principles of Sociology_.

  Tylor, E. B., _Primitive Culture_. 2 vols.



SECTION VI. MYTHS

INTRODUCTORY


_What myths are._ It seems that every race of people in the period of
barbarism and early civilization has created fanciful, childlike stories
to explain such things as the origin of earth, sun, stars, clouds, life,
death, fire, man, lower animals, and plants, and the characteristics of
particular plants and animals. In most cases, if not all, they have
accounted for the origin of such things by the theory that they were
created by gods and super-human heroes. Among such peoples as the Greek
and Norse folk, many stories also grew up regarding the gods and
super-human heroes and their relations with one another and with men.
All of these old stories about the creation of things and about the gods
and super-human heroes are called myths. As time went on and the peoples
became civilized, the original myths were regarded merely as fanciful
tales, and were used to furnish characters and plots for many stories
told chiefly for entertainment. Often, as in the story of Ulysses,
legends of national heroes were combined with them. Even in our time
such writers as Hawthorne and Kingsley and Lowell have used these old
characters and plots as the basis of stories, many of which differ
greatly from the original myths.

_Myths and other folk stories._ Myths were pretty largely matters of
faith to begin with. They were the basis of old-time religious beliefs,
explaining to the mind of primitive man how things came to be as they
are. This tendency to adopt what are to educated minds fanciful
explanations of all that is beyond their understanding is easily
observable in the way children explain the unknown. It seems fairly
clear, on the other hand, that fairy stories were told by the folk as
matter of entertainment. They did not believe that pigs actually talked,
that a princess could sleep a hundred years, that a bean-stalk could
grow as fast and as far as Jack's did, or that toads and diamonds could
actually come out of one's mouth. It may be, as some theorists insist,
that remains of myth survive in some of these fairy stories. On the
whole, however, the folk believed these tales only in the sense in which
we believe in a fine story such as "The Vision of Sir Launfal" or "Enoch
Arden." They express the pleasing imaginings and longings of the human
spirit, its ideals of character and conduct, its sense of the wonder and
mystery of the universe. The fairy tale, in general, is nearer the
surface of life; the myth was concerned with the most fundamental
problems of the _whence_ and the _why_ of things.

Such distinctions, however, belong to the realm of scientific
scholarship. The teacher is concerned with myths simply as splendid
stories that have come down to us from a time when human beings seemed
to feel themselves bound into a unity with nature and all mysterious
powers around them; stories that through constant repetition were
rounded and perfected, and finally, through use by the poets, have
reached us in a fairly systematic form. The so-called "poetic mythology"
is the one of special value for our purposes. It comes to us through
Ovid in the South, and does not distinguish between the gods of Greece
and Rome. It comes through the Eddas of the North. It is this poetic
mythology that furnishes the basis of allusion in literature and in art,
and which is retold for us in the various versions for modern readers.
If we hold fast to this correct idea that as teachers in elementary
schools our interest in myths is exactly like our interest in other folk
products, an interest in them as stories tested by the ages, an interest
in them as presenting familiar and suggestive types of character and
conduct, an interest in them as stimulating our sense of wonder and
mystery, we shall not be disturbed by the violent discussions that
sometimes rage over the advisability of using myths with children.

_Values of myth._ To make the above proposition as clear as possible,
let us first tabulate briefly the values of myth, borrowing a suggestion
from Jeremiah Curtin:

        1. A wonderful story told in most effective
        fashion. To realize this value, one needs to
        recall only the efforts of Prometheus in
        bringing down fire for man and his heroic
        endurance of vengeful tyranny as a result. The
        work of Hercules in slaying the many-headed
        serpent or in cleansing the Augean stables, the
        adventures of Theseus culminating in the
        labyrinth of the horrible Minotaur, the
        beautiful hospitality of Baucis and Philemon,
        the equally beautiful sadness of the death of
        Balder--all these simply hint the riches of the
        myth as story. This story interest is the one
        that appeals to all human beings as human
        beings and is therefore fundamental.

        2. Myth preserves much material of social and
        antiquarian interest. It helps us understand
        the institutions and customs of primitive
        stages in human development, and as such has
        great value for scientific students of human
        society.

        3. Myth preserves evidences of how the mind of
        man looked out upon his surroundings and what
        it did in the way of interpreting them. It
        makes most valuable contributions, therefore,
        to the history of the human mind, and must be
        taken into account in the science of
        anthropology.

It must be evident that the second and third values are only in the
slightest degree within the range of the child in his early years of
school work.

_Objections to myth._ The objections to the use of myths in school may
also be brought under three heads:

        1. They come from a plane of ethics much lower
        than our own. This is the one strong argument
        against all folk material, and it has a
        validity that must be frankly recognized. There
        are the miscellaneous love affairs of Jupiter,
        and certain stories that have elements of
        horror and brutality. Such stories we cannot
        use, "though an error on that side is better
        than effeminancy." Occasional defects cannot
        outweigh the great positive ethical worth of
        myth. We must simply make intelligent choice.
        The situation is not different from what it is
        in choosing from modern poetry and story. It
        would be poor evidence of our sanity if we
        ruled out all poetry because some of it is not
        fit. Let us, however, omit entirely those myths
        that are not suitable rather than attempt
        making them over to suit modern conceptions. We
        may properly allow liberties to a literary
        artist like Hawthorne that a mere artisan
        should not take.

        2. Myth deals with the worn-out and obsolete
        ideas of the past, and will give children false
        religious and scientific notions. But one does
        not rule out _Paradise Lost_ because Milton's
        cosmogony is so purely fanciful, nor Dante
        because of his equally fantastic structure of
        the Inferno. Neither children nor older readers
        are ever led astray by these purely incidental
        backgrounds against which and by means of which
        the human interest is powerfully projected.

        3. Myth is too deeply symbolical. But readers
        of different ages and abilities find results up
        to their stature. We do not demand that the
        children shall be able to understand all that
        is back of _Gulliver's Travels_, or _Pilgrim's
        Progress_, before we give them those books.
        What is worth while in literature has an
        increasing message as the powers of the reader
        increase.

_How to use myths._ We may sum up the conclusions thus: Select those
myths that tell stories of dramatic force and that have sound ethical
worth. So far as possible let these be the ones most familiar in
literary allusion and in common speech. Present the myth as you would
any other folk story. Since myth naturally comes along a little later
than fairy stories, probably beginning not earlier than the third grade,
the discussion of its meanings may take a wider range. Keep the poetic
elements of the story prominent, as in most of the examples following.


SUGGESTIONS

        For the soundest and most illuminating
        discussion of the values and proper use of
        myths in education see Edward Howard Griggs,
        _Moral Education_, chap, xxi, "The Ethical
        Value of Mythology and Folk-Lore." For some
        good suggestions and lists consult Ezra Allen,
        "The Pedagogy of Myth in the Grades,"
        _Pedagogical Seminary_, Vol. VIII, p. 258. A
        very interesting plan for the use of myths may
        be found in two articles by O. O. Norris,
        "Myths and the Teaching of Myths," _The
        American Schoolmaster_, Vol. IX, p. 96 and p.
        145. Consult also MacClintock, _Literature in
        the Elementary School_, chap, vii, and McMurry,
        _Special Method in Reading_, pp. 92-105.

        The first nine myths in this section came
        originally from Greek mythology. The Romans
        adopted the mythology of the Greeks, but
        changed the names of the gods. English-speaking
        peoples have usually used these Latin versions.
        Hence in the following Greek myths the Roman
        names of the gods are used. In this note the
        Greek name is usually given in parenthesis
        after the Roman.

        According to mythology, Saturn once ruled the
        universe. After a great war he was overthrown
        and the universe was divided into three
        kingdoms, each governed by one of his sons.
        Jupiter (Zeus) ruled the heavens and the earth;
        Neptune (Poseidon) ruled the sea; and Pluto
        (Dis) ruled Hades, or Tartarus, the gloomy
        region of the dead in a cavern far under the
        surface of the earth. The home of Jupiter and
        the many other gods of heaven was represented
        as being the top of Mount Olympus, in Thessaly.
        Here each of the gods of heaven had a separate
        dwelling, but all assembled at times in the
        palace of Jupiter. Sometimes these gods went to
        earth, through a gate of clouds kept by
        goddesses called the Seasons.

        The relations between these divinities were
        much like those between people on earth. Some
        had greater power than others, and rivalries
        and quarrels frequently arose. Jupiter, the
        supreme ruler, governed by wisdom as well as by
        the power of his thunderbolt. He had three
        sisters: Juno, Vesta, and Ceres. Juno (Hera)
        was the wife of Jupiter and the noblest of the
        goddesses. Vesta (Hestia), the goddess of
        health, was not married. Ceres (Demeter), the
        goddess of agriculture, was the mother of
        Proserpine, who became wife of Pluto and queen
        of Hades. Minerva (Athena), goddess of wisdom
        and Jupiter's favorite daughter, had no mother,
        as she sprang fully armed from Jupiter's head.
        Venus (Aphrodite) was goddess of beauty and
        mother of Cupid, god of love. Two other
        goddesses were Diana (Artemis), modest virgin
        goddess of the moon, who protects brute
        creation, and Hebe, cup-bearer to the gods.
        Among the greatest of the gods were three sons
        of Jupiter: Apollo, Mars, and Vulcan. Apollo,
        or Phoebus, was god of the sun and patron of
        music, archery, and prophecy. Mars (Ares) was
        god of war, and Vulcan (Hephaestus), the lame
        god of fire, was the blacksmith of the gods.



255

        This version of the myth of Ceres and
        Proserpine is taken by permission of the author
        and the publishers from _Stories of Long Ago_,
        by Grace H. Kupfer. (Copyright. D. C. Heath &
        Co., Boston.) "Of all the beautiful fictions of
        Greek mythology," said Aubrey DeVere, "there
        are few more exquisite than the story of
        Proserpine, and none deeper in symbolical
        meaning." That portion of its meaning fitted to
        the understanding of children is indicated in
        the final paragraphs of Miss Kupfer's version.
        Teachers should realize that "the fable has,
        however, its moral significance also, being
        connected with that great mystery of Joy and
        Grief, of Life and of Death, which pressed so
        heavily on the mind of Pagan Greece, and
        imparts to the whole of her mythology a
        profound interest, spiritual as well as
        philosophical. It was the restoration of Man,
        not of flowers, the victory over Death, not
        over Winter, with which that high Intelligence
        felt itself to be really concerned."
        Hawthorne's version of this story appears in
        _Tanglewood Tales_ as "The Pomegranate Seeds."


A STORY OF THE SPRINGTIME

GRACE H. KUPFER


PART I

In the blue Mediterranean Sea, which washes the southern shore of
Europe, lies the beautiful island of Sicily. Long, long ago, there lived
on this island a goddess named Ceres. She had power to make the earth
yield plentiful crops of grain, or to leave it barren; and on her
depended the food, and therefore the life of all the people on the
great, wide earth.

Ceres had one fair young daughter, whom she loved very dearly. And no
wonder, for Proserpine was the sunniest, happiest girl you could
imagine.

Her face was all white and pink, like apple blossoms in spring, and
there was just enough blue in her eyes to give you a glimpse of an April
morning sky. Her long, golden curls reminded you of the bright sunlight.
In fact there was something so young and fair and tender about the
maiden that if you could imagine anything so strange as the whole
springtime, with all its loveliness, changed into a human being, you
would have looked but an instant at Proserpine and said, "She is the
Spring."

Proserpine spent the long, happy days in the fields, helping her mother,
or dancing and singing among the flowers, with her young companions.

Way down under the earth, in the land of the dead, lived dark King
Pluto; and the days were very lonely for him with only shadows to talk
to. Often and often, he had tried to urge some goddess to come and share
his gloomy throne; but not the richest jewels or wealth could tempt any
one of them to leave the bright sunlight above and dwell in the land of
shades.

One day Pluto came up to earth and was driving along in his swift
chariot, when, behind some bushes, he heard such merry voices and
musical laughter that he drew rein, and stepping down, parted the bushes
to see who was on the other side. There he saw Proserpine standing in
the center of a ring of laughing young girls who were pelting her with
flowers.

The stern old king felt his heart beat quicker at sight of all these
lovely maidens, and he singled out Proserpine, and said to himself, "She
shall be my queen. That fair face can make even dark Hades light and
beautiful." But he knew it would be useless to ask the girl for her
consent; so, with a bold stride, he stepped into the midst of the happy
circle.

The young girls, frightened at his dark, stern face, fled to right and
left. But Pluto grasped Proserpine by the arm and carried her to his
chariot, and then the horses flew along the ground, leaving Proserpine's
startled companions far behind.

King Pluto knew that he must hasten away with his prize, lest Ceres
should discover her loss; and to keep out of her path, he drove his
chariot a roundabout way. He came to a river; but as he neared its
banks, it suddenly began to bubble and swell and rage, so that Pluto did
not dare to drive through its waters. To go back another way would mean
great loss of time; so with his scepter he struck the ground thrice. It
opened, and, in an instant, horses, chariot, and all, plunged into the
darkness below.

But Proserpine knew that the nymph of the stream had recognized her, and
had tried to save her by making the waters of the stream rise. So, just
as the ground was closing over her, the girl seized her girdle and threw
it far out into the river. She hoped that in some way the girdle might
reach Ceres and help her to find her lost daughter.


PART II

In the evening Ceres returned to her home; but her daughter, who usually
came running to meet her, was nowhere to be seen. Ceres searched for her
in all the rooms, but they were empty. Then she lighted a great torch
from the fires of a volcano, and went wandering among the fields,
looking for her child. When morning broke, and she had found no trace of
Proserpine, her grief was terrible to see.

On that sad day, Ceres began a long, long wandering. Over land and sea
she journeyed, bearing in her right hand the torch which had been
kindled in the fiery volcano.

All her duties were neglected, and everywhere the crops failed, and the
ground was barren and dry. Want and famine took the place of wealth and
plenty throughout the world. It seemed as though the great earth grieved
with the mother for the loss of beautiful Proserpine.

When the starving people came to Ceres and begged her to resume her
duties and to be their friend again, Ceres lifted her great eyes,
wearied with endless seeking, and answered that until Proserpine was
found, she could think only of her child, and could not care for the
neglected earth. So all the people cried aloud to Jupiter that he should
bring Proserpine back to her mother, for they were sadly in need of
great Ceres' help.

At last, after wandering over all the earth in her fruitless search,
Ceres returned to Sicily. One day, as she was passing a river, suddenly
a little swell of water carried something to her feet. Stooping to see
what it was, she picked up the girdle which Proserpine had long ago
thrown to the water nymph.

While she was looking at it, with tears in her eyes, she heard a
fountain near her bubbling louder and louder, until at last it seemed to
speak. And this is what it said:

"I am the nymph of the fountain, and I come from the inmost parts of the
earth, O Ceres, great mother! There I saw your daughter seated on a
throne at the dark king's side. But in spite of her splendor, her cheeks
were pale and her eyes were heavy with weeping. I can stay no longer
now, O Ceres, for I must leap into the sunshine. The bright sky calls
me, and I must hasten away."

Then Ceres arose and went to Jupiter and said, "I have found the place
where my daughter is hidden. Give her back to me, and the earth shall
once more be fruitful, and the people shall have food."

Jupiter was moved, both by the mother's sorrow and by the prayers of the
people on earth; and he said that Proserpine might return to her home if
she had tasted no food while in Pluto's kingdom.

So the happy mother hastened down into Hades. But alas! that very day
Proserpine had eaten six pomegranate seeds; and for every one of those
seeds she was doomed each year to spend a month underground.

For six months of the year Ceres is happy with her daughter. At
Proserpine's coming, flowers bloom and birds sing and the earth
everywhere smiles its welcome to its young queen.

Some people say that Proserpine really is the springtime, and that while
she is with us all the earth seems fair and beautiful. But when the time
comes for Proserpine to rejoin King Pluto in his dark home underground,
Ceres hides herself and grieves through all the weary months until her
daughter's return.

Then the earth, too, is somber and sad. The leaves fall to the ground,
as though the trees were weeping for the loss of the fair, young queen;
and the flowers hide underground, until the eager step of the maiden,
returning to earth, awakens all nature from its winter sleep.



256

        Because of his beautiful idealism and the
        artistic nature of his work, Hawthorne
        (1804-1864) is one of America's most loved
        story-tellers. His stories are never idle
        tales, for each one reveals secret motives and
        impulses that determine human action. This
        characteristic makes his works wholesome and
        inspiring for both children and adults. Four
        volumes of his short stories, intended
        primarily for children, are classics for the
        upper grades. _Grandfather's Chair_ is a group
        of stories about life in New England in early
        times. _True Stories from History and
        Biography_ makes the child acquainted with such
        historical characters as Franklin and Newton.
        _A Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys_ and
        _Tanglewood Tales_ are Hawthorne's versions of
        old Greek myths.

        In his two volumes of Greek myths, Hawthorne
        does not hold to the plot or style of the
        original stories; but here, as in all his work,
        he shows how incidents in life determine human
        character. The following quotation from the
        Preface to _A Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys_
        explains in Hawthorne's own words the nature of
        his version of the myths: "He [the author] does
        not plead guilty to a sacrilege in having
        sometimes shaped anew, as his fancy dictated,
        the forms that have been hallowed by an
        antiquity of two or three thousand years. No
        epoch of time can claim a copyright in these
        immortal fables. They seem never to have been
        made; and certainly, so long as man exists,
        they can never perish; but, by their
        indestructibility itself, they are legitimate
        subjects for every age to clothe with its own
        garniture of manners and sentiment, and to
        imbue with its own morality."

        The story "The Paradise of Children," taken
        from _A Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys_, is
        Hawthorne's version of the Greek myth of
        Pandora's Box, which is an attempt to explain
        how pain and suffering came to humanity.
        According to the Greek myth, Jupiter was angry
        when he learned that Prometheus, one of the
        Titans, had given men fire stolen from heaven.
        That men might not have this blessing without
        an affliction to compensate, the gods filled a
        box with ills, but put Hope also in the box.
        Then, fearing that neither Prometheus nor his
        brother Epimetheus would open the box, they
        created Pandora. Mercury, the messenger of
        Jupiter, carried Pandora and the box as a gift
        to Epimetheus, and the curiosity of Pandora led
        her to open the box.


THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

Long, long ago, when this old world was in its tender infancy, there was
a child named Epimetheus, who never had either father or mother; and,
that he might not be lonely, another child, fatherless and motherless
like himself, was sent from a far country to live with him and be his
playfellow and helpmate. Her name was Pandora.

The first thing that Pandora saw, when she entered the cottage where
Epimetheus dwelt, was a great box. And almost the first question which
she put to him, after crossing the threshold, was this,--

"Epimetheus, what have you in that box?"

"My dear little Pandora," answered Epimetheus, "that is a secret, and
you must be kind enough not to ask any questions about it. The box was
left here to be kept safely, and I do not myself know what it
contains."

"But who gave it to you?" asked Pandora. "And where did it come from?"

"That is a secret, too," replied Epimetheus.

"How provoking!" exclaimed Pandora, pouting her lip. "I wish the great,
ugly box were out of the way!"

"Oh, come, don't think of it any more," cried Epimetheus. "Let us run
out of doors, and have some nice play with the other children."

It is thousands of years since Epimetheus and Pandora were alive; and
the world, nowadays, is a very different sort of thing from what it was
in their time. Then, everybody was a child. There needed no fathers and
mothers to take care of the children; because there was no danger, nor
trouble of any kind, and no clothes to be mended, and there was always
plenty to eat and drink. Whenever a child wanted his dinner, he found it
growing on a tree; and, if he looked at the tree in the morning, he
could see the expanding blossom of that night's supper; or, at eventide,
he saw the tender bud of to-morrow's breakfast. It was a very pleasant
life, indeed. No labor to be done, no tasks to be studied; nothing but
sports and dances, and sweet voices of children talking, or caroling
like birds, or gushing out in merry laughter, throughout the livelong
day.

What was most wonderful of all, the children never quarreled among
themselves; neither had they any crying fits; nor, since time first
began, had a single one of these little mortals ever gone apart into a
corner, and sulked. Oh, what a good time was that to be alive in! The
truth is, those ugly little winged monsters, called Troubles, which are
now almost as numerous as mosquitoes, had never yet been seen on the
earth. It is probable that the very greatest disquietude which a child
had ever experienced was Pandora's vexation at not being able to
discover the secret of the mysterious box.

This was at first only the faint shadow of a Trouble; but, every day, it
grew more and more substantial, until, before a great while, the cottage
of Epimetheus and Pandora was less sunshiny than those of the other
children.

"Whence can the box have come?" Pandora continually kept saying to
herself and to Epimetheus. "And what in the world can be inside of it!"

"Always talking about this box!" said Epimetheus, at last; for he had
grown extremely tired of the subject. "I wish, dear Pandora, you would
try to talk of something else. Come, let us go and gather some ripe
figs, and eat them under the trees, for our supper. And I know a vine
that has the sweetest and juiciest grapes you ever tasted."

"Always talking about grapes and figs!" cried Pandora, pettishly.

"Well, then," said Epimetheus, who was a very good-tempered child, like
a multitude of children in those days, "let us run out and have a merry
time with our playmates."

"I am tired of merry times, and don't care if I never have any more!"
answered our pettish little Pandora. "And, besides, I never do have any.
This ugly box! I am so taken up with thinking about it all the time. I
insist upon your telling me what is inside of it."

"As I have already said, fifty times over, I do not know!" replied
Epimetheus, getting a little vexed. "How, then, can I tell you what is
inside?"

"You might open it," said Pandora, looking sideways at Epimetheus, "and
then we could see for ourselves."

"Pandora, what are you thinking of?" exclaimed Epimetheus.

And his face expressed so much horror at the idea of looking into a box
which had been confided to him on the condition of his never opening it,
that Pandora thought it best not to suggest it any more. Still, however,
she could not help thinking and talking about the box.

"At least," said she, "you can tell me how it came here."

"It was left at the door," replied Epimetheus, "just before you came, by
a person who looked very smiling and intelligent, and who could hardly
forbear laughing as he put it down. He was dressed in an odd kind of a
cloak, and had on a cap that seemed to be made partly of feathers, so
that it looked almost as if it had wings."

"What sort of a staff had he?" asked Pandora.

"Oh, the most curious staff you ever saw!" cried Epimetheus. "It was
like two serpents twisting around a stick, and was carved so naturally
that I, at first, thought the serpents were alive."

"I know him," said Pandora, thoughtfully. "Nobody else has such a staff.
It was Quicksilver; and he brought me hither, as well as the box. No
doubt he intended it for me; and, most probably, it contains pretty
dresses for me to wear, or toys for you and me to play with, or
something very nice for us both to eat!"

"Perhaps so," answered Epimetheus, turning away. "But until Quicksilver
comes back and tells us so, we have neither of us any right to lift the
lid of the box."

"What a dull boy he is!" muttered Pandora, as Epimetheus left the
cottage. "I do wish he had a little more enterprise!"

For the first time since her arrival, Epimetheus had gone out without
asking Pandora to accompany him. He went to gather figs and grapes by
himself, or to seek whatever amusement he could find, in other society
than his little playfellow's. He was tired to death of hearing about the
box, and heartily wished that Quicksilver, or whatever was the
messenger's name, had left it at some other child's door, where Pandora
would never have set eyes on it. So perseveringly as she did babble
about this one thing! The box, the box, and nothing but the box! It
seemed as if the box were bewitched, and as if the cottage were not big
enough to hold it, without Pandora's continually stumbling over it, and
making Epimetheus stumble over it likewise, and bruising all four of
their shins.

Well, it was really hard that poor Epimetheus should have a box in his
ears from morning till night; especially as the little people of the
earth were so unaccustomed to vexations, in those happy days, that they
knew not how to deal with them. Thus, a small vexation made as much
disturbance, then, as a far bigger one would in our own times.

After Epimetheus was gone, Pandora stood gazing at the box. She had
called it ugly, above a hundred times; but, in spite of all that she had
said against it, it was positively a very handsome article of furniture,
and would have been quite an ornament to any room in which it should be
placed. It was made of a beautiful kind of wood, with dark and rich
veins spreading over its surface, which was so highly polished that
little Pandora could see her face in it. As the child had no other
looking-glass, it is odd that she did not value the box, merely on this
account.

The edges and corners of the box were carved with most wonderful skill.
Around the margin there were figures of graceful men and women, and the
prettiest children ever seen, reclining or sporting amid a profusion of
flowers and foliage; and these various objects were so exquisitely
represented, and were wrought together in such harmony, that flowers,
foliage, and human beings seemed to combine into a wreath of mingled
beauty. But here and there, peeping forth from behind the carved
foliage, Pandora once or twice fancied that she saw a face not so
lovely, or something or other that was disagreeable, and which stole the
beauty out of all the rest. Nevertheless, on looking more closely, and
touching the spot with her finger, she could discover nothing of the
kind. Some face, that was really beautiful, had been made to look ugly
by her catching a sideway glimpse at it.

The most beautiful face of all was done in what is called high relief,
in the center of the lid. There was nothing else, save the dark, smooth
richness of the polished wood, and this one face in the center, with a
garland of flowers about its brow. Pandora had looked at this face a
great many times, and imagined that the mouth could smile if it liked,
or be grave when it chose, the same as any living mouth. The features,
indeed, all wore a very lively and rather mischievous expression, which
looked almost as if it needs must burst out of the carved lips, and
utter itself in words.

Had the mouth spoken, it would probably have been something like this:

"Do not be afraid, Pandora! What harm can there be in opening the box?
Never mind that poor, simple Epimetheus! You are wiser than he, and have
ten times as much spirit. Open the box, and see if you do not find
something very pretty!"

The box, I had almost forgotten to say, was fastened; not by a lock, nor
by any other such contrivance, but by a very intricate knot of gold
cord. There appeared to be no end to this knot, and no beginning. Never
was a knot so cunningly twisted, nor with so many ins and outs, which
roguishly defied the skilfullest fingers to disentangle them. And yet,
by the very difficulty that there was in it, Pandora was the more
tempted to examine the knot, and just see how it was made. Two or three
times, already, she had stooped over the box, and taken the knot between
her thumb and forefinger, but without positively trying to undo it.

"I really believe," said she to herself, "that I begin to see how it was
done. Nay, perhaps I could tie it up again, after undoing it. There
would be no harm in that, surely. Even Epimetheus would not blame me for
that. I need not open the box, and should not, of course, without the
foolish boy's consent, even if the knot were untied."

It might have been better for Pandora if she had had a little work to
do, or anything to employ her mind upon, so as not to be so constantly
thinking of this one subject. But children led so easy a life, before
any Troubles came into the world, that they had really a great deal too
much leisure. They could not be forever playing at hide-and-seek among
the flower-shrubs, or at blind-man's-buff with garlands over their eyes,
or at whatever other games had been found out while Mother Earth was in
her babyhood. When life is all sport, toil is the real play. There was
absolutely nothing to do. A little sweeping and dusting about the
cottage, I suppose, and the gathering of fresh flowers (which were only
too abundant everywhere), and arranging them in vases,--and poor little
Pandora's day's work was over. And then, for the rest of the day, there
was the box!

After all, I am not quite sure that the box was not a blessing to her in
its way. It supplied her with such a variety of ideas to think of, and
to talk about, whenever she had anybody to listen! When she was in good
humor, she could admire the bright polish of its sides, and the rich
border of beautiful faces and foliage that ran all around it. Or, if she
chanced to be ill-tempered, she could give it a push, or kick it with
her naughty little foot. And many a kick did the box--(but it was a
mischievous box, as we shall see, and deserved all it got)--many a kick
did it receive. But, certain it is, if it had not been for the box, our
active-minded little Pandora would not have known half so well how to
spend her time as she now did.

For it was really an endless employment to guess what was inside. What
could it be, indeed? Just imagine, my little hearers, how busy your wits
would be, if there were a great box in the house, which, as you might
have reason to suppose, contained something new and pretty for your
Christmas or New-Year's gifts. Do you think that you should be less
curious than Pandora? If you were alone with the box, might you not feel
a little tempted to lift the lid? But you would not do it. Oh, fie! No,
no! Only, if you thought there were toys in it, it would be so very hard
to let slip an opportunity of taking just one peep! I know not whether
Pandora expected any toys; for none had yet begun to be made, probably,
in those days, when the world itself was one great plaything for the
children that dwelt upon it. But Pandora was convinced that there was
something very beautiful and valuable in the box; and therefore she felt
just as anxious to take a peep as any of these girls, here around me,
would have felt. And, possibly, a little more so; but of that I am not
quite so certain.

On this particular day, however, which we have so long been talking
about, her curiosity grew so much greater than it usually was, that, at
last, she approached the box. She was more than half determined to open
it, if she could. Ah, naughty Pandora!

First, however, she tried to lift it. It was heavy; quite too heavy for
the slender strength of a child, like Pandora. She raised one end of the
box a few inches from the floor, and let it fall again, with a pretty
loud thump. A moment afterwards, she almost fancied that she heard
something stir, inside of the box. She applied her ear as closely as
possible, and listened. Positively, there did seem to be a kind of
stifled murmur, within! Or was it merely the singing in Pandora's ears?
Or could it be the beating of her heart? The child could not quite
satisfy herself whether she had heard anything or no. But, at all
events, her curiosity was stronger than ever.

As she drew back her head, her eyes fell upon the knot of gold cord.

"It must have been a very ingenious person who tied this knot," said
Pandora to herself. "But I think I could untie it, nevertheless. I am
resolved, at least, to find the two ends of the cord."

So she took the golden knot in her fingers, and pried into its
intricacies as sharply as she could. Almost without intending it, or
quite knowing what she was about, she was soon busily engaged in
attempting to undo it. Meanwhile, the bright sunshine came through the
open window; as did likewise the merry voices of the children, playing
at a distance, and perhaps the voice of Epimetheus among them. Pandora
stopped to listen. What a beautiful day it was! Would it not be wiser if
she were to let the troublesome knot alone, and think no more about the
box, but run and join her little playfellows, and be happy?

All this time, however, her fingers were half unconsciously busy with
the knot; and, happening to glance at the flower-wreathed face on the
lid of the enchanted box, she seemed to perceive it slyly grinning at
her.

"That face looks very mischievous," thought Pandora. "I wonder whether
it smiles because I am doing wrong! I have the greatest mind in the
world to run away!"

But just then, by the merest accident, she gave the knot a kind of a
twist, which produced a wonderful result. The gold cord untwined itself,
as if by magic, and left the box without a fastening.

"This is the strangest thing I ever knew!" said Pandora. "What will
Epimetheus say? And how can I possibly tie it up again?"

She made one or two attempts to restore the knot, but soon found it
quite beyond her skill. It had disentangled itself so suddenly that she
could not in the least remember how the strings had been doubled into
one another; and when she tried to recollect the shape and appearance of
the knot, it seemed to have gone entirely out of her mind. Nothing was
to be done, therefore, but let the box remain as it was, until
Epimetheus should come in.

"But," said Pandora, "when he finds the knot untied, he will know that I
have done it. How shall I make him believe that I have not looked into
the box?"

And then the thought came into her naughty little heart, that, since she
would be suspected of having looked into the box, she might just as well
do so, at once. Oh, very naughty and very foolish Pandora! You should
have thought only of doing what was right, and of leaving undone what
was wrong, and not of what your playfellow Epimetheus would have said or
believed. And so perhaps she might, if the enchanted face on the lid of
the box had not looked so bewitchingly persuasive at her, and if she had
not seemed to hear, more distinctly than before, the murmur of small
voices within. She could not tell whether it was fancy or no; but there
was quite a little tumult of whispers in her ear,--or else it was her
curiosity that whispered:

"Let us out, dear Pandora,--pray let us out! We will be such nice pretty
playfellows for you! Only let us out!"

"What can it be?" thought Pandora. "Is there something alive in the box?
Well!--yes!--I am resolved to take just one peep! Only one peep; and
then the lid shall be shut down as safely as ever! There cannot possibly
be any harm in just one little peep!"

But it is now time for us to see what Epimetheus was doing.

This was the first time, since his little playmate had come to dwell
with him, that he had attempted to enjoy any pleasure in which she did
not partake. But nothing went right; nor was he nearly so happy as on
other days. He could not find a sweet grape or a ripe fig (if Epimetheus
had a fault, it was a little too much fondness for figs); or, if ripe at
all, they were over-ripe, and so sweet as to be cloying. There was no
mirth in his heart, such as usually made his voice gush out, of its own
accord, and swell the merriment of his companions. In short, he grew so
uneasy and discontented, that the other children could not imagine what
was the matter with Epimetheus. Neither did he himself know what ailed
him, any better than they did. For you must recollect that at the time
we are speaking of, it was everybody's nature, and constant habit, to be
happy. The world had not yet learned to be otherwise. Not a single soul
or body, since these children were first sent to enjoy themselves on the
beautiful earth, had ever been sick, or out of sorts.

At length, discovering that, somehow or other, he put a stop to all the
play, Epimetheus judged it best to go back to Pandora, who was in a
humor better suited to his own. But, with a hope of giving her pleasure,
he gathered some flowers, and made them into a wreath, which he meant to
put upon her head. The flowers were very lovely,--roses, and lilies, and
orange-blossoms, and a great many more, which left a trail of fragrance
behind, as Epimetheus carried them along; and the wreath was put
together with as much skill as could reasonably be expected of a boy.
The fingers of little girls, it has always appeared to me, are the
fittest to twine flower-wreaths; but boys could do it, in those days,
rather better than they can now.

And here I must mention that a great black cloud had been gathering in
the sky, for some time past, although it had not yet overspread the sun.
But, just as Epimetheus reached the cottage door, this cloud began to
intercept the sunshine, and thus to make a sudden and sad obscurity.

He entered softly; for he meant, if possible, to steal behind Pandora,
and fling the wreath of flowers over her head, before she should be
aware of his approach. But, as it happened, there was no need of his
treading so very lightly. He might have trod as heavily as he
pleased,--as heavily as a grown man,--as heavily, I was going to say, as
an elephant,--without much probability of Pandora's hearing his
footsteps. She was too intent upon her purpose. At the moment of his
entering the cottage, the naughty child had put her hand to the lid, and
was on the point of opening the mysterious box. Epimetheus beheld her.
If he had cried out, Pandora would probably have withdrawn her hand, and
the fatal mystery of the box might never have been known.

But Epimetheus himself, although he said very little about it, had his
own share of curiosity to know what was inside. Perceiving that Pandora
was resolved to find out the secret, he determined that his playfellow
should not be the only wise person in the cottage. And if there were
anything pretty or valuable in the box, he meant to take half of it to
himself. Thus, after all his sage speeches to Pandora about restraining
her curiosity, Epimetheus turned out to be quite as foolish, and nearly
as much in fault, as she. So, whenever we blame Pandora for what
happened, we must not forget to shake our heads at Epimetheus likewise.

As Pandora raised the lid, the cottage grew very dark and dismal; for
the black cloud had now swept quite over the sun, and seemed to have
buried it alive. There had, for a little while past, been a low growling
and muttering, which all at once broke into a heavy peal of thunder. But
Pandora, heeding nothing of all this, lifted the lid nearly upright, and
looked inside. It seemed as if a sudden swarm of winged creatures
brushed past her, taking flight out of the box, while, at the same
instant, she heard the voice of Epimetheus, with a lamentable tone, as
if he were in pain.

"Oh, I am stung!" cried he. "I am stung! Naughty Pandora; why have you
opened this wicked box?"

Pandora let fall the lid, and, starting up, looked about her, to see
what had befallen Epimetheus. The thunder-cloud had so darkened the room
that she could not very clearly discern what was in it. But she heard a
disagreeable buzzing, as if a great many huge flies, or gigantic
mosquitoes, or those insects which we call dor-bugs and pinching-dogs,
were darting about. And, as her eyes grew more accustomed to the
imperfect light, she saw a crowd of ugly little shapes, with bats'
wings, looking abominably spiteful, and armed with terribly long stings
in their tails. It was one of these that had stung Epimetheus. Nor was
it a great while before Pandora herself began to scream, in no less pain
and affright than her playfellow, and making a vast deal more hubbub
about it. An odious little monster had settled on her forehead, and
would have stung her I know not how deeply, if Epimetheus had not run
and brushed it away.

Now, if you wish to know what these ugly things might be, which had made
their escape out of the box, I must tell you that they were the whole
family of earthly Troubles. There were evil Passions; there were a great
many species of Cares; there were more than a hundred and fifty Sorrows;
there were Diseases, in a vast number of miserable and painful shapes;
there were more kinds of Naughtiness than it would be of any use to talk
about. In short, everything that has since afflicted the souls and
bodies of mankind had been shut up in the mysterious box, and given to
Epimetheus and Pandora to be kept safely, in order that the happy
children of the world might never be molested by them. Had they been
faithful to their trust, all would have gone well. No grown person would
ever have been sad, nor any child have had cause to shed a single tear,
from that hour until this moment.

But--and you may see by this how a wrong act of any one mortal is a
calamity to the whole world--by Pandora's lifting the lid of that
miserable box, and by the fault of Epimetheus, too, in not preventing
her, these Troubles have obtained a foothold among us, and do not seem
very likely to be driven away in a hurry. For it was impossible, as you
will easily guess, that the two children should keep the ugly swarm in
their own little cottage. On the contrary, the first thing that they did
was to fling open the doors and windows, in hopes of getting rid of
them; and, sure enough, away flew the winged Troubles all abroad, and
so pestered and tormented the small people, everywhere about, that none
of them so much as smiled for many days afterwards. And what was very
singular, all the flowers and dewy blossoms on earth, not one of which
had hitherto faded, now began to droop and shed their leaves, after a
day or two. The children, moreover, who before seemed immortal in their
childhood, now grew older, day by day, and came soon to be youths and
maidens, and men and women by and by, and aged people, before they
dreamed of such a thing.

Meanwhile, the naughty Pandora, and hardly less naughty Epimetheus,
remained in their cottage. Both of them had been grievously stung, and
were in a good deal of pain, which seemed the more intolerable to them
because it was the very first pain that had ever been felt since the
world began. Of course, they were entirely unaccustomed to it, and could
have no idea what it meant. Besides all this, they were in exceedingly
bad humor, both with themselves and with one another. In order to
indulge it to the utmost, Epimetheus sat down sullenly in a corner with
his back towards Pandora; while Pandora flung herself upon the floor and
rested her head on the fatal and abominable box. She was crying
bitterly, and sobbing as if her heart would break.

Suddenly there was a gentle little tap on the inside of the lid.

"What can that be?" cried Pandora, lifting her head.

But either Epimetheus had not heard the tap, or was too much out of
humor to notice it. At any rate, he made no answer.

"You are very unkind," said Pandora, sobbing anew, "not to speak to me!"

Again the tap! It sounded like the tiny knuckles of a fairy's hand,
knocking lightly and playfully on the inside of the box.

"Who are you?" asked Pandora, with a little of her former curiosity.
"Who are you, inside of this naughty box?"

A sweet little voice spoke from within,

"Only lift the lid, and you shall see."

"No, no," answered Pandora, again beginning to sob. "I have had enough
of lifting the lid! You are inside of the box, naughty creature, and
there you shall stay! There are plenty of your ugly brothers and sisters
already flying about the world. You need never think that I shall be so
foolish as to let you out!"

She looked towards Epimetheus, as she spoke, perhaps expecting that he
would commend her for her wisdom. But the sullen boy only muttered that
she was wise a little too late.
