This scene was the delight of the boys, for the rifles of Company F had
been secured, and at least a dozen soldiers kept filing in and out in
British uniform till Washington's august legs were hidden by the heaps
of arms rattled down before him. The martial music, the steady
tramp, and the patriotic memories awakened, caused this scene to be
enthusiastically encored, and the boys would have gone on marching till
midnight if Ralph had not peremptorily ordered down the curtain and
cleared the stage for the next tableau.

This had been artfully slipped in between two brilliant ones, to show
that the Father of his Country had to pay a high price for his glory.
The darkened stage represented what seemed to be a camp in a snow-storm,
and a very forlorn camp, too; for on "the cold, cold ground" (a reckless
display of cotton batting) lay ragged soldiers, sleeping without
blankets, their worn-out boots turned up pathetically, and no sign of
food or fire to be seen. A very shabby sentinel, with feet bound in
bloody cloths, and his face as pale as chalk could make it, gnawed a dry
crust as he kept his watch in the wintry night.

A tent at the back of the stage showed a solitary figure sitting on a
log of wood, poring over the map spread upon his knee, by the light of
one candle stuck in a bottle. There could be no doubt who this was, for
the buff-and-blue coat, the legs, the nose, the attitude, all betrayed
the great George laboring to save his country, in spite of privations,
discouragements, and dangers which would have daunted any other man.

"Valley Forge," said someone, and the room was very still as old and
young looked silently at this little picture of a great and noble
struggle in one of its dark hours. The crust, the wounded feet, the
rags, the snow, the loneliness, the indomitable courage and endurance of
these men touched the hearts of all, for the mimic scene grew real for
a moment; and, when a child's voice broke the silence, asking pitifully,
"Oh, mamma, was it truly as dreadful as that?" a general outburst
answered, as if every one wanted to cheer up the brave fellows and bid
them fight on, for victory was surely coming.

In the next scene it did come, and "Washington at Trenton" was prettily
done. An arch of flowers crossed the stage, with the motto, "The
Defender of the Mothers will be the Preserver of the Daughters;" and,
as the hero with his generals advanced on one side, a troop of girls, in
old-fashioned muslin frocks, came to scatter flowers before him, singing
the song of long ago:--

  "Welcome, mighty chief, once more
  Welcome to this grateful shore;
  Now no mercenary foe
  Aims again the fatal blow,--
  Aims at thee the fatal blow.

  "Virgins fair and matrons grave,
  Those thy conquering arm did save,
  Build for thee triumphal bowers;
  Strew, ye fair, his way with flowers,--
  Strew your hero's way with flowers."

And they did, singing with all their hearts as they flung artificial
roses and lilies at the feet of the great men, who bowed with benign
grace. Jack, who did Lafayette with a limp, covered himself with glory
by picking up one of the bouquets and pressing it to his heart with all
the gallantry of a Frenchman; and when Washington lifted the smallest
of the maids and kissed her, the audience cheered. Couldn't help it, you
know, it was so pretty and inspiring.

The Washington Family, after the famous picture, came next, with Annette
as the serene and sensible Martha, in a very becoming cap. The General
was in uniform, there being no time to change, but his attitude was
quite correct, and the Custis boy and girl displayed the wide sash and
ruffled collar with historic fidelity. The band played "Home," and every
one agreed that it was "Sweet!"

"Now I don't see what more they can have except the death-bed, and
that would be rather out of place in this gay company," said the old
gentleman to Mr. Burton, as he mopped his heated face after pounding so
heartily he nearly knocked the ferule off his cane.

"No; they gave that up, for my boy wouldn't wear a night-gown in public.
I can't tell secrets, but I think they have got a very clever little
finale for the first part--a pretty compliment to one person and
a pleasant surprise to all," answered Mr. Burton, who was in great
spirits, being fond of theatricals and very justly proud of his
children, for the little girls had been among the Trenton maids, and the
mimic General had kissed his own small sister, Nelly, very tenderly.

A great deal of interest was felt as to what this surprise was to be,
and a general "Oh!" greeted the "Minute Man," standing motionless upon
his pedestal. It was Frank, and Ralph had done his best to have the
figure as perfect as possible, for the maker of the original had been a
good friend to him; and, while the young sculptor was dancing gayly at
the ball, this copy of his work was doing him honor among the
children. Frank looked it very well, for his firm-set mouth was full of
resolution, his eyes shone keen and courageous under the three-cornered
hat, and the muscles stood out upon the bare arm that clutched the old
gun. Even the buttons on the gaiters seemed to flash defiance, as the
sturdy legs took the first step from the furrow toward the bridge where
the young farmer became a hero when he "fired the shot heard 'round the
world."

"That _is_ splendid!" "As like to the original as flesh can be to
bronze." "How still he stands!" "He'll fight when the time comes, and
die hard, won't he?" "Hush! You make the statue blush!" These very
audible remarks certainly did, for the color rose visibly as the modest
lad heard himself praised, though he saw but one face in all the crowd,
his mother's, far back, but full of love and pride, as she looked up at
her young minute man waiting for the battle which often calls us when we
least expect it, and for which she had done her best to make him ready.

If there had been any danger of Frank being puffed up by the success of
his statue, it was counteracted by irrepressible Grif, who, just at the
most interesting moment, when all were gazing silently, gave a whistle,
followed by a "Choo, choo, choo!" and "All aboard!" so naturally that no
one could mistake the joke, especially as another laughing voice added,
"Now, then, No. 11!" which brought down the house and the curtain too.

Frank was so angry, it was very difficult to keep him on his perch for
the last scene of all. He submitted, however, rather than spoil the
grand finale, hoping that its beauty would efface that ill-timed
pleasantry from the public mind. So, when the agreeable clamor of hands
and voices called for a repetition, the Minute Man reappeared, grimmer
than before. But not alone, for grouped all about his pedestal were
Washington and his generals, the matrons and maids, with a background of
troops shouldering arms, Grif and Joe doing such rash things with their
muskets, that more than one hero received a poke in his august back.
Before the full richness of this picture had been taken in, Ed gave a
rap, and all burst out with "Hail Columbia," in such an inspiring style
that it was impossible for the audience to refrain from joining, which
they did, all standing and all singing with a heartiness that made the
walls ring. The fife shrilled, the horn blew sweet and clear, the fiddle
was nearly drowned by the energetic boom of the drum, and out into
the starry night, through open windows, rolled the song that stirs the
coldest heart with patriotic warmth and tunes every voice to music.

"'America!' We must have 'America!' Pipe up, Ed, this is too good to end
without one song more," cried Mr. Burton, who had been singing like
a trumpet; and, hardly waiting to get their breath, off they all went
again with the national hymn, singing as they never had sung it before,
for somehow the little scenes they had just acted or beheld seemed
to show how much this dear America of ours had cost in more than one
revolution, how full of courage, energy, and virtue it was in spite of
all its faults, and what a privilege, as well as duty, it was for each
to do his part toward its safety and its honor in the present, as did
those brave men and women in the past.

So the "Scenes from the Life of Washington" were a great success, and,
when the songs were over, people were glad of a brief recess while they
had raptures, and refreshed themselves with lemonade.

The girls had kept the secret of who the "Princess" was to be, and,
when the curtain rose, a hum of surprise and pleasure greeted the pretty
group. Jill lay asleep in all her splendor, the bonny "Prince" just
lifting the veil to wake her with a kiss, and all about them the court
in its nap of a hundred years. The "King" and "Queen" dozing comfortably
on the throne; the maids of honor, like a garland of nodding flowers,
about the couch; the little page, unconscious of the blow about to fall,
and the fool dreaming, with his mouth wide open.

It was so pretty, people did not tire of looking, till Jack's lame leg
began to tremble, and he whispered: "Drop her or I shall pitch." Down
went the curtain; but it rose in a moment, and there was the court after
the awakening: the "King" and "Queen" looking about them with sleepy
dignity, the maids in various attitudes of surprise, the fool grinning
from ear to ear, and the "Princess" holding out her hand to the
"Prince," as if glad to welcome the right lover when he came at last.

Molly got the laugh this time, for she could not resist giving poor
Boo the cuff which had been hanging over him so long. She gave it
with unconscious energy, and Boo cried "Ow!" so naturally that all the
children were delighted and wanted it repeated. But Boo declined, and
the scenes which followed were found quite as much to their taste,
having been expressly prepared for the little people.

Mother Goose's Reception was really very funny, for Ralph was the old
lady, and had hired a representation of the immortal bird from a real
theatre for this occasion. There they stood, the dame in her pointed
hat, red petticoat, cap, and cane, with the noble fowl, a good deal
larger than life, beside her, and Grif inside, enjoying himself
immensely as he flapped the wings, moved the yellow legs, and waved the
long neck about, while unearthly quacks issued from the bill. That was a
great surprise for the children, and they got up in their seats to gaze
their fill, many of them firmly believing that they actually beheld the
blessed old woman who wrote the nursery songs they loved so well.

Then in came, one after another, the best of the characters she has made
famous, while a voice behind the scenes sang the proper rhyme as each
made their manners to the interesting pair. "Mistress Mary," and
her "pretty maids all in a row," passed by to their places in the
background; "King Cole" and his "fiddlers three" made a goodly show; so
did the royal couple, who followed the great pie borne before them, with
the "four-and-twenty blackbirds" popping their heads out in the most
delightful way. Little "Bo-Peep" led a woolly lamb and wept over its
lost tail, for not a sign of one appeared on the poor thing. "Simple
Simon" followed the pie-man, gloating over his wares with the drollest
antics. The little wife came trundling by in a wheelbarrow and was not
upset; neither was the lady with "rings on her fingers and bells on her
toes," as she cantered along on a rocking-horse. "Bobby Shafto's" yellow
hair shone finely as he led in the maid whom he came back from sea
to marry. "Miss Muffet," bowl in hand, ran away from an immense black
spider, which waggled its long legs in a way so life-like that some of
the children shook in their little shoes. The beggars who came to town
were out in full force, "rags, tags, and velvet gowns," quite true to
life. "Boy Blue" rubbed his eyes, with hay sticking in his hair, and
tooted on a tin horn as if bound to get the cows out of the corn. Molly,
with a long-handled frying-pan, made a capital "Queen," in a tucked-up
gown, checked apron, and high crown, to good "King Arthur," who, very
properly, did not appear after stealing the barley-meal, which might be
seen in the pan tied up in a pudding, like a cannon-ball, ready to fry.

But Tobias, Molly's black cat, covered himself with glory by the spirit
with which he acted his part in,

  "Sing, sing, what shall I sing?
  The cat's run away with the pudding-bag string."

First he was led across the stage on his hind legs, looking very fierce
and indignant, with a long tape trailing behind him; and, being set
free at the proper moment, he gave one bound over the four-and-twenty
blackbirds who happened to be in the way, and dashed off as if an
enraged cook had actually been after him, straight downstairs to the
coal-bin, where he sat glaring in the dark, till the fun was over.

When all the characters had filed in and stood in two long rows, music
struck up and they danced, "All the way to Boston," a simple but lively
affair, which gave each a chance to show his or her costume as they
pranced down the middle and up outside.

Such a funny medley as it was, for there went fat "King Cole" with the
most ragged of the beggar-maids. "Mistress Mary," in her pretty blue
dress, tripped along with "Simple Simon" staring about him like a
blockhead. The fine lady left her horse to dance with "Bobby Shafto"
till every bell on her slippers tinkled its tongue out. "Bo-Peep" and
a jolly fiddler skipped gayly up and down. "Miss Muffet" took the big
spider for her partner, and made his many legs fly about in the wildest
way. The little wife got out of the wheelbarrow to help "Boy Blue"
along, and Molly, with the frying-pan over her shoulder, led off
splendidly when it was "Grand right and left."

But the old lady and her goose were the best of all, for the dame's
shoe-buckles cut the most astonishing pigeon-wings, and to see that
mammoth bird waddle down the middle with its wings half open, its long
neck bridling, and its yellow legs in the first position as it curtsied
to its partner, was a sight to remember, it was so intensely funny.

The merry old gentleman laughed till he cried; Mr. Burton split his
gloves, he applauded so enthusiastically; while the children beat
the dust out of the carpet hopping up and down, as they cried: "Do it
again!" "We want it all over!" when the curtain went down at last on the
flushed and panting party, Mother G---- bowing, with her hat all awry,
and the goose doing a double shuffle as if it did not know how to leave
off.

But they could not "do it all over again," for it was growing late, and
the people felt that they certainly had received their money's worth
that evening.

So it all ended merrily, and when the guests departed the boys cleared
the room like magic, and the promised supper to the actors was served in
handsome style. Jack and Jill were at one end, Mrs. Goose and her bird
at the other, and all between was a comical collection of military
heroes, fairy characters, and nursery celebrities. All felt the need of
refreshment after their labors, and swept over the table like a flight
of locusts, leaving devastation behind. But they had earned their fun:
and much innocent jollity prevailed, while a few lingering papas and
mammas watched the revel from afar, and had not the heart to order these
noble beings home till even the Father of his Country declared "that
he'd had a perfectly splendid time, but couldn't keep his eyes open
another minute," and very wisely retired to replace the immortal cocked
hat with a night-cap.




Chapter XIII. Jack Has a Mystery


"What is the matter? Does your head ache?" asked Jill, one evening in
March, observing that Jack sat with his head in his hands, an attitude
which, with him, meant either pain or perplexity.

"No; but I'm bothered. I want some money, and I don't see how I can earn
it," he answered, tumbling his hair about, and frowning darkly at the
fire.

"How much?" and Jill's ready hand went to the pocket where her little
purse lay, for she felt rich with several presents lately made her.

"Two seventy-five. No, thank you, I won't borrow."

"What is it for?"

"Can't tell."

"Why, I thought you told me everything."

"Sorry, but I can't this time. Don't you worry; I shall think of
something."

"Couldn't your mother help?"

"Don't wish to ask her."

"Why! can't _she_ know?"

"Nobody can."

"How queer! Is it a scrape, Jack?" asked Jill, looking as curious as a
magpie.

"It is likely to be, if I can't get out of it this week, somehow."

"Well, I don't see how I can help if I'm not to know anything;" and Jill
seemed rather hurt.

"You can just stop asking questions, and tell me how a fellow can earn
some money. That would help. I've got one dollar, but I must have some
more;" and Jack looked worried as he fingered the little gold dollar on
his watch-guard.

"Oh, do you mean to use that?"

"Yes, I do; a man must pay his debts if he sells all he has to do it,"
said Jack sternly.

"Dear me; it must be something very serious." And Jill lay quite still
for five minutes, thinking over all the ways in which Jack ever did earn
money, for Mrs. Minot liked to have her boys work, and paid them in some
way for all they did.

"Is there any wood to saw?" she asked presently, being very anxious to
help.

"All done."

"Paths to shovel?"

"No snow."

"Lawn to rake, then?"

"Not time for that yet."

