anxiously, and that an expression of relief came over his face as he
perceived him. He had, indeed, but eight or ten cucumbers left.

"Cucumbers to-day, sah? Berry fine cucumbers--first-rate cucumbers
dese."

"They look rather over-ripe," Vincent said.

"Not a bit, sah; dey just ripe. Dis berry fine one--ten cents dis."

"You are putting up your prices, darkey, and are making a fortune out of
us," Vincent said as he took the cucumber, which was a very large and
straight one. He had no difficulty with this, as with the melon; a sharp
twist broke it in two as he reached the corner he had used the day
previously. It had been cut in half, one end had been scooped out for
the reception of the handle of the turn-screw, and the metal been driven
in to the head in the other half. Hiding it under his jacket, he felt
that he was now prepared for escape.

He now asked himself whether he should go alone or take one or more of
his comrades into his confidence, and finally determined to give a young
Virginian officer named Geary, with whom he had been specially friendly
during his imprisonment, and Jackson, a chance of escape. He did not
like the latter, but he thought that after the reconciliation that had
taken place between them it was only right to take him rather than a
stranger. Drawing them aside, then, he told them that he had arranged a
mode of escape; it was impossible that all could avail themselves of it,
but that they were welcome to accompany him. They thanked him heartily
for the offer, and, when he explained the manner in which he intended to
make off, agreed to try their fortune with him.

"I propose," he said, "as soon as we are fairly beyond the prison, we
separate, and each try to gain the frontier as best he can. The fact
that three prisoners have escaped will soon be known all over the
country, and there would be no chance whatever for us if we kept
together. I will tell my boy to have three disguises ready; and when we
once put aside our uniforms I see no reason why, traveling separately,
suspicion should fall upon us; we ought to have no difficulty until at
any rate we arrive near the border, and there must be plenty of points
where we can cross without going anywhere near the Federal camps." The
others at once agreed that the chances of making their way separately
were much greater than if together. This being arranged, Vincent passed
a note next day to Dan, telling him to have three disguises in
readiness, and to be at the foot of the western wall, halfway along, at
twelve o'clock on the first wet night. A string would be thrown over,
with a knife fastened to it. He was to pull on the string till the rope
came into his hand, and to hold that tight until they were over. Vincent
chose this spot because it was equally removed from the sentry-boxes at
the corners of the yard, and because there was a stone seat in the yard
to which one end of the rope could be attached.

That night was fine, but the next was thick and misty. At nine o'clock
all were in bed, and he lay listening to the clocks in the distance. Ten
struck, and eleven, and when he thought it was approaching twelve he got
up and crept to the window. He was joined immediately by the others; the
turn-screw was set to work; and, as he expected, Vincent found no
trouble whatever with the screws, which were not yet rusted in the wood,
and turned immediately when the powerful screw-driver was applied to
them. When all were out the bar was carefully lifted from its place and
laid upon the floor.

The rope was then put round one of the other bars and drawn through it
until the two ends came together. These were then dropped to the ground
below. Geary went first, Jackson followed, and Vincent was soon standing
beside them. Taking one end of the rope, he pulled it until the other
passed round the bar and fell at their feet. All three were barefooted,
and they stole noiselessly across the yard to the seat, which was nearly
opposite their window. Vincent had already fastened his clasp-knife to
the end of the string, and he now threw it over the wall, which was
about twenty feet high.

He had tied a knot at forty feet from the end, and, standing close to
the wall, he drew in the string until the knot was in his hand. Another
two yards, and he knew that the knife was hanging a yard from the ground
against the wall. He now drew it up and down, hoping that the slight
noise the knife made against the wall might aid Dan in finding it. In
two or three minutes he felt a jerk, and knew that Dan had got it. He
fastened the end of the string to the rope and waited. The rope was
gradually drawn up; when it neared the end he fastened it to the stone
seat.

"Now," he said, "up you go, Geary."

The order in which they were to ascend had been settled by lot, as Geary
insisted that Vincent, who had contrived the whole affair, should be the
first to escape; but Vincent declined to accept the advantage, and the
three had accordingly tossed up for precedence.

Geary was quickly over, and lowered himself on the opposite side. The
others followed safely, but not without a good deal of scraping against
the wall, for the smallness of the rope added to the difficulty of
climbing it. However, the noise was so slight that they had little fear
of attracting attention, especially as the sentries would be standing in
their boxes, for the rain was now coming down pretty briskly. As soon as
they were down Vincent seized Dan by the hand.

"My brave lad," he said, "I owe you my freedom, and I sha'n't forget it.
Now, where are the clothes?"

"Here day are, sah. One is a rough suit, like a workingman's; another is
a black-and-white sort of suit--a check-suit; de oder one is for you--a
clargy's suit, sir. You make very nice young minister, for sure."

"All right, Dan!" Vincent said laughing; "give me the minister's suit."

"Then I will be the countryman," Geary said.

There was a little suppressed laughter as they changed their clothes in
the dark; and then, leaving their uniforms by the wall, they shook hands
and started at once in different directions, lest they might come across
some one who would, when the escape was known, remember four men having
passed him in the dark.

"Now, Dan, what is the next move?" Vincent asked as they walked off.
"Have you fixed upon any plan?"

"No special plan, sah, but I have brought a bag; you see I have him in
my hand."

"I suppose that's what you carried the clothes in?"

"No, sir; I carried dem in a bundle. Dis bag has got linen, and boots,
and oder tings for you, sah. What I tink am de best way is dis. Dar am a
train pass trou here at two o'clock and stop at dis station. Some people
always get out. Dar is an hotel just opposite the station, and some of
de passengers most always go there. I thought the best way for you would
be to go outside the station. Just when the train come in we walk across
de road wid the others and go to hotel. You say you want bedroom for
yo'self, and that your sarvant can sleep in de hall. Den in de morning
you get up and breakfast, and go off by de fust train."

"But then they may send down to look at the passengers starting, and I
should be taken at once."

"De train go out at seven o'clock, sah. I don't expect dey find dat you
have got away before dat."

"No, Dan. We all turn out at seven, and I shall be missed then; but it
will be some little time before the alarm is given, and they find out
how we got away, and send out search-parties. If the train is anything
like punctual we shall be off long before they get to the station."

"Besides, sah, dar are not many people knows your face, and it not
likely de bery man dat know you come to the station. Lots of oder places
to search, and dey most sure to tink you go right away--not tink you
venture to stop in town till the morning."

"That is so, Dan; and I think your plan is a capital one."

Dan's suggestion was carried out, and at seven o'clock next morning they
were standing on the platform among a number of other parsons waiting
for the train. Just as the locomotive's whistle was heard the sound of a
cannon boomed out from the direction of the prison.

"That means some of the prisoners have escaped," one of the porters on
the platform said. "There have been five or six of them got away in the
last two months, but most of them have been caught again before they
have gone far. You see, to have a chance at all, they have got to get
rid of their uniforms, and as we are all Unionists about here that ain't
an easy job for 'em to manage."

Every one on the platform joined in the conversation, asking which way
the fugitive would be likely to go, whether there were any cavalry to
send after him, what would be done to him if he were captured, and other
questions of the same kind, Vincent joining in the talk. It was a relief
to him when the train drew up, and he and Dan took their place in it,
traveling, however, in different cars. Once fairly away, Vincent had no
fear whatever of being detected, and could travel where he liked, for
outside the prison there were not ten people who knew his face
throughout the Northern States. It would be difficult for him to make
his way down into Virginia from the North as the whole line of frontier
there was occupied by troops, and patrols were on the watch night and
day to prevent persons from going through the lines. He therefore
determined to go west to St. Louis, and from there work his way down
through Missouri. After two days' railway traveling they reached St.
Louis, a city having a large trade with the South, and containing many
sympathizers with the Confederate cause. Vincent, having now no fear of
detection, went at once to an hotel, and taking up the newspaper, one of
the first paragraphs that met his eye was headed:

"Escape of three Confederate officers from Elmira. Great excitement was
caused on Wednesday at Elmira by the discovery that three Confederate
officers had, during the night, effected their escape from prison. One
of the bars of the window of the ward on the first floor in which they
were, with fifteen other Confederate officers, confined, had been
removed; the screws having been taken out by a large screw-driver which
they left behind them. They had lowered themselves to the yard, and
climbed over the wall by means of a rope which was found in position in
the morning. The rest of the prisoners professed an entire ignorance of
the affair, and declare that until they found the beds unoccupied in the
morning they knew nothing of the occurrence.

"This is as it may be, but it is certain they must have been aided by
traitors outside the prison, for the rope hung loose on the outside of
the wall, and must have been held by some one there as they climbed it.
The inside end was fastened to a stone seat, and they were thus enabled
to slide down it on the other side. Their uniforms were found lying at
the foot of the wall, and their accomplice had doubtless disguises ready
for them. The authorities of the prison are unable to account for the
manner in which the turn-screw and rope were passed in to them, or how
they communicated with their friends outside."

Then followed the personal description of each of the fugitives, and a
request that all loyal citizens would be on the look-out for them, and
would at once arrest any suspicious character unable to give a
satisfactory account of himself. As Vincent sat smoking in the hall of
the hotel he heard several present discussing the escape of the
prisoners.

"It does not matter about them one way or the other," one of the
speakers said. "They seem to be mere lads, and whether they escape or
not will not make any difference to any one. The serious thing is that
there must be some traitors among the prison officials, and that next
time, perhaps two or three generals may escape, and that would be a
really serious misfortune."

"We need not reckon that out at present," another smoker said. "We
haven't got three of the rebel generals yet, and as far as things seem
to be going on, we may have to wait some time before we have. They are
pretty well able to take care of themselves, I reckon."

"They are good men, some of them, I don't deny," the first speaker said;
"but they might as well give up the game. In the spring we shall have an
army big enough to eat them up."

"So I have heard two or three times before. Scott was going to eat them
up, McClellan was going to eat them up, then Pope was going to make an
end of 'em altogether. Now McClellan is having a try again, but somehow
or other the eating up hasn't come off yet. It looks to me rather the
other way."

There was an angry growl from two or three of those sitting round, while
others uttered a cordial "That's so."

"It seems to me, by the way you put it, that you don't wish to see this
business come to an end."

"That's where you are wrong now. I do wish to see it come to an end. I
don't want to see tens of thousands of men losing their lives because
one portion of these States wants to ride roughshod over the other. The
sooner the North looks this affair squarely in the face and sees that it
has taken up a bigger job than it can carry through, and agrees to let
those who wish to leave it go if they like, the better for all parties.
That's what I think about it."

"I don't call that Union talk," the other said angrily.

"Union or not Union, I mean to talk it, and I want to know who is going
to prevent me?"

The two men rose simultaneously from their chairs, and in a second the
crack of two revolvers sounded. As if they had only been waiting for the
signal, a score of other men leaped up and sprang at each other. They
had, as the altercation grew hotter, joined in with exclamations of
anger or approval, and Vincent saw that although the Unionists were the
majority the party of sympathizers with the South was a strong one.
Having neither arms nor inclination to join in a broil of this kind he
made his escape into the street the instant hostilities began, and
hurried away from the sound of shouts, oaths, the sharp cracks of
pistols, and the breaking of glass. Ten minutes later he returned. The
hotel was shut up, but an angry mob were assembled round the door
shouting, "Down with the rebels! down with the Secessionists!" and were
keeping up a loud knocking at the door. Presently a window upstairs
opened, and the proprietor put out his head.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I can assure you that the persons who were the
cause of this disturbance all left the hotel by the back way as soon as
the affair was over. I have sent for the police commissioner, and upon
his arrival he will be free to search the house, and to arrest any one
concerned in this affair."

The crowd were not satisfied, and renewed their knocking at the door;
but two or three minutes later an officer, with a strong body of police,
arrived on the spot. In a few words he told the crowd to disperse,
promising that the parties concerned in the affair would be taken in and
duly deal with. He then entered the house with four of his men, leaving
the rest to wait. Vincent entered with the constables, saying that he
was staying at the house. The fumes of gunpowder were still floating
about the hall, three bodies were lying on the floor, and several men
were binding up their wounds. The police-officer inquired into the
origin of the broil, and all present concurred in saying that it arose
from some Secessionists speaking insultingly of the army of the Union.

Search was then made in the hotel, and it was found that eight persons
were missing. One of the killed was a well-known citizen of the town; he
was the speaker on the Union side of the argument. The other two were
strangers, and no one could say which side they espoused. All those
present declared that they themselves were Union men, and it was
supposed that the eight who were missing were the party who had taken
the other side of the question. The evidence of each was taken down by
the police-officer. Vincent was not questioned, as, having entered with
the constables, it was supposed he was not present at the affair.

In the morning Vincent read in the local paper a highly colored account
of the fray. After giving a large number of wholly fictitious details of
the fray, it went on to say: "The victims were Cyrus D. Jenkins, a
much-esteemed citizen and a prominent Unionist; the other two were
guests at the hotel; one had registered as P. J. Moore of Vermont, the
other James Harvey of Tennessee. Nothing is as yet known as to the
persons whose rooms were unoccupied, and who had doubtless made their
escape as soon as the affray was over; but the examination of their
effects, which will be made by the police in the morning, will doubtless
furnish a clew by which they will be brought to justice."

Having read this, Vincent looked for the news as to the escape from
Elmira, being anxious to know whether his companions had been as
fortunate as himself in getting clear away. He was startled by reading
the following paragraph: "We are enabled to state that the police have
received a letter stating that one of the officers who escaped from
Elmira prison has adopted the disguise of a minister, and is traveling
through the country with a black servant. At present the authorities are
not disposed to attach much credit to this letter, and are inclined to
believe that it has been sent in order to put them on a wrong scent.
However a watch will doubtless be kept by the police throughout the
country for a person answering to this description."

Accustomed to rise early, Vincent was taking his breakfast almost alone,
only two or three of the other guests having made their appearance. He
finished his meal hastily, and went out to Dan, who was lounging in
front of the hotel.

"Dan, go upstairs at once, pack the bag, bring it down and get out with
it immediately. I will pay the bill. Don't stop to ask questions now."

Vincent then walked up to the desk at the end of the hall, at which a
clerk was sitting reading the paper. Sincerely hoping that the man's eye
had not fallen on this paragraph, he asked if his account was made out.
As he had fortunately mentioned on the preceding evening that he should
be leaving in the morning, the bill was ready; and the clerk, scarce
looking up from the paper, handed it to him. Vincent paid him the
amount, saying carelessly, "I think I have plenty of time to catch the
train for the east?"

The clerk glanced at the clock.

"Yes, it goes at 8, and you have twenty minutes. It's only five minutes'
walk to the station."


CHAPTER XI. FUGITIVES.

On leaving the hotel Vincent walked a short distance, and then stopped
until Dan came up to him.

"Anyting de matter, sah?"

"Yes, Dan. There is a notice in the paper that the police have obtained
information that I am traveling disguised as a minister, and have a
negro servant with me.."

"Who told dem dat?" Dan asked in surprise.

"We can talk about that presently, Dan; the great thing at present is to
get away from here. The train for the south starts at ten. Give me the
bag, and follow me at a distance. I will get you a ticket for Nashville,
and as you pass me in the station I will hand it to you. It must not be
noticed that we are traveling together. That is the only clew they have
got."

Dan obeyed his instructions. The journey was a long one. The train was
slow and stopped frequently; passengers got in and out at every station.
The morning's news from the various points at which the respective
forces were facing each other was the general topic of conversation, and
Vincent was interested in seeing how the tone gradually changed as the
passengers from St. Louis one by one left the train and their places
were taken by those of the more southern districts. At first the
sentiment expressed had been violently Northern, and there was no
dissent from the general chorus of hope and expectation that the South
were on their last legs and that the rebellion would shortly be stamped
out; but gradually, as the train approached the State of Tennessee, the
Unionist opinion, although expressed with even greater force and
violence, was by no means universal. Many men read their papers in
silence and took no part whatever in the conversation, but Vincent could
see from the angry glances which they shot at the speakers that the
sentiments uttered were distasteful to them. He himself had scarcely
spoken during the whole journey. He had for some time devoted himself to
the newspaper, and had then purchased a book from the newsboy who
perambulated the cars. Presently a rough-looking man who had been among
the wildest and most violent in his denunciation of the South said,
looking at Vincent:

"I see by the papers to-day that one of the cursed rebel officers who
gave them the slip at Elmira is traveling in the disguise of a minister.
I guess it's mighty unpleasant to know that even if you meet a parson in
a train like as not he is a rebel in disguise. Now, mister, may I ask
where you have come from and where you are going to?"

"You may ask what you like," Vincent said quietly; "but I am certainly
not going to answer impertinent questions."

A hum of approval was heard from several of the passengers.

"If you hadn't got that black coat on," the man said angrily, "I would
put you off the car in no time."

"Black coat or no black coat," Vincent said, "you may find it more
difficult than you think. My profession is a peaceful one; but even a
peaceful man, if assaulted, may defend himself. You say it's unpleasant
to know that if you travel with a man in a black coat he may be a
traitor. It's quite as unpleasant to me to know that if I travel with a
man in a brown one he may be a notorious ruffian, and may as likely as
not have just served his time in a penitentiary."

Two or three of the passengers laughed loudly. The man, starting up,
crossed the car to where Vincent was sitting and laid his hand roughly
on his shoulder.

"You have got to get out!" he said. "No man insults Jim Mullens twice."

"Take your hand off my shoulder," Vincent said quietly, "or you will be
sorry for it."

The man shifted his hold to the collar of Vincent's coat amid cries of
shame from some of the passengers, while the others were silent, even
those of his own party objecting to an assault upon a minister. It was
only the fact that the fellow was a notorious local ruffian that
prevented their expressing open disapproval of the act. As the man
grasped Vincent's collar with his right hand Vincent saw his left go
under his coat toward the pocket in the back of the trousers where
revolvers were always carried. In an instant he sprang to his feet, and
before the man, who was taken by surprise at the suddenness of the
movement, could steady himself, he struck him a tremendous blow between
the eyes, and at the same moment, springing at his throat, threw him
backward on to the floor of the carriage. As he fell the man drew out
his revolver, but Vincent grasped his arm and with a sharp twist
wrenched the revolver from his grasp, and leaping up, threw it out of
the open window. The ruffian rose to his feat, for a moment half dazed
by the violence with which he had fallen, and poured out a string of
