but as he was too tired to gather more fern, they lay down side by side,
and never stirred till sunrise next morning.

'I must go now,' said the bear, pulling the sleepy prince on to his
feet; 'but first you shall cut off the tip of my ear, and when you are
in any danger just wish yourself a bear and you will become one. One
good turn deserves another, you know.' And the boy did as he was bid,
and he and the bear bade each other farewell.

'I wonder how it feels to be a bear,' thought he to himself when he had
walked a little way; and he took out the tip from the breast of his coat
and wished hard that he might become a bear. The next moment his body
stretched out and thick black fur covered him all over. As before, his
hands were changed into paws, but when he tried to switch his tail
he found to his disgust that it would not go any distance. 'Why it
is hardly worth calling a tail!' said he. For the rest of the day he
remained a bear and continued his journey, but as evening came on the
bear-skin, which had been so useful when plunging through brambles in
the forest, felt rather heavy, and he wished himself a boy again. He was
too much exhausted to take the trouble of cutting any fern or seeking
for moss, but just threw himself down under a tree, when exactly
above his head he heard a great buzzing as a bumble-bee alighted on a
honeysuckle branch. 'What are you doing here?' asked the bee in a cross
voice; 'at your age you ought to be safe at home.'

'I am running away from the mermaid,' replied the boy; but the bee, like
the lion and the bear, was one of those people who never listen to
the answers to their questions, and only said: 'I am hungry. Give me
something to eat.'

The boy took his last loaf and flask out of his knapsack and laid them
on the ground, and they had supper together. 'Well, now I am going to
sleep,' observed the bee when the last crumb was gone, 'but as you are
not very big I can make room for you beside me,' and he curled up his
wings, and tucked in his legs, and he and the prince both slept soundly
till morning. Then the bee got up and carefully brushed every scrap of
dust off his velvet coat and buzzed loudly in the boy's ear to waken
him.

'Take a single hair from one of my wings,' said he, 'and if you are in
danger just wish yourself a bee and you will become one. One good turn
deserves another, so farewell, and thank you for your supper.' And
the bee departed after the boy had pulled out the hair and wrapped it
carefully in a leaf.

'It must feel quite different to be a bee from what it does to be a lion
or bear,' thought the boy to himself when he had walked for an hour or
two. 'I dare say I should get on a great deal faster,' so he pulled out
his hair and wished himself a bee.

In a moment the strangest thing happened to him. All his limbs seemed
to draw together, and his body to become very short and round; his head
grew quite tiny, and instead of his white skin he was covered with the
richest, softest velvet. Better than all, he had two lovely gauze wings
which carried him the whole day without getting tired.

Late in the afternoon the boy fancied he saw a vast heap of stones a
long way off, and he flew straight towards it. But when he reached the
gates he saw that it was really a great town, so he wished himself back
in his own shape and entered the city.

He found the palace doors wide open and went boldly into a sort of
hall which was full of people, and where men and maids were gossiping
together. He joined their talk and soon learned from them that the king
had only one daughter who had such a hatred to men that she would never
suffer one to enter her presence. Her father was in despair, and had
had pictures painted of the handsomest princes of all the courts in the
world, in the hope that she might fall in love with one of them; but it
was no use; the princess would not even allow the pictures to be brought
into her room.

'It is late,' remarked one of the women at last; 'I must go to my
mistress.' And, turning to one of the lackeys, she bade him find a bed
for the youth.

'It is not necessary,' answered the prince, 'this bench is good enough
for me. I am used to nothing better.' And when the hall was empty he
lay down for a few minutes. But as soon as everything was quiet in the
palace he took out the hair and wished himself a bee, and in this shape
he flew upstairs, past the guards, and through the keyhole into the
princess's chamber. Then he turned himself into a man again.

At this dreadful sight the princess, who was broad awake, began to
scream loudly. 'A man! a man!' cried she; but when the guards rushed in
there was only a bumble-bee buzzing about the room. They looked under
the bed, and behind the curtains, and into the cupboards, then came
to the conclusion that the princess had had a bad dream, and bowed
themselves out. The door had scarcely closed on them than the bee
disappeared, and a handsome youth stood in his place.

'I knew a man was hidden somewhere,' cried the princess, and screamed
more loudly than before. Her shrieks brought back the guards, but though
they looked in all kinds of impossible places no man was to be seen, and
so they told the princess.

'He was here a moment ago--I saw him with my own eyes,' and the guards
dared not contradict her, though they shook their heads and whispered to
each other that the princess had gone mad on this subject, and saw a
man in every table and chair. And they made up their minds that--let her
scream as loudly as she might--they would take no notice.

Now the princess saw clearly what they were thinking, and that in future
her guards would give her no help, and would perhaps, besides, tell some
stories about her to the king, who would shut her up in a lonely tower
and prevent her walking in the gardens among her birds and flowers. So
when, for the third time, she beheld the prince standing before her, she
did not scream but sat up in bed gazing at him in silent terror.

'Do not be afraid,' he said, 'I shall not hurt you'; and he began to
praise her gardens, of which he had heard the servants speak, and the
birds and flowers which she loved, till the princess's anger softened,
and she answered him with gentle words. Indeed, they soon became so
friendly that she vowed she would marry no one else, and confided to
him that in three days her father would be off to the wars, leaving his
sword in her room. If any man could find it and bring it to him he would
receive her hand as a reward. At this point a cock crew, and the youth
jumped up hastily saying: 'Of course I shall ride with the king to
the war, and if I do not return, take your violin every evening to the
seashore and play on it, so that the very sea-kobolds who live at the
bottom of the ocean may hear it and come to you.'

Just as the princess had foretold, in three days the king set out for
the war with a large following, and among them was the young prince, who
had presented himself at court as a young noble in search of adventures.
They had left the city many miles behind them, when the king suddenly
discovered that he had forgotten his sword, and though all his
attendants instantly offered theirs, he declared that he could fight
with none but his own.

'The first man who brings it to me from my daughter's room,' cried he,
'shall not only have her to wife, but after my death shall reign in my
stead.'

At this the Red Knight, the young prince, and several more turned their
horses to ride as fast as the wind back to the palace. But suddenly a
better plan entered the prince's head, and, letting the others pass him,
he took his precious parcel from his breast and wished himself a lion.
Then on he bounded, uttering such dreadful roars that the horses were
frightened and grew unmanageable, and he easily outstripped them, and
soon reached the gates of the palace. Here he hastily changed himself
into a bee, and flew straight into the princess's room, where he became
a man again. She showed him where the sword hung concealed behind a
curtain, and he took it down, saying as he did so: 'Be sure not to
forget what you have promised to do.'

The princess made no reply, but smiled sweetly, and slipping a golden
ring from her finger she broke it in two and held half out silently to
the prince, while the other half she put in her own pocket. He kissed
it, and ran down the stairs bearing the sword with him. Some way off he
met the Red Knight and the rest, and the Red Knight at first tried to
take the sword from him by force. But as the youth proved too strong for
him, he gave it up, and resolved to wait for a better opportunity.

This soon came, for the day was hot and the prince was thirsty.
Perceiving a little stream that ran into the sea, he turned aside, and,
unbuckling the sword, flung himself on the ground for a long drink.
Unluckily, the mermaid happened at that moment to be floating on the
water not very far off, and knew he was the boy who had been given her
before he was born. So she floated gently in to where he was lying, she
seized him by the arm, and the waves closed over them both. Hardly had
they disappeared, when the Red Knight stole cautiously up, and could
hardly believe his eyes when he saw the king's sword on the bank. He
wondered what had become of the youth, who an hour before had guarded
his treasure so fiercely; but, after all, that was no affair of his! So,
fastening the sword to his belt, he carried it to the king.

The war was soon over, and the king returned to his people, who welcomed
him with shouts of joy. But when the princess from her window saw that
her betrothed was not among the attendants riding behind her father, her
heart sank, for she knew that some evil must have befallen him, and
she feared the Red Knight. She had long ago learned how clever and how
wicked he was, and something whispered to her that it was he who would
gain the credit of having carried back the sword, and would claim her as
his bride, though he had never even entered her chamber. And she could
do nothing; for although the king loved her, he never let her stand in
the way of his plans.

The poor princess was only too right, and everything came to pass
exactly as she had foreseen it. The king told her that the Red Knight
had won her fairly, and that the wedding would take place next day, and
there would be a great feast after it.

In those days feasts were much longer and more splendid than they are
now; and it was growing dark when the princess, tired out with all she
had gone through, stole up to her own room for a little quiet. But the
moon was shining so brightly over the sea that it seemed to draw her
towards it, and taking her violin under her arm, she crept down to the
shore.

'Listen! listen! said the mermaid to the prince, who was lying stretched
on a bed of seaweeds at the bottom of the sea. 'Listen! that is your old
love playing, for mermaids know everything that happens upon earth.'

'I hear nothing,' answered the youth, who did not look happy. 'Take me
up higher, where the sounds can reach me.'

So the mermaid took him on her shoulders and bore him up midway to the
surface. 'Can you hear now?' she asked.

'No,' answered the prince, 'I hear nothing but the water rushing; I must
go higher still.'

Then the mermaid carried him to the very top. 'You must surely be able
to hear now?' said she.

'Nothing but the water,' repeated the youth. So she took him right to
the land.

'At any rate you can hear now?' she said again.

'The water is still rushing in my ears,' answered he; 'but wait a
little, that will soon pass off.' And as he spoke he put his hand into
his breast, and seizing the hair wished himself a bee, and flew straight
into the pocket of the princess. The mermaid looked in vain for him, and
coated all night upon the sea; but he never came back, and never more
did he gladden her eyes. But the princess felt that something strange
was about her, though she knew not what, and returned quickly to the
palace, where the young man at once resumed his own shape. Oh, what joy
filled her heart at the sight of him! But there was no time to be lost,
and she led him right into the hall, where the king and his nobles were
still sitting at the feast. 'Here is a man who boasts that he can do
wonderful tricks,' said she, 'better even than the Red Knight's! That
cannot be true, of course, but it might be well to give this impostor a
lesson. He pretends, for instance, that he can turn himself into a
lion; but that I do not believe. I know that you have studied the art
of magic,' she went on, turning to the Red Knight, 'so suppose you just
show him how it is done, and bring shame upon him.'

Now the Red Knight had never opened a book of magic in his life; but he
was accustomed to think that he could do everything better than other
people without any teaching at all. So he turned and twisted himself
about, and bellowed and made faces; but he did not become a lion for all
that.

'Well, perhaps it is very difficult to change into a lion. Make yourself
a bear,' said the princess. But the Red Knight found it no easier to
become a bear than a lion.

'Try a bee,' suggested she. 'I have always read that anyone who can do
magic at all can do that.' And the old knight buzzed and hummed, but he
remained a man and not a bee.

'Now it is your turn,' said the princess to the youth. 'Let us see if
you can change yourself into a lion.' And in a moment such a fierce
creature stood before them, that all the guests rushed out of the hall,
treading each other underfoot in their fright. The lion sprang at the
Red Knight, and would have torn him in pieces had not the princess held
him back, and bidden him to change himself into a man again. And in a
second a man took the place of the lion.

'Now become a bear,' said she; and a bear advanced panting and
stretching out his arms to the Red Knight, who shrank behind the
princess.

By this time some of the guests had regained their courage, and returned
as far as the door, thinking that if it was safe for the princess
perhaps it was safe for them. The king, who was braver than they, and
felt it needful to set them a good example besides, had never left
his seat, and when at a new command of the princess the bear once more
turned into a man, he was silent from astonishment, and a suspicion of
the truth began to dawn on him. 'Was it he who fetched the sword?' asked
the king.

'Yes, it was,' answered the princess; and she told him the whole story,
and how she had broken her gold ring and given him half of it. And the
prince took out his half of the ring, and the princess took out hers,
and they fitted exactly. Next day the Red Knight was hanged, as he
richly deserved, and there was a new marriage feast for the prince and
princess.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]




Pivi and Kabo



When birds were men, and men were birds, Pivi and Kabo lived in an
island far away, called New Claledonia. Pivi was a cheery little bird
that chirps at sunset; Kabo was an ugly black fowl that croaks in the
darkness. One day Pivi and Kabo thought that they would make slings, and
practice slinging, as the people of the island still do. So they went to
a banyan tree, and stripped the bark to make strings for their slings,
and next they repaired to the river bank to find stones. Kabo stood on
the bank of the river, and Pivi went into the water. The game was for
Kabo to sling at Pivi, and for Pivi to dodge the stones, if he could.
For some time he dodged them cleverly, but at last a stone from Kabo's
sling hit poor Pivi on the leg and broke it. Down went Pivi into the
stream, and floated along it, till he floated into a big hollow bamboo,
which a woman used for washing her sweet potatoes.

'What is that in my bamboo?' said the woman. And she blew in at one end,
and blew little Pivi out at the other, like a pea from a pea-shooter.

'Oh!' cried the woman, 'what a state you are in! What have you been
doing?'

'It was Kabo who broke my leg at the slinging game,' said Pivi.

'Well, I am sorry for you,' said the woman; 'will you come with me, and
do what I tell you?'

'I will!' said Pivi, for the woman was very kind and pretty. She took
Pivi into a shed where she kept her fruit laid him on a bed of mats,
and made him as comfortable as she could, and attended to his broken leg
without cutting off the flesh round the bone, as these people usually
do.

'You will be still, won't you, Pivi?' she said. 'If you hear a little
noise you will pretend to be dead. It is the Black Ant who will come and
creep from your feet up to your head. Say nothing, and keep quiet, won't
you, Pivi?'

'Certainly, kind lady,' said Pivi, 'I will lie as still as can be.'

'Next will come the big Red Ant--you know him?'

'Yes, I know him, with his feet like a grasshopper's.'

'He will walk over your body up to your head. Then you must shake all
your body. Do you understand, Pivi?'

'Yes, dear lady, I shall do just as you say.'

'Very good,' said the woman, going out and shutting the door.

Pivi lay still under his coverings, then a tiny noise was heard, and the
Black Ant began to march over Pivi, who lay quite still. Then came the
big Red Ant skipping along his body, and then Pivi shook himself all
over. He jumped up quite well again, he ran to the river, he looked into
the water and saw that he was changed from a bird into a fine young man!

'Oh, lady,' he cried, 'look at me now! I am changed into a man, and so
handsome!'

'Will you obey me again?' said the woman.

'Always; whatever you command I will do it,' said Pivi, politely.

'Then climb up that cocoa-nut tree, with your legs only, not using your
hands,' said the woman.

Now the natives can run up cocoa-nut trees like squirrels, some using
