her greatest effort, she burst into Juliet's balcony scene, ending with
the poison and the tomb. She felt sure that she surpassed herself, and
waited for applause. A ringing laugh made her tingle with indignation
and disappointment, as she went to stand before Miss Cameron, saying in
a tone of polite surprise:

'I have been told that I did it very well. I'm sorry you don't think
so.'

'My dear, it's very bad. How can it help being so? What can a child like
you know of love and fear and death? Don't try it yet. Leave tragedy
alone till you are ready for it.'

'But you clapped Ophelia.'

'Yes, that was very pretty. Any clever girl can do it effectively. But
the real meaning of Shakespeare is far above you yet, child. The comedy
bit was best. There you showed real talent. It was both comic and
pathetic. That's art. Don't lose it. The Portia was good declamation.
Go on with that sort of thing; it trains the voice--teaches shades of
expression. You've a good voice and natural grace--great helps both,
hard to acquire.'

'Well, I'm glad I've got something,' sighed Josie, sitting meekly on a
stool, much crestfallen, but not daunted yet, and bound to have her say
out.

'My dear little girl, I told you that you would not like what I should
say to you; yet I must be honest if I would really help you. I've had to
do it for many like you; and most of them have never forgiven me, though
my words have proved true, and they are what I advised them to be--good
wives and happy mothers in quiet homes. A few have kept on, and done
fairly well. One you will hear of soon, I think; for she has talent,
indomitable patience, and mind as well as beauty. You are too young
to show to which class you belong. Geniuses are very rare, and even at
fifteen seldom give much promise of future power.'

'Oh, I don't think I'm a genius!' cried Josie, growing calm and sober as
she listened to the melodious voice and looked into the expressive face
that filled her with confidence, so strong, sincere, and kindly was it.
'I only want to find out if I have talent enough to go on, and after
years of study to be able to act well in any of the good plays people
never tire of seeing. I don't expect to be a Mrs Siddons or a Miss
Cameron, much as I long to be; but it does seem as if I had something
in me which can't come out in any way but this. When I act I'm perfectly
happy. I seem to live, to be in my own world, and each new part is a new
friend. I love Shakespeare, and am never tired of his splendid people.
Of course, I don't understand it all; but it's like being alone at night
with the mountains and the stars, solemn and grand, and I try to imagine
how it will look when the sun comes up, and all is glorious and clear to
me. I can't see, but I feel the beauty, and long to express it.'

As she spoke with the most perfect self-forgetfulness Josie was pale
with excitement, her eyes shone, her lips trembled, and all her little
soul seemed trying to put into words the emotions that filled it to
overflowing. Miss Cameron understood, felt that this was something
more than a girlish whim; and when she answered there was a new tone
of sympathy in her voice, a new interest in her face, though she wisely
refrained from saying all she thought, well knowing what splendid dreams
young people build upon a word, and how bitter is the pain when the
bright bubbles burst.

'If you feel this, I can give you no better advice than to go on loving
and studying our great master,' she said slowly; but Josie caught the
changed tone, and felt, with a thrill of joy, that her new friend was
speaking to her now as to a comrade. 'It is an education in itself, and
a lifetime is not long enough to teach you all his secret. But there is
much to do before you can hope to echo his words. Have you the patience,
courage, strength, to begin at the beginning, and slowly, painfully, lay
the foundation for future work? Fame is a pearl many dive for and only
a few bring up. Even when they do, it is not perfect, and they sigh for
more, and lose better things in struggling for them.'

The last words seemed spoken more to herself than to her hearer, but
Josie answered quickly, with a smile and an expressive gesture:

'I got the bracelet in spite of all the bitter water in my eyes.'

'You did! I don't forget it. A good omen. We will accept it.'

Miss Cameron answered the smile with one that was like sunshine to the
girl, and stretched her white hands as if taking some invisible gift.
Then added in a different tone, watching the effect of her words on the
expressive face before her:

'Now you will be disappointed, for instead of telling you to come and
study with me, or go and act in some second-rate theatre at once, I
advise you to go back to school and finish your education. That is the
first step, for all accomplishments are needed, and a single talent
makes a very imperfect character. Cultivate mind and body, heart and
soul, and make yourself an intelligent, graceful, beautiful, and healthy
girl. Then, at eighteen or twenty, go into training and try your powers.
Better start for the battle with your arms in order, and save the hard
lesson which comes when we rush on too soon. Now and then genius carries
all before it, but not often. We have to climb slowly, with many slips
and falls. Can you wait as well as work?'

'I will!'

'We shall see. It would be pleasant to me to know that when I quit the
stage I leave behind me a well-trained, faithful, gifted comrade to
more than fill my place, and carry on what I have much at heart--the
purification of the stage. Perhaps you are she; but remember, mere
beauty and rich costumes do not make an actress, nor are the efforts of
a clever little girl to play great characters real art. It is all dazzle
and sham, and a disgrace and disappointment now. Why will the public be
satisfied with opera bouffe, or the trash called society plays when
a world of truth and beauty, poetry and pathos lies waiting to be
interpreted and enjoyed?'

Miss Cameron had forgotten to whom she spoke, and walked to and fro,
full of the noble regret all cultivated people feel at the low state of
the stage nowadays.

'That's what Uncle Laurie says; and he and Aunt Jo try to plan plays
about true and lovely things--simple domestic scenes that touch people's
hearts, and make them laugh and cry and feel better. Uncle says that
sort is my style, and I must not think of tragedy. But it's so much
nicer to sweep about in crowns and velvet trains than to wear everyday
clothes, and just be myself, though it is so easy.'

'Yet that is high art, child, and what we need for a time till we are
ready for the masters. Cultivate that talent of yours. It is a special
gift, this power to bring tears and smiles, and a sweeter task to touch
the heart than to freeze the blood or fire the imagination. Tell your
uncle he is right, and ask your aunt to try a play for you. I'll come
and see it when you are ready.'

'Will you? Oh! will you? We are going to have some at Christmas, with a
nice part for me. A simple little thing, but I can do it, and should be
so proud, so happy to have you there.'

Josie rose as she spoke, for a glance at the clock showed her that her
call was a long one; and hard as it was to end this momentous interview,
she felt that she must go. Catching up her hat she went to Miss Cameron,
who stood looking at her so keenly that she felt as transparent as a
pane of glass, and coloured prettily as she looked up, saying, with a
grateful little tremor in her voice:

'I can never thank you for this hour and all you have told me. I shall
do just what you advise, and mamma will be very glad to see me settled
at my books again. I can study now with all my heart, because it is to
help me on; and I won't hope too much, but work and wait, and try to
please you, as the only way to pay my debt.'

'That reminds me that I have not paid mine. Little friend, wear this
for my sake. It is fit for a mermaid, and will remind you of your first
dive. May the next bring up a better jewel, and leave no bitter water on
your lips!'

As she spoke, Miss Cameron took from the lace at her throat a pretty
pin of aquamarine, and fastened it like an order on Josie's proud bosom;
then lifting the happy little face, she kissed it very tenderly, and
watched it go smiling away with eyes that seemed to see into a future
full of the trials and the triumphs which she knew so well.

Bess expected to see Josie come flying in, all raptures and excitement,
or drowned in tears of disappointment, but was surprised at the
expression of calm content and resolution which she wore. Pride and
satisfaction, and a new feeling of responsibility both sobered and
sustained her, and she felt that any amount of dry study and long
waiting would be bearable, if in the glorious future she could be
an honour to her profession and a comrade to the new friend whom she
already adored with girlish ardour.

She told her little story to a deeply interested audience, and all
felt that Miss Cameron's advice was good. Mrs Amy was relieved at the
prospect of delay; for she did not want her niece to be an actress and
hoped the fancy would die out.

Uncle Laurie was full of charming plans and prophecies and wrote one
of his most delightful notes to thank their neighbour for her kindness;
while Bess, who loved art of all kinds, fully sympathized with her
cousin's ambitious hopes, only wondering why she preferred to act out
her visions rather than embody them in marble.

That first interview was not the last; for Miss Cameron was really
interested, and had several memorable conversations with the Laurences,
while the girls sat by, drinking in every word with the delight all
artists feel in their own beautiful world, and learning to see how
sacred good gifts are, how powerful, and how faithfully they should be
used for high ends, each in its own place helping to educate, refine,
and refresh.

Josie wrote reams to her mother; and when the visit ended rejoiced her
heart by bringing her a somewhat changed little daughter, who fell to
work at the once-detested books with a patient energy which surprised
and pleased everyone. The right string had been touched, and even French
exercises and piano practice became endurable, since accomplishments
would be useful by and by; dress, manners, and habits were all
interesting now, because 'mind and body, heart and soul, must be
cultivated', and while training to become an 'intelligent, graceful,
healthy girl', little Josie was unconsciously fitting herself to play
her part well on whatever stage the great Manager might prepare for her.



Chapter 9. THE WORM TURNS

Two very superior bicycles went twinkling up the road to Plumfield
one September afternoon, bearing two brown and dusty riders evidently
returning from a successful run, for though their legs might be a trifle
weary, their faces beamed as they surveyed the world from their lofty
perches with the air of calm content all wheelmen wear after they have
learned to ride; before that happy period anguish of mind and body is
the chief expression of the manly countenance.

'Go ahead and report, Tom; I'm due here. See you later,' said Demi,
swinging himself down at the door of the Dovecote.

'Don't peach, there's a good fellow. Let me have it out with Mother
Bhaer first,' returned Tom, wheeling in at the gate with a heavy sigh.

Demi laughed, and his comrade went slowly up the avenue, devoutly hoping
that the coast was clear; for he was the bearer of tidings which would,
he thought, convulse the entire family with astonishment and dismay.

To his great joy Mrs Jo was discovered alone in a grove of proof-sheets,
which she dropped, to greet the returning wanderer cordially. But after
the first glance she saw that something was the matter, recent events
having made her unusually sharp-eyed and suspicious.

'What is it now, Tom?' she asked, as he subsided into an easy-chair with
a curious expression of mingled fear, shame, amusement, and distress in
his brick-red countenance.

'I'm in an awful scrape, ma'am.'

'Of course; I'm always prepared for scrapes when you appear. What is
it? Run over some old lady who is going to law about it?' asked Mrs Jo
cheerfully.

'Worse than that,' groaned Tom.

'Not poisoned some trusting soul who asked you to prescribe, I hope?'

'Worse than that.'

'You haven't let Demi catch any horrid thing and left him behind, have
you?'

'Worse even than that.'

'I give it up. Tell me quick; I hate to wait for bad news.'

Having got his listener sufficiently excited, Tom launched his
thunderbolt in one brief sentence, and fell back to watch the effect.

'I'm engaged!'

Mrs Jo's proof-sheets flew wildly about as she clasped her hands,
exclaiming in dismay:

'If Nan has yielded, I'll never forgive her!'

'She hasn't; it's another girl.'

Tom's face was so funny as he said the words, that it was impossible
to help laughing; for he looked both sheepish and pleased, besides very
much perplexed and worried.

'I'm glad, very glad indeed! Don't care who it is; and I hope you'll
be married soon. Now tell me all about it,' commanded Mrs Jo, so much
relieved that she felt ready for anything.

'What will Nan say?' demanded Tom, rather taken aback at this view of
his predicament.

'She will be rejoiced to get rid of the mosquito who has plagued her so
long. Don't worry about Nan. Who is this "other girl"?'

'Demi hasn't written about her?'

'Only something about your upsetting a Miss West down at Quitno; I
thought that was scrape enough.'

'That was only the beginning of a series of scrapes. Just my luck! Of
course after sousing the poor girl I had to be attentive to her, hadn't
I? Everyone seemed to think so, and I couldn't get away, and so I was
lost before I knew it. It's all Demi's fault, he would stay there and
fuss with his old photos, because the views were good and all the girls
wanted to be taken. Look at these, will you, ma'am? That's the way we
spent our time when we weren't playing tennis'; and Tom pulled a
handful of pictures from his pocket, displaying several in which he was
conspicuous, either holding a sun-umbrella over a very pretty young lady
on the rocks, reposing at her feet in the grass, or perched on a piazza
railing with other couples in seaside costumes and effective attitudes.

'This is she of course?' asked Mrs Jo, pointing to the much-ruffled
damsel with the jaunty hat, coquettish shoes, and racquet in her hand.

'That's Dora. Isn't she lovely?' cried Tom, forgetting his tribulations
for a moment and speaking with lover-like ardour.

'Very nice little person to look at. Hope she is not a Dickens Dora?
That curly crop looks like it.'

'Not a bit; she's very smart; can keep house, and sew, and do lots
of things, I assure you, ma'am. All the girls like her, and she's
sweet-tempered and jolly, and sings like a bird, and dances beautifully,
and loves books. Thinks yours are splendid, and made me talk about you
no end.'

'That last sentence is to flatter me and win my help to get you out of
the scrape. Tell me first how you got in'; and Mrs Jo settled herself to
listen with interest, never tired of boys' affairs.

Tom gave his head a rousing rub all over to clear his wits, and plunged
into his story with a will.

'Well, we've met her before, but I didn't know she was there. Demi
wanted to see a fellow, so we went, and finding it nice and cool rested
over Sunday. Found some pleasant people and went out rowing; I had Dora,
and came to grief on a confounded rock. She could swim, no harm done,
only the scare and the spoilt gown. She took it well, and we got
friendly at once--couldn't help it, scrambling into that beast of a boat
while the rest laughed at us. Of course we had to stay another day to
see that Dora was all right. Demi wanted to. Alice Heath is down there
and two other girls from our college, so we sort of lingered along,
and Demi kept taking pictures, and we danced, and got into a tennis
tournament; and that was as good exercise as wheeling, we thought. Fact
is, tennis is a dangerous game, ma'am. A great deal of courting goes
on in those courts, and we fellows find that sort of "serving" mighty
agreeable, don't you know?'

'Not much tennis in my day, but I understand perfectly,' said Mrs Jo,
enjoying it all as much as Tom did.

'Upon my word, I hadn't the least idea of being serious,' he continued
slowly, as if this part of his tale was hard to tell; 'but everyone else
spooned, so I did. Dora seemed to like it and expect it, and of course
I was glad to be agreeable. She thought I amounted to something, though
Nan does not, and it was pleasant to be appreciated after years of
snubbing. Yes, it was right down jolly to have a sweet girl smile at you
all day, and blush prettily when you said a neat thing to her, and look
glad when you came, sorry when you left, and admire all you did, and
make you feel like a man and act your best. That's the sort of treatment
a fellow enjoys and ought to get if he behaves himself; not frowns and
cold shoulders year in and year out, and made to look like a fool when
he means well, and is faithful, and has loved a girl ever since he was a
boy. No, by Jove, it's not fair, and I won't stand it!'

Tom waxed warm and eloquent as he thought over his wrongs, and bounced
up to march about the room, wagging his head and trying to feel
aggrieved as usual, but surprised to find that his heart did not ache a
bit.

'I wouldn't. Drop the old fancy, for it was nothing more, and take up
the new one, if it is genuine. But how came you to propose, Tom, as you
must have done to be engaged?' asked Mrs Jo, impatient for the crisis of
the tale.

'Oh, that was an accident. I didn't mean it at all; the donkey did it,
