to their midst. The gates were opened, and without any question the
villagers passed out, and the gates were shut instantly behind them.

Walter and his comrade at once started at a brisk pace and walked all
night in the direction of Hennebon. Their clothes soon dried, and elated
at their escape from danger they struggled on briskly. When morning
broke they entered a wood, and lay there till evening, as they feared
to continue their journey lest they might fall into the hands of some
roving band of French horse. They were, too, dog-tired, and were asleep
a few minutes after they lay down. The sun was setting when they awoke,
and as soon as it was dark they resumed their journey.

"I don't know what you feel, Master Walter, but I am well-nigh famished.
It is thirty-six hours since I swallowed a bit of food, just as the
French were moving to the attack. Hard blows I don't mind--I have been
used to it; but what with fighting, and being in the water for five or
six hours, and climbing up that endless rope, and walking all night on
an empty stomach, it does not suit me at all."

"I feel ravenous too, Ralph, but there is no help for it. We shall eat
nothing till we are within the walls of Hennebon, and that will be
by daylight tomorrow if all goes well. Draw your belt an inch or two
tighter, it will help to keep out the wolf."

They kept on all night, and in the morning saw to their delight the
towers of Hennebon in the distance. It was well that it was no further,
for both were so exhausted from want of food that they could with
difficulty drag their legs along.

Upon entering the town Walter made his way at once to the quarters of
the leader. Sir Walter had just risen, and was delighted at the sight of
his esquire.

"I had given you up for dead," he exclaimed. "By what miracle could you
have escaped? Are you alone?"

"I have with me only my faithful follower Ralph Smith, who is below;
but, Sir Walter, for mercy's sake order that some food be placed before
us, or we shall have escaped from the French only to die of hunger here.
We have tasted nought since the attack on Vannes began. Have any beside
us escaped?"

"Lord Stafford contrived, with two or three others, to cut their way
out by a postern-gate, bringing with them Robert of Artois, who is
grievously wounded. None others, save you and your man-at-arms, have
made their way here."

In a few minutes a cold capon, several manchets of bread, and a stoop
of wine were placed before Walter, while Ralph's wants were attended to
below. When he had satisfied his hunger the young esquire related his
adventures to Sir Walter and several other knights and nobles, who had
by this time gathered in the room.

"In faith, Master Somers, you have got well out of your scrape," Sir
Walter exclaimed. "Had I been in your place I should assuredly have
perished, for I would a thousand times rather meet death sword in hand,
than drop down into the deep hole of that well. And your brains served
you shrewdly in devising a method of escape. What say you, gentlemen?"

All present joined in expressions of praise at the lad's coolness and
presence of mind.

"You are doing well, young sir," the English leader went on, "and have
distinguished yourself on each occasion on which we have been engaged.
I shall be proud when the time comes to bestow upon you myself the order
of knighthood if our king does not take the matter off my hands."

A little later Robert of Artois died of his wounds and disappointment at
the failure of his hopes.

In October King Edward himself set sail with a great army, and landing
in Brittany early in November marched forward through the country and
soon reduced Ploermel, Malestrail, Redon, and the rest of the province
in the vicinity of Vannes, and then laid siege to that town. As his
force was far more than sufficient for the siege, the Earls of Norfolk
and Warwick were despatched in the direction of Nantes to reconnoitre
the country and clear it of any small bodies of the enemy they might
encounter. In the meantime Edward opened negotiations with many of the
Breton lords, who, seeing that such powerful aid had arrived for the
cause of the Countess of Montford, were easily persuaded to change
sides. Among them were the lords of Clisson, Moheac, Machecoul, Retz,
and many others of less importance.

The Count of Valentinois, who commanded the garrison of Vannes,
supported the siege with great courage and fortitude, knowing that
Charles of Blois and the King of France were collecting a great army for
his relief. Uniting their forces they advanced towards the town. Before
the force of the French, 40,000 strong, the Earl of Norfolk had fallen
back and rejoined the king, but even after this junction the French
forces exceeded those of Edward fourfold. They advanced towards Vannes
and formed a large entrenched camp near that of the English, who thus,
while still besieging Vannes, were themselves enclosed by a vastly
superior force. The King of France himself arrived at the French
camp. The French, although so greatly superior, made no motion toward
attacking the English, but appeared bent upon either starving them out
or forcing them to attack the strongly entrenched position occupied by
the French.

Provisions were indeed running short in the English camp, and the
arrival of supplies from England was cut off by a strong fleet under
Don Louis, which cruised off the coast and captured all vessels arriving
with stores. At this moment two legates, the Cardinal Bishop of Preneste
and the Cardinal Bishop of Tusculum, arrived from the pope and strove
to mediate between the two sovereigns and to bring about a cessation of
hostilities, pointing out to them the scandal and desolation which their
rivalry caused in Christendom, the waste of noble lives, the devastation
of once happy provinces, and the effusion of innocent blood. Going from
camp to camp they exhorted, prayed, and reproached the rival sovereigns,
urging that while Christians were shedding each other's blood in vain,
the infidels were daily waxing bolder and more insolent. Their arguments
would have been but of little use had either of the monarchs felt sure
of victory. King Edward, however, felt that his position was growing
desperate, for starvation was staring him in the face, and only by
a victory over an immensely superior force in a strongly entrenched
position could he extricate himself. Upon the part of the French,
however, circumstances were occurring which rendered them anxious for
a release from their position, for they were not without their share
of suffering. While the English army lay on a hill the French camp was
pitched on low ground. An unusually wet season had set in with bitterly
cold wind. The rain was incessant, a pestilence had destroyed a vast
number of their horses, and their encampment was flooded. Their forces
were therefore obligated to spread themselves over the neighbouring
fields, and a sudden attack by the English might have been fatal.

Thus distress pressed upon both commanders, and the pope's legates
found their exertions at last crowned with success. A suspension of
hostilities was agreed to, and the Dukes of Burgundy and Bourbon on the
one side and the Earls of Lancaster, Northampton, and Salisbury on
the other, met as commissioners and agreed to a convention by which
a general truce was to be made from the date of the treaty to the
following Michaelmas, and to be prolonged from that day for the full
term of three years. It was agreed that the truce should embrace not
only the sovereigns, but all the adherents of each of them. The truce
was to hold good in Brittany between all parties, and the city of Vannes
was to be given into the hands of the cardinals to dispose of as
they chose. It was specially provided that in the case of any of the
adherents of either party in the Duchies of Gascony and Brittany waging
war against each other, neither of the monarchs should either directly
or indirectly meddle therewith, nor should the truce be at all broken
thereby.

Immediately the treaty was signed, on the 19th of January, 1343, the
King of France dismissed his army, and Edward sailed for England with
the greater part of his troops. The Countess of Montford and her son
accompanied him, and the possessions of her husband in Brittany were
left to the guardianship of her partisans, with a small but choice body
of English troops.

The towns which had fallen into their hands and still remained were
Brest, Quimper-Corentin, Quimperle, Redon, and Guerande; Vannes was
handed over to them by the cardinals, and Hennebon, of course, remained
in their possession.

Walter returned to England with Sir Walter Manny, and on reaching London
was received with delight by his old friends Geoffrey Ward and Giles
Fletcher, who were never tired of listening to his tales of the wars.
Dame Vernon also received him with great kindness, and congratulated him
warmly upon the very favourable account which Sir Walter Manny had given
of his zeal and gallantry.

The time now for a while passed very quietly. Walter and the other young
squires practised diligently, under the instructions of Sir Walter, at
knightly exercises. Walter learned to bear himself well on horseback and
to tilt in the ring. He was already a skilful swordsman, but he spared
no pains to improve himself with his weapons. The court was a gay one,
and Walter, as a favoured esquire of one of the foremost knights there,
was admitted to all that took place. His courtly education, of course,
included dancing, and when he went down, as he often did, for a long
chat with his old friends, Geoffrey often said, laughing, that he
was growing such a fine gentleman that he hardly liked to sit in his
presence; but although changed in manner, Walter continued to be, as
before, a frank, manly young fellow, and free from the affectations
which were so general among the young men of the court.



CHAPTER XI: A STORMY INTERVIEW


Soon after Walter's return from France Dame Vernon returned to her
country estate, and a year passed before he again saw her. During this
time the truce which had been established between England and France had
remained unbroken. It was certain, however, that ere long the two powers
would again come to blows. The King of England had honourably observed
the terms of the treaty. Upon his return home he had entirely disbanded
his army and had devoted his whole attention to increasing the trade and
prosperity of the country. The measures which he took to do this were
not always popular with the people of England, for seeing how greatly
they excelled the English manufacturers Edward encouraged large numbers
of Flemings and other foreign workmen to settle in London, and gave
them many privileges to induce them to do so; this the populace strongly
resented. There was a strong ill feeling against the Flemings and
serious popular riots took place, for the English traders and workmen
considered that these foreigners were taking the bread from their
mouths. The king, however, was wiser than his people, he saw that
although the English weavers were able to produce coarse cloths, yet
that all of the finer sort had to be imported from the Continent. He
deemed that in time the Flemings would teach their art to his subjects,
and that England would come to vie with the Low Countries in the quality
of her produce. Such was indeed afterwards the case, and England gained
greatly by the importation of the industrious Flemings, just as she
afterwards profited from the expulsion from France of tens of thousands
of Protestant workmen who brought here many of the manufactures of which
France had before the monopoly. The relations between England and the
Flemings were at this time very close, for the latter regarded England
as her protector against the ambition of the King of France.

But while King Edward had laid aside all thought of war, such was not
the case with Phillip of Valois. He had retired after the signature
of the treaty full of rage and humiliation; for hitherto in all their
struggles his English rival had had the better of him, and against
vastly superior forces had foiled all his efforts and had gained alike
glory and military advantage. King Edward had hardly set sail when
Phillip began to break the terms of truce by inciting the adherents
of Charles of Blois to attack those of De Montford, and by rendering
assistance to them with money and men. He also left no means untried
to detach Flanders from its alliance with England. Several castles and
towns in Brittany were wrested from the partisans of De Montford, and
King Edward, after many remonstrances at the breaches of the conditions
of the truce, began again to make preparations for taking the field.
Several brilliant tournaments were held and every means were taken to
stir up the warlike spirit of the people.

One day Walter had attended his lord to the palace and was waiting in
the anteroom with many other squires and gentlemen, while Sir Walter,
with some other noblemen, was closeted with the king, discussing the
means to be adopted for raising funds for a renewal of a war with
France, when a knight entered whom Walter had not previously seen at
court.

"Who is that?" he asked one of his acquaintances; "methinks I know his
face, though it passes my memory to say where I have seen it."

"He has been away from England for some two years," his friend answered.
"That is Sir James Carnegie; he is a cousin of the late Sir Jasper
Vernon; he left somewhat suddenly a short time after Dame Vernon had
that narrow escape from drowning that you wot of; he betook himself
then to Spain, where he has been fighting the Moors; he is said to be
a valiant knight, but otherwise he bears but an indifferent good
reputation."

Walter remembered the face now; it was that of the knight he had seen
enter the hut of the river pirate on the Lambeth marshes. When released
from duty he at once made his way to the lodging of Dame Vernon. Walter
was now nineteen, for a year had elapsed since the termination of the
French war, and he was in stature and strength the match of most men,
while his skill at knightly exercises, as well as with the sword, was
recognized as pre-eminent among all the young esquires of the court.

After the first greeting he said to Dame Vernon: "I think it right to
tell you, lady, that I have but now, in the king's anteroom, seen the
man who plotted against your life in the hut at Lambeth. His face is
a marked one and I could not mistake it. I hear that he is a cousin
of yours, one Sir James Carnegie, as you doubtless recognized from my
description of him. I came to tell you in order that you might decide
what my conduct should be. If you wish it so I will keep the secret
in my breast; but if you fear aught from him I will openly accuse him
before the king of the crime he attempted, and shall be ready to meet
him in the ordeal of battle should he claim it."

"I have seen Sir James," Lady Vernon said. "I had a letter writ in a
feigned hand telling him that his handiwork in the plot against my life
was known, and warning him that, unless he left England, the proofs
thereof would be laid before justice. He at once sailed for Spain,
whence, he has returned but a few days since. He does not know for
certain that I am aware of his plottings against us; but he must have
seen by my reception of him when he called that I no longer regard him
with the friendship which I formerly entertained. I have received a
message from him that he will call upon me this evening, and that he
trusts he will find me alone, as he would fain confer with me on private
matters. When I have learned his intentions I shall be the better able
to judge what course I had best adopt. I would fain, if it may be, let
the matter rest. Sir James has powerful interest, and I would not have
him for an open enemy if I can avoid it; besides, all the talk and
publicity which so grave an accusation against a knight, and he of mine
own family, would entail, would be very distasteful to me; but should I
find it necessary for the sake of my child, I shall not shrink from
it. I trust, however, that it will not come to that; but I shall not
hesitate, if need be, to let him know that I am acquainted with his evil
designs towards us. I will inform you of as much of our interview as it
is necessary that you should know."

That evening Sir James Carnegie called upon Dame Vernon. "I would not
notice it the other day, fair cousin," he said, in return for her stiff
and ceremonious greeting; "but methinks that you are mightily changed
in your bearing towards me. I had looked on my return from my long
journeying for something of the sisterly warmth with which you once
greeted me, but I find you as cold and hard as if I had been altogether
a stranger to you. I would fain know in what way I have forfeited your
esteem."

"I do not wish to enter into bygones, Sir James," the lady said, "and
would fain let the past sleep if you will let me. Let us then turn
without more ado to the private matters concerning which you wished to
speak with me."

"If such is your mood, fair dame, I must needs fall in with it, though
in no way able to understand your allusion to the past, wherein my
conscience holds me guiltless of aught which could draw upon me your
disfavour. I am your nearest male relative, and as such would fain
confer with you touching the future of young Mistress Edith, your
daughter. She is now nigh thirteen years of age, and is the heiress of
broad lands; is it not time that she were betrothed to one capable of
taking care of them for her, and leading your vassals to battle in these
troubled times?"

"Thanks, Sir James, for your anxiety about my child," Dame Vernon said
coldly. "She is a ward of the king. I am in no way anxious that an early
choice should be made for her; but our good Queen Philippa has promised
that, when the time shall come, his Majesty shall not dispose of her
hand without my wishes being in some way consulted; and I have no doubt
that when the time shall come that she is of marriageable age--and I
would not that this should be before she has gained eighteen years, for
I like not the over young marriages which are now in fashion--a knight
may be found for her husband capable of taking care of her and her
possessions; but may I ask if, in so speaking to me, you have anyone in
your mind's eye as a suitor for her hand?"

"Your manner is not encouraging, certes; but I had my plan, which would,
I hoped, have met with your approval. I am the young lady's cousin,
and her nearest male relative; and although we are within the limited
degrees, there will be no difficulty in obtaining a dispensation from
Rome. I am myself passably well off, and some of the mortgages which I
had been forced to lay upon my estates have been cleared off during my
absence. I have returned home with some reputation, and with a goodly
sum gained in the wars with the Moors. I am older than my cousin
certainly; but as I am still but thirty-two, this would not, I hope, be
deemed an obstacle, and methought that you would rather entrust her to
your affectionate cousin than to a stranger. The king has received me
very graciously, and would, I trust, offer no opposition to my suit were
it backed by your goodwill."

"I suppose, Sir James," Dame Vernon said, "that I should thank you for
