Sir Harold Broome. Her brother, who but a year ago became lord of
Broomecastle at the death of his father, was one of the queen's men, and
it was he, I believe, who brought Sir Roland Somers to that side. He was
slain on the same night as Mortimer, and his lands, like those of Sir
Roland, have been seized by the crown. The child upstairs is by right
heir to both estates, seeing that his uncle died unmarried. They will
doubtless be conferred upon those who have aided the young king in
freeing himself from his mother's domination, for which, indeed,
although I lament that Lady Alice should have suffered so sorely in the
doing of it, I blame him not at all. He is a noble prince and will make
us a great king, and the doings of his mother have been a shame to
us all. However, I meddle not in politics. If the poor lady dies, as
methinks is well-nigh certain, Bertha and I will bring up the boy as our
own. I have talked it over with my wife, and so far she and I are not of
one mind. I think it will be best to keep him in ignorance of his birth
and lineage, since the knowledge cannot benefit him, and will but render
him discontented with his lot and make him disinclined to take to my
calling, in which he might otherwise earn a living and rise to be a
respected citizen. But Bertha hath notions. You have not taken a wife to
yourself, Master Geoffrey, or you would know that women oft have fancies
which wander widely from hard facts, and she says she would have him
brought up as a man-at-arms, so that he may do valiant deeds, and win
back some day the title and honour of his family."

Geoffrey Ward laughed. "Trust a woman for being romantic," he said.
"However, Master Fletcher, you need not for the present trouble about
the child's calling, even should its mother die. At any rate, whether he
follows your trade, or whether the blood in his veins leads him to take
to martial deeds, the knowledge of arms may well be of use to him, and I
promise you that such skill as I have I will teach him when he grows
old enough to wield sword and battle-axe. As you know I may, without
boasting, say that he could scarce have a better master, seeing that I
have for three years carried away the prize for the best sword-player
at the sports. Methinks the boy will grow up into a strong and stalwart
man, for he is truly a splendid lad. As to archery, he need not go far
to learn it, since your apprentice, Will Parker, last year won the prize
as the best marksman in the city bounds. Trust me, if his tastes lie
that way we will between us turn him out a rare man-at-arms. But I must
stand gossiping no longer; the rumours that we are likely ere long to
have war with France, have rarely bettered my trade. Since the wars in
Scotland men's arms have rusted somewhat, and my two men are hard at
work mending armour and fitting swords to hilts, and forging pike-heads.
You see I am a citizen though I dwell outside the bounds, because house
rent is cheaper and I get my charcoal without paying the city dues. So I
can work somewhat lower than those in the walls, and I have good custom
from many in Kent, who know that my arms are of as good temper as those
turned out by any craftsman in the city."

Giles Fletcher's anticipations as to the result of his guest's illness
turned out to be well founded. The fever abated, but left her prostrate
in strength. For a few weeks she lingered; but she seemed to have little
hold of life, and to care not whether she lived or died. So, gradually
she faded away.

"I know you will take care of my boy as if he were your own, Bertha,"
she said one day; "and you and your husband will be far better
protectors for him than I should have been had I lived. Teach him to be
honest and true. It were better, methinks, that he grew up thinking you
his father and mother, for otherwise he may grow discontented with
his lot; but this I leave with you, and you must speak or keep silent
according as you see his disposition and mind. If he is content to
settle down to a peaceful life here, say nought to him which would
unsettle his mind; but if Walter turn out to have an adventurous
disposition, then tell him as much as you think fit of his history, not
encouraging him to hope to recover his father's lands and mine, for that
can never be, seeing that before that time can come they would have been
enjoyed for many years by others; but that he may learn to bear himself
bravely and gently as becomes one of good blood."

A few days later Lady Alice breathed her last, and at her own request
was buried quietly and without pomp, as if she had been a child of the
bowman, a plain stone, with the name "Dame Alice Somers", marking the
grave.

The boy grew and throve until at fourteen years old there was no
stronger or sturdier lad of his age within the city bounds. Giles had
caused him to be taught to read and write, accomplishments which were
common among the citizens, although they were until long afterwards rare
among the warlike barons. The greater part of his time, however, was
spent in sports with lads of his own age in Moorfields beyond the walls.
The war with France was now raging, and, as was natural, the boys in
their games imitated the doings of their elders, and mimic battles,
ofttimes growing into earnest, were fought between the lads of
the different wards. Walter Fletcher, as he was known among his
play-fellows, had by his strength and courage won for himself the proud
position of captain of the boys of the ward of Aldgate.

Geoffrey Ward had kept his word, and had already begun to give the lad
lessons in the use of arms. When not engaged otherwise Walter would,
almost every afternoon, cross London Bridge and would spend hours in the
armourer's forge. Geoffrey's business had grown, for the war had caused
a great demand for arms, and he had now six men working in the forge. As
soon as the boy could handle a light tool Geoffrey allowed him to work,
and although not able to wield the heavy sledge Walter was able to do
much of the finer work. Geoffrey encouraged him in this, as, in the
first place, the use of the tools greatly strengthened the boy's
muscles, and gave him an acquaintance with arms. Moreover, Geoffrey was
still a bachelor, and he thought that the boy, whom he as well as Giles
had come to love as a son, might, should he not take up the trade of
war, prefer the occupation of an armourer to that of a bowmaker, in
which case he would take him some day as his partner in the forge. After
work was over and the men had gone away, Geoffrey would give the lad
instructions in the use of the arms at which he had been at work, and so
quick and strong was he that he rapidly acquired their use, and Geoffrey
foresaw that he would one day, should his thoughts turn that way, prove
a mighty man-at-arms.

It was the knowledge which he acquired from Geoffrey which had much to
do with Walter's position among his comrades. The skill and strength
which he had acquired in wielding the hammer, and by practice with the
sword rendered him a formidable opponent with the sticks, which
formed the weapons in the mimic battles, and indeed not a few were the
complaints which were brought before Giles Fletcher of bruises and hurts
caused by him.

"You are too turbulent, Walter," the bowyer said one day when a
haberdasher from the ward of Aldersgate came to complain that his son's
head had been badly cut by a blow with a club from Walter Fletcher. "You
are always getting into trouble, and are becoming the terror of other
boys. Why do you not play more quietly? The feuds between the boys of
different wards are becoming a serious nuisance, and many injuries have
been inflicted. I hear that the matter has been mentioned in the Common
Council, and that there is a talk of issuing an order that no boy not
yet apprenticed to a trade shall be allowed to carry a club, and that
any found doing so shall be publicly whipped."

"I don't want to be turbulent," Walter said; "but if the Aldersgate boys
will defy us, what are we to do? I don't hit harder than I can help, and
if Jonah Harris would leave his head unguarded I could not help hitting
it."

"I tell you it won't do, Walter," Giles said. "You will be getting
yourself into sore trouble. You are growing too masterful altogether,
and have none of the quiet demeanour and peaceful air which becomes an
honest citizen. In another six months you will be apprenticed, and then
I hope we shall hear no more of these doings."

"My father is talking of apprenticing me, Master Geoffrey," Walter said
that evening. "I hope that you will, as you were good enough to promise,
talk with him about apprenticing me to your craft rather than to his. I
should never take to the making of bows, though, indeed, I like well
to use them; and Will Parker, who is teaching me says that I show rare
promise; but it would never be to my taste to stand all day sawing, and
smoothing, and polishing. One bow is to me much like another, though my
father holds that there are rare differences between them; but it is a
nobler craft to work on iron, and next to using arms the most pleasant
thing surely is to make them. One can fancy what good blows the sword
will give and what hard knocks the armour will turn aside; but some day,
Master Geoffrey, when I have served my time, I mean to follow the army.
There is always work there for armourers to do, and sometimes at a pinch
they may even get their share of fighting."

Walter did not venture to say that he would prefer to be a man-at-arms,
for such a sentiment would be deemed as outrageous in the ears of a
quiet city craftsman as would the proposal of the son of such a man
nowadays to enlist as a soldier. The armourer smiled; he knew well
enough what was in Walter's mind. It had cost Geoffrey himself a hard
struggle to settle down to a craft, and deemed it but natural that
with the knightly blood flowing in Walter's veins he should long to
distinguish himself in the field. He said nothing of this, however, but
renewed his promise to speak to Giles Fletcher, deeming that a few years
passed in his forge would be the best preparation which Walter could
have for a career as a soldier.



CHAPTER II: THE HUT IN THE MARSHES


A week later a party of knights and court gallants, riding across the
fields without the walls, checked their horses to look at a struggle
which was going on between two parties of boys. One, which was
apparently the most powerful, had driven the other off from a heap of
rubbish which had been carried without the walls. Each party had a flag
attached to a stick, and the boys were armed with clubs such as those
carried by the apprentice boys. Many of them carried mimic shields made
of wood, and had stuffed their flat caps with wool or shavings, the
better to protect their heads from blows. The smaller party had just
been driven from the heap, and their leader was urging them to make
another effort to regain it.

"That is a gallant-looking lad, and a sturdy, my Lord de Vaux," a boy of
about ten years of age said. "He bears himself like a young knight, and
he has had some hard knocks, for, see, the blood is streaming down his
face. One would scarcely expect to see these varlets of the city playing
so roughly."

"The citizens have proved themselves sturdy fighters before now, my
prince," the other said; "they are ever independent, and hold to their
rights even against the king. The contingent which the city sends to the
wars bears itself as well as those of any of the barons."

"See!" the boy interrupted, "they are going to charge again. Their
leader has himself seized the flag and has swung his shield behind him,
just as a knight might do if leading the stormers against a place of
strength. Let us stop till we see the end of it."

With a shout of "Aldgate! Aldgate!" the leader of the assailants dashed
forward, followed by his comrades, and with a rush reached the top of
the heap.

"Well done!" the young prince exclaimed, clapping his hands. "See how
he lays about him with that club of his. There, he has knocked down the
leader of the defenders as if his club had been a battle-axe. Well done,
young sir, well done! But his followers waver. The others are too strong
for them. Stand, you cowards, rally round your leader!" and in his
enthusiasm the young prince urged his horse forward to the scene of
conflict.

But the assailants were mastered; few of them could gain the top of the
heap, and those who did so were beaten back from it by the defenders.
Heavy blows were exchanged, and blood flowed freely from many of their
heads and faces, for in those days boys thought less than they do now
of hard knocks, and manliness and courage were considered the first of
virtues. Their leader, however, still stood his ground on the crest,
though hardly pressed on all sides, and used his club both to strike and
parry with a skill which aroused the warmest admiration on the part of
the prince. In vain his followers attempted to come to his rescue; each
time they struggled up the heap they were beaten back again by those on
the crest.

"Yield thee prisoner," the assailants of their leader shouted, and the
prince in his excitement echoed the cry. The lad, however, heard or
heeded them not. He still kept his flag aloft in his left hand. With a
sudden spring he struck down one of his opponents, plucked up their flag
from the ground, and then fought his way back through his foes to the
edge of the battleground; then a heavy blow struck him on the temple,
and, still holding the flags, he rolled senseless to the foot of the
heap. The defenders with shouts of triumph were rushing down when the
prince urged his horse forward.

"Cease!" he said authoritatively. "Enough has been done, my young
masters, and the sport is becoming a broil."

Hitherto the lads, absorbed in their strife, had paid but little heed
to the party of onlookers; but at the word they at once arrested their
arms, and, baring their heads, stood still in confusion.

"No harm is done," the prince said, "though your sport is of the
roughest; but I fear that your leader is hurt, he moves not; lift his
head from the ground." The boy was indeed still insensible. "My lords,"
the prince said to the knights who had now ridden up, "I fear that this
boy is badly hurt; he is a gallant lad, and has the spirit of a true
knight in him, citizen's son though he be. My Lord de Vaux, will you bid
your squire ride at full speed to the Tower and tell Master Roger, the
leech, to come here with all haste, and to bring such nostrums as may be
needful for restoring the boy to life."

The Tower was but half a mile distant, but before Master Roger arrived
Walter had already recovered consciousness, and was just sitting up when
the leech hurried up to the spot.

"You have arrived too late, Master Roger," the prince said; "but I doubt
not that a dose of cordials may yet be of use, for he is still dazed,
and the blow he got would have cracked his skull had it been a thin
one."

The leech poured some cordial from a vial into a small silver cup and
held it to the boy's lips. It was potent and nigh took his breath away;
but when he had drunk it he struggled to his feet, looking ashamed and
confused when he saw himself the centre of attention of so many knights
of the court.

"What is thy name, good lad?" the prince asked.

"I am known as Walter Fletcher."

"You are a brave lad," the prince said, "and if you bear you as well as
a man as you did but now, I would wish no better to ride beside me
in the day of battle. Should the time ever come when you tire of the
peaceable life of a citizen and wish to take service in the wars, go to
the Tower and ask boldly for the Prince of Wales, and I will enroll you
among my own men-at-arms, and I promise you that you shall have your
share of fighting as stark as that of the assault of yon heap. Now, my
lords, let us ride on; I crave your pardon for having so long detained
you."

Walter was some days before he could again cross London Bridge to
inform his friend Geoffrey of the honour which had befallen him of being
addressed by the Prince of Wales. During the interval he was forced to
lie abed, and he was soundly rated by Master Giles for again getting
into mischief. Geoffrey was far more sympathetic, and said "Well,
Walter, although I would not that Gaffer Giles heard me say so, I think
you have had a piece of rare good fortune. It may be that you may never
have cause to recall the young prince's promise to him; but should
you some day decide to embrace the calling of arms, you could wish for
nothing better than to ride behind the Prince of Wales. He is, by all
accounts, of a most noble and generous disposition, and is said, young
as he is, to be already highly skilled in arms. Men say that he will be
a wise king and a gallant captain, such a one as a brave soldier might
be proud to follow; and as the king will be sure to give him plenty of
opportunities of distinguishing himself, those who ride with him may be
certain of a chance of doing valorous deeds. I will go across the bridge
tomorrow, and will have a talk with Master Fletcher. The sooner you are
apprenticed, the sooner you will be out of your time; and since Madge
married eight years since I have been lonely in the house and shall be
glad to have you with me."

Geoffrey Ward found his friend more ready to accede to his request, that
Walter should be apprenticed to him, than he had expected. The bowyer,
indeed, was a quiet man, and the high spirits and somewhat turbulent
disposition of his young charge gave him so much uneasiness, that he
was not sorry the responsibility of keeping him in order should be
undertaken by Geoffrey. Moreover, he could not but agree with the
argument, that the promise of the Prince of Wales offered a more
favourable opportunity for Walter to enter upon the career of arms and
so, perhaps, someday to win his way back to rank and honours than
could have been looked for. Therefore, on the following week Walter
was indentured to the armourer, and, as was usual at the time, left his
abode in Aldgate and took up his residence with his master. He threw
himself with his whole heart into the work, and by the time he was
fifteen was on the way to become a skilful craftsman. His frame and
muscles developed with labour, and he was now able to swing all save the
very heaviest hammers in the shop. He had never abated in his practice
at arms, and every day when work was over, he and his master had a
long bout together with cudgel or quarterstaff, sword or axe; Walter of
course used light weapons, but so quick was he with them that Geoffrey
Ward acknowledged that he needed to put out all his skill to hold his
own with his pupil. But it was not alone with Geoffrey that Walter had
an opportunity of learning the use of arms. Whenever a soldier, returned
from the wars, came to have a weapon repaired by the armourer, he would
be sure of an invitation to come in in the evening and take a stoup of
ale, and tell of the battles and sieges he had gone through, and in the
course of the evening would be asked to have a bout of arms with the
young apprentice, whom Geoffrey represented as being eager to learn how
to use the sword as well as how to make it.

Thus Walter became accustomed to different styles of fighting, but found
that very few, indeed, of their visitors were nearly so well skilled
with their arms as his master. Some of the soldiers were mortified at
finding themselves unable to hold their own with a boy; others would
take their reverses in good part and would come again, bringing with
them some comrade known to be particularly skilled with his weapons,
