believed that his grandfather was going to do what was right and
generous. He could not quite make up his mind to let him discover that
he had no inclination to be generous at all, and that he wanted his
own way on all occasions, whether it was right or wrong. It was such
a novelty to be regarded with admiration as a benefactor of the entire
human race, and the soul of nobility, that he did not enjoy the idea of
looking into the affectionate brown eyes, and saying: "I am a violent,
selfish old rascal; I never did a generous thing in my life, and I don't
care about Earl's Court or the poor people"--or something which would
amount to the same thing. He actually had learned to be fond enough
of that small boy with the mop of yellow love-locks, to feel that he
himself would prefer to be guilty of an amiable action now and then.
And so--though he laughed at himself--after some reflection, he sent for
Newick, and had quite a long interview with him on the subject of the
Court, and it was decided that the wretched hovels should be pulled down
and new houses should be built.

"It is Lord Fauntleroy who insists on it," he said dryly; "he thinks it
will improve the property. You can tell the tenants that it's his
idea." And he looked down at his small lordship, who was lying on the
hearth-rug playing with Dougal. The great dog was the lad's constant
companion, and followed him about everywhere, stalking solemnly after
him when he walked, and trotting majestically behind when he rode or
drove.

Of course, both the country people and the town people heard of the
proposed improvement. At first, many of them would not believe it; but
when a small army of workmen arrived and commenced pulling down the
crazy, squalid cottages, people began to understand that little Lord
Fauntleroy had done them a good turn again, and that through his
innocent interference the scandal of Earl's Court had at last been
removed. If he had only known how they talked about him and praised him
everywhere, and prophesied great things for him when he grew up, how
astonished he would have been! But he never suspected it. He lived his
simple, happy, child life,--frolicking about in the park; chasing the
rabbits to their burrows; lying under the trees on the grass, or on
the rug in the library, reading wonderful books and talking to the Earl
about them, and then telling the stories again to his mother; writing
long letters to Dick and Mr. Hobbs, who responded in characteristic
fashion; riding out at his grandfather's side, or with Wilkins as
escort. As they rode through the market town, he used to see the people
turn and look, and he noticed that as they lifted their hats their
faces often brightened very much; but he thought it was all because his
grandfather was with him.

"They are so fond of you," he once said, looking up at his lordship with
a bright smile. "Do you see how glad they are when they see you? I hope
they will some day be as fond of me. It must be nice to have EVERYbody
like you." And he felt quite proud to be the grandson of so greatly
admired and beloved an individual.

When the cottages were being built, the lad and his grandfather used to
ride over to Earl's Court together to look at them, and Fauntleroy
was full of interest. He would dismount from his pony and go and make
acquaintance with the workmen, asking them questions about building and
bricklaying, and telling them things about America. After two or three
such conversations, he was able to enlighten the Earl on the subject of
brick-making, as they rode home.

"I always like to know about things like those," he said, "because you
never know what you are coming to."

When he left them, the workmen used to talk him over among themselves,
and laugh at his odd, innocent speeches; but they liked him, and
liked to see him stand among them, talking away, with his hands in his
pockets, his hat pushed back on his curls, and his small face full
of eagerness. "He's a rare un," they used to say. "An' a noice little
outspoken chap, too. Not much o' th' bad stock in him." And they would
go home and tell their wives about him, and the women would tell each
other, and so it came about that almost every one talked of, or knew
some story of, little Lord Fauntleroy; and gradually almost every
one knew that the "wicked Earl" had found something he cared for at
last--something which had touched and even warmed his hard, bitter old
heart.

But no one knew quite how much it had been warmed, and how day by day
the old man found himself caring more and more for the child, who was
the only creature that had ever trusted him. He found himself looking
forward to the time when Cedric would be a young man, strong and
beautiful, with life all before him, but having still that kind heart
and the power to make friends everywhere, and the Earl wondered what the
lad would do, and how he would use his gifts. Often as he watched the
little fellow lying upon the hearth, conning some big book, the light
shining on the bright young head, his old eyes would gleam and his cheek
would flush.

"The boy can do anything," he would say to himself, "anything!"

He never spoke to any one else of his feeling for Cedric; when he spoke
of him to others it was always with the same grim smile. But Fauntleroy
soon knew that his grandfather loved him and always liked him to be
near--near to his chair if they were in the library, opposite to him at
table, or by his side when he rode or drove or took his evening walk on
the broad terrace.

"Do you remember," Cedric said once, looking up from his book as he lay
on the rug, "do you remember what I said to you that first night about
our being good companions? I don't think any people could be better
companions than we are, do you?"

"We are pretty good companions, I should say," replied his lordship.
"Come here."

Fauntleroy scrambled up and went to him.

"Is there anything you want," the Earl asked; "anything you have not?"

The little fellow's brown eyes fixed themselves on his grandfather with
a rather wistful look.

"Only one thing," he answered.

"What is that?" inquired the Earl.

Fauntleroy was silent a second. He had not thought matters over to
himself so long for nothing.

"What is it?" my lord repeated.

Fauntleroy answered.

"It is Dearest," he said.

The old Earl winced a little.

"But you see her almost every day," he said. "Is not that enough?"

"I used to see her all the time," said Fauntleroy. "She used to kiss me
when I went to sleep at night, and in the morning she was always there,
and we could tell each other things without waiting."

The old eyes and the young ones looked into each other through a moment
of silence. Then the Earl knitted his brows.

"Do you NEVER forget about your mother?" he said.

"No," answered Fauntleroy, "never; and she never forgets about me.
I shouldn't forget about YOU, you know, if I didn't live with you. I
should think about you all the more."

"Upon my word," said the Earl, after looking at him a moment longer, "I
believe you would!"

The jealous pang that came when the boy spoke so of his mother seemed
even stronger than it had been before; it was stronger because of this
old man's increasing affection for the boy.

But it was not long before he had other pangs, so much harder to face
that he almost forgot, for the time, he had ever hated his son's wife at
all. And in a strange and startling way it happened. One evening, just
before the Earl's Court cottages were completed, there was a grand
dinner party at Dorincourt. There had not been such a party at the
Castle for a long time. A few days before it took place, Sir Harry
Lorridaile and Lady Lorridaile, who was the Earl's only sister, actually
came for a visit--a thing which caused the greatest excitement in the
village and set Mrs. Dibble's shop-bell tinkling madly again, because
it was well known that Lady Lorridaile had only been to Dorincourt once
since her marriage, thirty-five years before. She was a handsome old
lady with white curls and dimpled, peachy cheeks, and she was as good
as gold, but she had never approved of her brother any more than did the
rest of the world, and having a strong will of her own and not being
at all afraid to speak her mind frankly, she had, after several lively
quarrels with his lordship, seen very little of him since her young
days.

She had heard a great deal of him that was not pleasant through the
years in which they had been separated. She had heard about his neglect
of his wife, and of the poor lady's death; and of his indifference to
his children; and of the two weak, vicious, unprepossessing elder boys
who had been no credit to him or to any one else. Those two elder
sons, Bevis and Maurice, she had never seen; but once there had come to
Lorridaile Park a tall, stalwart, beautiful young fellow about eighteen
years old, who had told her that he was her nephew Cedric Errol, and
that he had come to see her because he was passing near the place and
wished to look at his Aunt Constantia of whom he had heard his mother
speak. Lady Lorridaile's kind heart had warmed through and through at
the sight of the young man, and she had made him stay with her a week,
and petted him, and made much of him and admired him immensely. He was
so sweet-tempered, light-hearted, spirited a lad, that when he went
away, she had hoped to see him often again; but she never did, because
the Earl had been in a bad humor when he went back to Dorincourt,
and had forbidden him ever to go to Lorridaile Park again. But Lady
Lorridaile had always remembered him tenderly, and though she feared he
had made a rash marriage in America, she had been very angry when she
heard how he had been cast off by his father and that no one really knew
where or how he lived. At last there came a rumor of his death, and then
Bevis had been thrown from his horse and killed, and Maurice had died in
Rome of the fever; and soon after came the story of the American child
who was to be found and brought home as Lord Fauntleroy.

"Probably to be ruined as the others were," she said to her husband,
"unless his mother is good enough and has a will of her own to help her
to take care of him."

But when she heard that Cedric's mother had been parted from him she was
almost too indignant for words.

"It is disgraceful, Harry!" she said. "Fancy a child of that age being
taken from his mother, and made the companion of a man like my brother!
He will either be brutal to the boy or indulge him until he is a little
monster. If I thought it would do any good to write----"

"It wouldn't, Constantia," said Sir Harry.

"I know it wouldn't," she answered. "I know his lordship the Earl of
Dorincourt too well;--but it is outrageous."

Not only the poor people and farmers heard about little Lord Fauntleroy;
others knew him. He was talked about so much and there were so many
stories of him--of his beauty, his sweet temper, his popularity, and
his growing influence over the Earl, his grandfather--that rumors of him
reached the gentry at their country places and he was heard of in
more than one county of England. People talked about him at the dinner
tables, ladies pitied his young mother, and wondered if the boy were as
handsome as he was said to be, and men who knew the Earl and his habits
laughed heartily at the stories of the little fellow's belief in his
lordship's amiability. Sir Thomas Asshe of Asshawe Hall, being in
Erleboro one day, met the Earl and his grandson riding together, and
stopped to shake hands with my lord and congratulate him on his change
of looks and on his recovery from the gout. "And, d' ye know," he said,
when he spoke of the incident afterward, "the old man looked as proud as
a turkey-cock; and upon my word I don't wonder, for a handsomer, finer
lad than his grandson I never saw! As straight as a dart, and sat his
pony like a young trooper!"

And so by degrees Lady Lorridaile, too, heard of the child; she heard
about Higgins and the lame boy, and the cottages at Earl's Court, and a
score of other things,--and she began to wish to see the little fellow.
And just as she was wondering how it might be brought about, to her
utter astonishment, she received a letter from her brother inviting her
to come with her husband to Dorincourt.

"It seems incredible!" she exclaimed. "I have heard it said that the
child has worked miracles, and I begin to believe it. They say my
brother adores the boy and can scarcely endure to have him out of sight.
And he is so proud of him! Actually, I believe he wants to show him to
us." And she accepted the invitation at once.

When she reached Dorincourt Castle with Sir Harry, it was late in the
afternoon, and she went to her room at once before seeing her brother.
Having dressed for dinner, she entered the drawing-room. The Earl was
there standing near the fire and looking very tall and imposing; and at
his side stood a little boy in black velvet, and a large Vandyke collar
of rich lace--a little fellow whose round bright face was so handsome,
and who turned upon her such beautiful, candid brown eyes, that she
almost uttered an exclamation of pleasure and surprise at the sight.

As she shook hands with the Earl, she called him by the name she had not
used since her girlhood.

"What, Molyneux!" she said, "is this the child?"

"Yes, Constantia," answered the Earl, "this is the boy. Fauntleroy, this
is your grand-aunt, Lady Lorridaile."

"How do you do, Grand-Aunt?" said Fauntleroy.

Lady Lorridaile put her hand on his shoulders, and after looking down
into his upraised face a few seconds, kissed him warmly.

"I am your Aunt Constantia," she said, "and I loved your poor papa, and
you are very like him."

"It makes me glad when I am told I am like him," answered Fauntleroy,
"because it seems as if every one liked him,--just like Dearest,
eszackly,--Aunt Constantia" (adding the two words after a second's
pause).

Lady Lorridaile was delighted. She bent and kissed him again, and from
that moment they were warm friends.

"Well, Molyneux," she said aside to the Earl afterward, "it could not
possibly be better than this!"

"I think not," answered his lordship dryly. "He is a fine little
fellow. We are great friends. He believes me to be the most charming
and sweet-tempered of philanthropists. I will confess to you,
Constantia,--as you would find it out if I did not,--that I am in some
slight danger of becoming rather an old fool about him."

"What does his mother think of you?" asked Lady Lorridaile, with her
usual straightforwardness.

"I have not asked her," answered the Earl, slightly scowling.

"Well," said Lady Lorridaile, "I will be frank with you at the outset,
Molyneux, and tell you I don't approve of your course, and that it is my
intention to call on Mrs. Errol as soon as possible; so if you wish to
quarrel with me, you had better mention it at once. What I hear of the
young creature makes me quite sure that her child owes her everything.
We were told even at Lorridaile Park that your poorer tenants adore her
already."

"They adore HIM," said the Earl, nodding toward Fauntleroy. "As to Mrs.
Errol, you'll find her a pretty little woman. I'm rather in debt to her
for giving some of her beauty to the boy, and you can go to see her if
you like. All I ask is that she will remain at Court Lodge and that you
will not ask me to go and see her," and he scowled a little again.

"But he doesn't hate her as much as he used to, that is plain enough to
me," her ladyship said to Sir Harry afterward. "And he is a changed man
in a measure, and, incredible as it may seem, Harry, it is my opinion
that he is being made into a human being, through nothing more nor less
than his affection for that innocent, affectionate little fellow. Why,
the child actually loves him--leans on his chair and against his knee.
His own children would as soon have thought of nestling up to a tiger."

The very next day she went to call upon Mrs. Errol. When she returned,
she said to her brother:

"Molyneux, she is the loveliest little woman I ever saw! She has a voice
like a silver bell, and you may thank her for making the boy what he is.
She has given him more than her beauty, and you make a great mistake in
not persuading her to come and take charge of you. I shall invite her to
Lorridaile."

"She'll not leave the boy," replied the Earl.

"I must have the boy too," said Lady Lorridaile, laughing.

But she knew Fauntleroy would not be given up to her, and each day she
saw more clearly how closely those two had grown to each other, and
how all the proud, grim old man's ambition and hope and love centered
themselves in the child, and how the warm, innocent nature returned his
affection with most perfect trust and good faith.

She knew, too, that the prime reason for the great dinner party was the
Earl's secret desire to show the world his grandson and heir, and to let
people see that the boy who had been so much spoken of and described was
even a finer little specimen of boyhood than rumor had made him.

"Bevis and Maurice were such a bitter humiliation to him," she said to
her husband. "Every one knew it. He actually hated them. His pride
has full sway here." Perhaps there was not one person who accepted the
invitation without feeling some curiosity about little Lord Fauntleroy,
and wondering if he would be on view.
