had not missed her. Mrs. Gibson, too, had not marked her absence.

"Where were you, Grace?" said Miriam curiously. "I opened my eyes and
you were gone. What's the matter? You look ready to cry."

"I am," replied Grace. "I could cry with sheer vexation." Then she
briefly recounted what had occurred.

"What a crusty old man," sympathized Miriam. "It would serve him right
if he did lose his old watch. Where are they sitting?"

"Down the aisle on the other side at the end," directed Grace.

Miriam turned around in her seat. "He looks capable of most anything,"
she remarked after a prolonged stare at the stranger, who was apparently
absorbed in his paper. "Are you sure, however, that you were not
mistaken, Grace? You can't always judge a man by his looks."

"You can this man," asserted Grace. "He is a polite villain of the
deepest dye, and I know it."

It was after eleven o'clock when the train pulled into Oakdale. Mrs.
Gibson's chauffeur awaited them with the big touring car, in which there
was ample room for all of them.

"Keep a sharp lookout for that man," whispered Grace to Miriam. "I want
to see if Oakdale is his destination."

The two girls lagged behind the others, eagerly scanning the platform.

"I think he must have gone on," said Miriam. "I don't see him. Don't
worry any more about him, Grace."

Then she walked on ahead.

But Grace lingered. "That looks like him now," she thought. "He is just
leaving the train. He seems to be waiting for some one."

She stood in the shadow of the station watching the man. Then she saw
another man rapidly approaching. The newcomer walked straight up to the
stranger and shook hands with him. Then the two men turned and she
obtained a full-face view of them both.

Grace gave a little gasp of surprise, for the newcomer who had shaken
the hand of the crook was Henry Hammond.




CHAPTER XX

MARIAN'S CONFESSION


Grace reached home that night with her head in a whirl. She could think
of nothing save the fact that she had seen Henry Hammond warmly welcome
a man whom she knew in her heart to be a professional crook. It formed
the first link in the chain of evidence she hoped to forge against him.
She had become so strongly imbued with the idea that Hammond was an
impostor that the incident at the station only served to confirm her
belief.

The Phi Sigma Tau were besieged with questions the next day, and at
recess the five members held forth separately to groups of eager and
admiring girls on the glories of the visit.

"Where is Marian Barber?" asked Grace of Ruth Deane, as they were
leaving the senior locker-room at the close of the noon recess.

"She hasn't been in school to-day," replied Ruth. "I suppose what
happened Friday was too much for her."

"What happened Friday?" repeated Grace. "Well, what did happen?"

"Oh, Eleanor Savelli and Marian had a quarrel in the locker-room. I was
the only one who heard it, and I shouldn't have stayed but I know
Eleanor of old, and I made up my mind that I had better stay and see
that Marian had fair play. But I might as well have stayed away, for I
wasn't of any use to either side. In fact, I doubt if either one
realized I was there, they were so absorbed in their own troubles."

"It's a wonder that I wasn't around," remarked Grace. "I am really glad,
however, that I wasn't. The Phi Sigma Tau were all in Miss Tebbs'
classroom at recess last Friday. Miss Tebbs is a dear friend of the
Southards, you know. She was invited to go with us, but had made a
previous engagement that she could not break. We were talking things
over with her. After school we all went straight home and I saw neither
Eleanor nor Marian. Have you any idea what it was about?"

"I don't know," returned Ruth bluntly. "Marian and Eleanor came into the
locker-room together. I heard Marian say something about telling Eleanor
what she had in confidence. Then Eleanor just laughed scornfully and
told Marian that she had told her secrets to the wrong person. Marian
grew very angry, and called Eleanor treacherous and revengeful, and
Eleanor said that Marian's opinion was a matter of indifference to her.

"Then she told Marian that she intended to call a class meeting for
Thursday of this week and entertain them with the very interesting
little story that Marian had told her the previous week.

"Marian wilted at that and cried like a baby, but Eleanor kept on
laughing at her, and said that she would know better another time, and
perhaps would think twice before she spoke once. She said that no one
could trample upon her with impunity."

"Oh, pshaw," exclaimed Grace impatiently. "She always says that when she
is angry. She said that last year."

"Well, Marian cried some more," continued Ruth, "and Eleanor made a
number of other spiteful remarks and walked out with a perfectly hateful
look of triumph on her face."

"And what about Marian?" asked Grace.

"She didn't go back to the study hall. She told Miss Thompson that she
was ill and went home."

"Poor Marian," said Grace. "She certainly has been very foolish to leave
her real friends and put her faith in people like Eleanor and that Henry
Hammond. I have been afraid all along that she would be bitterly
disillusioned. I think I'd better go to see her to-night."

"Why, I thought she wasn't on speaking terms with the Phi Sigma Tau!"
exclaimed Ruth.

"Speaking terms or not, I'm going to find out what the trouble is and
straighten it out if I can. Please don't tell that to any one, Ruth. I
don't imagine it's anything serious. Eleanor always goes to extremes."

"Trust me, Grace, not to say a word," was the response.

"I wish Anne were here," mused Grace, as she took her seat and drew out
her text-book on second year French. Then for the time being she
dismissed Marian from her mind, and turned her attention to the lesson
on hand.

By the time school closed that afternoon Grace had made up her mind to
go to see Marian before going home. Leaving Nora and Jessica at the
usual corner, she walked on for a block, then turned into the street
where the Barbers lived.

Grace pulled the bell rather strenuously by way of expressing her
feelings, and waited.

"Is Marian in?" she inquired of Alice, the old servant.

"Yes, Miss Grace," answered the woman, "She's in the sittin' room, walk
right in there. It's a long time since I seen you here, Miss Grace."

"Yes, it is, Alice," replied Grace with a smile, then walked on into the
room.

Over in one corner, huddled up on the wide leather couch, was Marian.
Her eyes were swollen and red, and she looked ill and miserable.

"Marian," began Grace, "Ruth Deane told me you were ill, and so I came
to see you."

"Go away," muttered Marian. "I don't wish to see you."

"I am not so sure of that," answered Grace. "I understand you have been
having some trouble with Eleanor, and that she has threatened revenge."

"Who told you?" cried Marian, sitting up and looking angrily at Grace.
"I can manage my own affairs, without any of your help."

"Very well," replied Grace quietly. "Then I had better go. I thought
when I came that I might be able to help you. You look both ill and
unhappy. I see I have been mistaken."

"You can't help me," replied Marian, her chin beginning to quiver.
"Nobody can help me. I'm the most miserable girl--" her voice ended in a
wail, and she rocked to and fro upon the couch, sobbing wildly.

"Listen to me, Marian," commanded Grace firmly. "You must stop crying
and tell me every single thing about this trouble of yours. I have
crossed swords with Eleanor before this, and I think I can bring her to
reason."

"How can I tell you?" sobbed Marian. "Grace, I am a thief and may have
to go to prison."

"A thief!" echoed Grace. "Nonsense, Marian. I don't believe you would
steal a penny."

"But I am," persisted Marian tearfully. "I stole the class money, and
it's all gone."

She began to sob again.

Grace let Marian finish her cry before interrogating her further. She
wanted time to think. Her mind hastily reviewed the two conversations
she had overheard between Marian and Henry Hammond. This, then, was the
meaning of it all. The brief suspicion that had flashed into her mind
and Anne's on the night that Marian and Henry Hammond had passed them,
had been only too well founded. Marian had drawn the money from the bank
and given it to him.

"Marian," asked Grace, "did you give the money the judge sent us to
Henry Hammond?"

Marian nodded, too overcome as yet to speak.

"Can't you tell me about it?" continued Grace patiently.

Marian struggled for self-control, then began in a shaking voice.

"I have been a perfect idiot over that miserable Henry Hammond, and I
deserve everything. I was not satisfied with being a school-girl, but
thought it very smart to put up my hair and make a general goose of
myself.

"It all began the night of the bazaar. I had no business to pay any
attention to that man. He is really very clever, for before I realized
what I had said I had told him all about our sorority and about being
class treasurer, and a lot of things that were none of his business.

"After the bazaar I saw him often and told him about the judge's check.

"One day he asked me if I had any friends who had money that they would
like to double. I had fifty dollars of my own that I had been saving for
ever so long, and told him about it. He said that he manipulated stocks
a little (whatever that is) in connection with his real estate business.
He asked me to give him the money and let him prove to me how easily he
could double it. I did, and he brought me back one hundred dollars.

"Of course, I was delighted. Then mother sent me fifty dollars for
Christmas, and I bought all those presents. It took every cent I had,
and I was awfully silly, for no one cared as much for them as if they'd
been pretty little gifts that I made myself. That was my first folly.

"The next was those three gowns. They haven't been paid for yet. I
haven't dared give father the bills, and I can never face mother. She
would never have allowed me to order anything like them. Well, you know
how badly I behaved at the house party, and how nice you all were to me,
even when I was so hateful.

"On New Year's Night, when we were coming from Nesbits, Henry Hammond
asked me for the class money. He said he had a chance to treble it, and
that it was too good an opportunity to be lost.

"I refused point blank at first, and then he talked and talked in that
smooth way of his until I began to think what a fine thing it would be
to walk into the class and say, 'Girls, here are fifteen hundred dollars
instead of five hundred.' I was feeling awfully cross at you girls just
then, because he made me believe that you were slighting me and leaving
me out of things. Besides, all of you had warned me against him, and I
wanted to show you that I knew more than you did.

"I didn't promise to give it to him that night, but the more I thought
of it the more I inclined toward his views, and the upshot of the matter
was that I drew it out of the bank and let him have it."

Marian paused and looked piteously at Grace. Then she said brokenly:

"He lost it, Grace, every cent of it. The week after I gave it to him he
told me that luck had been against him, and that it was all gone. When I
asked him what he intended to do about it he promised that he would sell
some real estate of his and turn the money over to me to give back to
the class. He said it was his fault for persuading me to do it, and that
I shouldn't suffer for it. But he never kept his word.

"Last week I asked him for the last time if he would refund the money,
and he laughed at me and said that I had risked it and ought to accept
my losses with good grace. I threatened to expose him, and he said if I
did I should only succeed in making more trouble for myself than for
him. He had only speculated with what I had given him. Where I obtained
the money was none of his business, and as long as I had appropriated it
I would have to abide by the consequences.

"Of course, I was desperate and didn't know what to do. I had no money
of my own, and I didn't dare ask my father for it. I had to tell some
one, so I told Eleanor."

"Eleanor!" exclaimed Grace aghast. "Oh, Marian, why did you tell her of
all people."

"I thought she was my friend," declared Marian, "but I soon found out
that she wasn't. As soon as I had told her, she changed entirely. She
told me last Friday that she had been watching for a long time in the
hope of revenging herself upon the Phi Sigma Tau for their insults, and
that at last she had the means to do so.

"Her friendship for me was merely a pretense. She said that when I
separated from my sorority she knew I was sure to do something foolish,
so she decided to make advances to me and see what she could find out.

"She is going to call a class meeting for next Thursday after school,
and she is going to expose me. She says that it is right that the class
should know just what sort of material the Phi Sigma Tau is made up of,
and that one of its members is a sneak and a thief."

"This is serious, and no mistake," replied Grace soberly. "Don't you
remember, Marian, that back in our junior year, when Eleanor tried to
get Anne's part in the play, I cautioned the girls to never put
themselves in a position where Eleanor might injure them."

"Yes, I remember, now," Marian faltered, "but it is too late."

"I might try to checkmate her at her own game by threatening to tell the
story of the missing costumes," reflected Grace aloud. "I'll try it at
any rate. But even if we do succeed in silencing Eleanor, where are we
to get the money to pay back the class fund? We can't arrest that
miserable Henry Hammond without making the affair public, and this
simply must remain a private matter. It is the hardest problem that I
have ever been called upon to contend with.

"You must brace up, Marian, and go back to school to-morrow," directed
Grace. "If you keep on this way it will serve to create suspicion. You
have done a very foolish and really criminal act, but your own remorse
has punished you severely enough. None of us are infallible. The thing
to do now, is to find a way to make up this money."

Marian wiped her eyes, and, leaving the lounge, walked over to Grace,
and, putting her arms about Grace's neck, said, with agonized
earnestness:

"Grace, can you and the girls ever forgive me for being so hateful?"

"Why, of course, we can. There is nothing to forgive. We have never
stopped thinking of you as a member of our sorority. We wouldn't ask any
one else to take your place."

An expression of intense relief shone in Marian's face.

"I am so glad," she said. "I can't help being happy, even with this
cloud hanging over me."

"Cheer up, Marian," said Grace hopefully. "I have an idea that I shall
straighten out this tangle yet. I must go now. Keep up your courage and
whatever you do, don't tell any one else what you have told me. There
are too many in the secret now."




CHAPTER XXI
