yourself. The Perkinses and the Cobbs always said they were wonderful,
but when Mrs. Cobb told me she thought they were better than Mr.
Longfellow's I was worried, because I knew that couldn't be true."

This ingenuous remark confirmed Miss Maxwell's opinion of Rebecca as a
girl who could hear the truth and profit by it.

"Well, my child," she said smilingly, "your friends were wrong and you
were right; judged by the proper tests, they are pretty bad."

"Then I must give up all hope of ever being a writer!" sighed Rebecca,
who was tasting the bitterness of hemlock and wondering if she could
keep the tears back until the interview was over.

"Don't go so fast," interrupted Miss Maxwell. "Though they don't amount
to anything as poetry, they show a good deal of promise in certain
directions. You almost never make a mistake in rhyme or metre, and this
shows you have a natural sense of what is right; a 'sense of form,'
poets would call it. When you grow older, have a little more
experience,--in fact, when you have something to say, I think you may
write very good verses. Poetry needs knowledge and vision, experience
and imagination, Rebecca. You have not the first three yet, but I
rather think you have a touch of the last."

"Must I never try any more poetry, not even to amuse myself?"

"Certainly you may; it will only help you to write better prose. Now
for the first composition. I am going to ask all the new students to
write a letter giving some description of the town and a hint of the
school life."

"Shall I have to be myself?" asked Rebecca.

"What do you mean?"

"A letter from Rebecca Randall to her sister Hannah at Sunnybrook Farm,
or to her aunt Jane at the brick house, Riverboro, is so dull and
stupid, if it is a real letter; but if I could make believe I was a
different girl altogether, and write to somebody who would be sure to
understand everything I said, I could make it nicer."

"Very well; I think that's a delightful plan," said Miss Maxwell; "and
whom will you suppose yourself to be?"

"I like heiresses very much," replied Rebecca contemplatively. "Of
course I never saw one, but interesting things are always happening to
heiresses, especially to the golden-haired kind. My heiress wouldn't be
vain and haughty like the wicked sisters in Cinderella; she would be
noble and generous. She would give up a grand school in Boston because
she wanted to come here where her father lived when he was a boy, long
before he made his fortune. The father is dead now, and she has a
guardian, the best and kindest man in the world; he is rather old of
course, and sometimes very quiet and grave, but sometimes when he is
happy, he is full of fun, and then Evelyn is not afraid of him. Yes,
the girl shall be called Evelyn Abercrombie, and her guardian's name
shall be Mr. Adam Ladd."

"Do you know Mr. Ladd?" asked Miss Maxwell in surprise.

"Yes, he's my very best friend," cried Rebecca delightedly. "Do you
know him too?"

"Oh, yes; he is a trustee of these schools, you know, and often comes
here. But if I let you 'suppose' any more, you will tell me your whole
letter and then I shall lose a pleasant surprise."


What Rebecca thought of Miss Maxwell we already know; how the teacher
regarded the pupil may be gathered from the following letter written
two or three months later.

    Wareham, December 1st

    My Dear Father,--As you well know, I have not always been an
    enthusiast on the subject of teaching. The task of cramming
    knowledge into these self-sufficient, inefficient youngsters
    of both sexes discourages me at times. The more stupid they
    are, the less they are aware of it. If my department were
    geography or mathematics, I believe I should feel that I was
    accomplishing something, for in those branches application
    and industry work wonders; but in English literature and
    composition one yearns for brains, for appreciation, for
    imagination! Month after month I toil on, opening oyster
    after oyster, but seldom finding a pearl. Fancy my joy this
    term when, without any violent effort at shell-splitting, I
    came upon a rare pearl; a black one, but of satin skin and
    beautiful lustre! Her name is Rebecca, and she looks not
    unlike Rebekah at the Well in our family Bible; her hair and
    eyes being so dark as to suggest a strain of Italian or
    Spanish blood. She is nobody in particular. Man has done
    nothing for her; she has no family to speak of, no money, no
    education worthy the name, has had no advantages of any sort;
    but Dame Nature flung herself into the breach and said:--

      "This child I to myself will take;
       She shall be mine and I will make
       A Lady of my own."

    Blessed Wordsworth! How he makes us understand! And the pearl
    never heard of him until now! Think of reading Lucy to a
    class, and when you finish, seeing a fourteen-year-old pair
    of lips quivering with delight, and a pair of eyes brimming
    with comprehending tears!

    You poor darling! You, too, know the discouragement of sowing
    lovely seed in rocky earth, in sand, in water, and (it almost
    seems sometimes) in mud; knowing that if anything comes up at
    all it will be some poor starveling plant. Fancy the joy of
    finding a real mind; of dropping seed in a soil so warm, so
    fertile, that one knows there are sure to be foliage,
    blossoms, and fruit all in good time! I wish I were not so
    impatient and so greedy of results! I am not fit to be a
    teacher; no one is who is so scornful of stupidity as I am. .
    . . The pearl writes quaint countrified little verses,
    doggerel they are; but somehow or other she always contrives
    to put in one line, one thought, one image, that shows you
    she is, quite unconsciously to herself, in possession of the
    secret. . . . Good-by; I'll bring Rebecca home with me some
    Friday, and let you and mother see her for yourselves.

    Your affectionate daughter,

    Emily.



XXII

CLOVER BLOSSOMS AND SUNFLOWERS

"How d' ye do, girls?" said Huldah Meserve, peeping in at the door.
"Can you stop studying a minute and show me your room? Say, I've just
been down to the store and bought me these gloves, for I was bound I
wouldn't wear mittens this winter; they're simply too countrified. It's
your first year here, and you're younger than I am, so I s'pose you
don't mind, but I simply suffer if I don't keep up some kind of style.
Say, your room is simply too cute for words! I don't believe any of the
others can begin to compare with it! I don't know what gives it that
simply gorgeous look, whether it's the full curtains, or that elegant
screen, or Rebecca's lamp; but you certainly do have a faculty for
fixing up. I like a pretty room too, but I never have a minute to
attend to mine; I'm always so busy on my clothes that half the time I
don't get my bed made up till noon; and after all, having no callers
but the girls, it don't make much difference. When I graduate, I'm
going to fix up our parlor at home so it'll be simply regal. I've
learned decalcomania, and after I take up lustre painting I shall have
it simply stiff with drapes and tidies and placques and sofa pillows,
and make mother let me have a fire, and receive my friends there
evenings. May I dry my feet at your register? I can't bear to wear
rubbers unless the mud or the slush is simply knee-deep, they make your
feet look so awfully big. I had such a fuss getting this pair of
French-heeled boots that I don't intend to spoil the looks of them with
rubbers any oftener than I can help. I believe boys notice feet quicker
than anything. Elmer Webster stepped on one of mine yesterday when I
accidentally had it out in the aisle, and when he apologized after
class, he said he wasn't so much to blame, for the foot was so little
he really couldn't see it! Isn't he perfectly great? Of course that's
only his way of talking, for after all I only wear a number two, but
these French heels and pointed toes do certainly make your foot look
smaller, and it's always said a high instep helps, too. I used to think
mine was almost a deformity, but they say it's a great beauty. Just put
your feet beside mine, girls, and look at the difference; not that I
care much, but just for fun."

"My feet are very comfortable where they are," responded Rebecca dryly.
"I can't stop to measure insteps on algebra days; I've noticed your
habit of keeping a foot in the aisle ever since you had those new
shoes, so I don't wonder it was stepped on."

"Perhaps I am a little mite conscious of them, because they're not so
very comfortable at first, till you get them broken in. Say, haven't
you got a lot of new things?"

"Our Christmas presents, you mean," said Emma Jane. "The pillow-cases
are from Mrs. Cobb, the rug from cousin Mary in North Riverboro, the
scrap-basket from Living and Dick. We gave each other the bureau and
cushion covers, and the screen is mine from Mr. Ladd."

"Well, you were lucky when you met him! Gracious! I wish I could meet
somebody like that. The way he keeps it up, too! It just hides your
bed, doesn't it, and I always say that a bed takes the style off any
room--specially when it's not made up; though you have an alcove, and
it's the only one in the whole building. I don't see how you managed to
get this good room when you're such new scholars," she finished
discontentedly.

"We shouldn't have, except that Ruth Berry had to go away suddenly on
account of her father's death. This room was empty, and Miss Maxwell
asked if we might have it," returned Emma Jane.

"The great and only Max is more stiff and standoffish than ever this
year," said Huldah. "I've simply given up trying to please her, for
there's no justice in her; she is good to her favorites, but she
doesn't pay the least attention to anybody else, except to make
sarcastic speeches about things that are none of her business. I wanted
to tell her yesterday it was her place to teach me Latin, not manners."

"I wish you wouldn't talk against Miss Maxwell to me," said Rebecca
hotly. "You know how I feel."

"I know; but I can't understand how you can abide her."

"I not only abide, I love her!" exclaimed Rebecca. "I wouldn't let the
sun shine too hot on her, or the wind blow too cold. I'd like to put a
marble platform in her class-room and have her sit in a velvet chair
behind a golden table!"

"Well, don't have a fit!--because she can sit where she likes for all
of me; I've got something better to think of," and Huldah tossed her
head.

"Isn't this your study hour?" asked Emma Jane, to stop possible
discussion.

"Yes, but I lost my Latin grammar yesterday; I left it in the hall half
an hour while I was having a regular scene with Herbert Dunn. I haven't
spoken to him for a week and gave him back his class pin. He was simply
furious. Then when I came back to the hall, the book was gone. I had to
go down town for my gloves and to the principal's office to see if the
grammar had been handed in, and that's the reason I'm so fine."

Huldah was wearing a woolen dress that had once been gray, but had been
dyed a brilliant blue. She had added three rows of white braid and
large white pearl buttons to her gray jacket, in order to make it a
little more "dressy." Her gray felt hat had a white feather on it, and
a white tissue veil with large black dots made her delicate skin look
brilliant. Rebecca thought how lovely the knot of red hair looked under
the hat behind, and how the color of the front had been dulled by
incessant frizzing with curling irons. Her open jacket disclosed a
galaxy of souvenirs pinned to the background of bright blue,--a small
American flag, a button of the Wareham Rowing Club, and one or two
society pins. These decorations proved her popularity in very much the
same way as do the cotillion favors hanging on the bedroom walls of the
fashionable belle. She had been pinning and unpinning, arranging and
disarranging her veil ever since she entered the room, in the hope that
the girls would ask her whose ring she was wearing this week; but
although both had noticed the new ornament instantly, wild horses could
not have drawn the question from them; her desire to be asked was too
obvious. With her gay plumage, her "nods and becks and wreathed
smiles," and her cheerful cackle, Huldah closely resembled the parrot
in Wordsworth's poem:--

  "Arch, volatile, a sportive bird,
       By social glee inspired;
  Ambitious to be seen or heard,
       And pleased to be admired!"

"Mr. Morrison thinks the grammar will be returned, and lent me
another," Huldah continued.

"He was rather snippy about my leaving a book in the hall. There was a
perfectly elegant gentleman in the office, a stranger to me. I wish he
was a new teacher, but there's no such luck. He was too young to be the
father of any of the girls, and too old to be a brother, but he was
handsome as a picture and had on an awful stylish suit of clothes. He
looked at me about every minute I was in the room. It made me so
embarrassed I couldn't hardly answer Mr. Morrison's questions straight."

"You'll have to wear a mask pretty soon, if you're going to have any
comfort, Huldah," said Rebecca. "Did he offer to lend you his class
pin, or has it been so long since he graduated that he's left off
wearing it? And tell us now whether the principal asked for a lock of
your hair to put in his watch?"

This was all said merrily and laughingly, but there were times when
Huldah could scarcely make up her mind whether Rebecca was trying to be
witty, or whether she was jealous; but she generally decided it was
merely the latter feeling, rather natural in a girl who had little
attention.

"He wore no jewelry but a cameo scarf pin and a perfectly gorgeous
ring,--a queer kind of one that wound round and round his finger. Oh
dear, I must run! Where has the hour gone? There's the study bell!"

Rebecca had pricked up her ears at Huldah's speech. She remembered a
certain strange ring, and it belonged to the only person in the world
(save Miss Maxwell) who appealed to her imagination,--Mr. Aladdin. Her
feeling for him, and that of Emma Jane, was a mixture of romantic and
reverent admiration for the man himself and the liveliest gratitude for
his beautiful gifts. Since they first met him not a Christmas had gone
by without some remembrance for them both; remembrances chosen with the
rarest taste and forethought. Emma Jane had seen him only twice, but he
had called several times at the brick house, and Rebecca had learned to
know him better. It was she, too, who always wrote the notes of
acknowledgment and thanks, taking infinite pains to make Emma Jane's
quite different from her own. Sometimes he had written from Boston and
asked her the news of Riverboro, and she had sent him pages of quaint
and childlike gossip, interspersed, on two occasions, with poetry,
which he read and reread with infinite relish. If Huldah's stranger
should be Mr. Aladdin, would he come to see her, and could she and Emma
Jane show him their beautiful room with so many of his gifts in
evidence?

When the girls had established themselves in Wareham as real boarding
pupils, it seemed to them existence was as full of joy as it well could
hold. This first winter was, in fact, the most tranquilly happy of
Rebecca's school life,--a winter long to be looked back upon. She and
Emma Jane were room-mates, and had put their modest possessions
together to make their surroundings pretty and homelike. The room had,
to begin with, a cheerful red ingrain carpet and a set of maple
furniture. As to the rest, Rebecca had furnished the ideas and Emma
Jane the materials and labor, a method of dividing responsibilities
that seemed to suit the circumstances admirably. Mrs. Perkins's father
had been a storekeeper, and on his death had left the goods of which he
was possessed to his married daughter. The molasses, vinegar, and
kerosene had lasted the family for five years, and the Perkins attic
was still a treasure-house of ginghams, cottons, and "Yankee notions."
So at Rebecca's instigation Mrs. Perkins had made full curtains and
lambrequins of unbleached muslin, which she had trimmed and looped back
with bands of Turkey red cotton. There were two table covers to match,
and each of the girls had her study corner. Rebecca, after much
coaxing, had been allowed to bring over her precious lamp, which would
have given a luxurious air to any apartment, and when Mr. Aladdin's
last Christmas presents were added,--the Japanese screen for Emma Jane
and the little shelf of English Poets for Rebecca,--they declared that
it was all quite as much fun as being married and going to housekeeping.

The day of Huldah's call was Friday, and on Fridays from three to half
past four Rebecca was free to take a pleasure to which she looked
forward the entire week. She always ran down the snowy path through the
pine woods at the back of the seminary, and coming out on a quiet
village street, went directly to the large white house where Miss
Maxwell lived. The maid-of-all-work answered her knock; she took off
her hat and cape and hung them in the hall, put her rubber shoes and
umbrella carefully in the corner, and then opened the door of paradise.
Miss Maxwell's sitting-room was lined on two sides with bookshelves,
and Rebecca was allowed to sit before the fire and browse among the
books to her heart's delight for an hour or more. Then Miss Maxwell
would come back from her class, and there would be a precious half hour
of chat before Rebecca had to meet Emma Jane at the station and take
the train for Riverboro, where her Saturdays and Sundays were spent,
and where she was washed, ironed, mended, and examined, approved and
reproved, warned and advised in quite sufficient quantity to last her
the succeeding week.

On this Friday she buried her face in the blooming geraniums on Miss
Maxwell's plant-stand, selected Romola from one of the bookcases, and
sank into a seat by the window with a sigh of infinite content, She
glanced at the clock now and then, remembering the day on which she had
been so immersed in David Copperfield that the Riverboro train had no
place in her mind. The distracted Emma Jane had refused to leave
without her, and had run from the station to look for her at Miss
Maxwell's. There was but one later train, and that went only to a place
three miles the other side of Riverboro, so that the two girls appeared
at their respective homes long after dark, having had a weary walk in
the snow.

When she had read for half an hour she glanced out of the window and
saw two figures issuing from the path through the woods. The knot of
bright hair and the coquettish hat could belong to but one person; and
her companion, as the couple approached, proved to be none other than
Mr. Aladdin. Huldah was lifting her skirts daintily and picking safe
stepping-places for the high-heeled shoes, her cheeks glowing, her eyes
sparkling under the black and white veil.

Rebecca slipped from her post by the window to the rug before the
bright fire and leaned her head on the seat of the great easy-chair.
She was frightened at the storm in her heart; at the suddenness with
which it had come on, as well as at the strangeness of an entirely new
sensation. She felt all at once as if she could not bear to give up her
share of Mr. Aladdin's friendship to Huldah: Huldah so bright, saucy,
and pretty; so gay and ready, and such good company! She had always
joyfully admitted Emma Jane into the precious partnership, but perhaps
unconsciously to herself she had realized that Emma Jane had never held
anything but a secondary place in Mr. Aladdin's regard; yet who was she
herself, after all, that she could hope to be first?

Suddenly the door opened softly and somebody looked in, somebody who
said: "Miss Maxwell told me I should find Miss Rebecca Randall here."

Rebecca started at the sound and sprang to her feet, saying joyfully,
"Mr. Aladdin! Oh! I knew you were in Wareham, and I was afraid you
wouldn't have time to come and see us."

"Who is 'us'? The aunts are not here, are they? Oh, you mean the rich
blacksmith's daughter, whose name I can never remember. Is she here?"

"Yes, and my room-mate," answered Rebecca, who thought her own knell of
doom had sounded, if he had forgotten Emma Jane's name.

The light in the room grew softer, the fire crackled cheerily, and they
talked of many things, until the old sweet sense of friendliness and
familiarity crept back into Rebecca's heart. Adam had not seen her for
several months, and there was much to be learned about school matters
as viewed from her own standpoint; he had already inquired concerning
her progress from Mr. Morrison.

"Well, little Miss Rebecca," he said, rousing himself at length, "I
must be thinking of my drive to Portland. There is a meeting of railway
directors there to-morrow, and I always take this opportunity of
visiting the school and giving my valuable advice concerning its
affairs, educational and financial."

"It seems funny for you to be a school trustee," said Rebecca
contemplatively. "I can't seem to make it fit."

"You are a remarkably wise young person and I quite agree with you," he
answered; "the fact is," he added soberly, "I accepted the trusteeship
in memory of my poor little mother, whose last happy years were spent
here."

"That was a long time ago!"

"Let me see, I am thirty-two; only thirty-two, despite an occasional
gray hair. My mother was married a month after she graduated, and she
lived only until I was ten; yes, it is a long way back to my mother's
time here, though the school was fifteen or twenty years old then, I
believe. Would you like to see my mother, Miss Rebecca?"

The girl took the leather case gently and opened it to find an
innocent, pink-and-white daisy of a face, so confiding, so sensitive,
that it went straight to the heart. It made Rebecca feel old,
experienced, and maternal. She longed on the instant to comfort and
strengthen such a tender young thing.

"Oh, what a sweet, sweet, flowery face!" she whispered softly.

"The flower had to bear all sorts of storms," said Adam gravely. "The
bitter weather of the world bent its slender stalk, bowed its head, and
dragged it to the earth. I was only a child and could do nothing to
protect and nourish it, and there was no one else to stand between it
