"Much you don't like oranges!" he said one day at dinner, in answer to
an innocent remark of hers.  "Much!  I've seen you eat two at a time,
without stopping.  Pa, Lilly says she don't like oranges!  I've seen
her eat two at a time, without stopping!  Much she doesn't!  I've seen
her eat two at a time, without stopping!"  He kept this up for five
minutes, looking from one person to another, and repeating, "Much she
don't!  Much!" till Lilly was almost crying from vexation, and even
Clover longed to box his ears.  Nobody was sorry when Mr. Page ordered
him to leave the room, which he did with a last vindictive "Much!"
addressed to Lilly.

"How can Clarence behave so?"  said Katy, when she and Clover were
alone.

"I don't know," replied Clover.  "He's such a nice boy, sometimes; but
when he isn't nice, he's the horridest boy I ever saw.  I wish you'd
talk to him, Katy, and tell him how dreadfully it sounds when he says
such things."

"No, indeed!  He'd take it much better from you.  You're nearer his
age, and could do it nicely and pleasantly, and not make him feel as
if he were being scolded.  Poor fellow, he gets plenty of that!"

Clover said no more about the subject, but she meditated.  She had a
good deal of tact for so young a girl, and took care to get Clarence
into a specially amicable mood before she began her lecture.  "Look
here, you bad boy, how could you tease poor Lilly so yesterday?
Guest, speak up, sir, and tell your massa how naughty it was!"

"Oh, dear! now you're going to nag!" growled Clarence, in an injured
voice.

"No, I'm not,--not the least in the world.  I'll promise not to.  But
just tell me,"--and Clover put her hand on the rough, red-brown hair,
and stroked it,--"just tell me why you 'go for to do' such things?
They're not a bit nice."

"Lilly's so hateful!" grumbled Clarence.

"Well,--she is sometimes, I know," admitted Clover, candidly. "But
because she is hateful is no reason why you should be unmanly."

"Unmanly!" cried Clarence, flushing.

"Yes.  I call it unmanly to tease and quarrel, and contradict like
that.  It's like girls.  They do it sometimes, but I didn't think
a boy would.  I thought he'd be ashamed!"

"Doesn't Dorry ever quarrel or tease?" asked Clarence, who liked to
hear about Clover's brothers and sisters.

"Not now, and never in that way.  He used to sometimes when he was
little, but now he's real nice.  He wouldn't speak to a girl as you
speak to Lilly for any thing in the world.  He'd think it wasn't
being a gentleman."

"Stuff about gentleman, and all that!" retorted Clarence.  "Mother
dings the word in my ears till I hate it!"

"Well, it is rather teasing to be reminded all the time, I admit; but
you can't wonder that your mother wants you to be a gentleman, Clarence.
It's the best thing in the world, I think.  I hope Phil and Dorry will
grow up just like papa, for everybody says he's the most perfect
gentleman, and it makes me so proud to hear them."

"But what does it mean any way!  Mother says it's how you hold your
fork, and how you chew, and how you put on your hat.  If that's all,
I don't think it amounts to much."

"Oh, that isn't all.  It's being gentle, don't you see?  Gentle and
nice to everybody, and just as polite to poor people as to rich ones,"
said Clover, talking fast, in her eagerness to explain her meaning,--
"and never being selfish, or noisy, or pushing people out of their
place.  Forks, and hats, and all that are only little ways of making
one's self more agreeable to other people.  A gentleman is a gentleman
inside,--all through!  Oh, I wish I could make you see what I mean!"

"Oh, that's it, is it?" said Clarence.  Whether he understood or not,
Clover could not tell; or whether she had done any good or not; but
she had the discretion to say no more; and certainly Clarence was not
offended, for after that day he grew fonder of her than ever.  Lilly
became absolutely jealous.  She had never cared particularly for
Clarence's affection, but she did not like to have any one preferred
above herself.

"It's pretty hard, I think," she told Clover.  "Clare does every thing
you tell him, and he treats me awfully.  It isn't a bit fair!  I'm his
sister, and you're only a second cousin."

All this time the girls had seen almost nothing of Louisa Agnew.  She
called once, but Lilly received the call with them, and so cool and
stiff that Louisa grew stiff also, and made but a short stay; and when
the girls returned the visit she was out.  A few days before the close
of vacation, however, a note came from her.


   "Dear Katy,--I am so sorry not to have seen more of you and
   Clover.  Won't you come and spend Wednesday with us?  Mamma
   sends her love, and hopes you will come early, so as to have
   a long day, for she wants to know you.  I long to show you
   the baby and every thing.  Do come.  Papa will see you home
   in the evening.  Remember me to Lilly.  She has so many
   friends to see during vacation that I am sure she will
   forgive me for stealing you for one day.
                        "Yours affectionately,
                                         "Louisa."


Katy thought this message very politely expressed, but Lilly, when she
heard it, tossed her head, and said she "really thought Miss Agnew
might let her name alone when she wrote notes."  Mrs. Page seemed to
pity the girls for having to go.  They must, she supposed, as it was
a schoolmate; but she feared it would be stupid for them.  The Agnews
were queer sort of people, not in society at all.  Mr. Agnew was
clever, people said; but, really, she knew very little about the
family.  Perhaps it would not do to decline.

Katy and Clover had no idea of declining.  They sent a warm little
note of acceptance, and on the appointed day set off bright and early
with a good deal of pleasant anticipation.  The vacation had been
rather dull at Cousin Olivia's.  Lilly was a good deal with her own
friends, and Mrs. Page with hers; and there never seemed any special
place where they might sit, or any thing in particular for then to do.

Louisa's home was at some distance from Mr. Page's, and in a less
fashionable street.  It looked pleasant and cosy as the girls opened
the gate.  There was a small garden in front with gay flower-beds;
and on the piazza, which was shaded with vines, sat Mrs. Agnew with
a little work-table by her side.  She was a pretty and youthful-
looking woman, and her voice and smile made them feel at home
immediately.

"There is no need of anybody to introduce you," she said.  "Lulu has
described you so often that I know perfectly well which is Katy and
which is Clover.  I am so glad you could come.  Won't you go right in
my bed-room by that long window and take off your things?  Lulu has
explained to you that I am lame and never walk, so you won't think
it strange that I do not show you the way.  She will be here in a
moment.  She ran upstairs to fetch the baby."

The girls went into the bed-room.  It was a pretty and unusual-looking
apartment.  The furniture was simple as could be, but bed and toilet
and windows were curtained and frilled with white, and the walls were
covered thick with pictures, photographs, and pen-and-ink sketches,
and water-color drawings, unframed most of them, and just pinned up
without regularity, so as to give each the best possible light.  It
was an odd way of arranging pictures; but Katy liked it, and would
gladly have lingered to look at each one, only that she feared Mrs.
Agnew would expect them and would think it strange that they did not
come back.

Just as they went out again to the piazza, Louisa came running
downstairs with her little sister in her arms.

"I was curling her hair," she explained, "and did not hear you come
in.  Daisy, give Katy a kiss.  Now another for Clover.  Isn't she a
darling?" embracing the child rapturously herself, "now isn't she a
little beauty?"

"Perfectly lovely?" cried the others, and soon all three were seated
on the floor of the piazza, with Daisy in the midst, passing her from
hand to hand as if she had been something good to eat.  She was used
to it, and submitted with perfect good nature to being kissed, trotted,
carried up and down, and generally made love to.  Mrs. Agnew sat by
and laughed at the spectacle.  When Baby was taken off for her noonday
nap, Louisa took the girls into the parlor, another odd and pretty
room, full of prints and sketches, and pictures of all sorts, some
with frames, others with a knot of autumn leaves or a twist of ivy
around them by way of a finish.  There was a bowl of beautiful autumn
roses on the table; and, though the price of one of Mrs. Page's damask
curtains would probably have bought the whole furniture of the room,
every thing was so bright and homelike and pleasant-looking that Katy's
heart warmed at the sight.  They were examining a portrait of Louisa
with Daisy in her lap, painted by her father, when Mr. Agnew came in.
The girls liked his face at once.  It was fine and frank; and nothing
could be prettier than to see him pick up his sweet invalid wife as
if she had been a child, and carry her into the dining-room to her
place at the head of the table.

Katy and Clover agreed afterward that it was the merriest dinner they
had had since they left home.  Mr. Agnew told stories about painters
and painting, and was delightful.  No less so was the nice gossip
upstairs in Louisa's room which followed dinner, or the afternoon
frolic with Daisy, or the long evening spent in looking over books
and photographs.  Altogether the day seemed only too short.  As they
went out of the gate at ten o'clock, Mr. Agnew following, lo! a dark
figure emerged from behind a tree and joined Clover.  It was Clarence!

"I thought I'd just walk this way," he explained, "the house has been
dreadfully dull all day without you."

Clover was immensely flattered, but Mrs. Page's astonishment next day
knew no bounds.

"Really," she said, "I have hopes of Clarence at last.  I never knew
him volunteer to escort anybody anywhere before in his life."

"I say," remarked Clarence, the evening before the girls went back to
school,--"I say, suppose you write to a fellow sometimes, Clover."

"Do you mean yourself by 'a fellow'?" laughed Clover.

"You don't suppose I meant George Hickman or that donkey of an Eels,
did you?" retorted Clarence.

"No, I didn't.  Well, I've no objection to writing to a fellow, if
that fellow is you, provided the fellow answers my letters.  Will
you?"

"Yes," gruffly, "but you mustn't show 'em to any girls or laugh at
my writing, or I'll stop.  Lilly says my writing is like beetle
tracks.  Little she knows about it though!  I don't write to her!
Promise, Clover!"

"Yes, I promise," said Clover, pleased at the notion of Clare's
proposing a correspondence of his own accord.  Next morning they all
left for Hillsover.  Clarence's friendship and the remembrance of
their day with the Agnews were the pleasantest things that the girls
carried away with them from their autumn vacation.




CHAPTER X.  A BUDGET OF LETTERS.


"Hillsover, October 21st.

Dearest Elsie,--I didn't write you last Saturday, because that was
the day we came back to school, and there hasn't been one minute since
when I could.  We thought perhaps Miss Jane would let us off from the
abstracts on Sunday, because it was the first day, and school was
hardly begun; and, if she had, I was going to write to you instead,
but she didn't.  She said the only way to keep girls out of mischief
was to keep them busy.  Rose Red is sure that something has gone wrong
with Miss Jane's missionary during the vacation,--she's so dreadfully
cross.  Oh, dear, how I do hate to come back and be scolded by her
again!

"I forget if I told you about the abstracts.  They are of the sermons
on Sunday, you know, and we have to give the texts, and the heads,
and as much as we can remember of the rest.  Sometimes Dr. Prince
begins: 'I shall divide my subject into three parts,' and tells what
they are going to be.  When he does that, most of the girls take out
their pencils and put them down, and then they don't listen any more.
Katy and I don't, for she says it isn't right not to listen some.
Miss Jane pretends that she reads all the abstracts through, but
she doesn't; for once Rose Red, just to try her, wrote in the middle
of hers, 'I am sitting by my window at this moment, and a red cow is
going down the street.  I wonder if she is any relation to Mrs.
Seccomb's cow?' and Miss Jane never noticed it, but marked her
'perfect' all the same.  Wasn't it funny?

"But I must tell you about our journey back.  Mr. Page came all the
way with us, and was ever so nice.  Clarence rode down in the carriage
to the depot.  He gave me a real pretty india-rubber and gold pencil
for a good-by present.  I think you and Dorry would like Clarence,
only just at first you might say he was rather rude and cross.  I did;
but now I like him ever so much.  Cousin Olivia gave Katy a worked
collar and sleeves, and me an embroidered pocket-handkerchief with
clover leaves in the corner.  Wasn't it kind?  I'm sorry I said in
my last letter that we didn't enjoy our vacation.  We didn't much;
but it wasn't exactly Cousin Olivia's fault.  She meant we should,
but she didn't know how.  Some people don't, you know.  And don't
tell any one I said so, will you?

"Rose Red got here in the train before we did.  She was so glad when we
came that she cried.  It was because she was home-sick waiting four
hours at the Nunnery without us, she said.  Rose is such a darling!
She had a splendid vacation, and went to three parties and a picnic.
Isn't it queer? her winter bonnet is black velvet trimmed with pink,
and so is mine.  I wanted blue at first, but Cousin Olivia said pink
was more stylish; and now I am glad, because I like to be like Rose.

"Katy and I have got No. 2 this term.  It's a good deal pleasanter
than our old room, and the entry-stove is just outside the door, so
we shall keep warm.  There is sun, too, only Mrs. Nipson has nailed
thick cotton over all the window except a little place at top.  Every
window in the house is just so.  You can't think how mad the girls
are about it.  The first night we had an indignation meeting, and
passed resolutions, and some of the girls said they wouldn't stay,--
they should write to their fathers to come and take them home.  None
of them did, though.  It's perfectly forlorn, not being able to look
out.  Oh, dear, how I wish it were spring!

"We've got a new dining-room.  It's a great deal bigger than the old
one, so now we all eat together, and don't have any first and second
tables.  It's ever so much nicer, for I used to get so dreadfully
hungry waiting that I didn't know what to do.  One thing is horrid,
though, and that is, that every girl has to make a remark in French
every day at dinner.  The remarks are about a subject.  Mrs. Nipson
gives out the subjects.  To-day the subject was 'Les oiseaux,' and
Rose Red said, 'J'aime beaucoup les oiseaux, et surtout ceux qui
sont rotis,' which made us all laugh.  That ridiculous little Bella
Arkwright said, 'J'aime beaucoup les oiseaux qui sing.'  She thought
sing was French!  Every girl in school began, 'J'aime beaucoup les
oiseaux'!  To-morrow the subject is 'Jules Cesar.'  I'm sure I don't
know what to say.  There isn't a word in Ollendorf about him.

"There aren't so many new scholars this term as there were last.  The
girls think it is because Mrs. Nipson isn't so popular as Mrs. Florence
used to be.  Two or three of the new ones look pleasant, but I don't
know them yet.  Louisa Agnew is the nicest girl here next to Rose.
Lilly Page says she is vulgar, because her father paints portraits
and they don't know the same people that Cousin Olivia know, but she
isn't a bit.  We went to spend the day there just before we left
Ashburn, and her father and mother are splendid.  Their house is
just full of all sorts of queer, interesting things, and pictures;
and Mr. Agnew told us ever so many stories about painters, and what
they did.  One was about a boy who used to make figures of lions in
butter, and afterward he became famous.  I forget his name.  We had
a lovely time.  I wish you could see Lou's little sister Daisy.  She's
only two, and a perfect little beauty.  She has got ten teeth, and
hardly ever cries.

"Please ask papa"--


Just as Clover had got to this point she was interrupted by Katy, who
walked in with her hat on, and a whole handful of letters.
