life again. The next night the A.V.I.S. gave a farewell party to Jane
Andrews before her departure for the West. And, while light feet danced
and bright eyes laughed and merry tongues chattered, there came a
summons to a soul in Avonlea that might not be disregarded or evaded.
The next morning the word went from house to house that Ruby Gillis was
dead. She had died in her sleep, painlessly and calmly, and on her face
was a smile--as if, after all, death had come as a kindly friend to lead
her over the threshold, instead of the grisly phantom she had dreaded.

Mrs. Rachel Lynde said emphatically after the funeral that Ruby Gillis
was the handsomest corpse she ever laid eyes on. Her loveliness, as she
lay, white-clad, among the delicate flowers that Anne had placed about
her, was remembered and talked of for years in Avonlea. Ruby had always
been beautiful; but her beauty had been of the earth, earthy; it had
had a certain insolent quality in it, as if it flaunted itself in the
beholder's eye; spirit had never shone through it, intellect had never
refined it. But death had touched it and consecrated it, bringing out
delicate modelings and purity of outline never seen before--doing what
life and love and great sorrow and deep womanhood joys might have
done for Ruby. Anne, looking down through a mist of tears, at her old
playfellow, thought she saw the face God had meant Ruby to have, and
remembered it so always.

Mrs. Gillis called Anne aside into a vacant room before the funeral
procession left the house, and gave her a small packet.

"I want you to have this," she sobbed. "Ruby would have liked you to
have it. It's the embroidered centerpiece she was working at. It isn't
quite finished--the needle is sticking in it just where her poor little
fingers put it the last time she laid it down, the afternoon before she
died."

"There's always a piece of unfinished work left," said Mrs. Lynde, with
tears in her eyes. "But I suppose there's always some one to finish it."

"How difficult it is to realize that one we have always known can really
be dead," said Anne, as she and Diana walked home. "Ruby is the first of
our schoolmates to go. One by one, sooner or later, all the rest of us
must follow."

"Yes, I suppose so," said Diana uncomfortably. She did not want to talk
of that. She would have preferred to have discussed the details of the
funeral--the splendid white velvet casket Mr. Gillis had insisted on
having for Ruby--"the Gillises must always make a splurge, even at
funerals," quoth Mrs. Rachel Lynde--Herb Spencer's sad face, the
uncontrolled, hysteric grief of one of Ruby's sisters--but Anne would
not talk of these things. She seemed wrapped in a reverie in which Diana
felt lonesomely that she had neither lot nor part.

"Ruby Gillis was a great girl to laugh," said Davy suddenly. "Will she
laugh as much in heaven as she did in Avonlea, Anne? I want to know."

"Yes, I think she will," said Anne.

"Oh, Anne," protested Diana, with a rather shocked smile.

"Well, why not, Diana?" asked Anne seriously. "Do you think we'll never
laugh in heaven?"

"Oh--I--I don't know" floundered Diana. "It doesn't seem just right,
somehow. You know it's rather dreadful to laugh in church."

"But heaven won't be like church--all the time," said Anne.

"I hope it ain't," said Davy emphatically. "If it is I don't want to
go. Church is awful dull. Anyway, I don't mean to go for ever so long. I
mean to live to be a hundred years old, like Mr. Thomas Blewett of White
Sands. He says he's lived so long 'cause he always smoked tobacco and it
killed all the germs. Can I smoke tobacco pretty soon, Anne?"

"No, Davy, I hope you'll never use tobacco," said Anne absently.

"What'll you feel like if the germs kill me then?" demanded Davy.




Chapter XV

A Dream Turned Upside Down


"Just one more week and we go back to Redmond," said Anne. She was
happy at the thought of returning to work, classes and Redmond friends.
Pleasing visions were also being woven around Patty's Place. There was
a warm pleasant sense of home in the thought of it, even though she had
never lived there.

But the summer had been a very happy one, too--a time of glad living
with summer suns and skies, a time of keen delight in wholesome things;
a time of renewing and deepening of old friendships; a time in which
she had learned to live more nobly, to work more patiently, to play more
heartily.

"All life lessons are not learned at college," she thought. "Life
teaches them everywhere."

But alas, the final week of that pleasant vacation was spoiled for Anne,
by one of those impish happenings which are like a dream turned upside
down.

"Been writing any more stories lately?" inquired Mr. Harrison genially
one evening when Anne was taking tea with him and Mrs. Harrison.

"No," answered Anne, rather crisply.

"Well, no offense meant. Mrs. Hiram Sloane told me the other day that a
big envelope addressed to the Rollings Reliable Baking Powder Company of
Montreal had been dropped into the post office box a month ago, and she
suspicioned that somebody was trying for the prize they'd offered for
the best story that introduced the name of their baking powder. She said
it wasn't addressed in your writing, but I thought maybe it was you."

"Indeed, no! I saw the prize offer, but I'd never dream of competing
for it. I think it would be perfectly disgraceful to write a story to
advertise a baking powder. It would be almost as bad as Judson Parker's
patent medicine fence."

So spake Anne loftily, little dreaming of the valley of humiliation
awaiting her. That very evening Diana popped into the porch gable,
bright-eyed and rosy cheeked, carrying a letter.

"Oh, Anne, here's a letter for you. I was at the office, so I thought
I'd bring it along. Do open it quick. If it is what I believe it is I
shall just be wild with delight." Anne, puzzled, opened the letter and
glanced over the typewritten contents.


Miss Anne Shirley,

Green Gables,

Avonlea, P.E. Island.

"DEAR MADAM: We have much pleasure in informing you that your charming
story 'Averil's Atonement' has won the prize of twenty-five dollars
offered in our recent competition. We enclose the check herewith. We are
arranging for the publication of the story in several prominent Canadian
newspapers, and we also intend to have it printed in pamphlet form for
distribution among our patrons. Thanking you for the interest you have
shown in our enterprise, we remain,

"Yours very truly,

"THE ROLLINGS RELIABLE

"BAKING POWDER Co."


"I don't understand," said Anne, blankly.

Diana clapped her hands.

"Oh, I KNEW it would win the prize--I was sure of it. _I_ sent your
story into the competition, Anne."

"Diana--Barry!"

"Yes, I did," said Diana gleefully, perching herself on the bed. "When
I saw the offer I thought of your story in a minute, and at first
I thought I'd ask you to send it in. But then I was afraid you
wouldn't--you had so little faith left in it. So I just decided I'd send
the copy you gave me, and say nothing about it. Then, if it didn't win
the prize, you'd never know and you wouldn't feel badly over it, because
the stories that failed were not to be returned, and if it did you'd
have such a delightful surprise."

Diana was not the most discerning of mortals, but just at this moment it
struck her that Anne was not looking exactly overjoyed. The surprise was
there, beyond doubt--but where was the delight?

"Why, Anne, you don't seem a bit pleased!" she exclaimed.

Anne instantly manufactured a smile and put it on.

"Of course I couldn't be anything but pleased over your unselfish wish
to give me pleasure," she said slowly. "But you know--I'm so amazed--I
can't realize it--and I don't understand. There wasn't a word in my
story about--about--" Anne choked a little over the word--"baking
powder."

"Oh, _I_ put that in," said Diana, reassured. "It was as easy as
wink--and of course my experience in our old Story Club helped me. You
know the scene where Averil makes the cake? Well, I just stated that
she used the Rollings Reliable in it, and that was why it turned out so
well; and then, in the last paragraph, where PERCEVAL clasps AVERIL in
his arms and says, 'Sweetheart, the beautiful coming years will bring us
the fulfilment of our home of dreams,' I added, 'in which we will never
use any baking powder except Rollings Reliable.'"

"Oh," gasped poor Anne, as if some one had dashed cold water on her.

"And you've won the twenty-five dollars," continued Diana jubilantly.
"Why, I heard Priscilla say once that the Canadian Woman only pays five
dollars for a story!"

Anne held out the hateful pink slip in shaking fingers.

"I can't take it--it's yours by right, Diana. You sent the story in and
made the alterations. I--I would certainly never have sent it. So you
must take the check."

"I'd like to see myself," said Diana scornfully. "Why, what I did wasn't
any trouble. The honor of being a friend of the prizewinner is enough
for me. Well, I must go. I should have gone straight home from the post
office for we have company. But I simply had to come and hear the news.
I'm so glad for your sake, Anne."

Anne suddenly bent forward, put her arms about Diana, and kissed her
cheek.

"I think you are the sweetest and truest friend in the world, Diana,"
she said, with a little tremble in her voice, "and I assure you I
appreciate the motive of what you've done."

Diana, pleased and embarrassed, got herself away, and poor Anne,
after flinging the innocent check into her bureau drawer as if it
were blood-money, cast herself on her bed and wept tears of shame and
outraged sensibility. Oh, she could never live this down--never!

Gilbert arrived at dusk, brimming over with congratulations, for he had
called at Orchard Slope and heard the news. But his congratulations died
on his lips at sight of Anne's face.

"Why, Anne, what is the matter? I expected to find you radiant over
winning Rollings Reliable prize. Good for you!"

"Oh, Gilbert, not you," implored Anne, in an ET-TU BRUTE tone. "I
thought YOU would understand. Can't you see how awful it is?"

"I must confess I can't. WHAT is wrong?"

"Everything," moaned Anne. "I feel as if I were disgraced forever. What
do you think a mother would feel like if she found her child tattooed
over with a baking powder advertisement? I feel just the same. I loved
my poor little story, and I wrote it out of the best that was in me.
And it is SACRILEGE to have it degraded to the level of a baking powder
advertisement. Don't you remember what Professor Hamilton used to tell
us in the literature class at Queen's? He said we were never to write
a word for a low or unworthy motive, but always to cling to the very
highest ideals. What will he think when he hears I've written a story to
advertise Rollings Reliable? And, oh, when it gets out at Redmond! Think
how I'll be teased and laughed at!"

"That you won't," said Gilbert, wondering uneasily if it were that
confounded Junior's opinion in particular over which Anne was worried.
"The Reds will think just as I thought--that you, being like nine out of
ten of us, not overburdened with worldly wealth, had taken this way of
earning an honest penny to help yourself through the year. I don't see
that there's anything low or unworthy about that, or anything ridiculous
either. One would rather write masterpieces of literature no doubt--but
meanwhile board and tuition fees have to be paid."

This commonsense, matter-of-fact view of the case cheered Anne a little.
At least it removed her dread of being laughed at, though the deeper
hurt of an outraged ideal remained.




Chapter XVI

Adjusted Relationships


"It's the homiest spot I ever saw--it's homier than home," avowed
Philippa Gordon, looking about her with delighted eyes. They were all
assembled at twilight in the big living-room at Patty's Place--Anne and
Priscilla, Phil and Stella, Aunt Jamesina, Rusty, Joseph, the Sarah-Cat,
and Gog and Magog. The firelight shadows were dancing over the walls;
the cats were purring; and a huge bowl of hothouse chrysanthemums,
sent to Phil by one of the victims, shone through the golden gloom like
creamy moons.

It was three weeks since they had considered themselves settled, and
already all believed the experiment would be a success. The first
fortnight after their return had been a pleasantly exciting one; they
had been busy setting up their household goods, organizing their little
establishment, and adjusting different opinions.

Anne was not over-sorry to leave Avonlea when the time came to return
to college. The last few days of her vacation had not been pleasant.
Her prize story had been published in the Island papers; and Mr. William
Blair had, upon the counter of his store, a huge pile of pink, green and
yellow pamphlets, containing it, one of which he gave to every customer.
He sent a complimentary bundle to Anne, who promptly dropped them all in
the kitchen stove. Her humiliation was the consequence of her own ideals
only, for Avonlea folks thought it quite splendid that she should have
won the prize. Her many friends regarded her with honest admiration; her
few foes with scornful envy. Josie Pye said she believed Anne Shirley
had just copied the story; she was sure she remembered reading it in
a paper years before. The Sloanes, who had found out or guessed that
Charlie had been "turned down," said they didn't think it was much to be
proud of; almost any one could have done it, if she tried. Aunt Atossa
told Anne she was very sorry to hear she had taken to writing novels;
nobody born and bred in Avonlea would do it; that was what came of
adopting orphans from goodness knew where, with goodness knew what
kind of parents. Even Mrs. Rachel Lynde was darkly dubious about the
propriety of writing fiction, though she was almost reconciled to it by
that twenty-five dollar check.

"It is perfectly amazing, the price they pay for such lies, that's
what," she said, half-proudly, half-severely.

All things considered, it was a relief when going-away time came. And
it was very jolly to be back at Redmond, a wise, experienced Soph with
hosts of friends to greet on the merry opening day. Pris and Stella and
Gilbert were there, Charlie Sloane, looking more important than ever a
Sophomore looked before, Phil, with the Alec-and-Alonzo question still
unsettled, and Moody Spurgeon MacPherson. Moody Spurgeon had been
teaching school ever since leaving Queen's, but his mother had concluded
