but it's useless extravagance. Claflin allows me a generous sum for
hotels, and if I go to a cheap one, I put the difference into my own
pocket."

"Is that expected?" asked Luke, doubtfully.

"It's allowed, at any rate. No one can complain if I choose to
live a little plainer. When it pays in the way of business to stop
at a big hotel, I do so. Of course, your boss pays your expenses?"

"Yes."

"Then you'd better do as I do--put the difference in your own
pocket."

"I shouldn't like to do that."

"Why not? It is evident you are a new traveler, or you would know
that it is a regular thing."

Luke did not answer, but he adhered to his own view. He meant to
keep a careful account of his disbursements and report to Mr.
Armstrong, without the addition of a single penny. He had no doubt
that he should be paid liberally for his time, and he didn't care
to make anything by extra means.

The Ottawa House was nearly a mile and a half distant. It was on one
of the lower streets, near the lake. It was a plain building with
accommodations for perhaps a hundred and fifty guests. This would
be large for a country town or small city, but it indicated a hotel
of the third class in Chicago. I may as well say here, however,
that it was a perfectly respectable and honestly conducted hotel,
notwithstanding it was selected by Mr. Coleman, who could not with
truth be complimented so highly. I will also add that Mr. Coleman's
selection of the Ottawa, in place of a more pretentious hotel, arose
from the fear that in the latter he might meet someone who knew him,
and who would warn Luke of his undesirable reputation.

Jumping out of the hack, J. Madison Coleman led the way into the
hotel, and, taking pen in hand, recorded his name in large,
flourishing letters--as from New York.

Then he handed the pen to Luke, who registered himself also
from New York.

"Give us a room together," he said to the clerk.

Luke did not altogether like this arrangement, but hardly felt
like objecting. He did not wish to hurt the feelings of J. Madison
Coleman, yet he considered that, having known him only six hours,
it was somewhat imprudent to allow such intimacy. But he who
hesitates is lost, and before Luke had made up his mind whether
to object or not, he was already part way upstairs--there was no
elevator--following the bellboy, who carried his luggage.

The room, which was on the fourth floor, was of good size, and
contained two beds. So far so good. After the ride he wished to wash
and put on clean clothes. Mr. Coleman did not think this necessary,
and saying to Luke that he would find him downstairs, he left our
hero alone.

"I wish I had a room alone," thought Luke. "I should like it much
better, but I don't want to offend Coleman. I've got eighty dollars
in my pocketbook, and though, of course, he is all right, I don't
want to take any risks."

On the door he read the regulations of the hotel. One item attracted
his attention. It was this:


"The proprietors wish distinctly to state that they will not be
responsible for money or valuables unless left with the clerk to
be deposited in the safe."


Luke had not been accustomed to stopping at hotels, and did not
know that this was the usual custom. It struck him, however, as
an excellent arrangement, and he resolved to avail himself of it.

When he went downstairs he didn't see Mr. Coleman.

"Your friend has gone out," said the clerk. "He wished me to say
that he would be back in half an hour."

"All right," answered Luke. "Can I leave my pocketbook with you?"

"Certainly."

The clerk wrapped it up in a piece of brown paper and put it
away in the safe at the rear of the office, marking it with Luke's
name and the number of his room.

"There, that's safe!" thought Luke, with a feeling of relief. He had
reserved about three dollars, as he might have occasion to spend a
little money in the course of the evening. If he were robbed of this
small amount it would not much matter.

A newsboy came in with an evening paper. Luke bought a copy and sat
down on a bench in the office, near a window. He was reading busily,
when someone tapped him on the shoulder. Looking up, he saw that it
was his roommate, J. Madison Coleman.

"I've just been taking a little walk," he said, "and now I am
ready for dinner. If you are, too, let us go into the dining-room."

Luke was glad to accept this proposal, his long journey having
given him a good appetite.



CHAPTER XXVII

COLEMAN ACTS SUSPICIOUSLY


After dinner, Coleman suggested a game of billiards, but as this was
a game with which Luke was not familiar, he declined the invitation,
but went into the billiard-room and watched a game between his
new acquaintance and a stranger. Coleman proved to be a very good
player, and won the game. After the first game Coleman called for
drinks, and invited Luke to join them.

"Thank you," answered Luke, "but I never drink."

"Oh, I forgot; you're a good boy," said Coleman. "Well, I'm no
Puritan. Whisky straight for me."

Luke was not in the least troubled by the sneer conveyed in
Coleman's words. He was not altogether entitled to credit for
refusing to drink, having not the slightest taste for strong
drink of any kind.

About half-past seven Coleman put up his cue, saying: "That'll do
for me. Now, Luke, suppose we take a walk."

Luke was quite ready, not having seen anything of Chicago as yet.
They strolled out, and walked for an hour. Coleman, to do him
justice, proved an excellent guide, and pointed out whatever they
passed which was likely to interest his young companion. But at
last he seemed to be tired.

"It's only half-past eight," he said, referring to his watch.
"I'll drop into some theater. It is the best way to finish up the
evening."

"Then I'll go back to the hotel," said Luke. "I feel tired, and
mean to go to bed early."

"You'd better spend an hour or two in the theater with me."

"No, I believe not. I prefer a good night's rest."

"Do you mind my leaving you?"

"Not at all."

"Can you find your way back to the hotel alone?"

"If you'll direct me, I think I can find it."

The direction was given, and Coleman was turning off, when, as if
it had just occurred to him, he said: "By the way, can you lend me
a five? I've nothing less than a fifty-dollar bill with me, and I
don't want to break that."

Luke congratulated himself now that he had left the greater
part of his money at the hotel.

"I can let you have a dollar," he said.

Coleman shrugged his shoulders, but answered: "All right;
let me have the one."

Luke did so, and felt now that he had more than repaid the fifty
cents his companion had paid for hack fare. Though Coleman had
professed to have nothing less than fifty, Luke knew that he had
changed a five-dollar bill at the hotel in paying for the drinks,
and must have over four dollars with him in small bills and change.

"Why, then," thought he, "did Coleman want to borrow five dollars
of me?"

If Luke had known more of the world he would have understood that
it was only one of the tricks to which men like Coleman resort to
obtain a loan, or rather a gift, from an unsuspecting acquaintance.

"I suppose I shall not see my money back," thought Luke. "Well, it
will be the last that he will get out of me."

He was already becoming tired of his companion, and doubted whether
he would not find the acquaintance an expensive one. He was sorry
that they were to share the same room. However, it was for one night
only, and to-morrow he was quite resolved to part company.

Shortly after nine o'clock Luke went to bed, and being fatigued with
his long journey, was soon asleep. He was still sleeping at twelve
o'clock, when Coleman came home.

Coleman came up to his bed and watched him attentively.

"The kid's asleep," he soliloquized. "He's one of the good
Sunday-school boys. I can imagine how shocked he would be if he
knew that, instead of being a traveler for H. B. Claflin, I have
been living by my wits for the last half-dozen years. He seems to
be half asleep. I think I can venture to explore a little."

He took Luke's trousers from the chair on which he had laid them,
and thrust his fingers into the pockets, but brought forth only
a penknife and a few pennies.

"He keeps his money somewhere else, it seems," said Coleman.

Next he turned to the vest, and from the inside vest pocket
drew out Luke's modest pocketbook.

"Oh, here we have it," thought Coleman, with a smile. "Cunning boy;
he thought nobody would think of looking in his vest pocket. Well,
let us see how much he has got."

He opened the pocketbook, and frowned with disappointment when he
discovered only a two-dollar bill.

"What does it mean? Surely he hasn't come to Chicago with only
this paltry sum!" exclaimed Coleman. "He must be more cunning than
I thought."

He looked in the coat pockets, the shoes, and even the socks of his
young companion, but found nothing, except the silver watch, which
Luke had left in one of his vest pockets.

"Confound the boy! He's foiled me this time!" muttered Coleman.
"Shall I take the watch? No; it might expose me, and I could not
raise much on it at the pawnbroker's. He must have left his money
with the clerk downstairs. He wouldn't think of it himself, but
probably he was advised to do so before he left home. I'll get up
early, and see if I can't get in ahead of my young friend."

Coleman did not venture to take the two-dollar bill, as that
would have induced suspicion on the part of Luke, and would have
interfered with his intention of securing the much larger sum of
money, which, as he concluded rightly, was in the safe in the office.

He undressed and got into bed, but not without observation. As he
was bending over Luke's clothes, examining them, our hero's eyes
suddenly opened, and he saw what was going on. It flashed upon him
at once what kind of a companion he had fallen in with, but he had
the wisdom and self-control to close his eyes again immediately. He
reflected that there was not much that Coleman could take, and if
he took the watch he resolved to charge him openly with it. To make
a disturbance there and then might be dangerous, as Coleman, who
was much stronger than he, might ill-treat and abuse him, without
his being able to offer any effectual resistance.



CHAPTER XXVIII

COLEMAN'S LITTLE PLAN


Though Coleman went to bed late, he awoke early. He had the power
of awaking at almost any hour that he might fix. He was still quite
fatigued, but having an object in view, overcame his tendency to
lie longer, and swiftly dressing himself, went downstairs. Luke was
still sleeping, and did not awaken while his companion was dressing.

Coleman went downstairs and strolled up to the clerk's desk,

"You're up early," said that official.

"Yes, it's a great nuisance, but I have a little business to attend
to with a man who leaves Chicago by an early train. I tried to find
him last night, but he had probably gone to some theater. That is
what has forced me to get up so early this morning."

"I am always up early," said the clerk.

"Then you are used to it, and don't mind it. It is different
with me."

Coleman bought a cigar, and while he was lighting it, remarked,
as if incidentally:

"By the way, did my young friend leave my money with you
last evening?"

"He left a package of money with me, but he didn't mention
it was yours."

"Forgot to, I suppose. I told him to leave it here, as I was going
out to the theater, and was afraid I might have my pocket picked.
Smart fellows, those pickpockets. I claim to be rather smart myself,
but there are some of them smart enough to get ahead of me.

"I was relieved of my pocketbook containing over two hundred dollars
in money once. By Jove! I was mad enough to knock the fellow's head
off, if I had caught him."

"It is rather provoking."

"I think I'll trouble you to hand me the money the boy left with
you, as I have to use some this morning."

Mr. Coleman spoke in an easy, off-hand way, that might have taken in
some persons, but hotel clerks are made smart by their positions.

"I am sorry, Mr. Coleman," said the clerk, "but I can only give it
back to the boy."

"I commend your caution, my friend," said Coleman, "but I can assure
you that it's all right. I sent it back by Luke when I was going to
the theater, and I meant, of course, to have him give my name with
it. However, he is not used to business, and so forgot it."

"When did you hand it to him?" asked the clerk, with newborn suspicion.

"About eight o'clock. No doubt he handed it in as soon as he came
back to the hotel."

"How much was there?"

This question posed Mr. Coleman, as he had no idea how much money
Luke had with him.

"I can't say exactly," he answered. "I didn't count it. There might
have been seventy-five dollars, though perhaps the sum fell a little
short of that."

"I can't give you the money, Mr. Coleman," said the clerk, briefly.
"I have no evidence that it is yours."

"Really, that's ludicrous," said Coleman, with a forced laugh. "You
don't mean to doubt me, I hope," and Madison Coleman drew himself
up haughtily.

"That has nothing to do with it. The rule of this office is to
return money only to the person who deposited it with us. If we
adopted any other rule, we should get into no end of trouble."

"But, my friend," said Coleman, frowning, "you are putting me to
great inconvenience. I must meet my friend in twenty minutes and
pay him a part of this money."

"I have nothing to do with that," said the clerk.

"You absolutely refuse, then?"

"I do," answered the clerk, firmly. "However, you can easily
overcome the difficulty by bringing the boy down here to authorize
me to hand you the money."

"It seems to me that you have plenty of red tape here," said
Coleman, shrugging his shoulders. "However, I must do as you
require."

Coleman had a bright thought, which he proceeded to carry
into execution.

He left the office and went upstairs. He was absent long enough to
visit the chamber which he and Luke had occupied together. Then he
reported to the office again.

"The boy is not dressed," he said, cheerfully. "However, he has
given me an order for the money, which, of course, will do as well."

He handed a paper, the loose leaf of a memorandum book,
on which were written in pencil these words:


"Give my guardian, Mr. Coleman, the money I left on deposit
at the office.                             LUKE LARKIN."


"That makes it all right, doesn't it?" asked Coleman, jauntily.
"Now, if you'll be kind enough to hand me my money at once, I'll
be off."

"It won't do, Mr. Coleman," said the clerk. "How am I to know
that the boy wrote this?"

"Don't you see his signature?"

The clerk turned to the hotel register, where Luke had enrolled
his name.

"The handwriting is not the same," he said, coldly.

"Oh, confound it!" exclaimed Coleman, testily. "Can't you
understand that writing with a pencil makes a difference?"

"I understand," said the clerk, "that you are trying to get
money that does not belong to you. The money was deposited a couple
of hours sooner than the time you claim to have handed it to the
boy--just after you and the boy arrived."

"You're right," said Coleman, unabashed. "I made a mistake."

"You cannot have the money."

"You have no right to keep it from me," said Coleman, wrathfully.

"Bring the boy to the office and it shall be delivered to him;
then, if he chooses to give it to you, I have nothing to say."

"But I tell you he is not dressed."

"He seems to be," said the clerk, quietly, with a glance at the
door, through which Luke was just entering.

Coleman's countenance changed. He was now puzzled for a moment.
Then a bold plan suggested itself. He would charge Luke with having
stolen the money from him.



CHAPTER XXIX

MR. COLEMAN IS FOILED IN HIS ATTEMPT


Luke looked from Coleman to the clerk in some surprise. He saw from
their looks that they were discussing some matter which concerned
him.

