(10) La bonne vetite Souris' par Madame d'Aulnoy.




GRACIOSA AND PERCINET

ONCE upon a time there lived a King and Queen who had one charming
daughter. She was so graceful and pretty and clever that she was called
Graciosa, and the Queen was so fond of her that she could think of
nothing else.

Everyday she gave the Princess a lovely new frock of gold brocade,
or satin, or velvet, and when she was hungry she had bowls full of
sugar-plums, and at least twenty pots of jam. Everybody said she was
the happiest Princess in the world. Now there lived at this same court
a very rich old duchess whose name was Grumbly. She was more frightful
than tongue can tell; her hair was red as fire, and she had but one eye,
and that not a pretty one! Her face was as broad as a full moon, and
her mouth was so large that everybody who met her would have been afraid
they were going to be eaten up, only she had no teeth. As she was as
cross as she was ugly, she could not bear to hear everyone saying how
pretty and how charming Graciosa was; so she presently went away from
the court to her own castle, which was not far off. But if anybody who
went to see her happened to mention the charming Princess, she would cry
angrily:

'It's not true that she is lovely. I have more beauty in my little
finger than she has in her whole body.'

Soon after this, to the great grief of the Princess, the Queen was taken
ill and died, and the King became so melancholy that for a whole year he
shut himself up in his palace. At last his physicians, fearing that he
would fall ill, ordered that he should go out and amuse himself; so a
hunting party was arranged, but as it was very hot weather the King soon
got tired, and said he would dismount and rest at a castle which they
were passing.

This happened to be the Duchess Grumbly's castle, and when she heard
that the King was coming she went out to meet him, and said that the
cellar was the coolest place in the whole castle if he would condescend
to come down into it. So down they went together, and the King seeing
about two hundred great casks ranged side by side, asked if it was only
for herself that she had this immense store of wine.

'Yes, sire,' answered she, 'it is for myself alone, but I shall be
most happy to let you taste some of it. Which do you like, canary, St.
Julien, champagne, hermitage sack, raisin, or cider?'

'Well,' said the King, 'since you are so kind as to ask me, I prefer
champagne to anything else.'

Then Duchess Grumbly took up a little hammer and tapped upon the cask
twice, and out came at least a thousand crowns.

'What's the meaning of this?' said she smiling.

Then she tapped the next cask, and out came a bushel of gold pieces.

'I don't understand this at all,' said the Duchess, smiling more than
before.

Then she went on to the third cask, tap, tap, and out came such a stream
of diamonds and pearls that the ground was covered with them.

'Ah!' she cried, 'this is altogether beyond my comprehension, sire.
Someone must have stolen my good wine and put all this rubbish in its
place.'

'Rubbish, do you call it, Madam Grumbly?' cried the King. 'Rubbish! why
there is enough there to buy ten kingdoms.'

'Well,' said she, 'you must know that all those casks are full of gold
and jewels, and if you like to marry me it shall all be yours.'

Now the King loved money more than anything else in the world, so he
cried joyfully:

'Marry you? why with all my heart! to-morrow if you like.'

'But I make one condition,' said the Duchess; 'I must have entire
control of your daughter to do as I please with her.'

'Oh certainly, you shall have your own way; let us shake hands upon the
bargain,' said the King.

So they shook hands and went up out of the cellar of treasure together,
and the Duchess locked the door and gave the key to the King.

When he got back to his own palace Graciosa ran out to meet him, and
asked if he had had good sport.

'I have caught a dove,' answered he.

'Oh! do give it to me,' said the Princess, 'and I will keep it and take
care of it.'

'I can hardly do that,' said he, 'for, to speak more plainly, I mean
that I met the Duchess Grumbly, and have promised to marry her.'

'And you call her a dove?' cried the Princess. '_I_ should have called
her a screech owl.'

'Hold your tongue,' said the King, very crossly. 'I intend you to behave
prettily to her. So now go and make yourself fit to be seen, as I am
going to take you to visit her.'

So the Princess went very sorrowfully to her own room, and her nurse,
seeing her tears, asked what was vexing her.

'Alas! who would not be vexed?' answered she, 'for the King intends
to marry again, and has chosen for his new bride my enemy, the hideous
Duchess Grumbly.'

'Oh, well!' answered the nurse, 'you must remember that you are a
Princess, and are expected to set a good example in making the best of
whatever happens. You must promise me not to let the Duchess see how
much you dislike her.'

At first the Princess would not promise, but the nurse showed her so
many good reasons for it that in the end she agreed to be amiable to her
step-mother.

Then the nurse dressed her in a robe of pale green and gold brocade, and
combed out her long fair hair till it floated round her like a golden
mantle, and put on her head a crown of roses and jasmine with emerald
leaves.

When she was ready nobody could have been prettier, but she still could
not help looking sad.

Meanwhile the Duchess Grumbly was also occupied in attiring herself. She
had one of her shoe heels made an inch or so higher than the other, that
she might not limp so much, and put in a cunningly made glass eye in the
place of the one she had lost. She dyed her red hair black, and painted
her face. Then she put on a gorgeous robe of lilac satin lined with
blue, and a yellow petticoat trimmed with violet ribbons, and because
she had heard that queens always rode into their new dominions, she
ordered a horse to be made ready for her to ride.

While Graciosa was waiting until the King should be ready to set out,
she went down all alone through the garden into a little wood, where she
sat down upon a mossy bank and began to think. And her thoughts were so
doleful that very soon she began to cry, and she cried, and cried, and
forgot all about going back to the palace, until she suddenly saw a
handsome page standing before her. He was dressed in green, and the cap
which he held in his hand was adorned with white plumes. When Graciosa
looked at him he went down on one knee, and said to her:

'Princess, the King awaits you.'

The Princess was surprised, and, if the truth must be told, very much
delighted at the appearance of this charming page, whom she could not
remember to have seen before. Thinking he might belong to the household
of the Duchess, she said:

'How long have you been one of the King's pages?'

'I am not in the service of the King, madam,' answered he, 'but in
yours.'

'In mine?' said the Princess with great surprise. 'Then how is it that I
have never seen you before?'

'Ah, Princess!' said he, 'I have never before dared to present myself to
you, but now the King's marriage threatens you with so many dangers that
I have resolved to tell you at once how much I love you already, and I
trust that in time I may win your regard. I am Prince Percinet, of whose
riches you may have heard, and whose fairy gift will, I hope, be of use
to you in all your difficulties, if you will permit me to accompany you
under this disguise.'

'Ah, Percinet!' cried the Princess, 'is it really you? I have so often
heard of you and wished to see you. If you will indeed be my friend, I
shall not be afraid of that wicked old Duchess any more.'

So they went back to the palace together, and there Graciosa found a
beautiful horse which Percinet had brought for her to ride. As it was
very spirited he led it by the bridle, and this arrangement enabled him
to turn and look at the Princess often, which he did not fail to do.
Indeed, she was so pretty that it was a real pleasure to look at her.
When the horse which the Duchess was to ride appeared beside Graciosa's,
it looked no better than an old cart horse, and as to their trappings,
there was simply no comparison between them, as the Princess's saddle
and bridle were one glittering mass of diamonds. The King had so many
other things to think of that he did not notice this, but all his
courtiers were entirely taken up with admiring the Princess and her
charming Page in green, who was more handsome and distinguished-looking
than all the rest of the court put together.

When they met the Duchess Grumbly she was seated in an open carriage
trying in vain to look dignified. The King and the Princess saluted her,
and her horse was brought forward for her to mount. But when she saw
Graciosa's she cried angrily:

'If that child is to have a better horse than mine, I will go back to my
own castle this very minute. What is the good of being a Queen if one is
to be slighted like this?'

Upon this the King commanded Graciosa to dismount and to beg the Duchess
to honour her by mounting her horse. The Princess obeyed in silence, and
the Duchess, without looking at her or thanking her, scrambled up upon
the beautiful horse, where she sat looking like a bundle of clothes, and
eight officers had to hold her up for fear she should fall off.

Even then she was not satisfied, and was still grumbling and muttering,
so they asked her what was the matter.

'I wish that Page in green to come and lead the horse, as he did when
Graciosa rode it,' said she very sharply.

And the King ordered the Page to come and lead the Queen's horse.
Percinet and the Princess looked at one another, but said never a word,
and then he did as the King commanded, and the procession started in
great pomp. The Duchess was greatly elated, and as she sat there in
state would not have wished to change places even with Graciosa. But
at the moment when it was least expected the beautiful horse began to
plunge and rear and kick, and finally to run away at such a pace that it
was impossible to stop him.

At first the Duchess clung to the saddle, but she was very soon thrown
off and fell in a heap among the stones and thorns, and there they found
her, shaken to a jelly, and collected what was left of her as if she had
been a broken glass. Her bonnet was here and her shoes there, her face
was scratched, and her fine clothes were covered with mud. Never was a
bride seen in such a dismal plight. They carried her back to the palace
and put her to bed, but as soon as she recovered enough to be able to
speak, she began to scold and rage, and declared that the whole affair
was Graciosa's fault, that she had contrived it on purpose to try and
get rid of her, and that if the King would not have her punished, she
would go back to her castle and enjoy her riches by herself.

At this the King was terribly frightened, for he did not at all want to
lose all those barrels of gold and jewels. So he hastened to appease the
Duchess, and told her she might punish Graciosa in any way she pleased.

Thereupon she sent for Graciosa, who turned pale and trembled at the
summons, for she guessed that it promised nothing agreeable for her. She
looked all about for Percinet, but he was nowhere to be seen; so she had
no choice but to go to the Duchess Grumbly's room. She had hardly got
inside the door when she was seized by four waiting women, who looked
so tall and strong and cruel that the Princess shuddered at the sight
of them, and still more when she saw them arming themselves with great
bundles of rods, and heard the Duchess call out to them from her bed
to beat the Princess without mercy. Poor Graciosa wished miserably that
Percinet could only know what was happening and come to rescue her.
But no sooner did they begin to beat her than she found, to her great
relief, that the rods had changed to bundles of peacock's feathers, and
though the Duchess's women went on till they were so tired that they
could no longer raise their arms from their sides, yet she was not hurt
in the least. However, the Duchess thought she must be black and blue
after such a beating; so Graciosa, when she was released, pretended to
feel very bad, and went away into her own room, where she told her
nurse all that had happened, and then the nurse left her, and when the
Princess turned round there stood Percinet beside her. She thanked him
gratefully for helping her so cleverly, and they laughed and were very
merry over the way they had taken in the Duchess and her waiting-maids;
but Percinet advised her still to pretend to be ill for a few days,
and after promising to come to her aid whenever she needed him, he
disappeared as suddenly as he had come.

The Duchess was so delighted at the idea that Graciosa was really
ill, that she herself recovered twice as fast as she would have done
otherwise, and the wedding was held with great magnificence. Now as the
King knew that, above all other things, the Queen loved to be told that
she was beautiful, he ordered that her portrait should be painted, and
that a tournament should be held, at which all the bravest knights of
his court should maintain against all comers that Grumbly was the most
beautiful princess in the world.

Numbers of knights came from far and wide to accept the challenge, and
the hideous Queen sat in great state in a balcony hung with cloth of
gold to watch the contests, and Graciosa had to stand up behind her,
where her loveliness was so conspicuous that the combatants could not
keep their eyes off her. But the Queen was so vain that she thought all
their admiring glances were for herself, especially as, in spite of the
badness of their cause, the King's knights were so brave that they were
the victors in every combat.

However, when nearly all the strangers had been defeated, a young
unknown knight presented himself. He carried a portrait, enclosed in a
bow encrusted with diamonds, and he declared himself willing to maintain
against them all that the Queen was the ugliest creature in the world,
and that the Princess whose portrait he carried was the most beautiful.

So one by one the knights came out against him, and one by one he
vanquished them all, and then he opened the box, and said that, to
console them, he would show them the portrait of his Queen of Beauty,
and when he did so everyone recognised the Princess Graciosa. The
unknown knight then saluted her gracefully and retired, without telling
his name to anybody. But Graciosa had no difficulty in guessing that it
was Percinet.

As to the Queen, she was so furiously angry that she could hardly
speak; but she soon recovered her voice, and overwhelmed Graciosa with a
torrent of reproaches.

'What!' she said, 'do you dare to dispute with me for the prize of
beauty, and expect me to endure this insult to my knights? But I will
not bear it, proud Princess. I will have my revenge.'

'I assure you, Madam,' said the Princess, 'that I had nothing to do with
it and am quite willing that you shall be declared Queen of Beauty

'Ah! you are pleased to jest, popinjay!' said the Queen, 'but it will be
my turn soon!'

The King was speedily told what had happened, and how the Princess was
in terror of the angry Queen, but he only said: 'The Queen must do as
she pleases. Graciosa belongs to her!'

The wicked Queen waited impatiently until night fell, and then she
ordered her carriage to be brought. Graciosa, much against her will,
was forced into it, and away they drove, and never stopped until they
reached a great forest, a hundred leagues from the palace. This forest
was so gloomy, and so full of lions, tigers, bears and wolves, that
nobody dared pass through it even by daylight, and here they set down
the unhappy Princess in the middle of the black night, and left her in
spite of all her tears and entreaties. The Princess stood quite still at
first from sheer bewilderment, but when the last sound of the retreating
carriages died away in the distance she began to run aimlessly hither
and thither, sometimes knocking herself against a tree, sometimes
tripping over a stone, fearing every minute that she would be eaten up
by the lions. Presently she was too tired to advance another step, so
she threw herself down upon the ground and cried miserably:

'Oh, Percinet! where are you? Have you forgotten me altogether?'

She had hardly spoken when all the forest was lighted up with a sudden
glow. Every tree seemed to be sending out a soft radiance, which was
clearer than moonlight and softer than daylight, and at the end of a
long avenue of trees opposite to her the Princess saw a palace of clear
crystal which blazed like the sun. At that moment a slight sound behind
her made her start round, and there stood Percinet himself.

'Did I frighten you, my Princess?' said he. 'I come to bid you welcome
to our fairy palace, in the name of the Queen, my mother, who is
prepared to love you as much as I do.' The Princess joyfully mounted
with him into a little sledge, drawn by two stags, which bounded off and
drew them swiftly to the wonderful palace, where the Queen received her
with the greatest kindness, and a splendid banquet was served at once.
Graciosa was so happy to have found Percinet, and to have escaped from
the gloomy forest and all its terrors, that she was very hungry and very
merry, and they were a gay party. After supper they went into another
lovely room, where the crystal walls were covered with pictures, and the
Princess saw with great surprise that her own history was represented,
even down to the moment when Percinet found her in the forest.

'Your painters must indeed be diligent,' she said, pointing out the last
picture to the Prince.

'They are obliged to be, for I will not have anything forgotten that
happens to you,' he answered.

When the Princess grew sleepy, twenty-four charming maidens put her to
bed in the prettiest room she had ever seen, and then sang to her so
sweetly that Graciosa's dreams were all of mermaids, and cool sea waves,
and caverns, in which she wandered with Percinet; but when she woke up
again her first thought was that, delightful as this fairy palace seemed
to her, yet she could not stay in it, but must go back to her father.
When she had been dressed by the four-and-twenty maidens in a charming
robe which the Queen had sent for her, and in which she looked
prettier than ever, Prince Percinet came to see her, and was bitterly
disappointed when she told him what she had been thinking. He begged her
to consider again how unhappy the wicked Queen would make her, and how,
if she would but marry him, all the fairy palace would be hers, and his
one thought would be to please her. But, in spite of everything he could
say, the Princess was quite determined to go back, though he at last
persuaded her to stay eight days, which were so full of pleasure and
amusement that they passed like a few hours. On the last day, Graciosa,
who had often felt anxious to know what was going on in her father's
palace, said to Percinet that she was sure that he could find out for
her, if he would, what reason the Queen had given her father for her
sudden disappearance. Percinet at first offered to send his courier to
find out, but the Princess said:

'Oh! isn't there a quicker way of knowing than that?'

'Very well,' said Percinet, 'you shall see for yourself.'

So up they went together to the top of a very high tower, which, like
the rest of the castle, was built entirely of rock-crystal.

There the Prince held Graciosa's hand in his, and made her put the tip
of her little finger into her mouth, and look towards the town, and
immediately she saw the wicked Queen go to the King, and heard her say
to him, 'That miserable Princess is dead, and no great loss either. I
have ordered that she shall be buried at once.'

And then the Princess saw how she dressed up a log of wood and had it
buried, and how the old King cried, and all the people murmured that the
Queen had killed Graciosa with her cruelties, and that she ought to have
her head cut off. When the Princess saw that the King was so sorry for
her pretended death that he could neither eat nor drink, she cried:

'Ah, Percinet! take me back quickly if you love me.'

And so, though he did not want to at all, he was obliged to promise that
he would let her go.

'You may not regret me, Princess,' he said sadly, 'for I fear that you
do not love me well enough; but I foresee that you will more than once
regret that you left this fairy palace where we have been so happy.'

But, in spite of all he could say, she bade farewell to the Queen, his
mother, and prepared to set out; so Percinet, very unwillingly, brought
the little sledge with the stags and she mounted beside him. But they
had hardly gone twenty yards when a tremendous noise behind her made
Graciosa look back, and she saw the palace of crystal fly into a million
splinters, like the spray of a fountain, and vanish.

'Oh, Percinet!' she cried, 'what has happened? The palace is gone.'

'Yes,' he answered, 'my palace is a thing of the past; you will see it
again, but not until after you have been buried.'

'Now you are angry with me,' said Graciosa in her most coaxing voice,
'though after all I am more to be pitied than you are.'

When they got near the palace the Prince made the sledge and themselves
invisible, so the Princess got in unobserved, and ran up to the great
hall where the King was sitting all by himself. At first he was very
much startled by Graciosa's sudden appearance, but she told him how the
Queen had left her out in the forest, and how she had caused a log
of wood to be buried. The King, who did not know what to think, sent
quickly and had it dug up, and sure enough it was as the Princess had
said. Then he caressed Graciosa, and made her sit down to supper with
him, and they were as happy as possible. But someone had by this time
told the wicked Queen that Graciosa had come back, and was at supper
with the King, and in she flew in a terrible fury. The poor old King
quite trembled before her, and when she declared that Graciosa was not
the Princess at all, but a wicked impostor, and that if the King did not
give her up at once she would go back to her own castle and never see
him again, he had not a word to say, and really seemed to believe that
it was not Graciosa after all. So the Queen in great triumph sent for
her waiting women, who dragged the unhappy Princess away and shut her
up in a garret; they took away all her jewels and her pretty dress, and
gave her a rough cotton frock, wooden shoes, and a little cloth cap.
There was some straw in a corner, which was all she had for a bed, and
they gave her a very little bit of black bread to eat. In this miserable
plight Graciosa did indeed regret the fairy palace, and she would have
called Percinet to her aid, only she felt sure he was still vexed with
her for leaving him, and thought that she could not expect him to come.

Meanwhile the Queen had sent for an old Fairy, as malicious as herself,
and said to her:

'You must find me some task for this fine Princess which she cannot
possibly do, for I mean to punish her, and if she does not do what I
order, she will not be able to say that I am unjust.' So the old Fairy
said she would think it over, and come again the next day. When she
returned she brought with her a skein of thread, three times as big
as herself; it was so fine that a breath of air would break it, and so
tangled that it was impossible to see the beginning or the end of it.

The Queen sent for Graciosa, and said to her:

'Do you see this skein? Set your clumsy fingers to work upon it, for I
must have it disentangled by sunset, and if you break a single thread
it will be the worse for you.' So saying she left her, locking the door
behind her with three keys.

The Princess stood dismayed at the sight of the terrible skein. If
she did but turn it over to see where to begin, she broke a thousand
threads, and not one could she disentangle. At last she threw it into
the middle of the floor, crying:

'Oh, Percinet! this fatal skein will be the death of me if you will not
forgive me and help me once more.'

And immediately in came Percinet as easily as if he had all the keys in
his own possession.

'Here I am, Princess, as much as ever at your service,' said he, 'though
really you are not very kind to me.'

Then he just stroked the skein with his wand, and all the broken threads
joined themselves together, and the whole skein wound itself smoothly
off in the most surprising manner, and the Prince, turning to Graciosa,
asked if there was nothing else that she wished him to do for her, and
if the time would never come when she would wish for him for his own
sake.

'Don't be vexed with me, Percinet,' she said. 'I am unhappy enough
without that.'

'But why should you be unhappy, my Princess?' cried he. 'Only come with
me and we shall be as happy as the day is long together.'
