

198

"Now" said he, "keep silence while I work the, charm!"

Having heard old Mombi pronounce the magic words, and having also succeeded
in bringing the Saw-Horse to life, Tip did not hesitate an instant in
speaking the three cabalistic words, each accompanied by the peculiar
gesture of the hands.

It was a grave and impressive ceremony.

As he finished the incantation the Thing shuddered throughout its huge bulk,
the Gump gave the screeching cry that is familiar to those animals, and then
the four wings began flopping furiously.

Tip managed to grasp a chimney, else he would have been blown off the roof
by the terrible breeze raised by the wings. The Scarecrow, being light in
weight, was caught up bodily and borne through the air until Tip luckily
seized him by one leg and held him fast. The Woggle-Bug lay flat upon the
roof and so escaped harm,

               Line-Art Drawing



199
and the Tin Woodman, whose weight of tin anchored him firmly, threw both
arms around Jack Pumpkinhead and managed to save him. The Saw-Horse toppled
over upon his back and lay with his legs waving helplessly above him.

And now, while all were struggling to recover themselves, the Thing rose
slowly from the roof and mounted into the air.

"Here! Come back!" cried Tip, in a frightened voice, as he clung to the
chimney with one hand and the Scarecrow with the other. "Come back at once,
I command you!"

It was now that the wisdom of the Scarecrow, in bringing the head of the
Thing to life instead of the legs, was proved beyond a doubt. For the Gump,
already high in the air, turned its head at Tip's command and gradually
circled around until it could view the roof of the palace.

"Come back!" shouted the boy, again.

And the Gump obeyed, slowly and gracefully waving its four wings in the air
until the Thing had settled once more upon the roof and become still.



200               Full page line-art drawing.



201               In the Jackdaw's Nest


"This," said the Gump, in a squeaky voice not at all proportioned to the
size of its great body, "is the most novel experience I ever heard of. The
last thing I remember distinctly is walking through the forest and hearing a
loud noise. Something probably killed me then, and it certainly ought to
have been the end of me. Yet here I am, alive again, with four monstrous
wings and a body which I venture to say would make any respectable animal or
fowl weep with shame to own. What does it all mean? Am I a Gump, or am I a
juggernaut?" The creature, as it spoke, wiggled its chin whiskers in a very
comical manner.

"You're just a Thing," answered Tip, "with a Gump's head on it. And we have
made you and brought you to life so that you may carry us through the air
wherever we wish to go."



202

"Very good!" said the Thing. "As I am not a Gump, I cannot have a Gump's
pride or independent spirit. So I may as well become your servant as
anything else. My only satisfaction is that I do not seem to have a very
strong constitution, and am not likely to live long in a state of slavery."

"Don't say that, I beg of you!" cried the Tin Woodman, whose excellent heart
was strongly affected by this sad speech." Are you not feeling well today?"

"Oh, as for that," returned the Gump, "it is my first day of existence; so I
cannot Judge whether I am feeling well or ill." And it waved its broom tail
to and fro in a pensive manner.

"Come, come!" said the Scarecrow, kindly. "do try, to be more cheerful and
take life as you find it. We shall be kind masters, and will strive to
render your existence as pleasant as possible. Are you willing to carry us
through the air wherever we wish to go?"

"Certainly," answered the Gump. "I greatly prefer to navigate the air. For
should I travel on the earth and meet with one of my own species, my
embarrassment would be something awful!"

"I can appreciate that," said the Tin Woodman, sympathetically.

"And yet," continued the Thing, "when I carefully



203
look you over, my masters, none of you seems to be constructed much more
artistically than I am."

"Appearances are deceitful," said the Woggle-Bug, earnestly. "I am both
Highly Magnified and Thoroughly Educated."

"Indeed!" murmured the Gump, indifferently.

"And my brains are considered remarkably rare specimens," added the
Scarecrow, proudly.

"How strange!" remarked the Gump.

"Although I am of tin," said the Woodman, "I own a heart altogether the
warmest and most admirable in the whole world."

"I'm delighted to hear it," replied the Gump, with a slight cough.

"My smile," said Jack Pumpkinhead, "is worthy your best attention. It is
always the same."

"Semper idem," explained the Woggle-Bug, pompously; and the Gump turned to
stare at him.

"And I," declared the Saw-Horse, filling in an awkward pause, "am only
remarkable because I can't help it."

"I am proud, indeed, to meet with such exceptional masters," said the Gump,
in a careless tone. "If I could but secure so complete an introduction to
myself, I would be more than satisfied."

"That will come in time," remarked the Scare-



204
crow. "To 'Know Thyself' is considered quite an accomplishment, which it has
taken us, who are your elders, months to perfect. But now," he added,
turning to the others, "let us get aboard and start upon our journey."

"Where shall we go?" asked Tip, as he clambered to a seat on the sofas and
assisted the Pumpkinhead to follow him.

"In the South Country rules a very delightful Queen called Glinda the Good,
who I am sure will gladly receive us," said the Scarecrow, getting into the
Thing clumsily. "Let us go to her and ask her advice."

"That is cleverly thought of," declared Nick Chopper, giving the Woggle-Bug
a boost and then toppling the Saw-Horse into the rear end of the cushioned
seats." I know Glinda the Good, and believe she will prove a friend indeed."

"Are we all ready?" asked the boy.

"Yes," announced the Tin Woodman, seating himself beside the Scarecrow.

"Then," said Tip, addressing the Gump, "be kind enough to fly with us to the
Southward; and do not go higher than to escape the houses and trees, for it
makes me dizzy to be up so far."

"All right," answered the Gump, briefly.



205

It flopped its four huge wings and rose slowly into the air; and then, while
our little band of adventurers clung to the backs and sides of the sofas for
support, the Gump turned toward the South and soared swiftly and
majestically away.

"The scenic effect, from this altitude, is marvelous," commented the
educated Woggle-Bug, as they rode along.

"Never mind the scenery," said the Scarecrow. "Hold on tight, or you may get
a tumble. The Thing seems to rock badly.'

"It will be dark soon," said Tip, observing that the sun was low on the
horizon. "Perhaps we should have waited until morning. I wonder if the Gump
can fly in the night."

"I've been wondering that myself," returned the Gump quietly. "You see, this
is a new experience to me. I used to have legs that carried me swiftly over
the ground. But now my legs feel as if they were asleep."

"They are," said Tip. "We didn't bring 'em to life."

"You're expected to fly," explained the Scarecrow. "not to walk."

"We can walk ourselves," said the Woggle-Bug."

I begin to understand what is required of me," remarked the Gump; "so I will
do my best to



206
please you," and he flew on for a time in silence.

Presently Jack Pumpkinhead became uneasy.

"I wonder if riding through the air is liable to spoil pumpkins," he said.

"Not unless you carelessly drop your head over the side," answered the
Woggle-Bug. "In that event your head would no longer be a pumpkin, for it
would become a squash."

"Have I not asked you to restrain these unfeeling jokes?" demanded Tip,
looking at the Woggle-Bug with a severe expression.

"You have; and I've restrained a good many of them," replied the insect.
"But there are opportunities for so many excellent puns in our language
that, to an educated person like myself, the temptation to express them is
almost irresistible."

"People with more or less education discovered those puns centuries ago,"
said Tip.

"Are you sure?" asked the Woggle-Bug, with a startled look.

"Of course I am," answered the boy. "An educated Woggle-Bug may be a new
thing; but a Woggle-Bug education is as old as the hills, judging from the
display you make of it."

The insect seemed much impressed by this remark, and for a time maintained a
meek silence.



207

The Scarecrow, in shifting his seat, saw upon the cushions the pepper-box
which Tip had cast aside, and began to examine it.

"Throw it overboard," said the boy; "it's quite empty now, and there's no
use keeping it."

"Is it really empty?" asked the Scarecrow, looking curiously into the box.

"Of course it is," answered Tip. "I shook out every grain of the powder.

"Then the box has two bottoms," announced the Scarecrow, "for the bottom on
the inside is fully an inch away from the bottom on the outside."

"Let me see," said the Tin Woodman, taking the box from his friend. "Yes,"
he declared, after looking it over, "the thing certainly has a false bottom.
Now, I wonder what that is for?"

"Can't you get it apart, and find out?" enquired Tip, now quite interested
in the mystery.

"Why, yes; the lower bottom unscrews," said the Tin Woodman. "My fingers are
rather stiff; please see if you can open it."

He handed the pepper-box to Tip, who had no difficulty in unscrewing the
bottom. And in the cavity below were three silver pills, with a carefully
folded paper lying underneath them.

This paper the boy proceeded to unfold, taking



208
care not to spill the pills, and found several lines clearly written in red
ink.

"Read it aloud," said the Scarecrow. so Tip read, as follows:

          "DR. NIKIDIK'S CELEBRATED WISHING PILLS.

"Directions for Use: Swallow one pill; count seventeen by twos; then make a
Wish.
-The Wish will immediately be granted.
               CAUTION: Keep in a Dry and Dark Place."


"Why, this is a very valuable discovery!" cried the Scarecrow.

"It is, indeed," replied Tip, gravely. "These pills may be of great use to
us. I wonder if old Mombi knew they were in the bottom of the pepper-box. I
remember hearing her say that she got the Powder of Life from this same
Nikidik."

"He must be a powerful Sorcerer!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman; "and since the
powder proved a success we ought to have confidence in the pills."

"But how," asked the Scarecrow, "can anyone count seventeen by twos?
Seventeen is an odd number."

"That is true," replied Tip, greatly disappointed. "No one can possibly
count seventeen by twos."

"Then the pills are of no use to us," wailed the Pumpkinhead; "and this fact
overwhelms me with



209
grief. For I had intended wishing that my head would never spoil."

"Nonsense!" said the Scarecrow, sharply. "If we could use the pills at all
we would make far better wishes than that."

"I do not see how anything could be better," protested poor Jack. "If you
were liable to spoil at any time you could understand my anxiety."

"For my part," said the Tin Woodman, "I sympathize with you in every
respect. But since we cannot count seventeen by twos, sympathy is all you
are liable to get."

By this time it had become quite dark, and the voyagers found above them a
cloudy sky, through which the rays of the moon could not penetrate.

The Gump flew steadily on, and for some reason the huge sofa-body rocked
more and more dizzily every hour.

The Woggle-Bug declared he was sea-sick; and Tip was also pale and somewhat
distressed. But the others clung to the backs of the sofas and did not seem
to mind the motion as long as they were not tipped out.

Darker and darker grew the night, and on and on sped the Gump through the
black heavens. The



210
travelers could not even see one another, and an oppressive silence settled
down upon them.

After a long time Tip, who had been thinking deeply, spoke.

"How are we to know when we come to the pallace of Glinda the Good?" he
asked.

"It's a long way to Glinda's palace," answered the Woodman; "I've traveled
it."

"But how are we to know how fast the Gump is flying?" persisted the boy. "We
cannot see a single thing down on the earth, and before morning we may be
far beyond the place we want to reach."

"That is all true enough," the Scarecrow replied, a little uneasily. "But I
do not see how we can stop just now; for we might alight in a river, or on,
the top of a steeple; and that would be a great disaster."

So they permitted the Gump to fly on, with regular flops of its great wings,
and waited patiently for morning.

Then Tip's fears were proven to be well founded; for with the first streaks
