I consider him primarily responsible for all the trouble that has
occurred."

"I don't defend Hector Roscoe," said Allan, "but he writes me that your
nephew was a bully, who imposed upon his schoolfellows, and that he, by
taking their part and stopping this tyranny, incurred his ill-will and
yours."

"I supposed I should be misrepresented," said Socrates, meekly. "I am
devoted to my school and my pupils, Mr. Roscoe. I am wearing out my life
in their service. I may make mistakes sometimes, but my heart--my heart,
Mr. Roscoe," continued Socrates, tapping his waistcoat, "is right, and
acquits me of any intentional injustice."

"I am glad to hear it, Mr. Smith," said Allan Roscoe, stiffly. "As
Hector has left you, I have only to settle your bill, and bid you
good-day."

"Will you not exert your influence to persuade the boy to return?"
pleaded Socrates.

"As I don't know where he is, I don't see how I can," said Allan Roscoe,
dryly.

"That man is an arch hypocrite!" he said to himself, as he was returning
home.

I may state here that at the end of the term half the pupils left Smith
Institute, and Socrates Smith lamented too late the folly that had made
him and his school unpopular.




CHAPTER XXVI. HECTOR'S ARRIVAL IN NEW YORK.



Mr. Crabb and Hector were sitting side by side in a railroad car,
speeding away from Smith Institute. In the heart of each was a feeling
of relief, which increased as each minute carried them farther away from
the school.

"Hector," said the usher, looking younger and happier than his pupil had
ever known him, "I feel like a free man now. It is a feeling that I have
not had since I first set foot in Smith Institute."

"I think you will lead a happier life in New York, Mr. Crabb."

"I am sure of it. Thanks to your considerate kindness, I shall for the
first time earn an ample salary, and even be able to lay up money. Is my
future pupil about your age?"

"He is a year younger."

"Where did you make his acquaintance?"

"At Saratoga, My father and I spent two months at Congress Hall two
summers ago, and as Walter's family were also there, we naturally got to
be friends. He is a capital fellow, and you will be sure to like him."

"I am ready to like him after reading that letter he wrote you. Is he
fond of study?"

"That is his weak point," said Hector, laughing. "Walter was never
cut out for a scholar. I don't mean, of course, that he hasn't fair
capacity, but his taste doesn't lie that way. However, he won't give you
any trouble, only you won't succeed as well as you may wish in pushing
him on."

"All boys are not cut out for scholars," said the usher. "Now you,
Hector, would do excellently, and might hope to make a very successful
professional man."

Hector shook his head.

"I must look to a different career," he said. "I am to be the architect
of my own fortune, you know."

"What are your plans, Hector?" asked the usher.

"I will consult with Mr. Boss, Walter's father. By the way, he knows
nothing of the change in my circumstances. He supposes me to be the heir
to the Roscoe estate."

"Trouble has come upon you early, Hector. Should you need help
hereafter, you must remember that I am earning a good salary and--"

"Thank you, Mr. Crabb," gratefully, "but you will need all you earn. I
don't look upon my loss of fortune as a trouble. I think it will make me
more manly and self-reliant, and stimulate me to exertion. I have a fair
education, and I am sure I can earn my living in some honest way."

"If that is your spirit, Hector, I am sure you will succeed. You are
young and hopeful. I am too much inclined to despond. I have always been
timid about the future. It is a matter of temperament."

It was early in the afternoon when they reached New York. As they
emerged from the depot a bright-faced boy came up eagerly and greeted
them.

"How are you, Hector?" he said. "You see, I came to meet you. I have
been longing to have you come."

"I am just as glad to see you, Walter," said Hector, heartily. "Mr.
Crabb, here is your future pupil, Walter Boss."

"I hope we may soon be friends, Walter," said the usher, attracted by
the bright, sunny face of the boy.

Walter gave the usher his hand.

"I hope so, too," he said, smiling. "I'll try not to worry you any more
than I can help."

"I have no misgivings," said Mr. Crabb, as he mentally contrasted his
new pupil with Jim Smith, and two or three others at the institute, who
had been a frequent source of trouble and annoyance.

"Here is the carriage," said Walter, pointing out a plain but handsome
carriage waiting outside. "Bundle in, both of you! I beg your pardon,
Mr. Crabb, for my familiarity. That was intended for Hector."

"I am ready to be classed with Hector," said Mr. Crabb.

"I am glad to hear you say so. I was afraid you would be stiff and
dignified."

"I think I shall take my cue from you."

"Oh, my rule is, go as you please. Edward, drive home!"

The house occupied by Mr. Boss was a fine brown-stone dwelling on
Forty-second Street. Arrived there, Mr. Crabb was shown into a spacious
chamber, on the third floor, furnished with a luxury to which the poor
usher was quite unaccustomed.

"Now, Hector, you can have a room to yourself, or you may share my den,"
said Walter.

"I would rather share the den," said Hector.

"That's what I hoped. You see, we shall have ever so much to say to each
other. We haven't seen each other for over a year."

A slight shade of gravity overspread Hector's face. Since he had met his
friend, his father had died, and he had been reduced from the heir of
wealth to a penniless orphan. Of this last change Walter knew nothing,
but Hector did not mean long to leave him in ignorance.

At dinner the two newcomers saw Mr. Ross, from whom they received a
friendly welcome. The usher was put at his ease at once.

"I hope you'll get along with my boy," said the bluff city merchant. "Of
one thing you may be assured, your scholarship won't be severely taxed
in educating him. Walter is a pretty good boy, but he isn't a prodigy of
learning."

"I may be some day, father," said Walter, "with Mr. Crabb's help."

"I take it Mr. Crabb isn't able to perform miracles," said Mr. Ross,
good-humoredly. "No, Mr. Crabb, I shan't expect too much of you. Get
your pupil on moderately fast, and I shall be satisfied. I am glad,
Hector, that you were able to pay Walter a visit at this time."

"So am I, sir."

"I thought you might not be able to leave your studies."

"I have given up study, sir."

"I am surprised at that, Hector. I thought you contemplated going to
college."

"So I did, sir, but circumstances have changed my plans."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, sir; I will explain after dinner, and will ask your advice."

Mr. Ross dropped the subject, and after dinner led the way to the
library, where he sank into an armchair, and, breathing a sigh of
satisfaction, said: "This, Mr. Crabb, is the most enjoyable part of the
twenty-four hours for me. I dismiss business cares and perplexities, and
read my evening paper, or some new book, in comfort."

As the usher looked about him and saw costly books, engravings,
furniture and pictures, he could well understand that in such
surroundings the merchant could take solid comfort. It was a most
agreeable contrast to the plain and poverty-stricken room at Smith
Institute, where the boys pursued their evening studies under his
superintendence.

"Well, Hector, so you don't propose to go back to school," said the
merchant. "Isn't that rather a sudden resolution?"

"Yes, sir; but, as I said, circumstances have changed."

"What circumstances? Because you are rich, you don't think you ought to
be idle, I hope?"

"Oh, no, sir. It is because I have discovered that I am not rich."

"Not rich! I always understood that your father left a large estate,"
said Mr. Ross, in surprise.

"So he did, sir."

"Didn't it descend to you?"

"I thought so till recently."

"Why don't you think so now?"

In answer, Hector told the story of the revelation made to him by Allan
Roscoe, after his father's death.

"You see, therefore," he concluded, "that I am penniless, and a
dependent upon Mr. Allan Roscoe's generosity."

"This is a most extraordinary story!" said the merchant, after a pause.

"Yes, sir; it changes my whole future."

"I suppose Mr. Allan Roscoe is the beneficiary, and the estate goes to
him?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did your father--the late Mr. Roscoe--ever hint to you anything which
could lead you to suspect that you were not his own, but an adopted
son?"

"Never, Mr. Ross," answered Hector, with emphasis.

"Did he continue to treat you with affection."

"Always. Nothing in his manner ever would have led me to imagine that I
was not his own son."

"He left no will?"

"No, sir."

"What are your plans?"

"I do not wish to remain dependent upon Allan Roscoe. I should like to
obtain a situation of some kind in the city, if I can."

"I can probably serve you, then, after a while. For the present, stay
here as Walter's companion."

"Thank you, sir; I should like nothing better."




CHAPTER XXVII. LARRY DEANE.



Not altogether in accordance with his inclinations, Walter was set to
work at his studies immediately under the direction of Mr. Crabb. He
asked his father for a week's vacation to go about the city with Hector,
but his father answered in the negative.

"You are too far behind in your studies, Walter," he said. "You are two
years, at least, behind Hector, and cannot spare the time as well as
he."

"Hector will have to go round alone," objected Walter.

"It will do him no harm to get acquainted with the different parts
of the city, as that will be a kind of knowledge he may require if he
should obtain a situation."

"I shan't see much of him."

"Oh, yes, you will; Mr. Crabb will not make you study all day. Mr.
Crabb, you may work with Walter from nine to one. This, with perhaps an
hour or more devoted to study in the afternoon or evening, will enable
him to make fair progress."

This arrangement struck Walter favorably, as he could, whenever he
desired it, spend the whole afternoon with Hector.

Hector found it very pleasant to act upon the suggestion made by Mr.
Ross. He had visited the city of New York at different times, but had
never enjoyed the opportunity of exploring it by himself. His first
visit was made to Central Park, where he mingled with the crowds
wandering about in search of pleasure.

He made his way to the lake, and took passage in one of the skiffs
which, in charge of a skilled oarsman, makes a tour of the pretty and
picturesque sheet of water.

The second morning he turned his steps southward, and walked down
Broadway. It was a leisurely walk, for he had no scruple in stopping
wherever he saw anything in the streets or in the shop windows that
seemed to him worthy of attention. About the corner of Canal Street
he was very much surprised at a boy who was on his knees, blacking the
boots of an elderly gentleman--a boy whom he recognized at once as the
son of a man who had for years been in his father's employ as gardener
at Castle Roscoe.

"What brings him here?" thought Hector, much surprised.

"Larry Deane!" he said, as the boy finished his job, and rose from his
feet to receive his pay.

"Hector Roscoe!" exclaimed Larry, not much less surprised.

"What brings you here, and what has reduced you to such work?" inquired
Hector.

Larry Deane was a boy of about Hector's age. He was a healthy-looking
country lad, looking like many another farmer's son, fresh from
the country. He had not yet acquired that sharp, keen look which
characterizes, in most cases, the New York boy who has spent all his
life in the streets.

"I can answer both your questions with the same word, Master Hector,"
said Larry, as a sober look swept over his broad, honest face.

"Don't call me master, Larry. We are equals here. But what is that
word?"

"That word is trouble,'" answered the bootblack.

"Come with me into this side street," said Hector, leading the way into
Howard Street. "You have a story to tell, and I want to hear it."

"Yes, I have a story to tell."

"I hope your father and mother are well," said Hector, interrupting him.

"Yes, they are well in health, but they are in trouble, as I told you."

"What is the trouble?"

"It all comes of Mr. Allan Roscoe," answered Larry, "and his son, Guy."

"Tell me all about it."

"I was walking in the fields one day," said Larry, "when Guy came out
and began to order me round, and call me a clodhopper and other unlikely
names, which I didn't enjoy. Finally he pulled off my hat, and when I
put it back on my head, he pulled it off again. Finally I found the only
way to do was to give him as good as he sent. So I pulled off his hat
and threw it up in a tree. He became very angry, and ordered me to go up
after it. I wouldn't do it, but walked away. The next day my father
was summoned to the house, where Mr. Allan Roscoe complained of me for
insulting his son. He asked my father to thrash me, and when father
refused, he discharged him from his employment. A day or two afterward a
new gardener came to Roscoe Castle, and father understood that there was
no chance of his being taken back."

"That was very mean in Mr. Roscoe," said Hector, indignantly.

"Yes, so it was; but father couldn't do anything. He couldn't get a
new place, for it wasn't the right time of year, and Mr. Roscoe said he
wouldn't give him a recommendation. Well, we had very little money in
the house, for mother has been sick of late years, and all father's
extra earnings went to pay for medicines and the doctor's bill. So one
day I told father I would come to New York and see if I couldn't find
something to do."

"I think you did the right thing, Larry," said Hector, approvingly. "It
was your duty to help your father if you could."

"I can't help him much," answered Larry.

"What made you take up this business, Larry?"

"I couldn't get anything else to do, besides, this pays better than
working in a store or office."

"How--much can you earn at it?"

"Six or seven dollars a week."

"I should think it would require all that to support you."

"It would if I went to a boarding house, but I can't afford that."

"Where do you live?"

"At the Newsboys' Lodging House."

"How much does that cost you?"

"For eighteen cents a day I get supper, lodging and breakfast. In the
middle of the day I go to a cheap restaurant."

"Then you are able to save something?"

"Yes; last week I sent home three dollars, the week before two dollars
and a half."

