plain, and a gun was kept loaded to call attention to the signal.
The boys, when they went out for their rides, carried their
carbines instead of their guns. The girls fulfilled the duties of
lookouts, going up every half-hour from daybreak to dusk; and the
call of "Sister Anne, do you see horsemen?" was invariably answered
in the negative. One day, however, Mr. Hardy had ridden over to
Canterbury to arrange with his friends about hiring shearers from
Rosario for the united flocks. The boys and Terence were in the
fields plowing, at a distance of half a mile from the house, when
they were startled by the sound of a gun. Looking round, they saw
both the girls standing upon the tower: Maud had just fired the
gun, and Ethel was pulling up the flag.

"Be jabers! and the Indians have come at last!" Terence exclaimed,
and they all three started at a run. Maud turned round and waved
her hand to them, and then she and Ethel continued looking over the
plain. At this moment they were joined on the tower by Mrs. Hardy
and Sarah.

"It is all right," Charley, who was of an unexcitable temperament,
said. "The Indians must be a long way off, or the girls would be
waving to us to make haste. Take it easy; we shall want to keep our
hands steady."

So they broke from the headlong speed at which they had started
into a steady trot, which in five minutes brought them up to the
house.

"What is it?" they exclaimed as they gained the top of the tower.

"Oh, dear, oh, dear!" Ethel said. "They have got all the animals."

"And I fear they have killed Gomez and Pedro," Mrs. Hardy added.

It was too evidently true. At a distance of six miles the boys
could see a dark mass rapidly retreating, and numerous single
specks could be seen hovering round them. Two miles from the house
a single horseman was galloping wildly. The girls had already made
him out to be Lopez.

The boys and Terence stood speechless with dismay. The Irishman was
the first to find his tongue.

"Och, the thundering villains!" he exclaimed; "the heathen thieves!
And to think that not one of us was there to give them a bating."

"What will papa say?" Hubert ejaculated.

Charley said nothing, but looked frowningly, with tightly closed
lips, after the distant mass, while his hands closed upon his
carbine. "How was it, Maud?" he asked at length.

"I was downstairs," Maud said, "when Ethel, who had just gone up,
called down, 'Come up, Maud, quickly; I think that something's the
matter.' I ran up the steps, and I saw our animals a long way off,
nearly four miles, and I saw a black mass of something going along
fast toward them from the left. They were rather nearer to us than
the cattle were, and were in one of the slopes of the ground, so
that they would not have been seen by any one with the cattle;
then, as they got quite near the animals, I saw a sudden stir. The
beasts began to gallop away, and three black specks--who, I
suppose, were the men--separated themselves from them and went off
sideways. One seemed to get a start of the other two. These were
cut off by the black mass, and I did not see anything more of them.
Lopez got away; and though some of the others rode after him for
about a mile, they could not overtake him. Directly I saw what it
was, I caught up the gun and fired, and Ethel ran up the flag.
That's all I saw."

Ethel confirmed her sister's account, merely adding that, seeing
the two bodies in the distance, one going very fast toward the
other, she suspected that something was wrong, and so called at
once to Maud.

The animals were now quite out of sight, and the whole party went
down to meet Lopez, who was just riding up to the enclosure. He was
very pale, and his horse was covered with foam.

"Are the peons killed, Lopez?" was Mrs. Hardy's first question.

"I do not know, signora; but I should think so. The Indians caught
them; I heard a scream," and the man shuddered. "Santa Virgine"--and
he crossed himself piously--"what an escape! I will burn
twenty pounds of candles upon your altar."

"How was it that you were surprised, Lopez?" Charley asked. "You
were so particularly ordered to keep a good lookout."

"Well, Signor Charles, I was keeping a good lookout, and it is
lucky that I was. I was further away than I ought to have been--I
know that, for the signor told me not to go far; but I knew that
the rise that I took them to was the highest in that direction, and
that I could see for miles away into the Indian country. So I got
out there, and Pedro and Gomez had got the sheep and cattle all
well together, and there was no fear of them straying, for the
grass there is very good. So the men lay down for their siesta, and
I was standing by my horse looking over the campo. Some of the
beasts seemed uneasy, and I thought that there must be a lion
somewhere about. So I got on my horse, and just as I did so I heard
a noise; and looking behind, where I had never dreamed of them, I
saw a lot of Indians coming up at full gallop from the hollow. The
cattle went off at the same instant; and I gave a shout to the men,
and stuck my spurs into Carlos. It was a near touch of it, and they
gave me a hard chase for the first mile; but my horse was fresher
than theirs, and they gave it up."

"How many Indians were there?" Charley asked.

"I don't know, Signor Charles. It was only those in front that I
caught sight of, and I never looked round after I started. Some of
them had firearms, for eight or ten of them fired after me as I
made off, and the arrow, fell all round me."

"What do you think, girls, about the number?"

The girls were silent, and then Ethel said: "They were all in a
lump, Charley. One could not see them separately."

"The lump seemed to be about the size that our cattle do when they
are close together at the same distance. Don't you think so,
Ethel?" Maud said.

"Yes," Ethel thought that they were.

"Then there must be from a hundred to a hundred and fifty of them,"
Charley said.

"I wonder what papa will do! One of us had better ride off at once
and fetch him."

"I will go," Hubert said, moving away to saddle his horse.

"Stop, Hubert," Charley said; "I think you had better take Lopez's
horse. I don't know what papa may make up his mind to do, and it is
better to have your horse quite fresh."

Hubert agreed at once, and was mounting, when Maud said: "Wait a
moment, Hubert, I will run up to the lookout. I may see papa; it is
nearly time for him to be home."

Hubert paused while Maud ran up to the house, and in a minute
appeared at the top of the tower. She stood for a moment looking
across the stream toward Canterbury, and then held up her hand. "I
can see him," she called out. "He is a long way off, but he is
coming."

Hubert was about to alight again, when Mrs. Hardy said: "You had
better ride to meet your papa, Hubert. He will be very much alarmed
when he sees the flag, and it will be a great satisfaction to him
to know that we at least are all safe."

Hubert at once galloped off, while Maud continued to watch her
father. He was about two miles distant, and was riding quietly.
Then for a little while she lost sight of him. As he came up on the
next rise she saw him suddenly stop his horse. She guessed that he
was gazing at the flagstaff, for there was not a breath of wind,
and the flag drooped straight down by the pole, so that it was
difficult to distinguish it at a distance. Then she was sure that
he made it out, for he came on at a furious gallop; and as he came
nearer she could see that he had taken his gun from its place and
was carrying it across his arm in readiness for instant action. In
a few minutes Hubert met him, and after a short pause the two rode
together back to the house at a canter.

Mr. Hardy paused at the men's hut to give Lopez a hearty rating for
his disobedience of orders in going so far out upon the plain. Then
he came up to the house. "This is a bad affair, my dear," he said
cheerfully; "but as long as we are all safe we can thank God that
it's no worse. We shall get some of our beasts back yet, or I am
mistaken. Ethel, run down to Terence, and tell him to drive the
bullocks that are down with the plows into their enclosure, and to
fasten the gate after them. Maud, give all the horses a feed of
Indian corn and some water. Boys, tell Sarah to put some cold meat
and bread into your hunting-bags. Load the spare chambers of your
carbines, and see that your water-gourds are full."

Mr. Hardy then retired with his wife--who had been looking on
anxiously while these orders were being given--into their own room,
where they remained about ten minutes. When they came back into the
sitting-room Mrs. Hardy was pale, but composed, and the children
could see that she had been crying.

"Your mamma and I have been talking the matter over, boys, and I
have told her that I must do my best to get some, at least, of our
animals back. I shall take you bath with me. It is unfortunate that
two of our friends at Canterbury have ridden over early this
morning to Mr. Percy's, and will not be back until late to-night.
Had they been at home, they would, I know, have joined us. I
thought at first of sending over for Mr. Farquhar, who is at home,
but I do not like losing the time. I shall send Lopez over with a
note, asking him to come and sleep here to-night. We shall not be
back till to-morrow. There is no fear of another alarm to-day;
still I shall be more comfortable in knowing that you have some one
with you. Do not go beyond the enclosure, girls, until we return.
Terence, too, is to remain inside, and can sleep in the house
to-night; so also can Lopez. You will therefore be well protected.
Let us have something to eat, and then in ten minutes we will be in
the saddle. Charley, fetch down three blue-lights, two signal
rockets, and two of the tin rockets. Maud, fill our pocket-flasks
with brandy. Hubert, you boys will each take your carbine and a
revolver; I will carry my long rifle, and the other two Colts."
In ten minutes they were ready to mount, and after a final embrace,
and many a "Be sure and take care of yourselves" from their mother
and sisters, they started off across the plain at a long, steady
gallop.

"They have got just an hour's start, boys," Mr. Hardy said. "Your
mother said that it was exactly half an hour from the first alarm
to my arrival, and I was in the house a minute or two under that
time. It is about half-past twelve now."

"It is very fortunate, papa, that we had our horses safe up at the
house."

"Yes, boys. If we had been obliged to wait until tomorrow morning
before starting, our chance of coming up would have been very
slight. As it is, we shall be up with them in three or four hours.
The sheep cannot go really fast more than twelve or fifteen miles,
especially with their heavy fleeces on."

Half an hour's riding took them to the scene of the attack. As they
neared it they saw two figures lying upon the grass. There was no
occasion to go near: the stiff and distorted attitudes were
sufficient to show that they were dead.

Mr. Hardy purposely avoided riding close to them, knowing that the
shocking sight of men who have met with a violent death is apt to
shake the nerves of any one unaccustomed to such a sight, however
brave he may be.

"They are evidently dead, poor fellows!" he said. "It is no use our
stopping."

Charley looked at the bodies with a fierce frown upon his face, and
muttered to himself. "We'll pay them out for you, the cowardly
scoundrels."

Hubert did not even glance toward them. He was a tender-hearted boy
and he felt his face grow pale and a strange feeling of sickness
come over him, even at the momentary glance which he had at first
taken at the rigid figures.

"I suppose you do not mean to attack them until night, papa?"
Charley asked.

"Well, boys, I have been thinking the matter over, and I have come
to the conclusion that it will be better to do so directly we get
up to them."

"And do you think, papa, that we three will be able to thrash the
lot of them? They must be a poor, miserable set of cowards."

"No, Charley; I do not think that we shall be able to thrash the
lot, as you say; but with our weapons, we shall be able to give
them a terrible lesson. If we attack at night they will soon find
out how few are our numbers, and having no particular dread of our
weapons, may rush at us, and overpower us in spite of them. Another
thing, boys, is, I want to give them a lesson. They must know that
they shan't come and murder and steal on our place with impunity."

Scarcely another word was exchanged for the next hour. At a long,
steady gallop they swept along. There was no difficulty in
following the track, for the long grass was trampled in a wide
swath. Several times, too, exclamations of rage burst from the boys
as they came across a dead sheep, evidently speared by the savages
because he could not keep up with the others. After passing several
of them, Mr. Hardy called to the boys to halt, while he leaped off
his horse by the side of one of the sheep, and put his hand against
its body and into its mouth.

"It's quite dead; isn't it, papa?" Hubert said.

"Quite, Hubert; I never thought it was alive." And Mr. Hardy leaped
upon his horse again. "I wanted to see how warm the body was. If we
try again an hour's ride ahead, we shall be able to judge, by the
increased heat of the body, as to how much we have gained on the
Indians, and whether they are far ahead. You see, boys, when I was
young man, I was out many times in Texas against the Comanches and
Apaches, who are a very different enemy from these cowardly Indians
here. One had to keep one's eyes open there, for they were every
bit as brave as we were. Don't push on so fast, Charley. Spare your
horse; you will want all he's got in him before you have done. I
think that we must be gaining upon them very fast now. You see the
dead sheep lie every hundred yards or so, instead of every quarter
of a mile. The Indians know well enough that it would take a whole
day out on the edge of the settlements to collect a dozen men for
pursuit, and would have no idea that three men would set off alone;
so I expect that they will now have slackened their pace a little,
to give the sheep breathing time."

After another ten minutes' ride Mr. Hardy again alighted, and found
a very perceptible increase of warmth in the bodies of the sheep.
"I do not think that they can have been dead much more than a
quarter of an hour. Keep a sharp lookout ahead, boys; we may see
them at the top of the next rise."

Not a word was spoken for the next few minutes. Two or three slight
swells were crossed without any sign of the enemy; and then, upon
breasting a rather higher rise than usual, they saw a mass of
moving beings in the distance.

"Halt!" Mr. Hardy shouted, and the boys instantly drew rein. "Jump
off, boys. Only our heads have shown against the sky. They can
hardly have noticed them. There, hold my horse; loosen the
saddle-girths of yours too, and let them breathe freely. Take the
bridles out of their mouths. It seemed to me, by the glimpse I got
of our enemies, that they were just stopping. I am going on to make
sure of it."

So saying Mr. Hardy again went forward a short distance, going on
his hands and knees as he came on to the crest of the rise, in
order that his head might not show above the long grass. When he
reached it he saw at once that his first impression had been
correct. At a distance of a little over a mile a mass of animals
were collected, and round them were scattered a number of horses,
while figures of men were moving among them.

"It is as I thought, boys," he said when he rejoined his sons.
"They have stopped for awhile. The animals must all be completely
done up; they cannot have come less than thirty miles, and will
require three or four hours' rest, at the least, before they are
fit to travel again. One hour will do for our horses. Rinse their
mouths out with a little water, and let them graze if they are
disposed: in half an hour we will give them each a double handful
of Indian corn."
