his lips to the keyhole.

"Yes," chimed in Mr. Piper, irritably; "what do you mean by such an
infernal hubbub?"

"Open the door, and let me out," returned Paul, eagerly.

The party looked at each other in surprise. They did not expect to find
the desperate maniac a boy.

"Perhaps there's more than one of them," suggested the second servant,
prudently.

"Why don't you come out yourself?" asked James. "I am locked in."

The door was opened with a passkey and Paul confronted the party.

"Now, young man, what do you mean by making such a disturbance?"
demanded Mr. Piper, excitably. "My room is just below, and I expected
every minute you would come through."

"I am sorry if I disturbed you, sir," said Paul, politely; "but it was
the only way I could attract attention."

"How came you locked up here?"

"Yes," chimed in James, suspiciously, "how came you locked up here?"

"I was drugged with chloroform, and locked in," said Paul.

"Who did it?"

"Mr. Felix Montgomery; or that's what he called himself. I came here by
appointment to meet him."

"What did he do that for?"

"He has carried off a diamond ring which I came up here to sell him."

"A very improbable story," said Mr. Piper, suspiciously. "What should
such a boy have to do with a diamond ring?"

Nothing is easier than to impart suspicion. Men are prone to believe
evil of each other; and Paul was destined to realize this. The hotel
servants, ignorant and suspicious, caught the suggestion.

"It's likely he's a' thafe," said Bridget, from a safe distance.

"If I were," said Paul, coolly, "I shouldn't be apt to call your
attention by such a noise. I can prove to you that I am telling the
truth. I stopped at the office, and the bookkeeper sent a servant to
show me up here."

"If this is true," said Mr. Piper, "why, when you found yourself locked
in, didn't you ring the bell, instead of making such a confounded
racket? My nerves won't get over it for a week."

"I didn't think of the bell," said Paul; "I am not much used to hotels."

"What will we do with him?" asked James, looking to Mr. Piper for
counsel.

"You'd better take him downstairs, and see if his story is correct,"
said the nervous gentleman, with returning good sense.

"I'll do it," said James, to whom the very obvious suggestion seemed
marked by extraordinary wisdom, and he grasped Paul roughly by the arm.

"You needn't hold me," said our hero, shaking off the grasp. "I haven't
any intention of running away. I want to find out, if I can, what has
become of the man that swindled me."

James looked doubtfully at Mr. Piper.

"I don't think he means to run away," said that gentleman. "I begin to
think his story is correct. And hark you, my young friend, if you ever
get locked up in a hotel room again, just see if there is a bell before
you make such a confounded racket."

"Yes, sir, I will," said Paul, half-smiling; "but I'll take care not to
get locked up again. It won't be easy for anybody to play that trick on
me again."

The party filed downstairs to the office and Paul told his story to the
bookkeeper.

"Have you seen Mr. Montgomery go out?" asked our hero.

"Yes, he went out half an hour ago, or perhaps more. He left his key at
the desk, but said nothing. He seemed to be in a hurry."

"You didn't notice in what direction he went?"

"No."

Of course no attempt was made to detain Paul. There could be no case
against him. He went out of the hotel, and looked up and down Broadway
in a state of indecision. He did not mean to sit down passively and
submit to the swindle. But he had no idea in what direction to search
for Mr. Felix Montgomery.



CHAPTER XIX

PAUL DELIBERATES

Paul stood in the street irresolute. He looked hopelessly up and down
Broadway, but of course the jeweler from Syracuse was not to be seen.
Seeking for him in a city containing hundreds of streets and millions
of inhabitants was about as discouraging as hunting for a needle in a
haystack. But difficult as it was, Paul was by no means ready to give
up the search. Indeed, besides the regret he felt at the loss, he was
mortified at having been so easily outwitted.

"He's taken me in just as if I was a country boy," thought Paul. "I dare
say he's laughing at me now. I'd like to get even with him."

Finally he decided to go to Tiffany's, and ask them to detain any one
who might bring in the ring and offer it for sale. He at once acted upon
this thought, and, hailing a Broadway stage, for no time was to be lost,
soon reached his destination. Entering the store, he walked up to the
counter and addressed the clerk to whom he had before shown the ring.

"Do you remember my offering you a diamond ring for sale this morning?"
he asked.

"Yes, I remember it very well. Have you got it with you?"

"No, it has been stolen from me."

"Indeed! How was that?" asked the clerk, with interest.

"I met in the cars a well-dressed man, who called himself a jeweler from
Syracuse. He examined the ring, and offered me more than Mr. Tiffany,
but asked me to bring it to him at Lovejoy's Hotel. When I got there, he
drugged me with chloroform, and when I recovered he was gone."

"You have been unlucky. There are plenty of such swindlers about. You
should have been careful about displaying the ring before strangers."

"I was showing it to a friend."

"Have you notified the police?"

"Not yet. I came here to let you know, because I thought the thief might
bring it in here to sell."

"Very likely. Give me a description of him."

Paul described Mr. Felix Montgomery to the best of his ability.

"I think I should know him from your description. I will speak to Mr.
Tiffany, and he will no doubt give orders to detain any person who may
offer the ring for sale."

"Thank you."

"If you will give me your address, we will notify you in case the ring
is brought in."

Paul left his address, and went out of the store, feeling that he had
taken one step toward the recovery of his treasure. He next visited the
police headquarters, and left a detailed description of the man who had
relieved him of the ring and of the circumstances attending the robbery.
Then he went home.

His mother looked up as he entered.

"Well, Paul?" she said, inquiringly.

"I've got bad news, mother," he said.

"What is it? Tell me quick!" she said, nervously.

"The ring has been stolen from me."

"How did it happen, Paul?"

"First, I must tell you how much the ring is worth. I went up to
Tiffany's, and showed the ring to Mr. Tiffany himself. He told me
that he would give me two hundred and fifty dollars for it, if I would
satisfy him that I had a right to sell it."

"Two hundred and fifty dollars!" repeated Mrs. Hoffman, in amazement.

"Yes, the diamond is very large and pure."

"Two hundred and fifty dollars would be a great help to us."

"Yes, mother, that is what makes me feel so bad about being swindled out
of it."

"Tell me how it happened. Is there no chance of recovering it?"

"A little. I shall do what I can. I have already notified the police,
and Mr. Tiffany."

"You have not told me yet how you lost it."

When Paul had told the story, his mother asked, "Did you mention it in
the cars that you had offered it at Tiffany's?"

"Yes, and I mentioned his offer."

"Perhaps the thief would be cautious about going there, for that very
reason. He might think the ring would be recognized."

"He would go to a large place, thinking that so valuable a ring would be
more readily purchased there."

"He might go to Ball & Black's."

"That is true."

"It would be well to give notice there also."

"I will go up there at once. I only wish I could meet Mr. Felix
Montgomery; I don't think he would find it so easy to outreach me a
second time."

"Take some dinner first, Paul."

"Then I must hurry it down, mother; I don't want to run the risk
of getting too late to Ball & Black's. I can't help thinking what a
splendid thing it would be if we had the two hundred and fifty dollars.
I would buy out Barry's stand, and I would get a sewing-machine for you,
and we could live much more comfortably. It makes me mad to think I let
that villain take me in so! He must think me jolly green."

"Anybody might have been deceived, Paul. You mustn't blame yourself too
much for that."

Leaving Paul on his way to Ball & Black's, we return to Mr. Felix
Montgomery, as we shall continue to call him, though he had no right to
the name. After stupefying Paul, as already described, he made his way
downstairs, and, leaving his key at the desk, went out.

"I hope my young friend will enjoy himself upstairs," he chuckled to
himself. "He's quite welcome to the use of the room till to-morrow
morning. It's paid for in advance, and I don't think I shall find it
convenient to stop there."

He took the ring from his vest pocket and glanced at it furtively.

"It's a beauty," he murmured, complacently. "I never saw a handsomer
ring of the size. What was it the boy said he was offered for it? Two
hundred and fifty dollars! That'll give me a lift, and it doesn't come
any too soon. My money is pretty low."

He walked across the City Hall Park, and at Barclay street entered a
University place car.

"Evenin' paper, mister?" said a ragged newsboy, whose garments were
constructed on the most approved system of ventilation.

"What have you got?"

"Evenin' Post, Mail, Express!"

"Give me an Express. Here's ten cents."

"I haven't got but three cents change, mister."

"Never mind the change," said Mr. Montgomery, in a fit of temporary
generosity, occasioned by his good luck.

"Thank you, sir," said the newsboy, regarding Mr. Montgomery as a
philanthropist worthy of his veneration.

Felix Montgomery leaned back in his seat, and, with a benevolent smile,
ran his eyes over the columns of the Express. Among the paragraphs
which attracted his attention was one relating to a comrade, of similar
profession, who had just been arrested in Albany while in the act of
relieving a gentleman of his pocketbook.

"Jerry always was a bungler," said Mr. Montgomery, complacently, to
himself. "He can't hold a candle to me. I flatter myself that I know how
to manage a little affair, like this, for instance, as well as the next
man. It'll take a sharp detective to lay hold of me."

It might have been thought that the manner in which he had gained
possession of the ring would have troubled Mr. Montgomery, but it was
many years since he had led an honest life. He had made a living by
overreaching others, and his conscience had become so blunted as to
occasion him little trouble. He appeared to think that the world owed
him a living, and that he was quite justified in collecting the debt in
any way he could.

About twenty minutes brought the car to Amity street and Mr. Montgomery
signaled the conductor, and, the car being stopped, he got out.

He walked a few rods in a westerly direction, and paused before a
three-story brick house, which appeared to have seen better days.

It was now used as a boarding, or rather lodging-house. The guests were
not of a very high character, the landlady not being particular as long
as her rent was paid regularly. Mr. Montgomery ascended the steps in
a jaunty way, and, opening the door with a passkey, ascended the front
staircase. He paused before a room on the third floor, and knocked in a
peculiar manner.

The door was opened by a tall woman, in rather neglected attire.

"So you're back," she said.

"Yes, my dear, home again. As the poet says, 'There is no place like
home.'"

"I should hope there wasn't," said Mrs. Montgomery, looking about her
disdainfully. "A very delightful home it makes with such a charming
prospect of the back yard. I've been moping here all day."

"You've found something to console you, I see," said her husband,
glancing at the table, on which might be seen a bottle of brandy,
half-emptied, and a glass.

"Yes," said Mrs. Montgomery; "I felt so bad I had to send out for
something. It took every cent I had. And, by the way, Mrs. Flagg sent in
her bill, this morning, for the last two weeks' board; she said she must
have it."

"My dear," said Mr. Montgomery, "she shall have it."

"You don't mean to say you've got the money, Tony!" exclaimed his wife,
in surprise.

"No, I haven't got the money; but I've got what's just as good."

"What have you got?"

"What do you say to this?" and Mr. Montgomery drew from his pocket the
diamond ring, whose loss was so deeply felt by our hero.

"Is that genuine?" asked the lady.

"It's the real thing."

"What a beauty! Where did you get it?"

