to give them a sail."

"The boat is engaged to Mr. Sherwood, to-day."

"I can't help it; he will not have her to-day. Come, Lawry, be a
man. I won't be as hard with you, I say, as you were with me. I don't
ask you to be a deck-hand. You shall be the pilot still."

"No, I won't."

"Won't you?"

"I will not," said Lawry firmly, as he dried his tears. "The boat is
engaged to Mr. Sherwood, and he has invited a party to go with him.
They were to start at nine o'clock, and they will be down here soon."

"Can't help it. I promised to take Taylor and his friends out, and
they are all here now. There are the stores for his party," replied
Ben, as a couple of men brought a large basket on board, from the top
of which protruded the necks of a demijohn and several bottles.

"I shall not go with that party," added Lawry.

"But I want a pilot," said Ben.

"What's the trouble, Wilford?" demanded Taylor.

"Let me tell him you will go, Lawry?" whispered Ben. "He may be hard
on you if you don't."

"I will not. I must see Mr. Sherwood at once."

"What's the matter?" asked Ethan.

Lawry was explaining what had happened, when Ben came down with
Taylor.

"I shall not go in her till I have seen Mr. Sherwood," added Lawry,
as he finished his brief statement.

"Then I shall not," said Ethan.

"I can steer her myself," said Ben to Taylor.

"Certainly you can."

"Mr. Sherwood will be down soon, and we must be off before he gets
here."

"Go up, and start her then," added Taylor.

Without noticing Lawry and Ethan, Ben rushed up to the wheel-house,
and ordered the deck-hands to cast off the fasts, which was done. He
knew how to steer a boat, and understood the bells, having had
considerable experience on board the large steamers. He rang to back
her, supposing Ethan was at his post in the engine-room.

She did not back, and he rang again, but with no better success than
before.

"Back her!" shouted he, through the speaking-tube.

There was no answer; and, filled with anger, the new captain rushed
down to the engine-room to "blow up" the engineer. He found Ethan on
the main-deck.

"What are you doing there?" demanded Ben. "Don't you hear the bells?"

"I heard them," replied Ethan quietly.

"Why don't you start her, then?"

"I've nothing to do with her."

"Don't you run that engine?"

"I don't."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that I will have nothing to do with the engine as things are
now."

Ben raved and stormed at Ethan; then he tried to coax him to take
his place; but the engineer was as firm as the pilot had been. Taylor
offered him ten dollars if he would run the engine that day; but he
positively refused. The new captain then went down to the fire-room,
where the man in charge of the furnaces was promoted to the position
of engineer.

"Now we can go it," said Ben.

"No; don't start her," said the sheriff.

"Why not?"

"I am responsible for the safety of this boat, and she shall not go
with neither pilot nor engineer."

Taylor and the new captain swore terribly; but the sheriff was
immovable.




CHAPTER XVI

THE EXCURSION TO WHITEHALL


Lawry was no lawyer, and was therefore unable to form an opinion in
regard to the legality of the steps by which the _Woodville_ had
been taken from him. It was an accomplished fact, and he was as
disconsolate as though he had lost his best friend. He went on shore,
and until the peremptory order of the sheriff was given, he expected
to see the steamer shoot out from the wharf and disappear beyond the
point, in charge of another person than himself.

He had refused to pilot the steamer under the new order of things,
not because he wished to be spiteful to his brother, but because he
was smarting under a sense of injustice, which unfitted him for the
duty. Though he did not comprehend the legal measures which had been
taken, he felt that there was something wrong. The _Woodville_
belonged to him, not to his father; and though he was willing to give
all his earnings for the support of the family, and even to pay off
the mortgage on the place, he felt that it was not right to take the
steamer from him.

He stood on the wharf, paralyzed by the calamity which had overtaken
him. He wanted to do something, but he did not know what to do. The
sheriff, by his caution, had defeated the plans of the new captain,
and Lawry was waiting to see what would happen next. He wished to see
Mr. Sherwood, and he would have hastened up to his house if he could
have endured the thought of losing sight of the steamer even for a
moment. Ethan was still on deck, for though he refused to run the
engine, he felt it to be his duty to stand by and see that no
accident happened, for the steam was up, and the fireman was an
unskillful person.

Ben Wilford and Taylor were disappointed and chagrined at their
failure to get off. They stormed and swore, till it was apparent that
storming and swearing would not start the steamer. The sheriff
positively refused to let the boat depart without a competent pilot
and engineer.

"What shall we do, Wilford?" said Taylor. "Can't you persuade your
brother to take hold again?"

"He's as obstinate as a mule; but I'll try," replied Ben.

"Offer him twenty dollars for his day's work," added Taylor.

"I may be able to compromise with him, if you're willing."

"Anything you please, if you can make him and the other fellow go
with us."

"Lawry, Mr. Taylor will give you twenty dollars if you will pilot
the steamer to-day," said Ben.

"I wouldn't go for a hundred," replied the young pilot. "I won't go
with you at any rate."

"Don't be so obstinate, Lawry."

"I engaged the boat to Mr. Sherwood, and I will not go with anybody
else."

"Mr. Sherwood won't care when he finds out that you are not to
blame. You can't resist the law, and it isn't your fault."

"Ben, I wouldn't do what you have done for all the steamers on the
lake. You have got this man to attach the property, and take the
house away from mother, just because you wanted to be captain of this
steamer."

"What's the use of talking about that, Lawry?" replied Ben
impatiently. "I'm going to be captain of this steamer, anyhow; and
the sooner you make up your mind to it, the better it will be for you."

"I can't help myself."

"I know you can't, and for that reason you had better submit with a
good grace. If you will take your place in the wheel-house, Mr.
Taylor will remove the attachment."

"Will he?"

"I will," replied Taylor.

"And put everything where it was before?" asked Lawry.

"Of course I am to be captain, and Mr. Taylor is to have the boat
to-day," added Ben.

"Mr. Taylor can't have her to-day," said Lawry firmly. "I engaged
her to Mr. Sherwood, and if anybody has her to-day, he must. That's
all I want to say about it now."

The young pilot turned on his heel and walked away. His brother and
the creditor were conspirators, and he wanted nothing to do with
them. He might have been less resolute, if he had not seen Mr.
Sherwood's carriage stop at the head of the wharf.

"Are you all ready, Lawry?" asked Mr. Sherwood.

The poor boy could make no reply; he burst into tears, and turned
away from his kind friend.

"What's the matter, Lawry?" demanded Mr. Sherwood.

"I suppose he feels bad, sir," interposed the sheriff. "The boat has
been attached for his father's debts."

"For his father's debts!" exclaimed the rich gentleman.

The officer gave him a full explanation of the case.

"This will never do," added Mr. Sherwood indignantly. "This boat is
Lawry's property in his own right."

"I think not," added Taylor. "Here's my lawyer; he can explain the
matter to you."

"No explanation is needed," replied Mr. Sherwood.

"The boy is a minor," said the legal gentleman.

"He may need a guardian, nothing more, to enable him to hold the
property."

"Perhaps you are more familiar with the law than I am, Mr.
Sherwood," said the legal gentleman pompously. "You gave this boat to
the boy."

"I did."

"While she lay at the bottom of the lake she was worth nothing. She
was an abandoned wreck. If you had any property at all in her, it was
subject to the salvage. Lawry Wilford raised her. I suppose you are
willing to believe that the boy's father is entitled to his earnings?"

"I grant that."

"Well, sir, whatever the boy earned in the way of salvage belongs to
his father; and we sue to recover that."

"This is a ridiculous suit!" exclaimed Mr. Sherwood.

"Perhaps it is, sir, but we shall hold the boat, subject to the
decision of the court."

Mr. Sherwood was vexed and perplexed; for, whether the claim could
be substantiated or not, the _Woodville_ could be held until a
decision was reached. Lawry then took him aside, and told him what
his brother had done, in order to make himself captain of the steamer.

"Is that it, Lawry? I'm more sorry for your brother's sake than I am
for yours. I pity him, because he has been capable of doing so mean a
thing. Don't distress yourself, my boy. We will make this all right
in the course of ten minutes."

"But they have taken the steamer away from me, and given her up to
Ben, who is to take charge of her."

"Never mind, Lawry. They shall give her back to you," replied the
rich man, as he walked up to the lawyer. "How much is your claim
against Mr. Wilford?"

"One thousand and sixty-four dollars," answered the legal gentleman.

"Will you take my draft or check for the amount?"

"No, sir."

"I see you are not disposed to be accommodating."

"We intend to have the first sail in this steamer," sneered Taylor.

"I intend you shall not," said Mr. Sherwood.

Unfortunately he had not money enough with him to discharge the
claim against the ferryman, which, as it was a just debt, whatever
might be said of the means taken to recover it, he had decided to
pay, rather than give bonds for the steamer, and contest the
attachment. He had invited several gentlemen to accompany him up the
lake in the _Woodville_, who were now on the wharf, and from
them he borrowed enough to make up the sum required. The money was
given to Mrs. Wilford, with instructions to go to a certain lawyer
and employ him to see that the mortgage on the house and land was
properly canceled.

"When we get our money, the attachment on the boat can be dissolved,
not before," said the lawyer. "Mr. Sheriff, the debt is not paid yet."

"I will put the money in your hands, if you desire," added Mr.
Sherwood to the sheriff.

"I am satisfied. You may go where you please with the boat, and as
soon as you please," replied the official.

"She will not go till this claim is settled, Mr. Sheriff,"
remonstrated the legal gentleman.

"She may go now," responded the officer. "Ben Wilford, your services
will not be needed. Now, gentlemen, we will go up to the village and
settle the bills."

The lawyer protested that the attachment could not be removed till
the debt had been paid, but the sheriff was willing to take the
responsibility of releasing the boat.

"All aboard, Lawry!" shouted Mr. Sherwood.

"I didn't expect you to do this, sir," said the young pilot; "but I
will pay you every dollar, if the steamer ever earns so much."

"We will talk about that some other time, my boy. We are all ready
to be off now."

Lawry, with a light heart, sprang to his place in the wheel-house;
Ethan was already at his post in the engine-room, and the ladies and
gentlemen of the party hastened on board.

"Put that basket ashore," said Lawry to the deckhands, as he pointed
to the "stores" of the party.

The basket was tumbled on the wharf, to the imminent peril of the
glassware it contained. Ben Wilford stood on the pier, leaning
against one of the posts to which the steamer was fastened. He looked
sour and disappointed.

"Cast off the bow-line," said Lawry, when all was ready.

At this moment Ben jumped on board.

"Stop her!" said Mr. Sherwood sharply, as Lawry rang the bell to
back her.

"What's the matter, sir?" asked the pilot.

"Young man," said Mr. Sherwood, stepping up to Ben Wilford, "you
will oblige me by going on shore."

"What for?" demanded Ben crustily.

"We do not need your company."

"But I want to go."

"I do not wish you to go."

"I think it is rather steep for you to tell me I can't go in my
