"You know, perhaps, ma'am," she began that evening, when Moseley had
started on his night duty, and Maurice being sound asleep in bed, she
found herself quite alone with the little woman, "You know, perhaps,
ma'am, that we two little children and our dog have got to go on a very
long journey--a very, very long journey indeed."

"No, I don't know nothink about it, Cecile," said Mrs. Moseley in her
cheerful voice. "What we knows, my man and me, is, that you two little
mites has got to stay yere until we finds some good orphan school to
send you to, and you has no call to trouble about payment, deary, for
we're only too glad and thankful to put any children into our dead
child's place and into Susie's place."

"But we can't stay," said Cecile; "we can't stay, though we'd like to
ever so. I'm only a little girl. But there's a great deal put on me--a
great, great care. I don't mind it now, 'cause of Jesus. But I mustn't
neglect it, must I?"

"No, darling: Only tell Mammie Moseley what it is."

"Oh! May I call you that?"

"Yes; for sure, love. Now tell me what's yer care, Cecile, honey."

"I can't, Mammie, I can't, though I'd like to. I had to tell Jane
Parsons. I had to tell her, and she was faithful. But I think I'd
better not tell even you again. Only 'tis a great care, and it means a
long journey, and going south. It means all that much for me, and
Maurice, and Toby."

"Going south? You mean to Devonshire, I suppose, child?"

"I don't know. Is there a place called Devonshire there, ma'am? But we
has to go to France--away down to the south of France--to the Pyrenees."

"Law, child! Why, you don't never mean as you're going to cross the
seas?"

"Is that the way to France, Mammie Moseley? Oh! Do you _really_ know
the way?"

"There's no other way that I ever hear tell on, Cecile. Oh, my dear,
you must not do that!"

"But it's just there I've got to go, ma'am; and me and Maurice are a
little French boy and girl. We'll be sure to feel all right in France;
and when we get to the Pyrenees we'll feel at home. 'Tis there our
father lived, and our own mother died, and me and Maurice were born
there. I don't see how we can help being at home in the Pyrenees."

"That may be, child; and it may be right to send a letter to yer
people, and if they wants you two, and will treat you well, to let you
go back to them. But to have little orphans like you wandering about in
France all alone, ain't to be thought on, ain't to be thought on,
Cecile."

"But whether my people write for me and Maurice or not, ma'am, I must
go," said Cecile in a low, firm voice. "I must, because I promised--I
promised one that is dead."

"Well, my darling, how can I help you if you won't _conwide_ in me? Oh,
Cecile! you're for all the world just like what Susie was; only I hopes
as you won't treat us as bad."

"Susie was the girl who slept in our little bedroom," said Cecile. "Was
she older than me, ma'am? and was she yer daughter, ma'am?"

"No, Cecile. Susie was nothink to me in the flesh, though, God knows, I
loved her like a child of my own. God never gave me a bonnie girl to
love and care for, Cecile. I had one boy. Oh! I did worship him, and
when Jesus tuk him away and made an angel of him, I thought I'd go near
wild. Well, we won't talk on it. He died at five years old. But I don't
mind telling you of Susie."

"Oh! please, Mammie!"

"It was a year or more after my little Charlie wor tuk away," said Mrs.
Moseley. "My heart wor still sore and strange. I guessed as I'd never
have another baby, and I wor so bad I could not bear to look at
children. As I wor walking over Blackfriars Bridge late one evening I
heard a girl crying. I knew by her cry as she was a very young girl,
nearly a child; and, God forgive me! for a moment I thought as I'd
hurry on, and not notice her, for I did dread seeing children. However,
her cry was very bitter, and what do you think it was?

"'Oh, Mammie, Mammie, Mammie!'

"I couldn't stand that; it went through me as clean as a knife. I ran
up to her and said: 'What's yer trouble, honey?'

"She turned at once and threw her arms round me, and clung to me,
nearly in convulsions with weeping.

"'Oh! take me to my mother,' she sobbed. 'I want my mother.'

"'Yes, deary, tell me where she lives,' I said.

"But the bonnie dear could only shake her head and say she did not
know; and she seemed so exhausted and spent that I just brought her
home and made her up a bed in your little closet without more ado. She
seemed quite comforted that I should take to her, and left off crying
for her mother. I asked her the next day a lot of questions, but to
everything she said she did not know. She did not know where her mother
lived now. She would rather not see her mother, now she was not so
lonely. She would rather not tell her real name. I might call her
Susie. She had been in France, but she did not like it, and she had got
back to England. She had wandered back, and she was very desolate, and
she _had_ wanted her mother dreadfully, but not now. Her mother had
been bad to her, and she did not wish for her now that I was so good.
To hear her talk you'd think as she was hard, but at night John and I
'ud hear her sobbing often and often in her little bed, and naming of
her mammie. Never did I come across a more willful bit of flesh and
blood. But she had that about her as jest took everyone by storm. My
husband and I couldn't make enough on her, and we both jest made her
welcome to be a child of our own. She was nothing really but a child, a
big, fair English child. She said as she wor twelve years old. She was
lovely, fair as a lily, and with long, yellow hair."

"Fair, and with yellow hair?" said Cecile, suddenly springing to her
feet. "Yes, and with little teeth like pearls, and eyes as blue as the
sky."

"Why, Cecile, did you know her?" said Mrs. Moseley. "Yes, yes, that's
jest her. I never did see bluer eyes."

"And was her name Lovedy--Lovedy Joy?" asked Cecile.

"I don't know, child; she wouldn't tell her real name; she was only
jest Susie to us."

"Oh, ma'am! Dear Mrs. Moseley, ma'am, where's Susie now?"

"Ah, child! that's wot I can't tell you; I wishes as I could. One day
Susie went out and never come back again. She used to talk o' France,
same as you talk o' France, so perhaps she went there; anyhow, she
never come back to us who loved her. We fretted sore, and we
hadvertised in the papers, but we never, never heard another word of
Susie, and that's seven years or more gone by."




CHAPTER VIII.

THE TRIALS OF SECRECY.


The next day Mrs. Moseley went round to see her clergyman, Mr. Danvers,
to consult him about Cecile and Maurice. They puzzled her, these queer
little French children. Maurice was, it is true, nothing but a rather
willful, and yet winsome, baby boy; but Cecile had character. Cecile
was the gentlest of the gentle, but she was firm as the finest steel.
Mrs. Moseley owned to feeling even a little vexed with Cecile, she was
so determined in her intention of going to France, and so equally
determined not to tell what her motive in going there was. She said
over and over with a solemn shake of her wise little head that she must
go there, that a heavy weight was laid upon her, that she was under a
promise to the dead. Mrs. Moseley, remembering how Susie had run away,
felt a little afraid. Suppose Cecile, too, disappeared? It was so easy
for children to disappear in London. They were just as much lost as if
they were dead to their friends, and nobody ever heard of them again.
Mrs. Moseley could not watch the children all day; at last in her
despair she determined to appeal to her clergyman.

"I don't know what to make of the little girl," she said in conclusion,
"she reminds me awful much of Susie. She's rare and winsome; I think
she have a deeper nature than my poor lost Susie, but she's lovable
like her. And it have come over me, Mr. Danvers, as she knows Susie,
for, though she is the werry closest little thing I ever come across,
her face went quite white when I telled her about my poor lost girl,
and she axed me quite piteous and eager if her name wor Lovedy Joy."

"Lovedy is a very uncommon name." said Mr. Danvers. "You had no reason,
Mrs. Moseley, to suppose that was Susan's name?"

"She never let it out to me as it wor, sir. Oh, ain't it a trial, as
folk _will_ be so close and _contrary_."

Mr. Danvers smiled.

"I will go and see this little Cecile," he said, "and I must try to win
her confidence."

The good clergyman did go the next afternoon, and finding Cecile all
alone, he endeavored to get her to confide in him. To a certain extent
he was successful, the little girl told him all she could remember of
her French father and her English stepmother. All about her queer old
world life with Maurice and their dog in the deserted court back of
Bloomsbury. She also told him of Warren's Grove, and of how the French
cousin no longer sent that fifty pounds a year which was to pay Lydia
Purcell, how in consequence she and Maurice were to go to the Union,
and how Toby was to be hung; she said that rather than submit to
_that_, she and Maurice had resolved to run away. She even shyly and in
conclusion confided some of her religious doubts and difficulties to
the kind clergyman. And she said with a frank sweet light in her blue
eyes that she was quite happy now, for she had found out all about the
Guide she needed. But about her secret, her Russia-leather purse, her
motive in going to France, Cecile was absolutely silent.

"I must go to France," she said, "and I must not tell why; 'tis a great
secret, and it would be wrong to tell. I'd much rather tell you, sir,
and Mrs. Moseley, but I must not. I did tell Jane Parsons, I could not
help that, but I must try to keep my great secret to myself for the
future."

It was impossible not to respect the little creature's silence as much
as her confidence.

Mr. Danvers said, in conclusion, "I will not press for your story, my
little girl; but it is only right that I as a clergyman, and someone
much older than you, should say, that no matter _what_ promise you are
under, it would be very wrong for you and your baby brother to go alone
to France now. Whatever you may feel called on to do when you are grown
up, such a step would now be wrong. I will write to your French cousin,
and ask him if he is willing to give you and Maurice a home; in which
case I must try to find someone who will take you two little creatures
back to your old life in the Pyrenees. Until you hear from me again, it
is your duty to stay here."

"Me and Maurice, we asked Mammie Moseley for a night's lodging," said
Cecile. "Will it be many nights before you hear from our cousin in
France? Because me and Maurice, we have very little money, please, sir."

"I will see to the money part," said Mr. Danvers.

"And please, sir," asked Cecile, as he rose to leave, "is Jography a
thing or a person?"

"Geography!" said the clergyman, laughing. "You shall come to school
to-morrow morning, my little maid, and learn something of geography."




CHAPTER IX.

"A LETTER."


Mr. Danvers was as good as his word and wrote by the next post to the
French cousin. He wrote a pathetic and powerful appeal to this man,
describing the destitute children in terms that might well move his
heart. But whether it so happened that the French relation had no heart
to be moved, whether he was weary of an uncongenial subject, or was
ill, and so unable to reply--whatever the reason, good Mr. Danvers
never got any answer to his letter.

Meanwhile Cecile and Maurice went to school by day, and sometimes also
by night. At school both children learned a great many things. Cecile
found out what geography was, and her teacher, who was a very
good-natured young woman, did not refuse her earnest request to learn
all she could about France.

Cecile had long ago been taught by her own dead father to read, and she
could write a very little. She was by no means what would be considered
a smart child. Her ideas came slowly--she took in gradually. There were
latent powers of some strength in the little brain, and what she once
learned she never forgot, but no amount of school teaching could come
to Cecile quickly. Maurice, on the contrary, drank in his school
accomplishments as greedily and easily as a little thirsty flower
drinks in light and water. He found no difficulty in his lessons, and
was soon quite the pride of the infant school where he was placed.

The change in his life was doing him good. He was a willful little
creature, and the regular employment was taming him, and Mrs. Moseley's
motherly care, joined to a slight degree of wholesome discipline, was
subduing the little faults of selfishness which his previous life as
Cecile's sole charge could not but engender.

It is to be regretted that Toby, hitherto, perhaps, the most perfect
character of the three, should in these few weeks of prosperity
degenerate the most. Having no school to attend, and no care whatever
on his mind, this dog decided to give himself up to enjoyment. The
weather was most bitterly cold. It was quite unnecessary for him to
accompany Cecile and Maurice to school. _His_ education had long ago
been finished. So he selected to stay in the warm kitchen, and lie as
close to the stove as possible. He made dubious and uncertain friends
with the cat. He slept a great deal, he ate a great deal. As the weeks
flew on, he became fat, lazy-looking, and uninteresting. Were it not
for subsequent and previous conduct he would not have been a dog worth
writing about. So bad is prosperity for some!

But prosperous days were not the will of their heavenly Father for
these little pilgrims just yet, and their brief and happy sojourn with
kind Mrs. Moseley was to come to a rather sudden end.

Cecile, believing fully in the good clergyman's words, was waiting
patiently for that letter from France, which was to enable Maurice,
Toby, and herself to travel there in the very best way. Her little
heart was at rest. During the six weeks she remained with Mrs. Moseley,
she gained great strength both of body and mind.

She must find Lovedy. But surely Mr. Danvers was right and if she had a
grown person to go with her and her little brother, from how many
perils would they not be saved? She waited, therefore, quite quietly
for the letter that never came; meanwhile employing herself in learning
all she could about France. She was more sure than ever now that Lovedy
was there, for something seemed to tell her that Lovedy and Susie were
one. Of course this beautiful Susie had gone back to France, and once
there, Cecile would quickly find her. She had now a double delight and
pleasure in the hope of finding Lovedy Joy. She would give her her
mother's message, and her mother's precious purse of gold. But she
could do more than that. Lovedy's own mother was dead. But there was
another woman who cared for Lovedy with a mother's warm and tender
heart. Another woman who mourned for the lost Susie she could never
see, but for whom she kept a little room all warm and bright. Cecile
pictured over and over how tenderly she would tell this poor, wandering
girl of the love waiting for her, and longing for her, and of how she
herself would bring her back to Mammie Moseley.

Things were in this state, and the children and their adopted parents
were all very happy together, when the change that I have spoken of
came.

It was a snowy and bleak day in February, and the little party were all
at breakfast, when a quick and, it must be owned, very unfamiliar step
was heard running up the attic stairs. The rope was pulled with a
vigorous tug, and a postman's hand thrust in a letter.

"'Tis that letter from foreign parts, as sure as sure, never welcome
it," said Moseley, swallowing his coffee with a great gulp, and rising
to secure the rare missive.

Cecile felt herself growing pale, and a lump rising in her throat. But
