         Nor the battle to those people
         That shoot the biggest gun."

"Where did you get that song?" asked Dick. "I'll allow, under the
circumstances, that there seems to be some sense in it."

"A Texan that we captured last night sang it to us. He was a funny kind
of fellow. Didn't seem to be worried a bit because he was taken. Said
if his own people didn't retake him that he'd escape in a week, anyhow.
Likely enough he will, too. But he was good company, and he sang us that
song. Impudent, wasn't he?"

"But true so far, at least in the east. I fancy from what you say,
Frank, that we'll be here a day longer anyhow. I hope so, I want to
rest."

"So do I. I won't fight to-day, unless I'm ordered to do it. But I'm
thinking with you, Dick, that we'll retreat. We were outmaneuvered by
Lee and Jackson. That circuit of Jackson's through Thoroughfare Gap and
the attack from the rear undid us. It comes of being kept in the dark by
the enemy, instead of your keeping him in the dark. We never knew where
the blow was going to fall, and when it fell a lot of us weren't there.
But, Dick, old boy, we're going to win, in the end, aren't we, in spite
of Lee, in spite of Jackson, and in spite of everybody and everything?"

"As surely as the rising and setting of the sun, Frank."

Although Dick had little to do that day, events were occurring. It was
in the minds of Lee and Jackson that they might yet destroy the army
which they had already defeated, and heavy divisions of the Southern
army were moving. Dick heard about night that Jackson had marched ten
miles, through fields deep in mud, and meant to fall on Pope's flank or
rear again. Stuart and his unresting cavalry were also on their right
flank and in the rear, doing damage everywhere. Longstreet had sent
a brigade across Bull Run, and at many points the enemy was pressing
closer.

The next morning, Pope, alarmed by all the sinister movements on his
flanks and in his rear, gathered up his army and retreated. It was full
time or the vise would have shut down on him again. Late that day the
division under Kearney came into contact with Jackson's flanking force
in the forest. A short but fierce battle ensued, fought in the night
and amid new torrents of driving rain. General Kearney was killed by a
skirmisher, but the night and the rain grew so dense, and they were
in such a tangle of thickets and forests that both sides drew off, and
Pope's army passed on.

Dick was not in this battle, but he heard it's crash and roar above the
sweep of the storm. He and the balance of the regiment were helping to
guard the long train of the wounded. Now and then, he leaned from his
horse and looked at Warner who lay in one of the covered wagons.

"I'm getting along all right, Dick, old man," said Warner. "What's all
that firing off toward the woods?"

"A battle, but it won't stop us. We retreated in time."

"And we've been defeated. Well, we can stand it. It takes a good nation
to stand big defeats. You know I taught school once, Dick, and I learned
that the biggest nation the world has ever known was the one that
suffered the biggest defeats. Look at the terrible knocks the Romans
got! Why the Gauls nearly ate 'em alive two or three times, and for
years Hannibal whipped 'em every time he could get at 'em. But they
ended by whipping everybody who had whipped them. They whipped the whole
world, and they kept it whipped until they played out from old age."

Dick laughed cheerily.

"Now, you shut up, George," he said. "You've talked too much. What's
the use of going back as far as the old Romans for comfort. We can win
without having to copy a lot of old timers."

He dropped the flap of canvas and rode on listening to the sounds of the
combat. A powerful figure stepped out of the bushes and stood beside
his horse. It was Sergeant Whitley, who had passed through the battle
without a scratch.

"What has happened, Sergeant?" asked Dick, as he sat in the rain and
listened to the dying fire.

"There has been a fight, and both are quitting because they can't see
enough to carry it on any longer. But General Kearney has been killed."

The retreat continued until they reached the Potomac and were in the
great fortifications before Washington. Then Pope resigned, and the star
of McClellan rose again. The command of the armies about Washington
was entrusted to him, and the North gathered itself anew for the mighty
struggle.




CHAPTER VII. ORDERS NO. 191


When the Union army, defeated at the Second Manassas fell back on
Washington, Dick was detached for a few days from the regiment by
Colonel Winchester, partly that he might have a day or two of leave, and
partly that he might watch over Warner, who was making good progress.

Warner was in a wagon that contained half a dozen other wounded men, or
rather boys, and they were all silent like stoics as they passed over
the bridge to a hospital in Washington. His side and shoulder pained
him, and he had recurrent periods of fever, but he was making fine
progress.

Dick found his comrade on a small cot among dozens of others in a great
room. But George's cot was near a window and the pleasant sunshine
poured in. It was now the opening of September, and the hot days were
passing. There was a new sparkle and crispness in the air, and Warner,
wounded as he was, felt it.

"We're back in the capital to enjoy ourselves a while," he said
lightly to Dick, "and I'm glad to see that the weather will be fine for
sight-seeing."

"Yes, here we are," said Dick. "The Johnnies beat us this time. They
didn't outfight us, but they had the best generals. As soon as you're
well, George, we'll start out again and lick 'em."

"I'm glad you told 'em to wait for me, Dick. That's what you ought to
do. I hear that McClellan is at the head of things again."

"Yes, the Army of the Potomac is to the front once more, and it's
taken over the Army of Virginia. We hear that Pope is going out to the
northwest to fight Indians."

"McClellan is not likely to be trapped as Pope was, but he's so
tremendously cautious that he'll never trap anything himself. Now, which
kind of a general would you choose, Dick?"

"As between those two I'll take McClellan. The soldiers at least like
him and believe in him. And George, our man in the east hasn't come yet.
The generals we've had don't hammer. They don't concentrate, rush right
in and rain blows on the enemy."

"Do you think you know the right man, Dick?"

"I'm making a guess. It's Grant. We saw him at Donelson and Shiloh.
Surprised at both places, he won anyhow. He wouldn't be beat. That's the
kind of man we want here in the east."

"You may be right, Dick, but the politicians in this part of the country
all run him down. Halleck has been transferred to Washington as a sort
of general commander and adviser to the President, and they say he
doesn't like Grant."

Further talk was cut short by a young army surgeon, and Dick left
George, saying that he would come back the next day. The streets of
Washington were full of sunshine, but not of hope and cheerfulness.
The most terrible suspense reigned there. Never before or since was
Washington in such alarm. A hostile and victorious army was within a
day's march. Pope almost to the last had talked of victory. Then came a
telegram, asking if the capital could be defended in case his army was
destroyed. Next came the army preceded by thousands of stragglers and
heralds of disaster.

The people were dropped from the golden clouds of hope to the hard earth
of despair. They strained their eyes toward Manassas, where the flag of
the Union had twice gone down in disaster. It was said, and there
was ample cause for the saying of it, that Lee and Jackson with their
victorious veterans would appear any moment before the capital.
There were rumors that the government was packing up in order to flee
northward to Philadelphia or even New York.

But Dick believed none of these rumors. In fact, he was not greatly
alarmed by any of them. He was sure that McClellan, although without
genius, would restore the stamina of the troops, if indeed it were ever
lost, which he doubted very much. He had seen how splendidly they fought
at the Second Manassas, and he knew that there was no panic among them.
Moreover, the North was an inexhaustible storehouse of men and material,
and whenever one soldier fell two grew in his place.

So he strode through the crowded streets, calm of face and manner, and
took his way once more to the hotel, where he had sat and listened to
the talk before the Second Manassas. The lobby was packed with men, and
there was but one topic, the military situation. Would Lee and Jackson
advance, hot upon the heels of their victory? Would Washington fall?
Would McClellan be able to save them? Why weren't the generals of the
North as good as those of the South?

Dick listened to the talk which was for all who might choose to hear. He
did not assume any superior frame of mind, merely because he had fought
in many battles and these men had fought in none. He retained the
natural modesty of youth, and knowing that one who looked on might
sometimes be a better judge of what was happening than the one who took
part, he weighed carefully what they said.

He was in a comfortable chair by the wall, and while he sat there a
heavy man of middle age, whom he remembered well, approached and stood
before him, regarding him with a keen and measuring eye.

"Good morning, Mr. Watson," said Dick politely.

"Ah, it is you, Lieutenant Mason!" said the contractor. "I thought so,
but I was not sure, as you are thinner than you were when I last saw
you. I'll just take this seat beside you."

A man in the next chair had moved and the contractor dropped into it.
Then he crossed his legs, and smoothed the upper knee with a strong, fat
hand.

"You've had quite a trip since I last saw you, Mr. Mason," he said.

"We didn't go so terribly far."

"It's not length that makes a trip. It's what you see and what happens."

"I saw a lot, and a hundred times more than what I saw happened."

The contractor took two fine cigars from his vest pocket and handed one
to Dick.

"No, thank you," said the boy, "I've never learned to smoke."

"I suppose that's because you come from Kentucky, where they raise so
much tobacco. When you see a thing so thick around you, you don't care
for it. Well, we'll talk while I light mine and puff it. And so, young
man, you ran against Lee and Jackson!"

"We did, or they ran against us, which comes to the same thing."

"And got well thrashed. There's no denying it."

"I'm not trying to do so."

"That's right. I thought from the first that you were a young man of
sense. I'm glad to see that you didn't get yourself killed."

"A great many good men did."

"That's so, and a great many more will go the same way. You just listen
to me. I don't wear any uniform, but I've got eyes to see and ears to
hear. I suppose that more monumental foolishness has been hidden under
cocked hats and gold lace than under anything else, since the world
began. Easy now, I don't say that fools are not more numerous outside
armies than in them--there are more people outside--but the mistakes of
generals are more costly."

"I suppose our generals are doing the best they can. You will let me
speak plainly, will you, Mr. Watson?"

"Of course, young man. Go ahead."

"Perhaps you feel badly over a disaster of your own. I saw the smoking
fires at Bristoe Station. The rebels burned there several million
dollars worth of stores belonging to us. Maybe a large part of them were
your own goods."

The contractor rubbed his huge knee with one hand, took his cigar out
of his mouth with the other hand, blew several rings of fine blue smoke
from his nose, and watched them break against the ceiling.

"Young man," he said, "you're a good guesser, but you don't guess all.
More than a million dollars worth of material that I supplied was
burned or looted at Bristoe Station. But it had all been paid for by a
perfectly solvent Union government. So, if I were to consider it from
the purely material standpoint, which you imagine to be the only one I
have, I should rejoice over the raids of the rebels because they make
trade for contractors. I'm a patriot, even if I do not fight at the
front. Besides my feelings have been hurt."

"In what way?"

The contractor drew from his pocket a coarse brown envelope, and he took
from the envelope a letter, written on paper equally coarse and brown.

"I received this letter last night," he said. "It was addressed simply
'John Watson, Washington, D. C.,' and the post office people gave it to
me at once. It came from somebody within the Confederate lines. You know
how the Northern and Southern pickets exchange tobacco, newspapers and
such things, when they're not fighting. I suppose the letter was passed
on to me in that way. Listen."



"John Watson,    Washington, D. C.

"My dear sir: I have never met you, but certain circumstances have made
me acquainted with your name. Believing therefore that you are a man
of judgment and fairness I feel justified in making to you a complaint
which I am sure you will agree with me is well-founded. At a little
place called Bristoe Station I recently obtained a fine, blue uniform,
the tint of which wind and rain will soon turn to our own excellent
Confederate gray. I found your own name as maker stamped upon the neck
band of both coat and vest.

"I ought to say however that after I had worn the coat only twice the
seams ripped across both shoulders, I admit that the fit was a little
tight, but work well done would not yield so quickly. I also picked
out a pair of beautiful shoes, bearing your name stamped upon them. The
leather cracked after the first day's use, and good leather will never
crack so soon.

"Now, my dear Mr. Watson, I feel that you have treated me unfairly. I
will not use any harsher word. We do not expect you to supply us with
goods of this quality, and we certainly look for something better from
you next time.

                  "Your obedient servant,
                              ARTHUR ST. CLAIR,
                       Lieutenant 'The Invincibles,'
                                             C. S. A."


"Now, did you ever hear of another piece of impudence like that?" said
Watson. "It has its humorous side, I admit, and you're justified in
laughing, but it's impudence all the same."

"Yes, it is impudence, and do you know, Mr. Watson, I've met the writer
of that letter. He is a South Carolinian, and from his standpoint he
has a real grievance. I never knew anybody else as particular about his
clothes, and it seems that the uniform and shoes you furnished him are
not all right. He's a gentleman and he wouldn't lie. I met him at
Cedar Run, when the burying parties were going over the field. He was
introduced to me by my cousin, Harry Kenton, who is on the other side.
Harry wouldn't associate with any fellow who isn't all right."

"All the same, if I ever catch that young jackanapes of a St.
Clair--it's an easy name to remember--I'll strip my uniform off him and
turn him loose for his own comrades to laugh at."

"But we won't catch either him or his comrades for a long time."

"That's so, but in the end we'll catch 'em. Now, Mr. Mason, you don't
agree with me about many things, but you're only a boy and you'll know
better later on. Anyway, I like you, and if you need help at any time
and can reach me, come."

"I'll do so, and I thank you now," said Dick, who saw that the
contractor's tone was sincere.

"That's right, good-bye. I see a senator whom I need."

They shook hands and Watson hurried away with great lightness and
agility for so large a man.

Dick stayed two days longer in Washington, visiting Warner twice a day
and seeing with gladness his rapid improvement. When he was with him the
last time, and told him he was going to join the Army of the Potomac,
Warner said:

