very first broadside the Dutch fired a chain-shot, and pretty well
cut Admiral Deane in two. I was close to him at the time. Monk, who
was standing by his side, undid his own cloak in a moment, threw it
over his comrade, and held up his hand to the few of us that had seen
what had happened, to take no notice of it.

"It was a good thing that Deane and Monk were on board the same ship.
If it had not been so, Deane's flag would have been hauled down and
all the Fleet would have known of his death, which, at the
commencement of the fight, would have greatly discouraged the men.

"They told me, though I know naught about it, that Rear-Admiral
Lawson charged with the Blue Squadron right through the Dutch line,
and so threw them into confusion. However, about three o'clock, the
fight having begun at eleven, Van Tromp began to draw off, and we got
more sail on the _Resolution_ and followed them for some hours, they
making a sort of running fight of it, till one of their big ships
blew up, about nine in the evening, when they laid in for shore.
Blake came up in the night with eighteen ships. The Dutch tried to
draw off, but at eight o'clock we came up to them, and, after
fighting for four hours, they hauled off and ran, in great confusion,
for the flats, where we could not follow them, and so they escaped to
Zeeland. We heard that they had six of their best ships sunk, two
blown up and eleven taken, but whether it was so or not I knew not,
for, in truth, I saw nothing whatever of the matter.

"We sailed to the Texel, and there blocked in De Ruyter's squadron of
twenty-five large ships, and we thought that there would be no more
fighting, for the Dutch had sent to England to ask for terms of
peace. However, we were wrong, and, to give the Dutchmen their due,
they showed resolution greater than we gave them credit for, for we
were astonished indeed to hear, towards the end of July, that Van
Tromp had sailed out again with upwards of ninety ships.

"On the 29th they came in view, and we sailed out to engage them, but
they would not come to close quarters, and it was seven at night
before the _Resolution_, with some thirty other ships, came up to
them and charged through their line. By the time we had done that it
was quite dark, and we missed them altogether and sailed south,
thinking Van Tromp had gone that way; but, instead, he had sailed
north, and in the morning we found he had picked up De Ruyter's
fleet, and was ready to fight. But we had other things to think of
besides fighting that day, for the wind blew so hard that it was as
much as we could do to keep off the shore, and if the gale had
continued a good part of the ships would have left their bones there.
However, by nightfall the gale abated somewhat, and by the next
morning the sea had gone down sufficient for the main deck ports to
be opened. So the Dutch, having the weather gauge, sailed down to
engage us.

"I thought it rough work in the fight two months before, but it was
as nothing to this. To begin with, the Dutch fire-ships came down
before the wind, and it was as much as we could do to avoid them.
They did, indeed, set the _Triumph_ on fire, and most of the crew
jumped overboard; but those that remained managed to put out the
flames.

"Lawson, with the Blue Squadron, began the fighting, and that so
briskly, that De Ruyter's flagship was completely disabled and towed
out of the fight. However, after I had seen that, our turn began, and
I had no more time to look about. I only know that ship after ship
came up to engage us, seeming bent upon lowering Monk's flag. Three
Dutch Admirals, Tromp, Evertson, and De Ruyter, as I heard
afterwards, came up in turn. We did not know who they were, but we
knew they were Admirals by their flags, and pounded them with all our
hearts; and so good was our aim that I myself saw two of the
Admirals' flags brought down, and they say that all three of them
were lowered. But you may guess the pounding was not all on our side,
and we suffered very heavily.

"Four men were hurt at the gun I worked, and nigh half the crew were
killed or wounded. Two of our masts were shot away, many of our guns
disabled, and towards the end of the fight we were towed out of the
line. How the day would have gone if Van Tromp had continued in
command of the Dutch, I cannot say, but about noon he was shot
through the body by a musket-ball, and this misfortune greatly
discouraged the Dutchmen, who fight well as long as things seem to be
going their way, but lose heart very easily when they think the
matter is going against them.

"By about two o'clock the officers shouted to us that the Dutch were
beginning to draw off, and it was not long before they began to fly,
each for himself, and in no sort of order. Some of our light
frigates, that had suffered less than the line-of-battle ships,
followed them until the one Dutch Admiral whose flag was left flying,
turned and fought them till two or three of our heavier ships came up
and he was sunk.

"We could see but little of the chase, having plenty of work, for,
had a gale come on, our ship, and a good many others, would assuredly
have been driven ashore, in the plight we were in. Anyhow, at night
their ships got into the Texel, and our vessels, which had been
following them, anchored five or six leagues out, being afraid of the
sands. Altogether we had burnt or sunk twenty-six of their ships of
war, while we lost only two frigates, both of which were burnt by
their fire-ships.

"As it was certain that they would not come out for some time again,
and many of our ships being unfit for further contention until
repaired, we returned to England, and I got my discharge and joined
Captain Dave again a fortnight later, when his ship came up the
river.

"Monk is a good fighter, Master Cyril, and should have the command of
the Fleet instead of, as they say, the Duke of York. Although he is
called General, and not Admiral, he is as good a sea-dog as any of
them, and he can think as well as fight.

"Among our ships that day were several merchantmen that had been
taken up for the service at the last moment and had guns slapped on
board, with gunners to work them. Some of them had still their
cargoes in the hold, and Monk, thinking that it was likely the
captains would think more of saving their ships and goods than of
fighting the Dutch, changed the captains all round, so that no man
commanded his own vessel. And the consequence was that, as all
admitted, the merchantmen were as willing to fight as any, and bore
themselves right stoutly.

"Don't you think, Master Cyril, if you go with the Fleet, that you
are going to see much of what goes on. It will be worse for you than
it was for me, for there was I, labouring and toiling like a dumb
beast, with my mind intent upon working the gun, and paying no heed
to the roar and confusion around, scarce even noticing when one
beside me was struck down. You will be up on the poop, having naught
to do but to stand with your hand on your sword hilt, and waiting to
board an enemy or to drive back one who tries to board you. You will
find that you will be well-nigh dazed and stupid with the din and
uproar."

"It does not sound a very pleasant outlook, John," Cyril laughed.
"However, if I ever do get into an engagement, I will think of what
you have said, and will try and prevent myself from getting either
dazed or stupid; though, in truth, I can well imagine that it is
enough to shake anyone's nerves to stand inactive in so terrible a
scene."

"You will have to take great care of yourself, Cyril," Nellie said
gravely.

Captain Dave and John Wilkes both burst into a laugh.

"How is he to take care of himself, Nellie?" her father said. "Do you
suppose that a man on deck would be any the safer were he to stoop
down with his head below the rail, or to screw himself up on the
leeward side of a mast? No, no, lass; each man has to take his share
of danger, and the most cowardly runs just as great a risk as the man
who fearlessly exposes himself."




CHAPTER XI

PRINCE RUPERT


The next day Cyril went down to breakfast in what he had often
called, laughingly, his Court suit. This suit he had had made for him
a short time before his father's death, to replace the one he had
when he came over, that being altogether outgrown. He had done so to
please Sir Aubrey, who had repeatedly expressed his anxiety that
Cyril should always be prepared to take advantage of any good fortune
that might befall him. This was the first time he had put it on.

"Well, truly you look a pretty fellow, Cyril," the Captain said, as
he entered. "Don't you think so, Nellie?"

The girl nodded.

"I don't know that I like him better than in his black suit, father.
But he looks very well."

"Hullo, lass! This is a change of opinion, truly! For myself I care
not one jot for the fashion of a man's clothes, but I had thought
that you always inclined to gay attire, and Cyril now would seem
rather to belong to the Court than to the City."

"If it had been any other morning, father, I might have thought more
of Cyril's appearance; but what you were telling us but now of the
continuance of the Plague is so sad, that mourning, rather than Court
attire, would seem to be the proper wear."

"Is the Plague spreading fast, then, Captain Dave?"

"No; but it is not decreasing, as we had hoped it would do. From the
beginning of December the deaths rose steadily until the end of
January. While our usual death-rate is under three hundred it went to
four hundred and seventy-four. Then the weather setting in very
severe checked it till the end of February, and we all hoped that the
danger was over, and that we should be rid of the distemper before
the warm weather set in; but for the last fortnight there has been a
rise rather than a fall--not a large one, but sufficient to cause
great alarm that it will continue until warm weather sets in, and may
then grow into terrible proportions. So far, there has been no case
in the City, and it is only in the West that it has any hold, the
deaths being altogether in the parishes of St. Giles's, St. Andrew's,
St. Bride's, and St. James's, Clerkenwell. Of course, there have been
cases now and then for many years past, and nine years ago it spread
to a greater extent than now, and were we at the beginning of winter
instead of nearing summer there would be no occasion to think much of
the matter; but, with the hot weather approaching, and the tales we
hear of the badness of the Plague in foreign parts one cannot but
feel anxious."

"And they say, too, that there have been prophecies of grievous evils
in London," Nellie put in.

"We need not trouble about that," her father replied. "The
Anabaptists prophesied all sorts of evils in Elizabeth's time, but
naught came of it. There are always men and women with disordered
minds, who think that they are prophets, and have power to see
further into the future than other people, but no one minds them or
thinks aught of their wild words save at a time like the present,
when there is a danger of war or pestilence. You remember Bill Vokes,
John?"

"I mind him, yer honour. A poor, half-crazed fellow he was, and yet a
good seaman, who would do his duty blow high or blow low. He sailed
six voyages with us, Captain."

"And never one of them without telling the crew that the ship would
never return to port. He had had dreams about it, and the black cat
had mewed when he left home, and he saw the three magpies in a tree
hard by when he stepped from the door, and many other portents of
that kind. The first time he well-nigh scared some of the crew, but
after the first voyage--from which we came back safely, of
course--they did but laugh at him; and as in all other respects he
was a good sailor, and a willing fellow, I did not like to discharge
him, for, once the men found out that his prophecies came to naught,
they did no harm, and, indeed, they afforded them much amusement.
Just as it is on board a ship, so it is elsewhere. If our vessel had
gone down that first voyage, any man who escaped drowning would have
said that Bill Vokes had not been without reason in his warnings, and
that it was nothing less than flying in the face of Providence, to
put to sea when the loss of the ship had been so surely foretold. So,
on shore, the fools or madmen who have dreams and visions are not
heeded when times are good, and men's senses sound, whereas, in
troubled times, men take their ravings to heart. If all the
scatterbrains had a good whipping at the pillory it would be well,
both for them and for the silly people who pay attention to their
ravings."

A few minutes later, Cyril took a boat to the Whitehall steps, and
after some delay was shown up to Prince Rupert's room.

"None the worse for your exertions yester-even, young gentleman, I
hope?" the Prince said, shaking hands with him warmly.

"None, sir. The exertion was not great, and it was but the
inconvenience of the smoke that troubled me in any way."

"Have you been to inquire after the young ladies who owe their lives
to you?"

"No, sir; I know neither their names nor their condition, nor, had I
wished it, could I have made inquiries, for I know not whither they
were taken."

"I sent round early this morning," the Prince said, "and heard that
they were as well as might be expected after the adventure they went
through. And now tell me about yourself, and what you have been
doing. 'Tis one of the saddest things to me, since I returned to
England, that so many good men who fought by my side have been made
beggars in the King's service, and that I could do naught for them.
'Tis a grievous business, and yet I see not how it is to be mended.
The hardest thing is, that those who did most for the King's service
are those who have suffered most deeply. None of those who were
driven to sell their estates at a fraction of their value, in order
to raise money for the King's treasury or to put men into the field,
have received any redress. It would need a vast sum to buy back all
their lands, and Parliament would not vote money for that purpose;
nor would it be fair to turn men out of the estates that they bought
and paid for. Do you not think so?" he asked suddenly, seeing, by the
lad's face, that he was not in agreement with him.

"No, sir; it does not seem to me that it would be unfair. These men
bought the lands for, as you say, but a fraction of their value; they
did so in the belief that Parliament would triumph, and their
purchase was but a speculation grounded on that belief. They have had
the enjoyment of the estates for years, and have drawn from them an
income which has, by this time, brought them in a sum much exceeding
that which they have adventured, and it does not seem to me that
there would be any hardship whatever were they now called upon to
restore them to their owners. 'Tis as when a man risks his money in a
venture at sea. If all goes as he hopes he will make a great profit
on his money. If the ship is cast away or taken by pirates, it is
unfortunate, but he has no reason to curse his ill-luck if the ship
had already made several voyages which have more than recouped the
money he ventured."

"Well and stoutly argued!" the Prince said approvingly. "But you must
remember, young sir, that the King, on his return, was by no means
strongly seated on the throne. There was the Army most evilly
affected towards him; there were the Puritans, who lamented the upset
of the work they or their fathers had done. All those men who had
purchased the estates of the Royalists had families and friends, and,
had these estates been restored to their rightful owners, there might
have been an outbreak that would have shaken the throne again. Many
would have refused to give up possession, save to force; and where
was the force to come from? Even had the King had troops willing to
carry out such a measure, they might have been met by force, and had
blood once been shed, none can say how the trouble might have spread,
or what might have been the end of it. And now, lad, come to your own
fortunes."

Cyril briefly related the story of his life since his return to
London, stating his father's plan that he should some day take
foreign service.

"You have shown that you have a stout heart, young sir, as well as a
brave one, and have done well, indeed, in turning your mind to earn
your living by such talents as you have, rather than in wasting your
time in vain hopes and in ceaseless importunities for justice. It may
be that you have acted wisely in thinking of taking service on the
Continent, seeing that we have no Army; and when the time comes, I
will further your wishes to the utmost of my power. But in the
meantime there is opportunity for service at home, and I will gladly
appoint you as a Volunteer in my own ship. There are many gentlemen
going with me in that capacity, and it would be of advantage to you,
if, when I write to some foreign prince on your behalf, I can say
that you have fought under my eye."

"Thank you greatly, Prince. I have been wishing, above all things,
that I could join the Fleet, and it would be, indeed, an honour to
begin my career under the Prince of whom I heard so often from my
father."

Prince Rupert looked at his watch.

"The King will be in the Mall now," he said. "I will take you across
and present you to him. It is useful to have the _entree_ at Court,
though perhaps the less you avail yourself of it the better."

So saying, he rose, put on his hat, and, throwing his cloak over his
shoulder, went across to the Mall, asking questions of Cyril as he
went, and extracting from him a sketch of the adventure of his being
kidnapped and taken to Holland.

Presently they arrived at the spot where the King, with three or four
nobles and gentlemen, had been playing. Charles was in a good humour,
for he had just won a match with the Earl of Rochester.

"Well, my grave cousin," he said merrily, "what brings you out of
your office so early? No fresh demands for money, I hope?"

"Not at present. And indeed, it is not to you that I should come on
such a quest, but to the Duke of York."

"And he would come to me," said the King; "so it is the same thing."

"I have come across to present to your Majesty a very gallant young
gentleman, who yesterday evening, at the risk of his life, saved the
three daughters of the Earl of Wisbech from being burned at the fire
in the Savoy, where his Lordship's mansion was among those that were
destroyed. I beg to present to your Majesty Sir Cyril Shenstone, the
son of the late Sir Aubrey Shenstone, a most gallant gentleman, who
rode under my banner in many a stern fight in the service of your
royal father."

"I knew him well," the King said graciously, "but had not heard of
his death. I am glad to hear that his son inherits his bravery. I
have often regretted deeply that it was out of my power to requite,
in any way, the services Sir Aubrey rendered, and the sacrifices he
made for our House."

His brow clouded a little, and he looked appealingly at Prince
Rupert.

"Sir Cyril Shenstone has no more intention of asking for favours than
I have, Charles," the latter said. "He is going to accompany me as a
Volunteer against the Dutch, and if the war lasts I shall ask for a
better appointment for him."

"That he shall have," the King said warmly. "None have a better claim
to commissions in the Navy and Army than sons of gentlemen who fought
and suffered in the cause of our royal father. My Lords," he said to
the little group of gentlemen, who had been standing a few paces away
while this conversation had been going on, "I would have you know Sir
Cyril Shenstone, the son of a faithful adherent of my father, and
who, yesterday evening, saved the lives of the three daughters of My
Lord of Wisbech in the fire at the Savoy. He is going as a Volunteer
with my cousin Rupert when he sails against the Dutch."

The gentlemen all returned Cyril's salute courteously.

"He will be fortunate in beginning his career under the eyes of so
brave a Prince," the Earl of Rochester said, bowing to Prince Rupert.

"It would be well if you all," the latter replied bluntly, "were to
ship in the Fleet for a few months instead of wasting your time in
empty pleasures."

The Earl smiled. Prince Rupert's extreme disapproval of the life at
Court was well known.

"We cannot all be Bayards, Prince, and most of us would, methinks, be
too sick at sea to be of much assistance, were we to go. But if the
Dutchmen come here, which is not likely--for I doubt not, Prince,
that you will soon send them flying back to their own ports--we shall
all be glad to do our best to meet them when they land."

The Prince made no reply, but, turning to the King, said,--

"We will not detain you longer from your game, Cousin Charles. I have
plenty to do, with all the complaints as to the state of the ships,
and the lack of stores and necessaries."

"Remember, I shall be glad to see you at my _levees_, Sir Cyril,"
the King said, holding out his hand. "Do not wait for the Prince to
bring you, for if you do you will wait long."

Cyril doffed his hat, raised the King's hand to his lips, then, with
a deep bow and an expression of thanks, followed Prince Rupert, who
was already striding away.

"You might have been better introduced," the Prince said when he
overtook him. "Still it is better to be badly introduced than to have
no introduction at all. I am too old for the flippancies of the
Court. You had better show yourself there sometimes; you will make
friends that may be useful. By the way, I have not your address, and
it may be a fortnight or more before the _Henrietta_ is ready to
take her crew on board." He took out his tablet and wrote down the
address. "Come and see me if there is anything you want to ask me. Do
not let the clerks keep you out with the pretence that I am busy, but
send up your name to me, and tell them that I have ordered it shall
be taken up, however I may be engaged."

Having no occasion for haste, Cyril walked back to the City after
leaving Prince Rupert. A great change had taken place in his fortunes
in the last twenty-four hours. Then he had no prospects save
continuing his work in the City for another two years, and even after
that time he foresaw grave difficulties in the way of his obtaining a
commission in a foreign army; for Sir John Parton, even if ready to
carry out the promise he had formerly made him, might not have
sufficient influence to do so. Now he was to embark in Prince
Rupert's own ship. He would be the companion of many other gentlemen
going out as Volunteers, and, at a bound, spring from the position of
a writer in the City to that occupied by his father before he became
involved in the trouble between King and Parliament. He was already
admitted to Court, and Prince Rupert himself had promised to push his
fortunes abroad.

And yet he felt less elated than he would have expected from his
sudden change. The question of money was the cloud that dulled the
brightness of his prospects. As a Volunteer he would receive no pay,
and yet he must make a fair show among the young noblemen and
gentlemen who would be his companions. Doubtless they would be
victualled on board, but he would have to dress well and probably pay
a share in the expenses that would be incurred for wine and other
things on board. Had it not been for the future he would have been
inclined to regret that he had not refused the tempting offer; but
the advantages to be gained by Prince Rupert's patronage were so
large that he felt no sacrifice would be too great to that end--even
that of accepting the assistance that Captain Dave had more than once
hinted he should give him. It was just the dinner-hour when he
arrived home.

"Well, Cyril, I see by your face that the Prince has said nothing in
the direction of your wishes," Captain Dave said, as he entered.

"Then my face is a false witness, Captain Dave, for Prince Rupert has
appointed me a Volunteer on board his own ship."

"I am glad, indeed, lad, heartily glad, though your going will be a
heavy loss to us all. But why were you looking so grave over it?"

"I have been wondering whether I have acted wisely in accepting it,"
Cyril said. "I am very happy here, I am earning my living, I have no
cares of any sort, and I feel that it is a very serious matter to
make a change. The Prince has a number of noblemen and gentlemen
going with him as Volunteers, and I feel that I shall be out of my
element in such company. At the same time I have every reason to be
thankful, for Prince Rupert has promised that he will, after the war
is over, give me introductions which will procure me a commission
abroad."

"Well, then, it seems to me that things could not look better,"
Captain Dave said heartily. "When do you go on board?"

"The Prince says it may be another fortnight; so that I shall have
time to make my preparations, and warn the citizens I work for, that
I am going to leave them."

"I should say the sooner the better, lad. You will have to get your
outfit and other matters seen to. Moreover, now that you have been
taken under Prince Rupert's protection, and have become, as it were,
an officer on his ship--for gentlemen Volunteers, although they have
no duties in regard to working the ship, are yet officers--it is
hardly seemly that you should be making up the accounts of bakers and
butchers, ironmongers, and ship's storekeepers."

"The work is honest, and I am in no way ashamed of it," Cyril said;
"but as I have many things to see about, I suppose I had better give
them notice at once. Prince Rupert presented me to the King to-day,
and His Majesty requested me to attend at Court, which I should be
