getting fullish.) I was a-selling oranges off of my barrow--for I ain't
a burglar by trade, though you 'ave used the name so free--an' there was
a lady bought three 'a'porth off me. An' while she was a-pickin' of them
out--very careful indeed, and I'm always glad when them sort gets a few
over-ripe ones--there was two other ladies talkin' over the fence. An'
one on 'em said to the other on 'em just like this--

"'I've told both gells to come, and they can doss in with M'ria and
Jane, 'cause their boss and his missis is miles away and the kids too.
So they can just lock up the 'ouse and leave the gas a-burning, so's
no one won't know, and get back bright an' early by 'leven o'clock. And
we'll make a night of it, Mrs Prosser, so we will. I'm just a-going
to run out to pop the letter in the post." And then the lady what had
chosen the three ha'porth so careful, she said: "Lor, Mrs Wigson, I
wonder at you, and your hands all over suds. This good gentleman'll slip
it into the post for yer, I'll be bound, seeing I'm a customer of his."
So they give me the letter, and of course I read the direction what was
written on it afore I shoved it into the post. And then when I'd sold
my barrowful, I was a-goin' 'ome with the chink in my pocket, and I'm
blowed if some bloomin' thievin' beggar didn't nick the lot whilst I was
just a-wettin' of my whistle, for callin' of oranges is dry work. Nicked
the bloomin' lot 'e did--and me with not a farden to take 'ome to my
brother and his missus.'

'How awful!' said Anthea, with much sympathy.

'Horful indeed, miss, I believe yer,' the burglar rejoined, with deep
feeling. 'You don't know her temper when she's roused. An' I'm sure I
'ope you never may, neither. And I'd 'ad all my oranges off of 'em.
So it came back to me what was wrote on the ongverlope, and I says to
myself, "Why not, seein' as I've been done myself, and if they keeps two
slaveys there must be some pickings?" An' so 'ere I am. But them cats,
they've brought me back to the ways of honestness. Never no more.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'these cats are very valuable--very indeed. And
we will give them all to you, if only you will take them away.'

'I see they're a breedy lot,' replied the burglar. 'But I don't want no
bother with the coppers. Did you come by them honest now? Straight?'

'They are all our very own,' said Anthea, 'we wanted them, but the
confidement--'

'Consignment,' whispered Cyril, 'was larger than we wanted, and they're
an awful bother. If you got your barrow, and some sacks or baskets, your
brother's missus would be awfully pleased. My father says Persian cats
are worth pounds and pounds each.'

'Well,' said the burglar--and he was certainly moved by her remarks--'I
see you're in a hole--and I don't mind lending a helping 'and. I don't
ask 'ow you come by them. But I've got a pal--'e's a mark on cats. I'll
fetch him along, and if he thinks they'd fetch anything above their
skins I don't mind doin' you a kindness.'

'You won't go away and never come back,' said Jane, 'because I don't
think I COULD bear that.'

The burglar, quite touched by her emotion, swore sentimentally that,
alive or dead, he would come back.

Then he went, and Cyril and Robert sent the girls to bed and sat up to
wait for his return. It soon seemed absurd to await him in a state
of wakefulness, but his stealthy tap on the window awoke them readily
enough. For he did return, with the pal and the barrow and the sacks.
The pal approved of the cats, now dormant in Persian repletion, and
they were bundled into the sacks, and taken away on the barrow--mewing,
indeed, but with mews too sleepy to attract public attention.

'I'm a fence--that's what I am,' said the burglar gloomily. 'I never
thought I'd come down to this, and all acause er my kind 'eart.'

Cyril knew that a fence is a receiver of stolen goods, and he replied
briskly--

'I give you my sacred the cats aren't stolen. What do you make the
time?'

'I ain't got the time on me,' said the pal--'but it was just about
chucking-out time as I come by the "Bull and Gate". I shouldn't wonder
if it was nigh upon one now.'

When the cats had been removed, and the boys and the burglar had parted
with warm expressions of friendship, there remained only the cow.

'She must stay all night,' said Robert. 'Cook'll have a fit when she
sees her.'

'All night?' said Cyril. 'Why--it's tomorrow morning if it's one. We can
have another wish!'

So the carpet was urged, in a hastily written note, to remove the cow to
wherever she belonged, and to return to its proper place on the nursery
floor. But the cow could not be got to move on to the carpet. So Robert
got the clothes line out of the back kitchen, and tied one end very
firmly to the cow's horns, and the other end to a bunched-up corner of
the carpet, and said 'Fire away.'

And the carpet and cow vanished together, and the boys went to bed,
tired out and only too thankful that the evening at last was over.

Next morning the carpet lay calmly in its place, but one corner was very
badly torn. It was the corner that the cow had been tied on to.



CHAPTER 9. THE BURGLAR'S BRIDE


The morning after the adventure of the Persian cats, the musk-rats, the
common cow, and the uncommon burglar, all the children slept till it was
ten o'clock; and then it was only Cyril who woke; but he attended to
the others, so that by half past ten every one was ready to help to get
breakfast. It was shivery cold, and there was but little in the house
that was really worth eating.

Robert had arranged a thoughtful little surprise for the absent
servants. He had made a neat and delightful booby trap over the kitchen
door, and as soon as they heard the front door click open and knew the
servants had come back, all four children hid in the cupboard under
the stairs and listened with delight to the entrance--the tumble, the
splash, the scuffle, and the remarks of the servants. They heard the
cook say it was a judgement on them for leaving the place to itself;
she seemed to think that a booby trap was a kind of plant that was quite
likely to grow, all by itself, in a dwelling that was left shut up. But
the housemaid, more acute, judged that someone must have been in the
house--a view confirmed by the sight of the breakfast things on the
nursery table.

The cupboard under the stairs was very tight and paraffiny, however, and
a silent struggle for a place on top ended in the door bursting open
and discharging Jane, who rolled like a football to the feet of the
servants.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, when the cook's hysterics had become quieter,
and the housemaid had time to say what she thought of them, 'don't you
begin jawing us. We aren't going to stand it. We know too much. You'll
please make an extra special treacle roley for dinner, and we'll have a
tinned tongue.'

'I daresay,' said the housemaid, indignant, still in her outdoor things
and with her hat very much on one side. 'Don't you come a-threatening
me, Master Cyril, because I won't stand it, so I tell you. You tell
your ma about us being out? Much I care! She'll be sorry for me when she
hears about my dear great-aunt by marriage as brought me up from a child
and was a mother to me. She sent for me, she did, she wasn't expected
to last the night, from the spasms going to her legs--and cook was that
kind and careful she couldn't let me go alone, so--'

'Don't,' said Anthea, in real distress. 'You know where liars go to,
Eliza--at least if you don't--'

'Liars indeed!' said Eliza, 'I won't demean myself talking to you.'

'How's Mrs Wigson?' said Robert, 'and DID you keep it up last night?'

The mouth of the housemaid fell open.

'Did you doss with Maria or Emily?' asked Cyril.

'How did Mrs Prosser enjoy herself?' asked Jane.

'Forbear,' said Cyril, 'they've had enough. Whether we tell or not
depends on your later life,' he went on, addressing the servants. 'If
you are decent to us we'll be decent to you. You'd better make that
treacle roley--and if I were you, Eliza, I'd do a little housework and
cleaning, just for a change.'

The servants gave in once and for all.

'There's nothing like firmness,' Cyril went on, when the breakfast
things were cleared away and the children were alone in the nursery.
'People are always talking of difficulties with servants. It's quite
simple, when you know the way. We can do what we like now and they won't
peach. I think we've broken THEIR proud spirit. Let's go somewhere by
carpet.'

'I wouldn't if I were you,' said the Phoenix, yawning, as it swooped
down from its roost on the curtain pole. 'I've given you one or two
hints, but now concealment is at an end, and I see I must speak out.'

It perched on the back of a chair and swayed to and fro, like a parrot
on a swing.

'What's the matter now?' said Anthea. She was not quite so gentle as
usual, because she was still weary from the excitement of last night's
cats. 'I'm tired of things happening. I shan't go anywhere on the
carpet. I'm going to darn my stockings.'

'Darn!' said the Phoenix, 'darn! From those young lips these strange
expressions--'

'Mend, then,' said Anthea, 'with a needle and wool.'

The Phoenix opened and shut its wings thoughtfully.

'Your stockings,' it said, 'are much less important than they now appear
to you. But the carpet--look at the bare worn patches, look at the great
rent at yonder corner. The carpet has been your faithful friend--your
willing servant. How have you requited its devoted service?'

'Dear Phoenix,' Anthea urged, 'don't talk in that horrid lecturing tone.
You make me feel as if I'd done something wrong. And really it is a
wishing carpet, and we haven't done anything else to it--only wishes.'

'Only wishes,' repeated the Phoenix, ruffling its neck feathers angrily,
'and what sort of wishes? Wishing people to be in a good temper, for
instance. What carpet did you ever hear of that had such a wish asked
of it? But this noble fabric, on which you trample so recklessly' (every
one removed its boots from the carpet and stood on the linoleum), 'this
carpet never flinched. It did what you asked, but the wear and tear must
have been awful. And then last night--I don't blame you about the cats
and the rats, for those were its own choice; but what carpet could stand
a heavy cow hanging on to it at one corner?'

'I should think the cats and rats were worse,' said Robert, 'look at all
their claws.'

'Yes,' said the bird, 'eleven thousand nine hundred and forty of them--I
daresay you noticed? I should be surprised if these had not left their
mark.'

'Good gracious,' said Jane, sitting down suddenly on the floor, and
patting the edge of the carpet softly; 'do you mean it's WEARING OUT?'

'Its life with you has not been a luxurious one,' said the Phoenix.

'French mud twice. Sand of sunny shores twice. Soaking in southern seas
once. India once. Goodness knows where in Persia once. Musk-rat-land
once. And once, wherever the cow came from. Hold your carpet up to the
light, and with cautious tenderness, if YOU please.'

With cautious tenderness the boys held the carpet up to the light; the
girls looked, and a shiver of regret ran through them as they saw how
those eleven thoousand nine hundred and forty claws had run through the
carpet. It was full of little holes: there were some large ones, and
more than one thin place. At one corner a strip of it was torn, and hung
forlornly.

'We must mend it,' said Anthea; 'never mind about my stockings. I can
sew them up in lumps with sewing cotton if there's no time to do them
properly. I know it's awful and no girl would who respected herself,
and all that; but the poor dear carpet's more important than my silly
stockings. Let's go out now this very minute.'

So out they all went, and bought wool to mend the carpet; but there
is no shop in Camden Town where you can buy wishing-wool, no, nor in
Kentish Town either. However, ordinary Scotch heather-mixture fingering
seemed good enough, and this they bought, and all that day Jane and
Anthea darned and darned and darned. The boys went out for a walk in
the afternoon, and the gentle Phoenix paced up and down the table--for
exercise, as it said--and talked to the industrious girls about their
carpet.

'It is not an ordinary, ignorant, innocent carpet from Kidderminster,'
it said, 'it is a carpet with a past--a Persian past. Do you know that
in happier years, when that carpet was the property of caliphs, viziers,
kings, and sultans, it never lay on a floor?'

'I thought the floor was the proper home of a carpet,' Jane interrupted.

'Not of a MAGIC carpet,' said the Phoenix; 'why, if it had been allowed
to lie about on floors there wouldn't be much of it left now. No,
indeed! It has lived in chests of cedarwood, inlaid with pearl and
ivory, wrapped in priceless tissues of cloth of gold, embroidered with
gems of fabulous value. It has reposed in the sandal-wood caskets of
princesses, and in the rose-attar-scented treasure-houses of kings.
Never, never, had any one degraded it by walking on it--except in the
way of business, when wishes were required, and then they always took
their shoes off. And YOU--'

'Oh, DON'T!' said Jane, very near tears. 'You know you'd never have been
hatched at all if it hadn't been for mother wanting a carpet for us to
walk on.'

'You needn't have walked so much or so hard!' said the bird, 'but
come, dry that crystal tear, and I will relate to you the story of the
Princess Zulieka, the Prince of Asia, and the magic carpet.'

'Relate away,' said Anthea--'I mean, please do.'

'The Princess Zulieka, fairest of royal ladies,' began the bird, 'had in
her cradle been the subject of several enchantments. Her grandmother had
been in her day--'

But what in her day Zulieka's grandmother had been was destined never to
be revealed, for Cyril and Robert suddenly burst into the room, and on
each brow were the traces of deep emotion. On Cyril's pale brow stood
beads of agitation and perspiration, and on the scarlet brow of Robert
was a large black smear.

'What ails ye both?' asked the Phoenix, and it added tartly that
story-telling was quite impossible if people would come interrupting
like that.

'Oh, do shut up, for any sake!' said Cyril, sinking into a chair.

Robert smoothed the ruffled golden feathers, adding kindly--

'Squirrel doesn't mean to be a beast. It's only that the MOST AWFUL
thing has happened, and stories don't seem to matter so much. Don't be
cross. You won't be when you've heard what's happened.'

'Well, what HAS happened?' said the bird, still rather crossly; and
Anthea and Jane paused with long needles poised in air, and long
needlefuls of Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool drooping from them.

'The most awful thing you can possibly think of,' said Cyril. 'That nice
chap--our own burglar--the police have got him, on suspicion of stolen
cats. That's what his brother's missis told me.'

'Oh, begin at the beginning!' cried Anthea impatiently.

'Well, then, we went out, and down by where the undertaker's is, with
the china flowers in the window--you know. There was a crowd, and of
course we went to have a squint. And it was two bobbies and our burglar
between them, and he was being dragged along; and he said, "I tell you
them cats was GIVE me. I got 'em in exchange for me milking a cow in a
basement parlour up Camden Town way."

'And the people laughed. Beasts! And then one of the policemen said
perhaps he could give the name and address of the cow, and he said, no,
he couldn't; but he could take them there if they'd only leave go of his
coat collar, and give him a chance to get his breath. And the policeman
said he could tell all that to the magistrate in the morning. He didn't
see us, and so we came away.'

'Oh, Cyril, how COULD you?' said Anthea.

'Don't be a pudding-head,' Cyril advised. 'A fat lot of good it would
have done if we'd let him see us. No one would have believed a word we
said. They'd have thought we were kidding. We did better than let him
see us. We asked a boy where he lived and he told us, and we went there,
and it's a little greengrocer's shop, and we bought some Brazil nuts.
Here they are.' The girls waved away the Brazil nuts with loathing and
contempt.

'Well, we had to buy SOMETHING, and while we were making up our minds
what to buy we heard his brother's missis talking. She said when he came
home with all them miaoulers she thought there was more in it than met
the eye. But he WOULD go out this morning with the two likeliest of
them, one under each arm. She said he sent her out to buy blue ribbon to
put round their beastly necks, and she said if he got three months' hard
it was her dying word that he'd got the blue ribbon to thank for it;
that, and his own silly thieving ways, taking cats that anybody would
know he couldn't have come by in the way of business, instead of things
that wouldn't have been missed, which Lord knows there are plenty such,
and--'

'Oh, STOP!' cried Jane. And indeed it was time, for Cyril seemed like a
clock that had been wound up, and could not help going on. 'Where is he
now?'

'At the police-station,' said Robert, for Cyril was out of breath. 'The
boy told us they'd put him in the cells, and would bring him up
before the Beak in the morning. I thought it was a jolly lark last
night--getting him to take the cats--but now--'

'The end of a lark,' said the Phoenix, 'is the Beak.'

'Let's go to him,' cried both the girls jumping up. 'Let's go and tell
the truth. They MUST believe us.'

'They CAN'T,' said Cyril. 'Just think! If any one came to you with such
a tale, you couldn't believe it, however much you tried. We should only
mix things up worse for him.'

'There must be something we could do,' said Jane, sniffing very
much--'my own dear pet burglar! I can't bear it. And he was so nice,
the way he talked about his father, and how he was going to be so extra
honest. Dear Phoenix, you MUST be able to help us. You're so good and
kind and pretty and clever. Do, do tell us what to do.'

The Phoenix rubbed its beak thoughtfully with its claw.

'You might rescue him,' it said, 'and conceal him here, till the
law-supporters had forgotten about him.'

'That would be ages and ages,' said Cyril, 'and we couldn't conceal him
here. Father might come home at any moment, and if he found the burglar
here HE wouldn't believe the true truth any more than the police would.
That's the worst of the truth. Nobody ever believes it. Couldn't we take
him somewhere else?'

Jane clapped her hands.

'The sunny southern shore!' she cried, 'where the cook is being queen.
He and she would be company for each other!'

And really the idea did not seem bad, if only he would consent to go.

So, all talking at once, the children arranged to wait till evening, and
then to seek the dear burglar in his lonely cell.

Meantime Jane and Anthea darned away as hard as they could, to make the
carpet as strong as possible. For all felt how terrible it would be if
the precious burglar, while being carried to the sunny southern shore,
were to tumble through a hole in the carpet, and be lost for ever in the
sunny southern sea.

The servants were tired after Mrs Wigson's party, so every one went to
bed early, and when the Phoenix reported that both servants were snoring
in a heartfelt and candid manner, the children got up--they had never
undressed; just putting their nightgowns on over their things had been
enough to deceive Eliza when she came to turn out the gas. So they were
ready for anything, and they stood on the carpet and said--

'I wish we were in our burglar's lonely cell.' and instantly they were.
