time he had seen the same things, and they always made him feel that he
wished he had something to do.

Suddenly he turned away from the gate and went into the house to speak
to Lazarus.  He found him in his dingy closet of a room on the fourth
floor at the back of the house.

"I am going for a walk," he announced to him.  "Please tell my father
if he asks for me.  He is busy, and I must not disturb him."

Lazarus was patching an old coat as he often patched things--even shoes
sometimes.  When Marco spoke, he stood up at once to answer him.  He
was very obstinate and particular about certain forms of manner.
Nothing would have obliged him to remain seated when Loristan or Marco
was near him.  Marco thought it was because he had been so strictly
trained as a soldier.  He knew that his father had had great trouble to
make him lay aside his habit of saluting when they spoke to him.

"Perhaps," Marco had heard Loristan say to him almost severely, once
when he had forgotten himself and had stood at salute while his master
passed through a broken-down iron gate before an equally
broken-down-looking lodging-house--"perhaps you can force yourself to
remember when I tell you that it is not safe--IT IS NOT SAFE!  You put
us in danger!"

It was evident that this helped the good fellow to control himself.
Marco remembered that at the time he had actually turned pale, and had
struck his forehead and poured forth a torrent of Samavian dialect in
penitence and terror.  But, though he no longer saluted them in public,
he omitted no other form of reverence and ceremony, and the boy had
become accustomed to being treated as if he were anything but the
shabby lad whose very coat was patched by the old soldier who stood "at
attention" before him.

"Yes, sir," Lazarus answered.  "Where was it your wish to go?"

Marco knitted his black brows a little in trying to recall distinct
memories of the last time he had been in London.

"I have been to so many places, and have seen so many things since I
was here before, that I must begin to learn again about the streets and
buildings I do not quite remember."

"Yes, sir," said Lazarus.  "There HAVE been so many.  I also forget.
You were but eight years old when you were last here."

"I think I will go and find the royal palace, and then I will walk
about and learn the names of the streets," Marco said.

"Yes, sir," answered Lazarus, and this time he made his military salute.

Marco lifted his right hand in recognition, as if he had been a young
officer.  Most boys might have looked awkward or theatrical in making
the gesture, but he made it with naturalness and ease, because he had
been familiar with the form since his babyhood. He had seen officers
returning the salutes of their men when they encountered each other by
chance in the streets, he had seen princes passing sentries on their
way to their carriages, more august personages raising the quiet,
recognizing hand to their helmets as they rode through applauding
crowds.  He had seen many royal persons and many royal pageants, but
always only as an ill-clad boy standing on the edge of the crowd of
common people. An energetic lad, however poor, cannot spend his days in
going from one country to another without, by mere every-day chance,
becoming familiar with the outer life of royalties and courts. Marco
had stood in continental thoroughfares when visiting emperors rode by
with glittering soldiery before and behind them, and a populace
shouting courteous welcomes.  He knew where in various great capitals
the sentries stood before kingly or princely palaces.  He had seen
certain royal faces often enough to know them well, and to be ready to
make his salute when particular quiet and unattended carriages passed
him by.

"It is well to know them.  It is well to observe everything and to
train one's self to remember faces and circumstances," his father had
said.  "If you were a young prince or a young man training for a
diplomatic career, you would be taught to notice and remember people
and things as you would be taught to speak your own language with
elegance.  Such observation would be your most practical accomplishment
and greatest power.  It is as practical for one man as another--for a
poor lad in a patched coat as for one whose place is to be in courts.
As you cannot be educated in the ordinary way, you must learn from
travel and the world.  You must lose nothing--forget nothing."

It was his father who had taught him everything, and he had learned a
great deal.  Loristan had the power of making all things interesting to
fascination.  To Marco it seemed that he knew everything in the world.
They were not rich enough to buy many books, but Loristan knew the
treasures of all great cities, the resources of the smallest towns.
Together he and his boy walked through the endless galleries filled
with the wonders of the world, the pictures before which through
centuries an unbroken procession of almost worshiping eyes had passed
uplifted.  Because his father made the pictures seem the glowing,
burning work of still-living men whom the centuries could not turn to
dust, because he could tell the stories of their living and laboring to
triumph, stories of what they felt and suffered and were, the boy
became as familiar with the old masters--Italian, German, French,
Dutch, English, Spanish--as he was with most of the countries they had
lived in.  They were not merely old masters to him, but men who were
great, men who seemed to him to have wielded beautiful swords and held
high, splendid lights.  His father could not go often with him, but he
always took him for the first time to the galleries, museums,
libraries, and historical places which were richest in treasures of
art, beauty, or story.  Then, having seen them once through his eyes,
Marco went again and again alone, and so grew intimate with the wonders
of the world.  He knew that he was gratifying a wish of his father's
when he tried to train himself to observe all things and forget
nothing.  These palaces of marvels were his school-rooms, and his
strange but rich education was the most interesting part of his life.
In time, he knew exactly the places where the great Rembrandts,
Vandykes, Rubens, Raphaels, Tintorettos, or Frans Hals hung; he knew
whether this masterpiece or that was in Vienna, in Paris, in Venice, or
Munich, or Rome. He knew stories of splendid crown jewels, of old
armor, of ancient crafts, and of Roman relics dug up from beneath the
foundations of old German cities.  Any boy wandering to amuse himself
through museums and palaces on "free days" could see what he saw, but
boys living fuller and less lonely lives would have been less likely to
concentrate their entire minds on what they looked at, and also less
likely to store away facts with the determination to be able to recall
at any moment the mental shelf on which they were laid.  Having no
playmates and nothing to play with, he began when he was a very little
fellow to make a sort of game out of his rambles through
picture-galleries, and the places which, whether they called themselves
museums or not, were storehouses or relics of antiquity.  There were
always the blessed "free days," when he could climb any marble steps,
and enter any great portal without paying an entrance fee.  Once
inside, there were plenty of plainly and poorly dressed people to be
seen, but there were not often boys as young as himself who were not
attended by older companions.  Quiet and orderly as he was, he often
found himself stared at.  The game he had created for himself was as
simple as it was absorbing.  It was to try how much he could remember
and clearly describe to his father when they sat together at night and
talked of what he had seen.  These night talks filled his happiest
hours.  He never felt lonely then, and when his father sat and watched
him with a certain curious and deep attention in his dark, reflective
eyes, the boy was utterly comforted and content.  Sometimes he brought
back rough and crude sketches of objects he wished to ask questions
about, and Loristan could always relate to him the full, rich story of
the thing he wanted to know.  They were stories made so splendid and
full of color in the telling that Marco could not forget them.



III

THE LEGEND OF THE LOST PRINCE

As he walked through the streets, he was thinking of one of these
stories.  It was one he had heard first when he was very young, and it
had so seized upon his imagination that he had asked often for it.  It
was, indeed, a part of the long-past history of Samavia, and he had
loved it for that reason.  Lazarus had often told it to him, sometimes
adding much detail, but he had always liked best his father's version,
which seemed a thrilling and living thing.  On their journey from
Russia, during an hour when they had been forced to wait in a cold
wayside station and had found the time long, Loristan had discussed it
with him.  He always found some such way of making hard and comfortless
hours easier to live through.

"Fine, big lad--for a foreigner," Marco heard a man say to his
companion as he passed them this morning.  "Looks like a Pole or a
Russian."

It was this which had led his thoughts back to the story of the Lost
Prince.  He knew that most of the people who looked at him and called
him a "foreigner" had not even heard of Samavia. Those who chanced to
recall its existence knew of it only as a small fierce country, so
placed upon the map that the larger countries which were its neighbors
felt they must control and keep it in order, and therefore made
incursions into it, and fought its people and each other for
possession.  But it had not been always so.  It was an old, old
country, and hundreds of years ago it had been as celebrated for its
peaceful happiness and wealth as for its beauty.  It was often said
that it was one of the most beautiful places in the world.  A favorite
Samavian legend was that it had been the site of the Garden of Eden.
In those past centuries, its people had been of such great stature,
physical beauty, and strength, that they had been like a race of noble
giants.  They were in those days a pastoral people, whose rich crops
and splendid flocks and herds were the envy of less fertile countries.
Among the shepherds and herdsmen there were poets who sang their own
songs when they piped among their sheep upon the mountain sides and in
the flower-thick valleys.  Their songs had been about patriotism and
bravery, and faithfulness to their chieftains and their country.  The
simple courtesy of the poorest peasant was as stately as the manner of
a noble.  But that, as Loristan had said with a tired smile, had been
before they had had time to outlive and forget the Garden of Eden.
Five hundred years ago, there had succeeded to the throne a king who
was bad and weak.  His father had lived to be ninety years old, and his
son had grown tired of waiting in Samavia for his crown. He had gone
out into the world, and visited other countries and their courts.  When
he returned and became king, he lived as no Samavian king had lived
before.  He was an extravagant, vicious man of furious temper and
bitter jealousies.  He was jealous of the larger courts and countries
he had seen, and tried to introduce their customs and their ambitions.
He ended by introducing their worst faults and vices.  There arose
political quarrels and savage new factions.  Money was squandered until
poverty began for the first time to stare the country in the face.  The
big Samavians, after their first stupefaction, broke forth into furious
rage.  There were mobs and riots, then bloody battles.  Since it was
the king who had worked this wrong, they would have none of him.  They
would depose him and make his son king in his place.  It was at this
part of the story that Marco was always most deeply interested.  The
young prince was totally unlike his father.  He was a true royal
Samavian.  He was bigger and stronger for his age than any man in the
country, and he was as handsome as a young Viking god.  More than this,
he had a lion's heart, and before he was sixteen, the shepherds and
herdsmen had already begun to make songs about his young valor, and his
kingly courtesy, and generous kindness.  Not only the shepherds and
herdsmen sang them, but the people in the streets. The king, his
father, had always been jealous of him, even when he was only a
beautiful, stately child whom the people roared with joy to see as he
rode through the streets.  When he returned from his journeyings and
found him a splendid youth, he detested him.  When the people began to
clamor and demand that he himself should abdicate, he became insane
with rage, and committed such cruelties that the people ran mad
themselves.  One day they stormed the palace, killed and overpowered
the guards, and, rushing into the royal apartments, burst in upon the
king as he shuddered green with terror and fury in his private room.
He was king no more, and must leave the country, they vowed, as they
closed round him with bared weapons and shook them in his face. Where
was the prince?  They must see him and tell him their ultimatum.  It
was he whom they wanted for a king.  They trusted him and would obey
him.  They began to shout aloud his name, calling him in a sort of
chant in unison, "Prince Ivor--Prince Ivor--Prince Ivor!"  But no
answer came.  The people of the palace had hidden themselves, and the
place was utterly silent.

The king, despite his terror, could not help but sneer.

"Call him again," he said.  "He is afraid to come out of his hole!"

A savage fellow from the mountain fastnesses struck him on the mouth.

"He afraid!" he shouted.  "If he does not come, it is because thou hast
killed him--and thou art a dead man!"

This set them aflame with hotter burning.  They broke away, leaving
three on guard, and ran about the empty palace rooms shouting the
prince's name.  But there was no answer.  They sought him in a frenzy,
bursting open doors and flinging down every obstacle in their way.  A
page, found hidden in a closet, owned that he had seen His Royal
Highness pass through a corridor early in the morning.  He had been
softly singing to himself one of the shepherd's songs.

And in this strange way out of the history of Samavia, five hundred
years before Marco's day, the young prince had walked--singing softly
to himself the old song of Samavia's beauty and happiness.  For he was
never seen again.

In every nook and cranny, high and low, they sought for him, believing
that the king himself had made him prisoner in some secret place, or
had privately had him killed.  The fury of the people grew to frenzy.
There were new risings, and every few days the palace was attacked and
searched again.  But no trace of the prince was found.  He had vanished
as a star vanishes when it drops from its place in the sky.  During a
riot in the palace, when a last fruitless search was made, the king
himself was killed.  A powerful noble who headed one of the uprisings
made himself king in his place.  From that time, the once splendid
little kingdom was like a bone fought for by dogs.  Its pastoral peace
was forgotten.  It was torn and worried and shaken by stronger
countries.  It tore and worried itself with internal fights.  It
assassinated kings and created new ones.  No man was sure in his youth
what ruler his maturity would live under, or whether his children would
die in useless fights, or through stress of poverty and cruel, useless
laws.  There were no more shepherds and herdsmen who were poets, but on
the mountain sides and in the valleys sometimes some of the old songs
were sung. Those most beloved were songs about a Lost Prince whose name
had been Ivor.  If he had been king, he would have saved Samavia, the
verses said, and all brave hearts believed that he would still return.
In the modern cities, one of the jocular cynical sayings was, "Yes,
that will happen when Prince Ivor comes again."

In his more childish days, Marco had been bitterly troubled by the
unsolved mystery.  Where had he gone--the Lost Prince?  Had he been
killed, or had he been hidden away in a dungeon?  But he was so big and
brave, he would have broken out of any dungeon. The boy had invented
for himself a dozen endings to the story.

"Did no one ever find his sword or his cap--or hear anything or guess
anything about him ever--ever--ever?" he would say restlessly again and
again.

One winter's night, as they sat together before a small fire in a cold
room in a cold city in Austria, he had been so eager and asked so many
searching questions, that his father gave him an answer he had never
given him before, and which was a sort of ending to the story, though
not a satisfying one:

"Everybody guessed as you are guessing.  A few very old shepherds in
the mountains who like to believe ancient histories relate a story
which most people consider a kind of legend.  It is that almost a
hundred years after the prince was lost, an old shepherd told a story
his long-dead father had confided to him in secret just before he died.
The father had said that, going out in the early morning on the
mountain side, he had found in the forest what he at first thought to
be the dead body of a beautiful, boyish, young huntsman.  Some enemy
had plainly attacked him from behind and believed he had killed him.
He was, however, not quite dead, and the shepherd dragged him into a
cave where he himself often took refuge from storms with his flocks.
Since there was such riot and disorder in the city, he was afraid to
speak of what he had found; and, by the time he discovered that he was
harboring the prince, the king had already been killed, and an even
worse man had taken possession of his throne, and ruled Samavia with a
blood-stained, iron hand.  To the terrified and simple peasant the
safest thing seemed to get the wounded youth out of the country before
there was any chance of his being discovered and murdered outright, as
he would surely be.  The cave in which he was hidden was not far from
the frontier, and while he was still so weak that he was hardly
conscious of what befell him, he was smuggled across it in a cart
loaded with sheepskins, and left with some kind monks who did not know
his rank or name.  The shepherd went back to his flocks and his
mountains, and lived and died among them, always in terror of the
changing rulers and their savage battles with each other. The
mountaineers said among themselves, as the generations succeeded each
other, that the Lost Prince must have died young, because otherwise he
would have come back to his country and tried to restore its good,
bygone days."

"Yes, he would have come," Marco said.

"He would have come if he had seen that he could help his people,"
Loristan answered, as if he were not reflecting on a story which was
probably only a kind of legend.  "But he was very young, and Samavia
was in the hands of the new dynasty, and filled with his enemies.  He
could not have crossed the frontier without an army.  Still, I think he
died young."

It was of this story that Marco was thinking as he walked, and perhaps
the thoughts that filled his mind expressed themselves in his face in
some way which attracted attention.  As he was nearing Buckingham
Palace, a distinguished-looking well-dressed man with clever eyes
caught sight of him, and, after looking at him keenly, slackened his
pace as he approached him from the opposite direction.  An observer
might have thought he saw something which puzzled and surprised him.
Marco didn't see him at all, and still moved forward, thinking of the
shepherds and the prince.  The well-dressed man began to walk still
more slowly.  When he was quite close to Marco, he stopped and spoke to
him--in the Samavian language.

"What is your name?" he asked.

Marco's training from his earliest childhood had been an extraordinary
thing.  His love for his father had made it simple and natural to him,
and he had never questioned the reason for it. As he had been taught to
keep silence, he had been taught to control the expression of his face
and the sound of his voice, and, above all, never to allow himself to
look startled.  But for this he might have started at the extraordinary
sound of the Samavian words suddenly uttered in a London street by an
English gentleman.  He might even have answered the question in
Samavian himself.  But he did not.  He courteously lifted his cap and
replied in English:

"Excuse me?"

The gentleman's clever eyes scrutinized him keenly.  Then he also spoke
in English.

"Perhaps you do not understand?  I asked your name because you are very
like a Samavian I know," he said.

"I am Marco Loristan," the boy answered him.

The man looked straight into his eyes and smiled.

"That is not the name," he said.  "I beg your pardon, my boy."

He was about to go on, and had indeed taken a couple of steps away,
when he paused and turned to him again.

"You may tell your father that you are a very well-trained lad. I
wanted to find out for myself."  And he went on.

Marco felt that his heart beat a little quickly.  This was one of
several incidents which had happened during the last three years, and
made him feel that he was living among things so mysterious that their
very mystery hinted at danger.  But he himself had never before seemed
involved in them.  Why should it matter that he was well-behaved?  Then
he remembered something.  The man had not said "well-behaved," he had
