
"What shall we do with this old crone?" Beorn said. "It would never do to
risk her giving an alarm, and though she looks feeble she might be able to
get down to Porthwyn."

"We will tie her securely, Beorn; we can't hurt the poor old creature. Her
sons are no doubt out with the Welsh bands hunting for us; but they will
return here sooner or later, so that no harm will come to her."

By his orders Osgod securely bound the old woman with a rope he found in
the hut, and then leaving her they went outside and called upon the men to
close in. Eight of the goats were killed, and were then cut up and divided
among the men. After a consultation Wulf and Beorn agreed that instead of
following the valley down, where they might meet with other huts, or even a
good-sized village, they had best keep along on the hillside, just inside
the line of trees, as in that way they would come out high up on the side
of the main valley, and probably obtain a good view of the fortalice.

In single file they made their way among the trees, and in an hour the
valley that they were in opened considerably, and through the trees they
saw a large village at their feet. A quarter of a mile farther and they
stood on the side of a wide valley. There were numerous flocks and herds to
be seen grazing in it, and four or five villages could be made out; their
attention, however, was chiefly directed to the object of their journey.
Some three hundred feet below the spot where they stood a rock jutted out
from the hillside, and extended some five or six hundred feet into the
valley. Its sides were perpendicular save where it stood out from the hill.
Here a strong wall some forty feet high ran across it; two square towers
stood at the angles, but there was no gateway visible. The wall was
continued right round the top of the rock, which was crossed by two other
walls each defended by flanking towers. The castle itself stood at the
extremity of the rock, and was a strong and massive-looking building. The
men were all ordered to lie down as soon as the castle was visible between
the trees, and among these Wulf and Beorn followed by Osgod moved
cautiously, until they reached a spot whence they could obtain through the
foliage a full view of the building.

"It is a formidable place," said Beorn. "The chief who first planted
himself here knew what he was doing. Yes. I should fancy from the look of
it the castle at the end was built first, then gradually the walls were
added until the whole rock was inclosed. This bit nearest to us is
evidently an addition during the last few years. You can see that by the
colour of the stone. You see the other two walls have gateways in them
while this has none. I should say until this was built the entrance to the
castle was along the neck, but they must have got some other way now, and
so shut it up altogether. How on earth can they get in?"

"Certainly not at the sides," Wulf said, "for they are as near
perpendicular as possible. It must be at the other end of the rock, which
we can't see. It may slope a little more gradually there, and they may have
cut a zigzag road up. Suppose we climb the hill behind us, till we get
high enough to see over the trees and get a complete view of the valley.
There is no fear of our being noticed. We are a good five hundred feet
above it now, and even if anyone did see us up there they would take us for
two herdsmen. Of course we will leave our shields and weapons behind us."

On attaining a spot from which a clear view of the whole valley could be
obtained, Wulf said:

"There, Beorn, do you see the hill juts out into the plain on the right,
half a mile from the castle, and is wooded to its foot. I think if we were
to make our way down there we should be able to obtain a view of the face
of the rock below the castle without leaving the shelter of the trees."
Beorn agreed that it was worth trying, and they returned to the men,
rearmed themselves, and spoke to Osgod.

"We are going to reconnoitre, Osgod, and may be an hour away. As we shall
not leave the forest there is no danger, and even were we seen we can climb
the hill again as fast as any Welshman can follow us. Do you keep an eye on
the castle, but do not stir until we return even if you hear shouts. I have
no doubt that we shall be able to rejoin you, and it is most important that
even if they do make us out they should have no reason for supposing that
there is any force behind us." After half an hour's walking Beorn and Wulf
found themselves at the edge of the wood in the valley.

"There is the road, you see," Wulf exclaimed. "It goes straight up that
gradual slope to the bottom of the rock, then it makes two zigzags to the
edge of that point that juts out a little, whence there is a bridge thrown
across a gap to the point where there is a turret. I can't see it beyond
that. I should think they must have driven a tunnel from there right up
into the castle, for you see there are fifty feet of perpendicular rock
above that turret. In case of attack, of course, they would cut away the
bridge, and it would be next to impossible to throw another across. They
could overwhelm any force attempting it with stones from above, besides
sweeping the zigzag road below."

Beorn agreed that the place was absolutely impregnable on that side, and
that it could only be attacked from the hillside, and by carrying the walls
in succession.

"Well, there is nothing more to see," Wulf said, "so we may as well return.
You see there is a large village nestling down there just at the foot of
the rock. We could not see it from where we were before.

"Well, Osgod, have you seen anything going on in the castle?"

"No, my lord, everything has been very quiet It seems to me that there are
very few men about for such a strong place."

"No doubt most of them are out in pursuit of us, Osgod; we know that the
country was roused by the beacons, and that there must be a big force
somewhere in the hills. I only hope they wont find Oswald and Edred, or I
fear it will go hard with them. The levies fight well when they have the
housecarls with them, but by themselves and in a strange country I am
afraid they would lose heart. Now, Beorn, I am going down to the wall on
this side. We can see that there is no sentry on it, and I want to find out
if there is any other defence besides what we can see. It is very important
to know that, as we agreed that this is the side from which the attack must
be made."

Descending among the trees Wulf cautiously approached the wall. He found on
nearing it that a perpendicular cut some thirty feet wide and twenty feet
deep had been made across the rock. It stretched from the foot of one
flanking tower to the foot of the other, the wall between them being some
ten feet from its edge. Having ascertained this he returned to Beorn.
Having told him what he had seen, he sat looking at the castle.

"What are you thinking of, Wulf?" Beorn asked. "I suppose we had better
stop where we are till nightfall and then make eastward."

"I am thinking, in the first place, that it would cost a great number of
lives to take that place by assault."

"That it would," Beorn agreed. "We have seen no place of anything like
equal strength in Wales, or indeed anywhere else."

"There is no doubt about that," Wulf agreed. "If well defended it ought to
hold out for weeks, for when we have taken that wall in front of us only a
third of the work has been done. In the next place, I am thinking that
Llewellyn and the greater part of his garrison are away in the hills."

Beorn nodded.

"And that being so, it seems to me that the best plan will be to take it
ourselves."

Beorn looked at his friend to see if he were serious, but there was no
smile on Wulf's face.

"Do you really mean it, Wulf?"

"Yes I mean it, certainly. What is to prevent our taking it? There may
never be such a good opportunity again. We have not seen a dozen men on the
walls, and I don't suppose there are fifty there altogether. But even if
there are a hundred, they will have no chance with our men if we are once
among them. You see the gates through those inner walls are open, and once
over this first one the place will be all open to us."

"That is true enough, but how in the world are we to climb that wall?"

"That is what I am puzzling over, Beorn. You see there is no time to lose,
for Llewellyn and his men may be back to-night. If they find Oswald's party
this morning they will return at once, if they don't they may not be back
till the morning. But we cannot count on that, what has to be done must be
done at once."

He sat thinking a little longer. "We must cut down a couple of trees and
make a ladder, Beorn. The pine-trees grew very close together where we
passed through them a quarter of a mile before we got here, and were very
slender for their height. We have no axes or we could fell a couple of them
in a few minutes; but even if we had them, we should not dare use them, for
the chances are that the villagers are forbidden to cut down trees anywhere
near the castle, and the sound might bring people up from below to see who
was chopping. I was thinking of burning two of them down, but in this dry
weather the flames might run up them, and we should get a blaze that would
bring all the villagers up here." He beckoned to Osgod, and when he came up
told him that Beorn and he had agreed to try and take the place.

"That is good," Osgod said joyfully. "I have been thinking of it, but I did
not see how you were to climb that wall."

"We must cut down two young pine-trees, but we must not chop them down."

"It would take a long time with our knives," Osgod said doubtfully. "It is
easy enough to cut through a pole three inches thick, but when it comes to
nine or ten it is a different matter."

"Then we must cut down small ones and tie them together. Bring twenty men
at once with you, Osgod, let the rest lie quiet, the less movement there is
the better."

As soon as the men were ready Wulf led them back to the point where the
pine-trees grew, then he selected eight of the tallest and slightest. They
were about three inches through at the foot, and were, he judged, at least
an inch and a half at twenty feet from the ground. Two men were set to work
at each tree, and in less than half an hour the eight trees were on the
ground. The branches were then lopped off, and four of the stems were cut
across five-and-twenty feet from the foot. The thin ends were then placed
together so as to overlap five feet. There was no difficulty about
lashings, as thongs were cut off the bottom of the men's leather jerkins.
The joint was made stronger by a light pole fifteen feet long being firmly
lashed across the junction. Thus the two poles for the ladder forty-five
feet long were ready for use. It needed only to lash cross-pieces for
steps, and in little over an hour from the time that work was begun the
ladder was complete. From the other young trees two ladders, each
twenty-five feet long, had been constructed in the meantime, and the whole
were then raised and carried back to the place where the band was lying.

"Now, men," Wulf said, "we are going to take this castle at once. I should
wait until nightfall were it not that I fear the return of the Welsh, but
as they may come back at any time there is not a minute to be lost. Now let
each understand his work. The short ladders are to enable us to cross a cut
twenty feet deep they have made through the rock; when we get over this we
can plant the long ladder against the wall. As soon as we gain the top
every man must lie down and crawl along over those who have preceded him.
If we are seen before a few of us are on the top of the wall we shall fail,
because they will have time to give the alarm, and shut the inner gates.

"So far we have seen no one go in or out of the courts between these walls,
and have every hope that we shall find no one there. I expect they are
places where the cattle are kept in case of siege. Our great danger is in
the chance of our being noticed by men on other parts of the walls or on
the castle. However, as far as we can see their attention is entirely
directed the other way, for they are no doubt on the look-out for news from
their chief or for his return. My intention is that all shall gain the top
of the wall before a movement is made, but if an alarm is given, those who
have got to the top are at once to follow us down the staircase into the
courtyard and run at full speed to the gate. Not a moment's halt is to be
made there; we must run on to the next gate and there defend ourselves
until the rest come to our aid. They will be taken so completely by
surprise that, even if we are but four or five, we can hold the gate until
the rest come up, and each man, as soon as he gains the top of the ladder,
must run on at full speed to our aid. Cut down all with arms in their
hands, but do not hurt women or children. Tell off six men, Osgod, to carry
the ladder and place it against the wall, and to be the first to follow us.
Let the others follow in the order in which they stand in rank."

They made their way down through the trees. As soon as they reached the cut
one short ladder was lowered, and the other was handed down and placed
against the opposite side of the cut. The end of the long ladder was then
lowered, and it was swung over and the upper end placed against the wall.
Six men then ascended the short ladder, and raised the long one until it
stood on the rock at the foot of the castle-wall.

"Now, Beorn, do you mount first and I will follow you."

"You should go first," Beorn said, "but I will do as you tell me."

As soon as Beorn was half-way up Wulf began to follow him, saying to Osgod
and the men, "Keep the same distance apart. Do not let more than two be on
the ladder at once whatever happens inside, if it were to break it would be
fatal to us all." As soon as he gained the top Wulf threw himself down by
the side of Beorn, and lay there watching the men on the other walls and on
the summit of the castle. Osgod and four men had joined them when Wulf
noticed a sudden stir and heard a shout. He leapt to his feet.

"Follow quickly, but be careful of the ladder," he called to those below;
then he dashed along the wall to the top of the staircase, and closely
followed by the others ran down and on through the gate in the next wall.
Here some five or six men were asleep in its shade, while some women were
standing in front of some low huts which bordered the yard on either side.
They gazed in astonishment for a moment at the seven men who appeared so
suddenly from the outer yard, and then set up a shrill cry of alarm.
Without heeding them Wulf ran on to the next gateway. Just as he reached it
a number of men came running up from the other side. "Osgod, do you and
Alfred cover our rear while we keep these men in front at bay."

The five men held the gate without difficulty against the Welsh who first
arrived, for these, at the shout of one of their comrades that men were
climbing the wall, had run down only with their knives, and could do
nothing against the Saxon shields and long swords. Presently, others with
spears and axes ran up, but the two young thanes and their three followers
still kept them back, for in the narrow gateway they could not be attacked
by more than their own number. Amid the yells of the Welsh Wulf could hear
nothing of what was passing behind them, and he was delighted when he heard
the voice of Osgod in his ear.

"There are eight here now, Wulf; we have finished with the Welshmen in the
courtyard, so you are clear behind. Our men are coming down from the wall
fast. In five minutes we shall have the whole band here. Now let me have a
turn;" and he stepped forward and took the place of one of the Saxons who
staggered back with a javelin in his shoulder.

Every moment added to the number of the Saxons.

"Let me know when they are all up," Wulf said to one of those behind him,
as he cut down a Welshman who sprang at him with uplifted knife. The attack
was growing weaker, as their assailants saw that instead of five men they
had now to face a considerable number, and Wulf had difficulty in
restraining his men.

"Keep back!" he shouted; "we must wait until we are all up, and then drive
them headlong before us and follow them into the castle. If they have once
time to shut the doors there we shall have a troublesome task." As he spoke
he yielded his place in the front rank to one of his followers, and turned
to see how matters stood behind. "Are they all up?" he asked.

"The last man told me that there were six more to come, my lord."

"Then we need wait no longer. Now, Beorn, all is ready--charge!" and with a
rush the Saxons swept through the gate, carrying the Welsh before them and
hewing down the front ranks. In an instant the defenders turned and fled,
but the Saxons pressed hard on their heels. Some of the Welsh ran up the
staircases to the walls, and many of the Saxons would have followed them,
but at Wulf's "To the castle, to the castle, we can deal with them
afterwards!" they followed him at once. On the steps up to the gateway of
the castle a desperate struggle was going on among the Welsh themselves.

Seeing the Saxons pressing on the rear of the fugitives, those within the
castle strove to shut the door, but strove in vain, as the terror-stricken
men outside tried to force their way in. The two young thanes, with Osgod
and many of their followers, cut their way through the struggling mass and
reached the door. Those trying to shut it had already seen the hopelessness
of the endeavour, and had fled into the hall beyond, in which a number of
terrified women were wailing and shrieking. As Wulf burst in he shouted to
the Welsh, "Throw down your arms and surrender, and your lives shall be
spared" but his words were not understood, and as the Welsh never gave
quarter themselves they had no thought of quarter being offered to them.

The women ceased screaming and broke into a death chant, many of them
seizing weapons from the walls, and joining the men in a last desperate
effort to drive back the Saxons.

For a moment those who had entered had difficulty in resisting the
desperate attack, but as others poured in they advanced, and although Wulf
continued to shout, "Spare all who throw down their arms," his orders were
of no avail, for the Welsh continued to fight desperately until the last
fell under the Saxon swords, most of the women, who fought with even
greater fury than the men, sharing their fate. As soon as the struggle was
over Wulf ordered Osgod to take eight or ten men, to find the entrance to
the tunnel leading down to the road on the face of the cliff, and to guard
it against any attack from without. Then, through his interpreters, he
called to the Welshmen on the walls that their lives should be spared if
they would lay down their arms. He was answered by derisive shouts and a
shower of javelins.

"We should lose a good many men in storming those two narrow staircases,
Beorn. There are but twenty or thirty of them, but that is enough to defend
such steep approaches. Let us take twenty men up to the top of the castle,
from there they can hurl javelins down at them, and they will soon see that
resistance is useless."

They ascended the stairs, but paused at the end of the room over the hall
which had been the scene of the conflict. An aged woman, whose dress showed
her high rank, was seated on a settle; beside her was a white-headed
harper, while two little children, a boy and a girl, stood at her knee and
looked fearlessly at the intruders.

Wulf despatched one of the men down to the hall to bring up the
interpreter. As soon as he arrived Wulf doffed his helmet and stepped
forward.

"Ask who this lady is and who are these children."

At a gesture from the old lady the harper answered:

"This is my mistress, Gweneth, the mother of Prince Llewellyn ap Rhys;
these are his children. In his name she bids you defiance. You have taken
his castle, but he will know how to avenge her and his children."

"I have no desire or intention of acting with any disrespect, still less of
injuring either your mistress or the children of Llewellyn," Wulf replied,
when this was translated to him. "My friend and I are Saxon thanes, who
have been forced to leave our homes and to embark on this war in order to
put a stop to the ravages committed across the border--the burning of towns
and villages, and the massacre of men, women, and children by your
countrymen. Llewellyn ap Rhys has brought this misfortune upon himself, and
did we render him motherless and childless, it would be but the fate that
he and his followers have inflicted upon many an Englishman. But we do not
make war upon women or children. Prisoners, of course, you must be, but be
assured of honourable treatment. None shall enter this room save with your
permission, and you can have your female attendants to serve you as usual."

While the interpreter was repeating his speech Wulf and Beorn left the
room, and with the men ascended to the top of the castle, where they were
joined by the interpreter, who addressed the Welsh on the walls. These
replied with shouts of defiance, and a volley of javelins was poured down
upon them. Three or four were struck, the rest, seeing that all hope was
gone, rapidly gathered in a body at the head of the staircase leading from
the wall.

"They are going to run down," Beorn exclaimed, and leaning over the parapet
shouted to the Saxons in the courtyard below to stand on their guard.

A minute later the Welsh rushed down, each intent on killing at least one
foe before he died. The Saxons' weapons and discipline were, however, too
much for them; but they fought until the last, not one of them throwing
down his weapon or asking for quarter.

"They are brave men. I would that we were not forced to slay them; but it
is their choosing and not ours, Beorn, and if they would but leave us alone
I am sure that nobody would wish to interfere with these wild countrymen."

"What is the next thing to be done, Wulf?"

"I should say let us turn all the women and children, save the old lady's
attendants, out of the castle, they would only be a trouble to us. Then we
must examine the store of provisions, plant sentries and cut away that
bridge, or, at any rate, cut away so much of it that a blow or two with an
axe will suffice to send it down. We must not forget to haul up our
ladders. Llewellyn and his men may be back at any moment. Let us go down
together to that turret we saw on the face of the rock."

Orders were at once given, and the women and children collected and told to
leave the castle. They were allowed to carry away with them some eight or
ten men who were found to be still living. They went for the most part in
silence, but some of the elder women poured out voluble curses on the
Saxons. Beorn and Wulf had already gone down to the turret. There was a
very strong gateway in the courtyard, beyond this a tunnel sloping steeply
down, eight feet high and four feet wide, had been cut in the solid rock.
Following it they emerged upon a platform, principally occupied by the
turret. The path led through a strong gateway under this on to the wooden
bridge. Here Osgod with his ten men had taken their station.

"The women and children and a few wounded will be coming down directly,
Osgod. As soon as they have passed do you set to work with your men and
pull up the planking of the bridge, all save a single plank; loosen that,
so that you can if necessary at once cast it down after the rest. If you
see the Welshmen pouring up the road, throw it over at once without waiting
for further orders, then close the gate and take your station in the
turret."

"We are all getting very hungry, master. We have eaten nothing this
morning, and fighting sharpens the appetite."

"I had forgotten all about it, Osgod. I will see that food is cooked at
once, and will send down a portion for you and your men, and some tankards
of whatever liquor we can find in the cellars. We are going to make an
examination of them at once."

Returning to the courtyard, they told off a body of men to search the
cellars and granaries, and were glad to find that there was an ample store
of grain to last for months, together with large quantities of ale and a
few casks of wine.

"So far all is well," Beorn said, "but would it not be prudent to send off
at once to Gurth, to let him know that though we are masters of the castle
at present, we may in a few hours be surrounded by a swarm of angry
Welshmen?"

