LESSON XLV.

   E LIC' IT, draw forth.
   IN TEL' LI GENT, knowing; well-informed.
   RE FRAIN, hold in, or keep back.
   IG NO RA' MUS, ignorant person.
   RE TORT', reply; answer back.
   IN DEL' I BLY, in a way not to be effaced.
   MYS' TE RIES, profound secrets.
   AB SORB' ED, engrossed; occupied.
   MOR TI FI CA' TION, deep disappointment.
   OB STA CLE, hinderance; impediment.
   RE VOLT ED, shrank back.
   POR' ING, earnestly perusing.
   EM I NENCE, distinction.
   IN FOR MA' TION, knowledge.
   IL LIT' ER ATE, ignorant; unlearned.
   PRO FES' SION, business; employment.
   DIS' CI PLIN ED trained; instructed.
   CON TEMPT' U OUS, scornful; hateful.
   AN TAG' O NIST, opponent; adversary.


THE AMBITIOUS APPRENTICE.

1. "How far is it from here to the sun?" asked Harmon Lee of his
father's apprentice, James Wallace, intending by the question to elicit
some reply that would exhibit the boy's ignorance.

2. James Wallace, a boy of fourteen, turned his bright, intelligent eyes
upon the son of his employer, and replied, "I don't know, Harmon. How
far is it?"

3. There was something so honest and earnest in the tone of the boy,
that, much as Harmon had felt disposed, at first, to sport with his
ignorance, he could not refrain from giving him a true answer. Still,
his contempt for the ignorant apprentice was not to be concealed, and he
replied, "_Ninety-five millions of miles_, you ignoramus!" James did not
retort; but, repeating over in his mind the distance named, fixed it
indelibly upon his memory.

4. On the same evening, after he had finished his day's work, he
obtained a small text-book on astronomy, which belonged to Harmon Lee,
and went up into his garret with a candle, and there, alone, attempted
to dive into the mysteries of that sublime science. As he read, the
earnestness of his attention fixed nearly every fact upon his mind. So
intent was he, that he perceived not the flight of time, until the
town-clock struck ten.

5. He lay down upon his hard bed, and gave full scope to his thoughts.
Hour after hour passed away, but he could not sleep, so absorbed was he
in reviewing the new and wonderful things he had read. At last, wearied
nature gave way, and he fell into a slumber, filled with dreams of
planets, moons, comets, and fixed stars.

6. The next morning the apprentice boy resumed his place at the
work-bench with a new feeling; and, with _this_ feeling, was mingled one
of regret, that he could not go to school as well as Harmon.

"But I can study at night, while he is asleep," he said to himself.

7. Just then Harmon Lee came into the shop, and, approaching James,
said, for the purpose of teasing him, "How big round is the earth,
James?"

"_Twenty-five thousand miles,_" was the quick reply.

8. Harmon looked surprised, for a moment, and then responded, with a
sneer,--for he was not a kind-hearted boy, but, on the contrary, very
selfish, and disposed to _injure_ rather than _do good_ to others,--"Oh!
how wonderfully wise you are all at once! And no doubt you can tell how
many moons Jupiter has? Come, let us hear."

9. "Jupiter has four moons," James answered, with something of
exultation in his tone.

"And, no doubt, you can tell how many rings it has?"

"Jupiter has no rings. Saturn has rings, and Jupiter belts," James
replied, in a decisive tone.

10. For a moment or two Harmon was silent with surprise and
mortification, to think that his father's _apprentice_, whom he esteemed
so far below him, should be possessed of knowledge equal to his, and on
the points in reference to which he had chosen to question him,--and
that he should be able to convict him of an error, into which he had
purposely fallen.

11. "I should like to know how long it is since you became so
wonderfully wise," said Harmon, with a sneer.

"Not very long," James replied calmly. "I have been reading one of your
books on astronomy."

12. "I should like to know what business _you_ have to touch one of _my_
books! You had better be minding your work."

"I did not neglect it, Harmon; I read at _night_, after I was done with
my work; and I did not hurt your book."

"I don't care if you _didn't_ hurt it. You are not going to have _my_
books, I can tell you. So, you just let them alone."

13. Poor James's heart sank within him at this unexpected obstacle, so
suddenly thrown in his way. He had no money of his own to buy, and knew
of no one from whom he could borrow the book, that had become so
necessary to his happiness. "Do, Harmon," he said, "lend me the book; I
will take good care of it."

"No; I will not. And don't you dare to touch it," was the angry reply.

14. James Wallace knew well enough the selfish disposition of Harmon, to
be convinced that there was now but little hope of his having the use of
his books, except by stealth; and from that his naturally open and
honest principles revolted. All day he thought earnestly of the means
whereby he should be able to obtain a book on astronomy, to quench the
ardent thirst he had created in his own mind.

15. He was learning the trade of a blind-maker. Having been already an
apprentice for two years, and being industrious and intelligent, he had
acquired a readiness with tools, and much skill in some parts of his
trade. While sitting alone, after he had finished his work for the day,
it occurred to him that he might, by working in the evening, earn some
money, and with it buy such books as he wanted.

16. By consent of his employer, he succeeded in getting a small job,
from one of his neighbors; and, in a short time, by working evenings, he
obtained sufficient money to purchase a book of his own, and had a half
dollar left, with which he bought a second-hand dictionary. Every night
found him poring over his books; and, as soon as it was light enough in
the morning to see, he was up and reading. During the day, his mind was
pondering over the things he had read, while his hands were diligently
employed in the labor assigned him.

17. It occurred, just at this time, that a number of benevolent
individuals established, in the town where James lived, one of those
excellent institutions, an Apprentices' Library. To this he applied, and
obtained the books he needed. And thus, did this poor apprentice boy lay
the foundation of future eminence and usefulness. At the age of
twenty-one, he was master of his trade; and, what was more, had laid up
a vast amount of general and scientific information.

18. Let us now turn to mark the progress of the young student, Harmon
Lee, in one of the best seminaries in his native city, and afterwards at
college. The idea that he was to be a lawyer, soon took possession of
his mind, and this caused him to feel contempt for other boys, who were
merely designed for trades or store-keeping.

19. Like too many others, he had no love for learning. To be a _lawyer_
he thought would be much more honorable than to be a mere mechanic; and,
for this reason _alone_, he desired to be one. As for James Wallace, the
poor illiterate apprentice, he was most heartily despised, and never
treated by Harmon with the least degree of kind consideration.

20. At the age of eighteen, Harmon was sent away to one of the eastern
universities, and there remained until he was twenty years of age, when
he graduated, and came home with the honorary title of Bachelor of Arts.
On the very day that James completed his term of apprenticeship, Harmon
was admitted to the bar.

21. From some cause, James determined he would make law _his_
profession. To the acquirement of a knowledge of legal matters,
therefore, he bent all the energies of a well disciplined mind. Two
years passed away in an untiring devotion to the studies he had assigned
himself, and he then made application for admission to the bar.

22. Young Wallace passed his examinations with some applause, and the
first case on which he was employed, chanced to be one of great
difficulty, which required all his skill; the lawyer on the opposite
side was Harmon Lee, who entertained for his father's apprentice the
utmost contempt.

23. The cause came on. There was a profound silence and a marked
attention and interest, when the young stranger arose in the court-room
to open the case. A smile of contempt curled the lip of Harmon Lee, but
Wallace saw it not. The prominent points of the case were presented in
plain, but concise language to the court; and a few remarks bearing upon
its merits being made, the young lawyer took his seat, and gave room for
the defense.

24. Instantly Harmon Lee was on his feet, and began referring to the
points presented by his "very learned brother," in a very flippant
manner. There were those present who marked the light that kindled in
the eye of Wallace, and the flash that passed over his countenance at
the first contemptuous word and tone that were uttered by his antagonist
at the bar. These soon gave place to attention, and an air of conscious
power. Nearly an hour had passed when Harmon resumed his seat with a
look of exultation, which was followed by a pitying and contemptuous
smile, as Wallace again slowly rose.

25. Ten minutes, however, had not passed when that smile had changed to
a look of surprise, mortification, and alarm. The young lawyer's first
speech showed him to be a man of calm, deep, systematic thought,--well
skilled in points of law and in authorities,--and, more than all, a
lawyer of practical and comprehensive views. When he sat down, no
important point in the case had been left untouched, and none that had
been touched, required further elucidation.

20. Lee followed briefly, in a vain attempt to torture his language and
break down his positions. But he felt that he was contending with
weapons whose edges were turned at every blow. When he took his seat
again, Wallace merely remarked that he was prepared, without further
argument, to submit the case to the court.

27. The case was accordingly submitted, and a decision unhesitatingly
made in favor of the plaintiff, or Wallace's client. From that hour
James Wallace took his true position. _The despised apprentice became
the able and profound lawyer,_ and was esteemed for real talent and real
moral worth, which, when combined, ever place their possessor in his
true position. Ten years from that day, Wallace was elevated to the
bench, while Lee, a second-rate lawyer, never rose above that position.

QUESTIONS.--1. What profession did James study, after he had learned his
trade? 2. Who was his opponent in the first cause he tried? 3. Which won
the case? 4. What did James finally become?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLVI.

   TAUNT' ING LY, insultingly.
   DIG' NI FI ED, noble.
   DIS PU' TANTS, persons disputing.
   RES O LU' TION, decision.
   IM AG' IN ED, fancied.
   RE FLEC' TION, thought; consideration.
   SU PE RI OR' I TY, preeminence.
   SUB OR DI NATE, one inferior in position.
   BUF' FET ED, struggled against.
   THRALLS, bondage.
   DES POT' IC, tyrannical.
   OP PRES' SION, tyranny.
   PEN' U RY, poverty; destitution.
   PRED E CES' SORS, those who have gone before.
   DIS PEN SA' TIONS, dealings.
   CRI TE' RI ON, standard; measure.


"SO WAS FRANKLIN."

ANON.

1. "Oh, you're a _'prentice!_" said a little boy, the other day,
tauntingly, to his companion. The boy addressed turned proudly round,
and, while the fire of injured pride, and the look of pity were
strangely blended in his countenance, coolly answered, "_So was
Franklin!_"

2. This dignified reply struck me forcibly, and I turned to mark the
disputants more closely. The former, I perceived by his dress, was of a
higher class in society than his humble, yet more dignified companion.
The latter was a sprightly, active lad, scarce twelve years old, and
coarsely, but neatly attired. But, young as he was, there was visible in
his countenance much of genius, manly dignity, and determinate
resolution; while that of the former showed only fostered pride, and the
imagined superiority of riches.

3. That little fellow, thought we, gazing at our young hero, displays
already much of the man, though his calling be a humble one; and, though
poverty extends to him her dreary, cheerless reality, still he looks on
the brightest side of the scene, and already rises in anticipation from
poverty and wretchedness! Once, "_so was Franklin_" and the world may
one day witness in our little "_'prentice_" as great a philosopher as
they have already seen in his noble pattern! And we passed on, buried in
meditation.

4. The motto of our infantile philosopher contains much,--too much to be
forgotten, and should be engraven on the minds of all. What can better
cheer man in a humble calling, than the reflection that the greatest and
the best of earth--the greatest statesmen, the brightest philosophers,
and the proudest warriors--have once graced the same profession?

5.
   "Look at Franklin! He who
   With the thunder talked, as friend to friend,
   And wove his garland of the lightning's wing,
   In sportive twist."

What was he? A _printer!_ once a subordinate in a printing office!
Poverty stared him in the face; but her blank, hollow look, could
nothing daunt him. He struggled against a harder current than most are
called to encounter; but he did not yield. He pressed manfully onward;
bravely buffeted misfortune's billows, and gained the desired haven!

6. Look at Cincinnatus! At the call of his country he laid aside the
plow and seized the sword. But having wielded it with success, when his
country was no longer endangered, and public affairs needed not his
longer stay, "he beat his sword Into a ploughshare," and returned with
honest delight to his little farm.

7. Look at Washington! What was his course of life? He was first a
_farmer;_ next a _Commander in Chief_ of the hosts of freedom, fighting
for the liberation of his country from the thralls of despotic
oppression; next, called to the highest seat of government by his
ransomed brethren, a _President of the largest Republic on earth_, and
lastly, a _farmer_ again.

8. What was the famous Ben Jonson? He was first a _brick-layer, or
mason!_ What was he in after years? 'Tis needless to answer.

What was Burns? An Ayrshire _plowman!_ What was he in after life, in the
estimation of his countrymen, and the world? Your library gives the
answer!

9. But shall we go on, and call up, in proud array, all the mighty host
of worthies that have lived and died, who were cradled in the lap of
penury, and received their first lessons in the school of affliction'?
Nay'; we have cited instances enough already,--yea, more than enough to
prove the point in question--namely, _that there is no profession,
however low in the opinion of the world, but has been honored with
earth's greatest and worthiest._

10. Young man! Does the iron hand of misfortune press hard upon you, and
disappointments well-nigh sink your despairing soul'? Have courage!
Mighty ones have been your predecessors, and have withstood the current
of opposition that threatened to overwhelm their fragile bark.

11. Do you despise your humble station, and repine that Providence has
not placed you in some nobler sphere'? Murmur not against the
dispensations of an All-wise Creator! Remember that wealth is no
criterion of moral rectitude or intellectual worth,--that riches
dishonestly gained, are a lasting curse,--that virtue and uprightness
work out a rich reward,--and that

  "An honest man's the noblest work of God."

12. And when dark Disappointment comes, do not wither at her stare; but
press forward, and the prize is yours! It was thus with _Franklin_,--it
can be thus with _you_. He strove for the prize, and he won it! So may
_you!_ 'Tis well worth contending for; and may success attend you, and
the "stars" grow brighter, as the "stripes" wear deeper!

QUESTIONS.--1. What did the rich boy say of the poor boy? 2. What reply
did the poor boy make? 3. What other examples are cited of eminent men
who were once poor? 4. What is said of Cincinnatus? 5. Of Washington? 6.
Of Ben Jonson? 7. Of Burns? 8. What do all these examples prove? 9. What
encouragement is given to young men? 10. What are the full forms of the
words _you're, 'prentice?_

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLVII.

   MAG'IC, power of enchantment.
   CONTEN'TION, strife; controversy.
   TRA DI'TION, facts or events handed down from age to age.
   SUB TILE, thin; slight; slender.
   IN VEST'ED, clothed.
   CREST'ED, adorned with a plume or crest.
   AZ'URE, light-blue; sky-colored.
   PER SPECT' IVE, (PER, _through_; SPECT, _to see_; IVE, _having
   the power_,) having the power to see through; a view through.
   UN  DI  VERT'  ED, (UN, _not_; DI, _aside_; VERTED, _turned_,)
   not turned aside; unheeded.
   VEST'URE, garment.
   SE DATE', calm; quiet.
   FAN TAS'TIC, fanciful; visionary.
   RA DI ANCE, brightness; luster.
   IN VEC'TIVE, railing speech.
   I DE'AL, imaginary.
   FA TIGU ING, wearisome, toilsome.
   AS PIR'ING, aiming; seeking to rise.


NOW AND THEN.

JANE TAYLOR.

 1. In distant days,--of wild romance,
      Of magic, mist, and fable,--
    When stones could argue, trees advance,[Footnote 1]
      And brutes to talk were able,--
    When shrubs and flowers were said to preach,
    And manage all the parts of speech,--

 2. 'Twas _then_, no doubt, if 'twas at all,
      (But doubts we need not mention,)
    That _Then_ and _Now_, two adverbs small,
      Engaged in sharp contention;
    But how they made each other hear,
    Tradition doth not make appear.

 3. _Then_ was a sprite of subtile frame,
      With rainbow tints invested.--
    On clouds of dazzling light she came,
      And stars her forehead crested;
    Her sparkling eyes of azure hue,
    Seemed borrowed from the distant blue.

 4. _Now_ rested on the solid earth,
      And sober was her vesture;
    She seldom either grief or mirth
      Expressed, by word or gesture;
    Composed, sedate, and firm she stood,
    And looked industrious, calm, and good.

 5. _Then_ sang a wild, fantastic song,
      Light as the gale she flies on,
    Still stretching, as she sailed along,
      Toward the far horizon,
    Where clouds of radiance, fringed with gold,
    O'er hills of emerald beauty rolled.

 6. _Now_ rarely raised her sober eye
      To view that golden distance;
    Nor let one idle minute fly
      In hope of _Then's_ assistance;
    But still with busy hands she stood,
    Intent on doing _present_ good.

 7. She ate the sweet, but homely fare,
      That passing moments brought her;
    While _Then_, expecting dainties rare,
      Despised such bread and water;
    And waited for the fruits and flowers
    Of future, still receding hours.

 8. _Now_, venturing once to ask her why,
      She answered with invective;
    And pointed, as she made reply,
      _Toward that long perspective
    Of years to come_,--in distant blue,
    Wherein she meant to _live_ and _do_,

 9. "Alas!" says she, _"how hard you toil!_
      With undiverted sadness;
    Behold yon land of wine and oil!
      Those sunny hills of gladness!
    Those joys I wait, with eager brow,"
    _"And so you always will!"_ said _Now_.

10. "That fairy land that looks so real,
      Recedes as you pursue it;
   Thus, while you wait for time's ideal,
      _I take my work and do it;_
   Intent to form, when time is gone,
   A _pleasant past_ to look upon."

11. "Ah, well," said _Then_, "I envy not
      Your dull, fatiguing labors,--
    Aspiring to a brighter lot,
      With thousands of my neighbors;
    Soon as I reach that golden hill,"--
    "But that," says _Now_, "you _never will!"_

12. "And e'en suppose you should," said she,
      "(Though mortal ne'er attained it,)
    Your nature you must change with me,
      The moment you have gained it;
    Since hope fulfilled, (you must allow,)
    Turns NOW to _Then_, and THEN to _Now_."

[Footnote 1: The reference is to Orpheus, (or' fuse,) an ancient poet
and musician of Greece. The skill of Orpheus on the lyre, was fabled to
have been such as to move the very trees and rocks, and to assemble the
beasts around him as he touched its chords.]

QUESTIONS.--1. What two words are represented as holding a controversy?
2. Describe the appearance of each. 3. When did _Then_ propose to do
something? 4. How did Now act? 5. What answer did _Then_ make, when
_Now_ asked her why she waited? 6. What was _Now's_ reply? 7. What did
_Now_ finally say to _Then_? 8. How should passages, within a
parenthesis, be read? See SANDERS' UNION READER, NUMBER THREE, page 20.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLVIII.

   IN GEN' IOUS, artful; skillful.
   STRAT' A GEM, trick; artifice.
   EX CEED' ED, surpassed.
   SIG' NALS, signs.
   AM' I CA BLE, friendly; peaceable.
   RE PEL', (RE, _back_; PEL, _to drive_,)drive back.
   MU' TU AL, reciprocal.
   EX TRAOR' DI NA RY, uncommon.
   IN VET' ER ATE, obstinate; violent.
   HARANGUE', declamatory speech.
   EN TER TAIN' ED, held; had.
   SUS PI' CION, mistrust.
   EN COUN' TER ED, met face to face.
   EX' E CU TED, carried out.
   FOR' MI DA BLE, fearful; dreadful.
   PER FID' I OUS, treacherous.
   PRE CIP' ITATELY, headlong.
   IN AN' I MATE, dead; lifeless.


AN INGENIOUS STRATAGEM.

DAYS OF WASHINGTON.

1. In the early part of the war, a sergeant and twelve armed men
undertook a journey through the wilderness, in the State of New
Hampshire. Their route was remote from any settlement, and they were
under the necessity of encamping over night in the woods. Nothing
material happened the first day of their excursion; but, early in the
afternoon of the second, they, from an eminence, discovered a body of
armed Indians advancing toward them, whose number rather exceeded their
own.

2. As soon as the whites were perceived by their red brethren, the
latter made signals, and the two parties approached each other in an
amicable manner. The Indians appeared to be much gratified with meeting
the sergeant and his men, whom, they observed, they considered as their
protectors. They said they belonged to a tribe which had raised the
hatchet with zeal in the cause of liberty, and were determined to do all
in their power to repel the common enemy.

3. They shook hands in friendship. When they had conversed with each
other for some time, and exchanged mutual good wishes, they, at length,
separated, and each party traveled in a different direction. After
proceeding to the distance of a mile or more, the sergeant, who was
acquainted with all the different tribes, and knew on which side of the
contest they were respectively ranked, halted his men, and addressed
them in the following words:

4. "My brave companions, we must use the utmost caution, or this night
may be our last. Should we not make some extraordinary exertions to
defend ourselves, to-morrow's sun may find us sleeping, never to wake.
You are surprised, comrades, at my words, and your anxiety will not be
lessened, when I inform you that we have just passed _our most
inveterate foe_, who, under the mask of pretended friendship, which you
have witnessed, would lull us to security, and, by such means, in the
unguarded moments of our midnight slumber, without resistance, seal our
fate."

5. The men with astonishment listened to this short harangue; and their
surprise was greater, as not one of them had entertained the suspicion
but that they had just encountered friends. They all immediately
resolved to enter into some scheme for their mutual preservation, and
the destruction of their enemies. By the proposal of their leader, the
following plan was adopted and executed.

6. The spot selected for their night's encampment, was near a stream of
water, which served to cover their rear. They felled a large tree,
before which, on the approach of night, a brilliant fire was lighted.
Each individual cut a log of wood, about the size of his body, rolled it
nicely in his blanket, placed his hat upon one end, and laid it before
the fire, that the enemy might be deceived, and mistake it for a man.

7. After they had thus fitted out logs, equal in number to the
sergeant's party, and had so artfully arranged them, that they might be
easily mistaken for so many soldiers, the men with loaded muskets placed
themselves behind the fallen tree, by which time the shades of evening
began to close around. The fire was kept burning brilliantly until late
in the evening, when it was suffered to decline.

8. The critical time was now approaching, when an attack might be
expected from the Indians; but the sergeant's men rested in their place
of concealment with great anxiety, till near midnight, without
perceiving any movement of the enemy. At length, a tall Indian was
discovered, through the glimmering of the fire, cautiously moving toward
them, making no noise, and apparently using every means in his power to
conceal himself from any one about the camp.
