"What are you going to do with it? It won't be of use to you, especially
the diamond earrings," he added, with a coarse laugh.

"No," answered Rodney shortly.

"My eyes, wouldn't my mother like to own all this jewelry. She's fond of
ornament, but pa won't buy them for her."

Rodney did not answer.

"I say, Ropes, I mustn't forget my errand. Will you do me a favor?"

"What is it?"

"Lend me five dollars till the first of next month. My allowance comes
due then. Now I haven't but a quarter left."

"What makes you apply to me, Bundy?"

"Because you always have money. I don't suppose you are worth as much as
my father, but you have more money for yourself than I have."

"I have had, perhaps, but I haven't now."

"Why, what's up? What has happened?"

"I have lost my fortune."

John whistled. This was his way of expressing amazement.

"Why, what have you been doing? How could you lose your fortune?"

"My guardian has lost it for me. That amount to the same thing."

"When did you hear that?"

"This morning."

"Is that true? Are you really a poor boy?"

"Yes."

John Bundy was astonished, but on the whole he was not saddened. In the
estimation of the school Rodney had always ranked higher than he, and
been looked upon as the star pupil in point of wealth.

Now that he was dethroned John himself would take his place. This would
be gratifying, though just at present, and till the beginning of the
next month, he would be distressed for ready money.

"Well, that's a stunner!" he said. "How do you feel about it? Shall you
stay in school?"

"No; I can't afford it. I must get to work."

"Isn't there anything left--not a cent?"

"There may be a few dollars."

"And then," said Bundy with a sudden thought, "there is this casket of
jewelry. You can sell it for a good deal of money."

"I don't mean to sell it."

"Then you're a fool; that's all I've got to say."

"I don't suppose you will understand my feeling in the matter, but these
articles belonged to my mother. They are all I have to remind me of her.
I do not mean to sell them unless it is absolutely necessary."

"I would sell them quicker'n a wink," said Bundy. "What's the good of
keeping them?"

"We won't discuss the matter," said Rodney coldly.

"Do you mind my telling the other boys about your losing your money?"

"No; it will be known tomorrow at any rate; there is no advantage in
concealing it."

A heavy step was heard outside. It stopped before the door.

"I must be getting," said Bundy, "or I'll get into trouble."

It was against the rule at the school for boys to make calls upon each
other in the evening unless permission were given.

John Bundy opened the door suddenly, and to his dismay found himself
facing the rigid figure of Dr. Sampson, the principal.

"How do you happen to be here, Bundy?" asked the doctor sternly.

"Please, sir, I was sympathizing with Ropes on his losing his money,"
said Bundy with ready wit.

"Very well! I will excuse you this time."

"I'm awful sorry for you, Ropes," said Bundy effusively.

"Thank you," responded Rodney.

"You can go now," said the principal. "I have a little business with
Master Ropes."

"All right, sir. Good night."

"Good night."

"Won't you sit down, Dr. Sampson?" said Rodney politely, and he took the
casket from the chair.

"Yes, I wish to have five minutes' conversation with you. So these are
the jewels, are they?"

"Yes, sir."

"They seem to be quite valuable," went on the doctor, lifting the pearl
necklace and poising it in his fingers. "It will be well for you to have
them appraised by a jeweler."

"It would, sir, if I wished to sell them, but I mean to keep them as
they are."

"I would hardly advise it. You will need the money. Probably you do not
know how near penniless you are."

"No, sir; I don't know."

"Your guardian, as you are aware, sent me a check for one hundred and
twenty five dollars. I have figured up how much of this sum is due to
me, and I find it to be one hundred and thirteen dollars and thirty
seven cents."

"Yes, sir," said Rodney indifferently.

"This leaves for you only eleven dollars and sixty three cents. You
follow me, do you not?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you any money saved up from your allowance?"

"A few dollars only, sir."

"Ahem! that is a pity. You will need all you can raise. But of course
you did not anticipate what has occurred?"

"No, sir."

"I will throw off the thirty seven cents," said the principal
magnanimously, "and give you back twelve dollars."

"I would rather pay you the whole amount of your bill," said Rodney.

"Ahem! Well perhaps that would be more business-like. So you don't wish
to part with any of the jewelry, Ropes?"

"No, sir."

"I thought, perhaps, by way of helping you, I would take the earrings,
and perhaps the necklace, off your hands and present them to Mrs.
Sampson."

Rodney shuddered with aversion at the idea of these precious articles,
which had once belonged to his mother, being transferred to the stout
and coarse featured consort of the principal.

"I think I would rather keep them," he replied.

"Oh well, just as you please," said Dr. Sampson with a shade of
disappointment for he had no idea of paying more than half what the
articles were worth. "If the time comes when you wish to dispose of them
let me know."

Rodney nodded, but did not answer in words.

"Of course, Ropes," went on the doctor in a perfunctory way, "I am very
sorry for you. I shall miss you, and, if I could afford it, I would tell
you to stay without charge. But I am a poor man."

"Yes," said Rodney hastily, "I understand. I thank you for your words
but would not under any circumstances accept such a favor at your
hands."

"I am afraid you are proud, Ropes. Pride is--ahem--a wrong feeling."

"Perhaps so, Dr. Sampson, but I wish to earn my own living without being
indebted to any one."

"Perhaps you are right, Ropes. I dare say I should feel so myself. When
do you propose leaving us?"

"Some time tomorrow, sir."

"I shall feel sad to have you go. You have been here so long that
you seem to me like a son. But we must submit to the dispensations of
Providence--" and Dr. Sampson blew a vigorous blast upon his red silk
handkerchief. "I will give you the balance due in the morning."

"Very well, sir."

Rodney was glad to be left alone. He had no faith in Dr. Sampson's
sympathy. The doctor had the reputation of being worth from thirty to
forty thousand dollars, and his assumption of being a poor man Rodney
knew to be a sham.

He went to bed early, for tomorrow was to be the beginning of a new life
for him.



CHAPTER III.


A STRANGE DISAPPEARANCE.


When it was generally known in the school that Rodney was to leave
because he had lost his property much sympathy was felt and expressed
for him.

Though he had received more than ordinary attention from the principal
on account of his pecuniary position and expectations, this had not
impaired his popularity. He never put on any airs and was on as cordial
relations with the poorest student as with the richest.

"I'm awfully sorry you're going, Rodney," said more than one. "Is it
really true that you have lost your property?"

"Yes, it is true."

"Do you feel bad about it?"

"I feel sorry, but not discouraged."

"I say, Rodney," said Ernest Rayner, in a low voice, calling Rodney
aside, "are you very short of money?"

"I haven't much left, Ernest."

"Because I received five dollars last week as a birthday present. I
haven't spent any of it. You can have it as well as not."

Rodney was much moved. "My dear Ernest," he said, putting his arm
caressingly around the neck of the smaller boy, "you are a true friend.
I won't forget your generous offer, though I don't need to accept it."

"But are you sure you have money enough?" asked Ernest.

"Yes, I have enough for the present. By the time I need more I shall
have earned it."

There was one boy, already introduced, John Bundy, who did not share in
the general feeling of sympathy for Rodney. This was John Bundy.

He felt that Rodney's departure would leave him the star pupil and give
him the chief social position in school. As to scholarship he was not
ambitious to stand high in that.

"I say, Ropes," he said complacently, "I'm to have your room after
you're gone."

"I congratulate you," returned Rodney. "It is an excellent room."

"Yes, I s'pose it'll make you feel bad. Where are you going?"

"I hope you will enjoy it as much as I have done."

"Oh yes, I guess there's no doubt of that. I'm going to get pa to send
me some nice pictures to hang on the wall. When you come back here on a
visit you'll see how nice it looks."

"I think it will be a good while before I come here on a visit."

"Yes. I s'pose it'll make you feel bad. Where are you going?"

"To the City of New York."

"You'll have to live in a small hall bedroom there."

"Why will I?"

"Because you are poor, and it costs a good deal of money to live in New
York. It'll be a great come down."

"It will indeed, but if I can earn enough to support me in plain style
I won't complain. I suppose you'll call and see me when you come to New
York?"

"Perhaps so, if you don't live in a tenement house. Pa objects to my
going to tenement houses. There's no knowing what disease there may be
in them."

"It is well to be prudent," said Rodney, smiling.

It did not trouble him much to think he was not likely to receive a call
from his quondan schoolmate.

"Here is the balance of your money, Ropes," said Dr. Sampson, drawing
a small roll of bills from his pocket, later in the day. "I am quite
willing to give you the odd thirty seven cents."

"Thank you, doctor, but I shan't need it."

"You are poorly provided. Now I would pay you a good sum for some of
your mother's jewelry, as I told you last evening."

"Thank you," said Rodney hastily, "but I don't care to sell at present."

"Let me know when you are ready to dispose of the necklace."

Here the depot carriage appeared in the street outside and Rodney with
his gripsack in one hand and the precious casket in the other, climbed
to a seat beside the driver.

His trunk he left behind, promising to send for it when he had found a
new boarding place.

There was a chorus of good byes. Rodney waved his handkerchief in
general farewell, and the carriage started for the depot.

"Be you goin' for good?" asked Joel, the driver, who knew Rodney well
and felt friendly to him.

"Yes, Joel."
