long as Mrs. Kinzer was in the house."

Very likely Ham was right; but just then he heard the voice of Dab,
behind him,--

"I say, Ham, when you've looked at the other things, I want to show you
'The Swallow.' I haven't hurt her a bit, and her new grapnel's worth
three of the old one."

"All right, Dab. I think I'd like a sniff of the water. Come on. There's
nothing else I know of like that smell of the shore with the tide half
out."

No more there is; and there have been sea-shore men, many of them, who
had wandered away into the interior of the country, hundreds and
hundreds of long miles, and settled there, and even got rich and old
there, and yet who have come all the way back again, just to get another
smell of the salt marshes and the sea-air and the out-going tide.

Ham actually took a little boat, and went on board "The Swallow," when
they reached the landing, and Dab kept close to him.

"She's all right, Ham. But what are you casting loose for?"

"Dab, they won't all be ready for breakfast in two hours. The stock and
things can go: the men'll tend to 'em. Just haul on that sheet a bit.
Now the jib. Look out for the boom. There! The wind's a little ahead,
but it isn't bad. Ah!"

The last word came out in a great sigh of relief, and was followed by a
chuckle which seemed to gurgle all the way up from Ham's boots.

"This is better than railroading," he said to Dabney, as they tacked
into the long stretch where the inlet widened toward the bay. "No
pounding or jarring here. Talk of your fashionable watering-places! Why,
Dab, there ain't any thing else in the world prettier than that reach of
water and the sand-island, with the ocean beyond it. There's some ducks
and some gulls. Why, Dab, do you see that? There's a porpoise, inside
the bar!"

It was as clear as daylight that Ham Morris felt himself "at home"
again, and that his brief experience of the outside world had by no
means lessened his affection for the place he was born in. If the entire
truth could have been known, it would have been found that he felt his
heart warm toward the whole coast and all its inhabitants, including the
clams. And yet it was remarkable how many of the latter were mere empty
shells when Ham finished his breakfast that morning. He preferred them
roasted, and his mother-in-law had not forgotten that trait in his
character.

Once or twice in the course of the sail, Dabney found himself on the
point of saying something about boarding-schools; but each time his
friend broke away to the discussion of other topics, such as blue-fish,
porpoises, crabs, or the sailing qualities of "The Swallow," and Dab
dimly felt that it would be better to wait until another time. So he
waited.

It was a grand good time, however, to be had before breakfast; and as
they again sailed up the inlet, very happy and very hungry, Dab suddenly
exclaimed,--

"Ham, do you see that? How could they have guessed where we'd gone?
There's the whole Kinzer tribe, and the boys are with them, and Annie."

"What boys and Annie?"

"Oh! Ford Foster and Frank Harley. Annie is Ford's sister. They live in
our old house, you know."

"What's become of Jenny?"

"You mean my boat? There she is, hitched a little out, just beyond the
landing."

There was nothing on Dab's face to lead any one to suppose that he
guessed the meaning of the quizzical grin on Ham's.

It is barely possible, however, that there would have been fewer people
at the landing, if Ham and Dab had not been keeping a whole house-full
of hungry mortals, including a bride, waiting breakfast for them.





CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW DAB WORKED OUT ANOTHER OF HIS GREAT PLANS.


There was a sort of council at the breakfast-table of the Foster family
that morning; and Ford and Annie found their side of it "voted down."

That was not at all because they did not debate vigorously, and even
"protest;" but the odds were too much against them.

"Annie, my dear," said Mrs. Foster at last, in a gentle but decided way,
"I'm sure your aunt Maria, if not your uncle, must feel hurt at your
coming away so suddenly. If we invite Joe and Foster to visit us, it
will make it all right."

"Yes," sharply exclaimed Mr. Foster: "we must have them come. They'll
behave themselves here. I'll write to their father: you write to Maria."

"They're her own boys, you know," added Mrs. Foster soothingly.

"Well, mother," said Annie, "if it must be. But I'm sure they'll make us
all very uncomfortable if they come."

"I can stand 'em for a week or so," said Ford, with the air of a man who
can do or bear more than most people. "I'll get Dab Kinzer to help me
entertain them."

"Excellent," said Mr. Foster; "and I hope they will be civil to him."

"To Dabney?" asked Annie.

"Fuz and Joe civil to Dab Kinzer?" exclaimed Ford.

"Certainly: I hope so."

"Father," said Ford, "may I say just what I was thinking?"

"Speak it right out."

"Well, I was thinking what a good time Fuz and Joe would be likely to
have, trying to get ahead of Dab Kinzer."

Annie looked at her brother, and nodded; and there was a bit of a
twinkle in the eyes of the lawyer himself, but he only remarked,--

"Well, you must be neighborly. I don't believe the Hart boys know much
about the seashore."

"Dab and Frank and I will try and educate them."

Annie thought of the ink, and her box of spoiled cuffs and collars,
while her brother was speaking. Could it be that Ford meant a good deal
more than he was saying? At all events, she fully agreed with him on the
Dab Kinzer question.

That was one "council;" and it was one of peace or war, probably a good
deal as the Hart boys themselves might thereafter determine.

At the same hour, however, matters of even greater importance were
coming to a decision around the well-filled breakfast-table in the
Morris mansion. Ham had given a pretty full account of his visit to
Grantley, including his dinner at Mrs. Myers's, and all he had learned
relating to the academy.

"It seems like spending a great deal of money," began Mrs. Kinzer, when
Ham at last paused for breath; but lid caught her up at once, with--

"I know you've been paying out a good deal, mother Kinzer, but Dab must
go, if I pay"--

"You pay, indeed? For my boy? I'd like to see myself! Now I've found out
what he is, I mean he shall have every advantage. If this Grantley's the
right place"--

"Mother," exclaimed Samantha, "it's the very place Mr. Foster is going
to send Ford to, and Frank Harley."

"Exactly," said Ham; "Mr. Hart spoke of a Mr. Foster,--his
brother-in-law,--a lawyer."

"Why," said Keziah, "he's living in our old house now. Ford Foster is
Dab's greatest crony. They're the very people you met at the landing."

"Yes, I've heard all that," said Ham, "but somehow I hadn't put the two
things together. Now, mother Kinzer, do you really mean Dab is to go?"

"Of course I do," said she.

"Well, if that isn't doing it easy! Do you know, it's about the nicest
thing I've heard since I got here?"

"Except the barn," said Dabney, unable to hold in any longer. "Mother,
may I stand on my head a while?"

"You'll need all the head you've got," said Ham. "You won't have much
time to get ready."

"He'll have books enough after he gets there," said Mrs. Kinzer
decidedly. "I'll risk Dabney."

"And they'll make him give up all his slang," added Samantha.

"Yes, Sam; when I come back I'll talk nothing but Greek and Latin. I'm
getting French now from Ford, and Hindu from Frank Harley. Then I know
English, and slang, and Long-Islandish. Think of one man with seven
first-rate languages!"

But Dabney soon found himself unable to sit still, even at the
breakfast-table. Not that he got up hungry, for he had done his duty by
Miranda's cookery; but the house itself, big as it was, seemed too small
to hold him, with all his new prospects swelling within him. Perhaps,
moreover, the rest of the family felt that they would be better able to
discuss the important subject before them, after Dab had taken himself
out into the open air; for none of them tried to stay his going.

"This beats dreaming, all hollow," he said to himself, as he stood, with
his hands in his pockets, half way down to the gate between the two
gardens. "Now I'll see what can be done about that other matter."

Two plans in one head, and so young a head as that?

Yes; and it spoke well for Dab's heart, as well as his brains, that his
plan number two was not a selfish one. The substance of it came out in
the first five minutes of the talk he had, a trifle later, with Ford and
Frank, on the other side of the gate.

"Ford, you know there's twenty dollars left of the money the Frenchman
paid us for the bluefish."

"Well, what of it? Isn't it yours?"

"One share of it's mine. The rest is yours and Dick's."

"He needs it more'n I do."

"Ford, did you know Dick Lee was real bright?"

"'Cute little chap as ever I saw. Why?"

"Well, he ought to go to school."

"Why don't he go?"

"He does, except in summer. He might go to the academy, if they'd take
him, and if he had money enough to go with."

"Academy? What academy?"

"Why, Grantley, of course. I'm going, and so are you and Frank. Why
shouldn't Dick go?"

"You're going? Hurrah for that! Why didn't you say so before?"

"Wasn't sure till this morning. You fellows 'll be a long way ahead of
me, though. But I mean to catch up."

For a few minutes poor Dick was lost sight of in a perfect storm of
talk; but Dab came back to him, with,--

"Dick's folks are dreadful poor, but we might raise it. Twenty dollars
to begin with."

"I've ten dollars saved up, and I know mother'll say 'Pass it right
in,'" exclaimed Ford.

It was hardly likely Mrs. Foster would express her assent in precisely
that way; but Frank Harley promptly added,--

"I think I can promise five."

"I mean to speak to Ham Morris and mother about it," said Dab. "All I
wanted was to fix it about the twenty dollars to start on."

"Frank," shouted Ford, "let's go right in, and see our crowd!"

Ford was evidently getting a little excited; and it was hardly five
minutes later that he wound up his story, in the house, with,--

"Father, may I contribute my ten dollars to the Richard Lee Education
Fund?"

"Of course; but he will need a good deal more money than you boys can
raise."

"Why, father, the advertisement says half a year for a hundred and
fifty. He can board for less than we can. Perhaps Mrs. Myers would let
him work out a part of it."

"I can spare as much as Ford can," here put in Annie.

"Do you leave me out entirely?" said her mother, with a smile that was
even sweeter than usual.

As for sharp-eyed lawyer Foster himself, he had been hemming and
coughing in an odd sort of way for a moment, and he had said, "I
declare," several times; but he now remarked, somewhat more to the
purpose,--

"I don't believe in giving any man a better education than he will ever
know what to do with; but then, this Dick Lee and you boys,--well, see
what you can do; but no one must be allowed to contribute outside of the
Foster and Kinzer families, and Frank. As for the rest, hem!--ah--I
think I'll say that there won't be any difficulty."

"You, father?"

"Why not, Annie? Do you s'pose I'm going to let myself be beaten in such
a matter by a mere country-boy like Dabney Kinzer?"

"Father," said Ford, "if you'd seen how Dick behaved, that night, out
there on the ocean, in 'The Swallow'!"

"Just as well, just as well, my son."

"Hurrah!" shouted Ford. "Then it's all right, and Dick Lee'll have a
fair shake in the world!"

"A what, my son?" exclaimed his mother.

"I didn't mean to talk slang, mother: I only meant--well, you know how
dreadfully black he is; but then, he can steer a boat tiptop, and he's
splendid for crabs and bluefish; and Dab says he's a good scholar too."

"Dab's a very good boy," said Mrs. Foster; "but your friend Dick will
need an outfit, I imagine,--clothing, and almost every thing. I must see
Mrs. Kinzer about it."

Meantime Dick Lee's part in the matter, and that of his family, had been
taken for granted, all around. An hour later, however, Mrs. Kinzer's
