
"There they are!" exclaimed Harry, pointing to the strip of forest on
the far side of the opening, "and there is the bugler, too."

He was studying the party intently.  The brilliant moonlight, and the
strength of his glasses made everything sharp and clear and his gaze
concentrated upon the bugler.  He knew that man, his powerful chest and
shoulders, and the well-shaped head on its strong neck.  Nor did he
deny to himself that he had a feeling of gladness when he recognized
him.

"It's none other," he said aloud.

"None other what?" asked St. Clair.

"Our warning bugler was Shepard, the Union spy.  I can make him out
clearly on his horse with his bugle in his hand.  You'll remember my
telling you how I had that fight with him in the river."

"And perhaps it would have been better for us all if you had finished
him off then."

"I couldn't have done it, Arthur, nor could you, if you had been in my
place."

"No, I suppose not, but these Yankees are coming up pretty close. It's
sure proof that Meade's whole army will be here in the morning, and the
bridge won't be built."

"It may be built, but, if Meade chooses a battle, a battle there will
be. Heavy forces must be very near.  You can see them now signaling to
one another from hill to hill."

"So I do, and this is as far as we ought to go.  A hundred yards or two
farther and we'll be in the territory of the enemy's sharpshooters
instead of our own."

They remained for a while among some bushes, and secured positive
knowledge that the bulk of the Army of the Potomac was drawing near.
Toward midnight Harry returned to his commander-in-chief and found him
awake and in consultation with his generals, under some trees near the
Potomac.  Longstreet, Rhodes, Pickett, Early, Anderson, Pender and a
dozen others were there, all of them scarred and tanned by battle, and
most of them bearing wounds.

Harry stood back, hesitating to invade this circle, even when he came
with dispatches, but the commander-in-chief, catching sight of him,
beckoned.  Then, taking off his cap, he walked forward and presented a
note from Colonel Talbot.  It was brief, stating that the enemy was
near, and Lee read it aloud to his council.

"And what were your own observations, Lieutenant Kenton?" asked the
commander-in-chief.

"As well as I could judge, sir, the enemy will appear on our whole
front soon after daybreak."

"And will be in great enough force to defeat us."

"Not while you lead us, sir."

"A courtier! truly a courtier!" exclaimed Stuart, smoothing the great
feather of his gorgeous hat, which lay upon his knee.

Harry blushed.

"It may have had that look," he said, "but I meant my words."

"Don't tease the lad," said the crippled Ewell.  "I knew him well on
Jackson's staff, and he was one of our bravest and best."

"A jest only," said Stuart.  "Don't I know him as well as you, Ewell?
The first time I saw him he was riding alone among many dangers to
bring relief to a beleaguered force of ours."

"And you furnished that relief, sir," said Harry.

"Well, so I did, but it was my luck, not merit."

"Be assured that you have no better friend than General Stuart," said
General Lee, smiling.  "You have done your duty well, Lieutenant
Kenton, and as these have been arduous days for you you may withdraw,
and join your young comrades of the staff."

Harry saluted and retired.  Before he was out of ear shot the generals
resumed their eager talk, but they knew, even as Harry himself, that
there was but one thing to do, stand with their backs to the river and
fight, if Meade chose to offer battle.

He slept heavily, and when he awoke the next day Dalton, who was up
before him, informed him that the Northern army was at hand.  Snatching
breakfast, he and Dalton, riding close behind the commander-in-chief,
advanced a little distance and standing upon a knoll surveyed the
thrilling spectacle before them.  Far along the front stretched the
Army of the Potomac, horse, foot and guns, come up with its enemy
again. Harry was sure that Meade was there, and with him Hancock and
Buford and Warren and all the other valiant leaders whom they had met
at Gettysburg. It was nine days since the close of the great battle,
and doubtless the North had poured forward many reinforcements, while
the South had none to send.

Harry appreciated the full danger of their situation, with the larger
army in front of them, and the deep and swollen torrent of the Potomac
behind them.  But he did not believe that Meade would attack.  Lee had
lost at Gettysburg, but in losing he had inflicted such losses upon his
opponent, that most generals would hesitate to force another battle.
The one who would not have hesitated was consolidating his great
triumph at Vicksburg.  Harry often thought afterward what would have
happened had Grant faced Lee that day on the wrong side of the Potomac.

His opinion that Meade would not attack came from a feeling that might
have been called atmospheric, an atmosphere created by the lack of
initiative on the Union side, no clouds of skirmishers, no attacks of
cavalry, very little rifle firing of any kind, merely generals and
soldiers looking at one another.  Harry saw, too, that his own opinion
was that of his superior officer.  Watching the commander-in-chief
intently he saw a trace of satisfaction in the blue eyes.  Presently
all of them rode back.

Thus that day passed and then another wore on.  Harry and Dalton had
little to do.  The whole Army of Northern Virginia was in position,
defiant, challenging even, and the Army of the Potomac made no movement
forward.  Harry watched the strange spectacle with an excitement that
he did not allow to appear on his face.  It was like many of those
periods in the great battles in which he had taken a part, when the
combat died, though the lull was merely the omen of a struggle, soon to
come more frightful than ever.

But here the struggle did not come.  The hours of the afternoon fell
peacefully away, and the general and soldiers still looked at one
another.

"They're working on the bridge like mad," said Dalton, who had been
away with a message, "and it will surely be ready in the morning.
Besides, the Potomac is falling fast.  You can already see the muddy
lines that it's leaving on its banks."

"And Meade's chance is slipping, slipping away!" said Harry exultingly.
"In three hours it will be sunset.  They can't attack in the night and
to-morrow we'll be gone.  Meade has delayed like McClellan at Antietam,
and, doubtless as McClellan did, he thinks our army much larger than it
really is."

"It's so," said Dalton.  "We're to be delivered, and we're to be
delivered without a battle, a battle that we could ill afford, even if
we won it."

Both were in a state of intense anxiety and they looked many times at
the sun and their watches.  Then they searched the hostile army with
their glasses.  But nothing of moment was stirring there.  Lower and
lower sank the sun, and a great thrill ran through the Army of Northern
Virginia. In both armies the soldiers were intelligent men--not mere
creatures of drill--who thought for themselves, and while those in the
Army of Northern Virginia were ready, even eager to fight if it were
pushed upon them, they knew the great danger of their position.  Now
the word ran along the whole line that if they fought at all it would
be on their side of the river.

Harry and Dalton did not sleep that night.  They could not have done so
had the chance been offered.  They like others rode all through the
darkness carrying messages to the different commands, insuring exact
cooperation.  As the hours of the night passed the aspect of everything
grew better.  The river had fallen so fast that it would be fordable
before morning.

But after midnight the clouds gathered, thunder crashed, lightning
played and the violent rain of a summer storm enveloped them again.
Harry viewed it at first with dismay, and then he found consolation.
The darkness and the storm would cover their retreat, as it had covered
the retreat of their enemy, Hooker, after Chancellorsville.

Harry and Dalton rode close behind Lee, who sat erect on his white
horse, supervising the first movement of troops over the new and
shaking bridge. Harry noted with amazement that despite his enormous
exertions, physical and mental, and an intense anxiety, continuous for
many days, he did not yet show signs of fatigue.  Word had come that a
part of the army was already fording the river, near Williamsport, but
this bridge near Falling Waters was the most important point.  General
Lee and his staff sat there on their horses a long time, while the rain
beat unheeded upon them.

Few scenes are engraved more vividly upon the mind of Harry Kenton than
those dusky hours before the dawn, the flashes of lightning, the almost
incessant rumble of thunder, the turbid and yellow river across which
stretched the bridge, a mere black thread in the darkness, swaying and
dipping and rising and creaking as horse and foot, and batteries and
ammunition wagons passed upon it.

There were torches, but they flared and smoked in the rain and cast a
light so weak and fitful that Harry could not see the farther shore.
The Army of Northern Virginia marched out upon a shaking bridge and
disappeared in the black gulf beyond.  Only the lack of an alarm coming
back showed that it was reaching the farther shore.

"Dawn will soon be here," said Dalton.

"So it will," said Harry, "and most of the troops are across.  Ah,
there go the Invincibles!  Look how they ride!"

Colonel Leonidas Talbot and Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St. Hilaire at
the head of their scanty band were just passing.  They took off their
hats, and swept a low bow to the great chief who sat silently on his
white horse within a few yards of them.  Then, side by side, they rode
upon the shaking bridge, followed by Langdon, St. Clair and their brave
comrades, and disappeared, where the bridge disappeared, in the rain
and mist.

"Brave men!" murmured Lee.

Harry, always watching his commander-in-chief, saw now for the first
time signs of fatigue and nervousness.  The tremendous strain was
wearing him down.  But while the rain still poured and ran in streams
from his gray hair and gray beard, the rear guard of the Army of
Northern Virginia passed upon the bridge, and Stuart, all his plumes
bedraggled, rode up to his chief, a smoking cup of coffee in his hand.

"Drink this, General, won't you?" he said.

He seized it, drank all of the coffee eagerly, and then handing back
the cup, said:

"I never before in my life drank anything that refreshed me so much."

Then he, with his staff, Stuart and some other generals rode over the
bridge, disappearing in their turn into the darkness and mist that had
swallowed up the others, but emerging, as the others had done, into the
safety of the Southern shore.

Meade and his generals had held a council the night before but nearly
all the officers advised against attack.  This night he made up his
mind to move against Lee anyhow, and was ready at dawn, only to find
the whole Southern army gone.




CHAPTER IX

IN SOCIETY


Harry, when the dawn had fully come, was sent farther away toward the
ford to see if the remainder of the troops had passed, and, when he
returned with the welcome news, the rain had ceased to fall.  The army
was rapidly drying itself in the brilliant sunshine, and marched
leisurely on.  He felt an immense relief.  He knew that a great crisis
had been passed, and, if the Northern armies ever reached Richmond, it
would be a long and sanguinary road.  Meade might get across and
attack, but his advantage was gone.

The same spirit of relief pervaded the ranks, and the men sang their
battle songs.  There had been some fighting at one or two of the fords,
but it did not amount to much, and no enemy hung on their rear.  But no
stop was made by the staff until noon, when a fire was made and food
was cooked.  Then Harry was notified that he and Dalton were to start
that night with dispatches for Richmond.  They were to ride through
dangerous country, until they reached a point on the railroad, wholly
within the Southern lines, when they would take a train for the
Confederate capital.

They were glad to go.  They felt sure that no great battles would be
fought while they were gone.  Neither army seemed to be in a mood for
further fighting just yet, and they longed for a sight of the little
city that was the heart of the Confederacy.  They were tired of the
rifle and march, of cannon and battles.  They wished to be a while
where civilized life went on, to hear the bells of churches and to see
the faces of women.

It seemed to them both that they had lived almost all their lives in
war. Even Jeb Stuart's ball, stopped by the opening guns of a great
battle, was far, far away, and to Harry, it was at least a century
since he had closed his Tacitus in the Pendleton Academy, and put it
away in his desk. That old Roman had written something of battles, but
they were no such struggles as Chancellorsville and Gettysburg had
been.  The legions, he admitted in his youthful pride, could fight
well, but they never could have beaten Yank or Reb.

He and Dalton slept through the afternoon and directly after dark, well
equipped and well-armed, they made their start into the South. But in
going they did not neglect to pass the camp of the Invincibles who were
now in the apex of the army farthest south.  They had found an
unusually comfortable place on a grassy plot beside a fine, cool
spring, and most of them were lying down.  But Colonel Talbot and
Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St. Hilaire sat on empty kegs, with a board
on an empty box between them.  The great game which ran along with the
war had been renewed.  St. Clair and Langdon sat on the grass beside
them, watching the contest.

The two colonels looked up at the sound of hoofs and paused a moment.

"I'm getting his king into a close corner, Harry," said Colonel Talbot,
"and he'll need a lot of time for thinking.  Where are you two going,
or perhaps I shouldn't ask you such a question?"

"There's no secret about it," replied Harry.  "We're going to Richmond
with dispatches."

"He was incorrect in saying that he was getting my king into a close
corner, as I'll presently show him," said Lieutenant-Colonel St.
Hilaire; "but you boys are lucky.  I suppose you'll stay a while in the
capital. You'll sleep in white beds, you'll eat at tables, with
tablecloths on 'em.  You'll hear the soft voices of the women and girls
of the South, God bless 'em!"

"And if you went on to Charleston you'd find just as fine women there,"
said Colonel Leonidas Talbot.

He sighed and a shade of sadness crossed his face.  Harry heard and saw
and understood.  He remembered a night long, long ago in that heat of
rebellion, when he had looked down from the window of his room, and, in
the dark, had seen two figures, a man and a woman, upon a piazza,
Colonel Talbot and Madame Delaunay, talking softly together.  He had
felt then that he was touching almost unconsciously upon the thread of
an old romance.  A thread slender and delicate, but yet strong enough
in its very tenderness and delicacy to hold them both.  The perfume of
the flowers and of the old romance that night in the town so far away
came back.  He was moved, and when his eyes met Colonel Talbot's some
kind of an understanding passed between them.

"The good are never rewarded," said Happy Tom.

"How so?" asked Harry.

"Because the proof of it sits on his horse here before us.  Why should
a man like George Dalton be sent to Richmond?  A sour Puritan who does
not know how to enjoy a dance or anything else, who looks upon the
beautiful face of a girl as a sin and an abomination, who thinks to be
ugly is to be good, who is by temperament and education unfit to enjoy
anything, while Thomas Langdon, who by the same measurements is fit to
enjoy everything, is left here to hold back the Army of the Potomac.
It's undoubtedly a tribute to my valor, but I don't like it."

"Thomas," said Colonel Leonidas Talbot, gravely, "you're entirely too
severe with our worthy young friend, Dalton.  The bubbles of pleasure
always lie beneath austere and solemn exteriors like his, seeking to
break a way to the surface.  The longer the process is delayed the more
numerous the bubbles are and the greater they expand.  If scandalous
reports concerning a certain young man in Richmond should reach us here
in the North, relating his unparalleled exploits in the giddier circles
of our gay capital, I should know without the telling that it was our
prim young George Dalton."

"You never spoke truer words, Leonidas," said Lieutenant-Colonel Hector
St. Hilaire.  "A little judicious gallantry in youth is good for any
one. It keeps the temperature from going too high.  I recall now the
case of Auguste Champigny, who owned an estate in Louisiana, near the
Louisiana estate of the St. Hilaires, and the estates of those cousins
of mine whom I visited, as I told you once.

"But pardon me.  I digress, and to digress is to grow old, so I will
not digress, but remain young, in heart at least.  I go back now.  I
was speaking of Auguste Champigny, who in youth thought only of making
money and of making his plantation, already great, many times greater.
The blood in his veins was old at twenty-two.  He did not love the
vices that the world calls such.  But yet there were times, I knew,
when he would have longed to go with the young, because youth cannot be
crushed wholly at twenty-two.  There was no escape of the spirits, no
wholesome blood-letting, so to speak, and that which was within him
became corrupt. He acquired riches and more riches, and land and more
land, and at fifty he went to New Orleans, and sought the places where
pleasures abound. But his true blossoming time had passed.  The blood
in his veins now became poison.  He did the things that twenty should
