"No-o; not really; only when I remember there's only little Susan to
manage the twins; though they're getting on real well without me. But I
kind of think, Rebecca, that I'm going to be given away to the Foggs for
good."

"Do you mean adopted?"

"Yes; I think father's going to sign papers. You see we can't tell how
many years it'll be before the poor baby outgrows its burns, and Mrs.
Fogg'll never be the same again, and she must have somebody to help
her."

"You'll be their real daughter, then, won't you, Clara Belle? And
Mr. Fogg is a deacon, and a selectman, and a road commissioner, and
everything splendid."

"Yes; I'll have board, and clothes, and school, and be named Fogg, and"
(here her voice sank to an awed whisper) "the upper farm if I should
ever get married; Miss Dearborn told me that herself, when she was
persuading me not to mind being given away."

"Clara Belle Simpson!" exclaimed Rebecca in a transport. "Who'd have
thought you'd be a female hero and an heiress besides? It's just like
a book story, and it happened in Riverboro. I'll make Uncle Jerry Cobb
allow there CAN be Riverboro stories, you see if I don't."

"Of course I know it's all right," Clara Belle replied soberly. "I'll
have a good home and father can't keep us all; but it's kind of dreadful
to be given away, like a piano or a horse and carriage!"

Rebecca's hand went out sympathetically to Clara Belle's freckled paw.
Suddenly her own face clouded and she whispered:

"I'm not sure, Clara Belle, but I'm given away too--do you s'pose I
am? Poor father left us in debt, you see. I thought I came away from
Sunnybrook to get an education and then help pay off the mortgage; but
mother doesn't say anything about my coming back, and our family's one
of those too-big ones, you know, just like yours."

"Did your mother sign papers to your aunts?'

"If she did I never heard anything about it; but there's something
pinned on to the mortgage that mother keeps in the drawer of the
bookcase."

"You'd know it if twas adoption papers; I guess you're just lent," Clara
Belle said cheeringly. "I don't believe anybody'd ever give YOU away!
And, oh! Rebecca, father's getting on so well! He works on Daly's farm
where they raise lots of horses and cattle, too, and he breaks all the
young colts and trains them, and swaps off the poor ones, and drives
all over the country. Daly told Mr. Fogg he was splendid with stock,
and father says it's just like play. He's sent home money three Saturday
nights."

"I'm so glad!" exclaimed Rebecca sympathetically. "Now your mother'll
have a good time and a black silk dress, won't she?"

"I don't know," sighed Clara Belle, and her voice was grave. "Ever since
I can remember she's just washed and cried and cried and washed. Miss
Dearborn has been spending her vacation up to Acreville, you know,
and she came yesterday to board next door to Mrs. Fogg's. I heard them
talking last night when I was getting the baby to sleep--I couldn't
help it, they were so close--and Miss Dearborn said mother doesn't like
Acreville; she says nobody takes any notice of her, and they don't give
her any more work. Mrs. Fogg said, well, they were dreadful stiff and
particular up that way and they liked women to have wedding rings."

"Hasn't your mother got a wedding ring?" asked Rebecca, astonished.
"Why, I thought everybody HAD to have them, just as they do sofas and a
kitchen stove!"

"I never noticed she didn't have one, but when they spoke I remembered
mother's hands washing and wringing, and she doesn't wear one, I know.
She hasn't got any jewelry, not even a breast-pin."

Rebecca's tone was somewhat censorious, "your father's been so poor
perhaps he couldn't afford breast-pins, but I should have thought he'd
have given your mother a wedding ring when they were married; that's the
time to do it, right at the very first."

"They didn't have any real church dress-up wedding," explained Clara
Belle extenuatingly. "You see the first mother, mine, had the big boys
and me, and then she died when we were little. Then after a while this
mother came to housekeep, and she stayed, and by and by she was Mrs.
Simpson, and Susan and the twins and the baby are hers, and she and
father didn't have time for a regular wedding in church. They don't have
veils and bridesmaids and refreshments round here like Miss Dearborn's
sister did."

"Do they cost a great deal--wedding rings?" asked Rebecca thoughtfully.
"They're solid gold, so I s'pose they do. If they were cheap we might
buy one. I've got seventy-four cents saved up; how much have you?"

"Fifty-three," Clara Belle responded, in a depressing tone; "and anyway
there are no stores nearer than Milltown. We'd have to buy it secretly,
for I wouldn't make father angry, or shame his pride, now he's got
steady work; and mother would know I had spent all my savings."

Rebecca looked nonplussed. "I declare," she said, "I think the Acreville
people must be perfectly horrid not to call on your mother only because
she hasn't got any jewelry. You wouldn't dare tell your father what Miss
Dearborn heard, so he'd save up and buy the ring?"

"No; I certainly would not!" and Clara Belle's lips closed tightly and
decisively.

Rebecca sat quietly for a few moments, then she exclaimed jubilantly:
"I know where we could get it! From Mr. Aladdin, and then I needn't tell
him who it's for! He's coming to stay over tomorrow with his aunt, and
I'll ask him to buy a ring for us in Boston. I won't explain anything,
you know; I'll just say I need a wedding ring."

"That would be perfectly lovely," replied Clara Belle, a look of hope
dawning in her eyes; "and we can think afterwards how to get it over to
mother. Perhaps you could send it to father instead, but I wouldn't dare
to do it myself. You won't tell anybody, Rebecca?"

"Cross my heart!" Rebecca exclaimed dramatically; and then with a
reproachful look, "you know I couldn't repeat a sacred secret like
that! Shall we meet next Saturday afternoon, and I tell you what's
happened?--Why, Clara Belle, isn't that Mr. Ladd watering his horse at
the foot of the hill this very minute? It is; and he's driven up from
Milltown stead of coming on the train from Boston to Edgewood. He's all
alone, and I can ride home with him and ask him about the ring right
away!"

Clara Belle kissed Rebecca fervently, and started on her homeward
walk, while Rebecca waited at the top of the long hill, fluttering her
handkerchief as a signal.

"Mr. Aladdin! Mr. Aladdin!" she cried, as the horse and wagon came
nearer.

Adam Ladd drew up quickly at the sound of the eager young voice.

"Well, well; here is Rebecca Rowena fluttering along the highroad like a
red-winged blackbird! Are you going to fly home, or drive with me?"

Rebecca clambered into the carriage, laughing and blushing with delight
at his nonsense and with joy at seeing him again.

"Clara Belle and I were just talking about you this minute, and I'm so
glad you came this way, for there's something very important to ask you
about," she began, rather breathlessly.

"No doubt," laughed Adam Ladd, who had become, in the course of his
acquaintance with Rebecca, a sort of high court of appeals; "I hope the
premium banquet lamp doesn't smoke as it grows older?"

"Now, Mr. Aladdin, you WILL not remember nicely. Mr. Simpson swapped off
the banquet lamp when he was moving the family to Acreville; it's not
the lamp at all, but once, when you were here last time, you said you'd
make up your mind what you were going to give me for Christmas."

"Well," and "I do remember that much quite nicely."

"Well, is it bought?"

"No, I never buy Christmas presents before Thanksgiving."

"Then, DEAR Mr. Aladdin, would you buy me something different, something
that I want to give away, and buy it a little sooner than Christmas?"

"That depends. I don't relish having my Christmas presents given away.
I like to have them kept forever in little girls' bureau drawers, all
wrapped in pink tissue paper; but explain the matter and perhaps I'll
change my mind. What is it you want?"

"I need a wedding ring dreadfully," said Rebecca, "but it's a sacred
secret."

Adam Ladd's eyes flashed with surprise and he smiled to himself with
pleasure. Had he on his list of acquaintances, he asked himself, a
person of any age or sex so altogether irresistible and unique as this
child? Then he turned to face her with the merry teasing look that made
him so delightful to young people.

"I thought it was perfectly understood between us," he said, "that if
you could ever contrive to grow up and I were willing to wait, that I
was to ride up to the brick house on my snow white"--

"Coal black," corrected Rebecca, with a sparkling eye and a warning
finger.

"Coal black charger; put a golden circlet on your lily white finger,
draw you up behind me on my pillion"--

"And Emma Jane, too," Rebecca interrupted.

"I think I didn't mention Emma Jane," argued Mr. Aladdin. "Three on a
pillion is very uncomfortable. I think Emma Jane leaps on the back of a
prancing chestnut, and we all go off to my castle in the forest."

"Emma Jane never leaps, and she'd be afraid of a prancing chestnut,"
objected Rebecca.

"Then she shall have a gentle cream-colored pony; but now, without any
explanation, you ask me to buy you a wedding ring, which shows
plainly that you are planning to ride off on a snow white--I mean coal
black--charger with somebody else."

Rebecca dimpled and laughed with joy at the nonsense. In her prosaic
world no one but Adam Ladd played the game and answered the fool
according to his folly. Nobody else talked delicious fairy-story twaddle
but Mr. Aladdin.

"The ring isn't for ME!" she explained carefully. "You know very well
that Emma Jane nor I can't be married till we're through Quackenbos's
Grammar, Greenleaf's Arithmetic, and big enough to wear long trails and
run a sewing machine. The ring is for a friend."

"Why doesn't the groom give it to his bride himself?"

"Because he's poor and kind of thoughtless, and anyway she isn't a bride
any more; she has three step and three other kind of children."

Adam Ladd put the whip back in the socket thoughtfully, and then stooped
to tuck in the rug over Rebecca's feet and his own. When he raised his
head again he asked: "Why not tell me a little more, Rebecca? I'm safe!"

Rebecca looked at him, feeling his wisdom and strength, and above all
his sympathy. Then she said hesitatingly: "You remember I told you all
about the Simpsons that day on your aunt's porch when you bought the
soap because I told you how the family were always in trouble and how
much they needed a banquet lamp? Mr. Simpson, Clara Belle's father, has
always been very poor, and not always very good,--a little bit THIEVISH,
you know--but oh, so pleasant and nice to talk to! And now he's turning
over a new leaf. And everybody in Riverboro liked Mrs. Simpson when she
came here a stranger, because they were sorry for her and she was so
patient, and such a hard worker, and so kind to the children. But where
she lives now, though they used to know her when she was a girl, they're
not polite to her and don't give her scrubbing and washing; and Clara
belle heard our teacher say to Mrs. Fogg that the Acreville people were
stiff, and despised her because she didn't wear a wedding ring, like all
the rest. And Clara Belle and I thought if they were so mean as that,
we'd love to give her one, and then she'd be happier and have more
work; and perhaps Mr. Simpson if he gets along better will buy her a
breast-pin and earrings, and she'll be fitted out like the others. I
know Mrs. Peter Meserve is looked up to by everybody in Edgewood on
account of her gold bracelets and moss agate necklace."

Adam turned again to meet the luminous, innocent eyes that glowed under
the delicate brows and long lashes, feeling as he had more than once
felt before, as if his worldly-wise, grown-up thoughts had been bathed
in some purifying spring.

"How shall you send the ring to Mrs. Simpson?" he asked, with interest.

"We haven't settled yet; Clara Belle's afraid to do it, and thinks I
could manage better. Will the ring cost much? Because, of course, if it
does, I must ask Aunt Jane first. There are things I have to ask Aunt
Miranda, and others that belong to Aunt Jane."

"It costs the merest trifle. I'll buy one and bring it to you, and we'll
consult about it; but I think as you're great friends with Mr. Simpson
you'd better send it to him in a letter, letters being your strong
point! It's a present a man ought to give his own wife, but it's worth
trying, Rebecca. You and Clara Belle can manage it between you, and I'll
stay in the background where nobody will see me."




Ninth Chronicle. THE GREEN ISLE

     Many a green isle needs must be
     In the deep sea of misery,
     Or the mariner, worn and wan,
     Never thus could voyage on
     Day and night and night and day,
     Drifting on his weary way.

     --Shelley


Meantime in these frosty autumn days life was crowded with events in the
lonely Simpson house at Acreville.

The tumble-down dwelling stood on the edge of Pliney's Pond; so called
because old Colonel Richardson left his lands to be divided in five
equal parts, each share to be chosen in turn by one of his five sons,
Pliny, the eldest, having priority of choice.

Pliny Richardson, having little taste for farming, and being ardently
fond of fishing, rowing, and swimming, acted up to his reputation
of being "a little mite odd," and took his whole twenty acres in
water--hence Pliny's Pond.

The eldest Simpson boy had been working on a farm in Cumberland County
for two years. Samuel, generally dubbed "see-saw," had lately found a
humble place in a shingle mill and was partially self-supporting. Clara
Belle had been adopted by the Foggs; thus there were only three mouths
to fill, the capacious ones of Elijah and Elisha, the twin boys, and
of lisping, nine-year-old Susan, the capable houseworker and
mother's assistant, for the baby had died during the summer; died of
discouragement at having been born into a family unprovided with food
or money or love or care, or even with desire for, or appreciation of,
babies.

There was no doubt that the erratic father of the house had turned over
a new leaf. Exactly when he began, or how, or why, or how long he would
continue the praiseworthy process,--in a word whether there would be
more leaves turned as the months went on,--Mrs. Simpson did not know,
and it is doubtful if any authority lower than that of Mr. Simpson's
Maker could have decided the matter. He had stolen articles for swapping
purposes for a long time, but had often avoided detection, and always
escaped punishment until the last few years. Three fines imposed for
small offenses were followed by several arrests and two imprisonments
for brief periods, and he found himself wholly out of sympathy with
the wages of sin. Sin itself he did not especially mind, but the wages
thereof were decidedly unpleasant and irksome to him. He also minded
very much the isolated position in the community which had lately become
his; for he was a social being and would ALMOST rather not steal from a
neighbor than have him find it out and cease intercourse! This feeling
was working in him and rendering him unaccountably irritable and
depressed when he took his daughter over to Riverboro at the time of the
great flag-raising.

There are seasons of refreshment, as well as seasons of drought, in the
spiritual, as in the natural world, and in some way or other dews
and rains of grace fell upon Abner Simpson's heart during that brief
journey. Perhaps the giving away of a child that he could not support
had made the soil of his heart a little softer and readier for planting
than usual; but when he stole the new flag off Mrs. Peter Meserve's
doorsteps, under the impression that the cotton-covered bundle
contained freshly washed clothes, he unconsciously set certain forces in
operation.

It will be remembered that Rebecca saw an inch of red bunting peeping
from the back of his wagon, and asked the pleasure of a drive with him.
She was no daughter of the regiment, but she proposed to follow the
flag. When she diplomatically requested the return of the sacred
object which was to be the glory of the "raising" next day, and he thus
discovered his mistake, he was furious with himself for having slipped
into a disagreeable predicament; and later, when he unexpectedly faced
a detachment of Riverboro society at the cross-roads, and met not only
their wrath and scorn, but the reproachful, disappointed glance of
Rebecca's eyes, he felt degraded as never before.

The night at the Centre tavern did not help matters, nor the jolly
patriotic meeting of the three villages at the flag-raising next
morning. He would have enjoyed being at the head and front of the
festive preparations, but as he had cut himself off from all such
friendly gatherings, he intended at any rate to sit in his wagon on the
very outskirts of the assembled crowd and see some of the gayety; for,
heaven knows, he had little enough, he who loved talk, and song, and
story, and laughter, and excitement.

The flag was raised, the crowd cheered, the little girl to whom he had
lied, the girl who was impersonating the State of Maine, was on the
platform "speaking her piece," and he could just distinguish some of the
words she was saying:

"For it's your star, my star, all the stars together, That makes our
country's flag so proud To float in the bright fall weather."

Then suddenly there was a clarion voice cleaving the air, and he saw
a tall man standing in the centre of the stage and heard him crying:
