the Toad is left alone; therefore it goes about wherever it likes.

The Rat does not come out of its hole and walk about except at night.

What the Toad and the Rat did, this I heard, and have told to thee.
This fable of the Toad and the Rat is now finished.



The Lion and the Wild Dog

The Lion said to the Wild Dog that he did not fear any one in the
forest except these four, viz., tree-leaves, grass, flies, and earth,
and when the Wild Dog said, "There is certainly one stronger than
thou," the Lion replied to the Wild Dog, "I kill the young ones of the
elephant, the wild cow, and the leopard, and bring them to my children
to be eaten.  If I give one roar, all the beasts of the forest tremble,
every one of them, on hearing me roar; none is greater than I within
this forest."

The Wild Dog said to the Lion, "As thou sayest that thou fearest not
any one in this forest, so let us go and show me thy house; and I will
come and call thee, in order to show thee a place where a black bird
comes to eat, as soon as I shall see him again."

The Lion took the Wild Dog with him and showed him his house; and then
the Wild Dog went home.

The next day, when a hunter was come to the forest the Wild Dog, on
seeing him, went to the Lion's house, and said to the Lion:

"Brother Lion, come, and follow me, and I will show thee something
which I have seen."

The Lion arose and followed the Wild Dog, and when they were come to
where the hunter was, the hunter prepared himself: he had put on his
forest garment, had sewn the bill of a long bird to his cap, and put it
on his head, and he walked as a bird.  The Wild Dog, seeing him, said
to the Lion:

"Brother Lion, yonder is that black bird.  Go and catch him, and when
thou hast caught him, please give me one of his legs, for I want it for
a charm."

The Lion attended to what the Wild Dog said, and went softly to where
the bird was; but the Wild Dog ran back.

The Lion went, thinking, "I will kill the bird," but he did not know
that on seeing him the hunter had prepared himself, and taken out his
arrow; so, as he thought, "I will go and seize the bird," and was come
close to the hunter, the hunter shot an arrow at the Lion and hit him.
Then the Lion fell back, and having got up and fallen down three times,
the arrow took effect and he felt giddy.  In the same moment the hunter
had disappeared[1] so that he saw him no more.  Then the Lion recovered
his courage and went very gently home.

On his arrival at home the Wild Dog said to him:

"Brother Lion, as thou saidst to me that thou art not afraid of any one
in the world except our Lord, tree-leaves, grass, flies, and dirt, why
didst thou not catch that black bird which I showed thee, and bring it
to thy children?"

The Lion replied, "This man's strength is greater than mine."

Then the Wild Dog said again, "Thou saidst that thou fearest no one,
except grass, flies, earth and tree-leaves; thou fearest, lest when
thou enterest the forest, the leaves of trees should touch thee, or
lest grass should touch thy body, or lest flies should sit on thy skin;
thou also fearest to lie upon the bare earth, and thou fearest our
Lord, who created thee: all these thou fearest, 'but not any other I
fear within this forest,' thou saidst; and yet I showed thee a bird,
the which thou couldst not kill, but thou leftest it, and rannest home;
now tell me how this bird looks?"

The Lion answered and said to the Wild Dog: "Wild Dog, what thou saidst
is true, and I believe it; a black man is something to be feared; if we
do not fear a black man neither shall we fear our Lord who created us."

Now all the wild beasts which God has created hunt for their food in
the forest, and eat it; but as soon as they see one black man standing,
they do not stop and wait, but run away.  Now the following beasts are
dangerous in the forest: viz., the leopard, the lion, the wild cow, the
wild dog and the hyena; but when they see a black man, they do not stop
and wait.  As for the dispute which the Lion and the Wild Dog had, the
Wild Dog was right, and the Lion gave him his right; then they shook
hands again, and each went and ran to his own home.  This fable, which
I heard, respecting the Wild Dog and the Lion, is now finished.

[1]This refers to the universal belief that hunters are able to render
themselves invisible, in moments of danger, by the operation of charms
and witchcraft.



How Sense Was Distributed

In the beginning not one of all the beasts of the forest was endowed
with sense: when they saw a hunter come to them intending to kill them,
they stood and looked at the hunter, and so the hunter killed them; day
after day he killed them.  Then our Lord sent one who put all the sense
into a bag, tied it, carried it, and put it down under a large tree.

The Weasel saw the man put the bag down, and afterward went, called the
Hare, and said to him:

"Brother Hare, I saw a man put something down under a tree, but as I
went to take it, I could not; so let us go and if thou wilt take it I
will show it to thee that thou mayest do so."

When the Weasel and the Hare had gone together to where the bag was,
the Weasel said to the Hare, "Behold, here is the thing which I could
not take and for which I called thee here."

But as the Hare went and attempted to take it, he could not, so he left
it and went away.

When he was gone the Weasel went again to take hold of the bag, but as
he attempted to take it, it was too heavy; so the Weasel did not know
what to do.  Then came a Pigeon, who sat upon a tree, and said
something to the Weasel.  The Weasel heard it say: "Lean it over and
take it."  And again, "Bend it and take it."

As soon as he had heard this, he dragged the bag along and thus brought
it and leaned it against a tree, and caused it to stand in an inclined
position; then having gone to the bottom of it, he bowed down, put his
head to the bag, and as he drew the bag toward him it went upon his
head; this being done, he pressed himself upon the ground, rose up and
stood there.  After this he went his way home, and on putting the bag
down upon the ground and untying it, the Weasel saw that there was no
other thing in the bag, but pure sense.

So he went and called the Hare again, and when the Hare was come, he
said to him:

"Brother Hare, there was not a single other thing in that bag but pure
sense: God has loved us so that to-day we have obtained sense; but do
not tell it to anybody, then I will give thee a little, and what
remains I will hide in my hole until some one comes and begs of me, and
then I will give him also a little."

So he took one sense and gave to the Hare, saying, "If thou takest home
this one sense, which I give thee, it will preserve thee.  When thou
sleepest by day open thy eyes; then if one comes to thee, thinking, 'I
have got meat, I will take it,' and sees that thine eyes are open, he
will think that thou art not asleep, will leave thee alone and go; but
when thou goest and liest down without sleeping, then shut thine eyes,
and if one sees thee, and sees that thine eyes are shut, when he comes
close to thee, saying, 'I have got meat, I will take it,' then thou
wilt see him, rise up and run away into thy forest.  This one sense
will be enough for thee; but what remains I will keep in mine own
house."  The Hare took his one sense and went home.

Now if one sees a Hare lying with his eyes open, it sleeps, but if its
eyes are closed it is awake, and does not sleep.  By this one sense
which it has got the Hare is preserved.

The Weasel took all the sense that was left and hid it in his house.
The Weasel surpasses all the beasts of the field in sense.  When you
see the Weasel, and say, "There the King of Sense has come out," and
drive it before you, saying, "I will catch it," it runs into its hole;
and if you begin to dig up the hole, it comes out behind you, and runs
until you see it no more.  This is why now if one sees a Weasel, one
calls it "The King of Sense."

Amongst all the beasts of the field he distributed sense only little by
little, and this is what they now have.

This word, showing how sense came abroad in the world, and the meaning
of which I have heard, is now finished.



What Employment Our Lord Gave to Insects

All the Insects assembled and went to our Lord to seek employment.  On
their arrival they said to our Lord, "Thou hast given every one his
work; now give us also a work to do, that we may have something to eat."

Our Lord attended to the request of the Insects, and said to them, "Who
will give notice that to-morrow all the Insects are to come?"

The Merchant-insect arose and said to our Lord, "The Cricket can give
notice well."

So our Lord called the Cricket and said to him when he was come, "Go
and give notice this evening, when the sun has set, that to-morrow
morning all the Insects are to come to me, for I wish to see them."

The Cricket, obeying our Lord's command, went back to his house, waited
until evening, until the sun set, and as soon as he had seen the
setting of the sun, he prepared and arose to give notice.  So when the
Cricket had given notice until midnight, our Lord sent a man to him
saying: "Go and tell the Cricket, that there has been much notice, and
that it is now enough; else he will have the headache."  But the
Cricket would not hear, he said: "If I am out they will see me."  So he
went into his hole, stretched only his head out, and began to give
notice.  The Cricket went on giving notice until the day dawned; but
when it was day he became silent and stopped giving notice.  Then all
the Insects arose and went to the prayer-place of our Lord, the
Merchant alone being left behind.  To all the Insects who came first,
our Lord gave their employment, which they all took and went home.

Afterward also the Merchant-insect went to our Lord, and our Lord said
to him: "To all thy people who came before, I have given their work,
and they are gone; now what kept thee back that thou camest to me last?"

The Merchant-insect replied to our Lord, "My bags are many and on the
day when I took my bags and bound them up in my large travelling sacks
to load them upon my asses, then my people left me behind and came to
thee first."

Our Lord said to him: "All other employments are assigned; the people
who came first took them and went away; but stop, I will also give one
to thee.  Go, and having arrived at the entrance of the black ants,
where are a great many ant-heads, when thou seest these many heads of
the black ants, take them, and fill thy bags with them; then load thy
bags upon thy ass, carry them to market, spread mats there, and sell
them."

So the Merchant-insect obtained his employment, drove his ass, and went
from our Lord, picked up ant-heads at the entrance of the black ants,
loaded his ass, and went his way to the market.  As he went the ass
threw off the large bag.  Then, he alone not being able to lift the
bag, he called people, saying: "Come, be so good as to help me; let us
take the sacks and load mine ass;" but not any of the people would do
so.  Then the little red ants came after him, and when they were come
to where he was, he said to them, "Please come and help me to load mine
ass".  The little red Ants said to the Merchant-insect, "We will not
help thee for nothing."

The Merchant-insect said to the little red Ants, "If you will not help
me for nothing, then come and help me, and when I have come back from
the market, I will pay you."

The little red Ants helped him to load his ass, and the Merchant-insect
drove his ass to the market, put down his sacks in the midst of the
market-place, prepared the ground, spread his mat there, and having
sold his ant-heads, he bought his things, and the market people began
to disperse.

Then the Merchant-insect started on his way home, and as he went the
little red Ants saw him, and said to him, "Father-merchant, give us
what thou owest us."

The Merchant, however, refused them their due, and went on his way.
Now as he went he got fever so that he sat down under a tree, tied his
ass fast, and took off the sacks from his ass's back.   As he sat there
the fever overpowered him, and he lay down.  On seeing him lying the
little red Ants assembled and came to him.  Now the fever was consuming
the Merchant-insect's strength, and when the little red Ants saw this
they assembled together and killed him.

There was one Insect who saw them kill him, and he ran to our Lord, and
said to him, "All the little red Ants assembled together and killed a
man in the midst of the town--that I saw it."

When our Lord heard what the Insect said he called a man and sent him,
saying: "Go and call the little red Ants which kill people and bring
them to me."

The messenger arose, went, called all the little red Ants and brought
them before our Lord.  On seeing the little red Ants, our Lord asked
them, "Why did you kill the man?"  The little red Ants answered, and
said to our Lord, "The reason why we killed this man is this: When he
went to market and his ass had thrown off the sacks, those sacks were
too heavy for him to take alone, so he called us, and when we came to
him, he said to us, 'Please help me to take my large bag and load it
upon mine ass, that I may go to market.  When I have sold my things and
come back, I will pay you.'  Accordingly we helped him to load his ass;
but when he had gone to market and sold all his things there, we saw
him on his return home, and went to him, to ask him for what he owed
us; but he refused it, drove his ass, and went homeward.  However, he
was only gone a little while, when he got fever, sat down under a tree,
tied his ass fast, took off his sacks and laid them down; and on the
same spot where he sat down, the fever overpowered him that he lay
down.  Then on seeing him lying we went, assembled ourselves and killed
him, because he had refused what he owed us."

Our Lord gave them right.

Our Lord said to the Merchant, "Thou goest to market until thy life
stands still."  Our Lord said to the Cricket, "Do thou give notice
whenever it is time!  This is thy work."

Our Lord said to the little red Ants, "Whenever ye see any Insect
unwell and lying down in a place, then go, assemble yourselves and
finish it."

Now the Cricket begins to give notice as soon as it is evening and does
not keep silence in his hole until the morning comes; this is its
employment.  The Merchant has no farm and does not do any work, but
constantly goes to market; this is its employment, given to it by the
Lord.  Now the little red Ants, whenever they see an Insect unwell and
lying down they go and assemble themselves against that Insect, and,
even if that Insect has not yet expired they finish it.  This our Lord
gave to the little red Ants for their employment.

I have now told thee the fable of the Insects, which I have heard of
Omar Pesami.  This is finished.



Man and Turtle

Let me tell of Turtle of Koka.

Man of Lubi la Suku caught a Turtle in the bush; he came with it to the
village.  They said: "Let us kill it!"

Some people said: "How shall we kill it?"  They said: "We shall cut it
with hatchets." Turtle replied, saying:

  "Turtle of Koka,
  And hatchet of Koka;
  Hatchet not kill me a bit."

The people said: "What shall we kill him with?"  Some said: "We shall
kill him with stones."  Turtle, fear grasped him, he said: "I am going
to die."  He says by mouth:

  "Turtle of Koka,
  And stone of Koka;
  Stone will not kill me a bit."

The people said: "Let us cast him into the fire!"  Turtle said:

  "Turtle of Koka,
  And fire of Koka;
  Fire will not kill me a bit.
  On my back,
  It is like stone;
  Not there can
  Catch on fire."

The people said: "We will kill him with knives."  Turtle said:

  "Turtle of Koka,
  And knife of Koka;
  Knife will not kill me a bit."

The people said: "This fellow, how shall we do?  How shall we kill
him?"  These said: "Let us cast him into the depth of water."  Turtle
said: "Woe!  I shall die there!  How shall I do?"  The people said: "We
have it!  We have found the way we can kill him!"

They carry him; they arrive with him at the river.  They cast him into
