the Canadian. Of course thar wouldn't have been any show for me if I
hadn't had a streak of luck. I know that country like a book, and I war
purty sartin of the trail them thieves meant to take, so I started to cut
across and head 'em off. I hadn't gone far when I come upon the camp of a
Comanche war-party, numberin' a hundred. I hadn't any trouble in picking
out an animal that suited, and then yer see I war all right, and, for fear
I might get off the track, I come back and took up the trail again, and I
kept it so hot that when they went into camp I warn't more than two miles
away; I didn't want to come any closer, for if they'd found out that I war
so near, they wouldn't have give me any kind of chance at all.

"I waited till it was dark, and thar wasn't a bit of moon that night, when
I sneaked into camp and got thar three animals agin, and heading for Port
Severn, I made up my mind to keep the thing going without giving 'em the
slightest chance to pull up. The weather had toned down so that it was
comfortable to travel, and arter I got out of hearin' of the camp, I just
swung my hat, and kicked and laughed to think how cheap them varmints
would feel when they'd come to wake up in the morning, and find out how
nice the white man had got ahead of 'em. Yer see, it war just a question
as to which of us war the smartest. We weren't going for each other's
hair--though we'd done that any other time--but for each other's hosses,
and I'd stole thars twice to thar stealin' mine once, and I still held
'em, so I had good reason to crow over 'em. Wal, sir, I made up my mind
that they warn't going to come any shenanigan over me, and I struck the
shortest line for Fort Severn. I rode through that very pass in which you
come so near getting cotched, and in fact, the place whar I got the hosses
warn't ten miles from that big cave.

"I had plain sailin' all the way into the fort, and everything went along
well. I had only to ride on my critter, when the others galloped along
like so many dogs. Yer see, I meant business, and I kept a watch for them
varmints all the time. When I stopped for food or rest, I made sartin that
they warn't anywhar in sight, and during the three or four days that
followed I never slept an hour together. I managed to snatch a few minutes
slumber while riding my mustang on a full gallop, but when I stopped to
give the animals time to rest, I kept watch, for I felt as though it would
break my heart to be outwitted again. I made the best kind of time, and my
last camp was within a dozen miles of Fort Severn. I was purty well used
up by that time, and making sure that the varmints warn't anywhar within a
day's ride, I put in a good two hours sleep. Well I never rightly
understood it," added Sut, with a sigh, "and I'm allers ashamed to tell
it, but when I went out to mount my mustang, the whole four war gone, and
the moccasin tracks on the ground showed who had took 'em. I can't
understand to this day how them varmints kept so close behind me, and how
they war ready when the chance came into their way; but they war, and they
beat me as fairly as the thing was ever done in this world."

"Didn't ye try to folly them?"

"No; I thought I might as well give up. I sneaked into the fort and tried
to keep the thing from 'em, but I couldn't tell a straight story, and they
found out how it was at last, and I don't suppose I'll ever hear the last
of it."

A short time afterward, the two laid down and slept.




CHAPTER XXII.

TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES.


All three of the little party needed rest, and none of them opened their
eyes until morning. As a simple precaution the scout smothered the fire
entirely, by scraping the ashes over the embers. Not a ray of moonlight
could reach them, and they were wrapped in the most impenetrable darkness.

As might be expected, Sut Simpson was the first to open his eyes, and by
the time the sun was up all three were stirring. Enough meat remained over
from the feast of the night before to furnish them with a substantial
breakfast, and cool, refreshing water was at hand for drink and ablution.
When the preliminaries had been completed, Sut went out to learn whether
any of the Apaches were threateningly near. He wished, too, to prepare his
horse for a ride to a point a dozen miles away, close to the margin of the
prairie, where he intended to establish himself until he could procure the
two animals that were needed by his companions. He had not been gone ten
minutes when he came back in great excitement.

"My mustang is stole, or may I be skulped!" and then he added a general
wail: "Them redskins are getting to be the greatest hoss-thieves in the
world. I don't know what's to become of us if they're going to keep on in
that way."

Mickey laughed heartily, for he recalled the narrative of the night
before. In the game for horse flesh it looked very much as if the Apaches
could be Sut's tutors.

"May I respectfully inquire where you got that crathur, in the first
place?"

"Why, I bought him of the varmints."

"How mooch did you pay?"

"Wall," laughed Sut, in turn, "I haven't paid anything yet."

"I suppose they've sint in their account till they're tired. Finding yer
doesn't pay any attention, they've come to take him back again."

"Are you sure that it was done by the Indians?" asked Fred, a little
frightened at learning that they had been so close while he slept.

"Thar ain't a bit of doubt. I've looked the ground over, and thar's the
trail, as plain as the nose on your face."

"How many?"

"Two."

"And they did it during the night?"

"No," replied the scout, displaying his wonderful woodcraft. "The varmints
come yesterday arternoon, or just at dusk, arter I'd took supper and
left."

"How do you know that?"

"I'd be a fool if I couldn't tell by the look of the trail how long ago it
war made."

It seemed impossible that such was the fact, and yet, young as was Fred,
he had heard of such things, and the scout spoke after the manner of one
who meant what he said.

"Begorra, but it's meself that has it!" exclaimed Mickey, with a sudden
lighting up of the countenance; "they're the same two spalpeens that took
your hoss down by the Staked Plain, and then follyed ye up and did the
same thing over again, just as ye was going into Fort Severn."

But the scout shook his head.

"The varmints don't know much about pity, but that's too rough a thing
even for a Comanche to repeat. I've a s'picion that Lone Wolf had a hand
in that, and I'm going for him. Come along."

And the indignant Sut strode out of camp, followed by his friends. He was
not the man to submit to such a loss, and they saw that he was in deadly
earnest. He neither spoke nor looked behind him for the next quarter of an
hour, nor were his friends able to tell what direction he was following,
for he changed so often, winding in and out among the trees, that they
could form no conjecture as to the general course taken.

They saw that he was following a trail, for he continually looked down at
the ground in front of him, and then glanced to the right and left,
occasionally inclining his head, as though he was listening for something
which he expected to hear. He appeared to be altogether unconscious of the
fact that he had companions at all and they sought to imitate his
stealthy, cat-like movement, without venturing to speak. After traveling
the distance mentioned, and while they were moving along in the same
cautious way, the scout suddenly wheeled on his knee, and faced them.

"See yer," said he; "it won't do for you to travel any further."

"What's up?" asked Mickey.

"Why, the trail's getting too hot. I ain't fur from them horses."

"Well, doesn't ye want us to stand by and obsarve the shtyle in which you
are going to scoop them in?"

Simpson shook his head.

"Ye are both too green to try this kind of business. I never could get a
chance at them varmints if I took yer along. All you've got to do is to
stay yer till I get back. That won't be long."

"Suppose you don't get back at all?" asked Fred, anxiously.

"Then yer needn't wait."

"But ain't it probable that some of the Apaches will visit us?"

The scout was quite confident that the contingency would not occur; but,
as long as they were in that part of the world, so long were they in
danger of the redskins. It was never prudent to lay aside habits of
caution; but he did not believe they were liable to molestation at that
time. He charged them to keep quiet and always on the alert, and to expect
his return within a couple of hours, although he might be delayed until
noon. They were not to feel any apprehension unless the entire day should
pass without his coming. Still, even that would be possible, he said,
without implying anything more than that he had encountered unexpected
difficulties in regaining his horse. They were still to wait for him until
the morrow, and if he continued absent they were at liberty to conclude
that the time had come for him to "pass in his checks." and they were to
make the effort to reach home the best way they could. With this
understanding they separated.

At the time Sut left his friends the trail was exceedingly "hot," as he
expressed it, and he was confident that within the next half hour he could
force matters to an issue. The scout was of the opinion that a couple of
Apaches had accidently struck his trail, or happened directly upon his
norse while he was grazing, and, without suspecting his ownership, aad
taken him away. The trail led toward the Apache camp, although by a
winding course, and that was not far away. He was desirous of coming up
with the marauders before they joined in with the others. In that case he
would consider himself fully equal to the task of getting even with them;
but it was not likely that they would go into camp when they were so close
to the main body.

Shortly after, to his great surprise, he came upon his mustang, tied by a
long lariat to the limb of a tree, and contentedly grazing upon the grass,
which was quite abundant. There was not the sign of an Indian visible.

"Skulp me! if that ain't a purty way to manage such things!" he exclaimed,
astonished at the shape the matter had taken. "Them varmints couldn't have
knowed that Sut Simpson owned that hoss, or they'd have tied him up
tighter than that, and they'd had somebody down yer to watch him; but they
war a couple of greenys, that's mighty sartin. It's a wonder they didn't
fetch out some of thar mustangs, and leave 'em whar I could lay my hands
onto 'em. But I rather think I've got my own hoss this time, as easy as a
chap need expect to get anything in this world."

There was something so curious in the fact of the horse being left alone
that Sut was a little suspicious, and decided to reconnoitre thoroughly
before venturing further. He was partly hidden behind a large tree and had
been so cautious and noiseless in his movements that his mustang, which
was one of the quickest to detect the approach of any one, was unaware of
his presence.

Sut was on the point of going forward, when a movement in the wood, on the
other side of where the animal was grazing, attracted his attention, and
he paused. At the same instant his steed lifted his head. There could be
no doubt as to the cause, for within the next minute the figure of an
Indian stepped forward toward the animal, and proceeded to examine him
with a care and minuteness which showed that he expected to identify his
ownership.

The eyes of Simpson lit up, and an expression of exultation crossed his
countenance, not merely because the redskin before him was in his power,
but because he recognized him as no one else but Lone Wolf, the Apache
war-chief.

It looked as if the horse-thieves had approached the vicinity of camp with
their plunder, and then, securing him to the branch of the tree, had gone
in and reported what they had done. Lone Wolf, suspecting, perhaps, that
it was the property of his enemy, Sut Simpson, had stolen out quietly and
alone to satisfy himself. He knew all the "trade-marks" of the hunter so
well that he could not be deceived. This was the theory which instantly
occurred to Sut, who muttered to himself:

"Oh, it's _mine_, and I'm _here_, though you don't think it, and we'll
soon shake hands over it!"

The scout speedily assured himself that Lone Wolf was alone--that he had
no half-dozen "retainers" who would immediately precipitate themselves
upon him the instant a row should begin. Lone Wolf had no rifle with him,
but carried his huge knife at his girdle--one of the most formidable
instruments ever seen.

As he walked slowly about the mustang, scrutinizing him very carefully, he
brought himself within a yard or two of where Sut Simpson crouched. The
latter waited until he was the nearest, when he stepped forward, with his
drawn knife in hand, and, placing himself directly in front of the
astounded war-chief, said:

"_Now_, Lone Wolf, we'll make our accounts square!"




CHAPTER XXIII.

BORDER CHIVALRY.


As the scout uttered these words, the Apache whirled like lightning and
drew his knife. His swarthy, painted face glowed with passion, and his
black eyes twinkled with a deadly light. Seeing that he had no weapon but
the knife, Sut Simpson, with a certain rude chivalry that did him credit,
left his rifle leaning against the tree, while he advanced with a weapon
corresponding to that of his enemy, so that both stood upon the same
footing.

"Lone Wolf is glad to meet the white dog that he has hunted so long," said
the chieftain, speaking English like a native.

With a sardonic grin Sut replied:

"That's played out, old Pockared"--alluding to the chieftain's pitted
face. "I'm just as mad at yer as I kin be, without yer getting up any
fancy didoes to upset my nerves. I've come for yer this time, and the best
thing yer kin do is to proceed to business."

They were facing each other with drawn knives--almost toe to toe, and each
waiting for the other to lead off. It would have been hard to tell which
stood the best chance of winning.

Lone Wolf suddenly sprang forward like a panther, and made a vicious lunge
with his knife, Sut easily avoiding it by leaping back, when, in turn, he
made a similar attempt upon his adversary, who escaped in precisely the
same manner. But the scout noticed an unaccountable thing. Lone Wolf had
dropped his knife!

True, he picked it up like a flash, and put himself on guard, but how it
was that a veteran like him could have made such a slip was totally
inexplainable to his foe. But the explanation came the next moment, when
the chief, without removing his eyes from those of the white man,
cautiously changed the knife to his left hand. His right arm was injured
in some way, so that it was unreliable. He had shown this, first by
dropping the weapon while attempting to use it, and he showed it again by
shifting it to his left hand, thus placing himself at a frightful
disadvantage.

Sut saw no wound, yet there could be no doubt of the truth, and his
feelings changed on the instant. He felt himself the meanest of men to
attempt to overcome an almost helpless foe.

"Lone Wolf," said he, still looking him straight in the eyes, "why don't
yer hold yer knife in the hand that yer generally do?"

"Lone Wolf can slay the dog of a white man with which hand he may choose."

"Yer haven't been able to do it with both hands during all these years
that you've been tryin', when yer've had yer whole tribe to help yer; but
don't make a fool of yerself, Lone Wolf. Are your right arm hurt?"

"Lone Wolf will fight the white dog with his strong arm."

"No, yer don't--that's played out," growled the scout, shoving his knife
back in his girdle. "I don't love yer 'any more than I love the devil, and
I felt happy to think that I had got a chance at last to git square with
yer; but when I lift the top-knot of Lone Wolf and slide him under, he's
got to have the same chance that I have. I don't believe you'd act that
way toward me; but, then, you're a redskin, and that makes the difference.
Lone Wolf, we'll adjourn the fight till you're yerself agin."

And, deliberately turning away, the scout vaulted upon the back of the
