Descheneaux, nor the others of that group. It's a gorgeous life that our
own court circle leads at Quebec, and at the great Chateau Bigot, in the
midst of its walks and flowers and gardens. I don't know why I'm telling
you these things, Mr. Lennox! It seems they should be the very last to
say to one's official enemy, but I can't feel that I'm doing anything
wrong when I do tell them to you."

His bright face was in gloom for a few moments, and Robert, quick in
perception, had a sudden feeling that this brilliant Quebec, enveloped
in so much color and glamour, might not be so sound within as the
English towns to the south, despite their wrangling. But it merely
increased his anxiety to see Quebec. Life would be all the more complex
there.

The great river spread before them, blue now under a dazzling blue sky,
and the stout _Frontenac_ left a long white trailing wake. A stone
house, larger than usual, showed through the green foliage on the south
bank. Father Drouillard gazed at it, and his face darkened. Presently he
arose and shook his hand towards the house, as if he were delivering a
curse.

"The chateau that you see belongs to the young Count Jean de Mezy, a
friend of the Intendant, Bigot. Sometimes they come from their revels at
Beaumanoir to the Chateau de Mezy, and continue them there. Now you can
see why Father Drouillard, who sympathizes with our _honnetes gens_,
delivers his malediction."

The priest returned to his seat, and averted his face. An hour later the
mighty rock of Quebec rose before them.





CHAPTER IX

AT THE INN


When Quebec came into view Robert stood up and looked long at the great
rock and the town that crowned it, hung on its slopes and nestled at the
foot of the cliffs below. Brilliant sunshine gilded its buildings of
stone and gray wood, and played like burnished gold on the steeples of
its many churches. In the distance the streets leading up the steep
cliffs looked like mere threads, but in the upper town the great public
buildings, the Intendant's Palace, the Cathedral, Notre Dame de la
Victoire, the convents of the Ursuline Nuns and the Recollet Friars, the
Bishop's Palace, and others raised for the glory and might of France,
were plainly visible.

In more than one place he saw the Bourbon lilies floating and from the
little boat on which he stood in the stream it looked like a grim and
impregnable fortress of the Old World. The wonderful glow of the air,
and the vast river flowing at its feet, magnified and colored
everything. It was a city ten times its real size and the distance
turned gray wood to gray stone. Everything was solid, immovable, and it
seemed fit to defy the world.

Robert felt a catch in his breath. He had often seen Quebec, great and
beautiful, in his dreams, but the reality was equal to it and more. To
the American of that day Quebec was one of the vital facts of life. From
that fortress issued the daring young French soldiers of fortune who led
the forays against New York and New England. It was the seat of the
power that threatened them continually. Many of the Bostonnais, seized
in their fields, had been brought here as prisoners to be returned home
only after years, or never. From this citadel, too, poured the stream of
arms and presents for the Indians who were to lie in ambush along the
English border, or to make murderous incursions upon the villages. From
it flowed the countless dangers that had threatened the northern
provinces almost continually for a century and a half. The Bostonnais
themselves, mark of the initiative and energy that were to distinguish
them so greatly later on, made a mighty effort against it, and doubtless
would have succeeded, had they been allowed to carry the fight to a
finish.

No man from New York or New England could look upon it without a
mingling of powerful emotions. It was the Carthage to their Rome. He
admired and yet he wished to conquer. He felt that permanent safety
could never come to the northern border until the Bourbon lilies ceased
to float over the great fortress that looked down on the St. Lawrence.
Robert was not the only one who felt strong emotion. Tayoga stood beside
him, his nostrils expanding and his gaze fierce:

"Stadacona!" he said under his breath, "Stadacona of the Ganeagaono,
our great brother nation!"

But the emotion of de Galisonniere was of pleasure only. His eyes
sparkled with joy and admiration. He was delighted to come back to
Quebec, the gay city that he beheld through the eyes of youth and
glowing recollections. He knew the corruption and wickedness of Bigot
and of Cadet and of Pean and of the whole reckless circle about the
Intendant, but Quebec, with its gallant men and its beautiful women; its
manners of an Old World aristocracy and its air of a royal court, had
many pleasures, and why should youth look too far into the future?

And yet another stood up and looked at Quebec, with emotions all his
own, and unlike those of the three who were so young. Father Drouillard,
tall in his black robe, gazed fixedly at the rock, and raised his hand
in a gesture much like that with which he had cursed the chateau of
Count Jean de Mezy. His eyes were set and stern, but, as the sun fell in
floods of burnished gold on the cathedral and the convents, his accusing
look softened, became sad, then pitying, then hopeful.

"A wonderful sight, Father Drouillard," said Willet, who stood at his
elbow and who also gazed at Quebec with feelings quite his own. "I've
seen it before, but I can never see it too often."

"Mr. Willet," said the priest, "you and I are greater in years than
these youths, and perhaps for that reason we can look farther into the
future. Youth fears nothing, but age fears everything. You come to
Quebec now in peace, and I trust that you may never come in war. I can
feel, nay I can see the clouds gathering over our two lands. Why should
we fight? On a continent so vast is there not room enough for all?"

"Room and to spare," replied the hunter, "but as you say, Father
Drouillard, you and I have lived longer than these youths, and age has
to think. If left to themselves I've no doubt that New France and the
English colonies could make a lasting peace, but the intrigues, the
jealousies and the hates of the courts at London and Paris keep our
forests, four thousand miles away, astir. When the Huron buries his
arrow in the heart of a foe the motive that sent him to the deed may
have had its start in Europe, but the poor savage never knows it."

The priest sighed, and looked at Willet with an awakened curiosity.

"I see that you're a man of education," he said, "and that you think.
What you say is true, but the time will come when other minds than those
of vain and jealous courtiers will sway the fortunes of all these vast
regions. I have asked you nothing of your mission in Quebec, Mr. Willet,
but I hope that I will see you again before you return."

"I hope so too," said the hunter sincerely.

The _Frontenac_ now drew in to a wharf between the Royal Battery and the
Dauphin's Battery, and Robert was still all eyes for the picturesque
sights that awaited him in the greatest French town of the New World. De
Galisonniere was hailed joyously by young officers and he made joyous
replies. Robert, as they landed, saw anew and in greater detail the
immense strength of Quebec.

He beheld the line of huge earthworks that Frontenac had built from the
river St. Charles to Cape Diamond, and he saw the massive redoubts lined
with heavy cannon. Now, he wondered at the boldness of the New
Englanders who had assailed the town with so much vigor, and who might
have taken it.

"I recommend to you," said de Galisonniere, "that you go to the Inn of
the Eagle in the Upper Town. It is kept by Monsieur Berryer, who as a
host is fully equal to Monsieur Jolivet of Montreal, and the merits of
Monsieur Jolivet are not unknown to you."

"They are not," said Robert heartily, "and we may thank you, Captain de
Galisonniere, for your great courtesy in bringing us from Montreal. We
can only hope for a time in which we shall be able to repay your
kindness."

After they had slipped some silver pieces to the boatmen and had said
farewell to Captain de Galisonniere, they took their way up a steep
street, a swarthy French-Canadian porter carrying their baggage. Here,
as at Montreal, the most attention was attracted by Tayoga, and, if
possible, the young Onondaga grew more haughty in appearance and manner.
His moccasined feet spurned the ground, and he gazed about with a fierce
and defiant eye.

Robert knew well what was stirring the spirit of the Onondaga. This was
not the Quebec of the French, it was the Stadacona of the Mohawks, the
great brother nation of the Onondagas, and the French here were but
interlopers and robbers.

But Robert soon lost thought of Tayoga as he looked at the crowded city,
and its mingling of the splendid and the squalid, its French and
French-Canadians, its soldiers and priests and civilians and Indians,
its great stone houses, and its wooden huts, its young officers in fine
white uniforms and its swarthy _habitants_ in brown homespun. Albany had
its Dutch, and New York had its Dutch, too, and people from many parts
of Europe, but Quebec was different, something altogether new, without a
trace of English or Dutch about it, and, for that reason, it made a
great appeal to his curiosity.

A light open carriage drawn by two stout ponies passed them at an
amazing pace considering the steepness of the street, and they saw in it
a florid young man in a splendid costume, his powdered hair tied in a
queue.

"De Mezy," said the priest, who was just behind them.

Then they knew that it was the young man, the companion of Bigot in his
revels, against whose chateau Father Drouillard had raised his
threatening hands. Now the priest spoke the name with the most intense
scorn and contempt, and Robert, feeling that he might encounter de Mezy
again in this pent-up Quebec, gazed at his vanishing figure with
curiosity. They had their gay blades in New York and Albany and even a
few in Boston of the Puritans, but he had not seen anybody like de Mezy.

"It is such as he who are pulling down New France," murmured Father
Drouillard.

A moment or two later the priest said farewell and departed in the
direction of the cathedral.

"There goes a man," said Willet, as he looked after the tall figure in
the black robe. "I don't share in the feeling of church against church.
I don't see any reason why Protestant should hate Catholic and Catholic
should hate Protestant. I've lived long enough and seen enough to know
that each church holds good men, and unless I make a big mistake, and I
don't think I make any mistake at all, Father Drouillard is not only a
good man, but he has a head full of sense and he's as brave as a lion,
too."

"Lots of priests are," said Robert. "Nobody ever endured the Indian
tortures better than they. And what's the figure over the doorway,
Dave?"

"That, Robert, is Le Chien d'Or, The Golden Dog. It's the sign put up by
Nicholas Jaquin, whom they often called Philibert. This is his warehouse
and he was one of the _honnetes gens_ that we've been talking about. He
fought the corrupt officials, he tried to make lower prices for the
people, and beneath his Golden Dog he wrote:"

   "Je suis un chien qui ronge l'os,
   En le rongeant je prends mon repos;
   Un jour viendra qui n'est pas venu,
   Que je mordrai qui m'aura mordu."

"That is, some day the dog will bite those who have bitten him?"

"That's about it, Robert, and I suppose it generally comes true. If you
keep on striking people some of them in time will strike you and strike
you pretty hard."

"And does Philibert still run his warehouse beneath his sign of the
Golden Dog?"

"No, Robert. He was too brave, or not cautious enough, and they
assassinated him, but there are plenty of others like him. The French
are a brave and honest people, none braver or more honest. I tell you
so, because I know them, but their government is corrupt through and
through. The House of Bourbon is dying of its own poison. It may seem
strange to you, hearing me say it here in the Western world, so far from
Versailles, but I'm not the only one who says so."

"But I like Quebec," said Robert. "I haven't seen another city that
speaks to the eye so much."

They were now well into the Upper Town, and the porter guided them to
the Inn of the Eagle, where Monsieur Paul Berryer, the host, gave them a
welcome, and from whom they learned that the Governor General, the
Marquis Duquesne, was absent in the east, but would return in two or
three days. Robert was not sorry for the delay, as it would give them a
chance to see the city, and perhaps, through de Galisonniere, make
acquaintances among the French officers.

They were able to secure a large room with three beds, and both Robert
and Willet drew from their small store of baggage suits quite in the
fashion, three-cornered hats, fine coats and waistcoats, knee breeches,
stockings and buckled shoes, and as a last and crowning triumph they
produced handsome small swords or rapiers that they buckled to their
belts.

"That canoe of ours wasn't large, but it brought a lot in it," said the
hunter.

Robert surveyed himself in a small glass, and his clothes brought great
pride. A chord in his nature responded to splendor of raiment, and the
surroundings of the great world. Quebec might be corrupt but he could
not hide from himself his immense interest in it. He noticed, too, that
Willet wore his fine costume naturally.

"It's not the first time that you've been in such clothes, Dave," he
said, "and it's not the first time that you've been in a society like
that which makes its home in Quebec."

"No, it is not," replied Willet, "and some time, Robert, I'll tell you
about those days, but not now."

Tayoga remained in his dress of a young Indian chief. Even if he had had
any other he would not have put it on, and the fine deerskin and the
lofty headdress became him and stamped him for what he was, a prince of
the forest. He held in his heart, too, a deeper feeling against the
French than any that animated either Robert or Willet. He could not
forget that this was not Quebec, but Stadacona of the Ganeagaono, whose
rights were also the rights of the other nations of the Hodenosaunee,
and it was here that Frontenac, who had slaughtered the Iroquois, had
made his home and fortress. The heart of Tayoga of the clan of the Bear
of the nation Onondaga, of the great League of the Hodenosaunee, burned
within him and the blood in his veins would not grow cool.

"I suppose, Dave," said Robert, "since we have to wait two days for the
Marquis Duquesne, that we might go forth at once and begin seeing the
town."

"Food first," said the hunter. "We've come a long journey on the river
and we'll test the quality of the, inn."

It was too cool for the little terrace that adjoined the Inn of the
Eagle, and Monsieur Berryer had a table set for them in the great
dining-room, which had an oaken floor, oaken beams and much china and
glass on shelves about the walls, the whole forming an apartment in
which the host took a just pride. It was gayer and brighter than the
inns of Albany and New York, and again Robert found his spirit
responding to it.

A fire of light wood that blazed and sparkled merrily burned in a huge
stone fireplace at the end of the room, and its grateful warmth entered
into Robert's blood. He suddenly felt a great exaltation. He was glad to
be there. He was glad that Tayoga and Willet were with him. He was glad
that they had encountered dangers on their journey because they had won
a triumph in overcoming them, and by the very act of victory they had
increased their own strength and confidence. His sensitive, imaginative
nature, easily kindled to supreme efforts, thrilled with the thoughts of
the great deeds they might do.

His pleasure in the company and the atmosphere increased. Everything
about him made a strong appeal to good taste. At the end of the room,
opposite the fireplace, stood a vast sideboard, upon which china and
glass, arranged in harmonious groups, shone and glittered. The broad
shelves or niches in the walls held much cut glass, which now and then
threw back from many facets the ruddy light of the fire. Before sitting
down, they had dipped their hands in a basin of white china filled with
water, and standing beside the door, and that too had pleased Robert's
fastidious taste.

At their table each of the three found an immaculate white napkin, a
large white china plate and goblet, knife, fork and spoon, all of
silver, polished to the last degree. Again Robert's nature responded and
he looked at himself in his fine dress in the glittering silver of the
goblet. Then his right hand stole down and caressed the hilt of his
rapier. He felt himself very much of a gentleman, very much of a
chevalier, fit to talk on equal terms with St. Luc, de Galisonniere or
the best French officer of them all. And Willet, wearing his costly
costume with ease, was very much of a gentleman too, and Tayoga, dressed
as the forest prince, was in his own way, and quite as good a way, as
much of a gentleman as either.

At least a dozen others were in the great room, and many curious eyes
were upon the three visitors from the south. It was likely that the
presence of such marked figures as theirs would become known quickly in
Quebec. They had shown the papers bearing their names at the gate by
which they had entered, and doubtless the news of their arrival had been
spread at once by the officer in command there. Well, they would prove
to the proud chevaliers of Quebec how the Bostonnais could bear
themselves, and Robert's pulses leaped.

They were served by an attentive and quiet waiter, and the three, each
in his own way, watched everything that was going on. They were aware
that not all would be as friendly as de Galisonniere or Father
Drouillard, but they were fully prepared to meet a challenge of any kind
and uphold the honor of their own people. Robert was hoping that de
Galisonniere might come, as he had recommended the inn to them. He did
not appear, but the others who did so lingered and young Lennox knew
that it was because of the three, who received many hostile glances,
although most were intended for the Onondaga. Robert was aware, too,
that if the Iroquois had lost this Stadacona of the Mohawks and had been
ravaged by Frontenac, they had taken a terrible revenge upon the French
and their chief allies, the Hurons. For generations the Hodenosaunee had
swept the villages along the St. Lawrence with fire and tomahawk,
slaying and capturing their hundreds. But to Tayoga it was and always
would be the French who had struck first, and the vital fact remained
