helped to roast Tom came up and begged his pardon, and thanked him for
not telling anything. Morgan sent for him, and was inclined to take the
matter up warmly, but Tom begged him not to do it; to which he agreed,
on Tom's promising to come to him at once in future--a promise which, I
regret to say, he didn't keep. Tom kept Harkaway all to himself, and
won the second prize in the lottery, some thirty shillings, which he and
East contrived to spend in about three days in the purchase of pictures
for their study, two new bats and a cricket-ball--all the best that
could be got--and a supper of sausages, kidneys, and beef-steak pies
to all the rebels. Light come, light go; they wouldn't have been
comfortable with money in their pockets in the middle of the half.

The embers of Flashman's wrath, however, were still smouldering, and
burst out every now and then in sly blows and taunts, and they both
felt that they hadn't quite done with him yet. It wasn't long, however,
before the last act of that drama came, and with it the end of bullying
for Tom and East at Rugby. They now often stole out into the hall at
nights, incited thereto partly by the hope of finding Diggs there and
having a talk with him, partly by the excitement of doing something
which was against rules; for, sad to say, both of our youngsters, since
their loss of character for steadiness in their form, had got into
the habit of doing things which were forbidden, as a matter of
adventure,--just in the same way, I should fancy, as men fall into
smuggling, and for the same sort of reasons--thoughtlessness in the
first place. It never occurred to them to consider why such and such
rules were laid down: the reason was nothing to them, and they only
looked upon rules as a sort of challenge from the rule-makers, which it
would be rather bad pluck in them not to accept; and then again, in the
lower parts of the school they hadn't enough to do. The work of the form
they could manage to get through pretty easily, keeping a good enough
place to get their regular yearly remove; and not having much ambition
beyond this, their whole superfluous steam was available for games and
scrapes. Now, one rule of the house which it was a daily pleasure of all
such boys to break was that after supper all fags, except the three
on duty in the passages, should remain in their own studies until nine
o'clock; and if caught about the passages or hall, or in one another's
studies, they were liable to punishments or caning. The rule was
stricter than its observance; for most of the sixth spent their evenings
in the fifth-form room, where the library was, and the lessons were
learnt in common. Every now and then, however, a prepostor would be
seized with a fit of district visiting, and would make a tour of
the passages and hall and the fags' studies. Then, if the owner were
entertaining a friend or two, the first kick at the door and ominous
"Open here" had the effect of the shadow of a hawk over a chicken-yard:
every one cut to cover--one small boy diving under the sofa, another
under the table, while the owner would hastily pull down a book or
two and open them, and cry out in a meek voice, "Hullo, who's there?"
casting an anxious eye round to see that no protruding leg or elbow
could betray the hidden boys. "Open, sir, directly; it's Snooks."
"Oh, I'm very sorry; I didn't know it was you, Snooks." And then with
well-feigned zeal the door would be opened, young hopeful praying that
that beast Snooks mightn't have heard the scuffle caused by his coming.
If a study was empty, Snooks proceeded to draw the passages and hall to
find the truants.

Well, one evening, in forbidden hours, Tom and East were in the hall.
They occupied the seats before the fire nearest the door, while Diggs
sprawled as usual before the farther fire. He was busy with a copy of
verses, and East and Tom were chatting together in whispers by the light
of the fire, and splicing a favourite old fives bat which had sprung.
Presently a step came down the bottom passage. They listened a moment,
assured themselves that it wasn't a prepostor, and then went on with
their work, and the door swung open, and in walked Flashman. He didn't
see Diggs, and thought it a good chance to keep his hand in; and as the
boys didn't move for him, struck one of them, to make them get out of
his way.

"What's that for?" growled the assaulted one.

"Because I choose. You've no business here. Go to your study."

"You can't send us."

"Can't I? Then I'll thrash you if you stay," said Flashman savagely.

"I say, you two," said Diggs, from the end of the hall, rousing up and
resting himself on his elbow--"you'll never get rid of that fellow till
you lick him. Go in at him, both of you. I'll see fair play."

Flashman was taken aback, and retreated two steps. East looked at
Tom. "Shall we try!" said he. "Yes," said Tom desperately. So the two
advanced on Flashman, with clenched fists and beating hearts. They were
about up to his shoulder, but tough boys of their age, and in perfect
training; while he, though strong and big, was in poor condition from
his monstrous habit of stuffing and want of exercise. Coward as he was,
however, Flashman couldn't swallow such an insult as this; besides, he
was confident of having easy work, and so faced the boys, saying, "You
impudent young blackguards!" Before he could finish his abuse, they
rushed in on him, and began pummelling at all of him which they could
reach. He hit out wildly and savagely; but the full force of his blows
didn't tell--they were too near to him. It was long odds, though, in
point of strength; and in another minute Tom went spinning backwards
over a form, and Flashman turned to demolish East with a savage grin.
But now Diggs jumped down from the table on which he had seated himself.
"Stop there," shouted he; "the round's over--half-minute time allowed."

"What the --- is it to you?" faltered Flashman, who began to lose heart.

"I'm going to see fair, I tell you," said Diggs, with a grin, and
snapping his great red fingers; "'taint fair for you to be fighting one
of them at a time.--Are you ready, Brown? Time's up."

The small boys rushed in again. Closing, they saw, was their best
chance, and Flashman was wilder and more flurried than ever: he caught
East by the throat, and tried to force him back on the iron-bound table.
Tom grasped his waist, and remembering the old throw he had learned
in the Vale from Harry Winburn, crooked his leg inside Flashman's, and
threw his whole weight forward. The three tottered for a moment, and
then over they went on to the floor, Flashman striking his head against
a form in the hall.

The two youngsters sprang to their legs, but he lay there still. They
began to be frightened. Tom stooped down, and then cried out, scared
out of his wits, "He's bleeding awfully. Come here, East! Diggs, he's
dying!"

"Not he," said Diggs, getting leisurely off the table; "it's all sham;
he's only afraid to fight it out."

East was as frightened as Tom. Diggs lifted Flashman's head, and he
groaned.

"What's the matter?" shouted Diggs.

"My skull's fractured," sobbed Flashman.

"Oh, let me run for the housekeeper!" cried Tom. "What shall we do?"

"Fiddlesticks! It's nothing but the skin broken," said the relentless
Diggs, feeling his head. "Cold water and a bit of rag's all he'll want."

"Let me go," said Flashman surlily, sitting up; "I don't want your
help."

"We're really very sorry--" began East.

"Hang your sorrow!" answered Flashman, holding his handkerchief to the
place; "you shall pay for this, I can tell you, both of you." And he
walked out of the hall.

"He can't be very bad," said Tom, with a deep sigh, much relieved to see
his enemy march so well.

"Not he," said Diggs; "and you'll see you won't be troubled with him any
more. But, I say, your head's broken too; your collar is covered with
blood."

"Is it though?" said Tom, putting up his hand; "I didn't know it."

"Well, mop it up, or you'll have your jacket spoilt. And you have got a
nasty eye, Scud. You'd better go and bathe it well in cold water."

"Cheap enough too, if we're done with our old friend Flashey," said
East, as they made off upstairs to bathe their wounds.

They had done with Flashman in one sense, for he never laid finger on
either of them again; but whatever harm a spiteful heart and venomous
tongue could do them, he took care should be done. Only throw dirt
enough, and some of it is sure to stick; and so it was with the fifth
form and the bigger boys in general, with whom he associated more or
less, and they not at all. Flashman managed to get Tom and East into
disfavour, which did not wear off for some time after the author of it
had disappeared from the School world. This event, much prayed for
by the small fry in general, took place a few months after the above
encounter. One fine summer evening Flashman had been regaling himself on
gin-punch, at Brownsover; and, having exceeded his usual limits, started
home uproarious. He fell in with a friend or two coming back from
bathing, proposed a glass of beer, to which they assented, the weather
being hot, and they thirsty souls, and unaware of the quantity of drink
which Flashman had already on board. The short result was, that Flashey
became beastly drunk. They tried to get him along, but couldn't; so they
chartered a hurdle and two men to carry him. One of the masters came
upon them, and they naturally enough fled. The flight of the rest raised
the master's suspicions, and the good angel of the fags incited him
to examine the freight, and, after examination, to convoy the hurdle
himself up to the School-house; and the Doctor, who had long had his eye
on Flashman, arranged for his withdrawal next morning.

The evil that men and boys too do lives after them: Flashman was gone,
but our boys, as hinted above, still felt the effects of his hate.
Besides, they had been the movers of the strike against unlawful
fagging. The cause was righteous--the result had been triumphant to a
great extent; but the best of the fifth--even those who had never fagged
the small boys, or had given up the practice cheerfully--couldn't help
feeling a small grudge against the first rebels. After all, their form
had been defied, on just grounds, no doubt--so just, indeed, that they
had at once acknowledged the wrong, and remained passive in the strife.
Had they sided with Flashman and his set, the rebels must have given way
at once. They couldn't help, on the whole, being glad that they had so
acted, and that the resistance had been successful against such of their
own form as had shown fight; they felt that law and order had gained
thereby, but the ringleaders they couldn't quite pardon at once.
"Confoundedly coxy those young rascals will get, if we don't mind," was
the general feeling.

So it is, and must be always, my dear boys. If the angel Gabriel were
to come down from heaven, and head a successful rise against the most
abominable and unrighteous vested interest which this poor old world
groans under, he would most certainly lose his character for many years,
probably for centuries, not only with the upholders of said vested
interest, but with the respectable mass of the people whom he had
delivered. They wouldn't ask him to dinner, or let their names appear
with his in the papers; they would be very careful how they spoke of
him in the Palaver, or at their clubs. What can we expect, then, when we
have only poor gallant blundering men like Kossuth, Garibaldi, Mazzini,
and righteous causes which do not triumph in their hands--men who
have holes enough in their armour, God knows, easy to be hit by
respectabilities sitting in their lounging chairs, and having large
balances at their bankers'? But you are brave, gallant boys, who hate
easy-chairs, and have no balances or bankers. You only want to have
your heads set straight, to take the right side; so bear in mind that
majorities, especially respectable ones, are nine times out of ten in
the wrong; and that if you see a man or boy striving earnestly on the
weak side, however wrong-headed or blundering he may be, you are not to
go and join the cry against him. If you can't join him and help him, and
make him wiser, at any rate remember that he has found something in the
world which he will fight and suffer for, which is just what you have
got to do for yourselves; and so think and speak of him tenderly.

So East and Tom, the Tadpole, and one or two more, became a sort of
young Ishmaelites, their hands against every one, and every one's hand
against them. It has been already told how they got to war with the
masters and the fifth form, and with the sixth it was much the same.
They saw the prepostors cowed by or joining with the fifth and shirking
their own duties; so they didn't respect them, and rendered no willing
obedience. It had been one thing to clean out studies for sons of heroes
like old Brooke, but was quite another to do the like for Snooks and
Green, who had never faced a good scrummage at football, and couldn't
keep the passages in order at night. So they only slurred through their
fagging just well enough to escape a licking, and not always that, and
got the character of sulky, unwilling fags. In the fifth-form room,
after supper, when such matters were often discussed and arranged, their
names were for ever coming up.

"I say, Green," Snooks began one night, "isn't that new boy, Harrison,
your fag?"

"Yes; why?"

"Oh, I know something of him at home, and should like to excuse him.
Will you swop?"

"Who will you give me?"

"Well, let's see. There's Willis, Johnson. No, that won't do. Yes, I
have it. There's young East; I'll give you him."

"Don't you wish you may get it?" replied Green. "I'll give you two for
Willis, if you like."

"Who, then?" asked Snooks. "Hall and Brown."

"Wouldn't have 'em at a gift."

"Better than East, though; for they ain't quite so sharp," said Green,
getting up and leaning his back against the mantelpiece. He wasn't a bad
fellow, and couldn't help not being able to put down the unruly fifth
form. His eye twinkled as he went on, "Did I ever tell you how the young
vagabond sold me last half?"

"No; how?"

"Well, he never half cleaned my study out--only just stuck the
candlesticks in the cupboard, and swept the crumbs on to the floor. So
at last I was mortal angry, and had him up, and made him go through the
whole performance under my eyes. The dust the young scamp made nearly
choked me, and showed that he hadn't swept the carpet before. Well, when
it was all finished, 'Now, young gentleman,' says I, 'mind, I expect
this to be done every morning--floor swept, table-cloth taken off and
shaken, and everything dusted.' 'Very well,' grunts he. Not a bit of
it though. I was quite sure, in a day or two, that he never took the
table-cloth off even. So I laid a trap for him. I tore up some paper,
and put half a dozen bits on my table one night, and the cloth over them
as usual. Next morning after breakfast up I came, pulled off the cloth,
and, sure enough, there was the paper, which fluttered down on to the
floor. I was in a towering rage. 'I've got you now,' thought I, and sent
for him, while I got out my cane. Up he came as cool as you please, with
his hands in his pockets. 'Didn't I tell you to shake my table-cloth
every morning?' roared I. 'Yes,' says he. 'Did you do it this morning?'
'Yes.' 'You young liar! I put these pieces of paper on the table last
night, and if you'd taken the table-cloth off you'd have seen them, so
I'm going to give you a good licking.' Then my youngster takes one hand
out of his pocket, and just stoops down and picks up two of the bits
of paper, and holds them out to me. There was written on each, in great
round text, 'Harry East, his mark.' The young rogue had found my
trap out, taken away my paper, and put some of his there, every bit
ear-marked. I'd a great mind to lick him for his impudence; but, after
all, one has no right to be laying traps, so I didn't. Of course I was
at his mercy till the end of the half, and in his weeks my study was so
frowzy I couldn't sit in it."

"They spoil one's things so, too," chimed in a third boy. "Hall and
Brown were night-fags last week. I called 'fag,' and gave them my
candlesticks to clean. Away they went, and didn't appear again. When
they'd had time enough to clean them three times over, I went out to
look after them. They weren't in the passages so down I went into the
hall, where I heard music; and there I found them sitting on the table,
listening to Johnson, who was playing the flute, and my candlesticks
stuck between the bars well into the fire, red-hot, clean spoiled.
They've never stood straight since, and I must get some more. However, I
gave them a good licking; that's one comfort."

Such were the sort of scrapes they were always getting into; and so,
partly by their own faults, partly from circumstances, partly from the
faults of others, they found themselves outlaws, ticket-of-leave men, or
what you will in that line--in short, dangerous parties--and lived the
sort of hand-to-mouth, wild, reckless life which such parties generally
have to put up with. Nevertheless they never quite lost favour with
young Brooke, who was now the cock of the house, and just getting into
the sixth; and Diggs stuck to them like a man, and gave them store of
good advice, by which they never in the least profited.

And even after the house mended, and law and order had been restored,
which soon happened after young Brooke and Diggs got into the sixth,
they couldn't easily or at once return into the paths of steadiness, and
many of the old, wild, out-of-bounds habits stuck to them as firmly as
ever. While they had been quite little boys, the scrapes they got into
in the School hadn't much mattered to any one; but now they were in the
upper school, all wrong-doers from which were sent up straight to the
Doctor at once. So they began to come under his notice; and as they were
a sort of leaders in a small way amongst their own contemporaries, his
eye, which was everywhere, was upon them.

It was a toss-up whether they turned out well or ill, and so they were
just the boys who caused most anxiety to such a master. You have been
told of the first occasion on which they were sent up to the Doctor, and
the remembrance of it was so pleasant that they had much less fear of
him than most boys of their standing had. "It's all his look," Tom used
to say to East, "that frightens fellows. Don't you remember, he never
said anything to us my first half-year for being an hour late for
locking-up?"

The next time that Tom came before him, however, the interview was of
a very different kind. It happened just about the time at which we have
now arrived, and was the first of a series of scrapes into which our
hero managed now to tumble.

The river Avon at Rugby is a slow and not very clear stream, in which
chub, dace, roach, and other coarse fish are (or were) plentiful
enough, together with a fair sprinkling of small jack, but no fish worth
sixpence either for sport or food. It is, however, a capital river for
bathing, as it has many nice small pools and several good reaches for
swimming, all within about a mile of one another, and at an easy twenty
minutes' walk from the school. This mile of water is rented, or used to
be rented, for bathing purposes by the trustees of the School, for the
boys. The footpath to Brownsover crosses the river by "the Planks," a
curious old single-plank bridge running for fifty or sixty yards into
the flat meadows on each side of the river--for in the winter there
are frequent floods. Above the Planks were the bathing-places for the
smaller boys--Sleath's, the first bathing-place, where all new boys
had to begin, until they had proved to the bathing men (three steady
individuals, who were paid to attend daily through the summer to prevent
accidents) that they could swim pretty decently, when they were allowed
to go on to Anstey's, about one hundred and fifty yards below. Here
there was a hole about six feet deep and twelve feet across, over which
the puffing urchins struggled to the opposite side, and thought no small
beer of themselves for having been out of their depths. Below the Planks
