place while they spied upon the great northern confederacy, now being
formed for the destruction of the white settlements, and they would do
what they could to impede it. Henry, Ross, and Sol would leave that night
on an expedition of discovery, while Paul and Jim Hart held the haunted
island. Paul, in this case, did not object to being left behind, because
he had, for the present at least, enough of danger, and he knew that he
was better suited to other tasks than the one on which the three great
woodsmen were now departing.

Jim Hart was to row them over to the mainland, and they were to signal
their return with three plaintive, long-drawn cries of the whip-poor-will.
They departed at the first coming of the dusk with short good-bys, leaving
Paul alone on the island. He stood near the margin under the foliage of a
great beech and watched them go. The boat, as it left a trailing wake of
melting silver, became a small black dot at the farther shore, and then
vanished.

Paul turned back toward the center of his island, inexpressibly lonely for
the while. Again he was a solitary being in the vast, encircling
wilderness, and, in feeling at least, no one was nearer than a thousand
miles away. He walked as swiftly as he could to the cove, where the supper
fire still smoldered, and he sought companionship in the light and warmth
that came from the bed of coals. No amount of hardship, no amount of
experience could change Paul's vivid temperament, so responsive to the
influences of time and place. He sat there, his knees drawn up to his
chin, and the ring of darkness came closer and closer; but out of it
presently arose the tread of footsteps, and all the brightness and
cheeriness returned at once to the boy's face.

Jim Hart walked into the rim of the firelight, and his long, thin,
saplinglike figure looked very consoling to Paul. He doubled into his
usual jackknife formation and, sitting down by the fire, looked into the
coals.

"Well, Paul," he said, "I've seen 'em off, an' a-tween you and me, I'd
rather be right here on this here haunted islan', a-hobnobbin' with Injun
ghosts an' havin' a good, comfortable, easy time, than be dodgin' braves,
an' feelin' every minute to see ef my scalp is on out thar among the Injun
villages."

"You don't think they'll be taken?" asked Paul, in some alarm.

Long Jim Hart laughed scornfully.

"Them fellers be took?" he said. "Why, they are the best three woodsmen in
North Ameriky, an', fur that, in the hull world. Nobody can take 'em, an'
if they wuz took, nobody could hold 'em. You could have Henry Ware tied to
the stake, with fifty Shawnees holdin' him an' a thousand more standin'
aroun', an' he'd get away, certain sure."

Paul smiled. It was an extravagant statement, but it restored his
confidence.

"And meanwhile we are safe here, protected by ghosts," he said. "Do you
believe in ghosts, Jim?"

Jim Hart looked up at the black rim of the forest, and then edged a little
closer to the fire.

"No, I don't," he said, "but sometimes I'm afeard of 'em, jest the same."

Paul laughed.

"That's about the way I feel, too," he said, "but they're mighty handy
just now, Jim. They're keeping us safe on this island. You won't deny
that?"

"No, I won't," said Jim; "but at night time I'm goin' to leave 'em all by
themselves in the trees over at their end uv of the island."

"So am I," said Paul; and ten minutes later both were sound asleep.




CHAPTER XI

A SUDDEN MEETING


Paul and queer, long Jim Hart spent a week together on the island, and
they were pleasant days to the boy. He was sure that Henry, Ross, and Sol
could take care of themselves, and he felt little anxiety about them. He
and Hart stayed well in the woods in the day, and they fished and hunted
at night. Hart killed another deer, this time swimming in the water, but
they easily made salvage of the body and took it to land. They also shot a
bear in the edge of the woods, near the south end of the lake, and Hart
quickly tanned both deerskins and the bearskin in a rude fashion. He said
they would need them as covers at night, and as the weather turned a
little colder, Paul found that he could use one of the skins quite
comfortably.

They built of sticks and brushwood a crude sort of lean-to against one of
the stony sides that enclosed the cove, and when a rain came they were
able to keep quite dry within its shelter. They also found rabbits on the
island, some of which they killed, and thus added further to their
larder. These labors of house-building and housekeeping kept them busy,
and Paul was surprised to find how well content he had become. Hart did
all the cooking, but Paul made amends in other directions, and at night,
when they were not fishing or hunting, they would sit by the little fire
and talk. Once about the noon hour they saw a smoke far to the south, and
both regarded it speculatively.

"Think likely it's an Injun huntin' party," said Jim Hart, "an' they don't
dream o' any white men bein' about. That's why they are so careless about
their fire, because the different tribes o' these parts are all at peace
with one another."

"How far away would you say that smoke is?" asked Paul.

"Three or four miles, anyway, an' I'm pow'ful glad this is a haunted
islan', so they won't come over here."

"So am I," said Paul devoutly.

He lay on his back on the soft turf, and watched the smoke rising away in
a thin spire into the heavens. He could picture to himself the savage
party as it sat about the fire, and it gave him a remarkable feeling of
comfort and safety to know that he was so well protected by the ghosts
that haunted the little island.

The smoke rose there all the morning, but Paul ceased by and by to pay any
attention to it, although he and Jim Hart kept well within the cove,
busying themselves with additions to their lean-to. Paul had found great
strips of bark shed by the trees, and he used these to patch the roof.
More pieces were used for the floor, and, with the bearskin spread over
them, it was quite dry and snug. Then he stood off and regarded it with a
critical and approving eye.

"You haven't seen a better house than that lately, have you, Jim?" he
said, in a tone of pride.

"Considerin' the fact that I ain't seen any other uv any kind in a long
time, I kin truthfully say I haven't," replied Jim Hart sardonically.

"You lack appreciation, Jim," said Paul. "Besides, your imagination is
deficient. Why don't you look at this hut of ours and imagine that it is a
magnificent stone castle?"

Jim Hart gazed wonderingly at the boy.

"Paul," he said, "you always wuz a puzzle to me. I can't see no
magnificent stone castle--jest a bark an' brush hut."

Paul shook his head reprovingly.

"I am sorry for you, Jim," he said. "I not only see a magnificent stone
castle, but I see a splendid town over there on the mainland."

"You talk plumb foolish, Paul," said Jim Hart.

"They are all coming," said Paul.

But Jim Hart continued to see only the bark and brush hut on the island,
and the vast and unbroken wilderness on the mainland. His eyes roved back,
from the mainland to the hut.

"Now, ef I had an ax an' a saw," he said regretfully, "I could make that
look like somethin'. I'm a good cook, ef I do say it, Paul, but I'd like
to be a fust-class carpenter. Thar ain't no chance, though, out here, whar
thar ain't nothin' much but cabins, an' every man builds his own hisself."

"Never mind, Jim," said Paul, "your time will come; and if it doesn't come
to you, it will come to your sons."

"Paul, you're talkin' foolisher than ever," said Jim indignantly. "You
know that I ain't a married man, an' that I ain't got no sons."

Paul only smiled. Again he was dreaming, looking far into the future.

The spire of smoke was still on the horizon line when the twilight came,
but the next morning it was gone, and they did not see it again. Several
days more passed in peace and contentment, and, desiring to secure more
game, Paul and Hart took out the canoe one evening and rowed to the
mainland.

They watched a while about the mouth of the brook, the favorite drinking
place of the wild animals, but they saw nothing. It seemed likely to Paul
that a warning had been sent to all the tenants of the forest not to drink
there any more, as it was a dangerous place, and he expressed a desire to
go farther into the forest.

"All right, Paul," said Jim Hart, "but you kain't be too keerful. Don't
git lost out thar in the woods, an' don't furgit your way back to this
spot. I'll wait right here in the boat and watch fur a deer. One may come
yet."

Paul took his rifle and entered the woods. It was his idea that he might
find game farther up the little stream, and he followed its course, taking
care to make no noise. It was a fine moonlight night, and, keeping well
within the shadow of the trees, he carefully watched the brook. He was so
much absorbed in his task that he forgot the passage of time, and did not
notice how far he had gone.

Paul had acquired much skill as a hunter, and he was learning to observe
the signs of the forest; but he did not hear a light step behind him,
although he _did_ feel himself seized in a powerful grasp. This particular
warrior was a Miami, and he may have been impelled by pride--that is, a
desire to take a white youth alive, or at least hold him until his
comrades, who were near, could come and secure him. To this circumstance,
and to a fortunate slip of the savage, the boy undoubtedly owed his life.

Paul was strong, and the grasp of the Indian was like the touch of fire to
him. He made a sudden convulsive effort, far greater than his natural
physical powers, and the arms of the warrior were torn loose. Both
staggered, each away from the other, and while they were yet too close for
Paul to use his rifle, he did, under impulse, what the white man often
does, the red man never. His clenched fist shot out like lightning, and
caught the savage on the point of the jaw.

The Miami hit the earth with a thud, and lay there stunned. Paul turned
and ran with all his might, and as he ran he heard the war cry behind him,
and then the pattering of feet. But he heard no shots. He judged that the
distance and the darkness kept the savages from firing, and he thanked God
for the night.

He had sufficient presence of mind to remember the stream, and he kept
closely to its course as he ran back swiftly toward the canoe.

"Up, Jim, up! The warriors have come!" he shouted, as he ran.

But Jim Hart, an awkward bean pole of a lion-hearted man, was already
coming to meet him, and fired past him at a dusky, dancing figure that
pursued. The death yell followed, the pursuit wavered for a moment, and
then Jim Hart, turning, ran with Paul to the canoe, into which both leaped
at the same time. But Hart promptly undoubled himself, seized the paddle,
and with one mighty shove sent the boat out into the lake. Paul grasped
the other paddle, and bent to the same task. Their rifles lay at their
feet.

"Bend low, Paul," said Jim Hart. "We're still within range of the shore."

Paul almost lay down in the canoe, but he never ceased to make long,
frantic sweeps with the paddle, and he was glad to see the water flashing
behind him. Then he heard a great yell of rage and the crackle of rifles,
and bullets spattered the surface of the lake about them. One chipped a
splinter from the edge of the canoe and whistled by Paul's ear, singing,
as it passed, "Look out! Look out!" But Paul's only reply was to use his
paddle faster, and yet faster.

The boy did not notice that Jim Hart had turned the course of the canoe,
and that they were running northward, about midway between the island and
the mainland; but the rifle fire ceased presently, and Jim Hart said to
him:

"You can take it easier now, Paul. We're out uv range, though not uv
sight."

Paul straightened up, laid his paddle in the boat, and gasped for breath.

"Look over thar, Paul, ef you want to see a pleasant scene," said Jim Hart
calmly.

Paul's gaze followed the long man's pointing finger, and he saw at least
twenty warriors gathered on the bank, and regarding them now in dead
silence.

"Mad!" said Jim Hart. "Mad clean through!"

"They've chased us on land, and now they are chasing us on water. I wonder
where they will chase us next," said Paul.

"Not through the air, 'cause they can't fly, nor kin we," said Jim Hart
sagely.

Paul looked back again at the ferocious band gathered on the shore, and,
while he could not see their faces at the distance, he could imagine the
evil passions pictured there. As he gazed the band broke up, and many of
them came running along the shore. Then Paul noticed that the prow of
their canoe was not turned toward the island, but was bearing steadily
toward the north end of the lake, leaving the island well to the left. He
glanced at Jim Hart, and the long man laughed low, but with deep
satisfaction.

"Don't you see, Paul," he said, "that we kain't go to the islan' an' show
to them that we've been livin' thar? That might wipe out all the spell uv
the place. We got to let 'em think we're 'fraid uv it, too, an' that we
dassent land thar. We'll paddle up to the head uv the lake, come down on
the other side, an' then, when it's atween us an' them, we'll come across
to our islan'."

They were still abreast of the island, and yet midway between it and the
mainland. Paul saw the Indians running along the shore, and now and then
taking a shot at the canoe. But the bullets always fell short.

"Foolish! Plumb foolish," said Jim Hart, "a-wastin' good powder an' good
lead in sech a fashion!"

"That one struck nearer," said Paul, as a little jet of water spurted up
in the lake. "Keep her off, Jim. A bullet that is not wasted might come
along directly."

Hart sheered the boat off a little toward the island, and then took a long
look at a warrior who had reached a projecting point of land.

"That thar feller looks like a chief," he said, "an' I kain't say that his
looks please me a-tall, a-tall. I don't like the set uv his figger one
little bit."

"What difference does it make?" said Paul. "You can't change it."

"Wa'al, now, I was a-thinkin' that maybe I could," drawled Jim Hart.
"Hold the boat steady, Paul."

He laid down his paddle and took up his rifle, which he had reloaded.

