after he came he did not kneel down because of the noise, but sat up in
bed till the candle was out, and then stole out and said his prayers, in
fear lest some one should find him out. So did many another poor little
fellow.

3. Then he began to think that he might just as well say his prayers in
bed, and then that it did not matter whether he was kneeling, or sitting,
or lying down. And so it had come to pass with Tom, as with all who will
not confess their Lord before men; and for the last year he had probably
not said his prayers in earnest a dozen times.

4. Poor Tom! the first and bitterest feeling, which was like to break his
heart, was the sense of his own cowardice. The vice of all others which he
loathed was brought in and burned in on his own soul. He had lied to his
mother, to his conscience, to his God. How could he bear it? And then the
poor, little, weak boy, whom he had pitied and almost scorned for his
weakness, had done that which he, braggart as he was, dared not do.

5. The first dawn of comfort came to him in vowing to himself that he
would stand by that boy through thick and thin, and cheer him, and help
him, and bear his burdens, for the good deed done that night. Then he
resolved to write home next day and tell his mother all, and what a coward
her son had been. And then peace came to him as he resolved, lastly, to
bear his testimony next morning.

6. The morning would be harder than the night to begin with, but he felt
that he could not afford to let one chance slip. Several times he
faltered, for the Devil showed him, first, all his old friends calling him
"Saint," and "Squaretoes" and a dozen hard names, and whispered to him
that his motives would be misunderstood, and he would be left alone with
the new boy; whereas, it was his duty to keep all means of influence, that
he might do good to the largest number.

7. And then came the more subtle temptation, "shall I not be showing
myself braver than others by doing this? Have I any right to begin it now?
Ought I not rather to pray in my own study, letting other boys know that I
do so, and trying to lead them to it, while in public, at least, I should
go on as I have done?" However, his good angel was too strong that night,
and he turned on his side and slept, tired of trying to reason, but
resolved to follow the impulse which had been so strong, and in which he
had found peace.

8. Next morning he was up and washed and dressed, all but his jacket and
waistcoat, just as the ten minutes' bell began to ring, and then in the
face of the whole room he knelt down to pray. Not five words could he
say,--the bell mocked him; he was listening for every whisper in the
room,--what were they all thinking of him?

9. He was ashamed to go on kneeling, ashamed to rise from his knees. At
last, as it were from his inmost heart, a still, small voice seemed to
breathe forth the words of the publican, "God be merciful to me a sinner!"
He repeated them over and over, clinging to them as for his life, and rose
from his knees comforted and humbled, and ready to face the whole world.

10. It was not needed: two other boys besides Arthur had already followed
his example, and he went down to the great school with a glimmering of
another lesson in his heart,--the lesson that he who has conquered his own
coward spirit has conquered the whole outward world; and that other one
which the old prophet learned in the cave at Mount Horeb, when he hid his
face, and the still, small voice asked, "What doest thou here,
Elijah?"--that however we may fancy ourselves alone on the side of good,
the King and Lord of men is nowhere without his witnesses; for in every
society, however seemingly corrupt and godless, there are those who have
not bowed the knee to Baal.

[Transcriber's Footnote: Baal--Various fertility and nature gods of the
ancient Semitic peoples considered to be false gods by the Hebrews.]

11. He found, too, how greatly he had exaggerated the effect to be
produced by his act. For a few nights there was a sneer or a laugh when he
knelt down, but this passed off soon, and one by one all the other boys
but three or four followed the lead.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Leav'en, to make a general change, to imbue. 4. Loathed,
hated, detested. Brag'gart, a boaster. 5. Vow'ing, making a solemn promise
to God. Tes'ti-mo-ny, open declaration. 6. Fal'tered, hesitated. Mo'tive,
that which causes action, cause, reason. 7. Sub'tle (pro. sut'l), artful,
cunning. Stud'y, a private room devoted to study. 10. Glim'mer-ing, a
faint view.


NOTES.--1. Arnold's. Dr. Thomas Arnold was head master at Rugby nearly
fifteen years. His influence on the character of the boys was very marked,
and soon made the school celebrated throughout England. The Schoolhouse
was the name of one of the numerous buildings belonging to Rugby.


EXERCISES.--Relate Tom's early experience at Rugby. Was it courageous in
him to stop saying his prayers? How did he feel over it? What did he
resolve to do? Did he carry out his resolve? What two lessons was he
taught?



LXIX. THE WRECK OF THE HESPERUS. (190)

By Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, one of the greatest of American poets. He
was born in Portland, Me., in 1807. For some years he held the
professorship of Modern Languages in Bowdoin College, and later a similar
professorship in Harvard College. He died March 21th, 1882.

1. It was the schooner Hesperus,
     That sailed the wintry sea;
   And the skipper had taken his little daughter,
     To bear him company.

2. Blue were her eyes as the fairy flax,
     Her checks like the dawn of day,
   And her bosom white as the hawthorn buds,
     That ope in the month of May.

3. The skipper, he stood beside the helm,
     His pipe was in his mouth,
   And he watched how the veering flaw did blow
     The smoke now west, now south.

4. Then up and spake an old sailor,
     Had sailed to the Spanish Main,
   "I pray thee, put into yonder port,
     For I fear the hurricane.

5. "Last night, the moon had a golden ring,
     And to-night no moon we see!"
   The skipper, he blew a whiff from his pipe,
     And a scornful laugh laughed he.

6. Colder and louder blew the wind,
     A gale from the northeast;
   The snow fell hissing in the brine,
     And the billows frothed like yeast.

7. Down came the storm, and smote amain
     The vessel in its strength;
   She shuddered and paused, like a frighted steed,
     Then leaped her cable's length.

8. "Come hither! come hither! my little daughter,
     And do not tremble so;
   For I can weather the roughest gale
     That ever wind did blow."

9. He wrapped her warm in his seaman's coat,
     Against the stinging blast:
   He cut a rope from a broken spar,
     And bound her to the mast.

10. "O father! I hear the church bells ring,
      Oh say, what may it be?"
    "'Tis a fog bell on a rock-bound coast!"
      And he steered for the open sea.

11. "O father! I hear the sound of guns,
      Oh say, what may it be?"
    "Some ship in distress, that can not live
      In such an angry sea!"

12. "O father! I see a gleaming light,
      Oh say, what may it be?"
    But the father answered never a word,
      A frozen corpse was he.

13. Lashed to the helm, all stiff and stark,
      With his face turned to the skies,
    The lantern gleamed through the gleaming snow
      On his fixed and glassy eyes.

14. Then the maiden clasped her hands, and prayed
      That saved she might be;
    And she thought of Christ, who stilled the wave
      On the lake of Galilee.

15. And fast through the midnight dark and drear,
      Through the whistling sleet and snow,
    Like a sheeted ghost, the vessel swept
      Tow'rds the reef of Norman's Woe.

16. And ever the fitful gusts between
      A sound came from the land:
    It was the sound of the trampling surf
      On the rocks and the hard sea sand.

17. The breakers were right beneath her bows,
      She drifted a dreary wreck,
    And a whooping billow swept the crew
      Like icicles from her deck.

18. She struck where the white and fleecy waves
      Looked soft as carded wool,
    But the cruel rocks, they gored her side
      Like the horns of an angry bull.

19. Her rattling shrouds, all sheathed in ice,
      With the masts, went by the board;
    Like a vessel of glass, she stove and sank,
      Ho! ho! the breakers roared!

20. At day break, on the bleak seabeach,
      A fisherman stood aghast,
    To see the form of a maiden fair
      Lashed close to a drifting mast.

21. The salt sea was frozen on her breast,
      The salt tears in her eyes;
    And he saw her hair, like the brown seaweed,
      On the billows fall and rise.

22. Such was the wreck of the Hesperus
      In the midnight and the snow:
    Heav'n save us all from a death like this
      On the reef of Norman's Woe!


DEFINITIONS.--l. Skip'per, the master of a small merchant ves-sel. 3.
Veer'ing, changing. Flaw, a sudden gust of wind. 4. Port, harbor. 6.
Brine, the sea. 7. A-main', with sudden force. 8. Weath'er, to endure, to
resist. 9. Spar, a long beam. 13. Helm, the instrument by which a ship is
steered. 18. Card'ed, cleaned by combing. 19. Shrouds, sets of ropes
reaching from the mastheads to the sides of a vessel to support the masts.
Stove, broke in.


NOTES.--This piece is written in the style of the old English ballads. The
syllables marked (') have a peculiar accent not usually allowed.

4. The Spanish Main was the name formerly applied to the northern coast of
South America from the Mosquito Territory to the Leeward Islands.

15. The reef of Norman's Woe. A dangerous ledge of rocks on the
Massachusetts coast, near Gloucester harbor.

19. Went by the board. A sailor's expression, meaning "fell over the side
of the vessel."



LXX. ANECDOTES OF BIRDS. (193)

1. I had once a favorite black hen, "a great beauty," as she was called by
everyone, and so I thought her; her feathers were so jetty, and her
topping so white and full! She knew my voice as well as any dog, and used
to run cackling and bustling to my hand to receive the fragments that I
never failed to collect from the breakfast table for "Yarico," as she was
called.

2. Yarico, by the time she was a year old, hatched a respectable family of
chickens; little, cowering, timid things at first, but, in due time, they
became fine chubby ones; and old Norah said, "If I could only keep Yarico
out of the copse, it would do; but the copse is full of  weasels and of
foxes.

3. "I have driven her back twenty times; but she watches till some one
goes out of the gate, and then she's off again. It is always the case with
young hens, Miss; they think they know better than their keepers; and
nothing cures them but losing a brood or two of chickens." I have often
thought since that young people, as well as young hens, buy their
experience equally dear.

4. One morning; after breakfast, I went to seek my favorite in the poultry
yard; plenty of hens were there, but no Yarico. The gate was open, and, as
I concluded she had sought the forbidden copse, I proceeded there,
accompanied by the yard mastiff; a noble fellow, steady and sagacious as a
judge.

5. At the end of a lane, flanked on one side by a quickset hedge, on the
other by a wild common, what was called the copse commenced; but before I
arrived near the spot I heard a loud and tremendous cackling, and met two
young, long-legged pullets, running with both wings and feet toward home.
Jock pricked up his sharp ears, and would have set off at full gallop to
the copse; but I restrained him, hastening onward, however, at the top of
my speed, thinking I had as good a right to see what was the matter as
Jock.

6. Poor Yarico! An impertinent fox cub had attempted to carry off one of
her children; but she had managed to get them behind her in the hedge, and
venturing boldly forth had placed herself in front, and positively kept
the impudent animal at bay. His desire for plunder had prevented his
noticing our approach, and Jock soon made him feel the superiority of an
English mastiff over a cub fox.

7. The most interesting portion of my tale is to come. Yarico not only
never afterward ventured to the copse, but formed a strong friendship for
the dog which had preserved her family. Whenever he appeared in the yard,
she would run to meet him, prating and clucking all the time, and impeding
his progress by walking between his legs, to his no small annoyance. If
any other dog entered the yard, she would fly at him most furiously,
thinking, perhaps, that he would injure her chickens; but she evidently
considered Jock her especial protector, and treated him accordingly.

8. It was very droll to see the peculiar look with which he regarded his
feathered friend; not knowing exactly what to make of her civilities, and
doubting how they should be received. When her family were educated, and
able to do without her care, she was a frequent visitor at Jock's kennel,
and would, if permitted, roost there at night, instead of returning with
the rest of the poultry to the henhouse. Yarico certainly was a most
grateful and interesting bird. * *

9. One could almost believe a parrot had intellect, when he keeps up a
conversation so spiritedly; and it is certainly singular to observe how
accurately a well-trained bird will apply his knowledge. A friend of mine
knew one that had been taught many sentences; thus, "Sally, Poll wants her
breakfast!" "Sally, Poll wants her tea!" but she never mistook the one for
the other; breakfast was invariably demanded in the morning, and tea in
the afternoon; and she always hailed her master, but no one else, by "How
do you do, Mr. A?"

10. She was a most amusing bird, and could whistle dogs, which she had
great pleasure in doing. She would drop bread out of her cage as she hung
at the street door, and whistle a number about her, and then, just as they
were going to possess themselves of her bounty, utter a shrill scream of
"Get out, dogs!" with such vehemence and authority as dispersed the
assembled company without a morsel, to her infinite delight. * * *

11. How wonderful is that instinct by which the bird of passage performs
its annual migration! But how still more wonderful is it when the bird,
after its voyage of thousands of miles has been performed, and new lands
visited, returns to the precise window or eaves where, the summer before,
it first enjoyed existence! And yet, such is unquestionably the fact.

12. Four brothers had watched with indignation the felonious attempts of a
sparrow to possess himself of the nest of a house martin, in which lay its
young brood of four unfledged birds.

13. The little fellows considered themselves as champions for the bird
which had come over land and sea, and chosen its shelter under their
mother's roof. They therefore marshaled themselves with blowguns, to
execute summary vengeance; but their well-meant endeavors brought
destruction upon the mud-built domicile they wished to defend. Their
artillery loosened the foundations, and down it came, precipitating its
four little inmates to the ground. The mother of the children, Good
Samaritan-like, replaced the little outcasts in their nest, and set it in
the open window of an unoccupied chamber.

14. The parent birds, after the first terror was over, did not appear
disconcerted by the change of situation, but hourly fed their young as
usual, and testified, by their unwearied twitter of pleasure, the
satisfaction and confidence they felt. There the young birds were duly
fledged, and from that window they began their flight, and entered upon
life.

15. The next spring, with the reappearance of the martins, came four,
which familiarly flew into the chamber, visited all the walls, and
expressed their recognition by the most clamorous twitterings of joy. They
were, without question, the very birds that had been bred there the
preceding year.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Copse, a grove of small trees or bushes. 4. Sa-ga'cious,
quick in discernment. 6. Im-per'ti-nent, rude, intru-sive. 8. Ken'nel, a
place for dogs. 10. Ve'he-mence, force. 11. Mi-gra'tion, change of place,
removal. 12. Fe-lo'ni-ous, criminal. 13. Dom'i-cile, the home or residence
of anyone. Ar-til'er-y, weapons of warfare. 14. Dis-con-cert'ed,
interrupted, confused. 15. Rec-og-ni'tion, recollection of a former
acquaintance.



LXXI. THE RAINBOW PILGRIMAGE. (197)

By Sara J. Lippincott, born at Onondaga, N. Y., in 1823, of New England
parentage. Under the name of "Grace Greenwood" she has written many
charming stories for children. Some of her best sketches are in "Records
of Five Years."

1. One summer afternoon, when I was about eight years of age, I was
standing at an eastern window, looking at a beautiful rainbow that,
bending from the sky, seemed to be losing itself in a thick, swampy wood
about a quarter of a mile distant.

2. It happened that no one was in the room with me then but my brother
Rufus, who was just recovering from a severe illness, and was sitting,
propped up with pillows, in an easy-chair, looking out, with me, at the
rainbow.

3. "See, brother," I said, "it drops right down among the cedars, where we
go in the spring to find wintergreens!"

4. "Do you know, Gracie," said my brother, with a very serious face, "that
if you should go to the end of the rain how, you would find there purses
filled with money, and great pots of gold and silver?"

5. "Is it truly so?" I asked.

6. "Truly so," answered my brother, with a smile. Now, I was a
simple-hearted child who believed everything that was told me, although I
was again and again imposed upon; so, without another word, I darted out
of the door, and set forth toward the wood. My brother called after me as
loudly as he was able, but I did not heed him.

7. I cared nothing for the wet grass, which was sadly drabbling my clean
frock,--on and on I ran: I was so sure that I knew just where that rainbow
ended. I remember how glad and proud I was in my thoughts, and what fine
presents I promised to all my friends out of my great riches.

8. So thinking, and laying delightful plans, almost before I knew it I had
reached the cedar grove, and the end of the rainbow was not there! But I
saw it shining down among the trees a little farther off; so on and on I
struggled, through the thick bushes and over logs, till I came within the
sound of a stream which ran through the swamp. Then I thought, "What if
the rainbow should come down right in the middle of that deep, muddy
brook!"

9. Ah! but I was frightened for my heavy pots of gold and silver, and my
purses of money. How should I ever find them there? and what a time I
should have getting them out! I reached the bank of the stream, and "the
end was not yet." But I could see it a little way off on the other side. I
crossed the creek on a fallen tree, and still ran on, though my limbs
seemed to give way, and my side ached with fatigue.

10. The woods grew thicker and darker, the ground more wet and swampy, and
I found, as many grown people had found before me, that there was rather
hard traveling in a journey after, riches. Suddenly I met in my way a
large porcupine, who made himself still larger when he saw me, as a cross
cat raises its back and makes tails at a dog. Fearing that he would shoot
his sharp quills at me, I ran from him as fast as my tired feet would
carry me.

11. In my fright and hurry I forgot to keep my eye on the rainbow, as I
had done before; and when, at last, I remembered and looked for it, it was
nowhere in sight! It had quite faded away. When I saw that it was indeed
gone, I burst into tears; for I had lost all my treasures, and had nothing
to show for my pilgrimage but muddy feet and a wet and torn frock. So I
set out for home.

12. But I soon found that my troubles had only begun; I could not find my
way: I was lost! I could not tell which was east or west, north or south,
but wandered about here and there, crying and calling, though I knew that
no one could hear me.

13. All at once I heard voices shouting and hallooing; but, instead of
