and silencing the "still small voice," he went home: and there was no
joy in heaven over the returning prodigal.

"Charles," said his father, sternly, as he entered the house, "you were
not at school yesterday!"

"I got late, and did not like to go," whined he.

"Where were you?"

"Down at the village."

"Go to your room, and don't leave it without permission."

Charles obeyed. The consequences of his error were already beginning to
overtake him. His father joined him soon after, and talked to him very
severely. He was really alarmed, for Captain Sedley had given him a hint
concerning his son's intimacy with Tim Bunker.

Charles was not permitted to leave his room that afternoon, and his
supper was sent up to him; but his mother brought it, and consoled him
in his troubles--promising to prevent his father from punishing him any
more.

"Now, go to bed, Charley; never do so again, and it will be all right
to-morrow," said the weak mother, as she took her leave.

But Charles did not go to bed. The family retired early; and, taking his
great-coat on his arm, he stole noiselessly out of the house. At nine
o'clock he was at the rendezvous of the Rovers.

It was not deemed prudent to put their plans in execution till a later
hour; and the band dispersed, with instructions to meet again in an hour
at Flat Rock, where the boats would be in readiness to take them off to
the island.

Tim and Charles, with four others, immediately repaired to the place
where Joe Braman's boat, which had been hired for the enterprise, was
concealed. Seating themselves in it, they waited till the hour had
expired, and then, with muffled oars, pulled up to the Butterfly's
house.

The doors which opened out upon the lake were not fastened, and an
entrance was readily effected. The boat was loosed, pushed out into the
lake without noise, and towed down to the Zephyr's house. But here the
doors were found to be fastened; and one of the boys had to enter by a
window, and draw the bolt. The boat was then secured without difficulty.

"Now, Charley, you get into the Zephyr with two fellows, and tow the
Sylph off," said Tim, in a whisper.

"Shan't I get my crew first?"

"Just as you like."

Charles and his two companions got into the Zephyr and worked her down
to the rock, where he received his crew. It was found then that some of
the Rovers had not yet made their appearance, so that there were only
ten boys to each boat.

Although the success of the criminal undertaking required the utmost
caution, Charles found his command were disposed to be very boisterous,
and all his efforts would hardly keep them quiet. After some trouble he
got away from the shore; but his crew, from the want of discipline,
were utterly incapable of pulling in concert. They had not taken three
strokes before they were all in confusion--tumbling off the thwarts,
knocking each other in the back, and each swearing at and abusing his
companions.

"Hold your jaw, there!" called Tim Bunker, in a low tone, from the
Butterfly.

"Cease rowing!" said Charles.

But they would not "cease rowing," and the prospect was that a general
fight would soon ensue in spite of all the coxswain's efforts to restore
order. At last Tim came alongside, and rapping two or three of the
turbulent Rovers over the head with a boathook, he succeeded in quieting
them.

After several attempts Charles got them so they could pull without
knocking each other out of the boat; but he was heartily disgusted with
his crew, and would gladly have escaped from them, even if Rippleton
Jail had yawned to receive him. After half a dozen trials he placed the
Zephyr alongside the Sylph, let go her moorings, and took her in tow.
The Rovers then pulled for the island; but the passage thither was long
and difficult.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE CAMP ON THE ISLAND.


As the crew of the Zephyr tugged at their oars, their imperfect
discipline imposing double labor upon them, Charles had an opportunity
to consider his position. The bright color of romance which his fancy
had given to the enterprise was gone. The night air was cold and damp,
and his companions in error were repulsive to him. There was no pleasure
in commanding such a motley crew of ill-natured and quarrelsome bullies,
and if it had been possible, he would have fled from them. Who plunges
into vice may find himself in a snare from which he cannot escape though
he would.

At last they reached the island, and the Sylph was anchored near the
shore. There was a great deal of hard work to be done; but each of the
Rovers seemed to expect the others would do it.

"Now, Charley, everything is right so far," said Tim Bunker, whose party
had just drawn Joe Braman's boat upon the beach.

"Everything is wrong," Charles wanted to say; but Tim was too powerful
to be lightly offended.

"I can do nothing with such a crew as that," whined he. "They won't
mind, and every fellow wants his own way."

"Hit 'em if they don't mind," replied Tim.

"I think we had better spend an hour in drilling them. We can't handle
the boat as it is."

"We must get the tents up before we do anything else. You go after the
stakes and poles and I will get the provisions."

Before the crews returned to the boats, Tim made a little speech to them
upon the necessity of order; promising, if any boy did not obey, he
would thrash him "within an inch of his life."

"Now tumble into the boats, and, Charley, if any feller don't do what
you tell him, let me know it, and I will lick him for you."

"All aboard!" said Charles.

"Where are we going now?" asked one of his crew.

"No matter; all you have got to do is to obey orders," replied Charles,
sharply.

"Say that again!" said the fellow, with an oath, as he doubled up his
fist, and menaced the unfortunate coxswain with a thrashing.

"Hallo, Tim!" shouted Charles, who dared not venture to carry out the
Bunker's summary policy.

"What's the row?" said Tim, as he hastened to the spot.

"I can't do anything with this crew; here is a fellow shaking his fist
in my face."

"Let him be civil then," added the refractory Rover.

"It was you, was it, Barney?" said Tim, as he stepped into the boat.

"I'll bet it was," replied the fellow, standing upon the defensive.

"Take that, then," continued the "chief," as he brought his fist down
upon the rebel with such force that he tumbled over the side of the boat
into the water. "You want to get up a mutiny--don't you?"

The fellow scrambled ashore, wet through and shivering with cold.

"You'll catch it for that, Tim Bunker!" growled Barney.

"I'll teach you to mind. Now, Charley, put off, and don't be so stiff
with them yet. They are not such chicken-hearted pups as the Zephyrs, I
can tell you;" and Tim stepped ashore.

"Take your oars; if you only do as I tell you, we shall get along very
well," said Charles. "We can't do anything unless you mind."

He then showed them how to get their oars out, and how to start
together; but they did not feel interest enough in the process to pay
much attention to what he said, and several ineffectual attempts were
made before they got a fair start.

"Hallo! Ain't you going to take me?" shouted Barney, from the shore, as
they were leaving.

"Will you obey orders?"

"Yes; but I won't be kicked."

"Nobody wants to kick you," replied Charles, who, deeming that the rebel
had made a satisfactory concession, put back after him.

"This ducking will be the death of me," said Barney, as he got into the
boat.

"A little hard pulling will warm you, and when we get back, we shall
make a fire on the island," answered Charles, in a conciliatory tone,
"Now, ready--pull!"

The Rovers worked better now, and the Zephyr moved with tolerable
rapidity towards the shore; but it was very dark under the shadow of the
trees, and Charles could not readily find the place where the materials
for the tent had been concealed. Each of the crew thought he knew more
about the business than the coxswain; and in the scrape the Zephyr was
run aground, heeled over on one side, and filled half full of water.

It required some time to bail her out; but it was accomplished at last,
the stakes and poles put on board, and they rowed off to the island
again. Tim had arrived before him, and had landed the stores.

"Where are the matches, Tim?" asked Charles.

"What are you going to do?"

"Make a fire."

"What for?"

"Some of us are wet, and we can't see to put up the tents without it."

"But a fire will betray us."

"What matter? We are safe from pursuit."

"Go it, then," replied Tim, as he handed Charles a bunch of matches.

The fire was kindled, and it cast a cheerful light over the scene of
their operations.

"Now, Rovers, form a ring round the fire," said Tim, "and we will fix
things for the future."

The boys obeyed this order, though Barney, in consideration of his
uncomfortable condition, was permitted to lie down before the fire and
dry his clothes.

"I am the chief of the band; I suppose that is understood," continued
Tim.

"Yes," they all replied.

"And that Charley Hardy is second in command. He can handle a boat, and
the rest of you can't."

"I don't know about that," interposed one of them. "He upset the boat on
the beach."

"That was because the crew did not obey orders," replied Charles.

"He is second in command," replied Tim. "Do you agree to that?"

"Yes," answered several, who were willing to follow the lead of the
chief.

"Very well; I shall command one party and Charley the other; each in his
own boat and on the island. Now we will divide each party into two
squads, or watches."

"What for?" asked Barney.

"To keep watch, and do any duty that may be wanted of them."

Tim had got this idea of an organization from his piratical literature.
Indeed, the plan of encamping upon the island was an humble imitation of
a party of buccaneers who had fortified one of the smallest of the
islands in the West Indies. The whole scheme was one of the natural
consequences of reading bad books, in which the most dissolute,
depraved, and wicked men are made to appear as heroes, whose lives and
characters are worthy of emulation.

Such books fill boys' heads with absurd, not to say wicked ideas. I have
observed their influence in the course of ten years' experience with
boys; and when I see one who has named his sled "Blackbeard," "Black
Cruiser," "Red Rover," or any such names, I am sure he has been reading
about the pirates, and has got a taste for their wild and daring
exploits--for their deeds of blood and rapine. One of the truant
officers of Boston, whose duty it is to hunt up runaway boys, related to
me a remarkable instance of the influence of improper books. A few years
ago, two truant boys were missed by their parents. They did not return
to their homes at night, and it was discovered that one of them had
stolen a large sum of money from his father. A careful search was
instituted, and the young reprobates were traced to a town about ten
miles from the city, where they were found encamped in the woods. They
had purchased several pistols with their money, and confessed their
intention of becoming highwaymen! It was ascertained that they had been
reading the adventures of Dick Turpin, and other noted highwaymen, which
had given them this singular and dangerous taste for a life in violation
of the laws of God and man. My young readers will see where Tim got his
ideas, and I hope they will shun books which narrate the exploits of
pirates and robbers.

Two officers were chosen in each band to command the squads. Tim was
shrewd enough to know that the more offices he created, the more friends
he would insure--members who would stand by him in trial and difficulty.
In Charles's band, one of these offices was given to the turbulent
Barney; his fidelity was thus secured, and past differences reconciled.

"Now, Charley, my crew shall put up one tent, and yours the other."

"Very well," replied Charles, who derived a certain feeling of security
from the organization which had just been completed, and he began to
feel more at home.

The stakes were driven down, and the poles placed upon the forks; but
sewing the cloth together for the covering was found to be so tedious a
job that it was abandoned. The strips were drawn over the frame of the
tent, and fastened by driving pins through it into the ground. Then it
was found that there was only cloth enough to cover one tent. Tim's
calculations had been defective.

"Here's a pretty fix," said Tim.

"I have it," replied Charles. "Come with me, Barney, and we will have
the best tent of the two."
