A lively discussion followed. John's voice had decided the opinion of
the kitchen. It had been divided hitherto, but it was not now. The
beautiful young lady with the starry eyes and the golden hair had
certainly been torn away, and the sympathy of cooks and maids was
strongly for her. While they talked John tried to collect his thoughts.
After the first shock, he was convinced that Julie's life was in no
danger, but her liberty certainly was. Auersperg would use the charge
that she was a spy to hold her, and he was a powerful man. The pressure
upon her would grow heavier and heavier all the time. Could she resist
it? He might make her think that the fate of a spy would be hers, unless
she chose to marry him.

In all the world, since Philip would lie long in the hospital with a
wound, there was but one man who could help her. And it was he, John
Scott. Out of the depths of his misery and despair a star of hope shot
up. His own strong heart and arm, and his only, would rescue her. Some
minds gather most courage when things are at the worst, like steel
hardening in the fire, and John's was markedly of this type. Since
chance had brought him on this road, and to the very house in which
Julie had slept, the same kindly chance would continue to guide him on
the right way. It was a good omen.

The twilight outside, cold and gray, was deepening into night. His
appetite was satisfied and he felt buoyant and strong. Had he obeyed his
impulse he would have started on the road to Metz in pursuit. But he
knew that it was folly to exhaust himself in such a manner for nothing.
Instead he told Johanna that he would go to the stable now and sleep.
Jacques, a stalwart hostler, was called to show him his quarters, and he
departed with all their good wishes.

Jacques was a large brown peasant, and as he led the way to the stable
he said:

"They told me your name was Jean Castel from Lorraine?"

"Yes, back of Metz."

"And the house is full of German officers."

He pointed to the windows of the dining-room, which were ruddy with
light. Young men in tight-fitting uniforms, their blond hair
pompadoured, were outlined vividly against the glow.

"Will they go forward or will they come back?" asked Jacques in a hoarse
whisper. "Is the work of Bismarck to stand or is it to undo itself?"

John believed Jacques to be a French sympathizer, anxious for an opinion
that would agree with his hopes, but one could not be sure in such
times, and it behooved him above all, with Julie at the end of his
journey, to be careful. So he merely shrugged his shoulders and replied:

"I know not. I'm a simple buyer and seller of horses. I'm a much better
judge of a horse than of an army. I've no idea which side is the
stronger. I don't love war, and I'm going away from it as fast as I
can."

Jacques laughed.

"Perhaps it will follow you," he said. "There is war everywhere now, or
soon will be. I hear that it's spreading all over the world."

John shrugged his shoulders, and followed Jacques up a ladder into a
loft over the horses. But it was not a bad room. It had two small iron
beds and it was secure from wet and cold.

"You take that," said Jacques, pointing to the bed on the right. "It
belonged to Fritz who was the hostler here with me. He went to the army
at the first call and was killed at Longwy. Fritz was a German, a Saxon,
but he and I were friends. We had worked together here three years. I'd
have been glad if the bullets had spared him. The horses miss him, too.
He had a kind hand with them and they liked him. Poor Fritz! You sleep
in the bed of a good man."

"My eyes are so heavy that I think I'll go to bed now."

"The bed is waiting for you. It's always welcome to one who has walked
all day in the cold as you have. I have more work. I have the tasks of
that poor Fritz and my own to do now. It may be an hour, two hours
before I'm through, but if you sleep as soundly as I do I'll not wake
you up."

John sank into deep slumber almost at once and knew nothing until the
next morning.




CHAPTER VIII

INTO GERMANY


A frosty dawn was just beginning to show through the single window that
lighted up the little room. It opened toward the east, where the light
was pink over the hills, but the upper sky was yet in dusk. John sat up
in bed and rubbed the last sleep out of his eyes. A steady moaning sound
made him think he was hearing again the thunder of great guns, as he had
heard it days and nights at the Battle of the Marne.

The low ominous mutter came from a point toward the north, and glancing
that way, although he knew his eyes would meet a blank wall, he saw that
it was only Jacques, snoring, not an ordinary common snore, but the loud
resounding trumpet call that can only come from a mighty chest and a
powerful throat through an eagle beak. Jacques was stretched flat upon
his back and John knew that he must have worked extremely hard the night
before to roar with so much energy through his nose while he slept.
Well, Jacques was a good fellow and a friend of France, the nation that
was fighting for its existence, and if he wanted to do it he might snore
until he raised the roof!

John sat up. He saw the pink on the eastern hills turning to blue and
then spreading to the higher skies. The day was going to be clear and
cold. He walked to the window and looked up at the skies, seeking for
aeroplanes, after the habit that had now grown upon him. But the sky was
speckless and no sounds came from the Gratz farmhouse. Doubtless the
German officers quartered there were sleeping late, knowing that they
had no need to hurry to the front, since the fighting in the hills and
mountains was desultory.

But the crisp clear blue of the cold morning was wonderfully suitable to
the hosts of the air and they were at work. Along a battle front of five
hundred miles in the west and of seven or eight hundred in the east
messages were flashing, on wires by telephone and telegraph and then on
nothing but the pulsating air.

John, who had been compelled to deal so much with these invisible
agencies felt them now about him. He had a highly sensitive mind like a
photographic plate that registered everything, and when he opened the
window that he might see better and admit the fresh air, he did not have
to reach out for knowledge. It came, and registered itself upon that
delicate and imaginative mind. He had thought so much and he had striven
so hard to see and to divine what lay before him that he felt almost
able to send messages of his own through the air, messages of hope
winging their way directly to Julie.

The mind of man is a strange thing. It may be a godlike instrument, the
powers of which are yet but little known. John did not believe in the
least in anything supernatural, but he did believe in the immense and
unfathomed power of the natural. Alone, and in the early dawn with
silence all about him it seemed that he heard Julie calling to him. Her
voice traveled like the wireless on the pulsating air. She needed him
and she turned to him alone for aid. She had divined in some manner that
only he could help her and he would come, no matter what the risk. The
cry was registered again and again upon his sensitive soul, and always
he sent back the answer that he was coming. His mind, like hers, had
become a wireless, and both were working.

He became unconscious of time and place. He no longer saw the blue sky,
but he stretched out his arms and called:

"I am coming!"

"Coming? What do you mean by coming? Who is it you're telling?"

John came out of his dream, or the misty region between here and
nowhere, and turned to Jacques, who in the process of awakening at that
moment had heard his words which were spoken in French.

"I was just talking to the air," replied John a little uncertainly.
"Fine mornings appeal to me, and I was telling this one that I'd soon
come out into it"

Jacques continued to awaken. He was a big man who worked hard and who
slept heavily. Rousing from sleep was a task accomplished by degrees and
it took some time. He had heard John with one ear and now he heard with
the other. His right eye opened slowly and then the left. The blood
became more active in his brain and in a minute or two he was awake all
over.

"Telling the morning air that you're coming out into it, eh Castel?" he
said as he put one foot on the floor. "You're a poet, I see. You don't
look it, but being French, as you Lorrainers are, it makes you fond of
poetry."

"I do believe you have it right, Jacques," said John, "but if I can get
my breakfast now I mean to go upon the road at once."

"Oh, you can get it, Castel. The whole kitchen has fallen in love with
you. I found that out last night after you had gone away. That little
Annette told me so."

"It was to tease you," said John, who understood at once and who was
willing to fib in a good cause. "I saw her watching through a window a
fine big fellow, exactly your size, age and appearance, and with the
same name. I said something about his being a hulking hostler and she
turned upon me like a hawk."

"Now, did she?" exclaimed Jacques, a great smile spreading slowly across
his face.

"She did. Told me it was a poor return for their kindness to criticize a
better man."

"Ah, that Annette is bright and quick. She can see through a man at one
look. Castel, I like you, and I hope you'll get to Metz without trouble.
But keep a civil and a slow tongue in your mouth. Don't speak until the
Germans speak to you, and then tell the truth without stammering. I'll
go to the kitchen with you, as my work begins early."

John knew that he had a friend, and the two left the stable together.
But he was not thinking much then of the Gratz farm or of anybody upon
it. He had sent his soul on before, and he meant that his body should
catch up with it.

Johanna, Annette and the master, Gratz himself, were in the kitchen. He
ate a good breakfast with Jacques, paid Gratz for food and lodging, and
putting his blankets and knapsack upon his back, took once more to the
road. Jacques repeated his good advice to be polite to men to whom it
paid to be polite, and Annette, standing by the side of the stalwart
hostler, waved him farewell.

The slush, frozen the night before, had not yet melted, and John walked
rapidly along the broad firm highway, elated and bold. Julie had called
to him. He would not reason with himself, and ask how or why it had been
done, but he felt it. He liked to believe that wireless signals had
passed between them. Anyway he was going to believe it, and hence his
heart was light and his spirit strong.

He passed sentinels posted along the road, but his passport was always
sufficient, and his pleasant manner bred a pleasant manner in return.
Soon there was nothing but a line of smoke to mark where the Gratz farm
stood, but he carried with him good memories of it. He hoped that the
romance of Jacques and Annette would end happily. In truth he was quite
sure that it would, and he began to whistle softly to himself, a trick
that he had caught from General Vaugirard.

John had no certainty that he would enter Metz, which must now be less
of a city than a great fortress with a powerful garrison. But he felt
sure that he could at least penetrate to the outskirts and there find
more trace of Auersperg. A prince and man of his social importance could
scarcely pass through the city without being noticed, and there would be
gossip among the soldiers. Fortunately he had been in Metz twice and he
knew the romantic old city at the confluence of the Moselle and the
Seille, dominated by its magnificent Gothic cathedral. After all he
might overtake Auersperg there and in some manner achieve his task.
Chance took a wide range in so great a war and nothing was impossible.

He was now approaching the line between France and Germany, and Metz lay
only eleven miles beyond. The beauty of the clear cold day endured.
There was snow on the hills, but the brilliant sun touched it with a
luminous golden haze, and the crisp air was the breath of life.

He swung along at a great gait for one who walked. Life for months
without a roof had been hard, but it had toughened wonderfully those
whom it did not kill, and John with a magnificent constitution was one
of those who had profited most. He felt no weariness now although he had
come many miles.

About one o'clock in the afternoon he sat on a stone by the roadside and
ate with the appetite of vigorous youth good food from his knapsack.
While he was there a German sergeant, with about twenty men in wagons
going toward Metz, stopped and spoke to him.

"Hey, you on the stone, what are you doing?" asked the sergeant.

John cut off a fresh piece of sausage with his clasp knife and answered
briefly and truthfully:

"Eating."

The sergeant had a broad, red and merry face, and facing a man of good
humor he was not offended.

"So I see," he said, "but that wasn't what I meant."

John, without another word, took out his passport, handed it to him and
went on eating. The sergeant examined it, handed it back to him and
said:

"Correct."

"I show it to everybody," said John. "When a man speaks to me I don't
care who he is, or what he is, I hand it to him. I, Jean Castel, as you
see by the name on the passport, don't want trouble with anybody."

"And a wise fellow you are, Castel. I'm Otto Scheller, a sergeant in the
service of his Imperial Majesty and the Fatherland."

"You look as if you had seen much of war, Sergeant Scheller, but I am a
dealer in horses and I am happiest where the bullets are fewest."

"It's an honest confession, but it does not bespeak a high heart."

"Perhaps not, but sometimes a horse-dealer is more useful than a
soldier. For instance, the off horse of the front wagon has picked up a
stone in his left hind foot, and if it's not taken out he'll go lame
long before you reach Metz."

"Donnerwetter! But it's true. You do know something about horses and
you have an eye in your head. Here you, Heinrich, take that stone out,
quick, or it won't be good for you!"

"And the right horse of the third wagon has glanders. The swelling is
just beginning to show below the jaw. It's contagious, you know. You'd
better turn him loose, or all your horses will die."

"Donner und blitzen! See Fritz, if it's true. It's so, is it? Then
release the poor animal as Castel says, and put in one of the extras.
See, you Castel, you're a wizard, you hardly glanced at the horses, and
you saw what we didn't see, although we've been with them all day."

"I've grown up with horses. It's my business to know everything about
them, and maybe your trade before the war didn't bring you near them."

Scheller threw back his great head and laughed.

"If a horse had approached where I worked," he said, "much good beer
would have been spilt. I was the head waiter in a restaurant on the
Unter den Linden. Ah, the happy days! Oh, the glorious street! and here
it's nothing but march, march, and shoot, shoot! Three of my best
waiters have been killed already. And the other lads are no horsemen
either. That big Fritz over there made toys, Joseph drove a taxicab,
August was conductor on a train to Charlottenberg, and Eitel was porter
in a hotel. We're all from Berlin, and will you tell us, Castel, how
soon we can take Paris and London and go back to the Unter den Linden?"

John shook his head.

"There are about fifteen hundred million people in the world who are
asking that question, Otto Scheller," he replied, "and out of all the
fifteen hundred millions not one can answer it. But I will ask you a
question in return."

"What is it?"

"Will you give me a ride in one of your wagons to Metz?"

"Why, certainly," replied Scheller. "Your passport is in good order, and
we can take you to the first line of fortifications. There you'll meet
high officers and you'll have to make more statements, because Metz, as
you know, is one of the most powerful fortresses in Europe."

"I know; why shouldn't I, a Lorrainer, know? But my passport will take
me in. Meanwhile, I thank you, Otto Scheller, for the kindness you're
