rest continued their work with the herd.

"It's a chase," said Obed. "Those fellows want scalps and they don't
care whether we're Texans or Mexicans. Besides, they may have better
horses than the Mexican ponies. But it's a long chase that has no
turning, and if our horses don't stumble we'll beat them. Look out for
potholes and such places."

They rode knee to knee, not yet putting the horses to their full speed,
but covering the ground, nevertheless, at a great rate. It seemed play
for their fine horses, which arched their necks and sped on, not a drop
of perspiration yet staining their glossy skins. Ned felt the thrill, as
the ground spun back under his horse's feet, and the air rushed past his
face. It did not occur to him that the Lipans could overtake them, and
their pursuit merely added a fresh spice to a magnificent ride.

He took another look back. The Lipans, although they had lost ground,
were still following. They came in a close group, carrying, besides
their arms, shields, made of layers of buffalo hide. Several wore
magnificent war bonnets. Otherwise all were naked save for the
breech-cloth, and their brown bodies were glistening with war paint.
Behind them, yet came the black front of the buffalo herd, but it was a
full mile away.

Obed looked also, and his heart smote him. Older and more experienced
than Ned, he knew that with the fierce Lipans the most powerful of all
lures was the lure of scalps. Just as the wolf can trail down the moose
at last, they could follow for days on their tough mustangs. But as he
shifted his good rifle a bit he felt better. Both he and Ned were
splendid marksmen, and if the chase were a success for the Lipans there
would also be a bitter fight at the end of it.

Now he and Ned ceased to talk, the sun blazed down on the plain, and on
sped the chase, hour after hour.




CHAPTER XII

THE TRIAL OF PATIENCE


The hours of the afternoon trailed slowly away, one by one. Perspiration
appeared at last upon the glossy skins of the horses, but their stride
did not abate. The powerful muscles still worked with their full
strength and ease. Ned never felt a tremor in the splendid horse beneath
him. But when he looked back again there were the Lipans, a little
further away, but hanging on as grimly as before, still riding in a
close group.

Ned began to understand now the deadly nature of the pursuit. These
Lipans would follow not merely for hours, but into the night, and if he
and Obed were lost to sight in the darkness they would pick up the trail
the next day by the hoof prints on the plain. He felt with absolute
certainty that chance had brought upon them one of the deadliest dangers
they had yet encountered.

"It's growing a little cooler, Obed," he said.

"So it is. The evening wanes. But, Ned, do you see any sign of forest or
high hills ahead?"

"I do not, Obed. There is nothing but the plain which waves like the
ripples on a lake, the bunches of buffalo grass here and there, and now
and then an ugly yucca."

"You see just what I see, Ned, and as there is no promise of shelter
we'd better ease our horses a little. Our lives depend upon them, and
even if the Lipans do regain some of their lost ground now it will not
matter in the end."

They let the horses drop into a walk, and finally, to put elasticity
back into their own stiffened limbs, they dismounted and walked awhile.

"If the Lipans don't rest their horses now they will have to do it
later," said Obed, "but as they're mighty crafty they'll probably slow
down when we do. Do you see them now, Ned?"

"Yes, there they are on the crest of a swell. They don't seem to gain on
us much. I should say they are a full mile away."

"A mile and a half at least. The air of these great uplands is very
deceptive, and things look much nearer than they really are."

"Look how gigantic they have grown! They stand squarely in the center of
the sun now."

The sun was low and the Lipans coming out of the southwest were
silhouetted so perfectly against it that they seemed black and
monstrous, like some product of the primitive world. The fugitives felt
a chill of awe, but in a moment or two they threw it off, only to have
its place taken a little later by the real chill of the coming night. A
wind began to moan over the desolate plain, and their faces were stung
now and then by the fine grains of sand blown against them. But as the
Lipans were gaining but little, Ned and Obed still walked their horses.

They went on thus nearly an hour. The night came, but it was not dark,
and they could yet see the Lipans following as certain as death. Before
them the plain still rolled away, bare and brown. There was not a sign
of cover. Ned's spirits began to sink. The silent and tenacious pursuit
weighed upon him. It was time to rest and sleep. The Lipans had been
pursuing for seven or eight hours now, and if they could not catch
fugitives in that time they ought to turn back. Nevertheless, there they
were, still visible in the moonlight and still coming.

Ned and Obed remounted and rode at a running walk, which was easy but
which nevertheless took them on rapidly. But it became evident that the
Lipans had increased their pace in the same ratio, as the distance of a
mile and a half named by Obed did not decrease. Ned looked up longingly
at the sky. There was not a cloud. The moon, round and full, never shone
more brightly, and it seemed that countless new stars had arrived that
very night. He sighed. They might as well have been riding in broad
daylight.

Toward midnight the swells and dips of the plain became accentuated, and
they lost sight of the pursuing Lipans. But there was yet no forest to
hide them, only the miserable mesquite and the ragged yucca. Save for
them the plain stretched away as bare and brown as ever. Two hours more
with the Lipans still lost to view, Obed called a halt.

"The Lipans will pick up our trail in the morning," he said. "Though
lost to sight we are to their memory dear, and they will hang on. But
our horses are faster than theirs, and as they cannot come near us on
this bare plain, without being seen we can get away. Whereas, I say, and
hence and therefore we might as well rest and let our good steeds rest,
too."

"What time would you say it is?"

"About two o' the morning by the watch that I haven't got, and it will
be four or five hours until day. Ned, if I were you I'd lie down between
blankets. You can relax more comfortably and rest better that way."

Ned did not wish to do it, but Obed insisted so strongly, and was so
persuasive that he acceded at last. They had chosen a place on a swell
where they could see anything that approached a quarter of a mile away,
and Obed stood near the recumbent boy, holding the bridles of the two
horses in one hand and his rifle in the other.

The man's eyes continually traveled around the circle of the horizon,
but now and then he glanced at the boy. Ned, brave, enduring and
complaining so little, had taken a great hold upon his affection. They
were comrades, tried by many dangers, and no danger yet to come could
induce him to desert the boy.

The moon and stars were still very bright, and Obed, as his eyes
traveled the circle of the horizon, saw no sign of the Indian approach.
But that the Lipans would come with the dawn, or some time afterward, he
did not have the slightest doubt. He glanced once more at Ned and then
he smiled. The boy, while never meaning it, was sleeping soundly, and
Obed was very glad. This was what he intended, relying upon Ned's utter
exhaustion of body and mind.

All through the remaining hours of the night the man, with the bridles
of the two horses in one hand and the rifle in the other, kept watch.
Now and then he walked in a circle around and around the sleeping boy,
and once or twice he smiled to himself. He knew that Ned when he awoke
would be indignant because Obed let him sleep, but the man felt quite
able to stand such reproaches.

Obed, staunch as he was, felt the weirdness and appalling loneliness of
time and place. A wolf howled far out on the plain, and the answering
howl of a wolf came back from another point. He shivered a little, but
he continued his steady tread around and around the circle.

Dawn shot up, gilding the bare brown plain with silver splendor for a
little while. Obed awoke Ned, and laughed at the boy's protests.

"You feel stronger and fresher, Ned," he said, "and nothing has been
lost."

"What of you?"

"I? Oh, I'll get my chance later. All things come to him who works while
he waits. Meanwhile, I think we'd better take a drink out of our water
bottles, eat a quick breakfast and be off before we have visitors."

Once more in the saddle, they rode on over a plain unchanged in
character, still the same swells and dips, still the same lonesome
yuccas and mesquite, with the occasional clumps of bunch grass.

"Don't you think we have shaken them off?" asked Ned.

"No," replied Obed. "They would scatter toward dawn and the one who
picked up the trail would call the others with a whoop or a rifle shot."

"Well, they've been called," said Ned, who was looking back. "See,
there, on the highest ridge."

A faint, dark blur had appeared on a crest three or four miles behind
them, one that would have been wholly invisible had not the air been so
clear and translucent. It was impossible at the distance to distinguish
shapes or detach anything from the general mass, but they knew very well
that it was the Lipans. Each felt a little chill at this pursuit so
tenacious and so menacing.

"I wish that we had some sort of a place like that in which we faced the
Mexicans, where we could put our backs to the wall and fight!" exclaimed
Ned.

"I know how you feel," said Obed, "because I feel the same way myself,
but there isn't any such place, Ned, and this plain doesn't ever give
any sign of producing one, so we'll just ride on. We'll trust to time
and chance. Something may happen in our favor."

They strengthened their hearts, whistled to their horses and rode
ahead. As on the day before the interminable pursuit went on hour after
hour. It was another hot day, and their water bottles were almost
emptied. The horses had had nothing to drink since the day before and
the two fugitives began to feel for them, but about noon they came to a
little pool, lying in a dip or hollow between the swells. It was perhaps
fifty feet either way, less than a foot deep and the water was yellowish
in color, but it contained no alkali nor any other bitter infusion.
Moreover, grass grew around its edges and some wild ducks swam on its
surface. It would have been a good place for a camp and they would have
stayed there gladly had it not been for that threat which always hung on
the southern horizon.

The water was warm, but the horses drank deeply, and Ned and Obed
refilled their bottles. The stop enabled the pursuing Lipans to come
within a mile of them, but, moving away at an increased pace, they began
to lengthen the gap.

"The Lipans will stop and water their ponies and themselves just as we
have done," said Obed. "Everything that we have to endure they have to
endure, too. It's a poor rule that doesn't work for one side as well as
the other."

"It would all look like play," said Ned, "if we didn't know that it was
so much in earnest. Just as you said, Obed, they're stopping to drink at
the pond."

A shadow seemed to pass between himself and the blazing glare of the
sun. He looked up. It was a shadow thrown by a great bird, with black
wings, flying low. Others of the same kind circled higher. Ned saw with
a shiver that they were vultures. Obed saw them, too, and he also saw
Ned's face pale a little.

"You take it as an omen," he said, "and maybe it is, but it's a poor
omen that won't work both ways. They're flying back now towards the
Indians, so I guess the Lipans had better look out."

Nevertheless, both were depressed by the appearance of the vultures and
the heat that afternoon grew more intense than ever. The horses, at
last, began to show signs of weariness, but Ned reflected that for every
mile they traveled the Lipans must travel one also, and he recalled the
words of Obed that chance might come to their aid.

Another night followed, clear and bright, with the great stars dancing
in the southern skies, and Ned and Obed rode long after nightfall. Again
the Lipans sank from sight, and, as before, the two stopped on one of
the swells.

"Now, Obed," said Ned, "it is your time to sleep and mine to watch. I
submitted last night and you must submit to-night. You know that you
can't go on forever without sleep."

"Your argument is good," said Obed, "and I yield. It isn't worth while
for me to tell you to watch well, because I know you'll do it."

He stretched himself out, folded between his blankets, and was soon
asleep. The horses tethered to a lonesome yucca found a few blades of
grass on the swell, which they cropped luxuriously. Then they lay down.
Ned walked about for a long time rifle on shoulder. It turned colder and
he wrapped his serape around his shoulders and chest. Finally he grew
tired of walking, and sat down on the ground, holding his rifle across
his lap. He sat on the highest point of the swell, and, despite the
night, he could see a considerable distance.

His sight and hearing alike were acute, but neither brought him any
alarm. He tried to reconstruct in his mind the Lipan mode of procedure.
With the coming of the night and the disappearance of the fugitives from
their sight they would spread out in a long line, in order that they
might not pass the two without knowing it, and advance until midnight,
perhaps. Then they, too, would rest, and pick up the trail again in the
morning.

Ned did not know that time could be so long. He had not been watching
more than three or four hours, and yet it seemed like as many days. But
it was not long until dawn, and then it would be time for them to be up
and away again. The horses reposed by the yucca, and, down the far side
of the swell, close to the bottom of the dip, was another yucca. Ned's
glance wandered toward the second yucca, and suddenly his heart thumped.

There was a shadow within the shadow of the yucca. Then he believed that
it must be imagination, but nevertheless he rose to his feet and cocked
his rifle. The shadow blended with the shadow of the yucca just behind
its stern, but Ned, watching closely, saw in the next instant the two
shadows detach and separate. The one that moved was that of a Lipan
warrior, naked save for the breech-cloth and horrible with war paint.
Ned instantly raised his rifle and fired. The Lipan uttered a cry and
fell, then sprang to his feet, and ran away down the dip. In answer to
the shot came the fierce note of the war whoop.

"Up, Obed, up!" cried Ned. "The Lipans are coming down upon us. I just
shot at one of them in the bush!"

But Obed was up already, running toward the alarmed horses, his blankets
under one arm and his rifle under the other. Ned followed, and, in an
instant, they were on their horses with their arms and stores. From the
next swell behind them came a patter of shots, and, for the second
time, the war cry. But the two were now galloping northward at full
speed.

"Good work, Ned, my lad," cried Obed. "I didn't have time to see what
you shot, but I heard the yell and I knew it must have been a Lipan."

"He was stalking us, a scout, I suppose, and I just got a glimpse of him
behind a yucca. I hit him."

"Good eyes and good hand. You saved us. They must have struck our trail
in some manner during the night and then they thought they had us. Ah,
they still think they have us!"

The last remark was drawn by a shout and another spatter of shots. Two
or three bullets struck alarmingly close, and they increased the speed
of their horses, while the Lipans urged their ponies to their best.

"They're too eager," said Obed. "It's time to give them a hint that
their company is not wanted."

He wheeled and executed with success that most difficult of feats, a
running shot. A Lipan fell from his horse, and the others drew back a
little for fear of Ned, the second marksman.

"They've taken the hint," said Obed grimly, as he accomplished a second
difficult feat, that of reloading his rifle while they were at full
gallop. The Lipans did not utter another war cry, but settled down into
a steady pursuit.

"I think I'll try a shot, Obed," said Ned.

"All right," said Obed, "but be sure that you hit something. Never waste
a good bullet on empty air."

Ned fired. He missed the Lipan at whom he aimed, but he killed the pony
the warrior was riding. The Indian leaped on the pony that had been
ridden by the warrior slain by Obed and continued in the group of
pursuers. Ned looked somewhat chagrined, and Obed noticed it.

"You did very well, Ned," he said. "Of course, no one likes to kill a
horse, but it's the horses that bring on the Lipans, and the fewer
horses they have the better for us."

Ned also reloaded as they galloped and then said:

"Don't you think they're dropping back a little?"

"Yes, they want to keep out of range. They know that our rifles carry
farther than theirs, and they will not take any more risk until they
finally corner us, of which they feel sure."

"But of which we are not so sure."

"No, and we are going to be hidden from them, for a while, by something.
You haven't noticed, Ned, that the country is rapidly growing much
worse, and that we are now in what is practically a sandy desert. You
don't see even a yucca, but you do see something whirling there in the
southwest. That's a 'dust devil,' and there's a half dozen more whirling
in our direction. We're going to have a sand storm."

Ned looked with interest. The "dust devils," rising up like water
spouts, danced over the surface of the sand. They were a half dozen,
then a dozen, then twenty. A sharp wind struck the faces of the two
fugitives, and it had an edge of fine sand that stung. All the "dust
devils" were merged and the air darkened rapidly. The cloud of dust
about them thickened. They drew their sombreros far down over their
eyes, and rode very close together. They could not see twenty yards
away, and if they became separated in the dust storm it was not likely
that they would ever see each other again. But they urged their horses
on at a good rate, trusting to the instinct of the animals to take them
over a safe course.

Ned had not only pulled the brim of his sombrero down over his eyes, but
he reinforced it with one hand to keep from being blinded, for the time,
by the sand, but it was hard work. As a final resort he let the lids
remain open only enough for him to see his comrade who was but three
feet away. Meanwhile, he felt the sand going down his collar, and
entering every opening of his clothing, scratching and stinging his
skin. The wind all the time was roaring in his ears, and now and then
the horses neighed in alarm. But they kept onward. Ned knew that they
were passing dips and swells, but he knew nothing else.

The storm blew itself out in about three hours. Ned and Obed emerged
from an obscurity as great as that of night. The wind ceased shrieking
and was succeeded by a stillness that was almost deathly in comparison.
The sun came out suddenly, and shone brightly over the dips and swells.
But Ned and Obed looked at each other and laughed. Both were so thickly
plastered with sand and dust that they had little human semblance.

Ned shook himself, and a cloud of dust flew from him, but so much
remained that he could not tell the difference.

"I think we'd better take a drink out of our water bottles," said Obed.
"I'd like mighty well to have a bath, too, but I don't see a bath tub
convenient. Is there any sign of our friends, the enemy, Ned?"

"None," replied Ned, examining the horizon line. "There is absolutely
nothing within view on the plains."

"Don't you fret about 'em. They'll come. They'll spread out and pick up
our trail just as they do every morning."

Obed spoke dispassionately, as if he and Ned were not concerned in it.
His predictions were justified. Before night they saw the Lipans coming
as usual in a close group, now at a distance of about three miles. Ned
could not keep from shuddering. They were as implacable as fate. Night,
the storm and bullets did not stop them. They could not shake them off
in the immense spaces of plain and desert. A kind of horror seized him.
Such tenacity must triumph. Was it possible that Obed and he would fall
