
"You slay them all, and why? Because they scratch up a little handful of
wheat or corn, while searching for worms or weevils.

"Do you never think who made them and who taught them their songs of
love? Think of your woods and orchards without birds!

"And, friends, would you rather have insects in the hay? You call the
birds thieves, but they guard your farms. They drive the enemy from your
cornfields and from your harvests.

"Even the blackest of them, the crow, does good. He crushes the beetle
and wages war on the slug and the snail.

"And, what is more, how can I teach your children gentleness and mercy
when you contradict the very thing I teach?"

But the farmers only shook their heads and laughed. "What does the
teacher know of such things?" they asked. And they passed a law to have
the birds killed.

So the dreadful war on birds began. They fell down dead, with
bloodstains on their breasts. Some fluttered, wounded, away from the
sight of man, while the young died of starvation in the nests.


II


The summer came, and all the birds were dead. The days were like hot
coals. In the orchards hundreds of caterpillars fed. In the fields and
gardens hundreds of insects of every kind crawled, finding no foe to
check them. At last the whole land was like a desert.

From the trees caterpillars dropped down upon the women's bonnets, and
they screamed and ran. At every door, the women gathered and talked.

"What will become of us?" asked one. "The men were wrong,--something
must be done."

"The teacher was right," said another.

At last, the farmers grew ashamed of having killed the birds. They met
and did away with the wicked law, but it was too late.

[Illustration: The wagon filled with branches and cages]

Harvest time came, but there was no harvest. In many a home there was
want and sorrow.

The next spring a strange sight was seen--a sight never seen before or
since. Through the streets there went a wagon filled with great branches
of trees. Upon them were hung cages of birds that were making sweet
music.

From all the country round these birds had been brought by order of the
farmers. The cages were opened, and once more the woods and fields were
filled with the beautiful birds, who flew about singing their songs of
joy. And again the harvests grew in the fields and filled to overflowing
the farmers' barns.

--_Adapted from_ LONGFELLOW.




THE TRAILING ARBUTUS

I


Many, many moons ago, in a lodge in a forest, there lived an old man.
His hair was white as the snowdrift. All the world was winter; snow and
ice were everywhere, and the old man wore heavy furs.

The winds went wildly through the forest searching every bush and tree
for birds to chill. The old man looked in vain in the deep snow for
pieces of wood to keep up the fire in his lodge. Then he sat down by his
dull and low fire.

Shaking and trembling he sat there, hearing nothing but the tempest as
it roared through the forest, seeing nothing but the snowstorm as it
whirled and hissed and drifted.

All the coals became white with ashes, and the fire was slowly dying.
Suddenly the wind blew aside the door of the lodge, and there came in a
most beautiful maiden.

Her cheeks were like the wild rose, her eyes were soft and glowed like
the stars in springtime; and her hair was as brown as October's nuts.

Her dress was of ferns and sweet grasses, her moccasins were of white
lilies, on her head was a wreath of wild flowers, and in her hands were
beautiful blossoms. When she breathed, the air became warm and fragrant.

"Ah, my daughter," exclaimed the old man. "Happy are my eyes to see you.
Sit here on the mat beside me; sit here by the dying embers. Tell me of
your strange adventures, and I will tell you of my deeds of wonder."

From his pouch he drew his peace pipe, very old and strangely fashioned.
He filled the pipe with bark of willow, and placed a burning coal upon
it.

Then he said, "I am Manito, the Mighty. When I blow my breath about me,
the rivers become motionless and the waters hard as stone."

The maiden smiling said, "When I blow my breath about me, flowers spring
up over all the meadows. And all the rivers rush onward, singing songs
of joy."

"When I shake my hoary tresses," said the old man, darkly frowning, "all
the ground is covered with snow. All the leaves fade and wither."

"When I shake my flowing ringlets," said the maiden, "the warm rains
fall over all the land."

Then proudly the old man replied, "When I walk through the forest,
everything flees before me. The animals hide in their holes. The birds
rise from the lakes and the marshes, and fly to distant regions."

Softly the maiden answered, "When I walk through the forest, all is
bright and joyous. The animals come from their holes. The birds return
to the lakes and marshes. The leaves come back to the trees. The plants
lift up their heads to kiss the breezes. And where-ever my footsteps
wander, all the meadows wave their blossoms, all the woodlands ring with
music."


II


While they talked, the night departed. From his shining lodge of silver
came the sun. The air was warm and pleasant; the streams began to
murmur; the birds began to sing. And a scent of growing grasses was
wafted through the lodge.

The old man's face dropped upon his breast, and he slept. Then the
maiden saw more clearly the icy face before her--saw the icy face of
winter.

Slowly she passed her hands above his head. Streams of water ran from
his eyes, and his body shrunk and dwindled till it faded into the
air--vanished into the earth--and his clothing turned to green leaves.

The maiden took from her bosom the most precious flowers. Kneeling upon
the ground, she hid them all about among the leaves.

[Illustration: The maiden hides the flowers among the leaves]

"I give you my most precious flowers and my sweetest breath," she said,
"but all who would pluck you must do so upon bended knee."

Then the maiden moved away--through the forest and over the waking
fields; and wherever she stepped, and nowhere else in all the land,
grows the trailing arbutus.

--INDIAN LEGEND.




HIDDEN TREASURE

I


Once upon a time there was an old farmer named John Jacobs. He had heard
that treasures were found in odd places. He thought and thought about
such treasures until he could think of nothing else; and he spent all
his time hunting for them. How he wished he could find a pot of gold!

One morning he arose with a bright face and said to his wife, "At last,
Mary, I've found the treasure."

"No, I cannot believe it," she said.

"Yes," he answered; "at least it is as good as found. I am only waiting
until I have my breakfast. Then I will go out and bring it in."

"Oh, how did you find it?" asked the wife.

"I was told about it in a dream," said he.

"Where is it?"

"Under a tree in our orchard," said John.

"Oh, John, let us hurry and get it."

So they went out together into the orchard.

"Which tree is it under?" asked the wife.

John scratched his head and looked silly.

"I really do not know," he said.

"Oh, you foolish man," said the wife. "Why didn't you take the trouble
to notice?"

"I did notice," said he. "I saw the exact tree in my dream, but there
are so many trees, here that I am confused. There is only one thing to
do now. I must begin with the first tree and keep on digging until I
come to the one with the treasure under it."

This made the wife lose all hope. There were eighty apple trees and a
score of peach trees.

She sighed and said, "I suppose if you must, you must, but be careful
not to cut any of the roots."

By this time John was in a very bad humor. He went to work saying, "What
difference does it make if I cut all the roots? The whole orchard will
not bear one bushel of good apples or peaches. I don't know why, for in
father's time it bore wagonloads of choice fruit."

"Well, John," said his wife, "you know father used to give the trees a
great deal of attention."

But John grumbled to himself as he went on with his digging. He dug
three feet deep around the first tree, but no treasure was there. He
went to the next tree, but found nothing; then to the next and the next,
until he had dug around every tree in the orchard. He dug and dug, but
no pot of gold did he find.


II


The neighbors thought that John was acting queerly. They told other
people, who came to see what he was doing.

They would sit on the fence and make sly jokes about digging for hidden
treasure. They called the orchard "Jacobs' folly."

Soon John did not like to be seen in the orchard. He did not like to
meet his neighbors. They would laugh and say, "Well, John, how much
money did you get from the holes?"

This made John angry. At last he said, "I will sell the place and move
away."

"Oh, no," said the wife, "this has always been our home, and I cannot
think of leaving it. Go and fill the holes; then the neighbors will stop
laughing. Perhaps we shall have a little fruit this year, too. The heaps
of earth have stood in wind and frost for months, and that will help the
trees."

John did as his wife told him. He filled the holes with earth and
smoothed it over as level as before. By and by everybody forgot "Jacobs'
folly."

Soon the spring came. April was warm, and the trees burst into bloom.

"Mary," said John one bright spring day, "don't you think the blossoms
are finer than usual this year?"

"Yes, they look as they did when your father was alive," said his wife.

[Illustration: John's trees full of fruit]

By and by, the blooms fell, leaving a million little green apples and
peaches. Summer passed and autumn followed. The branches of the old
trees could hardly hold up all the fine fruit on them.

Now the neighbors came, not to make fun, but to praise. "How did you do
it?" they asked.

"The trees were old and needed attention," said John. "By turning the
soil and letting in the air, I gave them strength to bear fruit. I have
found the treasure after all, and I have learned a lesson. Tilling the
soil well is the way to get treasure from it."

--GRIMM.




THE LITTLE BROWN BROTHER


  Little brown brother, oh! little brown brother,
    Are you awake in the dark?
  Here we lie cozily, close to each other;
    Hark to the song of the lark--

  "Waken!" the lark says, "waken and dress you;
    Put on your green coats and gay,
  Blue sky will shine on you, sunshine caress you--
    Waken! 'tis morning--'tis May!"

  Little brown brother, oh! little brown brother,
    What kind of flower will you be?
  I'll be a poppy--all white, like my mother;
    Do be a poppy like me.

  What! you're a sunflower? How I shall miss you
    When you're grown golden and high!
  But I shall send all the bees up to kiss you;
    Little brown brother, good-by!

--EMILY NESBIT.




HOW THE FLOWERS GROW


  This is how the flowers grow;
  I have watched them and I know:

  First, above the ground is seen
  A tiny blade of purest green,
  Reaching up and peeping forth
  East and west, and south and north.

  Then the sunbeams find their way
  To the sleeping bud and say,
  "We are children of the sun
  Sent to wake thee, little one."

  And the leaflet opening wide
  Shows the tiny bud inside,
  Peeping with half-opened eye
  On the bright and sunny sky.

  Breezes from the west and south
  Lay their kisses on its mouth;
  Till the petals all are grown,
  And the bud's a flower blown.

