ruined castle, and she had brought pencils and paper, so as to be ready
for the fortunate moment, if it should come. She was greatly
disappointed when the boat shot swiftly by the spot, so that she hardly
caught even a glimpse of the chosen view. Fani glanced at her
despondently, with a look which said:--

"You see I was right. There's nothing to be done about it."

On entering the gardens, Mrs. Stanhope said again that they must all
keep together. No one must linger behind, nor hurry before, or they
might get lost; and they must not touch anything in the garden.

This was a blow to Fred, and took away most of his satisfaction in
seeing the animals; and his martyrdom did not cease while they were in
the gardens. Here he heard great buzzing and humming in a bush, and he
longed to see the wonderful insects that made it. There he saw
bright-colored butterflies fluttering about the flowers; on one side
red-gold beetles were creeping in the grass before his eyes; on the
other some huge lizards were sunning themselves on a rock. He must pass
by all these attractions; not stop a moment to examine them, not touch
one of all this multitude of treasures. It was almost too much for him.
He could scarcely keep his hands off.

Elsli walked silently along, scarcely able to enjoy anything she saw,
for thinking:--

"They are all waiting for me; and I shall not come all day."

And so it was that all five, in spite of the enjoyments of the day, went
to bed at night with the feeling, "What a shame!"

But the next morning the thoughts of disappointment had passed away, and
they came out to their recreation in the garden with happy plans for the
day.

Oscar had a great deal of business on hand. He must see the Fink boys
and fix the day for the Festival. Then, Feklitus was to come to-day, and
he must be met at the station. They had put off the Festival till his
arrival, for he would be one countryman more, and that was worth
counting. Oscar had written him that there were three good hotels near
the station; the Bunch of Grapes, the Eagle, and the Morning Star. A
little farther on, down by the Rhine, was a magnificent house, as large
as the church and the school-house at home put together; yes, and six
dwelling-houses besides. It was called the Crown Prince. There were
Rhine baths there, and many guests came for the sake of the bathing;
perhaps this hotel was rather more expensive than the others.

Mr. and Mrs. Bickel immediately decided in favor of the Crown Prince, on
account of the name, which certainly suited perfectly for their son, and
also because of the acquaintances he might make there. Of course, there
would be only the best of company there, since only those would go who
could afford to pay high prices. It was proper, too, to show people
that their son was a person who could afford to stay at the most
expensive place. Oscar was therefore requested to engage a room for
Feklitus at the Crown Prince.

When the time came for the children to go out and occupy themselves as
they pleased, Oscar went off like a shot. He and the Fink brothers were
now such fast friends that they could not pass one day without meeting,
and had promised to remain intimate all their lives long. Oscar had
never had such friends before. When they were together the hours flew
like minutes, for they had a thousand interests in common--their plays,
their plans, their wishes for the future; they talked over everything
together.

When the hour came for Feklitus to arrive, they started for the station
together. In spite of the friendliness with which the Fink boys met the
new-comer, the greeting was rather a one-sided affair, for Feklitus was
not accustomed to making friends with strangers. His trunks were handed
over to the omnibus-driver, and the four boys proceeded to the hotel on
foot. Here he was shown to a very large room, furnished in splendid
bright red satin, and with windows higher than the doors of most
Buchberg houses.

Oscar began directly to tell Feklitus the arrangements that were to be
made to-day in preparation for the great Festival to-morrow. The
flag-staff must be set in a hole in the ground, and held firm by stones
placed close around its base, so that there would be no delay in the
morning. Then he told him whom he had found to join the society and take
part in the Festival.

Feklitus' nose went up in scorn.

"A fine set of people you have collected! and all from the small
cantons, too!" he exclaimed.

"What do you mean?" cried Oscar, angrily. "Who was it that wanted to
put on the banner, 'Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity'?"

"Well, I say that still," answered Feklitus, stoutly. "But I'll have
fraternity with those I choose, and not with every one that comes along,
as you do."

"Ho, ho! that's it, is it?" cried Oscar, still more furious. "What do
you understand, then, by equality?"

"Just what you do," retorted Feklitus. "I mean that we all have equal
rights to do our own way; I don't care what other people do as long as
they let me alone to act as I choose."

"Oh, you're a fine Swiss!" cried Oscar, screaming with excitement. "Much
you must know about the history of your country! Do you know what you
would be doing now if it had not been for the brave fellows from the
small cantons? You'd be crouching before the tyrant's hat and licking
the dust from his shoes!"

At this point the Fink boys joined with great liveliness in the dispute,
and supported Oscar's side so energetically that Feklitus became excited
in his turn, and shouted that he knew the history of Switzerland as well
as they did, and that he had always been at the head of his class in
school. The quarrel grew louder and louder, and above all Oscar's voice
rose the loudest, crying angrily:--

"We will show you by and by, when we are old enough, what fraternity and
equality and love of our country means. We will found a society for the
whole of Switzerland, and every year we will celebrate the Feast of the
Foundation, in which all the inhabitants of all the cantons shall take
part; and at the feasts they shall sit in the order in which they
joined the society. The first members shall sit at the head, and then
you will see who they are!"

"Yes; then you'll see!" screamed the Finks, and Feklitus raised his
voice still more furiously:--

"Well, you won't come anywhere near the first, you St. Gall fellows, not
by a long piece!"

Just here the door was thrown wide-open by a very elegant waiter, who
looked anxiously at the windows, as if he was afraid they had been
broken in the fray. Then he placed himself in the door-way with a very
polite air, as if to intimate that he would there await the close of the
entertainment.

Oscar found it quite time to lower his voice, and to invite his friends
to go with him to the place chosen for the Festival. The polite
spectator waiting at the door seemed to exercise a subduing influence
upon all the young patriots; for they became suddenly silent, and
followed Oscar readily. He stopped at Rosemount only to fetch his
banner, and then the boys went on.

When they reached the hill where the windmill stood, the banner was
unrolled and admired. The garland of Alpine roses was beautiful with its
bright colors and green leaves. On the other side Elsli had neatly sewed
a large circle of paper, on which Oscar had inscribed his favorite
motto, in large, legible letters.

The afternoon sun shone brightly on the hill and on the great sails of
the windmill. It was a fine place for a festival. The Fink brothers
began to dig a hole for the flag-staff; and Oscar directed them, and
when they were ready he held the staff upright while they filled in the
earth around it, and piled up the heavy stones. Feklitus looked on.

Just before this, the owner of the mill had decided on a walk to visit
his property. He was looking about inside, when unusual noises without
attracted his attention. Coming to a window in the upper story, he
looked down on the scene below. There, directly before his astonished
eyes, floated a banner, on which these words were plainly visible:

    "Freedom we shout! Freedom for all!
        Freedom forever and aye!
    We will not yield till all chains fall,
        And tyrants are banished or die!"

He saw, too, that the boys were working hard to fasten the staff
securely in its place.

"Hm, hm, so, so!" he murmured; "that's to be planted on my land! We'll
see about that."

He stood still at his post of observation, and watched the farther
proceedings. When the staff was firmly fixed so that it was not swayed
by the blowing of the banner above, it was carefully drawn out, the
stones were buried in the hole and neatly covered with sod. The
preparations for the Festival were now all made, and to-morrow the
banner could be easily set in place, and the celebration go on.

Oscar had long had a speech in readiness. Now he cast one long delighted
glance at the beautiful platform before the windmill, so suitable for a
speaker.

"At six o'clock to-morrow evening, not before; the others could not get
away before," he said to his friends. "The meeting-place is behind
Rosemount, by the three oaks. From there we shall march to music."

Then the four boys went down the hill, and at the main road they
separated, promising to meet at the appointed time and place to-morrow.

Early in the morning of this same day, Emma had begun in her busy brain
a new set of schemes. On the trip the day before, she had seen something
which had excited her inventive powers in the highest degree. At the
table at noon a keen observer would have suspected that something was in
the wind, from the unseemly haste with which the little girl devoured
her food. She was too busy with her project to remember her manners!
When they arose from the table, and Mrs. Stanhope, with her
never-forgotten politeness, dismissed them with "many wishes for an
agreeable afternoon," Emma slipped lightly down the stairs, like a
little weasel, and into the kitchen. The fat cook looked up with
surprise from her cup of coffee; she could not get along without her
coffee at noon, whatever happened.

"Well, now, has anything gone wrong with you, miss?" she asked.

"Oh, no," answered Emma; "but I have a little favor to ask of you.
Drink your coffee, first; do."

"I've finished. What do you want?" asked the cook, slowly rising from
her chair.

"My shoes are very dusty; will you please wipe them for me?" asked Emma,
as politely as if she could not speak in any other way.

"It's hardly worth while," answered the woman, but she lifted Emma's
foot upon a cricket, and began to rub it.

"And I want to ask you something more," began Emma. "Where do you get
those beautiful fish that we have on the table so often?"

"They come out of the water near by," answered the cook.

"Yes, of course; but I mean, does a fisherman bring them to you, or do
you go yourself to fetch them?"

"That would be a queer thing, if I had to trot round a couple of hours
before I could have fish for my frying-pan! There! your shoes are all
clean again." And she laid the brush away.

"Does it take a couple of hours to go to the fisherman's?" asked Emma.

"Goodness me! I can't speak always as if I were on oath; if you want to
know how far it is, you'd better go measure it yourself, miss," retorted
the displeased woman.

"That's just what I want to do! Will you please tell me the way?" asked
Emma; and she thanked the cook for brushing her shoes, like a little
lady.

"You go directly down behind the house, as far as the main road; go
along the road a little way, and then turn to the left along a narrow
path, till you come to a clump of willows; there you'll find the
fisherman's house."

With many thanks Emma ran off.

"She is thinking of going a-fishing herself, I'm sure," said the cook,
looking after her.

Emma rushed into the garden to find Fani.

"Come along, come with me! I know something nice! We can do it now!"
and, dragging the boy along with her, the impetuous girl told him that
the day before she had seen a fisherman out in his boat on the river,
and she had made an excuse to go into the kitchen to speak to the cook,
because she knew that children were not allowed there unless they had an
errand to do; and she had found out where the fisherman lived, and of
course they could hire his boat. In that they could go out on the river,
and she would keep the boat still while Fani took a sketch of the ruin.
If he could not finish it the first time, they could go again and again.
It wouldn't cost so much to hire the boat that they couldn't take it
several times if necessary.

Fani was delighted. But there was one difficulty.

"Who will row us, Elsli? I don't know how, and the fisherman couldn't
leave his work so long."

"I can row myself. I took four people out in a boat once, when I was
making a visit, near a lake, to some friends of mamma's. I have often
rowed about alone. You don't know how skilful I am."

Fani was quite satisfied. He never dreamed of questioning Emma's
capability. They went down to the road, and, after looking about for
some time and retracing their steps, they found at last the narrow
foot-path leading to the left, and, after walking a little way, they
saw before them the clump of willows at a short distance. It was now
nearly evening, for they had been a long time finding the way. The path
they had taken was twice as long as that by the river, by which Elsli
went; but they knew nothing of that. Under the willows all was still;
there was nothing to be seen beyond but more willows, and the sound of
the rushing river came through the silence to their ears. The children
came in among the trees till they could see the water that flowed
beyond. There lay the boat not far from them, and behind the bushes a
slender thread of blue smoke rising into the air showed them where the
fisherman's hut was. A man was just going down to the edge of the water,
and presently he began to hammer at something in the boat. Emma ran
towards him, and Fani followed.

"Are you the fisherman?" asked Emma?

The man raised his head, and stopped hammering.

"Yes, I am; at your service," he answered, politely. "Do you want to buy
some fish?"

Emma explained that they only wanted to hire a boat, just for an hour or
two; not to go far away from the shore at all. The man looked doubtful.
Fani looked like a steady little fellow. He ought to manage a boat;
still, it was best to be prudent, so he asked,--

"Are you young people in the habit of rowing yourselves?"

"Oh, yes, it is not our first trip, by any means," said Emma. "We can
take care of ourselves"; and Fani was no less confident.

The fisherman said it was too late to go that day; he should need the
boat himself, and there was some mending to be done to it before it
could be used. If they wanted it the next day, he would have it ready;
they could take it themselves, if he was not there. They ought not to go
far from shore, and the young gentleman could use the pole where the
oars wouldn't serve; he would understand. Emma promised to be careful,
and they promised to pay on their return; and these arrangements being
completed to their immense satisfaction, the children walked happily
back to Rosemount, eagerly discussing their plans on the way. At the
same time Elsli came silent and alone along the little foot-path by the
river. All three came from the same place, but they knew nothing of each
other, for Elsli had not come out of the house till after the others had
reached the road. In the garden they met, and asked each other whether
the supper-bell had rung. As they spoke they heard it; and, running up
the stone steps, they sat down to supper without farther questions, and
each was glad that the others asked none.




CHAPTER VI.

ANXIETY AT ROSEMOUNT.


The only really quiet part of the day at Rosemount was during the
morning hours, when the children were busy writing letters home and
learning their lessons. To-day, however, a certain restlessness seemed
to have taken possession of them all. Emma and Fani could not keep still
a minute. The latter tossed his papers about as if he couldn't make up
his mind which one he wanted. The former made all sorts of signs to him
across the table, and, in the midst of studying her French verbs, she
