"would do now," and quite regardless of the inconvenience to which I was
subjected by being kept in the pickle-jar. In this gravel she had
embedded the roots of some Water Crowfoot and other pond-plants. The
stones in the middle were nicely arranged, and well covered with moss
and water-weeds. When water had been poured in up to the brim of the
bell-glass, and we had been emptied out of the jars, the dragon-fly
larva got into a good hole among the stones and ate most of the May-fly
grubs, water-shrimps, and so forth, as they came into sight. I did not
do badly myself, and only the bigger and stronger members of our society
and a few skins were there next day, when Francis brought a jar full of
minnows, a small carp, and a bull's-head, and turned them out in our
midst.

"How they dart and swim round and round!" he exclaimed.

"Splendid," said Molly. "I _am_ so sorry I am going away just now. You
will try and keep the water fresh, won't you?"

"Of course I will. And let me have the scarlet spider whilst you are
away. I couldn't find another."

"Well, if you must; but do take care, Francis. And here are the two
bits of gutta-percha tubing to make into syphons. You must put them into
hot water for a minute before you bend them, you know."

"I'll do it to-morrow, Molly; I have nothing else _to_ do, you know,
because Edward Brown won't be back for three or four days. So we can do
nothing about the cricket club."

It was on the third day, when both the pieces of gutta-percha tubing
were in a wash-hand basin of hot water, and the dragon-fly larva and I
were finishing a minnow, with the help of the water-scorpion, that
Master Edward Brown arrived unexpectedly, and so pressed his friend
Francis to come out and consult "just for two minutes," and so delayed
him when he got him, that the tubing melted into a shapeless lump, and
the carp died unnoticed by any one but myself.

On the fourth day the glass pond was moved into the conservatory, "to be
out of the way." The fish were excellent eating, and though the snails
were at their wits' end as the refuse rotted, and the water became more
stagnant, and the weeds grew, till all the shell-fish in the pond could
not have kept the place clean,--I did not mind it myself. As the water
got low, I found a nice bit of rockwork above water, where I could sit
by day, and at night the lights from the drawing-room gave an
indescribable stimulus to my wings, and I sailed in, and flew round and
round till I was tired, and (forgetting that no pond, not even a bed of
mud, was below me!) drew in my wings, and dropped sharply down on to the
floor. To do the family justice, they learned to know the sound of my
fall, and even the old Doctor himself would go down on hands and knees
to hunt for me under the sofa, for fear I should be trodden on.

On the fifth day I swallowed the scarlet spider. I hated myself for
doing it, when I thought of Molly; but the spider was very foolish to
meet me. He should have kept behind. And if I hadn't eaten him, the
dragon-fly larva would. What _he_ had eaten, I do not think he could
have told himself. There was very little left now for any one; even the
water-scorpion had disappeared.

On the sixth day the glass pond had only two tenants worth speaking
of--the dragon-fly larva and myself. We had both over-eaten ourselves,
and for some hours we moved slowly about through the thickening puddle,
nodding civilly when we passed each other among the feathery sprays of
the Water Crowfoot. Then I began to get hungry. I knew it by feeling an
impulse to look out for the dragon-fly larva, and I knew he knew it
because he began to avoid me.

On the seventh day Molly ran into the conservatory, followed by her
brother, and uttered a cry of dismay.

"Oh, what a state it's in! Where are the syphons?"

"Why, they melted the day Edward Brown came back. We've been having such
a lot of cricket, Molly!"

"There isn't a fish left, and it smells horribly."

"I'm very sorry, Molly. Let's throw it out. I don't want Grandfather to
see it. Let me come."

"No, no, Francis! There may be some left. Yes, there's the beetle. I
shall put it all in a pail and take it back to the pond. Oh dear! oh
dear! I can't see anything of the scarlet spider. My beautiful scarlet
spider! I was so fond of him. Oh, I am so sorry! And no one has watered
the Soldier, and he's dead too."

"Don't cry, Molly! Please don't cry! I dare say the spider is there,
only it's so small."

For some time Molly poked carefully here and there, but the spider was
not to be found, and the contents of the aquarium were carried back to
the wood.

I was very glad to see the pond again. The water-gnats were taking
dimensions as usual, a blue-black beetle sat humming on the stake, and
dragon-flies flitted hungrily about, like splinters of a broken
rainbow; but the Water-Soldier's place was empty, and it was never
refilled. He was the only specimen.

Molly was probably in the right when, after a last vain search for the
scarlet spider, as Francis slowly emptied the pail, she said with a
sigh,

"What makes me so very sorry is, that I don't think we ought to have
'collected' things unless we had really attended to them, and knew how
to keep them alive."

FOOTNOTES:

Footnote D: Water-soldier--_Stratiotes aloides._ A handsome and rare
plant, of aloe-like appearance, with a white blossom rising in the
centre of its sword-leaves.





AMONG THE MERROWS.

A SKETCH OF A GREAT AQUARIUM.


I remember the time when I, and a brother who was with me, devoutly
believed in a being whom we supposed to live among certain black,
water-rotted, weed-grown stakes by the sea. These old wooden ruins were,
I fancy, the remains of some rude pier, and amid them, when the tide was
low, we used to play, and to pay fancy visits to our fancy friend.

We called her Shriny--why, I know no more than when I first read
Croker's delightful story of "The Soul Cages" I knew why the Merrow whom
Jack went to see below the waves was called Coomara.

My remembrance of even what we fancied about Shriny is very dim now; and
as my brother was only four years old (I was eight), his is not more
distinct. I know we thought of her, and talked of her, and were always
eager to visit her supposed abode, and wander together amongst its
rotten pillars (which, as we were so small, seemed lofty enough in our
eyes), where the mussels and limpets held tightly on, and the slimy,
olive-green fucus hung loosely down--a sea-ivy covering ruins made by
the waves.

I have never been to the place since those days. If Shriny's palace is
there now at all, I dare say I should find the stakes to be stumps, and
all the vastness and mystery about them gone for ever. And yet we used
to pretend to feast with her there. We served up the seed-vessels of the
fucus as fish. I do not think we really ate them, we only sucked out the
salt water, and tried to fancy we were enjoying the repast. Once we
_began_ to eat a limpet!--Beyond that point my memory is dumb.

I wonder how we should have felt if Shriny had really appeared to us, as
Coomara appeared to Jack Dogherty, and taken us down below the waves, or
kept us among the stakes of her palace till the tide flooded them, and
perhaps filled it with wonderful creatures and beautiful things, and
floated out the dank, dripping fucus into a veil of lace above our
heads; as our mother used to float out little dirty lumps of seaweed
into beautiful web-like pictures when she was preserving them for her
collection.

Shriny never did come, though Mr. Croker says Coomara came to Jack.

Perhaps, young readers, some of you have never read the story of the
Soul Cages. It is a long one, and I am not going to repeat it here,
only to say a word or two about it, for which I have a reason.

Jack Dogherty--so the story goes--had always longed to see a Merrow.
Merrow is the Irish name for seafolk; indeed, it properly means a
mermaid. And Jack, you know, lived in a fairy tale, and not in lodgings
at a watering-place on the south coast; so he saw his Merrow, though we
never saw Shriny.

I do not think any of the after-history of the Merrow is equal to Mr.
Croker's account of his first appearance to Jack: afterwards "Old Coo"
becomes more like a tipsy old fisherman than the man-fish that he was.

The first appearance was on the coast to the northward, when "just as
Jack was turning a point, he saw something, like to nothing he had ever
seen before, perched upon a rock at a little distance out to sea; it
looked green in the body, as well as he could discern at that distance,
and he would have sworn, only the thing was impossible, that it had a
cocked-hat in its hand. Jack stood for a good half-hour, straining his
eyes and wondering at it, and all the time the thing did not stir hand
or foot. At last Jack's patience was quite worn out, and he gave a loud
whistle and a hail, when the Merrow (for such it was) started up, put
the cocked-hat on its head, and dived down, head foremost, from the
rocks."

For a long time Jack could get no nearer view of "the sea-gentleman
with the cocked-hat," but at last, one stormy day, when he had taken
refuge in one of the caves along the coast, "he saw, sitting before him,
a thing with green hair, long green teeth, a red nose, and pig's eyes.
It had a fish's tail, legs with scales on them, and short arms like
fins. It wore no clothes, but had the cocked-hat under its arm, and
seemed engaged thinking very seriously about something."

As I copy these words--_It wore no clothes, but had the cocked-hat under
its arm, and seemed engaged thinking very seriously about something_--it
seems to me that the portrait is strangely like something that I have
seen. And the more I think of it, the more I am convinced that the type
is familiar to me, and that, though I do not live in a fairy story, I
have been among the Merrows. And further still that any one who pleases
may go and see Coomara's cousins any day.

There can be no doubt of it! I have seen a Merrow--several Merrows. That
unclothed, over-harnessed form is before me now; sitting motionless on a
rock, "engaged thinking very seriously," till in some sudden impulse it
rises, turns up its red nose, makes some sharp angular movements with
head and elbows, and plunges down, with about as much grace as if some
stiff, red-nosed old admiral, dressed in nothing but cocked-hat,
spectacles, telescope, and a sword between his legs, were to take a
header from the quarter-deck into the sea.

I do not want to make a mystery about nothing. I should have resented it
thoroughly myself when I was young. I make no pretence to have had any
glimpses of fairyland. I could not see Shriny when I was eight years
old, and I never shall now. Besides, no one sees fairies now-a-days. The
"path to bonnie Elfland" has long been overgrown, and few and far
between are the Princes who press through and wake the Beauties that
sleep beyond. For compensation, the paths to Mother Nature's Wonderland
are made broader, easier, and more attractive to the feet of all men,
day by day. And it is Mother Nature's Merrows that I have seen--in the
Crystal Palace Aquarium.

How Mr. Croker drew that picture of Coomara the Merrow, when he probably
never saw a sea crayfish, a lobster, or even a prawn at home, I cannot
account for, except by the divining and prophetic instincts of genius.
And when I speak of his seeing a crayfish, a lobster, or a prawn at
home, I mean at their home, and not at Mr. Croker's. Two very different
things for our friends the "sea-gentlemen," as to colour as well as in
other ways. In his own home, for instance, a lobster is of various
beautiful shades of blue and purple. In Mr. Croker's home he would be
bright scarlet--from boiling! So would the prawn, and as solid as you
please; who in his own home is colourless and transparent as any ghost.

Strangely beautiful those prawns are when you see them at home. And that
one seems to do in the Great Aquarium; though, I suppose, it is much
like seeing land beasts and birds in the Zoological Gardens--a poor
imitation of their free life in their natural condition. Still, there is
no other way in which you can see and come to know these wonderful "sea
gentlemen" so well, unless you could go, like Jack Dogherty, to visit
them at the bottom of the sea. And whilst I heartily recommend every one
who has not seen the Aquarium to visit it as soon as possible, let me
describe it for the benefit of those who cannot do so at present. It may
also be of some little use to them hereafter to know what is most worth
seeing there, and where to look for it.

No sooner have you paid your sixpence at the turnstile which admits you,
than your eye is caught by what seems to be a large window in the wall,
near the man who has taken your money. You look through the glass, and
find yourself looking into a deep sea-pool, with low stone-grey rocks
studded with sea-anemones in full bloom. There are twenty-one different
species of sea-anemones in the Aquarium; but those to be seen in this
particular pool are chosen from about seven of the largest kinds. The
very biggest, a _Tealia crassicornis_, measures ten inches across when
he spreads his pearly fingers to their full extent. "In my young days"
we called him by the familiar name of Crassy; and found him so difficult
to keep in domestic captivity, that it was delightful to see him
blooming and thriving as he does in Tank No. 1 of the Great Aquarium.
His squat build--low and broad--contrasts well with those tall white
neighbours of his (_Dianthus plumosa_), whose faces are like a plume of
snowy feathers. All the sea-anemones in this tank have settled
themselves on the rocks according to their own fancy. They are of lovely
shades of colour, rosy, salmon-coloured, and pearly-white.

There are more than five thousand sea-anemones of various kinds in the
Aquarium; and they have an attendant, whose sole occupation is to feed
them, by means of a pair of long wooden forceps.

Reluctantly breaking away from such old friends, we pass through a door
into a long vault-like stone passage or hall, down one side of which
there seem to be high large windows, about as far apart as windows of a
long room commonly are. Behind each of these is a sea-pool like the
first one.

Take the first of the lot--Tank No. 2. It is stocked with _Serpulae_.
Sea-anemones are well-known to most people, but tube-worms are not such
familiar friends; so I will try to describe this particular kind of
"sea-gentlemen." The tube-worms are so called because, though they are
true worms (sea-worms), they do not trust their soft bodies to the sea,
as our common earth-worms trust theirs in a garden-bed, but build
themselves tubes inside which they live, popping their heads out at the
top now and then like a chimney-sweep pushing his brush out at the top
of a tall round chimney. Now if you can fancy one of our tall round
manufactory chimneys to be white instead of black, and the round
chimney-sweep's brush to have lovely gay-coloured feathers all round it
instead of dirty bristles, or if you can fancy the sweep letting off a
monster catherine-wheel at the chimney's mouth, you may have some idea
what a tube-worm's head is like when he pokes it out of his tube.

The _Serpulae_ make their tubes of chalky stuff, something like
egg-shell; and they stick them on to anything that comes to hand down
below. Those in the Great Aquarium came from Weymouth. They were dredged
up with the white pipes or tubes sticking to oyster-shells, old bottles,
stones, and what not, like bits of maccaroni glued on to old crockery
sherds. These odds and ends are overgrown, however, with weeds and
zoophytes, and (like an ugly house covered by creepers) look picturesque
rather than otherwise. The worms have small bristles down their bodies,
which serve as feet, and help them to scramble up inside their tubes,
when they wish to poke their heads out and breathe. These heads are
delicate, bright-coloured plumes. Each species has its own plume of its
own special shape and colour. They are only to be seen when the animal
is alive. A good many little _Serpulae_ have been born in the Aquarium.

Through the next window--Tank No. 3--you may see more tube-worms, with
