and while they expected to hear of some foreign enemy on the borders, a
monstrous turbot was brought in, and they were consulted whether it was
to be cut in pieces or have a dish made on purpose for it. Another time
he invited a number of guests, and they found themselves in a black
marble hall, with funeral couches, each man's name graven on a column
like a tomb, a feast laid as at a funeral, and black boys to wait on
them! This time it was only a joke; but Domitian did put so many people
to death that he grew frightened lest vengeance should fall on him, and
he had his halls lined with polished marble, that he might see as in a
glass if any one approached him from behind. But this did not save him.
His wife found that he meant to put her to death, and contrived that a
party of servants should murder him, A.D. 96.

[Illustration: COIN OF NERO.]




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE AGE OF THE ANTONINES.

96--194.


Domitian is called the last of the twelve Caesars, though all who came
after him called themselves Caesar. He had no son, and a highly esteemed
old senator named Cocceius Nerva became Emperor. He was an upright man,
who tried to restore the old Roman spirit; and as he thought
Christianity was only a superstition which spoiled the ancient temper,
he enacted that all should die who would not offer incense to the gods,
and among these died St. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, who had been bred
up among the Apostles. He was taken to Rome, saw his friend St.
Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, on the way, and wrote him one of a set of
letters which remain to this day. He was then thrown to the lions in the
Colosseum.

It seems strange that the good Emperors were often worse persecutors
than the bad ones, but the fact was that the bad ones let the people do
as they pleased, as long as they did not offend them; while the good
ones were trying to bring back what they read of in Livy's history, of
plain living and high thinking, and shut their ears to knowing more of
the Christians than that they were people who did not worship the gods.
Moreover, Julius Trajanus, whom Nerva adopted, and who began to reign
after him in 98, did not persecute actively, but there were laws in
force against the Christians. When Pliny the younger was propraetor of
the province of Pontica in Asia Minor, he wrote to ask the Emperor what
to do about the Christians, telling him what he had been able to find
out about them from two slave girls who had been tortured; namely, that
they were wont to meet together at night or early morning, to sing
together, and eat what he called a harmless social meal. Trajan answered
that he need not try to hunt them out, but that, if they were brought
before him, the law must take its course. In Rome, the chief refuge of
the Christians was in the Catacombs, or quarries of tufa, from which the
city was chiefly built, and which were hollowed out in long galleries.
Slaves and convicts worked them, and they were thus made known to the
Christians, who buried their dead in places hollowed at the sides, used
the galleries for their churches, and often hid there when there was
search made for them.

[Illustration: TEMPLE OF ANTONINUS AND FAUSTINA.]

Trajan was so good a ruler that he bears the title of Optimus, the Best,
as no one else has ever done. He was a great captain too, and conquered
Dacia, the country between the rivers Danube, Theiss, and Pruth, and the
Carpathian Hills; and he also defeated the Parthians, and said if he
had been a younger man he would have gone as far as Alexander. As it
was, the empire was at its very largest in his reign, and he was a very
great builder and improver, so that one of his successors called him a
wall-flower, because his name was everywhere to be seen on walls and
bridges and roads--some of which still remain, as does his tall column
at Rome, with a spiral line of his conquests engraven round it from top
to bottom. He was on his way back from the East when, in 117, he died at
Cilicia, leaving the empire to another brave warrior, Publius AEtius
Hadrianus, who took the command with great vigor, but found he could not
keep Dacia, and broke down the bridge over the Danube. He came to
Britain, where the Roman settlements were tormented by the Picts. There
he built the famous Roman wall from sea to sea to keep them out. He was
wonderfully active, and hastened from one end of the empire to the other
wherever his presence was needed. There was a revolt of the Jews in the
far East, under a man who pretended to be the Messiah, and called
himself the Son of a Star. This was put down most severely, and no Jew
was allowed to come near Jerusalem, over which a new city was built, and
called after the Emperor's second name, AElia Capitolina; and, to drive
the Jews further away, a temple to Jupiter was built where the Temple
had been, and one to Venus on Mount Calvary.

But Hadrian did not persecute, and listened kindly to an explanation of
the faith which was shown him at Athens by Quadratus, a Christian
philosopher. Hadrian built himself a grand towerlike monument,
surrounded by stages of columns and arches, which was to be called the
Mole of Hadrian, and still stands, though stripped of its ornaments.
Before his death, in 138, he had chosen his successor, Titus Aurelius
Antoninus, a good upright man, a philosopher, and 52 years old; for it
had been found that youths who became Emperors had their heads turned by
such unbounded power, while elder men cared for the work and duty.
Antoninus was so earnest for his people's welfare that they called him
Pius. He avoided wars, only defended the empire; but he was a great
builder, for he raised another rampart in Britain, much further north,
and set up another column at Rome, and in Gaul built a great
amphitheatre at Nismes, and raised the wonderful aqueduct which is still
standing, and is called the Pont du Gard.

His son-in-law, whom he adopted and who succeeded him, is commonly
called Marcus Aurelius, as a choice among his many names. He was a deep
student and Stoic philosopher, with an earnest longing for truth and
virtue, though he knew not how to seek them where alone they could be
found; and when earthquake, pestilence and war fell on his empire, and
the people thought the gods were offended, he let them persecute the
Christians, whose faith he despised, because the hope of Resurrection
and of Heaven seemed weak and foolish to him beside his stern, proud,
hopeless Stoicism. So the aged Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, the last
pupil of the Apostles themselves, was sentenced to be burnt in the
theatre of his own city, though, as the fire curled round him in a
curtain of flame without touching him, he was actually slain with the
sword. And in Gaul, especially at Vienne, there was a fearful
persecution which fell on women of all ranks, and where Blandina the
slave, under the most unspeakable torments, was specially noted for her
brave patience.

Aurelius was fighting hard with the German tribes on the Danube, who
gave him no rest, and threatened to break into the empire. While
pursuing them, he and his army were shut into a strong place where they
could get no water, and were perishing with thirst, when a whole
legion, all Christian soldiers, knelt down and prayed. A cloud came up,
a welcome shower of rain descended, and was the saving of the thirsty
host. It was said that the name of the Thundering Legion was given to
this division in consequence, though on the column reared by Aurelius it
is Jupiter who is shown sending rain on the thirsty host, who are
catching it in their shields. After this there was less persecution, but
every sort of trouble--plague, earthquake, famine, and war--beset the
empire on all sides, and the Emperor toiled in vain against these
troubles, writing, meantime, meditations that show how sad and sick at
heart he was, and how little comfort philosophy gave him, while his eyes
were blind to the truth. He died of a fever in his camp, while still in
the prime of life, in the year 180, and with him ended the period of
good Emperors, which the Romans call the age of the Antonines. Aurelius
was indeed succeeded by his son Commodus, but he was a foolish
good-for-nothing youth, who would not bear the fatigues and toils of
real war, though he had no shame in showing off in the arena, and is
said to have fought there seven hundred and fifty times, besides killing
wild beasts. He boasted of having slain one hundred lions with one
hundred arrows, and a whole row of ostriches with half-moon shaped
arrows which cut off their heads, the poor things being fastened where
he could not miss them, and the Romans applauding as if for some noble
deed. They let him reign sixteen years before he was murdered, and then
a good old soldier named Pertinax began to reign; but the Praetorian
Guard had in those sixteen years grown disorderly, and the moment they
felt the pressure of a firm hand they attacked the palace, killed the
Emperor, cut off his head, and ran with it to the senate-house, asking
who would be Emperor. An old senator was foolish enough to offer them a
large sum if they would choose him, and this put it into their heads to
rush out to the ramparts and proclaim that they would sell the empire to
the highest bidder.

A vain, old, rich senator, named Didius Julianus, was at supper with his
family when he heard that the Praetorians were selling the empire by
auction, and out he ran, and actually bought it at the rate of about
L200 to each man. The Emperor being really the commander-in-chief, with
other offices attached to the dignity, the soldiers had a sort of right
to the choice; but the other armies at a distance, who were really
fighting and guarding the empire, had no notion of letting the matter
be settled by the Praetorians, mere guardsmen, who stayed at home and
tried to rule the rest; so each army chose its own general and marched
on Rome, and it was the general on the Danube, Septimius Severus, who
got there first; whereupon the Praetorians killed their foolish Emperor
and joined him.

[Illustration: MARCUS AURELIUS.]




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE PRAETORIAN INFLUENCE.

197--284.


Septimus Severus was an able Emperor, and reigned a long time. He was
stern and harsh, as was needed by the wickedness of the time; and he was
very active, seldom at Rome, but flashing as it were from one end of the
empire to the other, wherever he was needed, and keeping excellent
order. There was no regular persecution of the Christians in his time;
but at Lyons, where the townspeople were in great numbers Christians,
the country-folk by some sudden impulse broke in and made a horrible
massacre of them, in which the bishop, St. Irenaeus, was killed. So few
country people were at this time converts, that Paganus, a peasant, came
to be used as a term for a heathen.

Severus was, like Trajan and Hadrian, a great builder and road-maker.
The whole empire was connected by a network of paved roads made by the
soldiery, cutting through hills, bridging valleys, straight, smooth, and
so solid that they remain to this day. This made communication so
rapid that government was possible to an active man like him. He gave
the Parthians a check; and, when an old man, came to Britain and marched
far north, but he saw it was impossible to guard Antonius' wall between
the Forth and Clyde, and only strengthened the rampart of Hadrian from
the Tweed to the Solway. He died at York, in 211, on his return, and his
last watchword was "Labor!" His wife was named Julia Domna, and he left
two sons, usually called Caracalla and Geta, who divided the empire; but
Geta was soon stabbed by his brother's own hand, and then Caracalla
showed himself even worse than Commodus, till he in his turn was
murdered in 217.

[Illustration: SEPTIMUS SEVERUS.]

[Illustration: ANTIOCH.]

His mother, Julia Domna, had a sister called Julia Saemias, who lived at
Antioch, and had two daughters, Saemias and Mammaea, who each had a son,
Elagabalus--so called after the idol supposed to represent the sun,
whose priest at Emesa he was--and Alexander Severus. The Praetorian
Guard, in their difficulty whom to chose Emperor, chose Elagabalus, a
lad of nineteen, who showed himself a poor, miserable, foolish wretch,
who did the most absurd things. His feasts were a proverb for excess,
and even his lions were fed on parrots and pheasants. Sometimes he would
get together a festival party of all fat men, or all thin, all tall, or
short, all bald, or gouty; and at others he would keep the wedding of
his namesake god and Pallas, making matches between the gods and
goddesses all over Italy; and he carried on his service to his god with
the same barbaric dances in a strange costume as at Emesa, to the great
disgust of the Romans. His grandmother persuaded him to adopt his cousin
Alexander, a youth of much more promise, who took the name of Severus.
The soldiers were charmed with him; Elagabalus became jealous, and was
going to strip him of his honors; but this angered the Praetorians, so
that they put the elder Emperor to death in 222.

[Illustration: ALEXANDER SEVERUS.]

Alexander Severus was a good and just prince, whose mother is believed
to have been a Christian, and he had certainly learned enough of the
Divine Law to love virtue, and be firm while he was forbearing. He loved
virtue, but he did not accept the faith, and would only look upon our
Blessed Lord as a sort of great philosopher, placing His statue with
that of Abraham, Orpheus, and all whom he thought great teachers of
mankind, in a private temple of his own, as if they were all on a level.
He never came any nearer to the faith, and after thirteen years of good
and firm government he was killed in a mutiny of the Praetorians in 235.

These guards had all the power, and set up and put down Emperors so
rapidly that there are hardly any names worth remembering. In the
unsettled state of the empire no one had time to persecute the
Christians, and their numbers grew and prospered; in many places they
had churches, with worship going on openly, and their Bishops were known
and respected. The Emperor Philip, called the Arabian, who was actually
a Christian, though he would not own it openly, when he was at Antioch,
joined in the service at Easter, and presented himself to receive the
Holy Communion; but Bishop Babylas refused him, until he should have
done open penance for the crimes by which he had come to the purple,
and renounced all remains of heathenism. He turned away rebuked, but put
off his repentance; and the next year celebrated the games called the
Seculae, because they took place every Seculum or hundredth year, with
all their heathen ceremonies, and with tenfold splendor, in honor of
this being Rome's thousandth birthday.

Soon after, another general named Decius was chosen by the army on the
German frontier, and Philip was killed in battle with him. Decius wanted
to be an old-fashioned Roman; he believed in the gods, and thought the
troubles of the empire came of forsaking them; and as the Parthians
molested the East, and the Goths and Germans the North, and the soldiers
seemed more ready to kill their Emperors than the enemy, he thought to
win back prosperity by causing all to return to the old worship, and
begun the worst persecution the Church had yet known. Rome, Antioch,
Carthage, Alexandria, and all the chief cities were searched for
Christians. If they would not throw a handful of incense on the idol's
altar or disown Christ, they were given over to all the horrid torments
cruel ingenuity could invent, in the hope of subduing their constancy.
Some fell, but the greater number were firm, and witnessed a glorious
confession before, in 251, Decius and his son were both slain in battle
in Maesia.

[Illustration: TEMPLE OF THE SUN AT PALMYRA.]

The next Emperor whose name is worth remembering was Valerian, who had
to make war against the Persians. The old stock of Persian kings,
professing to be descended from Cyrus, and, like him, adoring fire, had
overcome the Parthians, and were spreading the Persian power in the
East, under their king Sapor, who conquered Mesopotamia, and on the
banks of the Euphrates defeated Valerian in a terrible battle at
Edessa. Valerian was made prisoner, and kept as a wretched slave, who
was forced to crouch down that Sapor might climb up by his back when
mounting on horseback; and when he died, his skin was dyed purple,
stuffed, and hung up in a temple.

[Illustration: THE CATACOMBS AT ROME.]

The best resistance made to Sapor was by Odenatus, a Syrian chief, and
his beautiful Arabian wife Zenobia, who held out the city of Palmyra, on
an oasis in the desert between Palestine and Assyria, till Sapor
retreated. Finding that no notice was taken of them by Rome, they called
themselves Emperor and Empress. The city was very beautifully adorned
with splendid buildings in the later Greek style; and Zenobia, who
reigned with her young sons after her husband's death, was well read in
Greek classics and philosophy, and was a pupil of the philosopher
Longinus. Aurelian, becoming Emperor of Rome, came against this strange
little kingdom, and was bravely resisted by Zenobia; but he defeated
her, made her prisoner, and caused her to march in his triumph to Rome.
She afterwards lived with her children in Italy.

Aurelian saw perils closing in on all sides of the empire, and thought
it time to fortify the city of Rome itself, which had long spread beyond
the old walls of Servius Tullus. He traced a new circuit, and built the
wall, the lines of which are the same that still enclose Rome, though
the wall itself has been several times thrown down and rebuilt. He also
built the city in Gaul which still bears his name, slightly altered into
Orleans. He was one of those stern, brave Emperors, who vainly tried to
bring back old Roman manners, and fancied it was Christianity that
corrupted them; and he was just preparing for a great persecution when
he was murdered in his tent, and there were three or four more Emperors
set up and then killed almost as soon as their reign was well begun. The
last thirty of them are sometimes called the Thirty Tyrants. This power
of the Praetorian Guard, of setting up and pulling down their Emperor as
being primarily their general, lasted altogether fully a hundred years.

[Illustration: COIN OF SEVERUS]




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE DIVISION OF THE EMPIRE.

284-312.


A Dalmatian soldier named Diocles had been told by a witch that he
should become Emperor by the slaughter of a boar. He became a great
hunter, but no wild boar that he killed seemed to bring him nearer to
the purple, till, when the army was fighting on the Tigris, the Emperor
Numerianus died, and an officer named Aper offered himself as his
successor. Aper is the Latin for a boar, and Diocles, perceiving the
scope of the prophecy, thrust his sword into his rival's breast, and was
hailed Emperor by the legions. He lengthened his name out to
Diocletianus, to sound more imperial, and began a dominion unlike that
of any who had gone before. They had only been, as it were, overgrown
generals, chosen by the Praetorians or some part of the army, and at the
same time taking the tribuneship and other offices for life. Diocletian,
though called Emperor, reigned like the kings of the East. He broke the
strength of the Praetorians, so that they could never again kill one
Emperor and elect another as before; and he never would visit Rome lest
he should be obliged to acknowledge the authority of the Senate, whose
power he contrived so entirely to take away, that thenceforward Senator
