opened into the rock, seemingly near the centre.  It was perhaps ten
feet in height and with a width slightly greater.  Could it be she
meant he should enter that black forbidding passage?  He asked the
question and she replied that such was her wish.

He could not decline to take her whither she desired to go.  Gently
swaying the blade, he sent the boat within the dark opening, which
appeared to distend its jaws to swallow the canoe and them from the
world to which they had bidden good-bye.

Ashman was beginning to ask himself how he was to continue the advance
in the darkness, which must become impenetrable as they passed beyond
the limit of the moonlight, when he perceived the water into which he
dipped the paddle.

Not only that, but it grew more distinct as he progressed, until once
more the form of his beloved came out to view, as she sat near him in
the canoe.

Wondering what it all meant, he gazed ahead.  The surface of the water
grew plainer, as his eye ranged along the tunnel, until, only a short
distance away, the view was clearer than on the lake itself, beneath
the full moon.

What was the explanation of this wonderful sea of illumination into
which he was guiding the canoe?




CHAPTER XXX.

A GUESS.

Standing in the door of the building, his figure so wrapped in gloom
that it was invisible to the fierce Murhapas, Professor Grimcke
cautiously peered out upon the multitude that were clamorously seeking
the death of himself and comrade.

The horde seemed to be everywhere.  They were glaring over the river
bank, behind which they could find secure shelter by merely dropping
their heads; they were crouching at the corners of the adjacent houses,
the king's residence affording screen to fully a score.  Not yet fully
recovered from their panic, they appeared to be awaiting the leadership
of some strong man who held the fire-arms of the explorers in less
dread than they.

A form rose upright along the Xingu, at the upper portion of the line
of savages.  In the full moonlight he was as clearly revealed as if at
mid-day.

It was with strange feelings that Professor Grimcke saw that this
individual belonged to the same race as himself.  He was one of the two
white men that had lived for years among the Murhapas and who had
instigated the furious assault upon them.

"You have earned your fate," muttered the German, bringing his unerring
Winchester once more to his shoulder, and sighting as best he could at
the unconscious miscreant, who appeared to be conversing with some one
sitting on the ground at his side.

The finger of Grimcke was pressing the trigger when, yielding to an
unaccountable impulse, he lowered the weapon.  He was impatient with
himself that his heart should fail him at the critical moment, but
perhaps it was well it was so.

"You and I ought to be friends," he reflected, "and it is not my fault
that we are not, however, I cannot shoot you down like a dog, though
you deserve it."

The emotion which checked him so unexpectedly, also prevented his
renewing fire upon the Murhapas, who were really less guilty than he.

He had decided to await the next demonstration before discharging his
gun again.

Jared Long was as vigilant and alert as his friend.  It may be doubted
whether he would have spared Waggaman, had he been given the
opportunity to draw bead on him.  He realized too vividly that the two
defenders never would have been in this fearful situation but for the
machinations of those two men.

It seemed to him that Bippo was curiously quiet.  He had not spoken,
nor, so far as he could judge, moved since his own return from his
brief conference with the Professor.

He pronounced his name in a low voice, but there was no reply.  A call
in a louder tone also failed of response.

"I wonder whether he was killed?" was the thought which led Long to
leave his station at the door, and to set out on a tour of
investigation around the room, using his hands and feet to aid him.

He expected every minute to come in contact with the lifeless figure of
his helper, whom he supposed to have been pierced by the poisoned
weapon of the Murhapa; but when he had passed around the apartment and
across it several times, until assured that not a foot of square space
had been neglected he awoke to the fact that Bippo was not there.

It was hardly probable that he had entered the front apartment, but he
made inquiry of the Professor.  The latter replied that he had heard
nothing of him; but, since he had a few minutes that could be spared
without danger for that purpose, he went through a search similar to
that of his friend.

"He is not here," called the Professor, in a guarded undertone.

The surprising conclusion followed that the fellow after all had
effected his escape from the building, though how it was done puzzled
the two whom he left behind.

Bippo had got away by yielding to one of those sudden inspirations
which sometimes come to a person.  Hearing the explorers speaking about
a stealthy withdrawal by the rear, he decided to anticipate them.
Without pausing to debate the matter or ask for permission, he slipped
out the rear door and moved rapidly off in a crouching posture.

He must have been seen by numbers of the Murhapas, but was mistaken for
one of their own number.

The error cannot be regarded as remarkable, when it is recalled that
Bippo bore a strong resemblance to the savages around them.  He was
dressed the same and carried a spear similar to the missiles used by
them.  Though he lacked their bushy heads and stature, these were not
marked enough to attract notice at a time when the Murhapas knew that
several of their number had been defeated in their efforts to enter the
structure from the rear.

With his wits sharpened by his danger, Bippo displayed admirable
discretion.  Showing no undue haste or flurry, he avoided too close
acquaintance with the savages, who were so absorbed in the work of
securing the destruction of the white men that they paid less attention
to such an incident than they would at any other time.

So it was that he edged farther and farther away, until he found
himself so close to the woods that he whisked among the trees without
any one questioning or trying to check him.  He was free at last, and,
as if Dame Fortune had decided to take him in charge, he had hardly
reached the margin of the Xingu, at a point considerably below the
village, when he almost stumbled over Pedros, who was waiting and
wondering what he ought to do next.

Both the Professor and his friend were glad that Bippo had managed to
get away.  They liked the fellow, and, even if they must be sacrificed,
it was a relief to know that the poor native, who had had such a woful
experience since leaving the Amazon, now had a fighting chance of
escaping from the dreadful region.

Besides, as has been shown, the presence of the fellow was more of an
incumbrance than a help.  But for the delay caused by Long's rush to
his help, the whites would have made a dash for liberty themselves,
though the question of their escape was problematical to the last
degree.

Precious little ground could the explorers see for extricating
themselves from their peril.  The Murhapas numbered a hundred, all were
brave, and the weapons in their hands were dreaded tenfold more than
firearms.  It seemed miraculous that Grimcke and Long had not been
pierced long before.  Why did not the Murhapas set fire to the
building, after the manner of the North American Indians?

This was the question which both the defenders had asked themselves
several times, but in the case of each the answer was obvious.

The house, it will be recalled, adjoined that of King Haffgo, and,
although there was no wind blowing, the burning of the less important
structure was sure to endanger the other.  As a last resort, the white
men might be driven out in that way, but not yet.

If the besiegers could persuade themselves to make a united rush, they
would be sure to prevail; but, as has been explained, the cost of such
an essay was sure to be frightful, and led the Murhapas to defer that,
also, until assured less risky means would not prevail.

It seemed to our friends that there were scores of schemes which ought
to be successful, and, such being the case, it will be understood why
they believed their last fight was on, and why they were disposed to
show no mercy to their assailants.

The Professor was surprised, knowing, as he did, the part taken against
them by Waggaman and Burkhardt, that no reports of firearms had yet
been heard among the assailants.  It would seem as if something of the
kind was required in order that those miscreants should retain their
prestige among the people.

Now, all these thoughts and many more passed through the minds of the
defenders in a tenth of the time it has taken us to put them on paper.
It was yet early in the evening, and the crisis in the siege must come
before long.

Jared Long peeped out of the rear entrance.  A study of what he saw
showed little change in the situation.  He was convinced that the next
demonstration would be from the front.  He, therefore, did not hesitate
to leave his post and slip into the next room for a few hasty words
with the Professor.

"There's no use of staying in here," he said, "for we are sure to be
overwhelmed within the next hour."

"I fully agree with you."

"And I can see but one desperate hope."

"What is that?"

"To follow Bippo."

"I agree with you again; let us make such a demonstration from the
front that we shall be able to draw most of them there; then one of us
will make a rush."

"Why not both."

"We shall fail; one must keep up the firing while they think both are
at it, and then the other can make the attempt."

"Very well; let me open here."

"No; we will both do it; you know that this station is mine and as soon
as there appears to be a chance, you can make the start."

Now, both of the men believed in their hearts that if the desperate
scheme could work, that the utmost it could do would be to save one:
there could be no earthly chance for the other.

It was characteristic of the chivalrous friendship of each that he had
fully determined that that forlorn opportunity should be given to the
other.

But they understood their mutual natures too well to waste any words in
argument, for neither would yield.

"Very well, Professor; we'll draw lots."

"I will agree to that."

It was so dark in the room that they could not see each other, nor did
either window afford light enough for their purpose.

Grimcke glanced out the door.  No immediate movement seemed impending,
and they moved to the fire-place.  The Professor kicked some of the
ashes aside and a tiny blaze arose, throwing a dull illumination over a
few feet of the room.

The Professor drew an American coin from his pocket,--one that he had
kept ever since entering South America.

"Now," said he, placing both hands behind his back, "tell me which
contains it."

"The right," said the New Englander.

"You have lost," coolly replied the Professor, bringing the two hands
quickly to the front and opening the palms.

Sure enough the coin was in the left, but the sly fellow did not
confess that he had deftly changed it after his companion made his
guess.




CHAPTER XXXI.

A DESPERATE SCHEME.

Not another word was said.  The question had been submitted to the
arbitrament of chance and the New Englander had lost, and that, too
without any suspicion on his part of the little trick played upon him.

Before resorting to the last opportunity, Long slipped through the back
room and ascertained the outlook there.  He was surprised at the
result.  Hardly a native was visible.  It looked indeed as if they were
working their way round to the front, and that some scheme of attack
had been agreed upon by the leaders from that point.

The Professor's survey confirmed the theory of his friend.  The
Murhapas were more plentiful than ever.  They appeared to be
marshalling along the bank of the Xingu, where there were so many that
it was impossible to count the heads and shoulders rising above the
slope.

Waggaman was not in sight, though there could be no doubt that he was
the inspiring spirit in the movement.  All the indications were that a
rush had been agreed upon.  Should it be permitted to come off
unopposed in its incipiency, it would be all up with the men who had
defended themselves so bravely thus far.

"I will begin at the head of the row," said the Professor, "and you at
the foot; make every shot tell."

"All right; begin!"

The fusillade was opened the same instant.  Both men fired rapidly,
and, though they could not pause to make their aim as sure as they
wished, and though it is not to be supposed that every shot was
effective, yet the execution was dreadful.

Arms were seen flung spasmodically upwards, figures leaped clear off
the ground and then fell back out of sight, shrieks and shouts filled
the air, and still the crack of the Winchesters continued without
intermission.

One gratifying feature of the fearful scene was that the warriors began
flocking around to the front, though they kept well back, as if to
avoid the murderous discharge.  These new arrivals not only afforded
additional targets to the riflemen, despite their furious efforts to
screen themselves, but proved that the scheme of the defenders was
working as they desired: the natives were swarming from the rear to the
front.

"Off with you; don't wait!" commanded the Professor.

"Good-bye!" was all that Jared Long said, as he darted from the side of
his gallant friend and vanished.

Professor Grimcke took a few seconds to refill his magazine, when up
went his Winchester again and the furious discharges seemed to be more
rapid than before.

It would naturally be supposed that if the assailants saw that both of
the white men had concentrated their fusillade at the front, they would
make a dash to the rear.  That, it may be said, would be the second
step in the programme.  It was calculated that the sudden volleys of
the rifles would draw all the natives thither, and then, after learning
what had taken place, a large part of them would rush back again.

The New Englander had been gone only a few minutes, when the Professor
saw evidences that the second step was about to be taken.  The savages
were beginning to move back to the rear, though at a greater distance
then from the building than before.

All at once Grimcke ceased firing.  While looking sharply out of the
door, he mechanically refilled the magazine of his rifle from his stock
of cartridges which was running low.

"Now or never!" he said to himself, and then, turning, he ran swiftly
through the two rooms to the rear door, through which he bounded
without a moment's hesitation.

He expected his flight would be announced by a series of shouts and a
storm of poisoned javelins.  He held his breath, and, as the seconds
passed, began wondering whether there was a possibility after all of
successfully following the footsteps of his friend.

He was encouraged by the sounds of the deafening tumult from the front
of the house.  The Murhapas had swarmed into the front-room, proving
that they had decided upon making the very rush of which the defenders
stood in such dread.

This, although only a momentary diversion, was immeasurably in favor of
the daring attempt of the flying fugitive.

Lest the reader may pronounce the escape of these two white men
incredible, we hasten to explain that which, if left unexplained, would
warrant such disbelief on the part of our friends.

The individual who gave the wild scheme an ending that otherwise it
never could have had, was Ziffak, the head chieftain of the Murhapas.
He proved to be the all-potent factor in the terrible problem.

From what has been related about these strange inhabitants of the Matto
Grosso, it need not be said that they were too cunning, if left to
themselves, to allow a door to stand open for their intended victims to
escape, after penning them in such a trap.

Ziffak was the shrewdest member of the Murhapa tribe and much more
fitted to be its ruler than King Haffgo.  After bidding good-bye to the
lovers, he hastened back to the middle of the village, where he arrived
after the first disastrous repulse given his people by Professor
Grimcke.

It took the fellow but a few moments to grasp the situation.  He told
no one of the death of Burkhardt, but busied himself in learning
precisely how matters stood.  Had he dared to do so, he would have
ordered a cessation of the attack, but the latter was made by the
direct orders of King Haffgo, and Ziffak was not the chieftain to butt
his head against a stone wall, by an open defiance of his royal
brother's authority.

The assault was under the direction of Waggaman himself.  The king from
his own door, where he could not be reached by any bullet of the
defenders, was watching the futile assault with an impatience and anger
that could hardly be restrained.  His soul became like a volcano, as he
saw his brave warriors fall back, with many of them biting the dust.
Had not the traditions of his country forbade such a proceeding, he
would have placed himself at the head of the natives and led the
decisive charge.

Seeing how it was at the front, Ziffak cautiously made his way to the
rear.  There were few warriors there, and he instinctively felt that if
his white friends were to get off at all, it must be through the rear
opening.

While intently debating with himself what he could do to help them, he
stealthily slipped down to where the large boat was lying under the
bank.  No one was near it, for the attention of all was concentrated on
the fight under way.  Unobserved, he shoved the craft out into the
stream and saw it drift with the current.

Returning to the rear of the besieged building again, he formed the
