well as he (Bill) could, and only wore spectacles out of a peculiar
kind of pride and vain-glory which he could not exactly specify.
Master Arthur seemed to think, at any rate, that he was not very
civil, and began at once to talk to the boy himself.

"Why were you not at school last time, Willie? couldn't your mother
spare you?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Then why didn't you come?" said Master Arthur, in evident
astonishment.

Poor Bill! He stammered as he had stammered before the doctor, and
finally gasped--

"Please, Sir, I was scared."

"Scared? What of?"

"Ghosts," murmured Bill in a very ghostly whisper. Mr. Bartram raised
himself a little. Master Arthur seemed confounded.

"Why, you little goose! How is it you never were afraid before?"

"Please, Sir, I saw one the other night."

Mr. Bartram took another look over the top of his eye-glass and sat
bolt upright, and John Gardener stayed his machine and listened, while
poor Bill told the whole story of the Yew-lane Ghost.

When it was finished, the gardener, who was behind Master Arthur,
said--

"I've heard something of this, Sir, in the village," and then added
more which Bill could not hear.

"Eh, what?" said Master Arthur. "Willie, take the machine and drive
about the garden a-bit wherever you like. Now, John."

Willie did not at all like being sent away at this interesting point.
Another time he would have enjoyed driving over the short grass, and
seeing it jump up like a little green fountain in front of him; but
now his whole mind was absorbed by the few words he caught at
intervals of the conversation going on between John and the young
gentlemen. What could it mean? Mr. Bartram seemed to have awakened to
extraordinary energy, and was talking rapidly. Bill heard the words
"lime-light" and "large sheet," and thought they must be planning a
magic-lantern exhibition, but was puzzled by catching the word
"turnip." At last, as he was rounding the corner of a bed of
geraniums, he distinctly heard Mr. Bartram ask--

"They cut the man's head off, didn't they?"

Then they were talking about the ghost, after all! Bill gave the
machine a jerk, and to his dismay sliced a branch off one of the
geraniums. What was to be done? He must tell Master Arthur, but he
could not interrupt him just now; so on he drove, feeling very much
dispirited, and by no means cheered by hearing shouts of laughter from
the party on the grass. When one is puzzled and out of spirits, it is
no consolation to hear other people laughing over a private joke;
moreover, Bill felt that if they were still on the subject of the
murdered man and his ghost, their merriment was very unsuitable.
Whatever was going on, it was quite evident that Mr. Bartram was the
leading spirit of it, for Bill could see Master Arthur waving the one
legged donkey in an ecstasy, as he clapped his friend on the back till
the eye-glass danced upon his nose. At last Mr. Bartram threw himself
back as if closing a discussion, and said loud enough for Bill to
hear--

"You never heard of a bully who wasn't a coward."

Bill thought of Bully Tom, and how he had said he dared not risk the
chance of meeting with a ghost, and began to think that this was a
clever young gentleman, after all. Just then Master Arthur called to
him; and he took the bit of broken geranium and went.

"Oh, Willie!" said Master Arthur, "we've been talking over your
misfortunes--geranium? fiddle-sticks! put it in your button-hole--your
misfortunes, I say, and for to-night at any rate we intend to help you
out of them. John--ahem!--will be--ahem!--engaged to-night, and unable
to take his class as usual; but this gentleman has kindly consented to
fill his place ("Hear, hear," said the gentleman alluded to), and if
you'll come to-night, like a good lad, he and I will walk back with
you; so if you do see the ghost, it will be in good company. But,
mind, this is on one condition. You must not say anything about
it--about our walking back with you, I mean--to anybody. Say nothing;
but get ready and come to school as usual. You understand?"

"Yes, Sir," said Bill; "and I'm very much obliged to you, Sir, and the
other gentleman as well."

Nothing more was said, so Bill made his best bow and retired. As he
went he heard Master Arthur say to the gardener--

"Then you'll go to the town at once, John. We shall want the things as
soon as possible. You'd better take the pony, and we'll have the list
ready for you."

Bill heard no more words; but as he left the grounds the laughter of
the young gentlemen rang out into the road.

What did it all mean?




CHAPTER IV

     "The night was now pitmirk; the wind soughed amid the
     headstones and railings of the gentry (for we all must die),
     and the black corbies in the steeple-holes cackled and
     crawed in a fearsome manner."

     MANSIE WAUGH.


Bill was early at the night-school. No other of his class had arrived,
so he took the corner by the fire sacred to first-comers, and watched
the gradual gathering of the school. Presently Master Arthur appeared,
and close behind him came his friend. Mr. Bartram Lindsay looked more
attractive now than he had done in the garden. When standing, he was
an elegant though plain-looking young man, neat in his dress, and with
an admirable figure. He was apt to stand very still and silent for a
length of time, and had a habit of holding his chin up in the air,
which led some people to say that he "held himself very high." This
was the opinion that Bill had formed, and he was rather alarmed by
hearing Master Arthur pressing his friend to take his class instead of
the more backward one, over which the gardener usually presided; and
he was proportionably relieved when Mr. Bartram steadily declined.

"To say the truth, Bartram," said the young gentleman, "I am much
obliged to you, for I am used to my own boys, and prefer them."

Then up came the schoolmaster.

"Mr. Lindsay going to take John's class? Thank you, Sir. I've put out
the books; if you want anything else, Sir, p'raps you'll mention it.
When they have done reading, perhaps, Sir, you will kindly draft them
off for writing, and take the upper classes in arithmetic, if you
don't object, Sir."

Mr. Lindsay did not object.

"If you have a picture or two," he said. "Thank you. Know their
letters? All right. Different stages of progression. Very good. I've
no doubt we shall get on together."

"Between ourselves, Bartram," whispered Master Arthur into his
friend's ear, "the class is composed of boys who ought to have been to
school, and haven't; or who have been, and are none the better for it.
Some of them can what they call 'read in the Testament,' and all of
them confound b and d when they meet with them. They are at one point
of general information--namely, they all know what you have just told
them, and will none of them know it by next time. I call it the
rag-tag and bob-tail class. John says they are like forced tulips.
They won't blossom simultaneously. He can't get them all to one
standard of reading."

Mr. Lindsay laughed and said--

"He had better read less, and try a little general oral instruction.
Perhaps they don't remember because they can't understand;"--and the
Rector coming in at that moment, the business of the evening
commenced.

Having afterwards to cross the school for something, Bill passed the
new teacher and his class, and came to the conclusion that they did
"get on together," and very well too. The rag-tag and bob-tail shone
that night, and afterwards were loud in praises of the lesson. "It was
so clear," and "He was so patient." Indeed, patience was one great
secret of Mr. Lindsay's teaching; he waited so long for an answer that
he generally got it. His pupils were obliged to exert themselves when
there was no hope of being passed over, and everybody was waiting.
Finally, Bill's share of the arithmetic lesson converted him to Master
Arthur's friend. He _was_ a clever young gentleman, and a kind one
too.

The lesson had been so interesting--the clever young gentleman,
standing (without his eye-glass) by the blackboard, had been so strict
and yet so entertaining, was so obviously competent, and so pleasantly
kind, that Bill, who liked arithmetic, and (like all intelligent
children) appreciated good teaching, had had no time to think of the
Yew-lane Ghost till the lesson was ended. It was not till the hymn
began (they always ended the night-school with singing), then he
remembered it. Then, while he was shouting with all his might Bishop
Ken's glorious old lines--

    "Keep me, oh keep me, King of kings,"

he caught Mr. Lindsay's eyes fixed on him, and back came the thoughts
of his terrible fright, with a little shame too at his own timidity.
Which of us trusts as we should do in the "defence of the Most High?"

Bill lingered as he had done the last time, and went out with the
"grown-ups." It had been raining, and the ground was wet and sludgy,
though it was fair overhead. The wind was cold, too, and Mr. Lindsay
began to cough so violently, that Bill felt rather ashamed of taking
him so far out of his way, through the damp chilly lane, and began to
wonder whether he could not summon up courage to go alone. The result
was, that with some effort he said--

"Please, Mr. Lindsay, Sir, I think you won't like to come so far this
cold night. I'll try and manage, if you like."

Mr. Lindsay laid one hand on Bill's shoulder, and said quietly--

"No, thank you, my boy, we'll come with you, Thank you, all the same."

"Nevertheless, Bartram," said Master Arthur, "I wish you could keep
that cough of yours quiet--it will spoil everything. A boy was eating
peppermints in the shade of his copy-book this very night. I did box
his ears; but I wish I had seized the goodies, they might have kept
you quiet."

"Thank you," was the reply, "I abhor peppermint; but I have got some
lozenges, if that will satisfy you. And when I smell ghosts, I can
smother myself in my pocket-handkerchief."

Master Arthur laughed boisterously.

"We shall smell one if brimstone will do it. I hope he won't set
himself on fire, or the scenic effect will be stronger than we
bargained for."

This was the beginning of a desultory conversation carried on at
intervals between the two young gentlemen, of which, though Bill heard
every sentence, he couldn't understand one. He made one effort to
discover what Master Arthur was alluding to, but with no satisfactory
result, as we shall see.

"Please, Master Arthur," he said desperately, "you don't think
there'll be two ghosts, do you, Sir?"

"I should say," said Master Arthur, so slowly and with such gravity
that Bill felt sure he was making fun of him, "I should say, Bill,
that if a place is haunted at all there is no limit to the number of
ghosts--fifty quite as likely as one. What do you say, Bartram?"

"Quite so," said Bartram.

Bill made no further attempts to understand the mystery. He listened,
but only grew more and more bewildered at the dark hints he heard, and
never understood what it all meant until the end came; when (as is not
uncommon) he wondered how he could have been so stupid, and why he had
not seen it all from the very first.

They had now reached the turning-point, and as they passed into the
dark lane, where the wind was shuddering and shivering among the
trees, Bill shuddered and shivered too, and felt very glad that the
young gentlemen were with him, after all.

Mr. Lindsay pulled out his watch.

"Well?" said his friend.

"Ten minutes to nine."

Then they walked on in silence, Master Arthur with one arm through his
friend's, and the one-legged donkey under the other; and Mr. Lindsay
with his hand on Bill's shoulder.

"I _should_ like a pipe!" said Master Arthur presently; "it's so
abominably damp."

"What a fellow you are," said Mr. Lindsay. "Out of the question! With
the wind setting down the lane too! you talk of my cough--which is
better, by-the-bye."

"What a fellow _you_ are!" retorted the other. "Bartram, you are the
oddest creature I know. What ever you take up, you do drive at so. Now
I have hardly got a lark afloat before I'm sick of it. I wish you'd
tell me two things--first, why are you so grave to-night? and,
secondly, what made you take up our young friend's cause so warmly?"

"One answer will serve both questions," said Mr. Lindsay. "The truth
is, old fellow, our young friend--[and Bill felt certain that the
'young friend' was himself]--has a look of a little chap I was chum
with at school--Regy Gordon. I don't talk about it often, for I can't
very well; but he was killed--think of it, man!--_killed_ by such a
piece of bullying as this! When they found him, he was quite stiff and
speechless; he lived a few hours, but he only said two words--my name,
and amen."

"Amen?" said Master Arthur, inquiringly.

"Well, you see when the surgeon said it was no go, they telegraphed
for his friends; but they were a long way off, and he was sinking
rapidly; and the old Doctor was in the room, half heart-broken, and he
saw Gordon move his hands together, and he said, 'If any boy knows
what prayers Gordon minor has been used to say, let him come and say
them by him;' and I did. So I knelt by his bed and said them, the old
Doctor kneeling too and sobbing like a child; and when I had done,
Regy moved his lips and said 'Amen;' and then he said 'Lindsay!' and
smiled, and then--"

Master Arthur squeezed his friend's arm tightly, but said nothing, and
both the young men were silent; but Bill could not restrain his tears.
It seemed the saddest story he had ever heard, and Mr. Lindsay's hand
upon his shoulder shook so intolerably whilst he was speaking, that he
had taken it away, which made Bill worse, and he fairly sobbed.

"What are you blubbering about, young 'un?" said Mr. Lindsay. "He is
better off than any of us, and if you are a good boy you will see him
some day;" and the young gentleman put his hand back again, which was
steady now.

"What became of the other fellow?" said Master Arthur.

"He was taken away, of course. Sent abroad, I believe. It was hushed
up. And now you know," added Mr. Lindsay, "why my native indolence has
roused itself to get this cad taught a lesson, which many a time I
wished to GOD when wishes were too late, that that other bully had
been taught _in time_. But no one could thrash him; and no one durst
complain. However, let's change the subject, old fellow! I've got over
it long since: though sometimes I think the wish to see Regy again
helps to keep me a decent sort of fellow. But when I saw the likeness
this morning, it startled me; and then to hear the story, it seemed
like a dream--the Gordon affair over again. I suppose rustic nerves
are tougher; however, your village blackguard shan't have the chance
of committing murder if we can cure him!"

"I believe you half wanted to undertake the cure yourself," said
Master Arthur.

Mr. Lindsay laughed.

"I did for a minute. Fancy your father's feelings if I had come home
with a black eye from an encounter with a pot-house bully! You know I
put my foot into a tender secret of your man's, by offering to be the
performer!"

"How?"

Mr. Lindsay lowered his voice, but not so that Bill could not hear
what he said, and recognize the imitation of John Gardener.

"He said, 'I'd rather do it, if _you_ please, Sir. The fact is, I'm
partial to the young woman myself!' After that, I could but leave John
to defend his young woman's belongings."

"Gently!" exclaimed Master Arthur. "There is the Yew Walk."

From this moment the conversation was carried on in whispers, to
Bill's further mystification. The young gentlemen recovered their
spirits, and kept exploding in smothered chuckles of laughter.

"Cold work for him if he's been waiting long!" whispered one.

"Don't know. His head's under cover, remember!" said the other: and
they laughed.

"Bet you sixpence he's been smearing his hand with brimstone for the
last half hour."

"Don't smell him yet, though."

"He'll be a patent aphis-destroyer in the rose-garden for months to
come."
