out, he would subdue them in a lump by taking a header in the pond,
whose shore they reached at that moment. But Nellie said he was in no
danger so far as she could see, of immediate combustion and when she
came to examine her own garments they were also free from the same
peril.

"Now, what shall we do that we have got here?" she asked, as, after
walking a few steps, he came to a stop.

"Wait, and see how things are coming out," he answered. "I begin to
feel tired, so suppose we sit down and rest ourselves."

The moment this was done, both uttered an exclamation of pleasure; for
the relief from the distressing smoke was so great that it was as if
they had emerged into the open country, where there was none of it at
all.

"Why did we not think of this before?" said Nick; "we ought to have
known that smoke doesn't keep close to the ground."

The atmosphere was not clear by any means, but the change was so marked
that it appeared more than pure, and they sat several minutes gratefully
inhaling that from which it seemed they had been shut off for many
hours.

But their rejoicing was too soon; for, though it may be true that in a
burning building the surest place in which to gain enough air to support
life is close to the floor, yet there can be so much of the strangling
vapor that it will penetrate everywhere.

Less than five minutes had passed, when a volume of smoke swept over and
enveloped them, so dense that it was like the darkness of Egypt, that
could be felt, and the suffering of the brother and sister was pitiful.

"Put your face close to the water," called out Nick, as well as he could
do from coughing and strangling.

At the same moment, their fevered cheeks touched the cold, refreshing
surface, and something of relief was experienced.

"It won't do to stay here," said Nick, a moment later.

"But where can we go?"

"Out in the pond; there's a better chance to breathe there than along
shore."

"But I can't swim, Nick."

"What of that? I can, and I'll take care of you; but there is plenty of
wood and we can make a raft. That reminds me that there _was_ a raft
here last week, when Sam Harper and I had a swim: I wonder where it can
be. Help me to look for it."

They moved slowly along the margin of the pond, peering through the
gloom as best they could, but seeing nothing of the support on which
they now placed so much hope.

Nick Ribsam, however, did not fail to notice one thing--it was becoming
hotter every minute and they could not wait much longer before entering
the water in very self-defense.

They pushed bravely on, and when the circuit of Shark Pond was half
completed, reached a point where the thick vapor lifted, or, more
properly, it had not yet descended, and they stopped to rest themselves
again.

"Well," exclaimed Nick, with a sigh, "some folks would call this fun,
but I don't see where it comes in."

"I don't see how any one could find fun in such suffering; but, Nick,
you will have to make a raft."

"I believe you are right; there isn't much chance to fasten these dry
logs together, and I haven't time to build one that will hold us both."

"What will you do?"

"I will place you on it, and I'll swim along-side----"

"There's the raft! I see it! I see it!"

Nellie sprang to her feet and pointed out on the pond where, through the
smoky gloom, the outlines of the half dozen logs, which Nick and
several of his playmates had bound together with withes, when frolicking
in the water, were seen.

The lad threw off his hat, vest, shoes, and stockings, so that only his
shirt and trousers remained, and then took a header, his whole being
thrilling with pleasure as the cold water closed around him.

"Take care of my clothes!" he called to Nellie, "and I'll bring the raft
over to you."

As there was no immediate hurry, the situation of his sister being quite
comfortable, the lad could not resist the temptation to disport himself
awhile in the cool, refreshing element. He sank until his bare feet
touched the pebbly bottom, and then shot upward with a bound; then he
went over backward, floundered, and tumbled about like a porpoise.

"Nick," called his sister, "you had better hurry and get that raft, for
I cannot see it now."

This startled the lad, but when he found he could not see Nellie either,
he understood that it was on account of the overshadowing gloom that had
fallen still lower; at the same time the disturbance of the atmosphere
had caused a strong wind to blow across the pond, and it was doubtless
this which had started the mass of pine logs from the land, and was now
bearing it away from where it lay when discovered by the girl.

"Are you comfortable there?" called out Nick to his sister.

"Yes, but don't wait too long, for it is growing warm, and I think the
fire is close to me."

The lad felt he had done wrong in idling his time, and he bent all his
energies toward swimming to the raft, which, under any circumstances
could not be far off.

As it was, Nick was amazed to find it necessary to go a considerable
ways before he caught sight of the familiar pile of logs floating
buoyantly on the water, but he speedily reached them, and, drawing
himself on top, hunted for the long pole that he had used so many times
in navigating the pond.

But it was not there, and he sank back into the water, and, holding on
with his hands, used his feet vigorously to propel the raft toward the
bank, where he had left his loved sister but a short time before.

"I'll soon be there, Nellie," he called; "are you all right?"

This was a curious question to ask, though it was natural, perhaps, for
any boy, under similar circumstances, but Nick felt a pang of fear when
he repeated the call and did not receive any answer.

He put forth all the energy at his command, and steadily pushed the
float toward land. Now and then, while doing so, he shouted to his
sister, without hearing any reply.

"Can it be anything has happened to her?" he asked himself several times
as he peered through the gloom, unable to catch the outlines of brave
little Nellie.




CHAPTER XXXV.

WHAT FRIGHTENED NELLIE.


Nick Ribsam thought not of himself, in his anxiety for his sister. He
had left her but a few brief minutes before, sitting on the shore of the
lake, and now when he returned she was missing.

He had called to her repeatedly without receiving any answer, and when
he looked about him in the smoke and gloom, he could see nothing of her
loved figure.

He noticed that it was very hot where he stood, and there could be no
doubt that the flames were advancing in that direction. His dread was
that Nellie had lost her wits in the presence of the new danger, and had
run blindly into the burning woods where there could be no escape for
her.

"Nellie! Nellie!" he shouted in agonized tones; "Where are you? Why
don't you answer me?"

He thought he heard something like a faint response, but it was not
repeated, and poor Nick was half distracted. For the first time since
entering the burning forest he lost his self-control, and not doubting
that his sister was somewhere close at hand, he dashed among the trees,
still calling to her at the height of his voice.

He had gone but a short distance when he was brought face to face with
such a fierce blast of flame that he was forced to turn and run back to
the water's edge, where he stopped for a minute or two gasping for
breath.

This repulse served to give him time to collect his wits, and he tried
hard to decide what was best to do, for he was resolved never to leave
that place until he learned the fate of Nellie.

"She had good sense," he added to himself, "and she would not have done
such a foolish thing. She has gone to some other spot along the shore
and is waiting for me."

Possibly this was so, but it did not explain the curious fact that all
the calls of Nick remained unanswered. The space inclosing the pond was
so slight that his voice must have penetrated every portion of it, and
it did seem that if she were in any place safe for her to be, she could
not fail to hear him.

Nick found a long branch, which answered for a pole with which to guide
the raft, and stepping on it he began pushing it along shore as rapidly
as he could, looking into the gloom about him and often pronouncing the
name of his sister. His heart sank within him when this continued
several minutes, and half the circuit of the pond was completed without
bringing him the first evidence of the whereabouts of Nellie.

Finally he paused, wearied and distressed beyond description.

The darkness of night rested on Shark Pond and the surrounding woods.
The murky volumes of smoke seemed to shut out all light, excepting when
the tongues of fire shot through them. The wind blew a gale, stirring
the water into tiny waves, and the roaring of the fire through the
woods, the sound of trees crashing to the earth, and the millions of
sparks, with blazing bits of wood, were carried a great distance
through the air. Some of these flaming brands fell on the raft on which
Nick Ribsam stood, and they continually dropped hissing into the water
around him.

The problem was, how the children had escaped thus far; and as the
sturdy lad stood out on the pond with the long limb grasped in his hand,
staring around him, he could not but wonder how it was he had been
preserved after driving directly into the forest when it was literally
aflame from one end to the other.

But these thoughts were only for the moment; he had left Nellie, not
expecting to be out of her sight, much less beyond her hearing, and she
had vanished as mysteriously as if the earth had opened and swallowed
her up.

And yet he could not believe she was lost. She had proven that she was
not the weak girl to do anything rashly, or to sit down and fold her
hands and make no attempt to save herself. Something more than the
general danger which impended over both must have arisen, during that
brief period, to drive her from her post.

"Nellie! Nellie!" he called again, shoving the pole vigorously against
the bottom of the pond.

He was sure he heard the faint response this time, and so distinctly
that he caught the direction; it was from a point on the shore very
nearly opposite where he had left her.

"I hear you," he called back, working the unwieldy float toward the
spot; "I'll soon be there."

The distance was not great and it took but a few minutes to approach
quite close to the land, where, with a delight which can scarcely be
imagined, he saw Nellie standing close to the water's edge, beckoning
him to make all haste.

"Are you hurt?" he asked, as he forced the craft close to her.

"No," she answered, with a strange laugh, "but I thought my last moment
had come."

"Didn't you hear me call you?"

"Of course I did; any one within a mile could hear you."

"Why then didn't you answer me?"

"I was afraid to."

"Afraid of what?"

"Didn't you see him?" was the puzzling question of Nellie in return, as
she stepped carefully upon the raft, helped by the extended hand of her
brother.

"Nellie, stop talking in puzzles," said Nick; "I was so scared about you
that I won't get over it for a week; I called to, and hunted for you,
and you say you heard me; you must have known how frightened I was, and
yet you stood still and never made any answer, except a minute ago, when
I just managed to hear you. If you think it is right, I don't--that's
all."

He turned away offended, when she said:

"Forgive me, Nick; but I was afraid to answer you."

"Afraid of _what_?"

"Of that _bear_--you must have seen him," was the astonishing answer of
the girl.

Nellie then told her story: she was standing on the shore awaiting the
return of her brother, when she was terrified almost out of senses by
the appearance of a large black bear, which was evidently driven out of
the burning forest by the flames.

He did not seem to notice the girl, but when he began lumbering toward
her, as if seeking a good spot where he might enter the pond, Nellie did
not stay on the order of her going, but fled from the new peril, hardly
conscious of what direction she took. She knew better than to venture
among the blazing trees from which she and her brother had had such a
narrow escape, and she sped forward around the lake until she reached a
point nearly opposite. On the way she never looked behind her once,
certain as she was that the creature was ready to seize and devour her.

She was sure she heard him crashing almost upon her heels; but when she
paused, and finally turned her frightened looks backward, nothing of the
brute was to be seen, and she did not know what had become of him.

"That's the other bear which Mrs. Fowler saw, and which she told Sam
Harper, Herbert Watrous, and me, we would see some time or other."

"But that was almost two years ago."

"I know that; don't you suppose a bear will keep that long? This one has
known enough to stay out of sight until the fire has forced him from
his hiding-place."

After Nellie had heard her brother call to her, she was fearful that if
she answered she would betray herself to the brute, who would instantly
make for her; so she held her peace, even though she saw nothing of the
bear, and venturing on a rather feeble answer when the tones of Nick
told how much apprehension he was suffering over his failure to find
her.

Now that the two were on the raft, which was shoved out in the deep
water, something like confidence came back to her, and she was willing
to talk about the beast.

"I can't imagine what has become of him," said the brother, after her
story was told; "from what I have heard and read, the bear is not afraid
of water, and they often go in to bathe, just like us boys, for the fun
of the thing. I don't see why he should have waited when he had the fire
to urge him on."

"Maybe he is swimming around the lake now," whispered Nellie, looking
over as much of the surface as was visible through the hot smoke.

"I shouldn't be surprised, though it is odd that I did not see him,"
said Nick, pressing his pole against the bottom; "he is not far off, you
may depend."

"There! didn't you hear him?" asked Nellie, a moment later, as something
like the grunt of a huge hog alarmed both brother and sister.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AN UNWELCOME PASSENGER.


A second time a loud snort was heard, as though some large animal were
blowing the water from his nostrils, and at the same instant Nick and
Nellie caught sight of the huge snout of the bear coming through the
water toward them.

He was making directly for the raft beyond all question.

"By jingo, this raft wasn't built to carry bears!" exclaimed the
startled lad, who used the pole with all the strength of which he was
master; but, unfortunately, the bottom of the pond was composed of
slippery rocks in many places, and the blunt end of the crooked limb
slid along the upper surface of one of these so quickly that Nick
dropped on his side and came within a hair's breadth of rolling
overboard.

But he was up again like a flash, and toiling with might and main.

Rafts as generally constructed, are not capable of much speed, and
though Nick Ribsam got out all there was in the one which he had
managed, it was not to be expected that he could compare with the
velocity of a strong, healthy bear.

"He's coming, Nick! Oh, he will catch us sure!" exclaimed the sorely
frightened Nellie, edging so far away that she, too, was in danger of
going over.

"I know he is," replied the sturdy lad, working hard with the guiding
pole, "and I think he can beat us. Do you stay where you are, and don't
try to get any further off or you will be drowned. I'll bang him over
the head if he tries to climb on here and ride with us."

Such was the purpose of the beast, beyond question; and, approaching
fast, only a brief time elapsed ere his huge snout was shoved against
the logs, his big paws, dripping with wet, flapped out from below the
surface and both rested on the raft, which sank so low that Nellie
screamed and Nick turned pale.

Determined to keep off such an undesirable passenger, the lad raised
the stick in his hand and brought it down with all his strength on the
head of the bear, which acted as though unaware that he was struck.

Nick repeated the blows, that would have settled the business for a less
formidable animal but it was plain that brain did not consider the
