
"All right," said Bob, "Philip knows. He's lashing his tail and doing
some business till I'm ready. Help me to put this cushion under my
cloak for a hump-back, will you? I didn't like the twelfth hat, it's
too like the third one, so I'm going on as a Jew Pedlar. Give me that
box. Now!" And before I could speak a roar of applause had greeted
Bobby as he limped on in his twelve hats, crying, "Oh tear, oh tear!
dish ish the tarkest night I ever shaw."

But either we acted unusually well, or our audience was exceptionally
kind, for it applauded everything and everybody till the curtain fell.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Behind the scenes" is always a place of confusion after amateur
theatricals; at least it used to be with us. We ran hither and
thither, lost our every-day shoes, washed the paint from our faces,
and mislaid any number of towels, and combs, and brushes, ate supper
by snatches, congratulated ourselves on a successful evening, and were
kissed all around by Granny, who came behind the scenes for the
purpose.

All was over, and the guests were gone, when I gave an invitation to
the others to come and make lemon-brew over my bedroom fire as an
appropriate concluding festivity. (It had been suggested by Bobby.) I
had not seen Philip for some time, but we were all astonished to hear
that he had gone out. We kept his "brew" hot for him, and Charles and
Bobby were both nodding--though they stoutly refused to go to
bed,--when his step sounded in the corridor, and he knocked and came
hastily in.

Everybody roused up.

"Oh, Philip, we've been wondering where you were! Here's your brew,
and we've each kept a little drop, to drink your good health."

("Mine is _all_ pips," observed Bobby as a parenthesis.) But Philip
was evidently thinking of something else.

"Isobel," he said, standing by the table, as if he were making a
speech, "I shall never forget your coming after me to-day. I told you
you had the temper of an angel."

"So did I," said Alice.

"Hear! hear!" said Bobby, who was sucking his pips one by one and
laying them by--"to plant in a pot," as he afterwards explained.

"You not only saved the theatricals," continued Philip, "you saved my
life I believe."

No "situation" in the play had been half so startling as this. We
remained open-mouthed and silent, whilst Philip sat down as if he were
tired, and rested his head on his hands, which were dirty, and stained
with something red.

"Haven't you heard about the accident?" he asked.

We all said "No."

"The 4.15 ran into the express where the lines cross, you know.
Isobel, _there were only two first-class carriages, and everybody in
them was killed but one man_. They have taken both his legs off, and
he's not expected to live. Oh, poor fellow, he did groan so!"

Bobby burst into passionate tears, and Philip buried his head on his
arms.

Neither Alice nor I could speak, but Charles got up and went round and
stood by Philip.

"You've been helping," he said emphatically, "I know you have. You're
a good fellow, Philip, and I beg your pardon for saucing you. I am
going to forget about the football too. I was going to have eaten raw
meat, and dumb-belled, to make myself strong enough to thrash you,"
added Charles remorsefully.

"Eat a butcher's shop full, if you like," replied Philip with
contempt. And I think it showed that Charles was beginning to practise
forbearance, that he made no reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some years have passed since those Twelfth Night theatricals. The
Dragon has long been dissolved into his component scales, and we never
have impromptu performances now. The passing fame which a terrible
railway accident gave to our insignificant station has also faded. But
it set a seal on our good resolutions which I may honestly say has not
been lightly broken.

There, on the very spot where I had almost resolved never to forgive
Philip, never to try to heal the miserable wounds of the family peace,
I learned the news of the accident in which he might have been
killed. Philip says that if anything could make him behave better to
me it is the thought that I saved his life, as he calls it. But if
anything could help me to be good to him, surely it must be the
remembrance of how nearly I did not save him.

I put Alice on an equality in our bedroom that night, and gave her
part-ownership of the text and the picture. We are very happy
together.

We have all tried to improve, and I think I may say we have been
fairly successful.

More than once I have heard (one does hear many things people say
behind one's back) that new acquaintances--people who have only known
us lately--have expressed astonishment, not unmixed with a generous
indignation, on hearing that we were ever described by our friends
as--A VERY ILL-TEMPERED FAMILY.




OUR FIELD.

    Though nothing can bring back the hour
    Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower;
    We will grieve not, rather find
    Strength in what remains behind,
    In the primal sympathy
    Which, having been, must ever be.

       *       *       *       *       *

    And, O ye fountains, meadows, hills, and groves,
    Think not of any severing of our loves!
    Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;

       *       *       *       *       *

    Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
    Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears:
    To me the meanest flower that blows can give
    Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

_Wordsworth_.




OUR FIELD


There were four of us, and three of us had godfathers and godmothers.
Three each. Three times three make nine, and not a fairy godmother in
the lot. That was what vexed us.

It was very provoking, because we knew so well what we wanted if we
had one, and she had given us three wishes each. Three times three
make nine. We could have got all we wanted out of nine wishes, and
have provided for Perronet into the bargain. It would not have been
any good Perronet having wishes all to himself, because he was only a
dog.

We never knew who it was that drowned Perronet, but it was Sandy who
saved his life and brought him home. It was when he was coming home
from school, and he brought Perronet with him. Perronet was not at all
nice to look at when we first saw him, though we were very sorry for
him. He was wet all over, and his eyes shut, and you could see his
ribs, and he looked quite dark and sticky. But when he dried, he
dried a lovely yellow, with two black ears like velvet. People
sometimes asked us what kind of dog he was, but we never knew, except
that he was the nicest possible kind.

When we had got him, we were afraid we were not going to be allowed to
have him. Mother said we could not afford him, because of the tax and
his keep. The tax was five shillings, but there wanted nearly a year
to the time of paying it. Of course his keep began as soon as he could
eat, and that was the very same evening. We were all very miserable,
because we were so fond of Perronet--at least, Perronet was not his
name then, but he was the same person--and at last it was settled that
all three of us would give up sugar, towards saving the expense of his
keep, if he might stay. It was hardest for Sandy, because he was
particularly fond of sweet things; but then he was particularly fond
of Perronet. So we all gave up sugar, and Perronet was allowed to
remain.

About the tax, we thought we could save any pennies or half-pennies we
got during the year, and it was such a long time to the time for
paying, that we should be almost sure to have enough by then. We had
not any money at the time, or we should have bought a savings-box; but
lots of people save their money in stockings, and we settled that we
would. An old stocking would not do, because of the holes, and I had
not many good pairs; but we took one of my winter ones to use in the
summer, and then we thought we could pour the money into one of my
good summer ones when the winter came.

What we most of all wanted a fairy godmother for was about our
"homes." There was no kind of play we liked better than playing at
houses and new homes. But no matter where we made our "home," it was
sure to be disturbed. If it was indoors, and we made a palace under
the big table, as soon as ever we had got it nicely divided into rooms
according to where the legs came, it was certain to be dinner-time,
and people put their feet into it. The nicest house we ever had was in
the out-house; we had it, and kept it quite a secret, for weeks. And
then the new load of wood came and covered up everything, our best
oyster-shell dinner-service and all.

Any one can see that it is impossible really to fancy anything when
you are constantly interrupted. You can't have any fun out of a
railway train stopping at stations, when they take all your carriages
to pieces because the chairs are wanted for tea; any more than you can
play properly at Grace Darling in a life-boat, when they say the old
cradle is too good to be knocked about in that way.

It was always the same. If we wanted to play at Thames Tunnel under
the beds, we were not allowed; and the day we did Aladdin in the
store-closet, old Jane came and would put away the soap, just when
Aladdin could not possibly have got the door of the cave open.

It was one day early in May--a very hot day for the time of year,
which had made us rather cross--when Sandy came in about four o'clock,
smiling more broadly even than usual, and said to Richard and me,
"I've got a fairy godmother, and she's given us a field."

Sandy was very fond of eating, especially sweet things. He used to
keep back things from meals to enjoy afterwards, and he almost always
had a piece of cake in his pocket. He brought a piece out now, and
took a large mouthful, laughing at us with his eyes over the top of
it.

"What's the good of a field?" said Richard.

"Splendid houses in it," said Sandy.

"I'm quite tired of fancying homes," said I. "It's no good; we always
get turned out."

"It's quite a new place," Sandy continued; "you've never been there,"
and he took a triumphant bite of the cake.

"How did you get there?" asked Richard.

"The fairy godmother showed me," was Sandy's reply.

There is such a thing as nursery honour. We respected each other's
pretendings unless we were very cross, but I didn't disbelieve in his
fairy godmother. I only said, "You shouldn't talk with your mouth
full," to snub him for making a secret about his field.

Sandy is very good-tempered. He only laughed and said, "Come along.
It's much cooler out now. The sun's going down."

He took us along Gipsy Lane. We had been there once or twice, for
walks, but not very often, for there was some horrid story about it
which rather frightened us. I do not know what it was, but it was a
horrid one. Still we had been there, and I knew it quite well. At the
end of it there is a stile, by which you go into a field, and at the
other end you get over another stile, and find yourself in the high
road.

"If this is our field, Sandy," said I, when we got to the first stile,
"I'm very sorry, but it really won't do. I know that lots of people
come through it. We should never be quiet here."

Sandy laughed. He didn't speak, and he didn't get over the stile; he
went through a gate close by it leading into a little sort of bye-lane
that was all mud in winter and hard cart-ruts in summer. I had never
been up it, but I had seen hay and that sort of thing go in and come
out of it.

He went on and we followed him. The ruts were very disagreeable to
walk on, but presently he led us through a hole in the hedge, and we
got into a field. It was a very bare-looking field, and went rather
uphill. There was no path, but Sandy walked away up it, and we went
after him. There was another hedge at the top, and a stile in it. It
had very rough posts, one much longer than the other, and the cross
step was gone, but there were two rails, and we all climbed over. And
when we got to the other side, Sandy leaned against the big post and
gave a wave with his right hand and said, "This is our field."

It sloped down hill, and the hedges round it were rather high, with
awkward branches of blackthorn sticking out here and there without any
leaves, and with the blossom lying white on the black twigs like snow.
There were cowslips all over the field, but they were thicker at the
lower end, which was damp. The great heat of the day was over. The sun
shone still, but it shone low down and made such splendid shadows that
we all walked about with grey giants at our feet; and it made the
bright green of the grass, and the cowslips down below, and the top of
the hedge, and Sandy's hair, and everything in the sun and the mist
behind the elder bush which was out of the sun, so yellow--so very
yellow--that just for a minute I really believed about Sandy's
godmother, and thought it was a story come true, and that everything
was turning into gold.

But it was only for a minute; of course I know that fairy tales are
not true. But it was a lovely field, and when we had put our hands to
our eyes and had a good look at it, I said to Sandy, "I beg your
pardon, Sandy, for telling you not to talk with your mouth full. It is
the best field I ever heard of."

"Sit down," said Sandy, doing the honours; and we all sat down under
the hedge.

"There are violets just behind us," he continued. "Can't you smell
them? But whatever you do, don't tell anybody of those, or we shan't
keep our field to ourselves for a day. And look here." He had turned
over on to his face, and Richard and I did the same, whilst Sandy
fumbled among the bleached grass and brown leaves.

"Hyacinths," said Richard, as Sandy displayed the green tops of them.

"As thick as peas," said Sandy. "This bank will be blue in a few
weeks; and fiddle-heads everywhere. There will be no end of ferns. May
to any extent--it's only in bud yet--and there's a wren's nest in
there----" At this point he rolled suddenly over on to his back and
looked up.

"A lark," he explained; "there was one singing its head off, this
morning. I say, Dick, this will be a good field for a kite, won't it?
_But wait a bit_."

After every fresh thing that Sandy showed us in our field, he always
finished by saying, "_Wait a bit"_; and that was because there was
always something else better still.

"There's a brook at the bottom there," he said, "with lots of
fresh-water shrimps. I wonder whether they would boil red. _But wait a
bit_. This hedge, you see, has got a very high bank, and it's worn
into kind of ledges. I think we could play at 'shops' there--_but wait
a bit_."

"It's almost _too_ good, Sandy dear!" said I, as we crossed the field
to the opposite hedge.

"The best is to come," said Sandy. "I've a very good mind not to let
it out till to-morrow." And to our distraction he sat down in the
middle of the field, put his arms round his knees, as if we were
playing at "Honey-pots," and rocked himself backwards and forwards
with a face of brimming satisfaction.

Neither Richard nor I would have been so mean as to explore on our own
account, when the field was Sandy's discovery, but we tried hard to
persuade him to show us everything.

He had the most provoking way of laughing and holding his tongue, and
he did that now, besides slowly turning all his pockets inside-out
into his hands, and mumbling up the crumbs and odd currants, saying,
"Guess!" between every mouthful.

But when there was not a crumb left in the seams of his pockets, Sandy
turned them back, and jumping up, said--"One can only tell a secret
once. It's a hollow oak. Come along!"

He ran and we ran, to the other side of Our Field. I had read of
hollow oaks, and seen pictures of them, and once I dreamed of one,
with a witch inside, but we had never had one to play in. We were
nearly wild with delight. It looked all solid from the field, but when
we pushed behind, on the hedge side, there was the door, and I crept
in, and it smelt of wood, and delicious damp. There could not be a
more perfect castle, and though there were no windows in the sides,
the light came in from the top, where the polypody hung over like a
fringe. Sandy was quite right. It was the very best thing in Our
Field.

Perronet was as fond of the field as we were. What he liked were the
little birds. At least, I don't know that he liked them, but they were
what he chiefly attended to. I think he knew that it was our field,
and thought he was the watch-dog of it, and whenever a bird settled
down anywhere, he barked at it, and then it flew away, and he ran
barking after it till he lost it; and by that time another had settled
down, and then Perronet flew at him, and so on, all up and down the
hedge. He never caught a bird, and never would let one sit down, if he
could see it.

We had all kinds of games in Our Field. Shops--for there were
quantities of things to sell--and sometimes I was a moss-merchant, for
there were ten different kinds of moss by the brook, and sometimes I
was a jeweller, and sold daisy-chains and pebbles, and coral sets made
of holly berries, and oak-apple necklaces; and sometimes I kept
provisions, like earth-nuts and mallow-cheeses, and mushrooms; and
sometimes I kept a flower-shop, and sold nosegays and wreaths, and
umbrellas made of rushes, I liked that kind of shop, because I am fond
of arranging flowers, and I always make our birthday wreaths. And
sometimes I kept a whole lot of shops, and Richard and Sandy bought my
things, and paid for them with money made of elder-pith, sliced into
rounds. The first shop I kept was to sell cowslips, and Richard and
Sandy lived by the brook, and were wine merchants, and made cowslip
wine in a tin mug.

The elder-tree was a beauty. In July the cream-coloured flowers were
so sweet, we could hardly sit under it, and in the autumn it was
covered with berries; but we were always a little disappointed that
