cushion. He had a red spot on each cheek.

"Come in," he said. "I've been thinking about you all morning."

"I've been thinking about you, too," answered Mary. "You don't know how
frightened Martha is. She says Mrs. Medlock will think she told me about
you and then she will be sent away."

He frowned.

"Go and tell her to come here," he said. "She is in the next room."

Mary went and brought her back. Poor Martha was shaking in her shoes.
Colin was still frowning.

"Have you to do what I please or have you not?" he demanded.

"I have to do what you please, sir," Martha faltered, turning quite red.

"Has Medlock to do what I please?"

"Everybody has, sir," said Martha.

"Well, then, if I order you to bring Miss Mary to me, how can Medlock
send you away if she finds it out?"

"Please don't let her, sir," pleaded Martha.

"I'll send _her_ away if she dares to say a word about such a thing,"
said Master Craven grandly. "She wouldn't like that, I can tell you."

"Thank you, sir," bobbing a curtsy, "I want to do my duty, sir."

"What I want is your duty," said Colin more grandly still. "I'll take
care of you. Now go away."

When the door closed behind Martha, Colin found Mistress Mary gazing at
him as if he had set her wondering.

"Why do you look at me like that?" he asked her. "What are you thinking
about?"

"I am thinking about two things."

"What are they? Sit down and tell me."

"This is the first one," said Mary, seating herself on the big stool.
"Once in India I saw a boy who was a Rajah. He had rubies and emeralds
and diamonds stuck all over him. He spoke to his people just as you
spoke to Martha. Everybody had to do everything he told them--in a
minute. I think they would have been killed if they hadn't."

"I shall make you tell me about Rajahs presently," he said, "but first
tell me what the second thing was."

"I was thinking," said Mary, "how different you are from Dickon."

"Who is Dickon?" he said. "What a queer name!"

She might as well tell him, she thought. She could talk about Dickon
without mentioning the secret garden. She had liked to hear Martha talk
about him. Besides, she longed to talk about him. It would seem to bring
him nearer.

"He is Martha's brother. He is twelve years old," she explained. "He is
not like any one else in the world. He can charm foxes and squirrels and
birds just as the natives in India charm snakes. He plays a very soft
tune on a pipe and they come and listen."

There were some big books on a table at his side and he dragged one
suddenly toward him.

"There is a picture of a snake-charmer in this," he exclaimed. "Come and
look at it."

The book was a beautiful one with superb colored illustrations and he
turned to one of them.

"Can he do that?" he asked eagerly.

"He played on his pipe and they listened," Mary explained. "But he
doesn't call it Magic. He says it's because he lives on the moor so much
and he knows their ways. He says he feels sometimes as if he was a bird
or a rabbit himself, he likes them so. I think he asked the robin
questions. It seemed as if they talked to each other in soft chirps."

Colin lay back on his cushion and his eyes grew larger and larger and
the spots on his cheeks burned.

"Tell me some more about him," he said.

"He knows all about eggs and nests," Mary went on. "And he knows where
foxes and badgers and otters live. He keeps them secret so that other
boys won't find their holes and frighten them. He knows about everything
that grows or lives on the moor."

"Does he like the moor?" said Colin. "How can he when it's such a great,
bare, dreary place?"

"It's the most beautiful place," protested Mary. "Thousands of lovely
things grow on it and there are thousands of little creatures all busy
building nests and making holes and burrows and chippering or singing
or squeaking to each other. They are so busy and having such fun under
the earth or in the trees or heather. It's their world."

"How do you know all that?" said Colin, turning on his elbow to look at
her.

"I have never been there once, really," said Mary suddenly remembering.
"I only drove over it in the dark. I thought it was hideous. Martha told
me about it first and then Dickon. When Dickon talks about it you feel
as if you saw things and heard them and as if you were standing in the
heather with the sun shining and the gorse smelling like honey--and all
full of bees and butterflies."

"You never see anything if you are ill," said Colin restlessly. He
looked like a person listening to a new sound in the distance and
wondering what it was.

"You can't if you stay in a room," said Mary.

"I couldn't go on the moor," he said in a resentful tone.

Mary was silent for a minute and then she said something bold.

"You might--sometime."

He moved as if he were startled.

"Go on the moor! How could I? I am going to die."

"How do you know?" said Mary unsympathetically. She didn't like the way
he had of talking about dying. She did not feel very sympathetic. She
felt rather as if he almost boasted about it.

"Oh, I've heard it ever since I remember," he answered crossly. "They
are always whispering about it and thinking I don't notice. They wish I
would, too."

Mistress Mary felt quite contrary. She pinched her lips together.

"If they wished I would," she said, "I wouldn't. Who wishes you would?"

"The servants--and of course Dr. Craven because he would get
Misselthwaite and be rich instead of poor. He daren't say so, but he
always looks cheerful when I am worse. When I had typhoid fever his face
got quite fat. I think my father wishes it, too."

"I don't believe he does," said Mary quite obstinately.

That made Colin turn and look at her again.

"Don't you?" he said.

And then he lay back on his cushion and was still, as if he were
thinking. And there was quite a long silence. Perhaps they were both of
them thinking strange things children do not usually think of.

"I like the grand doctor from London, because he made them take the iron
thing off," said Mary at last. "Did he say you were going to die?"

"No."

"What did he say?"

"He didn't whisper," Colin answered. "Perhaps he knew I hated
whispering. I heard him say one thing quite aloud. He said, 'The lad
might live if he would make up his mind to it. Put him in the humor.' It
sounded as if he was in a temper."

"I'll tell you who would put you in the humor, perhaps," said Mary
reflecting. She felt as if she would like this thing to be settled one
way or the other. "I believe Dickon would. He's always talking about
live things. He never talks about dead things or things that are ill.
He's always looking up in the sky to watch birds flying--or looking down
at the earth to see something growing. He has such round blue eyes and
they are so wide open with looking about. And he laughs such a big laugh
with his wide mouth--and his cheeks are as red--as red as cherries."

She pulled her stool nearer to the sofa and her expression quite changed
at the remembrance of the wide curving mouth and wide open eyes.

"See here," she said. "Don't let us talk about dying; I don't like it.
Let us talk about living. Let us talk and talk about Dickon. And then we
will look at your pictures."

It was the best thing she could have said. To talk about Dickon meant to
talk about the moor and about the cottage and the fourteen people who
lived in it on sixteen shillings a week--and the children who got fat on
the moor grass like the wild ponies. And about Dickon's mother--and the
skipping-rope--and the moor with the sun on it--and about pale green
points sticking up out of the black sod. And it was all so alive that
Mary talked more than she had ever talked before--and Colin both talked
and listened as he had never done either before. And they both began to
laugh over nothings as children will when they are happy together. And
they laughed so that in the end they were making as much noise as if
they had been two ordinary healthy natural ten-year-old
creatures--instead of a hard, little, unloving girl and a sickly boy who
believed that he was going to die.

They enjoyed themselves so much that they forgot the pictures and they
forgot about the time. They had been laughing quite loudly over Ben
Weatherstaff and his robin and Colin was actually sitting up as if he
had forgotten about his weak back when he suddenly remembered
something.

"Do you know there is one thing we have never once thought of," he said.
"We are cousins."

It seemed so queer that they had talked so much and never remembered
this simple thing that they laughed more than ever, because they had got
into the humor to laugh at anything. And in the midst of the fun the
door opened and in walked Dr. Craven and Mrs. Medlock.

Dr. Craven started in actual alarm and Mrs. Medlock almost fell back
because he had accidentally bumped against her.

"Good Lord!" exclaimed poor Mrs. Medlock, with her eyes almost starting
out of her head. "Good Lord!"

"What is this?" said Dr. Craven, coming forward. "What does it mean?"

Then Mary was reminded of the boy Rajah again. Colin answered as if
neither the doctor's alarm nor Mrs. Medlock's terror were of the
slightest consequence. He was as little disturbed or frightened as if an
elderly cat and dog had walked into the room.

"This is my cousin, Mary Lennox," he said. "I asked her to come and talk
to me. I like her. She must come and talk to me whenever I send for
her."

Dr. Craven turned reproachfully to Mrs. Medlock.

"Oh, sir," she panted. "I don't know how it's happened. There's not a
servant on the place that'd dare to talk--they all have their orders."

"Nobody told her anything," said Colin, "she heard me crying and found
me herself. I am glad she came. Don't be silly, Medlock."

Mary saw that Dr. Craven did not look pleased, but it was quite plain
that he dare not oppose his patient. He sat down by Colin and felt his
pulse.

"I am afraid there has been too much excitement. Excitement is not good
for you, my boy," he said.

"I should be excited if she kept away," answered Colin, his eyes
beginning to look dangerously sparkling. "I am better. She makes me
better. The nurse must bring up her tea with mine. We will have tea
together."

Mrs. Medlock and Dr. Craven looked at each other in a troubled way, but
there was evidently nothing to be done.

"He does look rather better, sir," ventured Mrs. Medlock.
"But"--thinking the matter over--"he looked better this morning before
she came into the room."

"She came into the room last night. She stayed with me a long time. She
sang a Hindustani song to me and it made me go to sleep," said Colin. "I
was better when I wakened up. I wanted my breakfast. I want my tea now.
Tell nurse, Medlock."

Dr. Craven did not stay very long. He talked to the nurse for a few
minutes when she came into the room and said a few words of warning to
Colin. He must not talk too much; he must not forget that he was ill; he
must not forget that he was very easily tired. Mary thought that there
seemed to be a number of uncomfortable things he was not to forget.

Colin looked fretful and kept his strange black-lashed eyes fixed on Dr.
Craven's face.

"I _want_ to forget it," he said at last. "She makes me forget it. That
is why I want her."

Dr. Craven did not look happy when he left the room. He gave a puzzled
glance at the little girl sitting on the large stool. She had become a
stiff, silent child again as soon as he entered and he could not see
what the attraction was. The boy actually did look brighter,
however--and he sighed rather heavily as he went down the corridor.

"They are always wanting me to eat things when I don't want to," said
Colin, as the nurse brought in the tea and put it on the table by the
sofa. "Now, if you'll eat I will. Those muffins look so nice and hot.
Tell me about Rajahs."




CHAPTER XV

NEST BUILDING


After another week of rain the high arch of blue sky appeared again and
the sun which poured down was quite hot. Though there had been no chance
to see either the secret garden or Dickon, Mistress Mary had enjoyed
herself very much. The week had not seemed long. She had spent hours of
every day with Colin in his room, talking about Rajahs or gardens or
Dickon and the cottage on the moor. They had looked at the splendid
books and pictures and sometimes Mary had read things to Colin, and
sometimes he had read a little to her. When he was amused and interested
she thought he scarcely looked like an invalid at all, except that his
face was so colorless and he was always on the sofa.

"You are a sly young one to listen and get out of your bed to go
following things up like you did that night," Mrs. Medlock said once.
"But there's no saying it's not been a sort of blessing to the lot of
us. He's not had a tantrum or a whining fit since you made friends. The
nurse was just going to give up the case because she was so sick of
him, but she says she doesn't mind staying now you've gone on duty with
her," laughing a little.

In her talks with Colin, Mary had tried to be very cautious about the
secret garden. There were certain things she wanted to find out from
him, but she felt that she must find them out without asking him direct
questions. In the first place, as she began to like to be with him, she
wanted to discover whether he was the kind of boy you could tell a
secret to. He was not in the least like Dickon, but he was evidently so
pleased with the idea of a garden no one knew anything about that she
thought perhaps he could be trusted. But she had not known him long
enough to be sure. The second thing she wanted to find out was this: If
he could be trusted--if he really could--wouldn't it be possible to take
him to the garden without having any one find it out? The grand doctor
had said that he must have fresh air and Colin had said that he would
not mind fresh air in a secret garden. Perhaps if he had a great deal of
fresh air and knew Dickon and the robin and saw things growing he might
not think so much about dying. Mary had seen herself in the glass
sometimes lately when she had realized that she looked quite a different
creature from the child she had seen when she arrived from India. This
