Ingred, who was still only half thawed.

In spite of boisterous March winds and late spring frosts the sun
climbed steadily higher in the sky and the days lengthened. Ingred, who
used to arrive home in the twilight at Wynchcote on Friday afternoons,
could now dig in the garden after tea. She liked the scent of
newly-turned earth, and was happy working away with a trowel
transplanting roots of wall-flowers and forget-me-nots to make a display
in the bed near the dining-room window. At school the various forms vied
with one another in shows of hyacinths grown in bowls, the best of which
were lent to the studio on drawing days and figured as models for
water-color sketches, together with daffodils and hazel catkins.
Lispeth, who did not relax the activities of The Rainbow League, revived
her idea of a Posy Union, persuaded some of the girls to bring little
pots of gay crocuses or blue squills to school, and after these had been
duly exhibited on a table in the lecture-hall, sent them through the
agency of a "Children's Welfare Worker" to brighten the bedsides of
various small invalids in the poorer quarters of the town and let them
know that spring had arrived.

Easter-tide was very near now, and the school would break up for three
weeks. Miss Burd was going away to allow her tired brains to lie fallow
for a while, and most of the other teachers were looking forward to a
well-earned rest apart from their forms. It came as a surprise to
everybody when Miss Strong--alone--among the staff--suggested the
project of taking some of her pupils for a short walking tour. They were
to start off, like pilgrims of old, carrying with them the barest
necessaries, and have a four days' tramp to visit a few of the beauty
spots of the neighborhood, spending a couple of nights _en route_.

"It will be a real open-air holiday," she assured them. "We shall be out
of doors all day long and eat most of our meals by the roadside. I've
planned it out carefully. A short railway journey to Carford, then walk
by easy stages through Ryton-on-the-Heath to Dropwick and Pursborough,
where we can get the train again back to Grovebury. I know of two
extremely nice Temperance Hotels where we can be put up for the night.
By going in this way we shall see the cream of the country. Any girl who
is a good walker may join the party."

It certainly sounded a fascinating program, and after due consideration
at home eight girls put their names down for the excursion--Ingred,
Verity, Nora, Bess, Linda, Francie, Kitty, and Belle. They felt it would
be quite a new experience to know Miss Strong out of school hours; the
light in her eyes when she announced the scheme gave promise of hitherto
hidden capacities for fun. It circulated round the form that she might
prove quite a jolly companion. Those girls who could not join the tour
were a trifle wistful and inclined towards envy. They took it out of the
pilgrims in gloomy prognostications concerning the weather.

"It will probably rain all the time and you'll tramp along like a row of
drowned rats," suggested Beatrice.

"It won't do anything of the sort. I believe we're going to have a fine
mild spell and it will be just glorious. I'm taking my 'Brownie,' so
there'll be some snapshots to show we've been enjoying ourselves,"
retorted Nora briskly. "You stay-at-homes will be sorry for yourselves
when you hear our adventures!"

To allow the weather ample chance of improvement, and perhaps also to
give Miss Strong time to rest, the excursion was fixed for the last week
of the holidays. One morning in mid-April, therefore, found teacher and
pupils meeting together on the platform of Grovebury station to catch
the 9.25 train to Carford. They wore jerseys and their school hats, and
they carried their luggage according to their individual ideas of
convenience. Linda wore her little brother's satchel slung over her
back. Nora had borrowed a knapsack, Kitty preferred a parcel, Verity
packed her possessions in a string bag, and Bess carried a neat
dispatch-case.

"I'd a ripping idea for mine, but it wouldn't work," declared Ingred. "I
meant to tie my parcel to a balloon and then just lead it along by a
string. But I couldn't get a proper gas balloon for the business, and
that's what you ought to have."

"And suppose the wind were to blow it away from you, what then?"
inquired Miss Strong.

"I suppose I should have to cable it round my waist."

"Then you might be whisked up with it, and we should see you sailing off
into the clouds in a kind of aeroplane holiday instead of a walking
tour! I don't think we can patent your balloon dodge yet."

"What I want," said Kitty, "is a sort of child's light mail-cart
arrangement that I could wheel along. It's what Mother always says she
needs for shopping--a parcel-holder on wheels. Why doesn't somebody
invent one? He--or she (I'm sure it would be a _she_)--would make a
fortune."

"We might have borrowed a perambulator," said Belle, quite seriously,
"and have packed all our luggage into it."

"Oh, I dare say! And who would have wheeled it?"

"We could have taken it in turns."

"With long turns for the willing horses, and short turns for shirkers!
No, thanks! Better each to stick to our own."

"Besides which, forget stiles. We hope to try some field paths as well
as high roads," added Miss Strong. "Also I should decidedly have jibbed
at escorting a perambulator. Here comes the train! Let us make a dash
for an empty carriage and keep it to ourselves."

It was only a short journey to Carford, but it took them over twelve
rather uninteresting miles and put them down just at the commencement of
a very beautiful stretch of country where open uplands alternated with
wooded coombes, and where the stone-roofed villages were the prettiest
in the county.

Miss Strong, who had had some experience of mountaineering in
Switzerland, restrained the pace and kept them all at what she called a
"guide's walk."

"It pays in the long run," she assured them. "If you tear ahead at
first, you get tired later on, and we must keep fairly well together. I
can't have some of you half a mile behind."

The April days were still cold, but very bracing for exercise. Lambs
were out in the fields, primroses grew in clumps under the hedgerows,
hazel catkins flung showers of pollen to the winds, and in the coppice
that bordered the road pale-mauve March violets and white anemone stars
showed through last year's carpet of dead leaves. There was that joyful
thrill of spring in the air, that resurrection of Nature when the
thraldom of winter is over, and beauty comes back to the gray dim world.
The old Greeks felt it, thousands of years ago, and fabled it in their
myth of Persephone and her return from Hades. The Druids knew it in
Ancient Britain, and fixed their religious ceremonies for May Day. The
birds were caroling it still in the hedgerows, and the girls caught the
joyous infection and danced along in defiance of Miss Strong's jog-trot
guide walk. Even the mistress herself, so wise at the outset, finally
flung prudence to the winds, and skirmished through the coppices with
enthusiasm equal to that of her pupils, lured from the pathway by the
glimpses of kingcups, or the pursuit of a peacock butterfly.

"All the same, if we tear round like small dogs, we shall never reach
Dropwick to-night, and I've booked our rooms there," she assured them.
"You don't want to sleep on the heather, I suppose!"

"Bow-wow! Shouldn't mind!" laughed Kitty. "We could cling together and
keep each other warm."

"You won't cling to me, thanks! I prefer a bed of my own."

Nora, having brought a good supply of films for her Brownie camera, was
most keen on taking snapshots. She photographed the company eating their
lunch on a bank by the roadside, with Miss Strong in the very act of
biting a piece of bread and butter, and Ingred with her face buried in a
mug. She even went further. She had been reading a book on faked
photography, and she yearned to try experiments.

"I'm going to give those stay-at-homes a few thrills," she declared. "I
told them we'd have adventures."

Nora expounded her plan to Miss Strong, who was sufficiently interested
in the subject to promise her collusion and good advice. A mock Alpine
scene came first. Nora had brought with her, for this express purpose, a
length of rope, which she wore around her jersey like a Carmelite's
girdle. She took it off now and fastened it round the waists of three of
her schoolfellows, linking them together in the manner of Swiss
mountaineers. Then she found a piece of rock on which were narrow
ledges, and, with the help of Miss Strong, posed them in attitudes of
apparent peril. Really, they were only a couple of feet from the ground,
and a fall would have been a laughing matter, but in a camera they
appeared to be clinging almost by their eyelashes to the face of an
inaccessible crag and in imminent danger of their lives. Nora took two
views, and chuckled with satisfaction.

"That'll make their hair stand on end! I'll fix a few more sensations if
I can. Who's game to run six inches in front of a mild old cow's horns,
while somebody urges her on from behind?"

"How will you guarantee she's mild?" inquired Bess dubiously. "She might
take it into her head to toss us!"

"Not she! It was only the 'cow with the crumpled horn' that went in for
tossing."

"Well, I'd rather be in a safer photo, thanks! I'm terrified of cows,
anyway."

Nora's instincts were really quite dramatic. She photographed Bess
crouching in the hollow of a tree, an imaginary fugitive, to whom
Francie, in an attitude of caution, handed surreptitious victuals. She
posed Linda, apparently lifeless, on the borders of a pond, with Kitty
and Verity applying artificial respiration. She bound up Ingred's head
with a handkerchief, and placed her arm in a sling as the result of a
fictitious accident, and would have arranged a circle of weeping girls
round the prostrate body of Miss Strong, had not that stalwart lady
stoutly objected.

"I'm not going to do anything of the sort, so put up that camera, and
come along at once. We've wasted far too much time already, and we shall
have to step out unless we want to finish our walk in the dark. I
promise you tea at Ryton-on-the-Heath, if you hurry, but we can't stop
half an hour there unless you put your best foot foremost, so, quick
march!"




CHAPTER XVII

The Rivals


This book does not propose to extol an ideal heroine, only to chronicle
the deeds and thoughts of a girl, who, like most other girls, had her
pleasant and her disagreeable moods, her high aspirations and good
intentions, and her occasional bursts of bad temper. Ingred had been
very passionate as a child, and, though she had learnt to put on the
curb, sometimes that uncomfortable lower self would take the bit between
its teeth and gallop away with her. It is sad to have to confess that
the enjoyment of her walking tour was entirely spoilt by an ugly little
imp who kept her company. In plain words she was horribly jealous of
Bess. Ingred liked to be popular. She was gratified to be warden of "The
Pioneers" and a member of the School Parliament. She felt she had an
acknowledged standing not only in her own form but throughout the
college. Her official position, her cleverness in class, her aptitude
for music, her skill at games, made her an all-round force and a referee
on most subjects. There is no doubt that Ingred would have had the
undivided post of favorite in her form had it not been for Bess
Haselford. Not that Bess was in any way a self-constituted rival--on the
contrary she was rather shy and retiring, and made no particular bid for
popularity. Perhaps that was one reason why the girls liked her. She was
generous in lending her property, invited her form-mates to charming
parties at Rotherwood, and often persuaded an indulgent father to
include some of her special chums in motoring expeditions on Saturday
afternoons. She had, indeed, taken up the exact role that Quenrede had
played years ago, before the war, and which Ingred would have followed
had Rotherwood and a car still been in the Saxons' possession. In spite
of several overtures from Bess, Ingred had thrust away all idea of
friendship, and had steadily refused any invitations to her old home.
The reports which the girls brought back of the renewed glories of
Rotherwood made her feel like a disinherited princess. She considered it
rough luck that her supplanter should be at the same school and in the
same form as herself, and decided that Bess had ousted her from both
house and favor. It made it only the more aggravating that Bess's
musical talent was quite equal, if not superior, to her own. Bess had
improved immensely on the violin, and her performance at the end-of-term
recital had received quite a little ovation.

When the question of the walking tour was broached, Bess, owing to home
engagements, had at first reluctantly refused, then had managed to
rearrange her holidays and had joined the party after all. To Ingred her
presence utterly marred the enjoyment. It was extremely unreasonable of
Ingred, for Bess was most unassuming and really very long-suffering. She
put up with snubs that would have made most girls retaliate indignantly.
Nobody likes to be sat upon too hard, however, and even the proverbial
worm will turn at last.

As the walking party, much urged by Miss Strong straggled along towards
Ryton-on-the-Heath, Bess made a lightning dive up a bank and came back
with a blue flower plainly of the _labiate_ species.

"Bugle!" she remarked with satisfaction.

"Bugle?" echoed Ingred scornfully. "Shows how much you know about
botany! That's self-heal!"

"Oh no; it's certainly bugle."

"I tell you it's self-heal. I found some at Lynstones last August and
looked it up in the flower-book."

"Very likely you did, but that doesn't prove that this is self-heal."

"It does, for anybody with a pair of eyes. I've been studying botany."

"And so have I!"

"You may think you know everything, Bess Haselford, but you don't know
this."

[Illustration: "YOU MAY THINK YOU KNOW EVERYTHING, BESS HASELFORD, BUT
YOU DON'T KNOW THIS!"]

"I didn't say I knew everything; but I'm certain this is bugle all the
same, and I stick to it!"

Bess's usually sweet voice had an obstinate note in it for once. She
seemed determined to defend her botanical trenches.

"Go it--hammer and tongs!" laughed Kitty. "I'll back the winner!"

"And I'll take the case into court," said Linda, snatching the flower
from her schoolfellow's hand and running on to show it to Miss Strong,
who was an authority on the subject.

The mistress paused to let the others overtake her.

"Bugle, certainly," she decided emphatically. "The first bit we've found
this year. It's out early. Self-heal? Oh dear no! The two are rather
alike and are sometimes mistaken one for another, but no botanist would
dream of confusing them. Bugle is a spring and early summer flower, and
self-heal blooms much later. Make a note in your nature diaries that you
found bugle on 15th April."

Considerably squashed, Ingred had for once to acknowledge her botany to
be at fault, and, though Bess did not triumph, Francie gave Kitty a poke
and the pair giggled.

"Well, of course, one can't be always right," said Ingred airily.

"So it seems; though some people set themselves up for wiseacres!"
sniggered Kitty.

Ingred fell behind with Verity and let the others walk on. It was only a
trifling incident, but she was annoyed to notice how openly and
instantly the girls had sided with Bess. She felt too glum for speech,
and as Verity was tired and disinclined to talk, they tramped along in
silence.

They had been winding steadily uphill for some miles and were now on the
heath from which Ryton took its name. The ground fell steeply to the
west, showing glimpses of a great river in the valley below, where the
still-leafless woods had burst here and there into faint tokens of
spring. Beyond the river rose the characteristic grey hills of the
neighborhood, with their stone walls and sheepfolds and stretches of
moorland, looking a little hazy in the afternoon light, but with patches
of yellow gorse catching the sunshine. Ryton was a delightful little
village. Its cottages, built long ago by local craftsmen, seemed
absolutely in harmony with the landscape: walls, dormers, and mullions
and long undulating roofs were all of limestone and conveyed an
impression of sturdy self-respect. The rain-worn, lichen-covered roofs
had weathered to charming irregularities of form and lovely tones of
color. Ivy and clematis climbed over the porches and twisted themselves
round the low chimneys. The little gardens were bright with daffodils,
mezereon, and flowering currant.

To the girls, somewhat tired and decidedly hungry, the main focus of the
village was a long iron post which stretched out over the street and
supported a rudely-painted sign of a bird, whose species might have been
a puzzle to an ornithologist but for the words "Pelican Inn" that
appeared beneath it.

In the long-ago days before railroads, the little hostelry had been a
stopping-place for stage-coaches, and a wooden board still set forth
that it supplied "Posting in all its branches." The landlord would no
doubt have been much dismayed if any wag had entered and demanded a
chaise and post-horses to drive to Gretna Green, and a shabby motor in
his stable-yard showed that he marched with the times.

Miss Strong, on consulting her watch, decided that her party might
safely indulge in a halt of half an hour, and ordered tea for nine
persons. The inn, built on a type common in the district, was entered by
an archway leading straight into a courtyard. A door on the right led to
the bar, and a door on the left to the coffee-room. To this latter more
aristocratic quarter Miss Strong conducted her pupils. Some of them had
never before been in a small village hostelry, and were much amused at
the quaint old parlor with its sporting prints, its glass cases of
stuffed squirrels and badgers, and its horsehair-seated chairs with
crochet antimacassars hung over the backs. The atmosphere was certainly
rather redolent of stale beer and tobacco, but a bunch of crimson
wall-flowers on the table did their best to spread a pleasant perfume.
The tea, when, after much delay, it arrived, was delicious. The Pelican
was a farm as well as an inn, and the rosy-faced servant girl carried in
cream, fresh butter, and red-currant jam to the coffee-room. She
apologized for the absence of cake, but it was an omission that nobody
minded. Upland air gives good appetites, and, though Miss Strong
reminded her flock that this was only a meal by the way, and that supper
was ordered for them at Dropwick, they set to work as if they would
taste nothing more till midnight. There was something so delightfully
fresh and out of the common in having tea at a wayside inn; they felt
true pilgrims of the road, and civilization and school seemed to have
faded into a far background. The love of travel is in the blood of both
Celt and Anglo-Saxon; our forefathers visited shrines for the joy of the
journey as well as for religious motives, and maybe our Bronze Age
ancestors, who flocked to the great Sun Festivals at Stonehenge or
Avebury Circles, derived pleasure from the change of scene as well as a
blessing from the Druids. The Romans, those great pioneers of travel,
had opened out the district eighteen centuries ago, and laid a straight,
paved road from Wendcester to Pursborough; the remains of their
fortified camps and of their villas were still left to mark their era.
The foss-way, leading from Ryton-on-the-Heath to Dropwick, was their
handiwork, and our pilgrims were to march on the identical track of some
old Roman legion.

It must be owned that when tea was finished they were very unwilling
pilgrims, and would gladly have spent the night at The Pelican and have
slept in the funny, musty, low-ceiled little bedrooms upstairs.

"Couldn't we possibly stop here?" implored Verity.

But Miss Strong, having booked rooms in Dropwick, was adamant.

"Besides which I wouldn't trust the beds here," she remarked. "So early
in the year they're almost bound to be damp, and we don't want any of
you laid up with rheumatic fever as the result of our trip. I prefer to
