kept by the more fanatical of Mahmud's followers, desertions had become
frequent, notwithstanding the certain death that awaited those who were
overtaken.

The evening after the cavalry made their first reconnaissance, the
slave who brought Gregory's food told him that Fatma wished to speak to
him. It was but three paces to the entrance of the tent, and his guards
made no objection. The entrance was closed as the slave entered, but
half a minute later it was opened an inch or two, and, without showing
herself, Fatma said:

"Listen to me."

"I am listening," Gregory replied.

"I am in great fear for you. You are in much danger. The Emirs say to
Mahmud that you ought to be killed; their followers are well-nigh
starving--why should an infidel prisoner be eating? His friends are now
close to us, and there will be a battle. None will be spared on either
side--why should this man be spared?

"Mahmud has many cares. The men are furious because he will not lead
them out to fight. Even the emirs are sullen; and Osman Digna, who was
on bad terms with him a short time ago, and who, Mahmud suspects, is
intriguing with them against him, is foremost in urging that an attack
should take place; though everyone knows he is a coward, and never
shows himself in battle, always running away directly he sees that
things are going against him. Still, he has five thousand followers of
his own.

"Mahmud told me today that he had done all in his power but, placed as
he was, he could not withstand the words of the emirs, and the
complaints of the tribesmen. When the battle comes--as it must come in
a day or two--it will need all his influence and the faith of the men
with him to win; and with so much at stake, how can he risk everything
for the sake of a single life, and that the life of an infidel? If you
would agree to aid in working his guns, as the Greeks and Egyptians do,
it would content the emirs."

"That I cannot do," Gregory said. "If I am to be killed, it is the will
of God; but better that, a thousand times, than turn traitor!"

"I knew that it would be so," Fatma said sorrowfully. "What can we do?
At other times, the protection of the harem would cover even one who
had slain a chief; but now that the Baggara are half starving, and mad
with anger and disappointment, even that no longer avails. If they
would brave the anger of the son of the Khalifa, they would not regard
the sanctity of the harem. I wish now that I had advised you to try and
escape when we left Shendy, or even when we first came here. It would
have been difficult, but not impossible; but now I can see no chance.
There is the thorn hedge round the wood, with few openings, and with
men on watch all round to prevent desertion. Several tried to escape
last night--all were caught and killed this morning. Even if it were
possible to pass through, there are bands of horsemen everywhere out on
the plain, keeping watch alike against the approach of the enemy and
the desertion of cowards.

"I have been in despair, all day, that I cannot save the life of one
who saved mine. I have told Mahmud that my honour is concerned, and
that I would give my life for yours. Months ago, he would have braved
the anger of all his army for me, but he has changed much of late. It
is not that he loves me less, but that he has been worried beyond
bearing, and in his troubles he drinks until he forgets them.

"My only hope is that your people will attack tomorrow. Mahmud says
that they will assuredly be beaten; they will be shot down as they
approach, and none will ever be able to get through the hedge. Then,
when they fall back, the Baggara will pour out, horse and foot, and
destroy them. They will then see how right he has been in not letting
them go out into the plain to fight. His influence will be restored,
and your life will be safe.

"We are to be removed to the farther side of the wood, when the
fighting begins; and there all the women are to be gathered, and wait,
till the infidels are utterly destroyed.

"If your people come tomorrow morning, you may be saved. Otherwise I
fear the worst."

"I thank you for what you have done for me," replied Gregory, "and
whatever comes of it, be sure that I shall feel grateful to you, and
shall not blame you for not having been able to do what was impossible.
I hope my friends may come tomorrow, for, whatever my fate may be,
anything is better than uncertainty."

"May Allah protect you!" the woman said, with a sob; "and go now. I
hear Mahmud calling me."



Chapter 12: The Battle Of Atbara.


Gregory had little sleep that night. It was clear to him that there was
absolutely no chance of making his escape. Even were his two guards
withdrawn, it would not improve his position. He had no means of
disguise, and even if he had an Arab dress and could stain his face, he
could not hope to make his way through the crowds of sleeping men, the
pitfalls and trenches, and pass out through the jealously guarded
zareba. There was nothing, for him, but to wait till the end.

He could not blame Mahmud. A leader on the eve of a great battle could
not, for the sake of a single captive, risk his influence and oppose
the wishes of his followers. It was much that he had, for his wife's
sake, postponed the fulfilment of his oath; and had so long withstood
the wishes of his most influential emirs. More could not be expected.
At any rate, he was better off than others who had been in the same
position. He had not, so far as he knew, a relation in the world--no
one who would be anywise affected by his death; and at least he would
have the satisfaction of knowing that it was a kind action which had
brought him to his end. He prayed earnestly, not that his life might be
spared, but that his death might be a painless one; and that he might
meet it as an English officer should, without showing signs of fear.

The next day he heard orders given, and a great stir in camp; and he
gathered, from those who passed near the tent, that the enemy's cavalry
were again approaching; and that the mounted men were to ride out and
cut them off from retreating, while the dismounted men were to pour out
and annihilate them. Then, for a time, all was silence in the camp.

Suddenly an outburst of shouts and cries broke out and, almost
simultaneously, he heard the rattle of Maxim guns--the fight had begun.
Would the Egyptian horsemen stand firm, or would they give way to
panic? If they broke and fled, none whatever would return to their camp
through the host of Baggara horsemen.

For a time, the roll of the fire from the machine guns was incessant.
Then there was a pause. Two or three minutes later it broke out again,
but it was evidently somewhat farther off; and so it went on, with
intervals of silence, but ever getting farther away. It was clear that
the horsemen had not been able to bring the cavalry to a standstill,
and that these were steadily falling back, covered by the fire of the
Maxims. At last the sound grew faint in the distance and, soon
afterwards, the noise in the camp showed that the infantry were
returning.

It was not till two hours later that he heard the mounted men ride in;
and gathered, from the talk outside, that they had lost nearly two
hundred men, and had been unable to prevent the Egyptian cavalry from
returning to camp. Towards evening he heard angry talking, and could
distinguish Mahmud's voice. Then the blanket was pulled off its
supports, and two men ordered him to follow them.

This was doubtless the end, and he nerved himself for what was to come;
and, with head erect and a steady face, he accompanied the men to the
front of Mahmud's tent. The chief was standing, with frowning face; and
several Emirs were gathered in front of him, while a number of
tribesmen stood a short distance away.

"Now," Mahmud said, "let one of you speak."

One of the Emirs stepped forward.

"I, Osman Digna, demand that this infidel be put to death. His
countrymen have slain many of my men, and yours."

Feeling now that Mahmud, after doing his best, had ceased to struggle
for him, and that his death was certain, Gregory took a step forward
towards the speaker, and said scornfully:

"So you are Osman Digna! I am one of the first of my countrymen to see
your face, though many have seen your back, at a distance."

Instead of provoking a pistol shot, as he had intended, his remark was
followed by a roar of laughter from the emirs; for Osman's cowardice
was a byword among them, and his nickname was "One who always runs."

Osman, indeed, had put his hand on the stock of one of the pistols in
his belt, but Mahmud said imperiously:

"The man's life is mine, not yours, Osman Digna. If you shoot him, I
shoot you!"

The fearlessness of the lad had pleased the other emirs; for,
recklessly brave themselves, the Baggara appreciated and esteemed
courage and honour. One of the others said:

"This is a brave young fellow and, infidels as his people are, we admit
that they are brave. Were it for ourselves only, we would say let him
live, until we see what comes of it. But our people complain. They say
his folk, with whom we had no quarrel, come here and aid the Egyptians
against us. They slew many yesterday. It is not right that this man
should be living among us, when his countrymen are fighting against
us."

There was a murmur of assent among the others, then Mahmud spoke.

"I have promised that he should not be killed, unless by order of the
Khalifa. But this I will do: he shall be placed in the front rank. If
Allah wills it, he will be killed by the bullets of his countrymen. If,
when the fight is over, he is unharmed, you shall all agree that the
matter be left for the Khalifa to decide. But, mind, I wash my hands of
his death. On the eve of a battle, it is not for me to set my wishes
above those of my emirs and my tribesmen; and I yield to your demands,
because it is necessary that all be of one mind. If he is killed, which
surely he will be, unless Allah protects him, his blood be upon your
heads!"

He waved his hand, and the men came forward and again took Gregory to
his tent.

The latter was well contented with the decision that he should be
killed. He had no doubt that, at least, his death would be swift and
sudden; he would not be speared, or cut to pieces with knives. He would
see his countrymen advancing. He would know that he would be speedily
avenged.

Two days passed, when the news came that the Egyptians had advanced to
Umdabieh, seven miles nearer; and, on the following morning, the
Dervish camp was disturbed early. There was joy in every face, and
renewed vigour in the bearing of the men. Scouting Dervishes had
brought in word that the infidels had marched, during the night, and
were now halting but a mile and a half away.

The hour had come, at last. They were confident in themselves, and
their trust in their leader was renewed. The fight, two days before,
had shown them that the guns of the white men were terrible on the
plain; and that it was, after all, wise to await them in the position
which had been made impregnable, and against which the foe would hurl
themselves in vain; then they were to pour out, and annihilate them.

The slave came to Gregory's tent, at daybreak.

"Fatma is praying to Allah for your safety," he said.

There was no time for more, for already the tents were being pulled
down, and soon the women were hurried away to the rear. Four men
surrounded Gregory, and led him to the edge of the camp, and there
fastened him to the stump of a tree that had been cut off six feet from
the ground, the upper portion being used in the construction of the
zareba. Ten or twelve men were similarly fastened, in a line with him.
These had been detected in trying to sneak away.

Gregory had not seen anything of the camp before and, as he was taken
along, he was astounded at the amount of work that had been done.
Everywhere the ground was pitted with deep holes, capable of sheltering
from fifteen to twenty men. The hedge was a high one, and was formed
for the most part of prickly bushes. The position was, indeed, a
formidable one; manned, as it was, by nearly twenty thousand desperate
fighters.

At six o'clock the first gun was fired; and, for an hour and a half,
the camp was swept with shell, shrapnel, and Maxim bullets. Most of the
Baggara were lying in the pits. Many, however, walked about calmly, as
if in contempt of the fire. More than half of the wretched men bound to
the trees were killed.

At last the fire of the guns slackened and, on the crest of the
position, in a semicircle round the wood, a long line of steadily
marching men appeared. The assault was about to begin.

The Dervishes sprang from their hiding places, and lined the trenches
behind the zareba. The troops halted, and waited. The Maxims moved in
front of the British brigade, and then opened fire. A bugle sounded,
and the whole line, black and white, advanced like a wall. When within
three hundred yards, the men knelt down and opened fire, in volleys of
sections. At the same instant the Dervishes, with difficulty restrained
until now, opened fire in return.

The Maxims, and the storm of British bullets swept the wood, filling
the air with a shower of falling leaves. Gregory murmured a prayer,
shut his eyes, and awaited death.

Suddenly he felt his ropes slacken and fall from him, and a voice said,
"Drop on your face, master!"

Almost mechanically he obeyed, too astonished even to think what was
happening; then a body fell across him.

"Lie still and don't move, master. They must think you are dead."

"Is it you, Zaki?" Gregory said, scarcely able, even now, to believe
that it was his faithful follower.

"It is I, master. I have been in the camp three days, and have never
had a chance of getting near you, before."

"Brave fellow! good friend!" Gregory said, and then was silent.

Speech was almost inaudible, amid the roar of battle. The pipes of the
Camerons could, however, be heard above the din. The men advanced
steadily, in line, maintaining their excellent volley firing. The three
other regiments, in close order, followed; bearing away farther to the
right, so as to be able to open fire and advance. On that side the
black regiments were advancing no less steadily, and the half brigade
of Egyptians were as eager as any. Steadily and well under control, all
pushed forward at a run; firing occasionally, but thirsting to get hand
to hand with those who had desolated their land, destroyed their
villages, and slain their friends.

The British were suffering, but the blacks suffered more; for the
volleys of the Camerons kept down the fire of those opposed to them,
better than the irregular fire of the Soudanese. The latter, however,
first reached the zareba; and, regardless of thorns or of fire, dashed
through it with triumphant shouts, and fell upon the defenders.

It was but a minute or two later that the Camerons reached the hedge.
Formidable as it looked, it took them but a short time to tear down
gaps, through which they rushed; while close behind them the Seaforths,
the Lincolns, and the Warwicks were all in, bursting through the low
stockade and trenches behind it, and cheering madly.

Now, from their holes and shelters, the Dervishes started up. Brave
though they were, the storm that had burst upon them with such
suddenness scared them, and none attempted to arrest the course of the
Highlanders and red coats. Firing as they ran, the Dervishes made for
the river. Many remained in their pits till the last, firing at the
soldiers as they rushed past, and meeting their death at the point of
the bayonet.

Hotly the troops pursued, often falling into the pits, which were half
hidden by thorns and long grass. There was no attempt at regularity in
these holes--nothing to show where they were. It was a wild and
confused combat. The officers kept their men as well together as it was
possible, on such ground; but it was sharp work, for from flank and
rear, as well as in front, the shots rang out from their hidden foes,
and these had to be despatched as they pushed forward.

As the troops burst through, Gregory sprang to his feet, seized a rifle
that had dropped from the hands of a Dervish who had fallen close by
and--shouting to Zaki "Lie still as if dead!"--joined the first line of
troops. No questions were asked. Every man's attention was fixed on the
work before him, and no thought was given to this white officer, who
sprang from they knew not where. He had no cartridges, and the
Dervishes did not carry bayonets; but, holding the rifle club-wise, he
kept in the front line, falling into pits and climbing out again,
engaged more than once with desperate foemen.

Striking and shouting, he fought on until the troops reached the river
bank; and, having cleared all before them, poured volleys into the mass
of fugitives crossing its dry bed. Other hordes were seen away to the
left, similarly driven out by Lewis's Egyptians, by whom a terrible
fire was kept up until the last of the fugitives disappeared in the
scrub on the opposite bank, leaving the river bed thickly dotted with
dead bodies; while, on the right, Macdonald's and Maxwell's blacks
similarly cleared the wood.

Then the Soudanese and whites alike burst into cheers. Men shook each
other by the hand, while they waved their helmets over their heads. The
Soudanese leapt and danced like delighted children. Presently an
officer left a group of others, who had been congratulating each other
on their glorious victory, and came up to Gregory.

"May I ask who you are, sir?" he said, courteously but coldly.

"Certainly, sir. My name is Hilliard. I have been a captive in the
hands of the Dervishes; who, when you attacked, tied me to the stump of
a tree as a target for your bullets; and I should certainly have been
killed, had not a faithful servant of mine, a black, taken the
opportunity, when the Dervishes rushed into the trenches and opened
fire upon you, to cut my ropes.

"I have no doubt, sir," he went on, as he saw the officer look somewhat
doubtful, "that General Hunter is here. I am known personally to him,
and served for a time on his staff."

"That is quite sufficient," the officer said, more cordially. "I
congratulate you on your escape. I confess it astonished us all, when a
strange white officer, whom none of us knew, suddenly joined us. You
will find General Hunter somewhere over on the left. He is certain to
have led the charge of the Soudanese."

"Thank you! I will go and find him; but first, I must return to where I
left my man. He had, of course, the Mahdist's patch on his clothes; and
I told him to lie still, as if dead, till I came for him; as, in the
melee, it would have been impossible for me to have protected him."

Gregory found Zaki still lying where he left him, head downward and
arms thrown forward; in so good an imitation of death that he feared,
for a moment, the lad had been shot after he left him. At the sound of
his master's voice, however, the native sprang to his feet.

"You have saved my life, Zaki," Gregory said, taking his hand. "I must
have fallen--every man tied to a tree is, as you see, dead; but before
we say anything else, cut that patch off your clothes, or you might be
shot as a Dervish by the first man you come across.

"Keep close to me. I am going to General Hunter. At present, I know
none of the officers of the white regiments. When I get among the
Soudanese, I shall be more at home."

In ten minutes, he came to where General Hunter was speaking to the
Sirdar. Gregory stopped at a short distance, before the general's eyes
fell upon him, and he gave an exclamation of pleasure.

"That is Hilliard, General; the young fellow who jumped from one of the
gunboats, off Metemmeh, to rescue the woman. The act was unnoticed at
the time, but a black he had with him was released, and brought word
that his master was a prisoner in their camp."

"I heard of it, at the time," the Sirdar said, and motioned to Gregory
to come up. "I am glad to find that you have escaped the fate we feared
had befallen you, but your action was altogether wrong. An officer's
life is no longer his own, but belongs to the country he serves; and
you had no right whatever to risk it when on duty, even in an action
which, at any other time, would do you great credit."

He spoke sharply and sternly. Gregory again saluted.

"I knew afterwards that I had done wrong, sir; but I did not stop to
think, and acted on the impulse of the moment."

"That may be," the Sirdar said; "but officers should think, and not act
on the impulse of the moment."

Gregory again saluted, and fell back. Three or four minutes later, the
two generals separated. General Hunter came up to him, and shook him
warmly by the hand.

"You must not mind what the Sirdar said, Hilliard. It was a very noble
action, and did you credit, and I can assure you that that was the
opinion of all who knew you; but to the Sirdar, you know, duty is
everything, and I think you are lucky in not being sent down, at once,
to the base. However, he said to me, after you had left him:

"'I shall be too busy this evening, but bring the young fellow with
you, tomorrow evening. I must hear how it was that Mahmud spared him.'

"I told him that I understood, from your black, that the woman was
Mahmud's favourite wife, and that she took you under her care.

"By the way, have you heard that Mahmud is captured? Yes, he is caught,
which is a great satisfaction to us; for his being sent down, a
prisoner, will convince the tribesmen that we have gained a victory, as
to which they would otherwise be incredulous. I hear that the Egyptian
brigade, which was to the extreme left, has captured Mahmud's wife, and
a great number of women."

"With your permission, sir, I will go over there at once, and ask
Colonel Lewis that she may receive specially good treatment. She has
been extremely kind to me, and it is to her influence over Mahmud that
I owe my life. Up to this morning Mahmud would have spared me, but
Osman Digna insisted that I should be killed, and he was obliged to
give way. They fastened me to a tree behind the trench, just inside the
zareba, and I should certainly have been killed by our own musketry
fire, had not my boy, who had come into the camp in disguise, cut my
cords. I fell as if shot, and he threw himself down on me; until the
Camerons burst in, when I at once joined them, and did what little I
could in the fight."

"I will give you a line to Colonel Lewis, to tell him that Mahmud's
wife, whom you will point out, is to be treated with respect; and that
her people may be allowed to make her an arbour of some sort, until the
Sirdar decides what is to be done with her. Probably she will be sent
down to Berber. No doubt we shall all fall back."

"Then you will not pursue, sir?"

"No. The cavalry have already gone off in pursuit of their horsemen,
but they are not likely to catch them; for we hear that Osman Digna is
with them, and he seems to enjoy a special immunity from capture. As
for the other poor beggars, we could not do it if we wanted to. I
expect the campaign is over, for the present. Certainly, nothing can be
done till the railway is completed; then the gunboats can tow the
native craft, abreast of us, as we march along the river bank.

"Shendy has been captured, and we found twelve thousand Jaalin
prisoners there, women and children, and a large quantity of stores.
That is what makes the position of the Dervish fugitives so hopeless.
There is nothing before them but to find their way across the desert to
Omdurman, and I fancy that few of them will get there alive.

"No doubt some will keep along by the Atbara, and others by the Nile.
The latter will have the best chance, for the friendlies at Kassala
will be on the lookout for fugitives. I am sorry for the poor wretches,
though they richly deserve the worst that can befall them. They have
never shown mercy. For twenty years they have murdered, plundered, and
desolated the whole land, and have shown themselves more ferocious and
merciless than wild beasts."

He took out his pocketbook, wrote the order to Colonel Lewis; and then,
tearing the leaf out, handed it to Gregory, who at once made his way,
followed closely by Zaki, to the spot where two Egyptian battalions had
halted. They had no difficulty in finding Colonel Lewis, who was
receiving a report, from the officers of the two battalions, of the
casualties they had sustained. Gregory had met the Colonel several
times, at Berber, and the latter recognized him at once.

"Ah! Major Hilliard," that officer said, as he came up; "I am glad to
see you. I heard that you had been captured by the Dervishes, and
killed; but I suppose, as I see you here, that it was only the usual
canard."

"No, sir. I was captured; but, as you see, not killed, though it has
been a pretty close thing. This is a note, sir, that General Hunter
requested me to give you."

Colonel Lewis read the order.

"The women are down over there, a couple of hundred yards away," he
said. "I will send a sergeant and four men with you. If you will point
out Mahmud's wife, I will see that she is made as comfortable as
possible."

"Thank you, sir! It is to her I owe my life, and I am most anxious to
do all I can to repay the debt."

"You came along through the other brigades. Do you know what their
losses have been?"

"The British losses are not heavy, sir, considering the fire they have
