
"Your hands tremble, mother; are you really well?"

"Oh, yes, my love; yes! You look at me as if you thought there was
something the matter. Have you--Effie, your looks frighten me."

"Don't let them frighten you, dear mother. You know the greatest longing
of my heart is to help and serve you. If there is anything worrying
you, you'll tell me, won't you?"

"I will," said Mrs. Staunton. She paused and looked at her daughter.
"There's nothing _exactly_ worrying me," she said, after a pause, "but
still I feel a little bit anxious."

"You'll tell me, won't you?"

"You won't scold me, Effie?"

"As if I could, mother darling!"

"Well, perhaps I did a rash thing--poor dear George!--You know how
devoted I am to him, Effie?"

"Oh, yes, mother darling, anyone can see that."

"Well, the fact is, I--I yielded to his entreaties. Perhaps I ought not
to tell you, Effie--perhaps it will displease him."

"Yes, do tell me," said Effie. "There ought not to be any secrets in
one's family. I ought to know--I will know. You are worried about
something, and I will know what your burden is. What is it, mother?"

"I'll tell you in a few words. There's nothing in it, after all. Shortly
after you left us, George persuaded me to put my money into the City
Bank in his name. He said it seemed such folly to have two accounts for
such very small sums."

"You did it?" said Effie, her face turning white.

"Yes, yes, I knew you would reproach me. I won't be reproached--I
won't!"

"I will not say a word, dearest, dearest mother. Take my hand--your hand
does shake so. Now tell me all about it."

"Oh, it's nothing, my love, really, only----"

"Yes, mother--only?"

"Only this morning I asked George to fill in a check for me before he
went to town. He did so. It was for five pounds. He seemed vexed at my
requiring so much, but I said I couldn't do with less, for there was the
landlady to pay, and the butcher has been so troublesome with his bills.
I couldn't do with less than five pounds, and George drew a check for me
for that amount. I sent Aggie with it straight to the bank, and----"

Mrs. Staunton's face became very pale, her hand shook more violently
than ever.

"Yes, mother?" said Effie.

"They sent it back. Effie, with 'No _effects_' written across the back.
I am sure there must be a mistake, but they told Aggie that George had
overdrawn his account, and that they couldn't cash this check--there
were no effects, that was it."

"No effects!" said Effie, her face scarlet. "But hadn't you some of your
money still left in the bank?"

"Yes, I had over fifty pounds. I put the money into the bank in George's
name over a week ago. It was to last us for some time. Oh, Effie, don't
look at me with those reproachful eyes! I feel faint."

Effie got up quickly; she poured some sal-volatile into a wineglass,
and, filling it up with water, brought it to her mother to drink.

Mrs. Staunton was soon better. The passing weakness went off quickly.

"What is to be done?" she said, raising her eyes to her daughter. "Oh, I
am so glad you don't scold me, Effie."

"Of course I don't, mother darling. You must have money, you can't get
on without it."

"That's just what I say. I am sure I am as saving as woman could be, but
the expenses are so heavy."

"Yes, of course."

"I'm expecting George in every minute," said Mrs. Staunton. "He has very
likely put the money back into the bank now. He is doing such a splendid
business that perhaps he drew the fifty pounds--meaning to return it at
once. He has such a capital head for making money--really, I never knew
such a boy. I dare say he has put it back _doubled_."

"Oh, mother, don't you know better?--how can he do that? But now let us
talk of something else. Here's Agnes, that's right. Agnes, will you get
some tea for mother? She's quite weak and upset. I'm going out. I must
hurry, for I've to be back at the hospital at five. I'm going out, but
I'll come to see you mother, before I return to the hospital. Get the
tea, Agnes; don't be long about it."

Agnes put a little kettle on the fire.

"Do you know about--about the check?" she asked Effie in a whisper.

"Oh, yes; don't make a fuss over it--it will be all right."

"Mrs. Robinson says she must be paid--she is owed four weeks' rent, and
she won't let it go on any longer."

"I'll see her when I come back," said Effie. "Now, do take care of
mother. I won't be away a minute longer than I can help."

"Won't you have a cup of tea first, Effie?"

"No, no; I've no time."

Effie ran downstairs, and went out into the street. She felt nerved and
braced now. The moment of indecision was past--the moment for definite
action had arrived. There was no question with regard to her duty. It
lay plain and straight before her.

She happened to know that the Harveys were in town. They were staying in
Eaton Place. She took an omnibus, which presently brought her into the
neighborhood of Victoria; a few minutes afterward she rang the bell at
their hall door.

A man-servant, whom she did not know, opened it.

"Is Mrs. Harvey at home?" asked Effie.

"I believe so," he replied, "but I'm not sure if she can see anyone."

"Perhaps she will see me if you give her my name," said Effie in a
gentle voice. "Say Miss Effie Staunton, please, and that I am anxious to
see her on pressing business."

The man withdrew, inviting Effie as he did so into the hall.

"He takes me for a servant," she said to herself. "Well, what matter?
That truly is only a pinprick."

In a minute or two he returned, with a changed expression on his face.

"Follow me upstairs, please, miss," he said. "My mistress will see you."

Effie followed him up some low stairs--her feet sank into the rich
carpets. The contrast between this luxurious house and the severity of
the hospital sickened her.

"I shall choke if I live here," she said to herself. But then she
crushed all thought of self.

The men led her up two or three short flights of stairs. At last he
knocked at a door, before which a rich curtain hung. A voice said "Come
in," and Effie found herself in Mrs. Harvey's presence. She was seated
in a deep armchair; her maid stood before her, holding out different
rich brocades and silks which had just been sent round for her to see.

"That will do, Carey," she said, when she saw Effie. "You can take all
those things away. Tell Madam Miller that I have decided on this blue
silk crepon, and this rose-colored silk. I'll call round to be fitted
to-morrow morning. Now, Miss Staunton, I'm sorry to have kept you
waiting. How do you do? I am so glad to see you."

Mrs. Harvey was not so impulsively glad as she had been the last time
she saw Effie. The doctor's death--the death he had died for her--seemed
removed into the background; her existence was absorbed in pleasure, in
gayety and excitement. She had an affectionate, kindly nature, however,
and one glance into Effie's sad eyes softened her toward the poor girl.

"Well, what can I do for you?" she said. "How are you? Why, you are a
nurse--you are in nurse's dress--how capital! What a splendid idea!"

"Yes, I am a probationer at St. Joseph's," said Effie.

"Oh my dear child, that's splendid for you, of course; but I trust you
have brought no infection in your clothes."

"No," said Effie, with the faintest of smiles. "I have nothing to do
with any of the infectious wards. I am quite safe. I want to speak to
you."

"I shall be very glad to listen to you, my dear. You know, of course,
that the Squire and I take the deepest interest in you and in your
family. By the way, how is your dear mother, and how are all those
pretty girls and boys getting on?"

Effie could not remember that Mrs. Harvey had ever seen her mother--why,
therefore, should she speak of her as "dear"? and as to the boys and
girls, they were not specially remarkable for their good looks, and if
they were, Mrs. Harvey knew nothing about it. She answered these
conventional inquiries in a quiet voice.

"I hope you'll forgive me," she said, at the first possible pause, "but
I am in a very great hurry. I have promised to be back again at St.
Joseph's at five o'clock, and it's nearly four now. May I tell you what
I really came about?"

"Oh, yes, of course, of course!"

"Do you remember, before I came to London, the very kind offer you and
the Squire made me?"

"Of course," said Mrs. Harvey, "if you mean our wish that you should
become governess to little Freda. But Freda goes to a kindergarten now.
Carey takes her around every morning, and Rhoda goes to fetch her at
dinner time. The life seems to suit her very well. Of course we did wish
for you very much, but as you could not come--oh, no doubt you have
chosen wisely."

Mrs. Harvey yawned; she stretched out her hand and rang the bell. The
servant appeared almost immediately.

"Tea for two," she said, "and be quick, Andrews."

"I can't wait for tea," said Effie, rising. "I am very much obliged. I
only came to say that circumstances would make me inclined to accept
your offer now, but as you don't want a governess there's nothing more
to be said."

"Oh, it's so sweetly good of you, Miss Staunton, and had matters been
different we should have been pleased. Well, good-by, if you must go.
Where did you say your mother lived?"

"A long way from here."

"But do give me her address. I should be so pleased to drive round and
see her some day. Perhaps she would go for a drive with me. What a good
idea! Yes, I'll come. Where did you say you lived?"

Effie had not said anything.

Mrs. Harvey held out her limp, long hand. "Good-by, Miss Staunton. You
know I take a great interest in you," she exclaimed.




CHAPTER XX.


Just at this moment the door was opened, and the Squire came in. He was
of different stuff from his wife. When he saw Effie, his face beamed
with pleasure, and he held out a big, hearty hand.

"Miss Staunton!" he exclaimed. "Why, this is a pleasure! Oh, you must
not run away; you must sit down and tell me all about yourself--I've
been longing to hear about you. How is your brother in the City, and
your mother? I do hope she is a little better. And all those other lads
and lasses? Sit down, my clear child, I insist on it--I have lots of
things to say to you."

Mrs. Harvey, who was standing near the mantelpiece, came gently forward
when the Squire began to speak. She looked at Effie with new interest.
Her face was long and pale, she had no color in her lips, her light hair
was very fashionably dressed. She wore a dress of the latest mode, and
her thin fingers were loaded with rings, which flashed and shone
whenever she moved her hand.

Effie hated those flashing rings--she turned her head so that she need
not see them.

Mrs. Harvey began to talk in a high falsetto voice to her husband.

"Do you know, my dear," she exclaimed, "that Miss Staunton has just been
so kind? She came here to offer her services for Freda; but you know
dear Freda is getting on so capitally at the kindergarten, that---- Why,
what in the world is the matter, Walter?"

"Matter!" exclaimed the Squire in his hearty voice. "Why, that we won't
be such fools as to reject Miss Staunton's offer. I was told only a few
minutes ago that that kindergarten is simply full of whooping-cough and
measles--children sickening with them and going home almost every day. I
was going to say that Freda must be moved."

"Oh, I should think so, indeed," said Mrs. Harvey. "Whooping-cough and
measles! how terrible! and I never had whooping-cough--why, I shouldn't
be able to go out for the whole season. I do hope and trust the dear
child hasn't contracted the infection. Dear Miss Staunton, of course
you'll come. It is exactly what we'd like best. How soon can you
come?--to-morrow?--to-night?"

"Neither to-morrow nor to-night," said Effie. "But if you really wish
for me, and if we agree as regards terms, the day after to-morrow."

"What do you mean by saying if we agree as to terms?" asked Mrs. Harvey.

"I want a big salary," said Effie, looking up bravely at the two, who
were watching her with half-amused, half-anxious expression. "I want to
come to you, and to leave the work which I love best, because I hope you
may be induced to give me an exceptional salary. I want the money
because my mother and my--my young brothers and sisters are almost--at
least they will be, if I don't get it, almost starving."

Effie spoke in jerks. She had the greatest difficulty in keeping back
her emotion. It was dreadful to have to plead with these rich
people--these people who knew nothing whatever of her sore need--to whom
money was so plentiful as to have lost its freshness, its desirability,
its charm. It was awful to look into their faces--to see the blank,
non-comprehending stare which came into Mrs. Harvey's pretty blue eyes,
and to notice the puzzled expression on the Squire's face.

"You can't mean that?" he exclaimed. "You can't mean there's any chance
of that?"

"There is a chance of it, but not if I come here. I know how kind you
are, how noble you have been to me. I'll come to Freda. I'll do
everything for her; I'll teach her, and I'll play with her, and I'll
love her, and I'll nurse her if she is ill, but oh, do please be
generous and give me as big a salary as you can."

"What do you expect--what do you think fair?" asked the Squire.

"I thought--I know it seems a great deal, but I thought you might be
willing to give me sixty pounds a year."

"Bless you, my dear child!" exclaimed the Squire; "if you'll accept it,
we'll give you a hundred and fifty."

"No, I couldn't accept that," said Effie. "It is not fair."

"Why not? We couldn't get anyone else to exactly take your place for the
money; and remember we have plenty of money."

"I'll take a hundred a year, because I am in sore distress," said Effie,
after a brief pause; "and--and will you pay me monthly, and may I have
my first month's salary in advance? I wouldn't ask it if they didn't
want it _terribly_ at home. Will you do this?"

"Yes, with pleasure," said the Squire. "I insist on your accepting ten
pounds a month--that will be one hundred and twenty a year. Now, will
you have a check, or shall I give you the money in gold and notes?"

"The gold will be the most acceptable," said Effie. "Oh, I feel so
ashamed!" she added.

"Why should you? You give us an equivalent. Besides, it makes matters
more tolerable. I cannot forget----"

"Oh, don't, Walter--don't allude to that awful time!"--cried Mrs.
Harvey.

The Squire shut up his lips. He took a little bundle of gold out of one
of his pockets and put ten sovereigns into Effie's hand.

"It is a bargain," he said. "I cannot tell you how relieved we are.
You'll be with us the morning after next? Elfreda, my love, we must tell
our little Freda what a pleasure is in store for her."

"Yes, I am more than delighted," exclaimed Mrs. Harvey. "This plan suits
me in every way. You won't fail us, Miss Staunton? for, in case Freda by
any chance has taken that awful whooping-cough, you can keep her in
