lost, stolen, or strayed; and that he would be even with any who
should find them, and bring them to the Hesperides; and he was in
the act of proving, more to his own satisfaction than to that of the
bell-man, that the books in the library were what he wanted, when
Reginald discovered them,--i.e., the golden apples,--peeping from
under his pillow, and shook him violently for his deceit.

"Louis, Louis!--the bell, the bell."

He started up in great alarm, and discovered that he was sitting on
his bed at school, listening to the sonorous clanging of the bell below.

Groans, shouts, and sleepy exclamations reverberated round him. Reginald,
rather more accustomed to good early habits at home than some of his
room-fellows, was busy rousing those who either did not, or pretended
not to hear the summons. Among the latter was our friend Frank Digby,
who stoutly resisted being awakened, and when obliged to yield to the
determined efforts of his cousin, nearly overwhelmed him with a species
of abuse.

"That bell's a complete bugbear," he groaned. "It ought to be indicted
for a nuisance, waking people up o' mornings when they ought to be in
the arms of Morpheus--I've a great mind to lie still. Half an hour's
sleep is worth sixpence."

"It's much better laid out with 'Maister,' Frank," suggested Meredith.

"And then Fudge will be so black about it," said Reginald.
"Come, up with you, Frank."

"As for Fudge," said Frank, "I wouldn't give you twopence for him,
nor his black looks neither. But you may be sure he'll be amiable
enough this morning. He has been remarkably affectionate these few
mornings--hasn't he, Meredith?"

"_To be sure_," replied the young gentleman addressed: "when did you
know a master otherwise the first week? They all know there's danger
of our cutting their acquaintance in a summary manner, and take good
care to be bland enough till we're tamed down."

"For my part," said Frank, "I have been longing for an opportunity of
putting Fudge in a passion. If only he or Danby would box my ears for
something, that I might fling a book at his head, and have a legitimate
excuse for taking myself off--but, alas! they are all so dreadfully
amiable, except old Garthorpe, and he's beneath all consideration."

Frank continued in this strain for some minutes, working himself into
a more rebellious humor, stimulated by those among his companions who
admired this demonstration of spirit. Confidentially I may remark,
that though running away seems to be the desideratum of a discontented
school-boy, it is far more interesting in theory than practice, and I
doubt much whether any malcontent who availed himself of this as his
only refuge from the miserable fate awaiting him in the dungeon to
which he was consigned, ever considered in the end that his condition
had been materially improved. Spangled canopies and soft turf couches
do well to read of, but stiff limbs and anxious hearts are sterner
realities, to say nothing of sundry woes inflicted on the culprit when
discovered. But I am enlarging and must return from my digression.

Dr. Wilkinson was engaged the greater part of the morning in arranging
the different classes and examining his new pupils. Great surprise was
felt among those interested, in the news that Charles Clifton was to
take his place in the second class. Even the doctor paused once or twice
in his examination, and looked earnestly on the great forehead and small
pale face of the child.

"Why, how old are you?" said he, at length.

"Twelve, sir," replied Charles, gravely.

"Very little of your age. Have you ever been at school before?"

Charles replied in the negative, and after another momentary scrutiny,
Dr. Wilkinson asked a few concluding questions, and then unhesitatingly
declared him a member of the second class.

Louis had, this half-year, a far better chance of distinguishing himself
than before, as his brother and Meredith, with one or two others, had
mounted into the first class, and John Salisbury had not returned. He
was, however, not a little surprised when Hamilton informed him that
he would have enough to do to keep pace with his new friend, whom he
had looked upon as quite one of the lower school.




CHAPTER XIV.


The first long dreary week had passed: quicker, however, in its
peaceable monotony than many a gayer time has been known to do,
and the young gentlemen of Ashfield House were beginning to settle
down soberly and rationally to their inevitable fate. Louis' position
was so altered this half-year, that he hardly understood himself the
universal affection and consideration with which he was treated. He
was indubitably a favorite with the doctor, but no one was jealous,
for he bore his honors very meekly, and was always willing to share
his favors with others, neither encroaching on nor abusing the kindness
displayed towards him by his master, who seemed, in common with his
pupils, to be exceedingly desirous of obliterating all remembrance of
the misunderstanding of the last half-year. But the doctor's affection
was much more sparingly exhibited than Hamilton's, who seemed at times
to forget every thing for Louis. He was now made the companion of the
seniors--he had free admission into all their parties. Hamilton seemed
unable to walk into Bristol unless Louis were allowed to accompany him.
Louis' place in the evening was now by Hamilton, who did his utmost
to make him steady, and to prevent him from yielding the first place to
Clifton, who very soon proved himself to be a boy of considerable genius,
united with much steadiness of purpose, and who had, evidently, been
very carefully educated. One evening about this time, when most of the
class-room party were very busy, under the orderly supervision of Messrs.
Hamilton and Trevannion, the door was quietly opened and Ferrers entered
with that doubtful air that expected an unfavorable reception. When I
speak of business and quietude at Ashfield House it must, of course,
be understood as comparative, for the quietest evening in that renowned
academy would have furnished noise enough to have distracted half the
quiet parlors in the kingdom--and on this particular evening there was
quite enough to cover the bashful entrance of the former bully. Hamilton
was writing, and doubly engaged in keeping Louis from listening to an
interesting history, delivered by Salisbury, of a new boy who had
arrived that half-year from a neighboring school. The boy in question
was a cunning dunce, who had already discovered Louis' failing, and
having partaken of the assistance Louis supplied as liberally as
allowed, had come more especially under the ken of the seniors, and
Hamilton had been administering a reproof to Louis for helping Casson
before getting his own lessons ready.

Ferrers had nearly reached the upper end of the table before any one
was aware of his vicinity, when Trevannion, looking up from his writing
to dip his pen anew in the ink, caught sight of him, recognizing him
so suddenly that even his equanimity was almost surprised into a start.
He colored slightly, and coldly acknowledging his presence by a stiff
bow and a muttered "How do you do," returned to his work, not, however,
before his movement had attracted the attention of one or two others.
The intimation of his presence was conveyed almost talismanically
round the room, and a silence ensued while the young gentlemen
looked at one another for an example. These unfriendly symptoms
added considerably to Ferrers' embarrassment. Pale with anxiety,
he affected to notice nothing, and looked for a place at one of the
tables where he might lay the books he had brought in with him.
The silence, however, had made Hamilton now very conscious of what,
till this moment, he had been in blissful ignorance--that his voice
was raised to nearly a shouting pitch to make his admonitions
sufficiently impressive to his protege--and the sonorous tones
of his voice, delivering an emphatic oration on weakness and
perseverance contrasted, were so remarkable that the attention
was a little drawn from Ferrers by this unusual phenomenon.

"What a burst of eloquence!" exclaimed Frank, who, on the first sound
of the kingly voice, had begun to attitudinize; while Trevannion gazed
on his friend with a quiet, gentlemanly air of inquiry, that was not to
be put out of countenance by any circumstance how ludicrous soever,
"His majesty's in an oratorical vein to-night. Such a flow of graceful
language, earnest, mellifluous persuasives dropping like sugar-plums
from his lips!"

"Three cheers for his majesty's speech," cried Salisbury.

These comments were hailed by a hearty laugh, mingled with clapping of
hands, and an effort on the part of a few to raise a cheer. Hamilton
joined in the laugh, though he had been so intent upon his lecture that
at first he hardly comprehended the joke.

"Your majesty's been studying rhetoric since we had the pleasure of
a speech," remarked Reginald, when a little lull had succeeded to the
uproarious mirth. "Mercury himself couldn't have done better."

"Considering that the speeches of Edward the Great usually savor
of Spartan brevity," said Smith, "we couldn't have hoped for such
a masterpiece."

"You don't understand his most gracious majesty," said Frank; "depend
upon it he's a veritable cameleon."

At this juncture, Louis, whose eyes had a sad habit of wandering
when they should be otherwise employed, caught sight of Ferrers,
and, starting up, he welcomed him with the utmost heartiness.

Hamilton looked round and colored furiously, but before Ferrers had
time to make any answers to Louis' rapid questions, he rose, and,
stepping forward, held out his hand--

"How are you, Ferrers?" he said, in a cheerful tone, "I neither saw
nor heard you come in just now. You have not been here long, have you?"

Ferrers grasped Hamilton's hand and looked in his face, astonished and
overcome with gratitude for this unexpected welcome. The silence of the
few minutes before was resumed, and every eye was riveted on Hamilton,
who, perceiving from the tight grasp on his hand and the crimsoned
countenance of Ferrers, his utter inability to speak, and being anxious
to remove the insupportable feeling of awkwardness under which he felt
sure he labored, continued, without waiting for an answer--

"You are very late this half. We have expected you every day."

He then sat down and went on telling Ferrers about the new-comers,
and the present condition of the first class, asking him some questions
about his journey, and all so quickly and cleverly as neither to appear
forced, nor to oblige Ferrers to speak more than he chose. While Hamilton
spoke he only now and then glanced at him from his work, which he had
apparently resumed as soon as he sat down.

"His majesty's taken Fudge's hint," said Frank, in a low,
discontented tone.

"Hamilton can, of course, do as he likes, but I won't," said another,
with a nod of determination. "We're not obliged to follow his lead."

"Trevannion won't, you'll see," muttered Peters.

"Be kind enough to lend me your lexicon, Salisbury," said Trevannion,
who had, since Hamilton's notice of Ferrers, assumed an air of more
than ordinary dignity, and now reached across Ferrers for the book,
as if there were no one there. Ferrers made an effort to assist in
the transition of the thick volume, but all his politeness obtained
was a haughty, cold stare, and a determined rejection of assistance.
Louis was sure that Hamilton observed this action, from the expression
of his face, but he made no remark, and continued to talk to Ferrers
a little longer, when he laughingly pleaded his avocations as an excuse
for being silent; but Louis was now disengaged, and Reginald had happily
followed Hamilton's example, for though at first inclined to be on
Trevannion's side, he could not help pitying his evident distress,
and, touched by the emotion he exhibited, he exerted himself to smooth
all down. Had all been as cold and repulsive as Trevannion and his
advocates, Ferrers would have been dogged and proud, but now the sense
of gratitude and humility was predominant, and at last so overpowered
him, that he was glad to get away in the playground by himself. As he
closed the door, the buz was resumed, and an attack was made on Hamilton
by those who had determinedly held back.

"Your royal clemency is most praiseworthy, most magnanimous Edward,"
said Frank Digby.

"Worthy of you, Hamilton," said Trevannion, sneeringly. "Ferrers is
a fit companion and associate for gentlemen."

"My manners not bearing any comparison with yours," replied Hamilton,
coolly, "I am not so chary of contamination."

"That's a hit at your slip just now, Trevannion," said Smith.
"How could you commit such a what-do-you-call it? gooch--gaucherie."

"You had better take lessons of the old woman over the way,"
said Salisbury; "she only charges twopence _extra for them as
learns manners_."

"A good suggestion," said Trevannion, laughing; "will you pay for me,
Hamilton?"

"Willingly," replied Hamilton, in a low, deep tone, "if, on inquiry,
I find her good manners are the result of good feeling."

"I am excessively indebted to you," replied Trevannion, coloring;
"and feel exceedingly honored by the solicitude of Ferrers' friend."

"Just as you choose to feel it, Trevannion," said Hamilton; "but I had
better speak my mind, gentlemen,--I do not think we have, as a body,
remembered the doctor's injunction."

"How could we?" "Is it likely?" "No, indeed." "I dare say!" "Very fine!"
sounded on all sides.

"Hear me to the end," said Hamilton; "I have not much to say."

"Two speeches in one night!" said Jones. "Never was such condescension."

Hamilton took no notice of the jeering remarks round him, but having
obtained a little silence, continued--

"We have made enough of this business. It is cruel now to carry it on
further. I confess myself to have felt as much repugnance as any one
could feel, to renewing any thing beyond the barest possible intercourse
with Ferrers; but let us consider, first, that it becomes us, while
we are Dr. Wilkinson's pupils, to pay some respect to his wishes,
whether they coincide with our feelings or not; and next, whether it
is charitable to shut a school-fellow out of a chance of reformation.
Let us put ourselves in his place."

"A very desirable position; rather too much for imagination,"
remarked Trevannion.

"It is a miserable position," said Hamilton; "therefore we should do
well to endeavor to help him out of it. I have no doubt if we had been
once in so painful a situation, we should not have considered ourselves
as hopeless or irremediable characters--nor is he; he is quite overcome
to-night because all have not been quite such savages as he expected."

"As he would have been. He wouldn't have been merciful!"
exclaimed Meredith.

"That's nothing to the purpose," said Hamilton. "We have only to act
rightly ourselves. Give him a chance. If he forfeit it by a similar
offence, I will not say another word for him."

There was a dead silence when Hamilton had finished. His appeal had
the more effect, that he was usually too indolent to trouble himself
much about what did not immediately concern him or his, but took all
as he found it.

"In giving what you call a chance, Hamilton," said Trevannion, who
alone, in the indecision evident, remained entirely unmoved; "in giving
what you call a chance, you forget that we implicate ourselves. As
honorable individuals, as gentlemen, we cannot admit to fellowship one
who has so degraded himself. To be 'hail-fellow-well-met' with him,
were to lower ourselves. We do not prevent his improving himself. When
he has done so, let us talk of receiving him among us again. In my
opinion, Dr. Wilkinson's allowing him to return is as much, and a great
deal more than he could expect."

"I shall say nothing more," said Hamilton. "I do not often make
a request."

"I know what Louis would say," said Salisbury, who had been watching
Louis' earnest, gratified gaze on Hamilton for the last few minutes;
"I think we ought to be guided by him in this matter."

"I! oh, I wish just what Hamilton has said--you know I wished it
long ago."

"What Louis says shall be the law," said Jones. "We won't refuse him
any thing."

"Especially in this matter," said Salisbury. "He's a brick, and so is
his majesty, after all. My best endeavors for your side, Louis."

"And mine," said Jones.

"I'll outwardly forgive the culprit, at any rate," said Frank. Several
others expressed their desire to abide by the same resolution; Hamilton
looked his satisfaction, Trevannion sulkily recommenced his work, and
Louis stole out of the room to find Casson, that he might finish telling
him his lesson, according to promise. When Dr. Wilkinson arrived, he
narrowly watched the manners of his pupils towards Ferrers, and was
satisfied with his scrutiny, though he was, of course, unconscious of
the means by which the civility shown had been procured. It is to be
hoped that we have not gone so far in the delineation of Dr. Wilkinson's
school, without discovering that the spirit of honor and confidence was
generally high among the young gentlemen, and, consequently, having
promised to be friendly to Ferrers, each individual, in duty bound, did
his utmost to fulfil that promise, and in a little while the stiffness
attendant on the effort wore off, and Ferrers was, in appearance, in
precisely the same position as before, to the great satisfaction of the
doctor, who was much pleased with his pupils' conduct on the occasion.




CHAPTER XV.


"Where is Louis Mortimer?" asked Hamilton, the next Saturday afternoon,
about a quarter of an hour after dinner. "Does any one know where
Louis Mortimer is?"

"Here I am, Hamilton, _pret a vous servir_, as Monsieur Gregoire would
say!" cried Louis, starting from behind the school-room door.

"Are you engaged this afternoon?"

"Never, when you want me!" exclaimed Louis.

Hamilton looked gratified, but checked the expression as soon as he
was aware of it.

"That is not right, Louis; I never wish, and never ought, to be an
excuse for breaking an engagement."

"But suppose I make your possible requirements a condition of my
engagements," said Louis, archly; "you have no objection to that,
have you?"

"Only I cannot imagine such a case."

"Such is the case, however, this afternoon. I had the vanity to hope you
would let me walk with you, and so only engaged myself conditionally."

"To whom were you engaged in default of my sufferance?"

"I was going to stay with Casson," replied Louis, hesitatingly. "He has
a cold and headache, and he asked me if I would stay with him in the
class-room, where he is obliged to stay while we are out."

"Casson!" said Hamilton, contemptuously; "you were not talking to him
just now?"

"No; I was only listening to Ferrers. He was telling me about a wager
Frank had just laid with Salisbury."

"How is it you prefer Casson to your friend Clifton?"

"Oh, Hamilton, I don't much like Casson; but he asked me, poor fellow.
Charlie's engaged to West--our days are Sunday, Monday, and Thursday."
