    And thee, the spirit of them all!




XXXII. FRANCE: AN ODE.

(1797.)

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.--1772-1834.


I.

    Ye Clouds! that far above me float and pause,
      Whose pathless march no mortal may control!
      Ye Ocean-Waves! that, wheresoe'er ye roll,
    Yield homage only to eternal laws!
    Ye Woods! that listen to the night-birds singing,
      Midway the smooth and perilous slope reclin'd,
    Save when your own imperious branches, swinging,
      Have made a solemn music of the wind!
        Where, like a man belov'd of God,
        Through glooms, which never woodman trod,
      How oft, pursuing fancies holy,
    My moonlight way o'er flowering weeds I wound,
      Inspir'd, beyond the guess of folly,
    By each rude shape and wild unconquerable sound!
    O ye loud Waves! and O ye Forests high!
      And O ye Clouds that far above me soar'd!
    Thou rising Sun! thou blue rejoicing Sky!
    Yea, every thing that is and will be free!
    Bear witness for me, wheresoe'er ye be,
      With what deep worship I have still ador'd
    The spirit of divinest Liberty.


II.

    When France in wrath her giant-limbs uprear'd,
      And with that oath, which smote air, earth, and sea,
      Stamp'd her strong foot and said she would be free,
    Bear witness for me, how I hoped and fear'd!
    With what a joy my lofty gratulation
      Unaw'd I sang, amid a slavish band;
    And when to whelm the disenchanted nation,
      Like fiends embattled by a wizard's wand.
        The Monarchs march'd in evil day,
        And Britain join'd the dire array,
      Though dear her shores and circling ocean,
    Though many friendships, many youthful loves,
      Had swoll'n the patriot emotion,
    And flung a magic light o'er all her hills and groves;
    Yet still my voice, unalter'd, sang defeat
      To all that brav'd the tyrant-quelling lance,
    And shame too long delay'd and vain retreat!
    For ne'er, O Liberty! with partial aim
    I dimm'd thy light or damp'd thy holy flame;
      But bless'd the paeans of deliver'd France,
    And hung my head and wept at Britain's name.


III.

    "And what," I said, "though Blasphemy's loud scream
      With that sweet music of deliverance strove!
      Though all the fierce and drunken passions wove
    A dance more wild than e'er was maniac's dream!
    Ye Storms, that round the dawning east assembled,
      The Sun was rising, though ye hid his light!"
    And when, to soothe my soul, that hoped and trembled,
      The dissonance ceas'd, and all seem'd calm and bright;
        When France her front deep-scarr'd and gory
        Conceal'd with clustering wreaths of glory;
      When, insupportably advancing,
    Her arm made mockery of the warrior's tramp,
      While, timid looks of fury glancing,
    Domestic treason, crush'd beneath her fatal stamp,
    Writh'd like a wounded dragon in his gore:
      Then I reproach'd my fears that would not flee;
    "And soon," I said, "shall Wisdom teach her lore
    In the low huts of them that toil and groan!
    And, conquering by her happiness alone,
      Shall France compel the nations to be free,
    Till Love and Joy look round, and call the earth their own."


IV.

    Forgive me, Freedom! O forgive those dreams!
      I hear thy voice, I hear thy loud lament,
      From bleak Helvetia's icy cavern sent,--
    I hear thy groans upon her blood-stain'd streams!
    Heroes, that for your peaceful country perish'd,
      And ye that, fleeing, spot your mountain-snows
    With bleeding wounds, forgive me, that I cherish'd
      One thought that ever bless'd your cruel foes!
        To scatter rage, and traitorous guilt,
        Where Peace her jealous home had built;
      A patriot-race to disinherit
    Of all that made their stormy wilds so dear,
      And with inexpiable spirit
    To taint the bloodless freedom of the mountaineer,--
    O France, that mockest Heaven, adulterous, blind,
      And patriot only in pernicious toils,
    Are these thy boasts, champion of human kind?
    To mix with kings in the low lust of sway,
    Yell in the hunt, and share the murderous prey;
      To insult the shrine of Liberty with spoils
    From freemen torn; to tempt and to betray?


V.

    The Sensual and the Dark rebel in vain,
      Slaves by their own compulsion! In mad game
      They burst their manacles and wear the name
    Of Freedom, graven on a heavier chain!
    O Liberty! with profitless endeavor
      Have I pursued thee, many a weary hour;
    But thou nor swell'st the victor's strain, nor ever
      Didst breathe thy soul in forms of human power.
        Alike from all, howe'er they praise thee
        (Nor prayer, nor boastful name delays thee),
      Alike from Priestcraft's harpy minions,
    And factious Blasphemy's obscener slaves,
      Thou speedest on thy subtle pinions,
    The guide of homeless winds, and playmate of the waves!
    And there I felt thee!--on that sea-cliff's verge,
      Whose pines, scarce travell'd by the breeze above,
    Had made one murmur with the distant surge!
    Yes, while I stood and gaz'd, my temples bare,
    And shot my being through earth, sea, and air,
      Possessing all things with intensest love,
    O Liberty! my spirit felt thee there.




XXXIII. COMPLAINT AND REPROOF.

COLERIDGE.


I.

    How seldom, friend! a good great man inherits
    Honor or wealth, with all his worth and pains!
    It sounds like stories from the land of spirits,
    If any man obtain that which he merits,
    Or any merit that which he obtains.


II.

    For shame, dear friend! renounce this canting strain!
    What wouldst thou have a good great man obtain?
    Place--titles--salary--a gilded chain--
    Or throne of corses which his sword hath slain?--
    Greatness and goodness are not means but ends!
    Hath he not always treasures, always friends,
    The good great man?--three treasures,--love, and light,
    And calm thoughts, regular as infant's breath;--
    And three firm friends, more sure than day and night,--
    Himself, his Maker, and the angel Death.




XXXIV. THE WELL OF ST. KEYNE.

ROBERT SOUTHEY.--1774-1843.


    A well there is in the west country,
      And a clearer one never was seen;
    There is not a wife in the west country
      But has heard of the Well of St. Keyne.

    An oak and an elm-tree stand beside,
      And behind doth an ash-tree grow,
    And a willow from the bank above
      Droops to the water below.

    A traveller came to the Well of St. Keyne;
      Joyfully he drew nigh;
    For from cock-crow he had been travelling,
      And there was not a cloud in the sky.

    He drank of the water so cool and clear,
      For thirsty and hot was he;
    And he sat down upon the bank
      Under the willow-tree.

    There came a man from the house hard by,
      At the well to fill his pail;
    On the well-side he rested it,
      And he bade the stranger hail.

    "Now, art thou a bachelor, stranger?" quoth he;
      "For, an if thou hast a wife,
    The happiest draught thou hast drank this day
      That ever thou didst in thy life.

    "Or has thy good woman, if one thou hast,
      Ever here in Cornwall been?
    For, an if she have, I'll venture my life
      She has drank of the Well of St. Keyne."

    "I have left a good woman who never was here,"
      The stranger he made reply;
    "But that my draught should be the better for that,
      I pray you answer me why."

    "St. Keyne," quoth the Cornish-man, "many a time
      Drank of this crystal well;
    And, before the angel summon'd her,
      She laid on the water a spell,--

    "If the husband of this gifted well
      Shall drink before his wife,
    A happy man thenceforth is he,
      For he shall be master for life;

    "But if the wife should drink of it first,
      God help the husband then!"
    The stranger stoop'd to the Well of St. Keyne,
      And drank of the water again.

    "You drank of the well, I warrant, betimes?"
      He to the Cornish-man said;
    But the Cornish-man smiled as the stranger spake,
      And sheepishly shook his head:--

    "I hasten'd, as soon as the wedding was done,
      And left my wife in the porch;
    But i' faith she had been wiser than me,
      For she took a bottle to church."




XXXV. THE ISLES OF GREECE.

LORD BYRON.--1788-1824.


    The isles of Greece! the isles of Greece!
      Where burning Sappho lov'd and sung,
    Where grew the arts of war and peace,
      Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!
    Eternal summer gilds them yet,
    But all, except their sun, is set.

    The Scian and the Teian muse,
      The hero's harp, the lover's lute,
    Have found the fame your shores refuse:
      Their place of birth alone is mute
    To sounds which echo further west
    Than your sires' "Islands of the Blest."

    The mountains look on Marathon--
      And Marathon looks on the sea;
    And musing there an hour alone,
      I dream'd that Greece might still be free;
    For standing on the Persians' grave,
    I could not deem myself a slave.

    A king sate on the rocky brow
      Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis;
    And ships, by thousands, lay below,
      And men in nations;--all were his!
    He counted them at break of day--
    And when the sun set, where were they?

    And where are they? and where art thou,
      My country? On thy voiceless shore
    The heroic lay is tuneless now--
      The heroic bosom beats no more!
    And must thy lyre, so long divine,
    Degenerate into hands like mine?

    'Tis something, in the dearth of fame,
      Though link'd among a fetter'd race,
    To feel at least a patriot's shame,
      Even as I sing, suffuse my face;
    For what is left the poet here?
    For Greeks a blush--for Greece a tear.

    Must _we_ but weep o'er days more blest?
      Must _we_ but blush?--Our fathers bled.
    Earth! render back from out thy breast
      A remnant of our Spartan dead!
    Of the three hundred grant but three,
    To make a new Thermopylae!

    What, silent still? and silent all?
      Ah! no;--the voices of the dead
    Sound like a distant torrent's fall,
      And answer, "Let one living head,
    But one, arise,--we come, we come!"
    'Tis but the living who are dumb.

    In vain--in vain: strike other chords;
      Fill high the cup with Samian wine!
    Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,
      And shed the blood of Scio's vine!
    Hark! rising to the ignoble call--
    How answers each bold Bacchanal!

    You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet;
      Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?
    Of two such lessons, why forget
      The nobler and the manlier one?
    You have the letters Cadmus gave--
    Think ye he meant them for a slave?

    Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
      We will not think of themes like these!
    It made Anacreon's song divine:
      He served--but served Polycrates--
    A tyrant; but our masters then
    Were still, at least, our countrymen.

    The tyrant of the Chersonese
      Was freedom's best and bravest friend;
    _That_ tyrant was Miltiades!
      Oh! that the present hour would lend
    Another despot of the kind!
    Such chains as his were sure to bind.

    Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
      On Suli's rock, and Parga's shore,
    Exists the remnant of a line
      Such as the Doric mothers bore;
    And there, perhaps, some seed is sown,
    The Heracleidan blood might own.

    Trust not for freedom to the Franks--
      They have a king who buys and sells:
    In native swords, and native ranks,
      The only hope of courage dwells;
    But Turkish force, and Latin fraud,
    Would break your shield, however broad.

    Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
      Our virgins dance beneath the shade--
    I see their glorious black eyes shine;
      But gazing on each glowing maid,
    My own the burning tear-drop laves,
    To think such breasts must suckle slaves.

    Place me on Sunium's marbled steep,
      Where nothing, save the waves and I,
    May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;
      There, swan-like, let me sing and die:
    A land of slaves shall ne'er be mine--
    Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!




XXXVI. GO WHERE GLORY WAITS THEE.

THOMAS MOORE.--1779-1852.


    Go where glory waits thee;
    But, while fame elates thee,
        O, still remember me!
    When the praise thou meetest
    To thine ear is sweetest,
        O, then remember me!
    Other arms may press thee,
    Dearer friends caress thee,
    All the joys that bless thee
        Sweeter far may be;
    But when friends are nearest,
    And when joys are dearest,
        O, then remember me!

    When, at eve, thou rovest
    By the star thou lovest,
        O, then remember me!
    Think, when home returning,
    Bright we've seen it burning,
        O, thus remember me!
    Oft as summer closes,
    When thine eye reposes
    On its lingering roses,
        Once so lov'd by thee,
    Think of her who wove them,
    Her who made thee love them,
        O, then remember me!

    When, around thee dying,
    Autumn leaves are lying,
        O, then remember me!
    And, at night, when gazing
    On the gay hearth blazing,
        O, still remember me!
    Then, should music, stealing
    All the soul of feeling,
    To thy heart appealing,
        Draw one tear from thee;
    Then let memory bring thee
    Strains I used to sing thee,--
        O, then remember me!




XXXVII. DEAR HARP OF MY COUNTRY.

MOORE.


    Dear Harp of my Country! in darkness I found thee,
      The cold chain of silence had hung o'er thee long,
    When proudly, my own Island Harp, I unbound thee,
      And gave all thy chords to light, freedom, and song!

    The warm lay of love and the light note of gladness
      Have waken'd thy fondest, thy liveliest thrill;
    But, so oft hast thou echo'd the deep sigh of sadness,
      That ev'n in thy mirth it will steal from thee still.

    Dear Harp of my Country! farewell to thy numbers,
      This sweet wreath of song is the last we shall twine!
    Go, sleep with the sunshine of fame on thy slumbers,
      Till touch'd by some hand less unworthy than mine;

    If the pulse of the patriot, soldier, or lover,
      Have throbb'd at our lay, 'tis thy glory alone;
    I was _but_ as the wind, passing heedlessly over,
      And all the wild sweetness I waked was thy own.




XXXVIII. COME, YE DISCONSOLATE.

MOORE.


    Come, ye disconsolate, where'er you languish,
      Come, at God's altar fervently kneel;
    Here bring your wounded hearts, here tell your anguish--
      Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot heal.

    Joy of the desolate, Light of the straying,
      Hope, when all others die, fadeless and pure,
    Here speaks the Comforter, in God's name saying,--
      "Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot cure."

    Go, ask the infidel, what boon he brings us,
      What charm for aching hearts _he_ can reveal,
    Sweet as that heavenly promise Hope sings us,
      "Earth has no sorrow that God cannot heal."




XXXIX. ON A LOCK OF MILTON'S HAIR.

LEIGH HUNT.--1784-1859.


    It lies before me there, and my own breath
    Stirs its thin outer threads, as though beside
    The living head I stood in honor'd pride,
    Talking of lovely things that conquer death.
    Perhaps he press'd it once, or underneath
    Ran his fine fingers, when he leant, blank-ey'd,
    And saw, in fancy, Adam and his bride
    With their rich locks, or his own Delphic wreath.
    There seems a love in hair, though it be dead.
    It is the gentlest, yet the strongest thread
    Of our frail plant,--a blossom from the tree
    Surviving the proud trunk;--as though it said
    Patience and gentleness is power; in me
    Behold affectionate eternity.




XL. THE GLOVE AND THE LIONS.

LEIGH HUNT.


    King Francis was a hearty king, and lov'd a royal sport,
    And one day, as his lions strove, sat looking on the court:
    The nobles fill'd the benches round, the ladies by their side,
    And 'mongst them Count de Lorge, with one he hoped to make
              his bride;
    And truly 'twas a gallant thing to see that crowning show,
    Valor and love, and a king above, and the royal beasts below.

    Ramp'd and roar'd the lions, with horrid laughing jaws;
    They bit, they glared, gave blows like beams, a wind went with
              their paws;
    With wallowing might and stifled roar they roll'd one on another,
    Till all the pit, with sand and mane, was in a thund'rous smother;
    The bloody foam above the bars came whizzing through the air;
    Said Francis then, "Good gentlemen, we're better here than there!"

    De Lorge's love o'erheard the King, a beauteous, lively dame,
    With smiling lips, and sharp bright eyes, which always seem'd
              the same:
    She thought, "The Count, my lover, is as brave as brave can be;
    He surely would do desperate things to show his love of me!
    King, ladies, lovers, all look on; the chance is wondrous fine;
    I'll drop my glove to prove his love; great glory will be mine!"

    She dropp'd her glove to prove his love: then look'd on him
              and smiled;
    He bow'd, and in a moment leap'd among the lions wild:
    The leap was quick; return was quick; he soon regain'd his place;
    Then threw the glove, but not with love, right in the lady's face!
    "In truth!" cried Francis, "rightly done!" and he rose from where
              he sat:
    "No love," quoth he, "but vanity, sets love a task like that!"

       *       *       *       *       *


    _Rough wind, that moanest loud
      Grief too sad for song;
    Wild wind, when sullen cloud
      Knells all the night long;
    Sad storm, whose tears are vain,
    Bare woods, whose branches strain,
    Deep caves and dreary main,
      Wail, for the world's wrong._

         _A Dirge_.--SHELLEY.




XLI. THE CLOUD.

PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY.--1792-1822.


I.

    I bring fresh showers for the thirsting flowers
      From the seas and the streams;
    I bear light shade for the leaves when laid
      In their noon-day dreams.
    From my wings are shaken the dews that waken
      The sweet buds every one,
