"Now, follow me," said Nancy, in a whisper.

He climbed a narrow, steep staircase, and then a ladder, and unfastening
the scuttle, he laid it back. The moon shone softly down, bathing the
city in its beautiful light. He got out lightly on the roof.

"Good-bye!" he said, "and thank you, Nancy."

"Good luck!" said Nancy.

He lowered the scuttle, and sat astride the roof, considering what to do
next.




CHAPTER XXIX.

JASPER IN A NEW CHARACTER.


It was a relief to be out of his prison, but it must be admitted that
Jasper's situation was not particularly desirable or agreeable. It was
midnight, and he was seated astride the roof of the house which had
served as his prison. There seemed to be no chance to reach the street,
except to slide down the roof, and that would be certain death.

Jasper looked about him in great perplexity.

As his deliverer had told him, the next house was a story higher than
the one on whose roof he was seated, and, still more important, there
was a side-window looking out in that direction. When Jasper saw this,
hope sprang up in his heart.

"If that window is not fastened I can get in," he thought.

He edged his way along to the window, and found that to reach it he
would have to slide down a little way and catch hold of the blind to
prevent sliding too far.

"There's some risk about it," thought Jasper. "Shall I try it?"

I don't know whether Jasper was justified in taking the risk he did, for
there was great danger of sliding over into the street. I don't think I
should have ventured to do it; but our hero was fearless and courageous,
and he resolved that, as this was the only method of escape, he would
avail himself of it. As a precaution against slipping, however, he took
off his shoes, and catching the strings in his teeth commenced the
perilous descent. He succeeded in grasping the blind and staying his
progress.

"Now, if the window should be fastened, what should I do?" he thought.

But it was not. He succeeded in raising it, and with a feeling of
intense relief made his way into the chamber.

Then for the first time there flashed upon him the thought that he had
placed himself in a very suspicious predicament. He had entered a house
at midnight through the window. Why might he not be taken for a burglar?
This was the way a burglar was likely to enter, and if he should be
caught here his explanation would be considered very unsatisfactory.

Jasper, brave as he was, was startled by this thought, while
simultaneously the difficulty of escape was forced upon him. He looked
about him in mental disturbance.

It was a small attic chamber. There was a bed in the room, a wash-stand,
a couple of chairs, and a clothes-press. This, being open, revealed a
few clothes belonging, apparently, to a man.

"Why isn't he here?" thought Jasper, "and what shall I do if he comes?"

Though his story was true, he nevertheless felt that it was improbable,
and before he could tell it he thought it likely that an alarm would be
given, resulting in his being consigned to the care of the police.

An idea came to him.

He opened the bed, drew out one of the sheets and arrayed himself in it,
after carefully folding back the quilt.

"Now," he said to himself, "if it is necessary, I will see what sort of
a ghost I can make."

Hardly had he done this than he heard steps ascending the stairs. Jasper
had little doubt that it was the occupant of the chamber which he had so
unceremoniously entered.

"I'll get into the wardrobe if I can," he thought.

He managed to squeeze himself into the wardrobe, and waited with anxiety
for the arrival of the new-comer.

Through a crevice he saw the entrance of a stout, good-natured-looking
young man, whistling a popular song. He was probably a clerk or young
mechanic, who, after a hard day's work, had been to some cheap place of
amusement. Wholly unconscious of Jasper's presence, the young man
undressed himself, still continuing to whistle, and got into bed. It was
so light outside that he had not lighted the gas.

"I wonder how long it'll take for him to get to sleep?" thought Jasper.
"I'm getting tired of being cooped up here."

Unfortunately for him the young man seemed to be in no hurry. He
whistled to himself, and occasionally sung in a low tone. At length
Jasper decided to make a desperate move. Observing that the young man
was lying with his face turned from the wardrobe, he seized his
opportunity, stepped softly out, and gained the middle of the floor
before he was seen.

The effect upon the young man was startling. The whistle died away, and
with blanched cheeks and staring eyes he sat bolt upright in bed.

"Oh, Lord!" he exclaimed, tremulously. "What are you?"

Not a word escaped from the white figure, but it solemnly waved its
hand.

"Are you a ghost?" asked the young man.

Jasper made a guttural noise and waved his arm again.

"Oh, Lord preserve me!" ejaculated the young man, shaking with terror.
"Go away, do, good ghost! I haven't done anything!"

As he spoke he covered up his head with the bedclothes, and Jasper could
see by the convulsive movements that he was in a state of the greatest
agitation. Our hero felt inclined to laugh, but forebore. He considered
whether it would be safe, disguised as he was, to make his way down
stairs and out at the front door. But another course suddenly suggested
itself. The young man looked good-natured. Why shouldn't he reveal
himself to him, and throw himself upon him for protection? Besides, he
was sorry to frighten him so much.

Acting upon his new resolution, he threw off the sheet and said in his
natural voice:

"Don't be frightened. I am not a ghost."

The young man in bed took courage to uncover his head.

"Ain't you a spirit?" he said, doubtfully.

"No more than you," said Jasper, laughing.

"What made you frighten me so? Who are you?"

"I am a friend of yours."

"I don't think I ever saw you before. How did you get in?"

"Through the window."

"You ain't a burglar, are you?" asked the young man, with fresh
apprehension.

"Of course not," said Jasper, laughing. "Do I look like a burglar?"

"No; but I don't see what made you come in."

"The fact is, I want you to help me," said Jasper. "Just light the gas,
and I'll tell you all about it."

He spoke so frankly and straightforwardly that the young man was
reassured. He got out of bed and lighted the gas.

"There! do I look like a burglar?" asked Jasper.

"No, you don't; but I don't see how you got in."

"Then I'll tell you. I've just escaped from the next house."

"Escaped?"

"Yes. I was locked up in a dark room for four days, and the only way I
could get out was through the roof. Of course I couldn't slide off into
the street and break my neck, so I got in here through the window."

"You don't say!" ejaculated the young man. "What did they shut you up
for? Was it your father?"

"No. It's a long story. I knew something they were afraid I would tell."

"What are you going to do?"

"I am going to ask you to let me out into the street."

"What! so late as this? You would have to stay out all night."

"That would be better than to be locked up as I have been for the last
four days."

"Suppose you wait till morning. This bed is big enough for both of us."

"Thank you. I should like that, and shall be much obliged to you."

"You are sure you are not a burglar?" said the young man, with a brief
return of his former suspicion.

"Neither burglar nor ghost," said Jasper.

"What made you put on the sheet?"

"I was afraid you would take me for a burglar, so I meant to frighten
you and escape, concluding that you would be afraid to pursue me."

"That's so. I really thought you were a spirit."

"If you think so now, just feel my muscle," said Jasper, smiling.

"I don't think so now."

"If I am to sleep with you, here is your sheet. We can make better use
of it than in masquerading as ghosts."

Jasper undressed himself and got into bed. He learned that his
companion's name was Adam Diedrich, and that he kept a small cigar store
near-by.




CHAPTER XXX.

JASPER GETS A PLACE.


Jasper took breakfast the next morning with the friendly young German,
whose acquaintance he had so singularly made. Not a word was said as to
the manner in which he had entered the house. He was introduced by Adam
as "my friend, Mr. Kent."

After breakfast Jasper went around with his new friend to the place of
business of the latter. He decided not to call upon Mr. Fitch till about
ten o'clock.

While on his way to the merchant's counting-room he met the girl, Nancy,
with a tin pail in her hand. The girl's face lighted up when she saw
him.

"So you got off the roof," she said. "I was so afraid you would fall."

"Thank you, Nancy," said Jasper. "Thanks to you I am out of prison."

"But how did you get off the roof?"

Jasper gave her an account of his midnight adventures.

"And now tell me," he said, "how does your uncle take my flight?"

"He's awful mad about it," said the girl, shaking her head.

"What does he think? Does he suspect you?" asked Jasper, eagerly.

"He did at first, but he doesn't now. He's puzzled to know how you got
away. And Jack, he's mad, too."

"Jack, does he know it?"

"Yes; he came around to the house about eight o'clock. He was looking
seedy, as if he'd been up all night. As near as I can find out, he
failed in some job last night, and that made him cross."

"Very likely."

"'Have you carried up that boy's breakfast?' I heard him say.

"'No,' said my uncle.

"'Then give it to me, and I'll take it up; I want to talk to him.'

"So Uncle Nathan made me get the breakfast ready. I gave it to him, and
he went up. A minute after he roared down stairs:

"'Where's the boy? What have you done with him?'

"Uncle Nathan stared, and called out:

"'Where's your eyes, Jack? Can't you see straight this morning?'

"Jack answered, as mad as could be:

"'Come up here, you old fool, and see if your eyes are any better than
mine!'

"Uncle went up the stairs, two at a time, and looked in the chamber,
too.

"'There, what do you say to that?' I heard Jack say.

"'I'm dumfounded!' said Uncle Nathan; and then he called me."

"Were you frightened?" asked Jasper.

"A little," said the girl. "I was afraid I'd look guilty.

"'Do you know anything about this?' asked my uncle, sternly.

"'Good gracious! You don't mean to say he's gone?' I said, looking as
much surprised as possible. 'How did he get out?'

"'That's what I want to know,' said Jack, and he looked suspiciously at
Uncle Nathan and me.

"'I'm as innocent as a new-born babe,' said Uncle Nathan.

"'Somebody must have let him out,' said Jack.

"'I guess he squeezed through the opening,' said I.

"'Maybe he did,' said Uncle Nathan.

"'Suppose he did, you'd see him or hear him. He couldn't get out.'

"'He might have got out through the door in the night,' said Uncle
Nathan.

"'Did you find the door unlocked?' asked Jack.

"'Nancy was up first. How was it, Nancy?' asked my uncle.

"'No; it was all right,' said I.

"That puzzled them both. Then they thought of the roof, and went up. I
was afraid they would find you there, but they didn't. They seemed to
think you couldn't get away so, and they're dreadfully puzzled to know
how you did escape. I was afraid you'd fallen off, so I went outside to
see if I could find any blood on the sidewalk, but I couldn't, and I
hoped you'd got into the next house."

"Your uncle didn't think of that, did he?"

"No, nor Jack, either."

"Well, I've been lucky. I only hope they won't suspect you."

"They will if they should see me talking to you in the street."

"Then we'd better separate. Good-morning, Nancy. I won't forget the
service you've done me."

"Good-morning, Jasper. I'm so glad you got away."

"I wish you were away, too, Nancy. It's not a good place for you."

"I don't think I shall stay long," said the girl. "I didn't know uncle
kept such company or I wouldn't have come to his house. Some day I shall
leave him, and then I shall go out to service."

"That would be better for you. I advise you to do it soon."

The two parted company, and Jasper proceeded at once to Mr. Fitch's
office.

"I wonder what he'll think of me?" Jasper said to himself. "I promised
to come back after carrying the money, and now it is four days late."

"Is Mr. Fitch in the counting-room?" asked our hero of the clerk.

"Yes, but he's busy."

"I will wait, then."

"Can't I attend to your business?"

"I think not."

"Your business must be very important," said the clerk, with a sneer.

"I don't know about that," said Jasper, composedly, "but I think if you
will tell Mr. Fitch that Jasper Kent is here he will receive me."

"Is your name of such weight?" asked the clerk, with another sneer.

"Suppose you put it to the test," said Jasper, smiling.

The clerk had not seen Jasper when he called before and didn't recognize
him as the restorer of little Harry; otherwise, he would have treated
our hero with more attention.

Influenced by curiosity he went into the counting-room and announced
Jasper's name.

"Bring him in," said the merchant.

Jasper entered, but the manner of Mr. Fitch differed greatly from what
it had been when they parted four days before. Then it was cordial and
friendly, now it was cold and suspicious.

"Good-morning, Mr. Fitch," said Jasper.

"Good-morning," responded the merchant, coldly. "You have been a long
time returning from your errand!"

"That's true, sir; but I would have come sooner if I could."

Mr. Fitch looked up in surprise.

"Do you mean to say that you couldn't come?" demanded he.

"Yes, sir."

"What prevented you?"

"I was in close confinement."

"What! were you arrested?" and again the merchant's face was overspread
by doubt and suspicion.

"No, sir; I hope I shall never fall into the hands of the police."

"How then could you be in confinement? This is a riddle."

"The house to which I was requested to bring the money was a haunt of
desperate men--burglars, I found out--and they were afraid I would
betray their rendezvous. They mixed me some lemonade, which I now think
must have been drugged, for I went to sleep in the middle of the day,
soon after drinking it. When I awoke up I found myself in a dark room,
in the centre of the house."

"Is this true?" asked the merchant, amazed. "Can such things take place
within earshot of the police?"

"Yes, sir; there was no chance of my making myself heard; if there had
been I would have called for help."

"How did you get out, and when?"

"Last night, at midnight."

"How?"

"I will tell you, sir. That, I think, is the most interesting part of
it."

"Proceed."

When Mr. Fitch had heard Jasper's explanation he no longer doubted him.
His friendly, cordial manner returned, and he congratulated our hero on
his prompt rejection of Jack's offers, though that rejection exposed him
to continued imprisonment.

"Now," he asked, "what are your plans?"
