of his head, nor the slovenly Latin prose of the old Templeton motto-
writer.

"Qui in se dominatur."  What Latin!  Dick pulled down Cresswell's
dictionary and looked up "se" and "dominatur," and wished he had the
fellow there to tell him he ought to be ashamed of himself.  Why, it
might mean "who is ruled by his inside!"  Perhaps it did mean that.

But no, Dick couldn't get out of the hobble he was in.  He tried every
way, but the right way.  He denounced the ghost, he denounced Heathcote,
he denounced the Latin grammar, but they always sent him back to where
he started; until, finally, in sheer desperation, he had to denounce
himself.

He was just beginning this congenial occupation, in as comfortable an
attitude as he could, in Cresswell's easy-chair, when the study door
opened, and Braider entered.

"Hallo!  You're here, are you?" said that youth.  "Why ever didn't you
come before?  I told you to be in the Quad, and I'd call for you; didn't
I?  You've got in a nice mess!"

Here was another candid friend going to tell him he'd got into a mess!

"What mess?  Who with?"

"Why, with the Club.  They elected you by a close shave, and expected
you'd come in.  I yelled all over the place for you, and couldn't find
you.  So they thought you'd skulked, and were nearly going to take
Culver after all, when I promised to find you, and bring you.  They're
waiting for you now."

"Awfully sorry, Braider," said Dick, in an embarrassed way.  "I can't
come."

"Can't come, you ass!  What do you mean?"

This was just what Dick wanted.  As long as Braider was civil, Dick had
to be rational, but as soon as Braider began to threaten, Dick could let
out a bit, and relieve his feelings.

"Look here! who are you calling an ass?" said he, starting up.

Fortunately for the peace, Cresswell at that moment entered the study.

"Hallo!" said he, looking round, "make yourselves at home in my study,
youngsters.  Can't you ask a few friends in as well?  What's the row?"

"Braider's the row," said Dick; "I want him to cut, and he won't.  He
wants me to--"

"All right," said Braider, in sudden concern, lest the secret of the
"Sociables" was to be divulged, "I'll cut.  And don't you forget, young
Richardson, what you've promised."

"Of course I shan't," said Dick.

The select "Sociables" sat in congress to a late hour that night.  What
passed, no one outside that worthy body exactly knew.  But Braider, on
the whole, had a busy time of it.

He did not visit Dick again, but he interviewed both Culver and
Heathcote, and was extremely confidential with each.  And both Culver
and Heathcote, after preparation, lounged outside the door, as Dick had
lounged two hours before.  And the two loungers, neither of them
fancying the intrusion of the other, came to words, and from words
proceeded to personalities, and from personalities to blows.

And as, in the course of the combat, Heathcote made a mighty onslaught
and caught his enemy round the body and wrestled a fall with him on the
threshold of the "Sociable" door, it so happened that the door, not
being securely latched, gave way beneath the weight of the two
combatants, and swinging suddenly open, precipitated them both on to the
floor of the apartment, just as the Club was proceeding to record its
votes.

Be it said to their credit, the select "Sociables" had a soul above mere
routine, and seeing the contest was even, and that blood was up on both
sides, they adjourned the business and hospitably invited the two
candidates to fight it out there and then.

Which the two candidates did, with the result that, on the whole,
Heathcote got rather less of the worst of it than Culver.  Then, having
politely ejected them both, the Club returned to business, and elected
George Heathcote as a fit and proper person to fill the vacancy caused
by the unjust expulsion of the late Alan Forbes.

Heathcote was thereupon brought in and informed of the honour bestowed
upon him; and after being sworn to secrecy, and promising to obey the
Club in all things, was called upon for a speech.

Heathcote's speech was short and memorable:--

"All serene.  Anything you like.  I don't care a hang."

Every sentence of this brilliant oration was cheered to the echo, and
Heathcote was installed into his new dignity with loud enthusiasm.

He had not a ghost of an idea who the "Sociables" were, what they did,
or what they wanted; but he had a rough idea they were a select assembly
not favoured by the monitors or the masters, in which a fellow was
popular in proportion to his record of "rows."

And Heathcote, whose one ambition it was at present, under Pledge's
influence, not to figure as a prig or a hypocrite, cast his lot in with
them, and chanced the rest.

It did occur to him to enquire if Dick was a member.

"Yes, he's a member, rather," said Spokes, the president.  "He was
elected this evening, wasn't he, you fellows?"

"Rather," echoed the high-souled club, winking at one another.
Whereupon Heathcote asked no more questions, and proceeded to enjoy
himself.

As the Club was breaking up, Twiss, one of its leading spirits, came up
to the new member and said--

"Look here, youngster, don't you forget you're on your honour not to say
a word about the Club outside to anybody.  Not to Pledge, or your chum,
or anybody."

"But Dick's a member too," said Heathcote.

"That does not matter.  You mayn't even speak about it to me, or pretend
you belong to my set.  Do you twig?"

"All right," said Heathcote, "it's a good job you told me, though, for I
was going to tell Dick about my election."

"Well, you know now.  You're on your honour, so are we all."

Noble society!  Organised dishonour held together in bonds of honour!
If boys were only to cast round what is right the same shield of honour
which they so often cast round what is wrong, what a world this would
be!

When Heathcote and Dick met that evening in the dormitory, they had
something more important to talk about or to be silent about than the
select "Sociables."

"Look here, old man," said Dick, thrusting a piece of newspaper into his
friend's hand.  "They wrapped up the notepaper I got in town to-day in
this.  It's a bit of last week's _Templeton Observer_."

Heathcote looked at the paragraph his friend pointed to, and read:--

  *The mysterious disappearance of a boat*.--Up to the present no news
  has been heard of the _Martha_ of Templeton, which is supposed to have
  been stolen from its moorings on the night of the 24th ult.  The
  police, however, profess to have a clue to the perpetrators of the
  robbery.  It is stated that late on the evening in question a lad,
  without shoes or stockings, was seen on the strand in the
  neighbourhood of the boat, and as the lad has been lost sight of
  since, it is supposed he may be concerned.  At present the police are
  unable to give a description of the suspected lad, but vigilant
  enquiries are being prosecuted, and it is hoped that before long the
  mystery may be solved and the culprit brought to justice.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

IN WHICH OUR HEROES DO NOT DISTINGUISH THEMSELVES.

One result of the alarming paragraph in the _Templeton Observer_ was,
that Dick and Heathcote for the remainder of the term became models of
virtue as far as going out of school bounds was concerned.

Other boys might stray down the High Street and look at the shops, but
they didn't.  Others might go down to the beach and become familiar with
the boatmen, but our heroes were far too respectable.  Others might
"mitch" off for a private cruise round Sprit Rock in quest of whiting,
or other treasures of the deep; but Dick and Georgie would not sully
their fair fame with any such breach of Templeton rules.

They kept up early morning "Tub," but that was the limit of their
wanderings from the fold, and it was often amusing to mark the diligence
with which they always took to drying their heads with the towels on the
way up, if ever a boatman happened to cross their path.

Heathcote on more than one occasion was compelled, politely but firmly,
to decline Pledge's commissions into the town, although it sometimes
cost him words, and, worse still, sneers from his patron.

Once, however, he had to yield, and a terrible afternoon he spent in
consequence.

"Youngster," said the 'Spider,' "I want you to go to Webster's in High
Street and get a book for me."

"Afraid I can't, Pledge," said Heathcote.  "I must swot this afternoon."

"What have you got to do?"

"There's thirty lines of Cicero, and I haven't looked at them."

"I'll do it for you before you come back."

"And there are some Latin verses for Westover, too."

"Leave them with me, too."

Heathcote felt uncomfortable, and it occurred to him it was not right to
accept another's help.

"I think I ought to do them myself," said he, "I don't like having them
done for me."

"Quite right, my dear young friend.  You're beginning to find out it
pays to be a good little boy, are you?  I always said you would.  I only
hope you'll make a good thing of it."

Heathcote coloured up violently.

"It's not that at all," said he, "it's only-- would it do if I went
after preparation this evening?"

"What!  Saint George propose to break rules?  Well, I am shocked; after
all my pains, too.  No, my child, I couldn't let you do this wicked
thing."

"What book am I to ask for?" said Heathcote, giving it up.

"Thanks, old man.  There's something better than the saint in you, after
all.  Tell Webster it's the book I ordered last week.  It is paid for."

Heathcote started on his mission with a heavy heart.  He had lost caste,
he feared, with Pledge, and he was running into the enemy's country and
perilling not only himself, but Dick, in the venture.

He made fearful and wonderful detours to avoid a few straggling
policemen, or any figure which in the distance looked remotely like a
British seaman.  The sight of a shopkeeper sitting at his door and
reading the _Templeton Observer_ scared him, and the bill offering a
reward for his discovery all but drove him headlong back to the school
without accomplishing his mission.

At length, after an anxious voyage, he ran into Mr Webster's harbour,
and for a little while breathed again.

The bookseller knew quite well what book Pledge had ordered.

"Here it is," said he, handing over a small parcel, "and I'd advise you
to get rid of it as soon as you can.  It would do you no good to be
found in your pocket, or Mr Pledge either," he added.

"He says it's paid for," said Heathcote.

"Quite right."  Then, noticing that the boy still seemed reluctant to
launch forth once more into the High Street, he said--

"Perhaps you'd like to look round the shop, Mr Heathcote?"

Heathcote thought he would, and spent a quarter of an hour in
investigating Mr Webster's shelves of books.

Just as he was about to leave, Duffield and the "sociable" Raggles
entered the shop.

"Hullo, Georgie!" said the latter; "who'd have thought of seeing you in
the town?  Everyone says you're keeping out of the way of the police,
don't they, Duff?"

"Yes," said Duffield, perceiving the joke, "for some burglary, or
something like that."

Heathcote breathed again at the word burglary, and made an heroic effort
to smile.

"Not at all," said Raggles, nudging his ally; "not a burglary, but boat-
stealing, isn't it, Webster?"

"Ah," said Mr Webster, who was a good man of business and fond of his
joke, "they never did find that young party, certainly."

"Shut up and don't be a fool!" said Heathcote, feeling the colour coming
to his face, and longing to be out in the open air.

"What's this the description was?" said Duffield, perching himself on
the corner of the counter and reading off the unhappy Heathcote's
personal appearance.  "Good-looking boy of fourteen, with fair hair and
a slight moustache.  Dressed in a grey tweed suit, masher collar, and
two tin sleeve-links.  Not very intelligent, and usually wears a smudge
of ink under his right eye.  Isn't that it?"

"That's something about the mark," said Mr Webster, laughing.

"Think of offering two pounds reward for a chap like that!" said
Raggles.  "They must be hard up."

"Look here," said Heathcote, seeing that his only refuge lay in swagger,
"I'm not going to have any of your cheek, Raggles.  Shut up, or I'll
lick you!"

"No fighting here, young gentlemen, please," said the affable
bookseller.

"Ha! ha!" said Raggles, enjoying himself under the security of
Duffield's alliance; "he's in a wax because we said it was only a
_slight_ moustache.  He thinks we ought to have said a heavy one!"

"He may think it ought to be, but it ain't," said Duffield.  "I never
saw such a slight one in all my days!"

It is rarely that any one sees reason to bless his own moustache, but on
this particular occasion, when he perceived the welcome controversy to
which it was giving rise, Georgie was very near calling down
benedictions on his youthful hairs.  With great presence of mind he
recovered his good-humour, and diverted the talk further and further
into its capillary course.  He backed his moustache against Duffield's
and Raggles' spliced together, he upbraided them with envy, and called
Webster to witness that the pimple on Raggles' lip, which he claimed as
the forerunner of his crop, had been there for the last six months with
never a sign of harvest.

Altogether, under shelter of his moustache, Georgie crept out of a very
awkward hobble, and finally out of Webster's shop, greatly to the relief
of his palpitating heart.

But his trials were not quite over.  As he was running headlong round
the corner of High Street, determined that no pretext should detain him
a moment longer than necessary in this perilous territory, he found
himself, to his horror, suddenly confronted with the form of the very
British seaman whom, of all others, he hoped to avoid; and, before he
could slacken speed or fetch a compass, he had plunged full into Tom
White's arms.

Tom White, as usual, I am sorry to say, was half-seas-over.  Never
steady in his best days, he had, ever since the loss of the _Martha_
made his headquarters at the bar of the "Dolphin."  Not that the loss of
the _Martha_ was exactly ruin to her late owner.  On the contrary, since
her disappearance, Tom had had more pocket-money than ever he had when
she was his.

For sympathetic neighbours, pitying his loss, had contributed trifles
towards his solace; the Templeton boys, with many of whom he had been a
favourite, had tipped him handsomely in his distress, and it was even
rumoured that half of a collection for the poor at the parish church a
few Sundays ago had been awarded to poor destitute Tom White.

On the whole, Tom felt that if he could lose a _Martha_ twice a year, he
might yet sup off tripe and gin-toddy seven times a week.

The "Dolphin" became his banker, and took very particular care of his
money.

All this the boy, of course, did not know.  All he knew was that the
waistcoat into which he had run belonged to the man he had wronged, who,
if he only suspected his wronger, could make the coming summer holidays
decidedly tedious for Georgie and his friend.

"Belay there!" hiccupped Tom, reeling back from the collision and
catching Heathcote by the arm.  "Got yer, young gem'n! and I'll bash
yer!"

"I beg your pardon," said Georgie, terribly scared, and seeing already,
in his mind's eye, the narrowest cell of the county jail.

Tom blinked at him stupidly, holding him at arm's length and cruising
round him.

"Bust me if it ain't a schollard!" said he.  "What cheer, my hearty?
Don't forget, the poor mariner that's lost his _Martha_.  It's very 'ard
on a honest Jack tar."

How Heathcote's soul went out to the poor British seaman as soon as he
discovered that he did not recognise him!  He gave him his all--two
shillings and one penny--and deemed it a mite to offer to so deserving a
cause.  He hoped from his heart Tom would find his boat, or, if not,
would get a pension from the Government, or be made an Inspector of
Coast-guards.  Nothing was too good for the sweet, delectable creature,
and he told him as much.

Whereat Tom, with the 2 shillings 1 penny in his hand and all the boy's
blandishments in his ears, retired to the "Dolphin" to digest both; and
once more Heathcote, with the perspiration on his brow and his chest
positively sore with the thumping of his heart, sped like a truant shade
from the fangs of Cerberus.

After that, neither threats, entreaties, or taunts could induce
Heathcote to venture either alone or in company into Templeton.

Fortunately for him and his leader, the approaching close of the term
gave every one at Templeton an excuse for keeping bounds, and sticking
steadily to work.  Pledge, among others, was in for a scholarship, which
five out of six of those who knew him prophesied he would get, if he
took a fortnight's hard work before the examination.

A fortnight before the examination, to the day, Pledge began to work,
and Templeton put down the Bishop's scholarship to him, without further
parley.  Only two men were against him--Cartwright, who, fine fellow as
he was, could not desert the cricket field and gymnasium even in the
throes of an examination, and Freckleton, the hermit, whom half of
Templeton didn't know by sight, and the other half put down as a
harmless lunatic, who divided his time between theological exercises and
plodding, but not always successful, study.

Our heroes, being new boys, were exempt from the general school
examinations--their guerdon of reward being the general proficiency
prize for new boys, a vague term, in which good conduct, study, and
progress, were all taken into account.  Dick sadly admitted that he was
out of it.  Still he vaguely hoped he might "pull off his remove," as
the phrase went--that is, get raised next term to the serene atmosphere
of the lower Fourth, along with the faithful Heathcote.

But nowhere was the studious fit more serious than in the upper Fifth,
where Birket, Swinstead, Wrangham and one or two others, cast longing
eyes on the vacant desk in the Sixth, and strained every nerve to win
it.  Cricket flagged, and it was hard during that fortnight to make up a
set at tennis.  The early "Tub" alone retained its attractions, and
indeed was never more crowded than when Templeton was heart and soul in
study.

One fellow regarded the whole scene half sadly, and that was Ponty.
Indolent as he seemed to be, he loved the old school, and hated the
thought of leaving it.  He had friends there that were like brothers to
him.  There were nooks here and there where he had lounged and enjoyed
life, which seemed like so many homes.  He knew he had not done anything
great for Templeton.  He knew he had let the tares grow side by side
with the wheat, and made no effort to uproot them.  He knew that there
were boys there whom he ought to have befriended, and others he ought to
have scathed; and it made him sad now to think of all he might have
done.

"I don't think they'll erect a statue to me in the Quad, old man," said
he to Mansfield at the end of the examination.

"I know there isn't a fellow that won't be sorry to lose you," said
Mansfield.

"Ah! no doubt.  They've had quiet times under easy-going old Saturn, and
don't fancy the prospect of Jove, with his thunderbolts, ruling in his
stead.  Eh?"

"If I could be sure of fellows being as fond of me as they are of you, I
should--well, I should get something I don't expect," said Mansfield.

"Don't be too sure, old man," said Ponty.  "But, I say, will you take a
hint from a failure like me?" added the old captain, digging deep into
his pockets, and looking a trifle nervous.

