most upright shock of hair she had ever seen. He put his arms akimbo and
gazed hard at Sue, and so motionless became his perfectly round orbs
that Sue thought he had been turned into stone. Suddenly, however, he
winked, and said in a shrill, cheerful tone:

"Well, then, plucky 'un, 'ow does yer find yerself now?"

Not any number of shocks could quite deprive Sue of her common-sense.
She had not an idea of what had become of her. Was this another and a
rougher way of taking her to the lock-up? Was this queer boy friend or
foe?

"Be yer agen me, boy?" she said.

"Agen yer! Well, the ingratitude! Ha'n't I jest rescued yer from the
hands o' that 'ere nipper?"

"Oh!" exclaimed Sue; and the relieved tension of her poor, terrified
little heart found vent in two big tears which rose to her eyes.

The red-haired boy balanced himself on one toe in order to survey those
tears more carefully.

"Well," he said at length, in a tone in which there was a ludicrous
mingling of wonder and contempt--"well, ye're a queer un fur a plucky
un--a wery queer un. Crying! My eyes! Ain't yer hin luck not to be in
prison, and ain't that a subject for rejoicing? I don't cry when I'm in
luck; but then, thank goodness! I'm not a gel. Lor'! they're queer
cattle, gels are--wery queer, the best o' 'em. But they're as they're
made, poor things! We can't expect much from such weakness. But now look
you here, you gel--look up at me, full and solemn in the face, and say
if ye're hinnercent in the matter o' that 'ere locket. If yer can say
quite solemn and straightforward as yer his innercent, why, I'll help
yer; but if yer is guilty--and, mark me, I can tell by yer heyes ef
ye're talking the truth--I can do naught, fur I'm never the party to
harbor guilty folks. Now speak the truth, full and solemn; be yer
hinnercent?"

Here the red-haired boy got down on his knees and brought his eyes
within a few inches of Sue's eyes.

"Be yer hinnercent?" he repeated.

"Yes," answered Sue, "I'm quite, quite hinnercent; yer can believe me or
not as yer pleases. I'm quite hinnercent, and I won't cry no more ef
yer dislikes it. I wor never reckoned a cry-baby."

"Good!" said the boy; "I b'lieves yer. And now jest tell me the whole
story. I come hup jest when the perleeceman and the pawnbroker were
a-gripping yer. Lor'! I could a' twisted out o' their hands heasy
enough; but then, to be thankful agen, I ain't a gel."

"There's no good twitting me wid being a gel," interrupted Sue; "gels
have their use in creation same as boys, and I guess as they're often
the pluckier o' the two."

"Gels pluckier! Well, I like that. However, I will say as you stood
game. I guessed as you wor hinnercent then. And now jest tell me the
story."

"It wor this way," began Sue, whose color and courage were beginning to
return. Then she told her tale, suppressing carefully all tears, for she
was anxious to propitiate the red-haired boy. She could not, however,
keep back the indignation from her innocent young voice; and this
indignation, being a sure sign in his mind of pluckiness, greatly
delighted her companion.

"'Tis the jolliest shame I ever heard tell on in all my life," he said
in conclusion; but though he said this he chuckled, and seemed to enjoy
himself immensely. "Now then," he added, "there's no doubt at all as
ye're hinnercent. I know that as clear--I feels as sartin on that
p'int--as tho' I wor reading the secrets of my own heart. But 'tis jest
equal sartin as a magistrate 'ud bring you hin guilty. He'd say--and
think hisself mighty wise, too--'You had the locket, so in course yer
tuk the locket, and so yer must be punished.' Then you'd be tuk from the
lock-up to the House o' Correction, where you'd 'ave solitary
confinement, most like, to teach you never to do so no more."

"'Ow long 'ud they keep me there?" asked Sue. "'Ow long 'ud they be
wicked enough to keep me there fur what I never did?"

"Well, as it wor a first offence, and you but young, they might make it
a matter of no longer than a year, or maybe eighteen months. But then,
agen, they'd 'ave to consider as it wor diamonds as you tuk. They gems
is so waluable that in course you must be punished according. Yes,
considerin' as it wor diamonds, Sue, I would say as you got off cheap
wid two years."

"You talk jest as tho' I had done it," said Sue angrily, "when you know
perfect well as I'm quite hinnercent."

"Well, don't be touchy. I'm only considerin' what the judge 'ud say. I
ain't the judge. Yes, you'd 'ave two years. But, lor'! it don't much
matter wot time you 'ad, for you'd never be no good arter."

"Wot do you mean now?" asked Sue.

"I mean as you'd never get no 'ployment, nor be able to hold up yer
head. Who, I'd like to know, 'ud employ a prison lass--and what else 'ud
you be?"

Here Sue, disregarding her companion's dislike to tears, broke down
utterly, and exclaimed through her sobs:

"Oh! poor Giles--poor, poor Giles! It 'ull kill my little Giles. Oh! I
didn't think as Lord Jesus could give me sech big stones to walk hover."

"Now ye're gettin' complicated," exclaimed the red-haired boy. "I make
'lowance fur yer tears--ye're but a gel, and I allow as the picture's
dark--but who hever is Giles? And where are the stones? Ye're setting
still this 'ere minute, and I guess as the arm-chair in which I placed
yer, though none o' the newest, be better than a stone."

"Giles is my brother," said Sue; "and the stones--well, the stones is
'phorical, ef yer knows wot that means."

"Bless us, no! I'm sure I don't. But tell about Giles."

So Sue wiped her eyes again and went back a little further in her
life-story.

"It is complicated," said her companion when she paused--"a lame
brother, poor chap, and you the support. Well, well! the more reason as
you should keep out o' prison. Now, Sue, this is wot I calls _deep_;
jest keep still fur a bit, and let me put on my considerin' cap."

The red-haired boy seated himself on the floor, thrust his two hands
into his shock of hair, and stared very hard and very straight before
him. In this position he was perfectly motionless for about the space of
half a minute; then, jumping up, he came again very close to Sue.

"Be yer willin' to take the adwice of a person a deal wiser nor
yourself? Look me full in the heyes and answer clear on that p'int."

"Yes, I'm sure I am," said Sue, in as humble a spirit as the most
exalted teacher could desire.

"Good!" said the red-haired boy, giving his thigh a great clap. "Then
you've got to hearken to _me_. Sue, there's nothink in life fur you but
to hide."

"To hide!" said Sue.

"Yes. You must on no 'count whatever let the perleece find yer. We must
get to discover the guilty party, and the guilty party must confess; but
in the meanwhile yer must hide. There must be no smell o' the prison
'bout yer, Sue."

"Oh! but--but--boy--I don't know yer name."

"Pickles," said the red-haired boy, giving his head a bob. "Pickles, at
yer sarvice."

"Well, then, Pickles," continued Sue, "if I go and hide, what 'ull
become o' Giles?"

"And what 'ull come o' him ef yer go ter prison--yer goose? Now, jest
yer listen to the words o' wisdom. You mustn't go back to Giles, fur as
sure as you do the perleece 'ull have you. That would break that little
tender brother's heart. No, no, leave Giles ter me; you must hide, Sue."

"But where, and fur how long?" asked Sue.

"Ah! now ye're comin' sensible, and axin' refreshin' questions. Where?
Leave the where to me. How long? Leave the how long ter me."

"Oh Pickles! ye're real good," sobbed Sue; "and ef yer'll only promise
as Giles won't die, and that he won't break his heart wid frettin', why,
I'll leave it ter you--I'll leave it all ter you."

"And yer couldn't--search the world over--leave it to a safer person,"
said Pickles. "So now that's a bargain--I'll take care on Giles."




CHAPTER XVII.

CINDERELLA.


"The first thing to be considered, Sue," said Pickles, as he seated
himself on the floor by her side, "is the disguise. The disguise must be
wot I consider deep."

"Wot hever does yer mean now?" asked Sue.

"Why, yer Silly, yer don't s'pose as yer can go hout and about as you
are now? Why, the perleece 'ud have yer. Don't yer s'pose as yer'll be
advertised?"

"I dunno heven wot that his," said Sue.

"Oh! my heyes, ain't yer green! Well, it 'ull be, say, like this.
There'll be by hall the perleece-stations placards hup, all writ hout in
big print: 'Gel missing--plain gel, rayther stout, rayther short, wid
round moon-shaped face, heyes small, mouth big, hair----"

"There! you needn't go on," said Sue, who, though by no means vain,
scarcely relished this description. "I know wot yer mean, and I don't
want ter be twitted with not being beautiful. I'd rayther be beautiful
by a long way. I s'pose, as the disguise is ter change me, will it make
me beautiful? I'd like that."

Pickles roared. "Well, I never!" he said. "We'll try. Let me see; I must
study yer fur a bit. Hair wot's called sandy now--changed ter black.
Heyebrows; no heyebrows in 'ticlar--mark 'em hout strong. Mouth:
couldn't sew hup the mouth in the corners. No, Sue, I'm feared as I
never can't make no pictur' of yer. But now to be serious. We must set
to work, and we has no time ter spare, fur hold Fryin-pan 'ull come
home, and there'll be the mischief to pay ef he finds us yere."

"Who's he?" asked Sue.

"Who? Why, the owner of this yer shop. I'm in his employ. I'm wot's
called his steady right-hand man. See, Sue, yere's a pair o' scissors;
get yer hair down and clip away, and I'll get ready the dye."

Pickles now set to work in earnest, and proved himself by no means an
unskilled workman. In a wonderfully short space of time Sue's long,
neutral-tinted hair was changed to a very short crop of the darkest hue.
Her eyebrows were also touched up, and as her eyelashes happened to be
dark, the effect was not quite so inharmonious as might have been
feared. Pickles was in ecstasies, and declared that "Not a policeman in
London 'ud know her." He then dived into an inner room in the funny
little shop, and returned with an old blue petticoat and a faded red
jersey. These Sue had to exchange for her own neat but sober frock.

"Ye're perfect," said Pickles, dancing round her. "Yer looks hangelic.
Now fur the name."

"The name?" said Sue. "Must I 'ave a new name too?"

"In course yer must; nothink must let the name o' Sue pass yer lips.
Now, mind, that slip o' the tongue might prove fatal."

"Wery well," said Sue in a resigned voice of great trouble.

"Yer needn't be so down on yer luck. I don't myself think anythink o'
the name o' Sue; 'tis what I considers low and common. Now, wot's yer
favorite character? Say in acting, now."

"There's no character hin all the world as I hadmires like Cinderella,"
said Sue.

"Oh, my heyes, Cinderella, of hall people! Worn't Cinderella wot might
'ave bin called beautiful? Dressed shabby, no doubt, and wid
hard-hearted sisters--but hadn't she small feet, now? Well, Sue, I don't
say as ye're remarkable fur them special features b'in' small, nor is
yer looks _wery_ uncommon; but still, ef yer have a fancy for the name,
so be it. It _will_ be fun thinkin' of the beautiful, small-footed
Cinderella and looking at you. But so much the better, so come along,
Cinderella, fur Fryin'-pan 'ull catch us ef we don't make haste."

"Where are we to go?" asked the poor little newly made Cinderella, with
a piteous face.

"Now, yer needn't look like that. None but cheerful folks goes down wid
me. Where are yer to go to? Why, to mother, of course--where else?"

"Oh, have you got a mother?" asked Sue.

"Well, wot next? 'Ow did I happen ter be born? Yes, I has a mother, and
the wery best little woman in the world--so come along."




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE METROPOLITAN FIRE BRIGADE.


Pickles and Sue had to go a long way before they reached the destination
of "the best little woman in the world." They walked along by-streets
and all kinds of queer places, and presently reached a part of London
where Sue had never been before. They passed whole streets of
warehouses, and came then to poor-looking dwelling-houses, but all of an
immense height, and very old and dirty. It was the back slums of
Westminster over again, but it was a Westminster severed as far as one
pole is from another to Sue.

"We does a roaring trade yere," said Pickles, looking around him with
the air of a proprietor well satisfied with his property.

"Wot in?" asked Sue.

"Wot hin? Well, that may surprise yer. Hin fire, of course."

"Wot do yer mean?" asked Sue.

"Wot does I mean? I mean as we deals in that 'ere rampagious helement.
We belongs to the great London Fire Brigade. That his, my brother Will
does; and I have a cousin wot thinks hisself no end of a swell, and he's
beginning his drill. Do you suppose, you goose, as I'd have acted as I
did, wid that 'ere remarkable coolness jest now, when the fire wor
burning, and the man wor on the wery brink of destruction, ef fire had
not bin, so to speak, my native hair? But now, here we are at last, so
come along hup to mother!"

Taking Sue's hand, Pickles dragged her up flight after flight of stairs,
until they reached the top of one of the very tall, dirty houses. Here
he suddenly flung open a door, and pushing Sue in, sang out:

"Mother, yere I be! And let me introduce to you Cinderella. Her sisters
have bin that unkind and mean as cannot be told, and she have taken
refuge wid us until the Prince comes to tie on the glass slipper."

No doubt Pickles' mother was thoroughly accustomed to him, for she did
not smile at all, but coming gravely forward, took Sue's two hands in
hers, and looking into her face, and seeing something of the great
trouble there, said in a soft, kind tone:

"Sit down, my dear--sit down. If I can help you I will."

"Oh, you can help her real fine, mother!" said Pickles, beginning to
dance a hornpipe round them both. "And I said as you were the wery best
little 'oman in all the world, and that you would do hall you could."

"So I will, my lad; only now do let the poor dear speak for herself."

But Sue did not. There are limits beyond which fortitude will not go,
