speaking distance, each one, as he approached me, performed a
salutation in much use among them, by placing his hand upon the ground
and kissing it; and thus I was kept waiting about an hour, until all
had performed the ceremony.  Connected with the city is a wooden bridge
ten paces wide, where the causeway is open to allow the water free
ingress and egress, as it rises and falls; and also for the security of
the city, as they can remove the long and wide beams of which the
bridge is formed, and replace them whenever they wish; and there are
many such bridges in different parts of the city, as Your Highness will
perceive hereafter from the particular account I shall give of it.

"When we had passed the bridge, the Senor Muteczuma came out to receive
us, attended by about two hundred nobles, all barefooted, and dressed
in livery, or a peculiar garb of fine cotton, richer than is usually
worn; they came in two processions in close proximity to the houses on
each side of the street, which is very wide and beautiful, and so
straight that you can see from one end of it to the other, although it
is two-thirds of a league in length, having on both sides large and
elegant houses and temples.  Muteczuma came through {164} the centre of
the street, attended by two lords, one upon his right and the other
upon his left hand, one of whom was the same nobleman who, as I have
mentioned, came to meet me in a litter, and the other was the brother
of Muteczuma, lord of the city of Iztapalapa, which I had left the same
day; all three were dressed in the same manner, except that Muteczuma
wore shoes, while the others were without them.  He was supported in
the arms of both, and as we approached, I alighted and advanced alone
to salute him; but the two attendant lords stopped me to prevent my
touching him, and they and he both performed the ceremony of kissing
the ground; after which he directed his brother who accompanied him to
remain with me; the latter accordingly took me by the arm, while
Muteczuma, with his other attendant, walked a short distance in front
of me, and after he had spoken to me, all the other nobles also came up
to address me, and then went away in two processions with great
regularity, one after the other, and in this manner returned to the
city.  At the time I advanced to speak to Muteczuma, I took off from
myself a collar of pearls and glass diamonds, and put it around his
neck.  After having proceeded along the street, one of his servants
came bringing two collars formed of shell fish, enclosed in a roll of
cloth, which were made from the shells of colored prawns or
periwinkles, held by them in great esteem; and from each collar
depended eight golden prawns, finished in a very perfect manner and
about a foot and a half in length.  When these were brought Muteczuma
turned toward me and put them around my neck; he then returned along
the street in the order already described, until he reached a very
large and splendid palace, in which we were to be quartered, {165}
which had been fully prepared for our reception.  He there took me by
the hand and led me into a spacious saloon, in front of which was a
court, through which we entered.  Having caused me to sit down on a
piece of rich carpeting, which he had ordered to be made for himself,
he told me to await his return there, and then went away.  After a
short space of time, when my people were all bestowed in their
quarters, he returned with many and various jewels of gold and silver,
feather work and five or six thousand pieces of cotton cloth, very rich
and of varied texture and finish.  After having presented these to me,
he sat down on another piece of carpet they had placed for him near me,
and being seated he discoursed as follows:

"'It is now a long time since, by means of written records, we learned
from our ancestors that neither myself nor any of those who inhabit
this region were descended from its original inhabitants, but from
strangers who emigrated hither from a very distant land; and we have
also learned that a prince, whose vassals they all were, conducted our
people into these parts, and then returned to his native land.  He
afterward came again to this country, after the lapse of much time, and
found that his people had inter-married with the native inhabitants, by
whom they had many children, and had built towns in which they resided;
and when he desired them to return with him, they were unwilling to go,
nor were they disposed to acknowledge him as their sovereign; so he
departed from the country, and we have always heard that his
descendants would come to conquer this land and reduce us to subjection
as his vassals; and according to the direction from which you say you
have come, namely the quarter where the sun rises, and from what {166}
you say of the great lord or king who sent you hither, we believe and
are assured that he is our natural sovereign, especially as you say
that it is a long time since you first had knowledge of us.  Therefore,
be assured that we will obey you, and acknowledge you for our sovereign
in place of the great lord whom you mention, and that there shall be no
default or deception on our part.  And you have the power in all this
land, I mean wherever my power extends, to command what is your
pleasure, and it shall be done in obedience thereto, and all that we
have is at your disposal.  And since you are in your own proper land
and your own house, rest and refresh yourself after the toils of your
journey, and the conflicts in which you have been engaged, which have
been brought upon you, as I well know, by all the people from
Puntunchan to this place; and I am aware that the Cempoallans and the
Tlascalans have told you much evil of me, but believe no more than you
see with your own eyes, especially from those who are my enemies, some
of whom were once my subjects, and having rebelled upon your arrival,
make these statements to ingratiate themselves in your favor.  These
people, I know, have informed you that I possessed houses with walls of
gold, and that my carpets and other things in common use were of the
texture of gold; and that I was a god, or made myself one, and many
other such things.  The houses, as you see, are of stone and lime and
earth.'  And then he opened his robes and showed his person to me,
saying: 'You see that I am composed of flesh and bone like yourself,
and that I am mortal and palpable to the touch,' at the same time
pinching his arms and body with his hands.  'See,' he continued, 'how
they have deceived you.  It is true that I have some things of gold,
which {167} my ancestors have left me; all that I have is at your
service whenever you wish it.  I am now going to my other houses where
I reside; you will be here provided with everything necessary for
yourself and your people, and will suffer no embarrassment, as you are
in your own house and country.'  I answered him in respect to all that
he had said, expressing my acknowledgments, and adding whatever the
occasion seemed to demand, especially endeavoring to confirm him in the
belief that Your Majesty was the sovereign they had looked for; and
after this he took his leave, and having gone, we were liberally
supplied with fowls, bread, fruits and other things required for the
use of our quarters.  In this way I was for six days amply provided
with all that was necessary, and visited by many of the nobility."

It throws a somewhat amusing light on the interview when we note that
the presents exchanged were of great value on Montezuma's part, while
the gift of Cortes was a collar of cheap imitation diamonds!

The emotions of the Spaniards at this singular meeting between the
immeasurable distance of the past and present were so strong that even
the rough soldier felt it.  "And when we beheld," says Bernal Diaz, "so
many cities and towns rising up from the water, and other populous
places situated on the terra firma, and that causeway, straight as a
level, which went into Mexico, we remained astonished, and said to one
another that it appeared like the enchanted castles which they tell of
in the book of Amadis, by reason of the great towers, temples, and
edifices which there were in the water, all of them work of masonry.
Some of our soldiers asked if this that they saw was not a thing in a
dream."

{168}

Fiske thus felicitously alludes to it: "It may be well called the most
romantic moment in all history, this moment when European eyes first
rested upon that city of wonders, the chief ornament of a stage of
social evolution two full ethnical periods behind their own.  To say
that it was like stepping back across the centuries to visit the
Nineveh of Sennacherib or hundred-gated Thebes, is but inadequately to
depict the situation, for it was a longer step than that.  Such chances
do not come twice to mankind, for when two grades of culture so widely
severed are brought into contact, the stronger is apt to blight and
crush the weaker where it does not amend and transform it.  In spite of
its foul abominations, one sometimes feels that one would like to
recall the extinct state of society in order to study it.  The devoted
lover of history, who ransacks all sciences for aid toward
understanding the course of human events, who knows in what unexpected
ways one progress often illustrates other stages, will sometimes wish
it were possible to resuscitate, even for one brief year, the vanished
City of the Cactus Rock.  Could such a work of enchantment be
performed, however, our first feeling would doubtless be one of
ineffable horror and disgust, like that of the knight in the old
English ballad, who, folding in his arms a damsel of radiant beauty,
finds himself in the embrace of a loathsome fiend."

What the emotions of the Mexicans were we have no account, but it is
not difficult to imagine them.  Amazement as at the visitation of a
god, fear begot of this gross superstition, apprehension of what might
be the result of the coming of these strange monsters, curiosity
mingled with admiration; and as they looked at the long lines of
fierce, dauntless, implacable {169} Tlascalans who accompanied the
Spaniards, their hereditary enemies, there must have swelled in their
savage breasts feelings of deep and bitter hatred.

Outwardly, however, all was calm.  The Spaniards marched through the
flower-decked streets to the great palace of Ayxacatl, which had been
assigned to them as a residence, and which was spacious and commodious
enough to take them all in, bag and baggage, including their savage
allies.  It is one of the singular contradictions of the Aztec
character that with all of their brutal religion and barbarism, they
were passionately fond of flowers and like other barbarians rejoiced in
color.  "Flowers were used in many of the religious festivals, and
there is abundant evidence, moreover, that the Mexicans were very fond
of them.  This is illustrated in the perpetual reference to flowers in
old Mexican poems: 'They led me within a valley to a fertile spot, a
flowery spot, where the dew spread out in glistening splendor, where I
saw various lovely fragrant flowers, lovely odorous flowers, clothed
with the dew, scattered around in rainbow glory; there they said to me,
'Pluck the flowers, whichever thou wishest; mayst thou, the singer, be
glad, and give them to thy friends, to the chiefs, that they may
rejoice on the earth.'  So I gathered in the folds of my garments the
various fragrant flowers, delicate, scented, delicious.'"

The will of Montezuma was supreme.  Nothing dimmed the warmth and
generosity of his splendid hospitality.  There were no frowning looks,
no mutterings of discontent, everything was joyous and pleasant, at
least outwardly, yet not one of the Christians was blind to the peril
in which he stood, or doubted that the least accident might precipitate
an outbreak {170} which would sweep them all from off the face of the
earth.

For six days the Spaniards remained the guests of the Mexican Emperor.
Visits were exchanged, religious discussions were indulged in, and
Cortes was only constrained from overthrowing their idols in the
temples which he visited, and substituting Christian emblems therein by
force, by the prudent counsel of the worthy priests, men remarkable for
their wisdom and their statesmanship, who accompanied him.  Continual
efforts were made to convert Montezuma, but without results.

That monarch, who was of a cheerful and jovial nature, professed great
friendship for and interest in the Spaniards, whom he often visited and
to whom he accorded many privileges.  Such a condition of affairs,
however, could not last very long.  The suspense was intolerable to a
man of action like Cortes and to the men who followed him as well.
They were not good waiters.  Something had to be done.

Into the mind of this Spanish soldier of fortune there leaped a bold
design.  He decided upon a course of action, as amazing in its
character, so far-reaching in its result, that its conception and its
execution almost thrust him into the ranks of the demi-gods.  This
project was nothing less than the seizure of the person of Montezuma in
the midst of his capital, a city of three hundred thousand people,
among whom were thousands of fierce and highly trained veteran warriors
who counted their lives as nothing in the Emperor's need.  Undoubtedly
such an action was the basest of treachery, but Cortes had put himself
in such a position that the nakedness of such an action did not prevail
with him for a moment.  He quieted his conscience with the {171} old
reasoning that Montezuma was a heathen, and that oaths to him were by
no means binding.

Whether he quieted his conscience or not, something was necessary.  He
could not retire from Mexico after this ostensibly friendly visit.
Such a withdrawal would not have suited his purposes at all, and it was
more than possible that the moment he turned his back on the Aztec
capital, he would be forced to fight for his life against conditions
which would leave him little or no possibility of escape.  It was
really Montezuma's life and liberty or Cortes' life and liberty.  In
such an alternative, there was no hesitation.


VIII. The Seizure of the Emperor

Occasion was soon found for the seizure.  A chief on the sea coast had
attacked and killed some of the men left at Vera Cruz.  It was alleged
that this was done by the orders of Montezuma.  Cortes accompanied by
the hardiest and bravest of his companions, and after a night of
prayer--singular with what good consciences they could pray for the
success of the most nefarious undertaking!--visited Montezuma, and
accused him of having instigated the crime.  Montezuma denied it, and
despatched messengers to the offending cacique, directing that he be
put under close arrest and brought to the capital.  This was all any
reasonable man could expect, but Cortes and his companions were not
reasonable.

In spite of the fact that the prompt action of the Aztec had deprived
them of the faintest pretext, they nevertheless at last declared to the
unhappy monarch that he must accompany them to the pueblo, which he had
assigned to them, and remain in the custody of {172} the Spaniards
until the matter had been decided.  In vain Montezuma protested.  His
situation was unfortunate.  He was surrounded by an intrepid body of
steel-clad Spaniards, and although the room was filled with officers,
courtiers and soldiers, he realized--indeed he was bluntly told--that
the first act of hostility against the Spaniards would result in his
immediate death.  He made a virtue of a necessity, and complied with
the Spaniards' demand.  Forbidding his subjects, who were moved to
tears--tears of rage and anger, most probably--to assist him, he
submitted himself to the will of his captors, and went away with them.
He had to go or he would have died then and there.  Far better would it
have been if he had chosen the nobler course, both for his fame and his
empire.

The affairs of the government were carried on as usual by Montezuma, to
whom his officers and his counsellors had free access.  Cortes even
permitted him to go to the Temple on occasion for the ordinary worship,
but in every instance he was accompanied and practically surrounded by
a body of one hundred completely armed and thoroughly resolute
Spaniards.  Cortes did not attempt to interfere in the least degree
with the national administration, although it was patent to everybody
that as he held the person of the Emperor, he could also command, if he
so elected, the power of the empire.

Meanwhile, the Cacique Quahpopoca, who was guilty of the murder of the
Spaniards on the coast, was brought into Mexico two weeks after the
seizure of Montezuma.  With a loyalty touchingly beautiful, he promptly
declared that he had acted upon his own responsibility and that
Montezuma had had {173} nothing whatever to do with it, which was, of
course, highly improbable.  The official clearing of Montezuma was
complete; nevertheless, despite the testimony of Quahpopoca, Cortes
actually put the Mexican monarch in double irons.  It is true, the
irons were removed almost immediately, and he was treated as he had
been during his two weeks' captivity, with the greatest possible
respect and deference, but the irons had not merely clasped the wrists
and ankles of the unfortunate Aztec.  They had entered his soul.

Quahpopoca was burned in the public square.  The heaping fagots which
surrounded the stake were made of javelins and spears collected by
Cortes with intrepid audacity and far-seeing prudence, from the public
armory.  Vast numbers of them were used.  The populace looked on in
sullen and gloomy silence.  Montezuma was not merely the ruler of the
country, but in some senses he was a deity, and his capture, together
with the capture of the great lords of his family, who, under ordinary
circumstances would have succeeded to his throne, paralyzed the
national, social, political and religious organization.

Cortes actually held his captive in this way until spring.  The
intervening months were not wasted.  Expeditions were sent to all parts
of the country to ascertain its resources and report upon them, so
that, when the Spaniards took over the government, they would be
prepared to administer it wisely and well.  No such prudent and
statesmanlike policy was inaugurated by any other conqueror.  Cortes in
this particular stands absolutely alone among the great adventurers,
Spanish and otherwise.  He was not a mere plunderer of the people, he
was laying a foundation for an empire.  Vast treasures were,
nevertheless, collected.  {174} Messengers were despatched to Charles
V. with the letters which have already been quoted and with the royal
share of the booty, which was great enough to insure them a favorable
reception.

What Cortes would have done further can only be surmised.  Something
happened suddenly which forced his hand.  In the spring, Montezuma
received word through an excellent corps of messengers which supplied
him daily with information from all parts of the empire, of the arrival
of a strange Spanish force on the coast.  Mexico had no writing, but
its messenger system was one of the best in the world.  Messengers
arrived daily from the farthest parts and confines of the Mexican
empire, supplementing pictures, which the Mexicans drew very cleverly,
with verbal accounts.  Incidentally, there was no money in the empire,
either.  The art of coinage had not been attained.


IX. The Revolt of the Capital

Cortes was naturally much interested and not a little perturbed by the
news.  Soon the exact tidings reached him from the commander at Vera
Cruz, that the force consisted of some twelve hundred men, including
eighty horse, all under the command of one Panfilo de Narvaez, which
had been organized, equipped and sent out by Cortes' old enemy,
Velasquez, with instructions to seize him and his companions and send
them back to Cuba for trial.  Narvaez was loud in his threats of what
he was going to do with Cortes and how he was going to do it.

The great Spaniard acted with his usual promptness.  He left in charge
of the city one Pedro de Alvarado, called from his fair hair, Tonatiuh,
or the {175} child of the sun.  Committing the care of Montezuma to
this cavalier and bidding him watch over him and guard him with his
life, as the safety of all depended upon him, Cortes with some two
hundred and fifty men made a dash for the coast.  It was two hundred
and fifty against five times that number, but with the two hundred and
fifty was a man whose mere presence equalized conditions, while with
the twelve hundred and fifty was another whose braggart foolishness
diminished their superiority until, in the end, it really amounted to
nothing!

