The grandmother in the meantime was lying with folded hands; her face,
which had been so sad a short time ago, was lit up with a happy smile.

Suddenly Heidi stopped.

"Are you well again, grandmother?" she asked.

"I feel very much better, Heidi. Please finish the song, will you?"

The child obeyed, and when she came to the last words,

    When mine eyes grow dim and sad,
      Let Thy love more brightly burn,
    That my soul, a wanderer glad,
      Safely homeward may return.

"Safely homeward may return!" she exclaimed: "Oh, grandmother, I know
what it is like to come home." After a while she said: "It is getting
dark, grandmother, I must go home now. I am glad that you feel
better again."

   [Illustration: THE TWO CHILDREN WERE ALREADY FLYING DOWN THE ALP]

The grandmother, holding the child's hand in hers, said: "Yes, I am
happy again, though I have to stay in bed. Nobody knows how hard it is
to lie here alone, day after day. I do not hear a word from anybody
and cannot see a ray of sunlight. I have very sad thoughts sometimes,
and often I feel as if I could not bear it any longer. But when I can
hear those blessed songs that you have read to me, it makes me feel as
if a light was shining into my heart, giving me the purest joy."

Shaking hands, the child now said good-night, and pulling Peter with
her, ran outside. The brilliant moon was shining down on the white
snow, light as day. The two children were already flying down the Alp,
like birds soaring through the air.

After Heidi had gone to bed that night, she lay awake a little while,
thinking over everything the grandmother had said, especially about
the joy the songs had given her. If only poor grandmother could hear
those comforting words every day! Heidi knew that it might be a week
or two again before she could repeat her visit. The child became very
sad when she thought how uncomfortable and lonely the old woman would
be. Was there no way for help? Suddenly Heidi had an idea, and it
thrilled her so that she felt as if she could not wait till morning
came to put her plan in execution. But in her excitement she had
forgotten her evening prayer, so sitting up in bed, she prayed
fervently to God. Then, falling back into the fragrant hay, she soon
slept peacefully and soundly still the bright morning came.

[Illustration]




XIX

WINTER STILL CONTINUES


Peter arrived punctually at school next day. He had brought his lunch
with him in a bag, for all the children that came from far away ate in
school, while the others went home. In the evening Peter as usual paid
his visit to Heidi.

The minute he opened the door she ran up to him, saying: "Peter, I
have to tell you something."

"Say it," he replied.

"You must learn to read now," said the child.

"I have done it already."

"Yes, yes, Peter, but I don't mean it that way," Heidi eagerly
proceeded; "you must learn so that you really know how afterwards."

"I can't," Peter remarked.

"Nobody believes you about that any more, and I won't either," Heidi
said resolutely. "When I was in Frankfurt, grandmama told me that it
wasn't true and that I shouldn't believe you."

Peter's astonishment was great.

"I'll teach you, for I know how; when you have learnt it, you must
read one or two songs to grandmother every day."

"I shan't!" grumbled the boy.

This obstinate refusal made Heidi very angry. With flaming eyes she
planted herself before the boy and said: "I'll tell you what will
happen, if you don't want to learn. Your mother has often said that
she'll send you to Frankfurt. Clara showed me the terrible, large
boys' school there, where you'll have to go. You must stay there till
you are a man, Peter! You mustn't think that there is only one teacher
there, and such a kind one as we have here. No, indeed! There are
whole rows of them, and when they are out walking they have high
black hats on their heads. I saw them myself, when I was out driving!"

Cold shivers ran down Peter's back.

"Yes, you'll have to go there, and when they find out that you can't
read or even spell, they'll laugh at you!"

"I'll do it," said Peter, half angry and half frightened.

"Oh, I am glad. Let us start right away!" said Heidi joyfully, pulling
Peter over to the table. Among the things that Clara had sent, Heidi
had found a little book with the A,B,C and some rhymes. She had chosen
this for the lessons. Peter, having to spell the first rhyme, found
great difficulty, so Heidi said, "I'll read it to you, and then you'll
be able to do it better. Listen:

    "If A, B, C you do not know,
    Before the school board you must go."

"I won't go," said Peter stubbornly.

"Where?"

"Before the court."

"Hurry up and learn the three letters, then you won't have to!"

Peter, beginning again, repeated the three letters till Heidi said:

"Now you know them."

Having observed the good result of the first rhyme, she began to read
again:

    D, E, F you then must read,
    Or of misfortune take good heed!

    Who over L and M doth stumble,
    Must pay a penance and feel humble.

    There's trouble coming; if you knew,
    You'd quickly learn N, O, P, Q.

    If still you halt on R, S, T,
    You'll suffer for it speedily.

Heidi, stopping, looked at Peter, who was so frightened by all these
threats and mysterious horrors that he sat as still as a mouse.
Heidi's tender heart was touched, and she said comfortingly: "Don't be
afraid, Peter; if you come to me every day, you'll soon learn all the
letters and then those things won't happen. But come every day, even
when it snows. Promise!"

Peter did so, and departed. Obeying Heidi's instructions, he came
daily to her for his lesson.

Sometimes the grandfather would sit in the room, smoking his pipe;
often the corners of his mouth would twitch as if he could hardly keep
from laughing.

He generally invited Peter to stay to supper afterwards, which
liberally rewarded the boy for all his great exertions.

Thus the days passed by. In all this time Peter had really made some
progress, though the rhymes still gave him difficulty.

When they had come to U, Heidi read:

    Whoever mixes U and V,
    Will go where he won't want to be!

and further,

    If W you still ignore,
    Look at the rod beside the door.

Often Peter would growl and object to those measures, but nevertheless
he kept on learning, and soon had but three letters left.

The next few days the following rhymes, with their threats, made Peter
more eager than ever.

      If you the letter X forget
      For you no supper will be set.

    If you still hesitate with Y,
    For shame you'll run away and cry.

When Heidi read the last,

    And he who makes his Z with blots,
    Must journey to the Hottentots,

Peter sneered: "Nobody even knows where they are!"

"I am sure grandfather does," Heidi retorted, jumping up. "Just wait
one minute and I shall ask him. He is over with the parson," and with
that she had opened the door.

"Wait!" shrieked Peter in great alarm, for he saw himself already
transported to those dreadful people. "What is the matter with you?"
said Heidi, standing still.

"Nothing, but stay here. I'll learn," he blubbered. But Heidi,
wanting to know something about the Hottentots herself, could only be
kept back by piteous screams from Peter. So at last they settled down
again, and before it was time to go, Peter knew the last letter, and
had even begun to read syllables. From this day on he progressed more
quickly.

It was three weeks since Heidi had paid her last visit to the
grandmother, for much snow had fallen since. One evening, Peter,
coming home, said triumphantly:

"I can do it!"

"What is it you can do, Peter?" asked his mother, eagerly.

"Read."

"What, is it possible? Did you hear it, grandmother?" exclaimed
Brigida.

The grandmother also was curious to learn how this had happened.

"I must read a song now; Heidi told me to," Peter continued. To the
women's amazement, Peter began. After every verse his mother would
exclaim, "Who would have ever thought it!" while the grandmother
remained silent.

One day later, when it happened that it was Peter's turn to read in
school, the teacher said:

"Peter, must I pass you by again, as usual? Or do you want to try--I
shall not say to read, but to stammer through a line?"

Peter began and read three lines without stopping.

In dumb astonishment, the teacher, putting down his book, looked at
the boy.

"What miracle has happened to you?" he exclaimed. "For a long time I
tried to teach you with all my patience, and you were not even able to
grasp the letters, but now that I had given you up as hopeless, you
have not only learnt how to spell, but even to read. How did this
happen, Peter?"

"It was Heidi," the boy replied.

In great amazement, the teacher looked at the little girl. Then the
kind man continued:

"I have noticed a great change in you, Peter. You used to stay away
from school, sometimes more than a week, and lately you have not even
missed a day. Who has brought about this change?"

"The uncle."

Every evening now Peter on his return home read one song to his
grandmother, but never more. To the frequent praises of Brigida, the
old woman once replied: "I am glad he has learnt something, but
nevertheless I am longing for the spring to come. Then Heidi can visit
me, for when she reads, the verses sound so different. I cannot always
follow Peter, and the songs don't thrill me the way they do when Heidi
says them!"

And no wonder! For Peter would often leave out long and difficult
words,--what did three or four words matter! So it happened sometimes
that there were hardly any nouns left in the hymns that Peter read.




XX

NEWS FROM DISTANT FRIENDS


May had come. Warm sunshine was bathing the whole Alp in glorious
light, and having melted the last snow, had brought the first spring
flowers to the surface. A merry spring wind was blowing, drying up the
damp places in the shadow. High above in the azure heaven the eagle
floated peacefully.

Heidi and her grandfather were back on the Alp. The child was so happy
to be home again that she jumped about among the beloved objects. Here
she discovered a new spring bud, and there she watched the gay little
gnats and beetles that were swarming in the sun.

The grandfather was busy in his little shop, and a sound of hammering
and sawing could be heard. Heidi had to go and see what the
grandfather was making. There before the door stood a neat new chair,
while the old man was busy making a second.

"Oh, I know what they are for," said Heidi gaily. "You are making them
for Clara and grandmama. Oh, but we need a third--or do you think that
Miss Rottenmeier won't come, perhaps?"

"I really don't know," said grandfather: "but it is safer to have a
chair for her, if she should come."

Heidi, thoughtfully looking at the backless chairs, remarked:
"Grandfather, I don't think she would sit down on those."

"Then we must invite her to sit down on the beautiful green lounge of
grass," quietly answered the old man.

While Heidi was still wondering what the grandfather had meant, Peter
arrived, whistling and calling. As usual, Heidi was soon surrounded by
the goats, who also seemed happy to be back on the Alp. Peter, angrily
pushing the goats aside, marched up to Heidi, thrusting a letter into
her hand.

"Did you get a letter for me on the pasture?" Heidi said, astonished.

"No."

"Where did it come from?"

"From my bag."

The letter had been given to Peter the previous evening; putting it in
his lunch-bag, the boy had forgotten it there till he opened the bag
for his dinner. Heidi immediately recognized Clara's handwriting, and
bounding over to her grandfather, exclaimed: "A letter has come from
Clara. Wouldn't you like me to read it to you, grandfather?"

Heidi immediately read to her two listeners, as follows:--

    DEAR HEIDI:--

    We are all packed up and shall travel in two or three days. Papa
    is leaving, too, but not with us, for he has to go to Paris
    first. The dear doctor visits us now every day, and as soon as
    he opens the door, he calls, 'Away to the Alp!' for he can
    hardly wait for us to go. If you only knew how he enjoyed being
    with you last fall! He came nearly every day this winter to tell
    us all about you and the grandfather and the mountains and the
    flowers he saw. He said that it was so quiet in the pure,
    delicious air, away from towns and streets, that everybody has
    to get well there. He is much better himself since his visit,
