'At Brussels. That telegram hasn't come yet.'

'I don't understand about time,' said Philip firmly, 'and I never shall.
I say, Helen, I was just looking for the _Lightning Loose_, to go off in
her on a voyage of discovery and find Lucy.'

'I don't think you need,' she said; 'I met a parrot on the island just
before I met you and it was saying poetry to itself.'

'It would be,' said Philip, 'if it was alive. I'm glad it _is_ alive,
though. What was it saying?'

'It was something like this,' she said, putting a log of wood on the
fire:

          'Philip and Helen
           Have the island to dwell in,
                               Hooray.
           They said of the island,
           "It's your land and my land!"
                 Hooray. Hooray. Hooray.

          'And till the ark
           Comes out of the dark
           There those two may stay
           For a happy while, and
           Enjoy their island
           Until the Giving Day.
                             Hooray.

          'And then they will hear the giving voice,
           They will hear and obey,
           And when people come
           Who need a home,
           They'll give the island away.
                                 Hooray.

          'The island with flower
           And fruit and bower,
           Forest and river and bay,
           Their very own island
           They'll sigh and smile and
           They'll give their island away.'

'What nonsense!' said Philip, 'I never will.'

'All right, my Pipkin,' said Helen cheerfully; 'I only told you just to
show that you're expected to stay here. "Philip and Helen have the
island to dwell in." And now, what about bed?'

They spent a whole week on the island. It was exactly all that they
could wish an island to be; because, of course, they had made it
themselves, and of course they knew exactly what they wanted. I can't
describe that week. I only know that Philip will never forget it. Just
think of all the things you could do on a magic island if you were there
with your dearest dear, and you'll know how Philip spent his time.

He enjoyed every minute of every hour of every day, and, best thing of
all, that week made him understand, as nothing else could have done,
that Helen still belonged to him, and that her marriage to Mr. Graham
had not made her any the less Philip's very own Helen.

And then came a day when Philip, swinging in a magnolia tree, looked out
to sea and cried out, 'A sail! a sail! Oh, Helen, here's the ark! Now
it's all over. Let's have Lucy to stay with us, and send the other
people away,' he added, sliding down the tree-trunk with his face very
serious.

'But we can't, dear,' Helen reminded him. 'The island's ours, you know;
and as long as it's ours no one else can land on it. We made it like
that, you know.'

'Then they can't land?'

'No,' said Helen.

'Can't we change the rule and let them land?'

'No,' said Helen.

'Oh, it _is_ a pity,' Philip said; 'because the island is the place for
islanders, isn't it?'

'Yes,' said Helen, 'and there's no fear of the sea here; you remember we
made it like that when we made the island?'

'Yes,' said Philip. 'Oh, Helen, I _don't_ want to.'

'Then don't,' said Helen.

'Ah, but I _do_ want to, too.'

'Then do,' said she.

'But don't you see, when you want to and don't want to at the same time,
what _are_ you to do? There are so many things to think of.'

'When it's like that, there's one thing you mustn't think of,' she said.

'What?' Philip asked.

'Yourself,' she said softly.

There was a silence, and then Philip suddenly hugged his sister and she
hugged him.

'I'll give it to them,' he said; 'it's no use. I know I ought to. I
shall only be uncomfortable if I don't.'

Helen laughed. 'My boy of boys!' she said. And then she looked sad. 'Boy
of my heart,' she said, 'you know it's not only giving up our island. If
we give it away I must go. It's the only place that there's a door into
out of my dreams.'

'I can't let you go,' he said.

'But you've got your deeds to do,' she said, 'and I can't help you in
those. Lucy can help you, but I can't. You like Lucy now, don't you?'

'Oh, I don't mind her,' said Philip; 'but it's _you_ I want, Helen.'

'Don't think about that,' she urged. 'Think what the islanders want.
Think what it'll be to them to have the island, to live here always,
safe from the fear!'

'There are three more deeds,' said Philip dismally; 'I don't think I
shall ever want any more adventures as long as I live.'

'You'll always want them,' she said, laughing at him gently, 'always.
And now let's do the thing handsomely and give them a splendid welcome.
Give me a kiss and then we'll gather heaps of roses.'

So they kissed each other. But Philip was very unhappy indeed, though
he felt that he was being rather noble and that Helen thought so too,
which was naturally a great comfort.

There had been a good deal more of this talk than I have set down.
Philip and Helen had hardly had time to hang garlands of pink roses
along the quayside where the _Lightning Loose_, that perfect yacht, lay
at anchor, before the blunt prow of the ark bumped heavily against the
quayside--and the two, dropping the rest of the roses, waved and smiled
to the group on the ark's terrace.

The first person to speak was Mr. Perrin, who shouted, 'Here we are
again!' like a clown.

Then Lucy said, 'We know we can't land, but the oracle said come and we
came.' She leaned over the bulwark to whisper, 'Who's that perfect duck
you've got with you?'

Philip answered aloud:

'This is my sister Helen--Helen this is Lucy.'

The two looked at each other, and then Helen held out her hands and she
and Lucy kissed each other.

'I knew I should like you,' Lucy whispered, 'but I didn't know I should
like you quite so much.'

Mr. Noah and Mr. Perrin were both bowing to Helen, a little stiffly but
very cordially all the same, and quite surprisingly without surprise.
And the Lord High Islander was looking at her with his own friendly
jolly schoolboy grin.

'If you will embark,' said Mr. Noah politely, 'we can return to the
mainland, and I will explain to you your remaining deeds.'

'Tell them, Pip,' said Helen.

'We don't want to embark--at present,' said Philip shyly. 'We want you
to land.'

'No one may land on the island save two,' said Mr. Noah. 'I am glad you
are the two. I feared one of the two might be the Pretenderette.'

'Not much,' said Philip. 'It's Helen's and mine. We made it. And we want
to give it to the islanders to keep. For their very own,' he added,
feeling that it would be difficult for any one to believe that such a
glorious present was really being made just like that, without speeches,
as if it had been a little present of a pencil sharpener or a peg-top.

He was right.

'To keep?' said the Lord High Islander; 'for our very own? Always?'

'Yes,' said Philip. 'And there's no fear here. You'll _really_ be "happy
troops" now.'

For a moment nobody said anything, though all the faces were
expressive. Then the Lord High Islander spoke.

'Well,' he said, 'of all the brickish bricks----' and could say no more.

'There are lots of houses,' said Philip, 'and room for all the animals,
and the island is thirty miles round, so there's lots of room for the
animals and everything.' He felt happier than he had ever done in his
life. Giving presents is always enjoyable, and this was such a big and
beautiful present, and he loved it so.

'I always did say Master Pip was a gentleman, and I always shall,' Mr.
Perrin remarked.

'I congratulate you,' said Mr. Noah, 'and I am happy to announce that
your fifth deed is now accomplished. You remember our empty silver
fruit-dishes? Your fifth deed was to be the supplying of Polistarchia
with fruit. This island is the only place in the kingdom where fruit
grows. The ark will serve to convey the fruit to the mainland, and the
performance of this deed raises you to the rank of Duke.'

'Philip, you're a dear,' said Lucy in a whisper.

'Shut up,' said Philip fiercely.

'Three cheers,' said a familiar voice, 'for the Duke of Donors.'

'Three cheers,' repeated the Lord High Islander, 'for the Duke of
Donors.'

What a cheer! All the islanders cheered and the M.A.'s and Lucy and Mr.
Perrin and Mr. Noah, and from the inside of the ark came enthusiastic
barkings and gruntings and roarings and squeakings--as the animals of
course joined in as well as they could. Thousands of gulls, circling on
white wings in the sun above, added their screams to the general chorus.
And when the sound of the last cheer died away, a little near familiar
voice said:

'Well done, Philip! I'm proud of you.'

It was the parrot who, perched on the rigging of the _Lightning Loose_,
had started the cheering.

'So that's all right,' it said, fluttered on to Philip's shoulder and
added, 'I've heard you calling for me on the island all the week. But I
felt I needed a rest. I've been talking too much. And that
Pretenderette. And that cage. I assure you I needed a little time to get
over my adventures.'

'We have all had our adventures,' said Mr. Noah gently. And Helen said:

'Won't you land and take possession of the island? I'm sure we are
longing to hear each other's adventures.'

'You first,' said Mr. Noah to the Lord High Islander, who stepped ashore
very gravely.

When Helen saw him come forward, she suddenly kissed Philip, and as the
Lord High Islander's foot touched the shore of that enchanted island,
she simply and suddenly vanished.

'Oh!' cried Philip, 'I wish I hadn't.' And his mouth trembled as girls'
mouths do if they are going to cry.

'The more a present costs you, the more it's worth,' said Mr. Noah.
'This has cost you so much, it's the most splendid present in the
world.'

'I know,' said Philip; 'make yourselves at home, won't you?' he just
managed to say. And then he found he could not say any more. He just
turned and went into the forest. And when he was alone in a green glade,
he flung himself down on his face and lay a long time without moving. It
had been such a happy week. And he was so tired of adventures.

When at last he sniffed with an air of finality and raised his head, the
first thing he saw was Lucy, sitting quite still with her back to him.

'Hullo!' he said rather crossly, 'what are you doing here?'

'Saying the multiplication table,' said Lucy promptly and turned her
head, 'so as not even to think about you. And I haven't even once
turned round. I knew you wanted to be alone. But I wanted to be here
when you'd done being alone. See? I've got something to say to you.'

'Fire ahead,' said Philip, still grumpy.

'I think you're perfectly splendid,' said Lucy very seriously, 'and I
want it to be real pax for ever. And I'll help you in the rest of the
adventures. And if you're cross, I'll try not to mind. Napoleon was
cross sometimes, I believe,' she added pensively, 'and Julius Caesar.'

'Oh, that's all right,' said Philip very awkwardly.

'Then we're going to be real chums?'

'Oh yes, if you like. Only--I don't mind just this once; and it was
decent of you to come and sit there with your back to me--only I hate
gas.'

'Yes,' said Lucy obediently, 'I know. Only sometimes you feel you must
gas a little or burst of admiration. And I've got your proper clothes in
a bundle. I've been carrying them about ever since the islanders' castle
was washed away. Here they are.'

She produced the bundle. And this time Philip was really touched.

'Now I _do_ call that something like,' he said. 'The seaweed dress is
all right here, but you never know what you may have to go through when
you're doing adventures. There might be thorns or snakes or anything.
I'm jolly glad to get my boots back too. I say, come on. Let's go to
Helen's palace and get a banquet ready. I know there'll have to be a
banquet. There always is, here. I know a first-rate bun-tree quite near
here.'

'The cocoa-nut-ice plants looked beautiful as I came along,' said Lucy.
'What a lovely island it is. And you made it!'

'No gas,' said Philip warningly. 'Helen and I made it.'

'She's the dearest darling,' said Lucy.

'Oh, well,' said Philip with resignation, 'if you must gas, gas about
her.'

The banquet was all that you can imagine of interesting and magnificent.
And Philip was, of course, the hero of the hour. And when the banquet
was finished and the last guest had departed to its own house--for the
houses on the island were of course all ready to be occupied, furnished
to the last point of comfort, with pin-cushions full of pins in every
room, Mr. Noah and Lucy and Philip sat down on the terrace steps among
the pink roses for a last little talk.

'Because,' said Philip, 'we shall start the first thing in the morning.
So please will you tell me now what the next deed is that I have to
do?'

'Will you go by ark?' Mr. Noah asked, rolling up his yellow mat to make
an elbow rest and leaning on it; 'I shall be delighted.'

'I thought,' said Philip, 'we might go in the _Lightning Loose_. I've
never sailed her yet, you know. Do you think I _could_?'

'Of course you can,' said Mr. Noah; 'and if not, Lucy can show you. Your
charming yacht is steered on precisely the same principle as the ark.
And in this land all the winds are favourable. You will find the yacht
suitably provisioned. And I may add that you can go most of the way to
your next deed by water--first the sea and then the river.'

'And what,' asked Philip, 'is the next deed?'

'In the extreme north of Polistarchia,' said Mr. Noah instructively,
'lies a town called Somnolentia. It used to be called Briskford in
happier days. A river then ran through the town, a rapid river that
brought much gold from the mountains. The people used to work very hard
to keep the channel clear of the lumps of gold which continually
threatened to choke it. Their fields were then well-watered and
fruitful, and the inhabitants were cheerful and happy. But when the
Hippogriff was let out of the book, a Great Sloth got out too. Evading
all efforts to secure him, the Great Sloth journeyed northward. He is a
very large and striking animal, and by some means, either fear or
admiration, he obtained a complete ascendancy over the inhabitants of
Briskford. He induced them to build him a temple of solid gold, and
while they were doing this the river bed became choked up and the stream
was diverted into another channel far from the town. Since then the
place is fallen into decay. The fields are parched and untilled. Such
water as the people need for drinking is drawn by great labour from a
well. Washing has become shockingly infrequent.'

'Are we to teach the dirty chaps to wash?' asked Philip in disgust.

'Do not interrupt,' said Mr. Noah. 'You destroy the thread of my
narrative. Where was I?'

'Washing infrequent,' said Lucy; 'but if the fields are dried up, what
do they live on?'

'Pine-apples,' replied Mr. Noah, 'which grow freely and do not need much
water. Gathering these is the sole industry of this degraded people.
Pine-apples are not considered a fruit but a vegetable,' he added
hastily, seeing another question trembling on Philip's lips. 'Whatever
of their waking time can be spared from the gathering and eating of the
pine-apples is spent in singing choric songs in honour of the Great
Sloth. And even this time is short, for such is his influence on the
Somnolentians that when he sleeps they sleep too, and,' added Mr. Noah
impressively, 'he sleeps almost all the time. Your deed is to devise
some means of keeping the Great Sloth awake and busy. And I think you've
got your work cut out. When you've disposed of the Great Sloth you can
report yourself to me here. I shall remain here for some little time. I
need a holiday. The parrot will accompany you. It knows its way about as
well as any bird in the land. Good-night. And good luck! You will excuse
my not being down to breakfast.'

And the next morning, dewy-early, Philip and Lucy and the parrot went
aboard the yacht and loosed her from her moorings, and Lucy showed
Philip how to steer, and the parrot sat on the mast and called out
instructions.

They made for the mouth of a river. ('I never built a river,' said
Philip. 'No,' said the parrot, 'it came out of the poetry book.') And
when they were hungry they let down the anchor and went into the cabin
for breakfast. And two people sprang to meet them, almost knocking
Lucy down with the violence of their welcome. The two people were Max
and Brenda.

[Illustration: He induced them to build him a temple of solid gold.]

'Oh, you dear dogs,' Lucy cried, and Philip patted them, one with each
hand, 'how did you get here?'

'It was a little surprise of Mr. Noah's,' said the parrot.
