the storm, which came on at nine o'clock, somewhat checked the
ardour of the assailants; and the water was invaluable to the
wounded.

At midnight four companies, who had gone out in search of the
general, arrived and cleared the enemy out of the village. The
casualties had been heavy, two officers and thirty-six men having
been killed, and five officers and a hundred and two men wounded.

Next day the force started on their way up the valley. Their object
was to attack a strongly-fortified village on the eastern side of
the valley, about six miles distant from the camp. When they were
within two thousand yards of the enemy's position, the tribesmen
could be seen, making their disposition for the attack.

The Sikhs, Dogras, and Buffs stormed the heights on either side;
but the enemy made no attempt to stand. The Guides advanced
straight on the village, which was destroyed without loss. The
grain found there was carried into camp. Several other villages
were captured and, though the enemy were several times gathered in
force, the appearance of a squadron of Bengal Lancers, in every
case, put them to flight.

In the meantime, the 3rd Brigade were encamped at Nawagai. The news
of the attack on General Jeffreys' column had upset the
arrangements. It was of the utmost importance to hold Nawagai,
which separated the country of the Hadda Mullah and the Mamunds. As
the whole country was hostile, and would rise at the first
opportunity, the force was not strong enough to march against the
Hadda Mullah, and leave a sufficient body to guard the camp. It was
therefore decided to wait, until they were joined by General Ellis'
force.

Skirmishing went on daily. On the 17th, heliographic communication
was opened with General Ellis. On the following day an order was
flashed to them, to join General Jeffreys in the Mamund valley.
This was impracticable, however, until General Ellis should arrive.

Next night a couple of hundred swordsmen crept up to a ravine,
within fifty yards of the camp, and suddenly fell upon the West
Surrey regiment. They were met by such a hail of bullets that most
of them dropped, and of the remainder not a man reached Hallal.

On the following day a messenger arrived, from General Ellis,
asking Sir Bindon Blood to meet him ten miles away. That afternoon
a reconnaissance was made, as news had been received that large
reinforcements had been received by Hadda Mullah. The enemy showed
themselves in great force, but kept out of range of the guns
though, during the return march, they followed the troops and, when
darkness set in, were but two miles from camp.

At nine in the evening the enemy, who had crept silently up,
attempted to rush the camp on three sides. The troops were well
prepared, and maintained a steady fire; although the enemy's
swordsmen hurled themselves against our entrenchments in great
numbers. The star shells were fired by the mountain battery, and
their reflection enabled the infantry to pour deadly volleys into
the midst of the enemy, who were but a few yards distant. The
tribesmen, however, completely surrounded the camp, their riflemen
keeping up a heavy fire, and their swordsmen making repeated
rushes.

The tents had all been struck, and the troops lay flat on the
ground while the enemy's bullets swept the camp. This was kept up
till two o'clock in the morning, the fire never slackening for a
minute; and the monotony of the struggle was only broken by an
occasional mad, fanatical rush of the Ghazis. The entrenchments
were so well made that only thirty-two casualties occurred, but a
hundred and fifteen horses and transport animals were killed.

The effect of this decisive repulse, of an attack which the enemy
thought would certainly be successful, was shown by the complete
dispersal of the enemy. Their losses had been terrible. It was
ascertained that, in the surrounding villages alone, three hundred
and thirty had been killed; while a great number of dead and
wounded had been carried away over the passes.

On the following day General Ellis arrived. It was arranged that
the 3rd Brigade should join his command. Thus reinforced, he could
deal with the Hadda Mullah, and General Blood would be at liberty
to join the 2nd Brigade in the Mamund Valley.

General Ellis took up a position, with the two brigades at his
disposal, at the mouth of the Bedmanai Pass; and sniping went on
all night. Next morning the troops moved forward to the attack.
Covered by the rest of the force, the 20th Punjabis, with the 3rd
Ghoorkhas in support, were ordered to make the assault, and to
secure the hills commanding the pass. The enemy fought stubbornly,
but were gradually driven back; their numbers being greatly reduced
by deserters, after the attack on the camp. The Hadda Mullah had
fled, directly the fight began; but the Suffi Mullah was seen
constantly rallying his followers.

On the following morning, General Westmacott's brigade marched to a
village situated at the mouth of the Jarobi gorge--a terrible
defile, with precipitous cliffs on either side, the crests of which
were well wooded. The resistance, however, was slight, and the
force pushed through and burned the houses, towers, and forts of
the Hadda Mullah. They were harassed, however, on their return to
camp.

In the meantime, Sir Bindon Blood had joined General Jeffreys'
brigade, which was still engaged in operations against the Mamunds.
Several villages were burned, and large supplies of game and fodder
carried off. The Mamunds at last sent in a party to negotiate; but
it soon appeared that they had no intention of surrendering, for
they had been joined by a considerable number of Afghans, and were
ready for a fresh campaign. The Afghan borderers were in a good
position, and were able to bring their forces to the assistance of
the Mamunds with the assurance that, if they were repulsed, they
could return to their homes.

General Jeffreys therefore recommenced operations, by an attack
upon two fortified villages. These were situated on the lower slope
of a steep and ragged hill, near enough to give support to each
other, and protected by rocky spurs. The inhabitants sallied out to
attack, but were checked by the appearance of our cavalry. The
force then pressed forward to the high jungle.

It was evident that the spurs on either side must be captured,
before the village could be stormed. The Guides were ordered to
clear the spur to the left, the 31st Punjab Infantry and the Dogras
the centre ridge between the two hills, while the West Kents
advanced straight up the hill.

The Guides dashed up the hill with a wild yell. This so intimidated
the tribesmen that, after firing a volley so wild that not a single
man was wounded in the attacking column, they fled in a panic.

The Punjabis, on the other hill, were stubbornly fighting their
way. The ground consisted, for the most part, of terraced fields,
commanded by strongly-built sangars. Colonel O'Brien was killed,
while gallantly leading his men on to the assault; but the Punjabis
persisted, under the covering fire of the mountain battery, and
dropped shell after shell into the Mamunds; who, however, although
losing heavily, stuck manfully to their rocks and boulders, and
finally were only driven out at the point of the bayonet.

The 31st were now joined by the West Kent, who came down from a
spur on the west, and were able to drive the enemy out of several
strong positions above the other village. On their way a half
company, on reaching a sangar, were suddenly charged by a body of
Ghazis. From the melee which ensued, many of the West Kents were
killed and wounded, among them the officer in command.

As it was now late, it was decided to return to camp for the night.
This was done steadily and deliberately, although the enemy kept up
a heavy fire. The casualties of the day were sixty-one, no fewer
than eight British officers being killed or wounded.

Two days' rest was given the troops, and then they marched against
Badelai. The attack was almost unopposed. The tribesmen imagined
that we were again going to attack their former position, and they
were unable to return in time to defend the village. Their loss,
however, was severe, as they came down to the open ground, and were
swept by the guns of the mountain battery.

A few days afterwards the campaign was brought to an end, the enemy
coming in and offering a general surrender. The expedition had been
very successful, twenty-six villages having been destroyed, and all
the hoards of grain having been carried off.

On the 13th of October the Mamund valley was evacuated, and the
force moved into Matassa. The inhabitants here were perfectly
peaceable and, beyond the blowing up of the fort of a chief, who
had continued hostile, there was no fighting. The force then
returned to Malakand, where it remained for two months.

Two tribes yet remained to be dealt with, namely the Bulas and
Chamlas. Both refused to comply with the reasonable terms imposed
upon them, by the government, for their complicity in the
rebellion.

The force selected for their punishment consisted of two brigades,
under General Meiklejohn and General Jeffreys. These advanced to
the assault on the Tangi Pass. The Guides, 31st Punjabis, three
squadrons of the Bengal Lancers, and two squadrons of the Guide
cavalry were sent to Rustam, a place which threatened three passes
leading into Buner. The enemy, being thus compelled to watch all
three routes, were prevented from assembling in any force.

Sir Bindon Blood encamped the two brigades on Thursday, the 6th of
January, at the mouth of the Tangi Pass. The detached column was to
protect an entrance over the Pirsai Pass. The assault was made by
the column under General Meiklejohn, and so well was the force
distributed--the hills on either side being captured, while three
batteries opened fire on the hill with shrapnel--that the tribesmen
were unable to maintain their position. The pass was captured with
only one casualty, and the troops marched triumphantly down into
Buner, the first British troops who had ever entered the country.

They halted at the first village. As this place was plentifully
stocked with goats and chickens, they found abundance of food.

The detached column were equally successful in their attack on the
Pirsai Pass, for they met with scarcely any resistance. Our
success, in capturing the two passes hitherto deemed impregnable,
brought about a complete collapse of the enemy. Deputations came in
from all the surrounding villages, and the tribesmen complied with
the terms imposed upon them.



Chapter 11: An Arduous March.


Lisle had heard of the operations that had been carried on by the
brigade under General Gazelee, under the general supervision of Sir
William Lockhart. The object was to cross by the Zolaznu Pass, to
punish two of the hostile tribes on the other side; to effect a
meeting with the Khuram column; and to concentrate and operate
against the Chamkannis, a tribe of inveterate robbers. On the 26th
General Gazelee started, and the newly-arrived wing of the Scottish
Fusiliers, and two companies of the Yorkshires was to follow, on
the 28th.

The approach to the pass, which was four miles to the left, was
across a very rough country; and as, after advancing four and a
half miles, a severe opposition was met with, most of the day was
spent in dislodging the tribesmen from the villages, and turning
them out of the spurs which covered the approach to the pass.
Finding it impossible to make the summit that night, they encamped
and, although they were fired into heavily, but little damage was
done.

At dawn the expedition started again but, by accident, they
ascended another pass parallel with the Lozacca. At nine o'clock
the Ghoorkhas and Sikhs arrived at the top of the pass. It was very
difficult and, as the baggage animals gave great trouble on the
ascent, and were unable to go farther, the party camped on the top
of the pass.

General Lockhart left the camp early that morning, but was also
opposed so vigorously that he was obliged to encamp, three miles
from the top of the pass, after having burnt all the villages from
which he had been fired upon. In the morning he joined the advance
party, and went ten miles down the pass. On arriving there, he
found that the Queen's and the 3rd Sikhs had pushed on farther to
Dargai. This was not the place previously visited of this name,
which appears to be a common one in the Tirah. Plenty of hay and
straw stores were found, and the troops were vastly more
comfortable than on the previous night.

It was here that Lisle had overtaken the column.

Next day the whole force was encamped at Dargai, where they were
received in a friendly manner by the villagers; who expressed
themselves willing to pay their share of the fines imposed, and
also to picket the hills. The rear guard, of two companies of
Ghoorkhas and two companies of Scottish Fusiliers, arrived late in
the day. They had met with great opposition. The tribesmen would,
indeed, have succeeded in carrying off the guns, had not a company
of the Ghoorkhas come up and, fighting stubbornly, driven them off.

Next morning the headmen of the village were summoned, to explain
why they had failed to pay the number of rifles they had promised;
and fire was applied to one of their houses. This had an
instantaneous effect and, in a quarter of an hour, the rifles were
forthcoming and the fine paid.

The force then moved on to Esor, where helio communication with the
Khuram column had been effected and, that day, Sir William Lockhart
and Colonel Hill--who commanded it--met. The country traversed was
a beautiful one. It was admirably cultivated, and the houses were
substantially built.

That day two columns went out: one under General Gazelee, to
collect the fines from one of the tribes; the other commanded by
Colonel Hill, to punish the Chamkannis. This was a small, but
extremely warlike and hardy tribe. A short time before, they had
raided a thousand head of cattle from across our border, and got
clear away with them.

A portion of the force was told off, to work its way into the
valley by the river gorge, while the main body ascended the path
over the Kotal. They reached this at a quarter-past ten and, while
they were waiting for the head of the column that had gone up the
gorge to appear, fire was opened upon them. This, however, was kept
down by the guns. It was an hour before the column appeared, but
the whole force was not through the defile until it was too late to
carry out the destruction of the villages. The column therefore
retired, severely harassed, the while, by the enemy.

Next day Colonel Hill was again sent forward, with the Border
Scouts, the 4th and 5th Ghoorkhas, part of the Queen's, and the
Khoat Battery. They were over the Kotal at nine o'clock, and the
5th Ghoorkhas and the scouts were sent to hold the hills on the
left. The Chamkannis had anticipated a sudden visit, and were in
force on the left, where they had erected several sangars.

The little body of scouts, eighty men strong, fought their way up
the hill; and waited there for the leading company of the 5th.
Lieutenant Lucas, who commanded them, told off half his company to
sweep the sangar, and then the remainder dashed at it.

The Chamkannis stood more firmly than any of the tribesmen had
hitherto done. They met the charge with a volley, and then drew
their knives to receive it. The fire of the covering party
destroyed their composure and, when the scouts were within thirty
yards, they bolted for the next sangar.

Lucas carried three of these defences, one after another, and drove
the enemy off the hill. The Ghoorkhas scouts, who had been engaged
thirty-six times during the campaign, had killed more than their
own strength of the enemy, and had lost but one man killed and two
wounded; and this without taking count of the many nights they had
spent in driving off prowlers round the camp.

The work of destruction now began. Over sixty villages were
destroyed in the valley and, on the following day, the expedition
started to withdraw. The lesson had been so severe that no attempt
was made, by the tribesmen, to harass the movement.

The column marched down to the camp in the Maidan--the Adam Khels,
through whose country they passed, paying the fine, and so
picketing many of the adjacent heights as to guard the camp from
the attacks of hostile tribesmen. When they reached Bara they
decided to rejoin the Peshawar column, without delay, as the
outlook was not promising. The evacuation began on the 7th of
December, but the rear guard did not leave till the 9th. It was
divided into two divisions in order, as much as possible, to avoid
the delay caused by the large baggage column. The 1st Division was
to march down on the Mastura Valley, while General Lockhart's 2nd
Division would again face the Dwatoi defile. Both the forces were
due to join the Peshawar column, on or about the 14th.

General Symonds, with the 1st Division, was unmolested by the way.
It was very different, however, with Lockhart.

The movement was not made a day too soon. Clouds were gathering,
the wind was blowing from the north, and there was every prospect
of a fall of snow, which would have rendered the passage of the
Bara Pass impossible. The 3rd Ghoorkhas led the way, followed by
the Borderers, with the half battalion of the Scottish Regiment and
the Dorsets. Behind them came the baggage of the brigade and
headquarters, the rear of the leading column being brought up by
the 36th Sikhs. General Kempster's Brigade followed, in as close
order as possible; having detached portions of the 1st and 2nd
Ghoorkhas, and the 2nd Punjab Infantry, to flank the whole force.

The Malikdin Khels were staunch to their word, and not a single
shot was fired till the force had passed through the defile. The
difficulties, however, were great, for the troops, baggage, and
followers had to wade through the torrent, two-thirds of the way.
The flanking had used up all the Ghoorkhas, and the Borderers now
became the advance guard.

Everything seemed peaceful, and the regiment was halfway across the
small valley, when a heavy fire was opened on the opposite hill.
General Westmacott was in command of the brigade. The Borderers
were to take and hold the opposite hill, supported by a company of
Dorsets and of Scottish Fusiliers. The battery opened fire, while a
party turned the nearest sangars on the right flank. By three
o'clock the whole of the crests were held, and the baggage streamed
into camp. Fighting continued, however, on the peaks, far into the
night.

No explanations were forthcoming why the enemy should have allowed
the force to pass through the defile, without obstruction, when a
determined body of riflemen could have kept the whole of them at
bay; for the artillery could not have been brought into position,
as the defile was the most difficult, of its kind, that a British
division had ever crossed.

The day following the withdrawal of the rear guard, it rained in
the Bara Valley, which meant snow in the Maidan. The pickets on the
heights had a bad time of it that night, as some of them were
constantly attacked; and it was not till three in the morning that
the baggage came in, the rear guard arriving in camp about ten.

The camp presented a wonderful sight that day, crowded as it was
with men and animals. The weather was bitterly cold, and the men
were busy gathering wood to make fires. On the hills all round, the
Sikhs could be seen engaged with the enemy, the guns aiding them
with their work. The 36th Sikhs, as soon as they arrived, were sent
off to occupy a peak, two miles distant, which covered the advance
into the Rajgul defile. The enemy mustered strong, but were turned
out of the position.

The next morning the villages were white with snow. A party was
sent on into the Rajgul valley, where they destroyed a big village.

Immediately after leaving Dwatoi, the valley broadened out till it
was nearly a mile wide. On the right it was commanded by steep
hills; on the left it was, to some extent, cultivated. The 4th
Brigade this time led the way, the 3rd bringing up the rear.

From the moment when the troops fell in on the 10th, till they
reached Barkai on the 14th, there was a general action from front
to rear. The advance guard marched at half-past seven. At eight
o'clock flanking parties were engaged with the enemy in the hills
and spurs. Serious opposition, however, did not take place until
five and a half miles of the valley had been passed.

Here the river turned to the right, and the front of the advance
was exposed to the fire of a strongly-fortified village, nestling
on the lower slope of a hill, on a terrace plateau. The village was
furnished with no fewer than ten towers, and from these a very
heavy fire was kept up.

The battery shelled the spur; while the Sikhs, in open order,
skirmished up the terraces to the plateau and, after a brisk
fusillade, took the village and burnt it.

A mile farther, the head of the column reached the camping place,
which was a strong village built into the river cleft. On the left
the 36th Sikhs and part of the Ghoorkhas cleared the way; while the
Bombay Pioneers, and the rest of the Ghoorkhas, became heavily
engaged with the enemy in some villages on the right. All along the
line a brisk engagement went on. The camp pickets took up their
positions early in the afternoon, and a foraging party went out and
brought in supplies, after some fighting.

Kempster's Brigade had not been able to reach the camp, and settled
itself for the night three miles farther up the valley. It, too,
had its share of fighting.

All night it rained heavily, and the morning of the 11th broke cold
and miserable. It was freezing hard; the hilltops, a hundred feet
above the camp, were wrapped in snow; and the river had swollen
greatly. The advance guard waded out into the river bed, and the
whole of the brigade followed, the Ghoorkhas clearing the sides of
the valley. In a short time they passed into the Zakka-Khel section
of the Bara Valley.

Curiously enough, the opposition ceased here. It may be that the
enemy feared to show themselves on the snow on the hilltops; or
that, being short of ammunition, they decided to reserve themselves
for an attack upon the other brigade. Scarcely a shot was fired
until the valley broadened out into the Akerkhel, where some small
opposition was offered by villagers on either bank. This, however,
was easily brushed aside.

The advance guard of the 3rd Brigade almost caught up the rear
guard of the 4th and, by four in the afternoon, its baggage was
coming along nicely, so that all would be in before nightfall. The
rear guard of the brigade, consisting of the Gordons, Ghoorkhas,
and 2nd Punjab Infantry, had been harassed as soon as they started
and, as the day wore on, the enemy increased greatly in numbers. As
the flanking parties fell back to join the rear guard, they were so
pressed that it was as much as they could do to keep them at bay.

When about three miles from camp, the baggage took a wrong road. In
trying a piece of level ground, they became helplessly mixed up in
swampy rice fields. The enemy, seeing the opportunity they had
waited for, outflanked the rear guard, and began pouring a heavy
fire into the baggage. The flanking parties were weak, for the
strain had been so severe that many men from the hospital escort
and baggage guard had been withdrawn, to dislodge the enemy from
the surrounding spurs.

The Pathans were almost among the baggage, when a panic seized the
followers. As night began to fall, the officer commanding the
Gordons, with two weak companies of his regiment, two companies of
