
"They're all deserted too," remarked Buzzby.

But Buzzby was wrong, for at that moment a very small and particularly
fat little boy in a fox-skin dress appeared at the mouth of one of the
low tunnels that formed the entrance to the nearest hut.  This boy
looked exactly like a lady's muff with a hairy head above it and a pair
of feet below.  The instant he observed the strangers he threw up his
arms, uttered a shrill cry of amazement, and disappeared in the tunnel.
Next instant a legion of dogs rushed out of the huts, barking furiously,
and on their heels came the entire population, creeping on their hands
and knees out of the tunnel mouths like dark hairy monsters issuing from
their holes.  They had spears and knives of ivory with them, but a
glance showed the two parties that they were friends, and in a few
moments Awatok and his comrades were chattering vociferously round the
sailors, and endeavouring by word and sign to make themselves
understood.

The Esquimaux received the three visitors and the rest of the
sledge-party, who came up a few hours later, with the utmost
hospitality.  But we have not space to tell of how they dragged them
into their smoky huts of snow, and how they offered them raw seals'
flesh to eat; and how, on the sailors expressing disgust they laughed,
and added moss mixed with oil to their lamps to enable them to cook
their food; and how they managed, by signs and otherwise, to understand
that the strangers had come in search of food, at which they (the
Esquimaux) were not surprised; and how they assured their visitors (also
by means of signs) that they would go a-hunting with them on the
following day, whereat they (the sailors) were delighted, and shook
hands all round.  Neither have we space to tell of how the visitors were
obliged to conform to custom, and sleep in the same huts with men,
women, children, and dogs, and how they felt thankful to be able to
sleep anywhere and anyhow, without being frozen.  All this, and a great
deal more, we are compelled to skip over here, and leave it unwillingly,
to the vivid imagination of our reader.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE HUNTING PARTY--RECKLESS DRIVING--A DESPERATE ENCOUNTER WITH A
WALRUS, ETCETERA.

Late in the day, by the bright light of the stars, the sailors and the
Esquimaux left the snow-huts of the village, and, travelling out to
seaward on the floes, with dogs and sledges, lances and spears, advanced
to do battle with the walrus.

The northern lights were more vivid than usual, making the sky quite
luminous, and there was a sharp freshness in the air, which, while it
induced the hunters to pull their hoods more tightly round their faces,
also sent their blood careering more briskly through their veins, as
they drove swiftly over the ice in the Esquimaux sledges.

"Did ye ever see walrusses a'fore, Davie!" enquired Buzzby who sat
beside Summers on the leading sledge.

"None but what I've seed on this voyage."

"They're remarkable creeturs," rejoined Buzzby, slapping his hand on his
thigh.  "I've seed many a one in my time, an I can tell ye, lad, they're
ugly customers.  They fight like good 'uns, and give the Esquimaux a
deal o' trouble to kill them--they do."

"Tell me a story about 'em, Buzzby--do, like a good chap," said Davie
Summers, burying his nose in the skirts of his hairy garment to keep it
warm.  "You're a capital hand at a yarn, now, fire away."

"A story, lad; I don't know as how I can exactly tell ye a story, but
I'll give ye wot they calls a hanecdote.  It wos about five years ago,
more or less, I wos out in Baffin's Bay, becalmed off one o' the Eskimo
settlements, when we wos lookin' over the side at the lumps of ice
floatin' past, up got a walrus not very far offshore, and out went half
a dozen kayaks, as they call the Eskimo men's boats, and they all sot on
the beast at once.  Well, it wos one o' the brown walrusses, which is
always the fiercest; and the moment he got the first harpoon he went
slap at the man that threw it; but the fellow backed out, and then a cry
was raised to let it alone, as it wos a brown walrus.  One young Eskimo,
howsiver, would have another slap at it and went so close that the brute
charged, upset the kayak, and ripped the man up with his tusks.  Seein'
this, the other Eskimos made a dash at it, and wounded it badly; but the
upshot wos that the walrus put them all to flight and made off, clear
away, with six harpoons fast in its hide."

"Buzzby's tellin' ye gammon," roared Tom Green, who rode on the second
sledge in rear of that on which Davie Summers sat.  "What is't all
about?"

"About gammon, of coorse," retorted Davie.  "Keep yer mouth shut for
fear your teeth freeze."

"Can't ye lead us a better road?" shouted Saunders, who rode on the
third sledge; "my bones are rattlin' about inside a' me like a bag o'
ninepins."

"Give the dogs a cut, old fellow," said Buzzby, with a chuckle and a
motion of his arm to the Esquimaux who drove his sledge.

The Esquimaux did not understand the words, but he quite understood the
sly chuckle and the motion of the arm, so he sent the lash of the heavy
whip with a loud crack over the backs of the team.

"Hold on for life!" cried Davie, as the dogs sprang forward with a
bound.

The part they were about to pass over was exceedingly rough and broken,
and Buzzby resolved to give his shipmates a shake.  The pace was
tremendous.  The powerful dogs drew their loads after them with
successive bounds, which caused a succession of crashes as the sledges
sprang from lump to lump of ice, and the men's teeth snapped in a truly
savage manner.

"Ba-a-ck ye-e-r to-o-psails, will ye?" shouted Amos Parr.

But the delighted Esquimaux leader, who entered quite into the joke, had
no intention whatever of backing his top-sails; he administered another
crack to the team, which yelled madly, and, bounding over a wide chasm
in the ice, came down with a crash which snapped the line of the leading
dog and set it free.  Here Buzzby caused the driver to pull up.

"Stop, ye varmint!  Come to an anchor!" said he.  "Is that a way to
drive the poor dogs!"

"Ye might have stopped him sooner, I think," cried the second mate in
wrath.

"Hai!" shouted the band of Esquimaux, pointing to a hummock of ice, a
few hundred yards in advance of the spot, on which they stood.

Instantly all were silent, and gazing intently ahead at a dark object
that burst upwards through the ice.

"A walrus!" whispered Buzzby.

"So it is," answered Amos Parr.

"I've my doobts on that point," remarked Saunders.

Before the doubts of the second mate could be resolved, the Esquimaux
uttered another exclamation and pointed to another dark object a quarter
of a mile to the right.  It was soon found that there were several of
these ocean elephants sporting about in the neighbourhood, and bursting
up the young ice that had formed on several holes, by using their huge
heads as battering-rams.  It was quickly arranged that the party should
divide into three, and while a few remained behind to watch and restrain
the dogs the remainder were to advance on foot to the attack.

Saunders, Buzzby, Amos Parr, Davie Summers, and Awatok formed one party,
and advanced with two muskets and several spears towards the walrus that
had been first seen, the sailors taking care to keep in rear of Awatok
in order to follow his lead, for they were as yet ignorant of the proper
mode of attack.

Awatok led the party stealthily towards a hummock, behind which he
caused them to crouch until the walrus should dive.  This it did in a
few minutes, and then they all rushed from their place of concealment
towards another hummock that lay about fifty yards from the hole.  Just
as they reached it, and crouched, the walrus rose, snorting the brine
from its shaggy muzzle, and lashing the water into foam with its
flippers.

"Losh, what a big 'un!" exclaimed Saunders in amazement; and well he
might, for this was an unusually large animal, more like an elephant in
size than anything else.

It had two enormous ivory tusks, with which it tore and pounded large
fragments from the ice-tables, while it barked like a gigantic dog, and
rolled its heavy form about in sport.

Awatok now whispered to his comrades, and attempted to get them to
understand that they must follow him as fast as possible at the next
run.  Suddenly the walrus dived.  Awatok rushed forward, and in another
instant stood at the edge of the hole with his spear in readiness in his
right hand, and the coil of line in his left.  The others joined him
instantly, and they had scarcely come up when the huge monster again
rose to the surface.

Saunders and Buzzby fired at his head the moment it appeared above
water, and Awatok at the same time planted a spear in his breast, and
ran back with the coil.  The others danced about in an excited state,
throwing their spears and missing their mark, although it was a big one,
frequently.

"Give him a lance-thrust, Amos," cried Saunders, reloading his piece.

But Amos could not manage it, for the creature lashed about so furiously
that, although he made repeated attempts, he failed to do more than
prick its tough sides, and render it still more savage.  Buzzby, too,
made several daring efforts to lance it, but failed, and nearly slipped
into the hole in his recklessness.  It was a wild scene of confusion--
the spray was dashed over the ice round the hole, and the men, as they
ran about in extreme excitement, slipped and occasionally tumbled in
their haste, while the maddened brute glared at them like a fiend, and
bellowed in its anger and pain.

Suddenly it dived, leaving the men staring at each other.  The sudden
cessation of noise and turmoil had a very strange effect.

"Is't away?" enquired Saunders with a look of chagrin.

He was answered almost instantly by the walrus reappearing, and making
furious efforts by means of its flippers and tusks to draw itself out
upon the ice, while it roared with redoubled energy.  The shot that was
instantly fired seemed to have no effect, and the well-directed harpoon
of Awatok was utterly disregarded by it.  Amos Parr, however, gave it a
lance-thrust that caused it to howl vehemently, and dyed the foam with
its blood.

"Hand me a spear, Buzzby," cried Saunders, "the musket-balls seem to
hurt him as little as peas.  Oot o' my gait."

The second mate made a rush so tremendous that something awful would
infallibly have resulted had he not struck his foot against a bit of ice
and fallen violently on his breast.  The impetus with which he had
started shot him forward till his head was within a foot of the walrus's
grim muzzle.  For one moment the animal looked at the man as if it were
surprised at his audacity, and then it recommenced its frantic
struggles, snorting blood, and foam, and water into Saunders's face as
he scrambled out of its way.  Immediately after, Awatok fixed another
harpoon in its side, and it dived again.

The struggle that ensued was tremendous, and the result seemed for a
long time to be doubtful.  Again and again shots were fired and
spear-thrusts made with effect, but the huge creature seemed
invulnerable.  Its ferocity and strength remained unabated, while the
men--sailors and Esquimaux alike--were nearly exhausted.  The battle had
now lasted three hours; the men were panting from exertion; the walrus,
still bellowing, was clinging to the edge of the ice, which for several
yards round the hole was covered with blood and foam.

"Wot a brute it is!" said Buzzby, sitting down on a lump of ice and
looking at it in despair.

"We might have killed it lang ago had I not wet my gun," growled
Saunders, regarding his weapon, which was completely drenched, with a
look of contempt.

"Give it another poke, Awatok," cried Amos Parr; "you'll know best
whereabouts its life lies; I can make nothin' o't."

Awatok obeyed, and gave it a thrust under the left flipper that seemed
to reach its heart, for it fell back into the water and struggled
violently.  At the same moment Davie Summers mounted to the top of a
hummock, part of which overhung the pool, and launched a harpoon down
upon its back.  This latter blow seemed to revive its ferocity, for it
again essayed to clamber out on the ice, and looked up at Davie with a
glance of seeming indignation, while Buzzby, who had approached, fell
backward as he retreated from before it.  At the same time Saunders
succeeded in getting his musket to go off.  The ball struck it in the
eye, and, entering the brain, caused instant death, a result which was
greeted with three enthusiastic cheers.

The getting of this enormous creature out of the water would have been a
matter of no small difficulty had there not been such a large party
present.  Even as it was, it took them a considerable time to accomplish
this feat, and to cut it up and pack it on the sledges.

While the battle above described was going on, two smaller walrus had
been killed and secured, and the Esquimaux were in a state of great
glee, for previous to the arrival of the sailors they had been
unsuccessful in their hunts, and had been living on short allowance.  On
returning home there was a general feasting and merry-making, and
Saunders felt that if he remained there long they would not only eat up
their own meat, but his also.  He therefore resolved to return
immediately to the ship with his prize, and leave part of his men behind
to continue the hunt until he should return with the sledge.

But he was prevented from putting this intention into practice by a
hurricane which burst over the Arctic regions with inconceivable
bitterness, and for two days kept all the inhabitants of the
snow-village confined to their huts.  This hurricane was the fiercest
that had swept over these bleak regions of ice since the arrival of the
_Dolphin_.  The wind shrieked, as it swept round the cliffs, and down
the ravines, and out upon the frozen sea, as if a legion of evil spirits
were embodied and concentrated in each succeeding blast.  The snow-drift
rose in solid masses, whirled madly round for a few seconds, and then
was caught by the blast, and swept away like sheets of white flame.  The
thermometer stood at 23 degrees below zero, a temperature that was mild
compared with what it usually had been of late, but the fierce wind
abstracted heat from everything exposed to it so rapidly that neither
man nor beast could face it for a moment.

Buzzby got a little bit of his chin frozen while he merely put his head
out at the door of the hut to see how the weather looked, and Davie
Summers had one of his fingers slightly frozen while in the act of
carrying in one of the muskets that had been left outside by mistake.

As for the Esquimaux, they recked not of the weather.  Their snow-huts
were warm, and their mouths were full, so like wise men and women they
waited patiently within-doors till the storm should blow itself out.
The doings of these poor people were very curious.  They ate
voraciously, and evidently preferred their meat raw.  But when the
sailors showed disgust at this, they at once made a small fire of moss,
mingled with blubber, over which they half-cooked their food.

Their mode of procuring fire was curious.  Two small stones were taken,
one a piece of white quartz, the other a piece of iron-stone, and struck
together smartly; the few sparks that flew out were thrown upon a kind
of white down, found on the willows, under which was placed a lump of
dried moss.  It was usually a considerable time before they succeeded in
catching a spark, but once caught they had no difficulty in blowing it
into a flame.

They had also an ingenious contrivance for melting snow.  This was a
flat stone, supported by two other stones, and inclined slightly at one
end; upon this flat stone a lump of snow was placed, and below it was
kindled a small fire of moss and blubber.  When the stone became heated,
the snow melted and flowed down the incline into a small seal-skin cup
placed there to catch it.

During the continuance of the storm the sailors shared the food and
lodging of these Esquimaux.  They were a fat, oily, hospitable, dirty
race, and vied with each other in showing kindness to those who had been
thus thrown into their society.  As Davie Summers expressed it, "they
were regular trumps"; and, according to Buzzby's opinion, "they wos the
jolliest set o' human walrusses wot he had ever comed across in all his
travels, and he ought to know, for he had always kep' his weather-eye
open, he had, and wouldn't give in on that p'int, he wouldn't, to no man
livin'."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE NORTHERN PARTY--A NARROW ESCAPE, AND A GREAT DISCOVERY--ESQUIMAUX
AGAIN, AND A JOYFUL SURPRISE.

It is interesting to meditate, sometimes, on the deviousness of the
paths by which men are led in earthly affairs--even when the
starting-point and object of pursuit are the same.  The two parties
which left the _Dolphin_ had for their object the procuring of fresh
food.  The one went south and the other north, but their field was the
same--the surface of the frozen sea and the margin of the ice-girt
shore.  Yet how different their experiences and results were the sequel
will show.

As we have already said, the northern party was in command of Bolton,
the first mate, and consisted of ten men, among whom were our hero Fred,
Peter Grim, O'Riley, and Meetuck, with the whole team of dogs, and the
large sledge.

Being fine weather when they set out, they travelled rapidly, making
twenty miles, as near as they could calculate, in the first six hours.
The dogs pulled famously, and the men stepped out well at first, being
cheered and invigorated mentally by the prospect of an adventurous
excursion and fresh meat.  At the end of the second day they buried part
of their stock of provisions at the foot of a conspicuous cliff,
intending to pick it up on their return, and, thus lightened, they
advanced more rapidly, keeping farther out on the floes, in hopes of
falling in with walrus or seals.

Their hopes, however, were doomed to disappointment.  They got only one
seal, and that was a small one--scarcely sufficient to afford a couple
of meals to the dogs.

They were "misfortunate entirely", as O'Riley remarked, and, to add to
their misfortunes, the floe-ice became so rugged that they could
scarcely advance at all.

"Things grow worse and worse," remarked Grim, as the sledge, for the
twentieth time that day, plunged into a crack in the ice, and had to be
unloaded ere it could be got out.  "The sledge won't stand much o' sich
work, and if it breaks--good-bye to it, for it won't mend without wood,
and there's none here."

"No fear of it," cried Bolton encouragingly; "it's made of material as
tough as your own sinews, Grim, and won't give way easily, as the thumps
it has withstood already prove.  Has it never struck you, Fred," he
continued, turning to our hero, who was plodding forward in
silence,--"has it never struck you that when things in this world get
very bad, and we begin to feel inclined to give up, they somehow or
other begin to get better."

"Why, yes, I have noticed that; but I have a vague sort of feeling just
now that things are not going to get better.  I don't know whether it's
this long-continued darkness, or the want of good food, but I feel more
downcast than I ever was in my life before."

Bolton's remark had been intended to cheer, but Fred's answer proved
that a discussion of the merits of the question was not likely to have a
good effect on the men, whose spirits were evidently very much cast
down, so he changed the subject.

Fortunately at that time an incident occurred which effected the mate's
purpose better than any efforts man could have made.  It has frequently
happened that when Arctic voyagers have, from sickness and long
confinement during a monotonous winter, become so depressed in spirits
that games and amusements of every kind failed to rouse them from their
lethargic despondency, sudden danger has given to their minds the
needful impulse, and effected a salutary change, for a time at least, in
their spirits.  Such was the case at the present time.  The men were so
worn with hard travel and the want of fresh food, and depressed by
disappointment and long-continued darkness, that they failed in their
attempts to cheer each other, and at length relapsed into moody silence.
Fred's thoughts turned constantly to his father, and he ceased to
remark cheerfully, as was his wont, on passing objects.  Even O'Riley's
jests became few and far between, and at last ceased altogether.  Bolton
alone kept up his spirits, and sought to cheer his men, the feeling of
responsibility being, probably, the secret of his superiority over them
in this respect.  But even Bolton's spirits began to sink at last.

While they were thus groping sadly along among the hummocks, a large
fragment of ice was observed to break off from a berg just over their
heads.

"Look out! follow me, quick!" shouted the first mate in a loud, sharp
voice of alarm, at the same time darting in towards the side of the
berg.

The startled men obeyed the order just in time, for they had barely
reached the side of the berg when the enormous pinnacle fell, and was
shattered into a thousand fragments on the spot they had just left.  A
rebounding emotion sent the blood in a crimson flood to Fred's forehead,
and this was followed by a feeling of gratitude to the Almighty for the
preservation of himself and the party.  Leaving the dangerous vicinity
of the bergs, they afterwards kept more inshore.

"What can yonder mound be?" said Fred, pointing to an object that was
faintly seen at a short distance off upon the bleak shore.

"An Esquimaux hut, maybe," replied Grim.  "What think'ee, Meetuck?"

Meetuck shook his head and looked grave, but made no reply.

"Why don't you answer?" said Bolton; "but come along, we'll soon see."

Meetuck now made various ineffectual attempts to dissuade the party from
examining the mound, which turned out to be composed of stones heaped
upon each other; but, as all the conversation of which he was capable,
failed to enlighten his companions, as to what the pile was, they
instantly set to work to open a passage into the interior, believing
