Don Cosme's plantation.  There was a flowery brilliance around us, full
of novelty.  We had been accustomed to the ruder scenes of a northern
clime.  The tropical moon threw a gauzy veil over objects that softened
their outlines; and the notes of the nightingale were the only sounds
that broke the stillness of what seemed a sleeping elysium.

Once a vanilla plantation, here and there the aromatic bean grew wild,
its ground usurped by the pita-plant, the acacia, and the thorny cactus.
The dry reservoir and the ruined _acequia_ proved the care that had in
former times been bestowed on its irrigation.  _Guardarayas_ of palms
and orange-trees, choked up with vines and jessamines, marked the
ancient boundaries of the fields.  Clusters of fruit and flowers hung
from the drooping branches, and the aroma of a thousand sweet-scented
shrubs was wafted upon the night air.  We felt its narcotic influence as
we rode along.  The helianthus bowed its golden head, as if weeping at
the absence of its god; and the cereus spread its bell-shaped blossom,
joying in the more mellow light of the moon.

The guide pointed to one of the guardarayas that led to the house.  We
struck into it, and rode forward.  The path was pictured by the
moonbeams as they glanced through the half-shadowing leaves.  A wild roe
bounded away before us, brushing his soft flanks against the rustling
thorns of the mezquite.

Farther on we reached the grounds, and, halting behind the jessamines,
dismounted.  Clayley and myself entered the inclosure.

As we pushed through a copse we were saluted by the hoarse bark of a
couple of mastiffs, and we could perceive several forms moving in front
of the rancho.  We stopped a moment to observe them.

"_Quitate, Carlo!  Pompo_!"  (Be off, Carlo!  Pompo!)  The dogs growled
fiercely, barking at intervals.

"_Papa, mandalos_!"  (Papa, order them off!)

We recognised the voices, and pressed forward.

"_Afuera, malditos perros! abajo_!"  (Out of the way, wicked dogs!--
down!) shouted Don Cosme, chiding the fierce brutes and driving them
back.

The dogs were secured by several domestics, and we advanced.

"_Quien es_?" inquired Don Cosme.

"_Amigos_" (Friends), I replied.

"_Papa! papa! es el capitan_!"  (Papa, it is the captain!) cried one of
the sisters, who had run out in advance, and whom I recognised as the
elder one.

"Do not be alarmed, Senorita," said I, approaching.

"Oh! you are safe--you are safe!--papa, he is safe!" cried both the
girls at once; while Don Cosme exhibited his joy by hugging my comrade
and myself alternately.

Suddenly letting go, he threw up his hands, and inquired with a look of
anxiety:

"_Y el senor gordo_?"  (And the fat gentleman?)

"Oh! he's all right," replied Clayley, with a laugh; "he has saved his
bacon, Don Cosme; though I imagine about this time he wouldn't object to
a little of yours."

I translated my companion's answer.  The latter part of it seemed to act
upon Don Cosme as a hint, and we were immediately hurried to the
dining-room, where we found the Dona Joaquina preparing supper.

During our meal I recounted the principal events of the day.  Don Cosme
knew nothing of these guerilleros, although he had heard that there were
bands in the neighbourhood.  Learning from the guide that we had been
attacked, he had despatched a trusty servant to the American camp, and
Raoul had met the party coming to our rescue.

After supper Don Cosme left us to give some orders relative to his
departure in the morning.  His lady set about preparing the sleeping
apartments, and my companion and I were left for some time in the sweet
companionship of Lupe and Luz.

Both were exquisite musicians, playing the harp and guitar with equal
cleverness.  Many a pure Spanish melody was poured into the delighted
ears of my friend and myself.  The thoughts that arose in our minds were
doubtless of a similar kind; and yet how strange that our hearts should
have been warmed to love by beings so different in character!  The gay,
free spirit of my comrade seemed to have met a responsive echo.  He and
his brilliant partner laughed, chatted, and sang in turns.  In the
incidents of the moment this light-hearted creature had forgotten her
brother, yet the next moment she would weep for him.  A tender heart--a
heart of joys and sorrows--of ever-changing emotions, coming and passing
like shadows thrown by straggling clouds upon the sun-lit stream!

Unlike was _our_ converse--more serious.  We may not laugh, lest we
should profane the holy sentiment that is stealing upon us.  There is no
mirth in love.  There are joy, pleasure, luxury; but laughter finds no
echo in the heart that loves.  Love is a feeling of anxiety--of
expectation.  The harp is set aside.  The guitar lies untouched for a
sweeter music--the music that vibrates from the strings of the heart.
Are our eyes not held together by some invisible chain?  Are not our
souls in communion through some mysterious means?  It is not language--
at least, not the language of words; for we are conversing upon
indifferent things--not indifferent, either.  Narcisso, Narcisso--a
theme fraternal.  His peril casts a cloud over our happiness.

"Oh! that he were here--then we could be happy indeed."

"He will return; fear not--grieve not; to-morrow your father will easily
find him.  I shall leave no means untried to restore him to so fond a
sister."

"Thanks! thanks!  Oh! we are already indebted to you so much."

Are those eyes swimming with love, or gratitude, or both at once?
Surely gratitude alone does not speak so wildly.  Could this scene not
last for ever?

"Good-night--good-night!"

"_Senores, pasan Vds. buena noche_!"  (Gentlemen, may you pass a
pleasant night!)

They are gone, and those oval developments of face and figure are
floating before me, as though the body itself were still present.  It is
the soft memory of love in all its growing distinctness!

We were shown to our sleeping apartments.  Our men picketed their horses
under the olives, and slept in the bamboo rancho, a single sentry
walking his rounds during the night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  Vds.  _Usted_, contraction of _Vuestra merced_, "your grace",
usually written as Vd., is the polite form of address in Spanish.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

A TOUGH NIGHT OF IT AFTER ALL.

I entered my chamber--to sleep?  No.  And yet it contained a bed fit for
Morpheus--a bed canopied and curtained with cloth from the looms of
Damascus: shining rods roofed upwards, that met in an ornamental design,
where the god of sleep, fanned by virgins of silver, reclined upon a
couch of roses.

I drew aside the curtains--a bank of snow--pillows, as if prepared for
the cheek of a beautiful bride.  I had not slept in a bed for two
months.  A close crib in a transport ship--a "shake-down" among the
scorpions and spiders of Lobos--a single blanket among the sand-hills,
where it was not unusual to wake up half-buried by the drift.

These were my _souvenirs_.  Fancy the prospect!  It certainly invited
repose; and yet I was in no humour to sleep.  My brain was in a whirl.
The strange incidents of the day--some of them were mysterious--crowded
into my mind.  My whole system, mental as well as physical, was flushed;
and thought followed thought with nervous rapidity.

My heart shared the excitement--chords long silent had been touched--the
divine element was fairly enthroned.  I was in love!

It was not the first passion of my life, and I easily recognised it.
Even jealousy had begun to distil its poison--"Don Santiago!"

I was standing in front of a large mirror, when I noticed two small
miniatures hanging against the wall--one on each side of the glass.

I bent over to examine, first, that which hung upon the right.  I gazed
with emotion.  They were _her_ features; "and yet," thought I, "the
painter has not flattered her; it might better represent her ten years
hence: still, the likeness is there.  Stupid artist!"  I turned to the
other.  "Her fair sister, no doubt.  Gracious heaven!  Do my eyes
deceive me?  No, the black wavy hair--the arching brows--the sinister
lip--_Dubrosc_!"

A sharp pang shot through my heart.  I looked at the picture again and
again with a kind of incredulous bewilderment; but every fresh
examination only strengthened conviction.  "There is no mistaking those
features--they are his!"  Paralysed with the shock, I sank into a chair,
my heart filled with the most painful emotions.

For some moments I was unable to think, much less to act.

"What can it mean?  Is this accomplished villain a fiend?--the fiend of
my existence?--thus to cross me at every point, perhaps in the end
to--."

Our mutual dislike at first meeting--Lobos--his reappearance upon the
sand-hills, the mystery of his passing the lines and again appearing
with the guerilla--all came forcibly upon my recollection; and now I
seized the lamp and rushed back to the pictures.

"Yes, I am _not_ mistaken; it is he--it is she, her features--all--all.
And thus, too!--the position--side by side--counterparts!  There are no
others on the wall; matched--mated--perhaps betrothed!  His name, too,
Don Emilio!  The American who taught them English!  _His_ is Emile--the
voice on the island cried `Emile!'  Oh, the coincidence is complete!
This villain, handsome and accomplished as he is, has been here before
me!  Betrothed--perhaps married--perhaps--Torture! horrible!"

I reeled back to my chair, dashing the lamp recklessly upon the table.
I know not how long I sat, but a world of wintry thoughts passed through
my heart and brain.  A clock striking from a large picture awoke me from
my reverie.  I did not count the hours.  Music began to play behind the
picture.  It was a sad, sweet air, that chimed with my feelings, and to
some extent soothed them.  I rose at length, and, hastily undressing,
threw myself upon the bed, mentally resolving to forget all--to forget
that I had ever seen her.

"I will rise early--return to camp without meeting her, and, once there,
my duties will drive away this painful fancy.  The drum and the fife and
the roar of the cannon will drown remembrance.  Ha! it was only a
passing thought at best--the hallucination of a moment.  I shall easily
get rid of it.  Ha! ha!"

I laid my fevered cheek upon the soft, cold pillow.  I felt composed--
almost happy.

"A Creole of New Orleans!  How could he have been here?  Oh! have I not
the explanation already?  Why should I dwell on it?"

Ah, jealous heart--it is easy to say "forget!"

I tried to prevent my thoughts from returning to this theme.  I directed
them to a thousand things: to the ships--to the landing--to the army--to
the soldiers--to the buttons upon their jackets and the swabs upon their
shoulders--to everything I could think of: all in vain.  Back, back,
back! in painful throes it came, and my heart throbbed, and my brain
burned with bitter memories freshly awakened.

I turned and tossed upon my couch for many a long hour.  The clock in
the picture struck, and played the same music again and again, still
soothing me as before.  Even despair has its moments of respite; and,
worn with fatigue, mental as well as physical, I listened to the sad,
sweet strain, until it died away into my dreams.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE LIGHT AFTER THE SHADE.

When I awoke all was darkness around me.  I threw out my arms and opened
the damask curtains.  Not a ray of light entered the room.  I felt
refreshed, and from this I concluded I must have slept long.  I slipped
out upon the floor and commenced groping for my watch.  Someone knocked.

"Come in!"  I called.

The door opened, and a flood of light gushed into the apartment.  It was
a servant bearing a lamp.

"What is the hour?"  I demanded.

"Nine o'clock, _mi amo_," (my master), was the reply.

The servant set down the lamp and went out.  Another immediately
entered, carrying a salver with a small gold cup.

"What have you there?"

"_Chocolate_, master; Dona Joaquina has sent it."

I drank off the beverage, and hastened to dress myself.  I was
reflecting whether I should pass on to camp without seeing any one of
the family.  Somehow, my heart felt less heavy.  I believe the morning
always brings relief to pain, either mental or bodily.  It seems to be a
law of nature--at least, so my experience tells me.  The morning air,
buoyant and balmy, dulls the edge of anguish.  New hopes arise and new
projects appear with the sun.  The invalid, couch-tossing through the
long watches of the night, will acknowledge this truth.

I did not approach the mirror.  I dared not.

"I will not looked upon the loved, the hated face--no, on to the camp!--
let Lethe--.  Has my friend arisen?"

"Yes, master; he has been up for hours."

"Ha! where is he?"

"In the garden, master."

"Alone?"

"No, master; he is with the _ninas_."

"Happy, light-hearted Clayley!  No jealous thoughts to torture him!"
mused I, as I buckled on my stock.

I had observed that the fair-haired sister and he were kindred spirits--
sympathetic natures, who only needed to be placed _en rapport_ to "like
each other mightily"--beings who could laugh, dance, and sing together,
romp for months, and then get married, as a thing of course; but, should
any accident prevent this happy consummation, could say "good-bye" and
part without a broken heart on either side; an easy thing for natures
like theirs; a return exchange of numerous _billets-doux_, a laugh over
the past, and a light heart for the future.  Such is the history of many
a love.  I can vouch for it.  How different with--

"Tell my friend, when he returns to the house, that I wish to see him."

"Yes, master."

The servant bowed and left the room.

In a few minutes Clayley made his appearance, gay as a grasshopper.

"So, good lieutenant, you have been improving your time, I hear?"

"Haven't I, though?  Such a delicious stroll!  Haller, this _is_ a
paradise."

"Where have you been?"

"Feeding the swans," replied Clayley, with a laugh.  "But, by the way,
your _chere amie_ hangs her pretty head this morning.  She seems hurt
that you have not been up.  She kept constantly looking towards the
house."

"Clayley, will you do me the favour to order the men to their saddles?"

"What! going so soon?  Not before breakfast, though?"

"In five minutes."

"Why, Captain, what's the matter?  And such a breakfast as they are
getting!  Oh, Don Cosme will not hear of it."

"Don Cosme--."

Our host entered at that moment, and, listening to his remonstrances,
the order was rescinded, and I consented to remain.

I saluted the ladies with as much courtesy as I could assume.  I could
not help the coldness of my manner, and I could perceive that with _her_
it did not pass unobserved.

We sat down to the breakfast-table; but my heart was full of bitterness,
and I scarcely touched the delicate viands that were placed before me.

"You do not eat, Captain.  I hope you are well?" said Don Cosme,
observing my strange and somewhat rude demeanour.

"Thank, you, Senor, I never enjoyed better health."

I studiously avoided looking towards her, paying slight attentions to
her sister.  This is the game of piques.  Once or twice I ventured a
side-glance.  Her eyes were bent upon me with a strange, inquiring look.

They are swimming in tears, and soft, and forgiving.  They are swollen.
She has been weeping.  That is not strange.  Her brother's danger is, no
doubt, the cause of her sorrow.

Yet, is there not reproach in her looks?  Reproach!  How ill does my
conduct of last night correspond with this affected coldness--this
rudeness!  Can she, too, be suffering?

I arose from the table, and, walking forth, ordered Lincoln to prepare
the men for marching.

I strolled down among the orange-trees.  Clayley followed soon after,
accompanied by both the girls.  Don Cosme remained at the house to
superintend the saddling of his mule, while Dona Joaquina was packing
the necessary articles into his portmanteau.

Following some silent instinct, we--Guadalupe and I--came together.
Clayley and his mistress had strayed away, leaving us alone.  I had not
yet spoken to her.  I felt a strange impulse--a desire to know the
worst.  I felt as one looking over a fearful precipice.

Then I will brave the danger; it can be no worse than this agony of
suspicion and suspense.

I turned towards her.  Her head was bent to one side.  She was crushing
an orange-flower between her fingers, and her eyes seemed to follow the
dropping fragments.

How beautiful was she at that moment!

"The artist certainly has not flattered you."

She looked at me with a bewildered expression.  Oh, those swimming eyes!

She did not understand me.

I repeated the observation.

"Senor Capitan, what do you mean?"

"That the painter has not done you justice.  The portrait is certainly a
likeness, yet the expression, I think, should have been younger."
