"What brave lad have we here?" asked Philip, perplexed.

John stepped forward, and answered for himself.

"I am John Plantagenet, once son of the King of England, but now vassal
to the King of France!"

Great was the astonishment on every face, and on none more than on those
of Philip and Richard.

The latter flushed, half in anger, half in shame, as he exclaimed, "Boy,
thou art mad!"

"Nay," said Philip, "the lad is a lad of sense, and bears a worthy name
that will serve our cause exceedingly."

So saying, he summoned one of his knights, and bidding him dismount,
gave the young prince his horse, and made him ride beside him.

"But tell us, lad," he said, when they had proceeded a little way, "how
is it thy father's dutiful and cherished son (for so I have heard him
speak of thee) comes thus among the ranks of his foemen, and that at a
time like this, when peace has been almost completed?"

"Ask me no questions," replied the prince, gloomily; "I am here because
I choose."

And so they rode into Tours.

A few days later, a silent group was standing round the sickbed of the
King of England, listening to the broken utterances which fell from the
lips of that old and wellnigh worn-out warrior.  Those who thus stood
round him were his favourite knights and barons, not a few of whom were
moved to tears as he spoke.

"I have sinned, and I have had my punishment.  My kingdom is gone, and
my glory.  Henceforward Henry Plantagenet will be the name but of a
vanquished and feeble old man.  The one whom I loved, and would have
forgiven as many times as they had asked forgiveness, have all, save
one, left me and turned against me.  I am like a man, wrecked and
tempest-tossed, clinging for hope to a single spar.  Yet I bless Heaven
for that.  Ruin I can submit to, dishonour I can survive, defeat I can
endure, while yet there is one child left to me of whom it can be said,
`He loved his father to the end.'  And such a son is John.  I charge you
all, honour him as you honour me, for though I have sworn to yield the
crown of England to his brother, Normandy, and all I possess besides,
belongs to _him_.  But where is he?  Why tarries he?  A week has passed
since he was here.  Where stays he?"

Before any of the attendants could reply, a knocking was heard without,
and entrance demanded for the messengers of Philip of France.  "We are
come," said they, "from our sovereign with the articles of treaty
between yourself and him, arranged at your late conference, and which
now await your ratification."

Henry motioned to them to proceed to business; and as each article was
read--declaring his allegiance to the crown of France and his cession of
his own crown to Richard--he inclined his head mechanically in token of
his assent, manifesting little or no interest in the proceeding.  But
his attention became more fixed when the article was read which provided
for the free pardon of all who had in any way, secretly or openly, been
engaged in the cause of his rebel son.

He turned in his bed towards the reader, and said: "A king must know the
names of his enemies before he can pardon them.  Read me, therefore, the
list of those who have rebelled, that I may forgive them each and all,
beginning with the noblest, down to the meanest."

He lay back on his bed, and half closed his eyes as he listened.

The messenger of Philip then said, "The first and foremost of your
majesty's enemies is John Plantagenet, your youngest son."

He sprang with a sudden cry of pain into a sitting posture, and
trembling in every fibre, and with a voice half choked, cried, "Who says
that?"  Then glaring wildly at the envoy, he whispered, "Read it again!"

"The first and foremost of your majesty's enemies is John Plantagenet,
your youngest son."

"Can it be true?" gasped the poor father, in helpless despair.  "Has he
also deserted me?  Then let everything go as it will; I care no more for
myself, nor for the world."

So saying, with his heart broken, he sank back upon the bed, from which
he never rose again.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

ARTHUR OF BRITTANY, THE BOY WHO SHOULD HAVE BEEN KING OF ENGLAND.

The fierce storm beats down on the gloomy Norman Castle of Falaise, in a
deep dungeon of which lies imprisoned the boy Prince Arthur, lawful heir
to the crown of England, but now, alas! a helpless victim of the cruelty
and injustice of his bad uncle, John Plantagenet, the usurper of his
throne.  The thunder peals so loudly, and the wind rages so angrily,
that Hubert de Burgh, the warden, does not for a long time distinguish
the sound of a knocking and shouting at the outer gate of the castle.
Presently, however, in a lull of the wind, his ears catch the noisy
summons, and he instantly gives orders to his men to let down the
drawbridge, and admit the new-comers.  These were three in number: one
attired as a king's messenger, and mounted on a richly caparisoned
horse; the other two in the garb of common men, and on foot.  When they
had come into the presence of the warden, the king's messenger said--

"I am charged by His Majesty King John of England to deliver to you this
letter, and require your faithful discharge of its commands."

So saying, he handed to Hubert de Burgh a sealed letter, which the
latter eagerly broke open and read.  As he read, his face clouded.  It
was a long letter, and couched in vague terms, but its substance was
this.  That whereas the peace of England and of King John's possessions
in France was constantly being disturbed by the partisans of the young
Prince Arthur, desiring to see him king instead of his uncle, and taking
up arms to enforce their claim, it was necessary, in order to put an end
to this rebellion, that the young prince should be rendered unfit for
governing; and as no people would be likely to choose a blind boy for
their king, Hubert de Burgh was instructed to have Arthur's eyes put
out; and the two men who had arrived with the king's messenger were
come, so the letter said, to carry out this design.

Hubert de Burgh said nothing as he put by the letter, and dismissed his
three visitors from his presence.  Cruel man as he had been, his heart
had still some pity left, and he shrank from obeying his master by so
brutal an act of cruelty upon the innocent boy in his charge.

However, the order of the king was peremptory; and if the deed must be
done, thought he, the sooner the better.

So he ordered the two villains to get ready their instruments, and
follow him to the dungeon.

"Stay here," said he, as they reached the young prince's door, "while I
enter alone and prepare him for his fate."

So those two set down their fire and the red-hot irons, and waited
outside for their summons.

When Hubert entered the dungeon, the poor boy was just waking from a
sleep.  He sat up and rubbed his eyes, being dazzled by the light which
Hubert carried in his hand.

"You are welcome," said he (for Arthur, with so few to love him, loved
even his surly, though not unkind, jailor).  "I have been in my dreams
away in merry England, where I thought I was living in a beautiful
palace, with food and servants, and rich clothing, and that there was a
crown on my head.  And so it shall be some day, Hubert, when I get my
rights; and then because you have not been as unkind to me as some in my
adversity, you shall be a great and rich man.  But why look you so
solemn?  What ails you?"

The warden stood silent for some moments before he spoke, and then his
voice was thick and hoarse.

"Prince," he said, "take your last look on the light, for you may never
see it again."

The boy sprang from his bed, and seized Hubert by the knees.

"What!  Are they going to kill me?  Must they take away my life?"

"Not so," said Hubert; "it is not thy life that is required, but thine
eyes."  And as he spoke he stamped on the floor, as the signal to those
two who waited without to enter.

At sight of their horrid instruments, the cords which were to bind him,
and the cruel faces of the executioners, Arthur fell on his knees and
implored mercy of the stubborn Hubert.

It was a strange and pitiful sight to see that weak and helpless boy
kneeling, and with tears entreating that stout old warrior, whose bosom
heaved and whose ringers twitched, and whose face winced, as he
listened; while the two others stood motionless, grasping their irons
and cords, ready for the word of command to step forward and do their
cruel deed.

But the cries and entreaties of the helpless and beautiful prince
prevailed.  Hubert wavered and hesitated; he bade the men advance, and
then bade them withhold; he looked at the prince, and he looked at the
glowing irons; he pushed the suppliant from him, and then suffered him
to cling to him.  The executioners themselves were moved to pity, and
lay down their instruments.  Finally, with a mighty effort, the warden
yielded, and said, "Retire, men, and take with you your tools, till I
require you."  Then turning to Arthur, he said, "Prince, thou shalt keep
thy sight and thy life while I am by to protect thee."  And the rough
hand of the old warrior stroked the hair of the weeping boy as it might
have been his own son's.

The answer that Hubert de Burgh sent back that day by the king's
messenger was an earnest appeal for mercy on behalf of his young and now
beloved charge.

But King John was a stranger to all feelings of pity, and his vengeance
was quick and dreadful.  Foiled of his cruel design upon the eyesight of
his hapless nephew, he determined now to have his life.  So he ordered
him to be removed from Falaise, and the custody of the humane De Burgh,
to the castle of Rouen, under whose walls flowed the waters of the River
Seine.  But the prince did not remain long there.  One night a jailor
entered his dungeon, and, waking him from his sleep, ordered him to
follow him.  The boy obeyed in silence, as the jailor conducted him down
the winding staircase which led to the foot of the tower, beside which
the Seine flowed.  A boat was waiting at the bottom, in which sat two
men.  The torch of the jailor cast a sudden glare over the dark waters,
and by its light Arthur recognised, with horror and despair, in one of
the two the cruel features of his Uncle John.  It was useless for him to
pray and entreat; it was useless for him to struggle or cry out.  They
dragged him into the boat, and held him fast as she drifted under the
shadow of those gloomy walls into mid stream.  What happened then no one
can tell; but had any listened that still, dark night, they might have
heard a boy's wild cry across the waters, and then a dull, heavy
splash--and that was all.

The story is that of those two, King John with his own hand did the foul
deed.  However that may be, Arthur of Brittany was never even heard of
more.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

RICHARD THE SECOND, THE BOY WHO QUELLED A TUMULT.

A vast, disorderly rabble thronged the great open space of Smithfield,
in London, on one side of which stood the venerable Abbey of Saint
Bartholomew, now occupied by the hospital of that name.  The men who
composed it were rough and wild, and, for the most part, shouted and
clutched their clubs and bows in a meaningless sort of way, which
plainly showed that they were not very clear in their own minds as to
the object of their assembling together, but that they came and shouted
and threatened because their leaders did so.

These leaders were few in number, and but that they were mounted, and
armed with swords and daggers, not to be distinguished from their
followers, for they were rough, wild men--men too whose occupation
seemed to be more in the way of herding cattle and plying their hammers
than leading an army of 20,000 rioters, or brandishing their swords
against a government.

Yet, though many of these rebels seemed not to comprehend the why and
the wherefore of their demonstration, there were not a few who looked
very much--nay, cruelly--in earnest, who talked vehemently and scowled,
and seemed, by the way they gripped their arms, determined to enforce
their demands against any man, be he noble, or baron, or king.  From
some of the groups one might have heard excited utterances like the
following:--

"We will have our rights or die!  Why do our leaders halt?"

"The king is expected!"

"Nay, then, let us slay him, who is the head of all our wrongs!"

"Not so; the king has already granted what we first demanded; and we are
gathered now because Wat Tyler demands yet more."

"God save Wat Tyler!  Was it not he who struck the first blow against
the tyrant?"

"It was.  The nobles demanded a poll tax on every man, woman, boy, and
girl in the land; and when one of their collectors would exact it from
Wat Tyler, at his place in Dartford, and (disbelieving his word
concerning the age of his young daughter) vilely insulted the maiden, he
arose and slew the wretch with his hammer.  And so this business began."

"Huzzah for Wat Tyler!  Down with the tyrant!"

"Nay, friend; our cause was a good one when it began, but since then Wat
and his friends have, to my mind, done us and themselves damage by their
bloodthirstiness and their unreasonableness.  Have they not demolished
palaces and temples?  Have they not butchered an archbishop and nobles
and harmless citizens?  Have they not insulted noble ladies?  And now,
when their demands have all been satisfied by the young king, they
demand yet more, and become themselves the tyrants."

"A traitor!--a traitor!  Who speaks against our brave Wat Tyler?  Kill
the traitor!  Down with tyranny!  Death to the king!  God save the
people!"

With such clamour and angry talk did the crowd agitate itself, till
suddenly there arose a cry.  "The king comes!"

And there rode up fearlessly, at the head of sixty men, a boy, only
fifteen years old, at sight of whom these rebels hung their heads and
let their wild clamour die on their lips.  A few of the most determined
looked black as they regarded the royal boy, and noted the effect his
frank carriage had on their followers.

"I am come," said King Richard, rising on his horse at a few paces from
the front of the crowd, "as I promised, to confer with my subjects and
hear their grievances.  Let your leader advance and speak with me."

Then Wat Tyler turned to his followers and said to them, "I will go
speak with him; do you abide my signal, then come on and slay all save
the young king; he will serve us better as a humble captive in our
hands, to lead through the land and bring all men to our service, than
as a slaughtered tyrant at our feet."

So he put spurs to his horse and advanced towards the king, whom he
approached so close that the flank of the horse touched that of the
king's.  Richard, nothing daunted by this threatening demeanour, turned
courteously towards him and waited for him to speak.

"Do you see this concourse of people?" began Wat, rudely, pointing
towards the now silent crowd.

"I see them," said the boy.  "What have you to ask on their behalf?"

"These men," said Tyler, "have sworn, one and all, to obey me in all
things, and to follow in whatever enterprise I shall lead them, and they
will not go hence till you grant us our petition."

"And I will grant it," replied the boy, frankly, for the demands to
which Wat Tyler now alluded had reference to the rights of the people to
hunt and fish on common lands.  "I will grant it."

What followed history does not very clearly record.  Among the followers
of the king, Wat, it is said, caught sight of a knight whom for some
reason he hated.  Turning his attention from the king, he glared angrily
at his enemy, and, putting his hand on the hilt of his dagger,
exclaimed, "By my faith, I will never eat bread till I have thy head!"
At that same instant up rode Sir William Walworth, the Lord Mayor of
London, who, seeing the menacing gesture of the insurgent leader, and
hearing his threatening speech, immediately concluded he was about to
attack the person of the young king.  Quick as thought, Sir William drew
his dagger, and before any one could interpose or hold him back, he
struck Wat Tyler in the throat, and his attendants following with
repeated blows, the leader of the people fell from his horse a dead man!
All this was so suddenly done, and so astonished the onlookers, that
Wat Tyler was already dead before a hand was moved or a voice raised on
either side.  Then there rose an angry shout from those twenty thousand
rebels, as they saw their leader down.  "We are betrayed!" they cried;
"they have killed our leader!"  And with that they raised their bows and
pointed their shafts at the heart of the young king.

But they lowered them in amazement when, instead of shrinking and
cowering behind his knights, they saw the lad put spurs to his horse and
gallop, all by himself, up to the very place where they stood.  "Men,"
he cried, "follow me; I am your king, and I will be your captain!  Wat
Tyler was a traitor; no ill shall befall you if you make me your
leader."

The brave words disarmed that great crowd as if by magic; the men who
had just now shouted, "Long live Wat Tyler!" now shouted with a mighty
shout, "Long live our King Richard!"

The insurrection was at an end, the confidence of the people returned
once more to their rulers, and they marched that day from Smithfield,
under the leadership of their young king, as far as the country hamlet
of Islington, there quietly to disperse to their own homes and resume
once again their ordinary pursuits.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

RICHARD WHITTINGTON, THE SCULLERY BOY WHO BECAME LORD MAYOR.

A poor boy, meanly clad, and carrying in his hand a small bundle,
trudged sadly along the road which led over the moor of Finsbury to
Highgate.  The first streak of dawn was scarcely visible in the eastern
sky, and as he walked, the boy shivered in the chill morning air.  More
than once he dashed from his eyes the rising tears, and clutched his
little wallet and quickened his pace, as if determined to hold to some
desperate resolve, despite of all drawings to the contrary.  As the road
rose gradually towards Highgate, the sun broke out from behind the
clouds on his right, and lit up fields and trees and hills with a
brightness and richness which contrasted strangely with the gloom on the
boy's face, and the poverty of his appearance.  The birds in the hedges
began to sing, and the cattle to low and tinkle their bells; the whistle
of the herdsmen came up from the valley, and all nature seemed to wake
with a cry of gladness to greet the new day.

Even poor Dick Whittington could not wholly resist the cheering
influence of that bright summer morning.  It was impossible to believe
that everything was miserable in the midst of so much gladness, and
Dick's face brightened and his step became brisker almost without his
knowing it, as he trudged higher and higher up that steep road.  His
thoughts, too, took a less desponding turn.

"After all," said he to himself, "perhaps I am foolish to be running
away from my master's house.  I had better be the scullery boy of good
Master Fitzwarren, although his cook does ill-treat me and lead me a
dog's life, than the vagabond idle boy which I am now.  And yet I cannot
endure the thought of returning to that cruel woman.  Would that I knew
what to do!"

Thus he thought and questioned with himself, when he came to a stone set
by the wayside; and here he sat to rest, and ruminate further upon his
evil fortune.

"If some voice would but say `Return,' I would return," said he, "even
though she scold and beat me, for I know not what to do, without a
