his throne to the peasant in the field, are born to labour--to labour
with the head or to labour with the hands, often with both; or if not,
strictly speaking, with the hands, at all events with the mind and body.

"And what, think you, is the labour all men ought to engage in?  What is
the great present object of labour?" asked the Doctor.  "Why, I reply,
to do good to our fellow-creatures, to ameliorate their condition by
every means in our power."

No boys took in these truths more eagerly than did Bracebridge and
Ellis.  They talked them over and over, and warmed with the glorious
theme.  To the former they were not new.  His father had propounded the
same to him long ago, but the Doctor's remarks gave them additional
strength and freshness.

"It is grand, indeed," exclaimed Ernest, "to feel what victories we have
to achieve, what enemies to overthrow; that if we do our duty we can
never be entirely defeated; and that, though success may be delayed, we
must be victorious at last; that there can be no hanging down of the
hands, no lassitude, no idleness, no want of occupation through life, no
want of excitement.  I don't care what grumblers may say; I maintain,
with my father, that this is a very glorious world to live in, with all
its faults; and still more should we be grateful that we are placed in
it, when we remember that it is the stepping-stone to eternity."

Ernest was, perhaps, somewhat beyond his years in his remarks, but it
must be remembered that he was an unusual boy, and that there were not
many like him.  Still he was but a boy.  Anybody observing him would
probably have remarked that he was a good-looking, intelligent boy, but
might have failed to discover any super-excellencies in him.  Indeed I
think that I have before remarked that he owed his success at school to
the fact, that all the talents he possessed by nature had been
judiciously cultivated, and allowed a full and free growth.  Certainly
no boy stood higher in the estimation both of his master and
schoolfellows.  He could not help discovering this, and he resolved by
all means to maintain and deserve their good opinion.  He had sometimes
a difficult task in keeping to his resolution.

I have said that Blackall for some weeks had appeared to be much less
dictatorial and inclined to bully; but by degrees his former habits
returned with greater force, from having been put under some restraint
for a time.  Ellis and Eden, and even Bouldon and Buttar, came in for a
share of his ill-treatment; so did a new boy, John Dryden by name, a
sturdy, independent little fellow, who, for his size, was as strong as
he was brave, but, of course, could not compete with a boy of so much
greater bulk and weight.

A considerable number of fellows vowed that they would stand this
conduct no longer; yet what could they do?  Blackall alone might have
been managed; but several big fellows had united with him, and had taken
it into their heads that they should like to introduce fagging.  They
got, indeed, two or three fellows--Dawson, Barber, and others--to
undertake to be fags, just to set the system going, those young
gentlemen hoping very soon to become masters themselves.  They talked
very big about the matter; they thought it would be a very fine thing:
their school was first-rate as it was, and if fagging were introduced it
would be fully equal to any public school.  Of course, the affair was to
be kept a great secret.  There could be no doubt that the Doctor would
approve of it ultimately, but at first he might be startled; though he
never hesitated to introduce any alterations which were improvements, he
might possibly look upon fagging without that reverence which it
deserved as a time-honoured institution.  He could not fail to
acknowledge that fagging was a very good thing; but then his school was
not a public school, however first-rate it might be as a private
establishment; and he might not wish to make it like a public school.
Thus the important subject was discussed for some time, till at last it
was decided that it would be wiser to begin quietly, at the same time in
due form.  The big fellows who had resolved to be the masters determined
to draw up a paper, which the intended fags were to sign, agreeing to do
duty and to serve their masters as fags, according to the custom
established at all public and first-rate schools.  Barber, Dawson, and
other advocates of the system, signed the precious document willingly
enough, and they managed to get some twenty other boys to do the same.

But when it was shown to Buttar and Bouldon, they turned it over and
over, and asked what it meant.

"Oh, don't you know?" exclaimed Dawson.  "It's a plan we have got up for
becoming a public school."

"I'll tell you what," answered Buttar, bursting into a fit of laughter,
"I look upon the affair as a bit of arrant tom-foolery; and so you may
tell the donkeys who drew it up."

Dawson grew very red; but he had a respect for Buttar's knuckles, and so
he held his tongue.  Bouldon had, meantime, recognised Blackall's
handwriting, and having a considerable amount of contempt for those
whose signatures were attached, he exhibited it in an unmistakable,
though certainly an unrefined manner, by holding up the paper, and
spitting into the middle of it.  Then he folded it up, and crammed it
into Dawson's pocket.  Dawson and he had had a set-to fight a little
time before, and though Dawson was the biggest fellow of the two, he had
ultimately declined continuing the combat.  The action performed by
Bouldon was equivalent to a declaration of war to the knife with
Blackall and all the big fellows who supported the system he wished to
introduce.  Dawson turned redder than ever, and looked very fierce at
him; but Tom closed his mouth, planted his feet firmly on the ground,
and doubling his fists, said--

"You'd better not attempt it, Dickey; you know me now."

Dawson did know him, and so he blustered out--

"You're a beastly fellow, that I know; and so I'll go and tell Blackall
what you say."

"Go, Dickey, and say I sent you," cried Bouldon; and, undaunted by the
threat which had been uttered, he bestowed a parting kick of very
considerable force on the portion of Dickey's body then turned towards
him.  Dawson ran off, vowing vengeance.

"You shouldn't have done that, Bouldon," said Buttar, who was a very
gentlemanly, refined fellow.  "The actions were expressive, and could
leave no manner of doubt as to what our course of action must be; but
perhaps we might have succeeded better had we left them in doubt, and
waited till they commence operations."

"I dare say you are right, Buttar," said Bouldon; "but, in truth, all my
English spirit was roused within me at the preposterous notion of those
few big fellows proposing all of a sudden to make slaves of the rest of
the school.  However, what is to be done now?"

"Let us go and talk to Bracebridge, and hear what he says," said Buttar.

They soon found Bracebridge, and told him all that had occurred.  He was
just as indignant as Tom was, and he could not help laughing at the way
in which he had exhibited his feelings, though he agreed with Buttar
that a less demonstrative mode of proceeding might have been wiser.  He
was decidedly of opinion that immediate steps should be taken to put
a stop to the proceedings of the big fellows, and that a
counter-resolution should be drawn up, and sent round for the signature
of those boys who had resolved not in any way to submit to fagging.  He
and Buttar immediately went into the school-room, and drew up the paper
which they considered met the object.  It was very temperate, and
couched in the most simple language, as such documents always should be
to be effectual.  It ran, as far as I remember, much in the following
words:--

"We, the undersigned, understanding that an attempt is being made by
some of the big boys to introduce a system of fagging into the school,
bind ourselves to resist such a proceeding by every means in our power,
and under no consideration to obey any boy who may order any of us to
fag for him."

"That will do," observed Bracebridge.  "The sentence might be better
rounded, but the document is short and explicit.  We will see what
effect it will have.  Let Dawson have a sight of it before it is
generally signed.  Here, you and I will sign it, to show from whom it
emanates.  They will not begin to try on their tricks upon us, I
suspect.  They will not know who else has signed it; and we will put the
little fellows up how to act, as circumstances may show us to be most
advisable."

"Capital!" exclaimed Buttar, affixing his signature in a clear bold hand
to the document.  "Would it not be better to tell Lemon what we have
done?"

"I think not," said Ernest.  "The resolution emanates from us, so let us
carry it out.  There is nothing like independence and freedom of action
to ensure success.  Lemon will not wish to make anybody fag for him; but
being a big fellow, he may not see the matter in the same light we do.
If we bravely resist the attempt, he is much more likely to assist us in
crushing it at the end, than if we were to go whining to him now for aid
and advice."

Buttar agreed in this point also with Ernest, and undertook to let
Dawson immediately have a look at the document.  Dawson said he should
like to show it to some of the big fellows.

"Catch a weasel asleep, and draw his teeth," answered Buttar.  "No, no,
Dickey!  You may take a copy of it in pencil, and show it to anybody you
like.  You may say also, that all the school, with the exception of a
few miserable sneaks, like some who shall be nameless, will sign it and
stick by it.  And now, just go and tell the fellows what you have seen."

Off went Dawson with the copy of the protest to his masters.  They
laughed scornfully.

"That upstart, conceited young monkey, Bracebridge, is at the bottom of
all mischief," observed Blackall; and the opinion was echoed by two or
three other fellows.

"I'll tell you what," said Blackall; "the only way will be to begin
fagging at once, and to crush this proposed rebellion in the bud.  We
must parcel out the boys of the lower classes, so that each of us may
have four or five fags a-piece.  You see we have already each of us got
a willing fag.  They shall be head fags, and assist to keep the rest in
order.  We'll tell them that, and then they will help us to bring the
rest under subjection."

Blackall's plan was willingly assented to by the rest of the big boys
who had entered into this conspiracy against the liberties of their
younger schoolfellows; and minor details being arranged, they considered
everything ripe for carrying out their plans.  All this time neither the
Doctor nor masters suspected that anything out of the way was taking
place.  During the school hours matters went on in their ordinary
routine.  Some of the boys, who had been thinking over what was to be
done, were less attentive than usual, and had more faults in their
exercises.  Games were got up and carried on by the boys with their
accustomed spirit.  Hockey and football had now come in.  The Doctor did
not prohibit any games, but he insisted that all should be played with
good temper; and a few he only allowed to be played in the presence of a
master.  Hockey was one of these, and consequently it was not often
played, except when a large number could join in it together.  A great
game of hockey was to be played one Saturday afternoon in November.
Blackall came forward as the chief on one side.  He called over the
names of a number of boys, but only a few of the younger ones joined
him.  He remarked that they were entirely Dawson's companions.  Another
big fellow stood up to lead on the opposite side, but so few consented
to play that he was obliged to throw up his leadership.  Then
Bracebridge, urged by several standing round him, stepped forward, and
he instantly had forty or fifty boys ranged under him.  Those who had
previously ranged themselves under the other big fellow, Haddon, went
over to Blackall.

The sides were now more equal, but still Blackall had not enough on his
side.  He cried out for followers, but still no one would go over to
him.  Bracebridge had at last to send off some of his side to make both
parties equal.  There were thus about forty on each side.  Everybody
knows what a hockey-stick is like.  It is a tough fellow, made of oak or
crab-apple tree, and turned up at the end in a crook, flattened somewhat
at the convex side.  It is a formidable weapon, and it is very
disagreeable to receive a blow from it on the shins.  In some places a
cork bung is used, but I have always seen and played with a light ball
made on purpose, and covered with leather.  We were very particular at
Grafton Hall about our hockey balls.  Though late in the year, the
weather was fine, so we played in the cricket-field.  It was a fine wide
extent.  A line drawn twenty yards in advance of the hedge on either
side formed the respective boundaries.  It was nearly due north and
south.  Ernest's party were on the north side, and their goal
consequently on the south side of the field.  Bracebridge and Blackall
tossed up to settle which side was to begin.  "Heads!" cried Ernest.
The shilling came down with the head up.  It was considered low by the
big boys to employ halfpence on such occasions.  Blackall looked daggers
at his opponent.  Bracebridge took the ball, and placed it about a third
of the distance away from his line.  His side were arranged behind and
on either hand of him.  He planted his feet firmly, and lifting his
stick above his head, cried "Play!" and, looking first at the point to
which he intended to send it, gave a steady blow to the ball.  Blackall
and his side watched its approach, and rushed forward "to take it up,"
or, in other words, to impede its progress, and to send it back in the
direction whence it had come.  They were boldly met by Ernest's party,
who once more "took up" the ball and drove it energetically back.

All Ernest's party were young boys.  Few were more than a year or two
older than he was, and scarcely any were taller or more active; indeed,
he was the acknowledged best player of his set.  On Blackall's side, on
the contrary, were a number of big fellows, and all those who had
undertaken to act as fags, as well as other hangers-on and chums of the
big fellows, patronised especially by them because they were well
supplied by injudicious friends at home with hampers of cakes and game,
and hams and tongues.  I've heard people say, "I'll send poor Tom a
basket of good things, because it will enable him to gain the friendship
of some of the bigger boys."  Now, I will tell those silly friends that
it will do no such thing.  It will make some of the worst boys make up
to him as long as his grub lasts, or while they think that he is likely
to get any more; but they will do him much more harm than good, and
their friendship he will not get.  No; send a boy to school fitted as
much as he can be, and let him win friends and work his way onward by
his own intrinsic merits; but never let him think of buying favour with
gifts of any sort.  But we are in the middle of a game of hockey.  It
was, however, necessary to explain the class of boys who were ranged on
either side.  Those hockey-sticks looked formidable weapons as they were
flourished about in the hands of the opposing parties.  Again Blackall's
party met the ball; a dozen hockey-sticks were at it, and one boy,
calling off the others, struck it so clear a blow that he nearly sent it
up to the goal across Ernest's line.  However, he, Buttar, Bouldon, and
some other of the most fearless and active boys rushed at it with their
sticks, regardless of all the blows aimed at them by their opponents,
and drove it back again into the middle of the ground.  Then on they
flew to drive it back still farther.  Both parties met in the centre.
There was a fierce tussle.  The hockey-sticks kept striking each other,
but none struck the ball.  Blackall had gone farther back to catch the
ball, should it be driven past the front rank of his party.  Ernest had
retired behind his friends for the same purpose.  His eye, however,
never left the ball.  He saw a stick uplifted which he thought would
strike it.  So it did, and the ball came flying towards him.  His quick
eye saw it coming, and with unerring aim he struck it over the heads of
both parties, who, not knowing what had become of it, broke asunder, and
enabled him to pass between them.  He reached the neighbourhood of the
ball at the same moment that Blackall, having seen it coming, got close
up to it.  They eyed the ball, and they eyed each other for some
moments; their eyes flashed fire.

"Out of my way, you rebellious young scamp!" shouted Blackall, irritated
by what he considered Ernest's daring coolness.  Ernest did not even
look at him, but threw himself into a position to strike the ball.  His
eye was at the same time on Blackall's stick.  He saw him lift it to
strike, not the ball, but him.  He had not learned the use of the
single-stick for nothing, and throwing himself back, he warded off the
blow, and then, quick as lightning, struck the ball, and sent it past
his cowardly opponent.  Blackall, not in the least ashamed of himself,
attempted to repeat the blow while Ernest was unable to defend himself;
but before his stick descended another actor had come into the field.
It was Ellis, who had been close at hand, and now springing forward, he
interposed his own stick, and saved his friend from the effects of the
blow, drawing, of course, all Blackall's rage upon himself.  Had any
body seen his countenance, they could not have failed to observe the
smile of satisfaction which lighted it up as Blackall showered heaps of
virulent abuse on his head.

"Go on, I don't fear you; remember that," said Ellis quietly; and then
hurried on, in the hopes of assisting Ernest to drive the ball on to the
goal.  The keen eye of Monsieur Malin, who was the master on duty on
that afternoon, had observed this little piece of by-play.  He noted it,
but said nothing at the time.  It required all Ernest's activity and the
energetic support of his party to make head against the big, strong
fellows of the opposite side.  When he had very nearly driven the ball
home to the goal, several of them threw themselves before him, and drove
it some way back again; but Buttar, Bouldon, Gregson, and some others
had now come up, and even little Eden rushed heroically in to stop its
course and to drive it back, so that Ernest might once more get it
within the power of his unerring stick.  The big fellows of Blackall's
party had rushed on, separating widely, and not observing, or rather
regarding, little Eden, whom had they seen they would not have supposed
daring enough to attempt to hit the ball.  He did not hit it very far,
certainly; but yet his stroke was one of the most important which had
been given, for it enabled Tom Bouldon to send it up very nearly to the
goal.  Ernest saw it coming.  He sprang forward; and almost before it
had stopped, his stick had caught it and sent it triumphantly over the
line.  The big fellows were astonished when they saw how and by whom
they had been defeated.  Blackall especially was enraged.
