at once."

This fact was, we may almost say, self-evident for Obo's attentions and
favours were distributed exclusively between Yohama and Kambira, though
the latter had unquestionably the larger share.

During the course of the feast, beer was served round by the little man
who had performed so deftly on the violin the previous evening.

"Drink," said Kambira hospitably; "I am glad to see my white brothers
here; drink, it will warm your hearts."

"Ay, an' it won't make us drunk," said Disco, destroying Jumbo's peace
of mind by winking and making a face at him as he raised the calabash to
his lips.  "Here's long life to you, Kambira, an' death to slavery."

There can be no doubt that the chief and his retainers would have
heartily applauded that sentiment if they had understood it, but at the
moment Antonio was too deeply engaged with another calabash to take the
trouble to translate it.

The beer, which was pink, and as thick as gruel, was indeed too weak to
produce intoxication unless taken in very large quantities; nevertheless
many of the men were so fond of it that they sometimes succeeded in
taking enough to bring them to the condition which we style "fuddled."
But at that time the particular brew was nearly exhausted, so that
temperance was happily the order of the day.

Having no hops in those regions, they are unable to prevent
fermentation, and are therefore obliged to drink up a whole brewing as
quickly as possible after it is made.

"Man, why don't ye wash yer face?" said Disco to the little fiddler as
he replenished his calabash; "it's awful dirty."

Jumbo laughed, of course, and the small musician, not understanding what
was said, followed suit out of sympathy.

"Wash him's face!" cried Antonio, laughing, "him would as soon cut off
him's head.  Manganja nevair wash.  Ah me!  You laugh if you hear de
womans ask me yesterday--`Why you wash?' dey say, `our men nevair do.'
Ho! ho! dey looks like it too."

"I'm sure that cannot be said of Kambira or any of his chief men," said
Harold.

"Perhaps not," retorted Antonio, "but some of 'um nevair wash.  Once
'pon a time one man of dis tribe foller a party me was with.  Not go way
for all we tell 'um.  We said we shoot 'um.  No matter, hims foller
still.  At last we say, `You scoun'rel, we _wash_ you!'  Ho! how hims
run!  Jist like zebra wid lion at 'um's tail.  Nevair see 'um after
dat--nevair more!"

"Wot a most monstrous ugly feller that is sittin' opposite Kambira, on
the other side o' the fire--the feller with the half-shaved head," said
Disco in an undertone to Harold during a temporary pause in eating.

"A well-made man, however," replied Harold.--"I say, Disco," he added,
with a peculiar smile, "you think yourself rather a good-looking fellow,
don't you, now?"

The worthy seaman, who was indeed an exceptionally good-looking tar,
modestly replied--"Well now, as you have put it so plump I don't mind if
I do confess that I've had some wild suspicions o' that sort now and
then."

"Then you may dismiss your suspicions now, for I can assure you that you
are regarded in this land as a very monster of ugliness," said Harold,
laughing.

"In the estimation of niggers your garments are hideous; your legs they
think elephantine, your red beard frightful, and your blue eyes
savage--_savage_! think of that."

"Well, well," retorted Disco, "your own eyes are as blue as mine, an' I
don't suppose the niggers think more of a yaller beard than a red one."

"Too true, Disco; we are both ill-favoured fellows here, whatever we may
be elsewhere; however, as we don't intend to take Manganja wives it
won't matter much.  But what think you of our plan, now that Kambira is
ready to fall in with it?"

"It seems a good one.  When do we start?"

"To-morrow," said Harold.

"Wery good," replied Disco, "I'm agreeable."

The morrow came, and with the early light all the people turned out to
witness the departure of the hunters.  Scouts had been previously sent
out in all directions to make sure that no enemies or slave-traders were
at that time in their immediate neighbourhood, and a strong force of the
best warriors was left to guard the village.

Of Harold's band, two half-castes, Jose and Oliveira, volunteered to
stay in camp with the guard, and two, Songolo and Mabruki, the freemen
of Quillimane, remained in the village to recruit their health, which
had failed.  Chimbolo likewise remained, the wounds on his back not
having healed sufficiently to admit of the hard labour of hunting.  All
the rest accompanied the hunters, and of these the three Makololo men,
Jumbo, Zombo, and Masiko, were incomparably the best and bravest.  Of
course the volatile Antonio also went, being indispensable.

On setting out--each man with his sleeping-mat on his back and his
little wooden pillow hung at his neck,--there was a great deal of
shouting and ho-ho-ing and well-wishing on the part of those who
remained behind, but above all the noise there arose a shrill cry of
intense and agonising despair.  This proceeded from the small windpipe
of little Obo, who had not until the last moment made the appalling
discovery that Kambira was going away without him!

There was something very touching in the cry of the urchin, and
something which brought vividly to the minds of the Englishmen the
infantine community of their own land.  There was the same sudden gaze
of horror on realising the true position of affairs,--the same sharp
shriek and frantic struggle to escape from the grasp of those who held
him back from following his father,--the same loud cry of agony on
finding that his efforts were vain, and then, the wide-open mouth, the
close-shut eyes, and the awful, prolonged silence--suggestive of fits--
that betokens the concentration of mind, heart, and lungs into that
tremendous roar of unutterable significance which appears to be the
safety-valve of the human family, black and white, at that tender period
of life.

Poor Obo! his sobs continued to burst out with steam-engine power, and
his eyes to pour cataracts of tears into Yohama's sympathetic bosom,
long after the hunting party had left the hills behind them, and
advanced into the almost impenetrable jungles of the low grounds.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

DESCRIBES A HUNTING EXPEDITION WHICH WAS BOTH EXCITING AND SUCCESSFUL.

Down by the reedy margin of a pretty large lake--where wild-fowl
innumerable made the air vocal with their cries by day, and frogs, in
numbers inconceivable, chirped and croaked a lullaby to men who slept,
and a symphony to beasts that howled and growled and prowled at night in
bush and brake--Kambira pitched his camp.

He did not indeed, select the moist level of the fever-breeding marshes,
but he chose for his temporary habitation the dry summit of a wooded
hill which overlooked the lake.

Here the natives of the neighbourhood said that elephants had been
lately seen, and buffaloes, zebras, etcetera, were at all times
numerous.

After two long days' march they had reached the spot, and encamped late
in the evening.  Next morning early the business of the expedition
began.  Various parties of natives, armed with bows and arrows and
spears, were sent out in different directions, but the principal band
was composed of Kambira and his chief men, with Harold and his party.

They did not go far before game was found.  Guinea-fowl were numerous,
and those who were aimed with bows soon procured a goodly supply of
these, but our travellers did not waste their energies or powder on such
small game.  Besides these, monkeys peeped inquisitively at the hunters
from among the trees, and myriads of turtle-doves were seen in the
covers.  As they advanced, wild pigs, elands, waterbucks, koodoos, and
other creatures, were seen in herds, and the natives dropped off, or
turned aside in pursuit of these, so that ere long the band remaining
with Kambira was reduced to about forty men.

Coming to a small river in which were a number of deep pools and
shallows, they saw several hippopotami lying asleep, their bodies nearly
all out of the water, appearing like masses of black rock in the stream.
But at the same place they discovered fresh traces of elephants and
buffaloes, therefore the hippopotami were left unmolested, save that
Harold sent a bullet amongst them, partly to let the natives hear the
report of his gun, and partly to see how the animals would take it.

They all started to their feet at once, and stared around them with
looks of stolid surprise that were almost equal to the looks of the
natives, to whom fire-arms were little known, except by report.  Another
shot sent the whole herd with a heavy plunge into deep water.

"It's a queer country," observed Disco when they had resumed their
march.  "Just look at them there lizards with red and blue tails running
about among the rocks an' eatin' up the white ants like one o'clock."

Disco might have said like twelve o'clock, if numbers would have added
to the force of his remark, for the little creatures referred to were
miraculously active in pursuit of their food.

"But I s'pose," continued Disco, "the niggers would think our country a
queerer place than this."

"Undoubtedly they would," replied Harold; "just fancy what would be the
feelings of Kambira if he were suddenly transported into the heart of
London."

"Hallo!" exclaimed Disco, stopping suddenly and pointing to one of the
men in advance, who had crouched and made signals to his friends to
halt, "breakers ahead--eh?"

"More likely buffaloes," whispered Harold, as he cocked his rifle and
advanced quickly with Kambira, who carried a short spear or javelin.

On reaching an opening in the bushes, a small herd of zebras was
observed not much more than a hundred yards in advance.

"Will the white man's gun kill so far?" asked the chief, turning to
Antonio.

The interpreter made no reply, but pointed to Harold, who was in the act
of taking aim.  The loud report was followed by the fall of the nearest
zebra.  Disco also fired and wounded another, which bounded away in wild
alarm with its fellows.

The natives yelled with delight, and Disco cheered in sympathy.

"You've hit him," said Harold, as he reloaded.

"Ay, but I han't disabled him.  Better luck next time.  I think I took
him somewhere on the port bow."

"If by that you mean the left shoulder," returned Harold, with a laugh,
"it's likely he won't run far.  What does Kambira think of the white
man's gun?" he added, turning round.

The tall chief nodded approvingly, and said, with a grave
countenance--"Good, good; it is good--better than this," shaking his
short spear.

At that moment a small antelope, which had been startled and put to
flight by some of the other bands of hunters, came crashing wildly
towards them, ignorant of the enemy in its front until within about
thirty yards.  It turned at a sharp angle and plunged into the jungle,
but the spear which Kambira had shaken whizzed though the air and
pierced its heart before it had time to disappear.

"A splendid heave!" cried Disco, with enthusiasm; "why, man alive, you'd
make yer fortin' as a harpooner if ye was to go to the whale-fishin'.--
Hallo! there's somethin' else; w'y, the place is swarmin'.  It's for all
the world like a zoological ga'rdings let loose."

As he spoke, the hoofs of a herd of ponderous animals were heard, but
the rank grass and underwood concealed them entirely from view.  The
whole party rushed to the nearest opening, and were just in time to see
the tail of an irate buffalo make a magnificent flourish in the air as
its owner plunged into cover.

There was no further attempt at conversation after this.  The near
presence of large game was too exciting, so that merely a word of
advice, direction, or inquiry, passed as the party advanced rapidly--one
or two of the most active going before as pioneers.

While Disco was striding along with flashing eyes, rifle ready, and head
turning from side to side in momentary expectation of something bounding
suddenly out of somewhere, he chanced to cast his eyes upwards, and, to
his horror, beheld two huge serpents coiled together among the branches
of a tree close to his head.

Uttering a yell of alarm--for he entertained an almost superstitious
dread of serpents--he fired blindly upwards, and dashed to one side so
violently that he tumbled himself and Harold into a bush of wait-a-bit
thorns, out of which the laughing natives found it difficult to extract
them.

"What _is_ the matter, man?" said Harold somewhat testily.

"Have a care! look!  Avast!  A bite'll be death, an' no mistake!" cried
Disco, pointing to the reptiles.

Harold fired at once and brought them both down, and the natives,
attacking them with sticks, soon killed them.

"No fear," said Antonio, with a chuckle.  "Dem not harm nobody, though
ums ugly an' big enough."

This was true.  They were a couple of pythons, and the larger of the
two, a female, was ten feet long; but the python is a harmless creature.

While they were talking, smoke was observed to rise from an isolated
clump of long grass and bushes not far from the banks of the river, much
to the annoyance of Kambira, who feared that the fire might spread and
scare away the game.  It was confined, however, to the place where it
began, but it had the effect of driving out a solitary buffalo that had
taken refuge in the cover.  Jumbo chanced to be most directly in front
of the infuriated animal when it burst out, and to him exclusively it
directed its attentions.

Never since Jumbo was the size of Obo had that laughter-loving savage
used his lithe legs with greater energy than on this occasion.  An
ostrich might have envied him as he rushed towards the river, into which
he sprang headlong when the buffalo was barely six feet behind him.

Of course Harold fired, as well as Disco, and both shots told, as also a
spear from Kambira, nevertheless the animal turned abruptly on seeing
Jumbo disappear, and charged furiously up the bank, scattering its
enemies right and left.  Harold fired again at little more than fifty
yards off, and heard the bullet thud as it went in just behind the
shoulder, yet strange to say, it seemed to have no other effect than to
rouse the brute to greater wrath, and two more bullets failed to bring
him down.

This toughness of the buffalo is by no means uncommon, but different
animals vary much in their tenacity of life.  Some fall at once to the
first well-directed shot; others die hard.  The animal the hunters were
now in pursuit of, or rather which was in pursuit of the hunters, seemed
to be of the latter class.  Harold fired another shot from behind a
tree, having loaded with a shell-bullet, which exploded on hitting the
creature's ribs.  It fell, much to the satisfaction of Disco, of whom it
happened to be in pursuit at the time.  The seaman at once stopped and
began to reload, and the natives came running forward, when Antonio, who
had climbed a tree to be out of harm's way, slipped down and ran with
great bravery up to the prostrate animal.

Just as he reached it the buffalo sprang up with the activity of a cat,
and charged him.  Antonio turned and ran with such rapidity that his
little legs became almost invisible, like those of a sparrow in a hurry.
He gained a tree, and had just time to climb into it when the buffalo
struck it like a battering-ram, hard enough almost to have split both
head and tree.  It paused a few seconds, drew back several paces, glared
savagely at Antonio, and then charged again and again, as if resolved
either to shake him out of the tree, or give itself a splitting
headache, but another shell from Harold, who could hardly take aim for
laughing, stretched the huge animal dead upon the ground.  Altogether,
it took two shells and five large solid rifle-balls to finish him.

"That wos a pretty good spurt," said Disco, panting, as he joined Harold
beside the fallen beast.  "It's well-known that a starn chase is a long
'un, but this would have been an exception to the rule if you hadn't
shot him, sir.  He pretty nigh made short work o' _me_.  He was a'most
aboard of me w'en you fired."

"True," said Harold; "and had that tree not grown where it stands, and
grown tough, too, I suspect he would have made short work of Antonio
too."

"Bah!" said the interpreter, with affected carelessness, "him was but a
slow brute, after all."

Disco looked at Jumbo, who was none the worse of his ducking, and shut
his right eye smartly.  Jumbo opened his cavernous mouth, and exploded
so violently that his double row of brilliant teeth must have been blown
out and scattered on the ground, had they not been miraculously strong.

"Come, now," said Kambira, who had just given orders to some of his
followers to remain behind and look after the carcase, "we go to find
elephants."

"Have we much chance of findin' them?" inquired Disco.

Kambira thought they had, because fresh traces had been recently seen in
the neighbourhood, whereupon Disco said that he would prefer to go after
lions, but Kambira assured him that these animals were not so easy to
find, and much more dangerous when attacked.  Admitting the force of
this, though still asserting his preference of lions to elephants, the
