  'Tis pity of him, too," he cried:
  "Bold can he speak, and fairly ride:
  I warrant him a warrior tried."--
  With this his mandate he recalls,
  And slowly seeks his castle halls.                                  90

      --_Sir Walter Scott_


  In what Quality of voice should the following passages
  of this poem be read: (_a_) the descriptive parts; (_b_)
  l. 10; (_c_) the first speeches of Marmion and Douglas,
  ll. 14-18, and ll. 21-29; (_d_) the second speeches of
  Marmion and Douglas, ll. 32-49, and ll. 52-56; (_e_) ll.
  57-58, and ll. 75-88?

       *       *       *       *       *


COLUMBUS


  Behind him lay the gray Azores.
    Behind him the gates of Hercules;
  Before him not the ghost of shores,
    Before him only shoreless seas.
  The good mate said: "Now we must pray,                               5
    For, lo! the very stars are gone.
  Brave Adm'r'l, speak; what shall I say?"
    "Why, say: 'Sail on! sail on! and on!'"

  "My men grow mutinous day by day;
    My men grow ghastly wan and weak."                                10
  The stout mate thought of home; a spray
    Of salt wave washed his swarthy cheek.
  "What shall I say, brave Adm'r'l, say,
    If we sight naught but seas at dawn?"
  "Why, you shall say, at break of day:                               15
    'Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!'"

  They sailed and sailed as winds might blow,
    Until at last the blanched mate said:
  "Why, now not even God would know
    Should I and all my men fall dead.                                20
  These very winds forget the way,
    For God from these dread seas is gone.
  Now speak, brave Adm'r'l, speak and say--"
    He said: "Sail on! sail on! and on!"

  They sailed. They sailed. Then spake the mate:                      25
    "This mad sea shows his teeth to-night;
  He curls his lip, he lies in wait,
    With lifted teeth as if to bite:
  Brave Adm'r'l, say but one good word;
    What shall we do when hope is gone?"                              30
  The words leapt as a leaping sword:
    "Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!"

  Then, pale and worn, he kept his deck
  And peered through darkness. Ah, that night
  Of all dark nights! And then, a speck--                             35
  A light! a light! a light! a light!
  It grew, a starlit flag unfurled!
  It grew to be Time's burst of dawn.
  He gained a world; he gave that world
  Its greatest lesson; "On! sail on!"                                 40

    --_Joaquin Miller_

    --_By permission of the publishers, Whitaker & Ray-Wiggin Co._


  WHAT, SHALL, WHY. (Appendix A, 7 and 8.)

  Give examples of words or phrases which when repeated
  become (1) unemphatic, (2) more emphatic, (3) equivalent
  to a climax. (Introduction, pp. 31 and 32.)

  Compare the mate's attitude of mind with that of the
  Admiral. How is the difference indicated by the Stress?

       *       *       *       *       *


FROM THE "APOLOGY" OF SOCRATES

From "The Dialogues of Plato"


1. Not much time will be gained, O Athenians, in return for the evil
name which you will get from the detractors of the city, who will say
that you killed Socrates, a wise man; for they will call me wise, even
although I am not wise, when they want to reproach you. If you had
waited a little while, your desire would have been fulfilled in the
course of nature. For I am far advanced in years, as you may perceive,
and not far from death. I am speaking now only to those of you who
have condemned me to death. And I have another thing to say to them:
You think that I was convicted through deficiency of words--I mean,
that if I had thought fit to leave nothing undone, nothing unsaid, I
might have gained an acquittal. Not so; the deficiency which led to
my conviction was not of words--certainly not. But I had not the
boldness or impudence or inclination to address you as you would have
liked me to address you, weeping and wailing and lamenting, and saying
and doing many things which you have been accustomed to hear from
others, and which, as I say, are unworthy of me. But I thought that I
ought not to do anything common or mean in the hour of danger; nor do
I now repent of the manner of my defence, and I would rather die
having spoken after my manner, than speak in your manner and live. For
neither in war nor yet at law ought any man to use every way of
escaping death. For often in battle there is no doubt that if a man
will throw away his arms, and fall on his knees before his pursuers,
he may escape death; and in other dangers there are other ways of
escaping death, if a man is willing to say and do anything. The
difficulty, my friends, is not in avoiding death, but in avoiding
unrighteousness; for that runs faster than death. I am old and move
slowly, and the slower runner has overtaken me, and my accusers are
keen and quick, and the faster runner, who is unrighteousness, has
overtaken them. And now I depart hence, condemned by you to suffer the
penalty of death, and they too go their ways, condemned by the truth
to suffer the penalty of villainy and wrong; and I must abide by my
reward--let them abide by theirs. I suppose that these things may be
regarded as fated,--and I think that they are well.

2. And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you;
for I am about to die, and that is the hour in which men are gifted
with prophetic power. And I prophesy to you who are my murderers,
that immediately after my death punishment far heavier than you have
inflicted on me will surely await you. Me you have killed because you
wanted to escape the accuser, and not to give an account of your
lives. But that will not be as you suppose: far otherwise. For I say
that there will be more accusers of you than there are now; accusers
whom hitherto I have restrained: and as they are younger they will be
more severe with you, and you will be more offended at them. For if
you think that by killing men you can avoid the accuser censuring your
lives, you are mistaken; that is not a way of escape which is either
possible or honourable; the easiest and the noblest way is not to be
crushing others, but to be improving yourselves. This is the prophecy
which I utter before my departure to the judges who have condemned me.

3. Friends, who would have acquitted me, I would like also to talk
with you about this thing which has happened, while the magistrates
are busy, and before I go to the place at which I must die. Stay then
a while, for we may as well talk with one another while there is time.
You are my friends, and I should like to show you the meaning of this
event which has happened to me. O my judges--for you I may truly call
judges--I should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance.
Hitherto the familiar oracle within me has constantly been in the
habit of opposing me even about trifles, if I was going to make a slip
or error about anything; and now, as you see, there has come upon me
that which may be thought, and is generally believed to be, the last
and worst evil. But the oracle made no sign of opposition, either as I
was leaving my house and going out in the morning, or when I was going
up into this court, or while I was speaking, at anything which I was
going to say; and yet I have often been stopped in the middle of a
speech, but now in nothing I either said or did touching this matter
has the oracle opposed me. What do I take to be the explanation of
this? I will tell you. I regard this as a proof that what has happened
to me is a good, and that those of us who think that death is an evil
are in error. This is a great proof to me of what I am saying, for the
customary sign would surely have opposed me had I been going to evil
and not to good.

4. Let us reflect in another way, and we shall see that there is a
great reason to hope that death is a good, for one of two things:
either death is a state of nothingness and utter unconsciousness, or,
as men say, there is a change and migration of the soul from this
world to another. Now if you suppose that there is no consciousness,
but a sleep like the sleep of him who is undisturbed even by the sight
of dreams, death will be an unspeakable gain. For if a person were to
select the night in which his sleep was undisturbed even by dreams,
and were to compare with this the other days and nights of his life,
and then were to tell us how many days and nights he had passed in the
course of his life better and more pleasantly than this one, I think
that any man, I will not say a private man, but even the great king
will not find many such days or nights, when compared with the others.
Now if death is like this, I say that to die is gain; for eternity is
then only a single night. But if death is the journey to another
place, and there, as men say, all the dead are, what good, O my
friends and judges, can be greater than this? If indeed when the
pilgrim arrives in the world below, he is delivered from the
professors of justice in this world, and finds the true judges who
are said to give judgment there, Minos and Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus,
and Triptolemus, and other sons of God who were righteous in their own
life, that pilgrimage will be worth making. What would not a man give
if he might converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer?
Nay, if this be true, let me die again and again. I, too, shall have a
wonderful interest in a place where I can converse with Palamedes, and
Ajax the son of Telamon, and other heroes of old, who have suffered
death through an unjust judgment; and there will be no small pleasure,
as I think, in comparing my own sufferings with theirs. Above all, I
shall be able to continue my search into true and false knowledge; as
in this world, so also in that; I shall find out who is wise, and who
pretends to be wise and is not. What would not a man give, O judges,
to be able to examine the leader of the great Trojan expedition; or
Odysseus, or Sisyphus, or numberless others, men and women too! What
infinite delight would there be in conversing with them and asking
them questions! For in that world they do not put a man to death for
this; certainly not. For besides being happier in that world than in
this, they will be immortal, if what is said is true.

5. Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, and know this of
a truth--that no evil can happen to a good man, either in life or
after death. He and his are not neglected by the gods; nor has my own
approaching end happened by mere chance. But I see clearly that to die
and be released was better for me; and therefore the oracle gave no
sign. For which reason, also, I am not angry with my accusers or my
condemners; they have done me no harm, although neither of them meant
to do me any good; and for this I may gently blame them.

6. Still I have a favour to ask of them. When my sons are grown up, I
would ask you, O my friends, to punish them and I would have you
trouble them, as I have troubled you, if they seem to care about
riches, or anything, more than about virtue; or if they pretend to be
something when they are really nothing,--then reprove them, as I have
reproved you, for not caring about that for which they ought to care,
and thinking that they are something when they are really nothing. And
if you do this, I and my sons will have received justice at your
hands.

7. The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways--I to die,
and you to live. Which is better God only knows.

      --_Benjamin Jowett_


  Illustrate from this extract the general principle that
  incompleteness is expressed by means of the Rising, and
  completeness by means of the Falling Inflection.

  Par. 1. FOR NEITHER IN WAR NOR YET AT LAW ... DEATH.
  Explain the Inflection placed on this negative
  statement. Give a similar example from Par. 2.

  I MUST ABIDE BY MY AWARD ... LET THEM ABIDE BY THEIRS.
  Explain the opposite Inflections on antithetical words
  and phrases. If one part of the antithesis is a
  negation, what is the Inflection? (Introduction, pp. 19
  and 20.) Give examples from Par. 2.

  I AM OLD AND MOVE SLOWLY ... WRONG. Explain the Emphasis
  in these sentences. Which one of a pair of contrasted
  words is necessarily emphatic? Give examples from this
  and the following paragraph, in which both are emphatic,
  and explain why. (Introduction, pp. 30-32.)

  Par. 4. Explain the Inflection on the questions.
  (Introduction, pp. 18 and 19.)

  What clauses in this paragraph are really parenthetical
  in force? How does the voice subordinate them? Give
  similar examples from other paragraphs. (Introduction,
  pp. 24 and 25.)

       *       *       *       *       *


HIGHLAND HOSPITALITY

From "The Lady of the Lake"


  The shades of eve come slowly down,
  The woods are wrapt in deeper brown,
  The owl awakens from her dell,
  The fox is heard upon the fell;
  Enough remains of glimmering light                                   5
  To guide the wanderer's steps aright,
  Yet not enough from far to show
  His figure to the watchful foe.
  With cautious step, and ear awake,
  He climbs the crag and threads the brake;                           10
  And not the summer solstice there,
  Tempered the midnight mountain air,
  But every breeze that swept the wold,
  Benumbed his drenched limbs with cold.
  In dread, in danger, and alone,                                     15
  Famished and chilled, through ways unknown,
  Tangled and steep, he journeyed on;
  Till, as a rock's huge point he turned,
  A watch-fire close before him burned.

  Beside its embers red and clear,                                    20
  Basked, in his plaid, a mountaineer;
  And up he sprung with sword in hand,--
  "Thy name and purpose! Saxon, stand!"--
  "A stranger."--"What dost thou require?"--
  "Rest and a guide, and food and fire.                               25
  My life's beset, my path is lost.
  The gale has chilled my limbs with frost."--
  "Art thou a friend to Roderick?"--"No."--
  "Thou darest not call thyself a foe?"--
  "I dare! to him and all the band                                    30
  He brings to aid his murderous hand."--
  "Bold words!--but, though the beast of game
  The privilege of chase may claim,
  Though space and law the stag we lend,
  Ere hound we slip, or bow we bend,                                  35
  Who ever recked, where, how, or when,
  The prowling fox was trapped or slain?
  Thus, treacherous scouts,--yet sure they lie,
  Who say thou camest a secret spy!"--
  "They do, by Heaven!--Come Roderick Dhu,                            40
  And of his clan the boldest two,
  And let me but till morning rest,
  I write the falsehood on their crest."--
  "If by the blaze I mark aright,
  Thou bear'st the belt and spur of Knight."--                        45
  "Then, by these tokens mayest thou know,
  Each proud oppressor's mortal foe."--
  "Enough, enough; sit down and share
  A soldier's couch, a soldier's fare."--

  He gave him of his Highland cheer,                                  50
  The hardened flesh of mountain deer;
  Dry fuel on the fire he laid,
  And bade the Saxon share his plaid.
  He tended him like welcome guest,
  Then thus his further speech addressed:--                           55
  "Stranger, I am to Roderick Dhu
  A clansman born, a kinsman true;
  Each word against his honour spoke,
  Demands of me avenging stroke;
  Yet more,--upon thy fate, 'tis said,                                60
  A mighty augury is laid.
  It rests with me to wind my horn,
  Thou art with numbers overborne;
  It rests with me, here, brand to brand,
  Worn as thou art, to bid thee stand:                                65
  But not for clan, nor kindred's cause,
  Will I depart from honour's laws;
  To assail a wearied man were shame,
  And stranger is a holy name;
  Guidance and rest, and food and fire,                               70
  In vain he never must require.
  Then rest thee here till dawn of day;
  Myself will guide thee on the way,
  O'er stock and stone, through watch and ward.
  Till past Clan-Alpine's outmost guard,                              75
  As far as Coilantogle's ford;
  From thence thy warrant is thy sword."--
  "I take thy courtesy, by Heaven,
  As freely as 'tis nobly given!"--
  "Well, rest thee; for the bittern's cry                             80
  Sings us the lake's wild lullaby."
  With that he shook the gathered heath,
  And spread his plaid upon the wreath;
  And the brave foemen, side by side,
  Lay peaceful down, like brothers tried,                             85
  And slept until the dawning beam
  Purpled the mountain and the stream.

      --_Sir Walter Scott_


  PREPARATORY.--Connect this scene with the rest of the
  poem.

  Give a dramatic form to this extract, describing
  definitely the scenery and stage-setting. One reader may
  render the descriptive parts, another the speeches of
  Roderick Dhu, and a third those of Fitz-James.

  WANDERER'S STEPS, CAUTIOUS STEP, TRECHEROUS SCOUTS,
  BOLDEST TWO. (Appendix A, 6.)

  25 and 70. (Appendix A, 5.) 1-4. Note the word-pictures.
  How do they affect the Pause? (Introduction, pp. 7 and
  8.)

  7. NOT ENOUGH. With what is it contrasted? Which word is
  emphatic? Where do the Pauses occur in this line?

  9. What is the atmosphere of this line? What is the
  Quality of voice? (Introduction, p. 34.)

  10-11. What Inflection? Why? What is the Shading when
  compared with the two following lines? (Introduction, p.
  24.)

  16-17. Give an example of Grouping.

  18-19. Compare the Shading of these two lines.

  22. What feeling and movement are here expressed? How
  does the voice give expression to them? (Introduction,
  pp. 5, 6, and 27.)

  Describe the mental attitude of each of the speakers.
  What is the Stress in each case? (Introduction, pp.
  27-29.)

  38. THE PROWLING FOX ... SCOUTS. What is the mental
  attitude here? What Stress is the result? (Introduction,
  p. 28.) How does the rest of the speech differ from the
  preceding? What is the Inflection? (Introduction, p.
  18.)

  What is the Stress of ordinary conversation? Illustrate
  from the above selection.

  32-39. BOLD WORDS ... SPY. (Introduction, p. 24.)

  48. Why should SIT DOWN be kept distinct from SHARE? How
  is this effected?

