Of all the men in the _Avenger_, however, no one was so much alarmed by
the captain's conduct as the first mate, between whom and Gascoyne there
had been a bitter feeling for some time past; and Manton knew (at least
he believed) that it would be certain death to him if he should chance
to thwart his superior in the mood in which he then was.

"That was a good shot, Manton," said Gascoyne, with a wild laugh, as the
fore-topsail yard of the _Talisman_ came rattling down on the deck,
having been cut away by a shot from Long Tom.

"It was, but _that_ was a better one," said Manton, pointing to the boom
of the schooner's mainsail, which was cut in two by a round shot, just
as the captain spoke.

"Good, very good," observed the latter with an approving nod; "but that
alters the game; down with the helm! steady!"

"Get the wreck of that boom cleared away, Manton, we won't want the
mainsail long.  Here comes a squall.  Look sharp.  Close reef topsails."

The boom was swaying to and fro so violently, that three of the men who
sprang to obey the order were hurled by it into the lee scuppers.
Gascoyne darted towards the broken spar and held it fast, while Manton
quickly severed the ropes that fastened it to the sail and to the deck,
then the former hurled it over the side with as much ease as if it had
been an oar.

"Let her away now."

"Why, that will run us right into the Long Shoal!" exclaimed Manton,
anxiously, as the squall which had been approaching struck the schooner
and laid her almost on her beam ends.

"I know it," replied Gascoyne, curtly, as he thrust aside the man at the
wheel and took the spokes in his own hands.

"It's all we can do to find our way through that place in fine weather,"
remonstrated the mate.

"I know it," said Gascoyne, sternly.

Scraggs, who chanced to be standing by, seemed to be immensely delighted
with the alarmed expression on Manton's face.  The worthy second mate
hated the first mate so cordially, and attached so little value to his
own life, that he would willingly have run the schooner on the rocks
altogether, just to have the pleasure of laughing contemptuously at the
wreck of Manton's hopes.

"It's worth while trying it," suggested Scraggs, with a malicious grin.

"I mean to try it," said Gascoyne, calmly.

"But there's not a spot in the shoal except the Eel's Gate that we've a
ghost of a chance of getting through," cried Manton, becoming excited as
the schooner dashed towards the breakers like a furious charger rushing
on destruction.

"I know it."

"And there's barely water on _that_ to float us over," he added,
striding forward, and laying a hand on the wheel.

"Half-a-foot too little," said Gascoyne, with forced calmness.

Scraggs grinned.

"You shan't run us aground if I can prevent it," cried Manton, fiercely,
seizing the wheel with both hands and attempting to move it, in which
attempt he utterly failed, and Scraggs grinned broader than ever.

"Remove your hands," said Gascoyne, in a low calm voice, which surprised
the men who were standing near and witnessed these proceedings.

"I won't.  Ho! lads, do you wish to be sent to the bottom by a--"

The remainder of this speech was cut short by the sudden descent of
Gascoyne's knuckles on the forehead of the mate, who dropped on the deck
as if he had been felled with a sledge hammer.  Scraggs laughed outright
with satisfaction.

"Remove him," said Gascoyne.

"Overboard?" inquired Scraggs, with a bland smile.

"Below," said the captain; and Scraggs was fain to content himself with
carrying the insensible form of his superior officer to his berth,
taking pains, however, to bump his head carefully against every spar and
corner and otherwise convenient projection on the way down.

In a few minutes more the schooner was rushing through the milk-white
foam that covered the dangerous coral reef named the Long Shoals, and
the _Talisman_ lay-to, not daring to venture into such a place, but
pouring shot and shell into her bold little adversary with terrible
effect, as her tattered sails and flying cordage shewed.  The fire was
steadily replied to by Long Tom, whose heavy shots, came crashing
repeatedly through the hull of the man-of-war.

The large boat, meanwhile, had been picked up by the _Talisman_, after
having rescued Mr Mason and Henry, both of whom were placed in the gig.
This light boat was now struggling to make the ship, but owing to the
strength of the squall, her diminished crew were unable to effect this;
they therefore ran ashore to await the issue of the fight and the storm.

For some time the _Avenger_ stood on her wild course unharmed, passing
close to huge rocks on either side of her, over which the sea burst in
clouds of foam.  Gascoyne still stood at the wheel, guiding the vessel
with consummate skill and daring, while the men looked on in awe and in
breathless expectation, quite regardless of the shot which flew around
them and altogether absorbed by the superior danger by which they were
menaced.

The surface of the sea was so universally white, that there was no line
of dark water to guide the pirate captain on his bold and desperate
course.  He was obliged to trust almost entirely to his intimate
knowledge of the coast, and to the occasional patches in the surrounding
waste where the comparative flatness of the boiling flood indicated less
shallow water.  As the danger increased, the smile left Gascoyne's lips,
but the flashing of his bright eyes and his deepened colour shewed that
the spirit boiled within, almost as wildly as the ocean raged around
him.

The centre of the shoal was gained, and a feeling of hope and exultation
began to rise in the breasts of the crew when a terrific shock caused
the little schooner to quiver from stem to stern, while an involuntary
cry burst from the men, many of whom were thrown violently on the deck.
At the same time a shot from the _Talisman_ came in through the stern
bulwarks, struck the wheel and carried it away with part of the tackle
attached to the tiller.

"Another leap like that, lass, and you're over," cried Gascoyne, with a
light smile, as he sprang to the iron tiller, and, seizing it with his
strong hands, steered the schooner as if she had been a boat.

"Get new tackle rove, Scraggs," said he, cheerfully, "I'll keep her
straight for Eel's Gate with _this_.  That was the first bar of the
gate--there are only two altogether, and the second won't be so bad."

As the captain spoke, the schooner seemed to recover from the shock and
again rushed forward on her foaming course; but before the men had time
to breathe, she struck again--this time less violently, as had been
predicted--and the next wave, lifting her over the shoal, launched her
into deep water.

"There, that will do," said Gascoyne, resigning the helm to Scraggs.
"You can keep her as she goes; there's plenty of water now and no fear
of that big bully following us.  Meanwhile, I will go below and see to
the welfare of our passengers."

Gascoyne was wrong in supposing that the _Talisman_ would not follow.
She could not, indeed, follow in the same course, but the moment that
Mulroy observed that the pirate had passed the shoals in safety, he
stood inshore, and, without waiting to pick up the gig, traversed the
channel by which they had entered the bay.  Then, trusting to the lead
and to his knowledge of the general appearance of shallows, he steered
carefully along until he cleared the reefs and finally stood out to sea.

In less than half-an-hour afterwards, the party on shore beheld the two
vessels disappear among the black storm-clouds that gathered over the
distant horizon.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE GOAT'S PASS--AN ATTACK, A BLOODLESS VICTORY, AND A SERMON.

When Ole Thorwald was landed at the foot of that wild gorge in the
cliffs, which has been designated the Goat's Pass, he felt himself to be
an aggrieved man, and growled accordingly.

"It's too bad o' that fire-eating fellow to fix on _me_ for this
particular service," said he to one of the settlers named Hugh Barnes, a
cooper, who acted as one of his captains; "and at night too, just as if
a man of my years were a cross between a cat, (which everybody knows can
see in the dark,) and a kangaroo, which is said to be a powerful leaper,
though whether in the dark or the light I don't pretend to know--not
being informed on the point.  Have a care, Hugh.  It seems to me you're
going to step into a quarry hole, or over a precipice.  How my old flesh
quakes, to be sure!  If it was only a fair flat field and open day, with
any odds you like against me, it would be nothing; but this abominable
Goat's--Hah!  I knew it.  Help! hold on there! murder!"

Ole's sudden alarm was caused by his stumbling in the dark over the root
of a shrub which grew on the edge of, and partly concealed, a precipice,
over which he was precipitated, and at the foot of which his mangled and
lifeless form would soon have reposed, had not his warlike forefathers,
being impressed with the advantage of wearing strong sword-belts,
furnished the sword which Ole wore with such a belt as was not only on
all occasions sufficient to support the sword itself, but which, on this
particular occasion, was strong enough to support its owner when he was
suspended from, and entangled with, the shrubs of the cliff.

A ray of light chanced to break into the dark chasm at the time, and
revealed all its dangers to the pendulous Thorwald so powerfully that he
positively howled with horror.

The howl brought Hugh and several of his followers to his side, and they
with much difficulty, for he was a heavy man, succeeded in dragging him
from his dangerous position and placing him on his feet, in which
position he remained for some time speechless and blowing.

"Now, I'll tell ye what it is, boys," said he at length, "if ever you
catch me going on an expedition of this sort again, flay me alive--
that's all--don't spare me.  Pull off the cuticle as if it were a glove,
and if I roar don't mind--that's what I say."

Having said this, the veteran warrior smiled a ghastly smile, as if the
idea of being so excruciatingly treated were rather pleasant than
otherwise.

"You're not hurt, I hope," inquired Hugh.

"Hurt! yes, I _am_ hurt--hurt in my feelings--not in my body, thanks to
my good sword and belt; but my feelings are injured.  That villain, that
rascal, that pirate--as I verily believe him to be--selected me
specially for this service, I am persuaded, just because he knew me to
be unfit for it.  Bah! but I'll pay him off for it.  Come, boys,
forward--perhaps, in the circumstances, it would be more appropriate to
say, upward!  We must go through with it now for our retreat is cut off.
Lead the way, Hugh, your eyes are younger and sharper than mine, and if
you chance to fall over a cliff, pray give a yell, like a good fellow,
so that I may escape your sad fate."

In the course of half an hour's rough scramble, the party gained the
crest of the Goat's Pass and descended in rear of the native village.
The country over which they had to travel, however, was so broken and so
beset with rugged masses of rock as to retard their progress
considerably, besides causing them to lose their way more than once.  It
was thus daybreak before they reached the heights that overlooked the
village, and the shot from the _Avenger_ with the broad side from the
frigate was delivered just as they began to descend the hill.

Ole, therefore, pushed on with enthusiasm to attack the village in rear,
but he had not advanced half a mile when the peculiar, and to him
inexplicable, movements of the two vessels which have been already
described, took place, leaving the honest commander of the land forces
in a state of great perplexity as to what was meant by his naval allies,
and in much doubt as to what he ought to do.

"It seems to me," said he to his chiefs in a hastily summoned council of
war, "that we are all at sixes and sevens.  I don't understand what
manoeuvres these naval men are up to and I doubt if they know
themselves.  This being the case, and the fleet, (if I may so name it,)
having run away, it behoves us, my friends, to shew these sailors how we
soldiers do our duty.  I would advise, therefore, that we should attack
at once.  But as we are not a strong party, and as we know not how
strong the savages may be, I think it my duty before leading you on, to
ask your opinions on the point."

The officers whose opinions were thus asked were Hugh Barnes, already
mentioned; Terence Rigg the blacksmith of the settlement, and John
Thomson the carpenter.  These, being strong of body, powerful of will,
and intelligent withal, had been appointed to the command of companies,
and when on duty were styled "captain" by their commanding officer, who
was, when on duty, styled "general" by them.

Ole Thorwald, be it remarked in passing, was a soldier at heart.  Having
gone through a moderate amount of military education, and possessing
considerable talent in the matter of drill, he took special pride in
training the natives and the white men of the settlement to act in
concert and according to fixed principles.  The consequence was that,
although his men were poorly armed, he had them under perfect command,
and could cause them to act unitedly at any moment.

The captains having been requested to give their opinions, Captain Rigg,
being senior, observed that his vote was for "goin' at 'em at wance,
neck or nothing," to which warlike sentiment he gave peculiar emphasis
by adding, "an' no mistake," in a very decided tone of voice.

"That's wot I says, too, General," said Captain Thomson, the carpenter.

Captain Barnes being of the same opinion, General Thorwald said--

"Well then, gentlemen, we shall attack without delay;" and proceeded to
make the necessary arrangements.

When the _Talisman_ fired her broadside of blank cartridge at the native
village, there was not a solitary warrior in it--only aged men, women
and children.  These, filled with unutterable consternation on hearing
the thunderous discharge, sent up one yell of terror and forthwith took
to their heels and made for the hills _en masse_, never once looking
behind them, and, therefore, remaining in ignorance of the ulterior
proceedings of the ships.

It was some time before they came in sight of Ole Thorwald and his men.

The moment they did so Ole gave the word to charge, and, whirling his
sword round his head, set the example.  The men followed with a yell.
The poor savages turned at once and fled--such of them at least as were
not already exhausted by their run up hill--and the rest, consisting
chiefly of old men and children, fell on their knees and faces and
howled for mercy.

As soon as the charging host became aware of the character of the enemy,
they came came to a sudden halt.

"Sure it's owld men and women we're about to kill!" cried Captain Rigg,
lowering his formidable forehammer, with which, in default of a better
weapon, he had armed himself, "but hooray!  Gineral, there may be lots
o' the warrior reptiles in among the huts, and them poor craturs have
been sent out to decaive us."

"That's true.  Forward my lads!" shouted Ole--and again the army
charged--nor did they stop short until they had taken possession of the
village, when they found that all the fighting men were gone.

This being happily accomplished without blood shed, Ole Thorwald, like a
wise general, took the necessary steps to insure and complete his
conquest.  He seized all the women and children and shut them up in a
huge temple built of palm-trees and roofed with broad leaves.  This
edifice was devoted to the horrible practice of cutting up human bodies
that were intended to be eaten.

Ole had often heard of the cannibalism that is practised by most of the
South Sea islanders, though some tribes are worse than others, but he
had never before this day come directly in contact with it.  Here,
however, there could be no doubt whatever of the fact.  Portions of
human bodies were strewn about this hideous temple--some parts in a raw
and bloody condition, as if they had just been cut from a lately slain
victim; others in a baked state as if ready to form part of some
terrible banquet.

Sick at heart, Ole Thorwald turned from this sight with loathing.
Concluding that the natives who practised such things could not be very
much distressed by being shut up for a time in a temple dedicated to the
gratification of their own disgusting tastes, he barricaded the entrance
securely, placed a guard over it, and hurried away to see that two other
buildings, in which the remainder of the women and children had been
imprisoned, were similarly secured and guarded.  Meanwhile the stalwart
knight of the forehammer, to whom the duty had been assigned, placed
sentries at the various entrances to the village, and disposed his men
in such a way as to prevent the possibility of being taken by surprise.

These various arrangements were not made a moment too soon.  The
savages, as we have said in a former chapter, rushed towards their
village from all quarters, on hearing the thunder of the great guns.
They were now arriving in scores, and came rushing over the brow of the
neighbouring hill, and down the slope that rose immediately in rear of
their rude homes.

On finding that the place was occupied by their enemies they set up a
yell of despair, and retired to a neighbouring height, where Ole could
see, by their wild gesticulations, that they were hotly debating what
should be done.  It soon became evident that an attack would be made,
for, as their comrades came pouring in, the party from the settlement
was soon greatly outnumbered.

Seeing this, and knowing that the party under command of Henry Stuart
would naturally hasten to his aid as soon as possible, Ole sought to
cause delay by sending out a flag of truce.

The natives had been so long acquainted with the customs of the
Europeans that they understood the meaning of this, and the chief of the
tribe, at once throwing down his club, advanced fearlessly to meet the
Christian native sent out with the flag.

The message was to the effect that if they, the enemy, should dare to
make an attack, all the women and children then in the hands of the
settlers should have their heads chopped off on the spot!

This was a startling announcement, and one so directly in opposition to
the known principles of the Christians, that the heathen chief was
staggered and turned pale.  He returned to his comrades with the
horrifying message, which seemed to them all utterly unaccountable.  It
was quite natural for themselves to do such a deed, because they held
that all sorts of cruelties were just in war.  But their constant
experience had been that, when a native became a follower of the
Christian missionary, from that moment he became merciful, especially
towards the weak and helpless.  Counting upon this, they were stunned as
well as astonished at Thorwald's message; for they believed implicitly
that he meant to do what he threatened.  They did not know that Ole,
although a worthy man, was not so earnest a believer in all Mr Mason's
principles, but that he could practise on their credulity in time of
need.  Like the missionary, he would rather have died than have
sacrificed the life of a woman or child; but, unlike him, he had no
objection to deceive in order to gain time.

As it turned out, his threat was unnecessary, for Henry and his men were
close at hand; and before the natives could make up their minds what to
do, the whole band came pouring over the hill, with Jo Bumpus far ahead
of the rest, leaping and howling like a maniac with excitement.

