Too much depends on wireless stations to run the risk of errors
through imperfections in the equipment."

"I can understand all that; but aren't there a score of other
regulations?"

"You mean about what they shall and shall not do?"

"Yes."

"There certainly are. There have to be because we have several
different types of land stations. Just as the shipboard stations have
their special kinds of work so do those on shore. For example, there
are two different classes of radio compass stations,--those that
operate independently and are located with a view to giving good
cross-bearings to vessels that are from fifty to a hundred miles out
to sea; and those known as harbor stations which are governed by a
central control station and designed to inform ships within thirty
miles of the entrance to outer channels of their position. The
function of each of these stations is, as you can see, quite different
and therefore each of them is obliged to have its own set of rules."

"I never knew anything about radio compass stations before," announced
Dick.

"That is because you never sailed the seas and had to call on one for
aid," smiled Bob. "If you did you would be very thankful, I guess,
that the government has so carefully provided some one to answer just
the sort of question you wished answered. I try to remember this when
I get hot under the collar because the license for our station does
not arrive. Uncle Sam can't help it if his men are slow. The plan at
the top is all right. There must be rules to govern wireless stations,
be they governmental, commercial, or private; rules to regulate the
wave lengths each may use; rules to make sure the operators who have
charge of them know their job; and inspectors to make sure that every
such rule is obeyed."

"Who has the big chore of following up all these people and making
certain that they are conforming to the law?" questioned Mr.
Crowninshield.

"The Department of Commerce issues the licenses for all private and
commercial stations and sends its inspectors to keep an eye on
whatever comes under their control. It is this department that will
have jurisdiction over Surfside if the license is granted. Government
radio stations on the other hand, not only the high-power class but
the coastal stations and everything that pertains to their relations
with commercial stations afloat or ashore, whether in the United
States or in foreign lands are entirely under the control of the
Director of Naval Communications of the Navy Department."

"I wish you'd tell us something more about compass stations," Dick
said. "Were you ever stationed at one?"

"Yes, for a little while I was on an island off the coast," replied
Bob. "But I did not like it very well and applied for a transfer."

"It must have been lonely as the dickens on an island; worse, even,
than being at Seaver Bay. Why in goodness did they build the station
there?"

"Why, you see, a compass station that operates independently as that
one did is usually situated on a lightship or an island because that
location is best suited to the sort of work it has to do."

"And that is?"

"To give ships their positions when they sing out to ask exactly where
they are," replied Bob. "Since the station is fairly well out to sea
itself, it is able to furnish excellent cross-bearings and set the
vessel on her course in case she is off it. Ships have been known to
miss their way, you know, especially in a fog; and if they have not
missed it they are often very grateful to be assured they have not and
that their own calculations were correct. So the rule is that an
operator must always be listening in for at least three minutes at
ten, twenty-five, forty, and fifty-five minutes past the hour and be
ready to answer a Q T E when he hears it."

"What's a Q T E?" inquired both Dick and Walter simultaneously.

"Those particular letters mean: _What is my true bearing?_ It takes
less time to send the letters than to spell out the entire sentence
and therefore a simple code which means the same in all languages is
used. When such a call is received the operator replies: Q T S
(meaning: Your true bearing is) and then follows it with the number of
degrees from his radio post stated in words, and also the name of the
station responding to the message. It is a general rule, by-the-by,
that all numerals used in any wireless communication must be spelled
out to make sure of their being perfectly understood."

"What a bother!" ejaculated Walter.

"It prevents mistakes, brother; and if it does that it is certainly
worth the trouble."

"I suppose so," answered His Highness a trifle crestfallen.

"Then what do you say next?" interrupted Dick, who was much interested
in the subject in hand.

"Well, after you have given the true bearing the ship wires: Q T F."

"And that means?"

"_What is my position?_"

"And you have to repeat those words before giving it just as you did
before?" asked Dick.

"Always," nodded Bob. "Every question asked is always repeated by the
operator answering it to make sure that each party fully understands
what is being talked about. You can't risk having a ship complain:
'Oh, I thought those figures you sent me were so-and-so.' No, indeed.
Everything must be so explicit that there will be no room for
blunders. So after you have repeated the question you send the
latitude and longitude _in words_."

"I guess there is sense in the rules after all," smiled Mrs.
Crowninshield. "Thus far we have not discovered any which, on being
examined, were not both reasonable and wise."

"That's the way I feel," Bob rejoined. "After being in radio work and
seeing the opportunities there are for mistakes I have decided
operators cannot be too careful. You see it is not like talking with
a person face to face. Those you are communicating with are usually
miles and miles away. Such stations as I have been telling you about
are on the lookout for any six-hundred-meter calls and they answer in
this tune. After communication with a ship is established, however,
the tune shifts to seven hundred and fifty-six meters if a Navy vessel
should be talking; if not, the six-hundred-meter wave length assigned
is used. This leaves the shorter range waves to commercial vessels and
greatly simplifies matters."

"That is a good rule, too," chimed in Mr. Crowninshield.

"And now about the harbor stations," suggested Dick.

The young tutor smiled.

"I had not intended to give you all this stuff this morning,"
protested he, "but since you are interested in it we may as well go on
with the subject. The task of the harbor stations, then, is to listen
both on a six-hundred-meter range, and one of nine hundred and
fifty-two--the first wave length for commercial and the latter for
Navy ship's calls. Then in response to inquiry the operator directs
the vessel how to enter that particular harbor, stating just where the
entrance buoys are and where the channel lies. If the man at the wheel
is new to the port this aid is invaluable."

"Not much like the navigation of the old days, is it?" mused Mr.
Crowninshield. "I should think such stations would put pilots out of
business."

"They do to some extent," was the reply. "There are, however, always
ships that cannot make a landing under their own steam, ships that
have to be towed. So the pilots still find something to do."

"And are these harbor stations on islands too?" questioned Nancy.

"Many of them are. A small proportion of them, though, are in
lighthouses. It all depends on which place has the more favorable
location."

"But do not the land stations that send messages sometimes interfere
with these stations?" queried Mr. Crowninshield.

"There are rules to prevent _that_," laughed Bob. "Of course the
difference in wave length to which the various types of stations are
limited solves a part of this difficulty. As I told you commercial
stations have their own particular wave length and must stick to it;
and private stations such as this one here have their range of two
hundred meters in which to operate and are confined to not more than
one kilowatt for sending messages. You cannot use more than this
without special permission from the Secretary of Labor. Should you do
so you are liable to a fine of one hundred dollars if your offense is
deliberate; if, however, it is proved that your apparatus was out of
adjustment and overreached itself you may get off with a
twenty-five-dollar fine. In that case you must see at once that your
radio error is corrected and your outfit set right."

"But sometimes along the coast aren't there big government stations
belonging to the army or navy? I should think these, with their press
of business, would butt in on the smaller ones and raise havoc with
them," ventured Mr. Crowninshield.

"Where there are such mix-ups and private or commercial stations
interfere with important government outfits the smaller ones are not
allowed to send messages during the first fifteen minutes of each
hour, such time being reserved for government business. The
government, on the other hand, must respect the rights of the littler
chap and use this particular interval for transmitting. In fact, when
licenses are issued this condition is made with private owners and the
station is so listed. Of course, however, should an S O S call come,
all rules go by the boards and the distress call has the right of way
in every case."

Mrs. Crowninshield, smiling mischievously, rose from her chair.

"There is an S O S coming in right now for a lemonade," said she,
fanning herself with her filmy handkerchief. "Who will join me?"

A chorus of "I!" "I!" greeted the question.

She touched a bell.

"Bring lemonade for six, Emelie," said she. "Put in some slices of
orange, some strawberries, and plenty of cracked ice. What a warm day
it is! I am glad I am not out on some hot, sun-baked island answering
radio calls."

"You probably would not be hot if you were on an island out to sea, my
dear," her husband returned playfully. "However, I'll agree that this
veranda is good enough for me on a July day."

The tinkling of ice cut short the conversation. Far away through the
house its distant cadence sounded.

"The first and tallest lemonade must be for Bob," Nancy announced. "He
has certainly earned it."




CHAPTER XVI

MIRACLES


Although throughout the day Mr. Crowninshield did not wander far from
the telephone no word came from the New York detectives and evening
saw him quite discouraged.

"I cannot imagine what those fellows are up to," fretted he. "Now that
they know where the yacht is and have had all day to do something
about it, it is beyond my comprehension why they haven't. Lola will be
dead before they get round to moving on Daly."

"I don't believe they are sitting idle," Bob declared in an effort to
cheer his patron. "Probably there will be news to-morrow."

"Maybe," sighed the financier. "But if something does not happen by
to-morrow, I shall start myself in my own yacht to chase up Daly."

"I doubt if that would do any good, sir," protested Bob. "It might
simply, as you said yourself, precipitate a crisis."

"Well, a crisis is better than having nothing done," fumed the man
irritably.

"You must not forget there is O'Connel."

"Much good he is doing. We have only heard from him once and as we
have no license you can't talk to him."

"Nevertheless, he is on the job at his end of the line," Bob answered.
"He has a lot of common sense, too. You can trust him to keep tabs on
how things are moving."

"Maybe I can. I hope so," was the dismal retort.

Evening, however, saw no improvement in Mr. Crowninshield's mood. "Not
a yip of any sort from those chaps in New York. One would think they
were dead," he growled. "Well, I'll give them one more day and then if
they haven't something to show I will send them to blazes and take up
the case myself. I almost wish I had done it in the first place. Here
I am paying a small fortune and getting no results."

Again Bob struggled to soothe the perturbed mind and raise the
capitalist's spirits.

"Oh, we'll hear something to-morrow, I guess," said he with an
optimism he did not altogether feel. "Maybe my license will come; or
the inspector may appear; or O'Connel may send tidings; or news may
come from New York. Something is sure to happen. Why don't we all go
over to the station and listen in on the broadcasting to-night. We are
sure to get something that will be interesting and now that the 'loud
speaker' is in position we shall be able to hear without using
individual receivers. You haven't any of you really heard what our
wireless can do."

"I know it," acknowledged the gentleman. "You see, just about every
night during broadcasting hours we have either had company or I have
been busy."

"But are you to be busy to-night?" inquired Bob.

"No, I fancy we're not. Mrs. Crowninshield said there was nothing on."

"Then why don't we light up the boathouse, and all of us listen to
what is going on in the world," Bob suggested. "I wish, too, Jerry
might come. He has not had a chance to see the outfit at all, much
less hear it. If it would not annoy you and the ladies just to let him
sit at the back of the room he could hear everything now that the horn
is on." Bob hesitated. "He has been so kind about helping us----"

"Sure! Ask him by all means," Mr. Crowninshield assented heartily. "Or
better yet, I will ask him myself. I am glad you reminded me of it.
Jerry is my right-hand man and I like to give him pleasure when I can.
What time will your show begin?"

"Oh, from seven o'clock on there is usually something doing, sir. But
the most interesting part of the program begins at eight."

"We'll be on hand, then."

This promise won Bob imparted the tidings to Dick and Walter and the
two assistants, as they dubbed themselves, hastened to prepare the new
radio building for the reception of guests. Comfortable chairs and gay
cushions were brought from the house and in his enthusiasm Dick even
went so far as to drape a flag over the entrance of the low room.

"We might have hung out bunting if we'd known sooner they were
coming," said he.

"I guess they won't care about the bunting once they are inside the
place," Walter asserted in a comforting tone.

"Don't you hope the outfit will show up well? I do," declared Dick.
"It would be just our luck to have something act up so we couldn't
hear anything. Then Dad, who is feeling pretty much on edge anyway,
would announce that a wireless was simply money thrown in a hole."

"We're not responsible for the conditions," laughed Bob. "If static is
bothersome it is not our fault."

"Nevertheless, Dad wouldn't understand that. He would just think we
did not know how to operate the thing."

"Well, we'll pray for moderate quiet," smiled Bob. "Of course I'd like
the apparatus to show off at its best. But like a child, it probably
won't. We shall have to take our luck; and if we do not get
satisfactory results to-night why the audience will have to come again
to-morrow or some other time."

"Maybe it won't--at least maybe Dad won't," Dick answered
incoherently. "If he starts off in the yacht to-morrow----"

"Oh, he won't set off to chase Daly to-morrow, don't you fret," put in
His Highness. "He was only sputtering. What good could he do? He
wouldn't have any right to search the _Siren_ even if he overtook her;
nor could he arrest the criminals aboard her. Daly would pitch Lola
over the side of the boat before he would stand by and let your father
board his yacht and he knows it."

"Maybe he does," admitted Dick. "Still, he was tremendously in earnest
this afternoon."

"He has calmed down some now," His Highness replied.

"I hope he'll stay calmed," Dick smiled. "Perhaps, unless our show
goes wrong and he gets irate at the radio company, he will."

In fact had the three young wireless operators been willing to admit
it they were far more perturbed when they heard the invited company
approaching than they would have been willing to confess. In the heart
of each of them was the same thought: the new radiophone must justify
itself and prove that it was worth all the money that had been
expended upon it.

"Well, here we are! And here's Jerry, too. He said he couldn't
possibly come--tried to make me believe he was too busy, the rascal.
But I labored with him and finally got him here," announced the master
triumphantly.

Very hot and very uncomfortable under the general banter Jerry
blushed.

"Now where do you wish to put us, Dick?" inquired the boy's mother.
"We are under your orders to-night--yours and Bob's."

"I think you will be able to hear in any of these chairs--that is, if
we hear at all," Dick responded nervously.

"What do you mean by _able to hear at all_?" put in his father
sharply.

"Why--eh--sometimes conditions vary," was the ambiguous answer. "One
does not always hear equally well." It seemed wiser to prepare his
father's mind for possible disappointment.

In the meantime Bob was tinkering with the plugs.

"Everybody ready?" he asked.

"All on deck!" came from Mr. Crowninshield whose depression, it was
plain to be seen, had momentarily vanished.

"Then here goes!" cried Bob.

Instantly the quiet of the room was transformed into a chaos of sound.
There was a shrill piping as of a singing wind, and a wail that echoed
hauntingly through the air as the tuner revolved.

"What in the name of goodness----?" began Mr. Crowninshield.

"Hush, Dad! It is always like that," explained Dick hastily.

"But it's horrible."

"Yes, I know. But wait."

"Isn't something out of order?"

"No." Dick smiled patronizingly.

"My soul and body," whispered Jerry from his corner, "did anybody ever
hear such a sound? Ain't it the wind outside. Seems as if a gale must
have come up--a hurricane, tornado, or something. If a storm's coming
I can't sit round here. I'll have to be seeing to the awnings or
they'll be ripped to pieces." He half rose from his chair.

"Don't worry, Jerry; everything's all right outside," interrupted
Walter reassuringly.

"You mean to say it's just in here?" murmured the bewildered Jerry.
Enjoying the old man's confusion, Walter nodded.
