"Exactly what I want," answered the provoking Doctor, rubbing his hands
with a satisfied air. "Rosy looks now like what she is, a modest little
girl, who does not want to be stared at. I think she would get a glance
of approval, though, from people who like sense and simplicity rather
than fuss and feathers. Revolve, my Hebe, and let me refresh my eyes by
the sight of you."

There was very little to see, however, only a pretty Gabrielle dress, of
a soft warm shade of brown, coming to the tops of a trim pair of boots
with low heels. A seal-skin sack, cap, and mittens, with a glimpse of
scarlet at the throat, and the pretty curls tied up with a bright velvet
of the same colour, completed the external adornment, making her look
like a robin redbreast wintry, yet warm.

"How do you like it, Rosy?" asked the Doctor, feeling that her opinion
was more important to the success of his new idea than that of all the
aunts on the hill.

"I feel very odd and light, but I'm warm as a toast, and nothing seems
to be in my way," answered Rose, with a skip which displayed shapely
gaiters on legs that now might be as free and active as a boy's under
the modest skirts of the girl.

"You can run away from the mad dogs, and walk off at a smart pace
without tumbling on your nose, now, I fancy?"

"Yes, uncle! suppose the dog coming, I just hop over a wall so and when
I walk of a cold day, I go like this."

Entering fully into the spirit of the thing, Rose swung herself over
the high back of the sofa as easily as one of her cousins, and then
went down the long hall as if her stout boots were related to the famous
seven-leaguers.

"There! you see how it will be; dress her in that boyish way and she
will act like a boy. I do hate all these inventions of strong-minded
women!" exclaimed Mrs. Clara, as Rose came back at a run.

"Ah, but you see some of these sensible inventions come from the brain
of a fashionable modiste, who will make you more lovely, or what you
value more 'stylish' outside and comfortable within. Mrs. Van Tassel
has been to Madame Stone, and is wearing a full suit of this sort. Van
himself told me, when I asked how she was, that she had given up lying
on the sofa, and was going about in a most astonishing way, considering
her feeble health."

"You don't say so! Let me see that book a moment," and Aunt Clara
examined the new patterns with a more respectful air, for if the elegant
Mrs. Van Tassel wore these "dreadful things" it would never do to be
left behind, in spite of her prejudices.

Dr. Alec looked at Mrs. Jessie, and both smiled, for "little Mum" had
been in the secret, and enjoyed it mightily.

"I thought that would settle it," he said with a nod.

"I didn't wait for Mrs. Van to lead the way, and for once in my life I
have adopted a new fashion before Clara. My freedom suit is ordered, and
you may see me playing tag with Rose and the boys before long," answered
Mrs. Jessie, nodding back at him.

Meantime Aunt Plenty was examining Rose's costume, for the hat and sack
were off, and the girl was eagerly explaining the new under-garments.

"See, auntie, all nice scarlet flannel, and a gay little petticoat, and
long stockings, oh, so warm! Phebe and I nearly died laughing when I put
this rig on, but I like it ever so much. The dress is so comfortable,
and doesn't need any belt or sash, and I can sit without rumpling any
trimming, that's such a comfort! I like to be tidy, and so, when I wear
fussed-up things, I'm thinking of my clothes all the time, and that's
tiresome. Do say you like it. I resolved I would, just to please uncle,
for he does know more about health than anyone else, I'm sure, and I'd
wear a bag if he asked me to do it."

"I don't ask that, Rose, but I wish you'd weigh and compare the
two suits, and then choose which seems best. I leave it to your own
commonsense," answered Dr. Alec, feeling pretty sure he had won.

"Why, I take this one, of course, uncle. The other is fashionable, and
yes I must say I think it's pretty but it's very heavy, and I should
have to go round like a walking doll if I wore it. I'm much obliged to
auntie, but I'll keep this, please."

Rose spoke gently but decidedly, though there was a look of regret when
her eye fell on the other suit which Phebe had brought in; and it was
very natural to like to look as other girls did. Aunt Clara sighed;
Uncle Alec smiled, and said heartily,

"Thank you, dear; now read this book and you will understand why I ask
it of you. Then, if you like, I'll give you a new lesson; you asked for
one yesterday, and this is more necessary than French or housekeeping."

"Oh, what?" and Rose caught up the book which Mrs. Clara had thrown down
with a disgusted look.

Though Dr. Alec was forty, the boyish love of teasing was not yet dead
in him, and, being much elated at his victory, he could not resist the
temptation of shocking Mrs. Clara by suggesting dreadful possibilities,
so he answered, half in earnest, half in jest, "Physiology, Rose.
Wouldn't you like to be a little medical student, with Uncle Doctor for
teacher, and be ready to take up his practice when he has to stop? If
you agree, I'll hunt up my old skeleton to-morrow."

That was too much for Aunt Clara, and she hastily departed, with her
mind in a sad state of perturbation about Mrs. Van Tassel's new costume
and Rose's new study.



Chapter 19--Brother Bones

Rose accepted her uncle's offer, as Aunt Myra discovered two or three
days later. Coming in for an early call, and hearing voices in the
study, she opened the door, gave a cry and shut it quickly, looking a
good deal startled. The Doctor appeared in a moment, and begged to know
what the matter was.

"How can you ask when that long box looks so like a coffin I thought it
was one, and that dreadful thing stared me in the face as I opened the
door," answered Mrs. Myra, pointing to the skeleton that hung from the
chandelier cheerfully grinning at all beholders.

"This is a medical college where women are freely admitted, so walk in,
madam, and join the class if you'll do me the honour," said the Doctor,
waving her forward with his politest bow.

"Do, auntie, it's perfectly splendid," cried Rose's voice, and Rose's
blooming face was seen behind the ribs of the skeleton, smiling and
nodding in the gayest possible manner.

"What are you doing, child?" demanded Aunt Myra, dropping into a chair
and staring about her.

"Oh, I'm learning bones to-day, and I like it so much. There are twelve
ribs, you know, and the two lower ones are called floating ribs, because
they are not fastened to the breastbone. That's why they go in so easily
if you lace tight and squeeze the lungs and heart in the let me see,
what was that big word oh, I know thoracic cavity," and Rose beamed with
pride as she aired her little bit of knowledge.

"Do you think that is a good sort of thing for her to be poking over?
She is a nervous child, and I'm afraid it will be bad for her," said
Aunt Myra, watching Rose as she counted vertebrae, and waggled a
hip-joint in its socket with an inquiring expression.

"An excellent study, for she enjoys it, and I mean to teach her how
to manage her nerves so that they won't be a curse to her, as many a
woman's become through ignorance or want of thought. To make a mystery
or terror of these things is a mistake, and I mean Rose shall understand
and respect her body so well that she won't dare to trifle with it as
most women do."

"And she really likes it?"

"Very much, auntie! It's all so wonderful, and so nicely planned, you
can hardly believe what you see. Just think, there are 600,000,000 air
cells in one pair of lungs, and 2,000 pores to a square inch of surface;
so you see what quantities of air we must have, and what care we should
take of our skin so all the little doors will open and shut right. And
brains, auntie, you've no idea how curious they are; I haven't got to
them yet, but I long to, and uncle is going to show me a manikin that
you can take to pieces. Just think how nice it will be to see all the
organs in their places; I only wish they could be made to work as ours
do."

It was funny to see Aunt Myra's face as Rose stood before her talking
rapidly with one hand laid in the friendliest manner on the skeleton's
shoulder. Every word both the Doctor and Rose uttered hit the good lady
in her weakest spot, and as she looked and listened a long array of
bottles and pill-boxes rose up before her, reproaching her with the
"ignorance and want of thought" that made her what she was, a nervous,
dyspeptic, unhappy old woman.

"Well, I don't know but you may be right, Alec, only I wouldn't carry
it too far. Women don't need much of this sort of knowledge, and are not
fit for it. I couldn't bear to touch that ugly thing, and it gives me
the creeps to hear about 'organs,'" said Aunt Myra, with a sigh and her
hand on her side.

"Wouldn't it be a comfort to know that your liver was on the right side,
auntie, and not on the left!" asked Rose with a naughty laugh in her
eyes, for she had lately learnt that Aunt Myra's liver complaint was not
in the proper place.

"It's a dying world, child, and it don't much matter where the pain
is, for sooner or later we all drop off and are seen no more," was Aunt
Myra's cheerful reply.

"Well, I intend to know what kills me if I can, and meantime, I'm going
to enjoy myself in spite of a dying world. I wish you'd do so too, and
come and study with uncle, it would do you good, I'm sure," and Rose
went back to counting vertebrae with such a happy face, that Aunt Myra
had not the heart to say a word to dampen her ardour.

"Perhaps it's as well to let her do what she likes the little while
she is with us. But pray be careful of her, Alec, and not allow her to
overwork," she whispered as she went out.

"That's exactly what I'm trying to do, ma'am, and rather a hard job
I find it," he added, as he shut the door, for the dear aunts were
dreadfully in his way sometimes.

Half an hour later came another interruption in the shape of Mac, who
announced his arrival by the brief but elegant remark,

"Hullo! what new game is this?"

Rose explained, Mac gave a long whistle of surprise, and then took a
promenade round the skeleton, observing gravely,

"Brother Bones looks very jolly, but I can't say much for his beauty."

"You mustn't make fun of him, for he's a good old fellow, and you'd be
just as ugly if your flesh was off," said Rose, defending her new friend
with warmth.

"I dare say, so I'll keep my flesh on, thank you. You are so busy you
can't read to a fellow, I suppose?" asked Mac, whose eyes were better,
but still too weak for books.

"Don't you want to come and join my class? Uncle explains it all to us,
and you can take a look at the plates as they come along. We'll give
up bones today and have eyes instead; that will be more interesting to
you," added Rose, seeing no ardent thirst for physiological information
in his face.

"Rose, we must not fly about from one thing to another in this way,"
began Dr. Alec, but she whispered quickly, with a nod towards Mac, whose
goggles were turned wistfully in the direction of the forbidden books,

"He's blue to-day, and we must amuse him; give a little lecture on eyes,
and it will do him good. No matter about me, uncle."

"Very well; the class will please be seated," and the Doctor gave a
sounding rap on the table.

"Come, sit by me, dear, then we can both see the pictures; and if your
head gets tired you can lie down," said Rose, generously opening her
little college to a brother, and kindly providing for the weaknesses
that all humanity is subject to.

Side by side they sat and listened to a very simple explanation of the
mechanism of the eye, finding it as wonderful as a fairy tale, for fine
plates illustrated it, and a very willing teacher did his best to make
the lesson pleasant.

"Jove! if I'd known what mischief I was doing to that mighty delicate
machine of mine, you wouldn't have caught me reading by firelight,
or studying with a glare of sunshine on my book," said Mac, peering
solemnly at a magnified eye-ball; then, pushing it away, he added
indignantly, "Why isn't a fellow taught all about his works, and how
to manage 'em, and not left to go blundering into all sorts of worries?
Telling him after he's down isn't much use, for then he's found it out
himself and won't thank you."

"Ah, Mac, that's just what I keep lecturing about, and people won't
listen. You lads need that sort of knowledge so much, and fathers and
mothers ought to be able to give it to you. Few of them are able, and
so we all go blundering, as you say. Less Greek and Latin and more
knowledge of the laws of health for my boys, if I had them. Mathematics
are all very well, but morals are better, and I wish, how I wish that I
could help teachers and parents to feel it as they ought."

"Some do; Aunt Jessie and her boys have capital talks, and I wish we
could; but mother's so busy with her housekeeping, and father with his
business, there never seems to be any time for that sort of thing; even
if there was, it don't seem as if it would be easy to talk to them,
because we've never got into the way of it, you know."

Poor Mac was right there, and expressed a want that many a boy and girl
feels. Fathers and mothers are too absorbed in business and housekeeping
to study their children, and cherish that sweet and natural confidence
which is a child's surest safeguard, and a parent's subtlest power. So
the young hearts hide trouble or temptation till the harm is done, and
mutual regret comes too late. Happy the boys and girls who tell all
things freely to father or mother, sure of pity, help, and pardon; and
thrice happy the parents who, out of their own experience, and by
their own virtues, can teach and uplift the souls for which they are
responsible.

This longing stirred in the hearts of Rose and Mac, and by a natural
impulse both turned to Dr. Alec, for in this queer world of ours,
fatherly and motherly hearts often beat warm and wise in the breasts
of bachelor uncles and maiden aunts; and it is my private opinion that
these worthy creatures are a beautiful provision of nature for the
cherishing of other people's children. They certainly get great comfort
out of it, and receive much innocent affection that otherwise would be
lost.

Dr. Alec was one of these, and his big heart had room for every one of
the eight cousins, especially orphaned Rose and afflicted Mac; so, when
the boy uttered that unconscious reproach to his parents, and Rose added
with a sigh, "It must be beautiful to have a mother!" the good Doctor
yearned over them, and, shutting his book with a decided slam, said in
that cordial voice of his,

"Now, look here, children, you just come and tell me all your worries,
and with God's help, I'll settle them for you. That is what I'm here
for, I believe, and it will be a great happiness to me if you can trust
me."

"We can, uncle, and we will!" both answered, with a heartiness that
gratified him much.

"Good! now school is dismissed, and I advise you to go and refresh your
600,000,000 air cells by a brisk run in the garden. Come again whenever
you like, Mac, and we'll teach you all we can about your 'works,' as you
call them, so you can keep them running smoothly."

"We'll come, sir, much obliged," and the class in physiology went out to
walk.

Mac did come again, glad to find something he could study in spite of
his weak eyes, and learned much that was of more value than anything his
school had ever taught him.

Of course, the other lads made great fun of the whole thing, and
plagued Dr. Alec's students half out of their lives. But they kept
on persistently, and one day something happened which made the other
fellows behave themselves for ever after.

It was a holiday, and Rose up in her room thought she heard the voices
of her cousins, so she ran down to welcome them, but found no one there.

"Never mind, they will be here soon, and then we'll have a frolic," she
said to herself, and thinking she had been mistaken she went into the
study to wait. She was lounging over the table looking at a map when an
odd noise caught her ear. A gentle tapping somewhere, and following the
sound it seemed to come from the inside of the long case in which the
skeleton lived when not professionally engaged. This case stood upright
in a niche between two book-cases at the back of the room, a darkish
corner, where Brother Bones, as the boys would call him, was out of the
way.

As Rose stood looking in that direction, and wondering if a rat had got
shut in, the door of the case swung slowly open, and with a great start
she saw a bony arm lifted, and a bony finger beckon to her. For a minute
she was frightened, and ran to the study door with a fluttering heart,
but just as she touched the handle a queer, stifled sort of giggle made
her stop short and turn red with anger. She paused an instant to collect
herself, and then went softly toward the bony beckoner. A nearer look
revealed black threads tied to the arm and fingers, the ends of threads
disappearing through holes bored in the back of the case. Peeping into
the dark recess, she also caught sight of the tip of an elbow covered
with a rough gray cloth which she knew very well.

Quick as a flash she understood the joke, her fear vanished, and with
a wicked smile, she whipped out her scissors, cut the threads, and
the bony arm dropped with a rattle. Before she could say, "Come out,
Charlie, and let my skeleton alone," a sudden irruption of boys, all in
a high state of tickle, proclaimed to the hidden rogue that his joke was
a failure.

"I told him not to do it, because it might give you a start," explained
Archie, emerging from the closet.

"I had a smelling bottle all ready if she fainted away," added Steve,
popping up from behind the great chair.

"It's too bad of you not to squawk and run; we depended on it, it's such
fun to howl after you," said Will and Geordie, rolling out from under
the sofa in a promiscuous heap.

"You are getting altogether too strong-minded, Rose; most girls would
have been in a jolly twitter to see this old fellow waggling his finger
at them," complained Charlie, squeezing out from his tight quarters,
dusty and disgusted.

"I'm used to your pranks now, so I'm always on the watch and prepared.
But I won't have Brother Bones made fun of. I know uncle wouldn't like
it, so please don't," began Rose just as Dr. Alec came in, and, seeing
the state of the case at a glance, he said quietly,

"Hear how I got that skeleton, and then I'm sure you will treat it with
respect."

The boys settled down at once on any article of furniture that was
nearest and listened dutifully.

"Years ago, when I was in the hospital, a poor fellow was brought there
with a rare and very painful disease. There was no hope for him, but we
did our best, and he was so grateful that when he died he left us his
body that we might discover the mysteries of his complaint, and so be
able to help others afflicted in the same way. It did do good, and his
brave patience made us remember him long after he was gone. He thought
I had been kind to him, and said to a fellow-student of mine, 'Tell the
Doctor I lave him me bones, for I've nothing else in the wide world, and
I'll nos be wanting 'em at all, at all, when the great pain hat kilt me
entirely.' So that is how they came to be mine, and why I've kept them
carefully, for, though only a poor, ignorant fellow, Mike Nolan did what
he could to help others, and prove his gratitude to those who tried to
help him."

As Dr. Alec paused, Archie closed the door of the case as respectfully
as if the mummy of an Egyptian king was inside; Will and Geordie looked
solemnly at one another, evidently much impressed, and Charlie pensively
remarked from the coal-hod where he sat,

"I've often heard of a skeleton in the house, but I think few people
have one as useful and as interesting as ours."



Chapter 20--Under The Mistletoe

Rose made Phebe promise that she would bring her stocking into the
"Bower," as she called her pretty room, on Christmas morning, because
that first delicious rummage loses half its charm if two little
night-caps at least do not meet over the treasures, and two happy voices
Oh and Ah together.

So when Rose opened her eyes that day they fell upon faithful Phebe,
rolled up in a shawl, sitting on the rug before a blazing fire, with her
untouched stocking laid beside her.

"Merry Christmas!" cried the little mistress smiling gaily.

"Merry Christmas!" answered the little maid, so heartily that it did one
good to hear her.

"Bring the stockings right away, Phebe, and let's see what we've got,"
said Rose, sitting up among the pillows, and looking as eager as a
child.

A pair of long knobby hose were laid out upon the coverlet, and their
contents examined with delight, though each knew every blessed thing
that had been put into the other's stocking.

Never mind what they were; it is evident that they were quite
satisfactory, for as Rose leaned back, she said, with a luxurious sigh
of satisfaction, "Now, I believe I've got everything in the world that I
want," and Phebe answered, smiling over a lapful of treasures, "This is
the most splendid Christmas I ever had since I was born." Then she added
