

At the end of the first week, Paul received five dollars, the sum which
the merchant had agreed to pay him for his services. With this he felt
very rich. He hurried home, and displayed to the sexton the crisp bank
note which had been given him.

"You will soon be a rich man, Paul," said Mr. Cameron, with a benevolent
smile, returning the bill.

"But I want you to keep it, Uncle Hugh."

"Shall I put it in the Savings Bank, for you, Paul?"

"I didn't mean that. You have been supporting me--giving me board and
clothes--for three years. It is only right that you should have what I
earn."

"The offer is an honorable one on your part, Paul," said the sexton;
"but I don't need it. If it will please you, I will take two dollars
a week for your board, now, and out of the balance you may clothe
yourself, and save what you can."

This arrangement seemed to be a fair one. Mr. Cameron deposited the five
dollar note in his pocket-book, and passed one of three dollars to Paul.
This sum our hero deposited the next Monday morning, in a savings bank.
He estimated that he could clothe himself comfortably for fifty dollars
a year. This would leave him one hundred towards the payment of the debt
due to Squire Conant.

"By-and-by my salary will be raised," thought Paul. "Then I can save
more."

He looked forward with eager anticipation to the time when he should be
able to redeem his father's name, and no one would be entitled to cast
reproach upon his memory.

He endeavored to perform his duties faithfully in the office, and to
learn as rapidly as he could the business upon which he had entered.
He soon found that he must depend mainly upon himself. George Dawkins
seemed disposed to afford him no assistance, but repelled scornfully
the advances which Paul made towards cordiality. He was by no means as
faithful as Paul, but whenever Mr. Danforth was absent from the office,
spent his time in lounging at the window, or reading a cheap novel, with
one of which he was usually provided.

When Paul became satisfied that Dawkins was not inclined to accept his
overtures, he ceased to court his acquaintance, and confined himself to
his own desk.

One day as he was returning from dinner, he was startled by an
unceremonious slap upon the shoulder.

Looking up in some surprise, he found that this greeting had come from a
man just behind him, whose good-humored face and small, twinkling eyes,
he at once recognized.

"How do you do, Mr. Stubbs?" inquired Paul, his face lighting up with
pleasure.

"I'm so's to be round. How be you?" returned the worthy pedler, seizing
our hero's hand and shaking it heartily.

Mr. Stubbs was attired in all the glory of a blue coat with brass
buttons and swallow tails.

"When did you come to New York?" asked Paul.

"Just arrived; that is, I got in this mornin'. But I say, how you've
grown. I shouldn't hardly have known you."

"Shouldn't you, though?" said Paul, gratified as most boys are, on being
told that he had grown. "Have you come to the city on business?"

"Well, kinder on business, and kinder not. I thought I'd like to have a
vacation. Besides, the old lady wanted a silk dress, and she was sot on
havin' it bought in York. So I come to the city."

"Where are you stopping, Mr. Stubbs?"

"Over to the Astor House. Pretty big hotel, ain't it?"

"Yes, I see you are traveling in style."

"Yes, I suppose they charge considerable, but I guess I can stand it. I
hain't been drivin' a tin-cart for nothin' the last ten years.

"How have you been enjoying yourself since you arrived?"

"Oh, pretty well. I've been round seeing the lions, and came pretty near
seeing the elephant at one of them Peter Funk places."

"You did! Tell me about it."

"You see I was walkin' along when a fellow came out of one of them
places, and asked me if I wouldn't go in. I didn't want to refuse such
a polite invitation, and besides I had a curiosity to see what there was
to be seen, so I went in. They put up a silver watch, I could see that
it was a good one, and so I bid on it. It ran up to eight dollars and
a quarter. I thought it was a pity it should go off so cheap, so I bid
eight and a half."

"'Eight and a half and sold,' said the man; 'shall I put it up for you?"

"'No, I thank you,' said I, 'I'll take it as it is.'

"'But I'll put it up in a nice box for you,' said he.

"I told him I didn't care for the box. He seemed very unwilling to let
it go, but I took it out of his hand and he couldn't help himself. Well,
when they made out the bill, what do you suppose they charged?"

"I don't know."

"Why, eighteen and a half."

"'Look here,' said I, 'I guess here's something of a mistake. You've got
ten dollars too much.'

"'I think you must be mistaken,' said he, smiling a foxy smile.

"'You know I am not,' said I, rather cross.

"We can't let that watch go for any thing shorter,' said he, coolly.

"Just then a man that was present stepped up and said, 'the man is
right; don't attempt to impose upon him.'

"With that he calmed right down. It seems it was a policeman who was
sent to watch them, that spoke. So I paid the money, but as I went out
I heard the auctioneer say that the sale was closed for the day. I
afterwards learned that if I had allowed them to put the watch in a box,
they would have exchanged it for another that was only plated."

"Do you know anybody in the city?" asked Paul.

"I've got some relations, but I don't know where they live."

"What is the name?" asked Paul, "we can look into the directory."

"The name is Dawkins," answered the pedler.

"Dawkins!" repeated Paul, in surprise.

"Yes, do you happen to know anybody of the name?"

"Yes, but I believe it is a rich family."

"Well, so are my relations," said Jehoshaphat. "You didn't think
Jehoshaphat Stubbs had any rich relations, did you? These, as I've heard
tell, hold their heads as high as anybody."

"Perhaps I may be mistaken," said Paul.

"What is the name--the Christian name, I mean--of your relation?"

"George."

"It must be he, then. There is a boy of about my own age of that name.
He works in the same office."

"You don't say so! Well, that is curious, I declare. To think that I
should have happened to hit upon you so by accident too."

"How are you related to them?" inquired Paul.

"Why, you see, I'm own cousin to Mr. Dawkins. His father and my mother
were brother and sister."

"What was his father's business?" asked Paul.

"I don't know what his regular business was, but he was a sexton in some
church."

This tallied with the account Paul had received from Mr. Cameron, and
he could no longer doubt that, strange as it seemed, the wealthy Mr.
Dawkins was own cousin to the pedler.

"Didn't you say the boy was in the same office with you, Paul?"

"Yes."

"Well, I've a great mind to go and see him, and find out where his
father lives. Perhaps I may get an invite to his house."

"How shocked Dawkins will be!" thought Paul, not, it must be confessed,
without a feeling of amusement. He felt no compunction in being the
instrument of mortifying the false pride of his fellow clerk, and
he accordingly signified to Mr. Stubbs that he was on his way to the
counting-room.

"Are you, though? Well, I guess I'll go along with you. Is it far off?"

"Only in the next street."

The pedler, it must be acknowledged, had a thoroughly countrified
appearance. He was a genuine specimen of the Yankee,--a long, gaunt
figure, somewhat stooping, and with a long aquiline nose. His dress has
already been described.

As Dawkins beheld him entering with Paul, he turned up his nose in
disgust at what he considered Paul's friend.

What was his consternation when the visitor, approaching him with
a benignant smile, extended his brown hand, and said, "How d'ye do,
George? How are ye all to hum?"

Dawkins drew back haughtily.

"What do you mean?" he said, pale with passion.

"Mr. Dawkins," said Paul, with suppressed merriment, "allow me to
introduce your cousin, Mr. Stubbs."

"Jehoshaphat Stubbs," explained that individual. "Didn't your father
never mention my name to you?"

"Sir," said Dawkins, darting a furious glance at Paul, "you are entirely
mistaken if you suppose that any relationship exists between me and
that--person."

"No, it's you that are mistaken," said Mr. Stubbs, persevering, "My
mother was Roxana Jane Dawkins. She was own sister to your grandfather.
That makes me and your father cousins Don't you see?"

"I see that you are intending to insult me," said Dawkins, the more
furiously, because he began to fear there might be some truth in the
man's claims. "Mr. Prescott, I leave you to entertain your company
yourself."

And he threw on his hat and dashed out of the counting-room.

"Well," said the pedler, drawing a long breath, "that's cool,--denyin'
his own flesh and blood. Rather stuck up, ain't he?"

"He is, somewhat," said Paul; "if I were you, I shouldn't be disposed to
own him as a relation."

"Darned ef I will!" said Jehoshaphat sturdily; "I have some pride, ef I
am a pedler. Guess I'm as good as he, any day."




XXVII.

MR. MUDGE'S FRIGHT.


Squire Newcome sat in a high-backed chair before the fire with his heels
on the fender. He was engaged in solemnly perusing the leading editorial
in the evening paper, when all at once the table at his side gave a
sudden lurch, the lamp slid into his lap, setting the paper on fire,
and, before the Squire realized his situation, the flames singed his
whiskers, and made his face unpleasantly warm.

"Cre-a-tion!" he exclaimed, jumping briskly to his feet.

The lamp had gone out, so that the cause of the accident remained
involved in mystery. The Squire had little trouble in conjecturing,
however, that Ben was at the bottom of it.

Opening the door hastily, he saw, by the light in the next room, that
young gentleman rising from his knees in the immediate vicinity of the
table.

"Ben-ja-min," said the Squire, sternly,

"What have you been a-doing?"

Ben looked sheepish, but said nothing.

"I repeat, Benjamin, what have you been a-doing?"

"I didn't mean to," said Ben.

"That does not answer my interrogatory. What have you been a-doing?"

"I was chasing the cat," said Ben, "and she got under the table. I
went after her, and somehow it upset. Guess my head might have knocked
against the legs."

"How old are you, Benjamin?"

"Fifteen."

"A boy of fifteen is too old to play with cats. You may retire to your
dormitory."

"It's only seven o'clock, father," said Ben, in dismay.

"Boys that play with cats are young enough to retire at seven," remarked
the Squire, sagaciously.

There was nothing for Ben but to obey.

Accordingly with reluctant steps he went up to his chamber and went
to bed. His active mind, together with the early hour, prevented his
sleeping. Instead, his fertile imagination was employed in devising
some new scheme, in which, of course, fun was to be the object attained.
While he was thinking, one scheme flashed upon him which he at once
pronounced "bully."

"I wish I could do it to-night," he sighed.

"Why can't I?" he thought, after a moment's reflection.

The more he thought of it, the more feasible it seemed, and at length he
decided to attempt it.

Rising from his bed he quickly dressed himself, and then carefully took
the sheet, and folding it up in small compass put it under his arm.

Next, opening the window, he stepped out upon the sloping roof of the
ell part, and slid down to the end where he jumped off, the height not
being more than four feet from the ground. By some accident, a tub of
suds was standing under the eaves, and Ben, much to his disgust, jumped
into it.

"Whew!" exclaimed he, "I've jumped into that plaguy tub. What possessed
Hannah to put it in a fellow's way?"

At this moment the back door opened, and Hannah called out, in a shrill
voice, "Who's there?" Ben hastily hid himself, and thought it best not
to answer.

"I guess 'twas the cat," said Hannah, as she closed the door.

"A two-legged cat," thought Ben, to himself; "thunder, what sopping wet
feet I've got. Well, it can't be helped."

With the sheet still under his arm, Ben climbed a fence and running
across the fields reached the fork of the road. Here he concealed
himself under a hedge, and waited silently till the opportunity for
playing his practical joke arrived.

I regret to say that Mr. Mudge, with whom we have already had
considerable to do, was not a member of the temperance society.
Latterly, influenced perhaps by Mrs. Mudge's tongue, which made his home
far from a happy one, he had got into the habit of spending his
evenings at the tavern in the village, where he occasionally indulged
in potations that were not good for him. Generally, he kept within the
bounds of moderation, but occasionally he exceeded these, as he had done
on the present occasion.

Some fifteen minutes after Ben had taken his station, he saw, in the
moonlight, Mr. Mudge coming up the road, on his way home. Judging from
his zigzag course, he was not quite himself.

Ben waited till Mr. Mudge was close at hand, when all at once he started
from his place of concealment completely enveloped in the sheet with
which he was provided. He stood motionless before the astounded Mudge.

"Who are you?" exclaimed Mudge, his knees knocking together in terror,
clinging to an overhanging branch for support.

There was no answer.

"Who are you?" he again asked in affright.

"Sally Baker," returned Ben, in as sepulchral a voice as he could
command.

Sally Baker was an old pauper, who had recently died. The name occurred
to Ben on the spur of the moment. It was with some difficulty that he
succeeded in getting out the name, such was his amusement at Mr. Mudge's
evident terror.

"What do you want of me?" inquired Mudge, nervously.

"You half starved me when I was alive," returned Ben, in a hollow voice,
"I must be revenged."

So saying he took one step forward, spreading out his arms. This was too
much for Mr. Mudge. With a cry he started and ran towards home at the
top of his speed, with Ben in pursuit.

"I believe I shall die of laughing," exclaimed Ben, pausing out of
breath, and sitting down on a stone, "what a donkey he is, to be sure,
to think there are such things as ghosts. I'd like to be by when he
tells Mrs. Mudge."

After a moment's thought, Ben wrapped up the sheet, took it under his
arm, and once more ran in pursuit of Mr. Mudge.

Meanwhile Mrs. Mudge was sitting in the kitchen of the Poorhouse,
mending stockings. She was not in the pleasantest humor, for one of the
paupers had managed to break a plate at tea-table (if that can be called
tea where no tea is provided), and trifles were sufficient to ruffle
Mrs. Mudge's temper.

"Where's Mudge, I wonder?" she said, sharply; "over to the tavern, I
s'pose, as usual. There never was such a shiftless, good-for-nothing
man. I'd better have stayed unmarried all the days of my life than have
married him. If he don't get in by ten, I'll lock the door, and it shall
stay locked. 'Twill serve him right to stay out doors all night."

Minutes slipped away, and the decisive hour approached.

"I'll go to the door and look out," thought Mrs. Mudge, "if he ain't
anywhere in sight I'll fasten the door."

She laid down her work and went to the door.

She had not quite reached it when it was flung open violently, and Mr.
Mudge, with a wild, disordered look, rushed in, nearly overturning his
wife, who gazed at him with mingled anger and astonishment.

"What do you mean by this foolery, Mudge?" she demanded, sternly.

"What do I mean?" repeated her husband, vaguely.

"I needn't ask you," said his wife, contemptuously. "I see how it is,
well enough. You're drunk!"

"Drunk!"

"Yes, drunk; as drunk as a beast."

"Well, Mrs. Mudge," hiccoughed her husband, in what he endeavored to
make a dignified tone, "you'd be drunk too if you'd seen what I've
seen."

"And what have you seen, I should like to know?" said Mrs. Mudge.

Mudge rose with some difficulty, steadied himself on his feet, and
approaching his wife, whispered in a tragic tone, "Mrs. Mudge, I've seen
a sperrit."

"It's plain enough that you've seen spirit," retorted his wife. "'Tisn't
many nights that you don't, for that matter. You ought to be ashamed of
yourself, Mudge."

"It isn't that," said her husband, shaking his hand, "it's a sperrit,--a
ghost, that I've seen."

"Indeed!" said Mrs. Mudge, sarcastically, "perhaps you can tell whose it
is."

"It was the sperrit of Sally Baker," said Mudge, solemnly.

"What did she say?" demanded Mrs. Mudge, a little curiously.

"She said that I--that we, half starved her, and then she started to run
after me--and--oh, Lordy, there she is now!"

Mudge jumped trembling to his feet. Following the direction of his
outstretched finger, Mrs. Mudge caught a glimpse of a white figure
