the offer which you have made; but I can only reply, that while duly
conscious of the high honour you have done my daughter by your offer, I
would rather see her in her grave than wedded to you."

The knight leapt from his seat with a fierce exclamation. "This is too
much," he exclaimed, "and I have a right to know why such an offer on my
part should be answered by disdain, and even insolence."

"You have a right to know," Dame Vernon answered quietly, "and I will
tell you. I repeat that I would rather see my child in her grave than
wedded to a man who attempted to compass the murder of her and her
mother."

"What wild words are these?" Sir James asked sternly. "What accusation
is this that you dare to bring against me?"

"I repeat what I said, Sir James," Dame Alice replied quietly. "I know
that you plotted with the water pirates of Lambeth to upset our boat as
we came down the Thames; that you treacherously delayed us at Richmond
in order that we might not reach London before dark; and that by
enveloping me in a white cloak you gave a signal by which I might be
known to your creatures."

The knight stood for a moment astounded. He was aware that the fact that
he had had some share in the outrage was known, and was not surprised
that his cousin was acquainted with the secret; but that she should know
all the details with which but one besides himself was, as he believed,
acquainted, completely stupefied him. He rapidly, however, recovered
himself.

"I recall now," he said scornfully, "the evidence which was given
before the justices by some ragged city boy, to the effect that he had
overheard a few words of a conversation between some ruffian over in the
Lambeth marshes, and an unknown person; but it is new to me indeed that
there was any suspicion that I was the person alluded to, still less
that a lady of my own family, in whose affection I believed, should
credit so monstrous an accusation."

"I would that I could discredit it, Sir James," Dame Vernon said sadly;
"but the proofs were too strong for me. Much more of your conversation
than was narrated in court was overheard, and it was at my request that
the ragged boy, as you call him, kept silence."

"And is it possible," the knight asked indignantly, "that you believed
the word of a fellow like this to the detriment to your kinsman? Why, in
any court of law the word of such a one as opposed to that of a knight
and gentleman of honour would not be taken for a moment."

"You are mistaken, sir," Dame Vernon said haughtily. "You may remember,
in the first place, that the lad who overheard this conversation risked
his life to save me and my daughter from the consequences of the attack
which he heard planned; in the second place, he was no ragged lad,
but the apprentice of a well-known citizen; thirdly, and this is of
importance, since he has recognized you since your return, and is ready
should I give him the word, to denounce you. He is no mere apprentice
boy, but is of gentle blood, seeing that he is the son of Sir Roland
Somers, the former possessor of the lands which I hold, and that he is
in high favour with the good knight Sir Walter Manny, whose esquire he
now is, and under whom he distinguished himself in the wars in France,
and is, as Sir Walter assured me, certain to win his spurs ere long.
Thus you see his bare word would be of equal value to your own, beside
the fact that his evidence does not rest upon mere assertion; but that
the man in the hut promised to do what you actually performed, namely,
to delay me at Richmond, and to wrap me in a white cloak in order that I
might be recognized by the river pirates."

Sir James was silent. In truth, as he saw, the evidence was
overwhelmingly strong against him. After a while he stammered out, "I
cannot deny that I was the man in question; but I swear to you that
this boy was mistaken, and that the scoundrel acted altogether beyond my
instructions, which were simply that he should board the boat and carry
you and your daughter away to a safe place."

"And with what object, sir," Dame Vernon said contemptuously, "was I to
be thus taken away?"

"I do not seek to excuse myself," the knight replied calmly, having now
recovered his self-possession, "for I own I acted wrongly and basely;
but in truth I loved you, and would fain have made you my wife. I knew
that you regarded me with only the calm affection of a kinswoman; but
I thought that were you in my power you would consent to purchase your
freedom with your hand. I know now that I erred greatly. I acknowledge
my fault, and that my conduct was base and unknightly, and my only
excuse is the great love I bore you.

"And which," the lady said sarcastically, "you have now transferred to
my daughter. I congratulate you, Sir James, upon the possession of a
ready wit and an invention which does not fail you at a pinch, and of
a tongue which repeats unfalteringly any fable which your mind may
dictate. You do not, I suppose, expect me to believe the tale. Still, I
own that it is a well-devised one, and might, at a pinch, pass muster;
but fear not, Sir James. As hitherto I have kept silence as to the
author of the outrage committed upon me, so I have no intention of
proclaiming the truth now unless you force me to do so. Suffice that
both for myself and for my daughter I disclaim the honour of your hand.
So long as you offer no molestation to us, and abstain from troubling us
in any way, so long will my mouth be sealed; and I would fain bury in
my breast the memory of your offence. I will not give the world's tongue
occasion to wag by any open breach between kinsfolk, and shall therefore
in public salute you as an acquaintance, but under no pretence whatever
will I admit you to any future private interview. Now leave me, sir,
and I trust that your future life will show that you deeply regret the
outrage which in your greed for my husband's lands you were tempted to
commit."

Without a word Sir James turned and left the room, white with shame and
anger, but with an inward sense of congratulation at the romance which
he had, on the spur of the moment, invented, and which would, he felt
sure, be accepted by the world as probable, in the event of the share
he had in the matter being made public, either upon the denunciation of
Dame Vernon or in any other manner.

One determination, however, he made, and swore, to himself, that he
would bitterly avenge himself upon the youth whose interference had
thwarted his plans, and whose report to his kinswoman had turned her
mind against him. He, at any rate, should be put out of the way at the
first opportunity, and thus the only witness against himself be removed;
for Lady Vernon's own unsupported story would be merely her word against
his, and could be treated as the malicious fiction of an angry woman.

The following day Dame Vernon sent for Walter, and informed him exactly
what had taken place.

"Between Sir James and me," she said, "there is, you see, a truce. We
are enemies, but, we agree to lay aside our arms for the time. But,
Walter, you must be on your guard.

"You know as well as I do how dangerous this man is, and how good a cause
he has to hate you. I would not have divulged your name had I not known
that the frequency of your visits here and the encouragement which I
openly give you as the future suitor of my daughter, would be sure to
come to his ears, and he would speedily discover that it was you
who saved our lives on the Thames and gave your testimony before the
justices as to the conversation in the hut on the marshes. Thus I
forestalled what he would in a few days have learnt."

"I fear him not, lady," Walter said calmly. "I can hold mine own, I
hope, against him in arms, and having the patronage and friendship of
Sir Walter Manny I am above any petty malice. Nevertheless I will hold
myself on my guard. I will, so far as possible, avoid any snare which
he may, as 'tis not unlikely, set for my life, and will, so far as I
honourably can, avoid any quarrel with which he may seek to saddle me."

A few days later Walter again met Sir James Carnegie in the king's
anteroom, and saw at once, by the fixed look of hate with which he had
regarded him, that he had already satisfied himself of his identity.
He returned the knight's stare with a cold look of contempt. The knight
moved towards him, and in a low tone said, "Beware, young sir, I have a
heavy reckoning against you, and James Carnegie never forgets debts of
that kind!"

"I am warned, Sir James," Walter said calmly, but in the same low tone,
"and, believe me, I hold but very lightly the threats of one who does
not succeed even when he conspires against the lives of women and
children."

Sir James started as if he had been struck. Then, with a great effort he
recovered his composure, and, repeating the word "Beware!" walked across
to the other side of the chamber. The next day Walter went down the
river and had a talk with his friend Geoffrey.

"You must beware, lad," the armourer said when he told him of the return
of Sir James Carnegie and the conversation which had taken place between
them. "This man is capable of anything, and careth not where he chooseth
his instruments. The man of the hut at Lambeth has never been caught
since his escape from Richmond Jail--thanks, doubtless, to the gold
of his employer--and, for aught we know, may still be lurking in the
marshes there, or in the purlieus of the city. He will have a grudge
against you as well as his employer, and in him Sir James would find a
ready instrument. He is no doubt connected, as before, with a gang of
water pirates and robbers, and it is not one sword alone that you would
have to encounter. I think not that you are in danger just at present,
for he would know that, in case of your murder, the suspicions of Dame
Vernon and of any others who may know the motive which he has in getting
rid of you would be excited, and he might be accused of having had a
share in your death. Still, it would be so hard to prove aught against
him, that he may be ready to run the risk in order to rid himself of
you. Look here, Walter. What think you of this?" and the smith drew out
from a coffer a shirt of mail of finer work than Walter had ever before
seen.

"Aye, lad, I knew you would be pleased," he said in answer to Walter's
exclamation at the fineness of the workmanship. "I bought this a month
ago from a Jew merchant who had recently come from Italy. How he got it
I know not, but I doubt if it were honestly, or he would have demanded
a higher price than I paid him. He told me that it was made by the first
armourer in Milan, and was constructed especially for a cardinal of the
church, who had made many enemies by his evil deeds and could not sleep
for fear of assassination. At his death it came as the Jew said,
into his possession. I suppose some rascally attendant took it as a
perquisite, and, knowing not of its value, sold it for a few ducats to
the Jew. However, it is of the finest workmanship. It is, as you see,
double, and each link is made of steel so tough that no dagger or
sword-point will pierce it. I put it on a block and tried the metal
myself, and broke one of my best daggers on it without a single link
giving. Take it, lad. You are welcome to it. I bought it with a special
eye to you, thinking that you might wear it under your armour in battle
without greatly adding to the weight; but for such dangers as threaten
you now it is invaluable. It is so light and soft that none will dream
that you have it under your doublet, and I warrant me it will hold you
safe against the daggers of Sir James's ruffians."

Walter did not like taking a gift so valuable, for his apprenticeship as
an armourer had taught him the extreme rarity and costliness of so fine
a piece of work. Geoffrey, however, would not hear of his refusal, and
insisted on his then and there taking off his doublet and putting it
on. It fitted closely to the body, descending just below the hips, and
coming well up on the neck, while the arms extended to the wrists.

"There!" the smith said with delight. "Now you are safe against sword or
dagger, save for a sweeping blow at the head, and that your sword can
be trusted to guard. Never take it off, Walter, save when you sleep; and
except when in your own bed, at Sir Walter Manny's, I should advise
you to wear it even at night. The weight is nothing, and it will not
incommode you. So long as this caitiff knight lives, your life will not
be safe. When he is dead you may hang up the shirt of mail with a light
heart."



CHAPTER XII: JACOB VAN ARTEVELDE


King Edward found no difficulty in awakening the war spirit of England
anew, for the King of France, in an act of infamous treachery, in
despite of the solemn terms of the treaty, excited against himself the
indignation not only of England but of all Europe. Oliver de Clisson,
with fourteen other nobles of Brittany and Normandy, were arrested by
his order, taken to Paris, and without form of trial there decapitated.
This act of treachery and injustice aroused disgust and shame among the
French nobles, and murmurs and discontent spread throughout the whole
country.

In Brittany numbers of the nobles fell off from the cause of Charles of
Blois, and King Edward hastened his preparations to avenge the butchery
of the adherents of the house of Montford. Phillip, however, in defiance
of the murmurs of his own subjects, of the indignant remonstrances
of Edward, and even those of the pope, who was devoted to his cause,
continued the course he had begun, and a number of other nobles were
seized and executed. Godfrey of Harcourt alone, warned by the fate of
his companions, refused to obey the summons of the king to repair to
Paris, and fled to Brabant. His property in France was at once seized by
Phillip; and Godfrey, finding that the Duke of Brabant would be unable
to shield him from Phillip's vengeance, fled to the English court, and
did homage to Edward.

On the 24th of April, 1345, Edward determined no longer to allow Phillip
to continue to benefit by his constant violations of the truce, and
accordingly sent a defiance to the King of France.

De Montford, who had just succeeded in escaping from his prison in
Paris, arrived at this moment in England, and shortly afterwards set
sail with a small army under the command of the Earl of Northampton for
Britanny, while the Earl of Derby took his departure with a larger force
for the defence of Guienne.

King Edward set about raising a large army, which he determined to lead
himself, but before passing over to France he desired to strengthen his
hold of Flanders. The constant intrigues of Phillip there had exercised
a great effect. The count of that country was already strongly in his
interest, and it was only the influence of Jacob van Artevelde which
maintained the alliance with England. This man had, by his talent
and energy, gained an immense influence over his countrymen; but his
commanding position and ability had naturally excited the envy and
hatred of many of his fellow citizens, among whom was the dean of the
weavers of Ghent, one Gerard Denis. The weavers were the most powerful
body in this city, and had always been noted for their turbulence and
faction; and on a Monday in the month of May, 1345, a great battle took
place in the market-place between them and the fullers, of whom 1500
were slain. This victory of the weavers strengthened the power of the
party hostile to Artevelde and the English connection; and the
former saw that unless he could induce his countrymen to take some
irretrievable step in favour of England they would ultimately fall back
into the arms of France. Accordingly he invited Edward to pass over with
a strong force into Flanders, where he would persuade the Flemings to
make the Prince of Wales their duke. King Edward at once accepted the
offer, and sailing from Sandwich on the 3d of July arrived in safety at
Sluys. His intention had been kept a profound secret, and his arrival
created the greatest surprise throughout Flanders. He did not disembark,
but received on board a ship with great honour and magnificence the
burgomasters of the various towns who appeared to welcome him. The king
had brought with him the Prince of Wales, now fifteen years old,
who wore a suit of black armour, and was therefore called "the Black
Prince."

Walter Somers was on board the royal vessel. The Prince of Wales had not
forgotten the promise which he had six years before made to him, and had
asked Sir Walter Manny to allow him to follow under his banner.

"You are taking my most trusty squire from me, Prince," the knight said;
"for although I have many brave young fellows in my following, there is
not one whom I value so much as Walter Somers. It is but fair, however,
that you should have him, since you told me when I first took him that
he was to follow your banner when you were old enough to go to the wars.
You can rely upon him implicitly. He cares not for the gaieties of which
most young men of his age think so much. He is ever ready for duty, and
he possesses a wisdom and sagacity which will some day make him a great
leader."

Walter was sorry to leave his patron, but the step was of course a great
advancement, and excited no little envy among his companions, for among
the young esquires of the Prince of Wales were the sons of many of the
noblest families of England.

Sir Walter presented him on leaving with a heavy purse. "Your expenses
will be large," he said, "among so many young gallants, and you must do
credit to me as well as to yourself. The young prince is generous to a
fault, and as he holds you in high favour, both from his knowledge of
you and from my report, you will, I know, lack nothing when you are once
fairly embarked in his service; but it is needful that when you first
join you should be provided with many suits of courtly raiment, of cloth
of gold and silk, which were not needed while you were in the service
of a simple knight like myself, but which must be worn by a companion of
the heir of England."

Walter had hoped that Sir James Carnegie would have accompanied the
forces of either the Earls of Northampton or Derby, but he found that he
had attached himself to the royal army.

Ralph of course followed Walter's fortunes, and was now brilliant in the
appointments of the Prince of Wales's chosen bodyguard of men-at-arms.

The councils of all the great towns of Flanders assembled at Sluys, and
for several days great festivities were held. Then a great assembly was
held, and Van Artevelde rose and addressed his countrymen. He set forth
to them the virtues of the Prince of Wales, whose courtesy and bearing
had so captivated them; he pointed out the obligations which Flanders
was under towards King Edward, and the advantages which would arise from
a nearer connection with England. With this he contrasted the weakness
of their count, the many ills which his adherence to France had brought
upon the country, and the danger which menaced them should his power be
ever renewed. He then boldly proposed to them that they should at once
cast off their allegiance to the count and bestow the vacant coronet
