they says, we won't live ourselves."

All the mermaids laughed at this, and the brown-haired one said,
"Well, if you are afraid, don't come. You may row your boat out of
this cave and never see us again, if you like. We merely thought it
would please little Mayre, and were willing to show her the sights
of our beautiful home."

"I'd like to see 'em, all right," said Trot, her eyes glistening
with pleasure.

"So would I," admitted Cap'n Bill, "if we would live to tell the
tale."

"Don't you believe us?" asked the mermaid, fixing her lovely eyes on
those of the old sailor and smiling prettily. "Are you afraid to
trust us to bring you safely back?"

"N-n-no," said Cap'n Bill, "'tain't that. I've got to look after
Trot."

"Then you'll have to come with me," said Trot decidedly, "for I'm
going to 'cept this inv'tation. If you don't care to come, Cap'n
Bill, you go home and tell mother I'm visitin' the mermaids."

"She'd scold me inter shivers!" moaned Cap'n Bill with a shudder. "I
guess I'd ruther take my chance down below."

"All right, I'm ready, Miss Mermaid," said Trot. "What shall I do?
Jump in, clothes and all?"

"Give me your hand, dear," answered the mermaid, lifting a lovely
white arm from the water. Trot took the slender hand and found it
warm and soft and not a bit "fishy."

"My name is Clia," continued the mermaid, "and I am a princess in
our deep-sea kingdom."

Just then Trot gave a flop and flopped right out of the boat into
the water. Cap'n Bill caught a gleam of pink scales as his little
friend went overboard, and the next moment there was Trot's face in
the water among those of the mermaids. She was laughing with glee as
she looked up into Cap'n Bill's face and called, "Come on in, Cap'n!
It didn't hurt a bit!"




CHAPTER 3

THE DEPTHS OF THE DEEP BLUE SEA


Cap'n Bill stood up in the boat as if undecided what to do. Never a
sailor man was more bewildered than this old fellow by the
strangeness of the adventure he had encountered. At first he could
hardly believe it was all true and that he was not dreaming; but
there was Trot in the water, laughing with the mermaids and floating
comfortably about, and he couldn't leave his dear little companion
to make the trip to the depths of the ocean alone.

"Take my hand, please, Cap'n Bill," said Princess Clia, reaching her
dainty arm toward him; and suddenly the old man took courage and
clasped the soft fingers in his own. He had to lean over the boat to
do this, and then there came a queer lightness to his legs and he
had a great longing to be in the water. So he gave a flop and
flopped in beside Trot, where he found himself comfortable enough,
but somewhat frightened.

"Law sakes!" he gasped. "Here's me in the water with my rheumatics!
I'll be that stiff termorrer I can't wiggle."

"You're wigglin' all right now," observed Trot. "That's a fine tail
you've got, Cap'n, an' its green scales is jus' beautiful."

"Are they green, eh?" he asked, twisting around to try to see them.

"Green as em'ralds, Cap'n. How do they feel?"

"Feel, Trot, feel? Why, this tail beats that ol' wooden leg all
holler! I kin do stunts now that I couldn't o' done in a thousand
years with ol' peg."

"And don't be afraid of the rheumatism," advised the Princess. "No
mermaid ever catches cold or suffers pain in the water."

"Is Cap'n Bill a mermaid now?" asked Trot.

"Why, he's a merMAN, I suppose," laughed the pretty princess. "But
when he gets home, he will be just Cap'n Bill again."

"Wooden leg an' all?" inquired the child.

"To be sure, my dear."

The sailor was now trying his newly discovered power of swimming,
and became astonished at the feats he could accomplish. He could
dart this way and that with wonderful speed, and turn and dive, and
caper about in the water far better than he had ever been able to do
on land--even before he got the wooden leg. And a curious thing
about this present experience was that the water did not cling to
him and wet him as it had always done before. He still wore his
flannel shirt and pea jacket and his sailor cap; but although he was
in the water and had been underneath the surface, the cloth still
seemed dry and warm. As he dived down and came up again, the drops
flashed from his head and the fringe of beard, but he never needed
to wipe his face or eyes at all.

Trot, too, was having queer experiences and enjoying them. When she
ducked under water, she saw plainly everything about her as easily
and distinctly as she had ever seen anything above water. And by
looking over her shoulder she could watch the motion of her new
tail, all covered with pretty iridescent pink scales, which gleamed
like jewels. She wore her dress the same as before, and the water
failed to affect it in the least.

She now noticed that the mermaids were clothed, too, and their
exquisite gowns were the loveliest thing the little girl had ever
beheld. They seemed made of a material that was like sheeny silk,
cut low in the neck and with wide, flowing sleeves that seldom
covered the shapely, white arms of her new friends. The gowns had
trains that floated far behind the mermaids as they swam, but were
so fleecy and transparent that the sparkle of their scales might be
seen reaching back of their waists, where the human form ended and
the fish part began. The sea fairies wore strings of splendid pearls
twined around their throats, while more pearls were sewn upon their
gowns for trimmings. They did not dress their beautiful hair at all,
but let it float around them in clouds.

The little girl had scarcely time to observe all this when the
princess said, "Now, my dear, if you are ready, we will begin our
journey, for it is a long way to our palaces."

"All right," answered Trot, and took the hand extended to her with a
trustful smile.

"Will you allow me to guide you, Cap'n Bill?" asked the blonde
mermaid, extending her hand to the old sailor.

"Of course, ma'am," he said, taking her fingers rather bashfully.

"My name is Merla," she continued, "and I am cousin to Princess
Clia. We must all keep together, you know, and I will hold your hand
to prevent your missing the way."

While she spoke they began to descend through the water, and it grew
quite dark for a time because the cave shut out the light. But
presently Trot, who was eagerly looking around her, began to notice
the water lighten and saw they were coming into brighter parts of
the sea. "We have left the cave now," said Clia, "and may swim
straight home."

"I s'pose there are no winding roads in the ocean," remarked the
child, swimming swiftly beside her new friend.

"Oh yes indeed. At the bottom, the way is far from being straight or
level," replied Clia. "But we are in mid-water now, where nothing
will hinder our journey, unless--"

She seemed to hesitate, so Trot asked, "Unless what?"

"Unless we meet with disagreeable creatures," said the Princess.
"The mid-water is not as safe as the very bottom, and that is the
reason we are holding your hands."

"What good would that do?" asked Trot.

"You must remember that we are fairies," said Princess Clia. "For
that reason, nothing in the ocean can injure us, but you two are
mortals and therefore not entirely safe at all times unless we
protect you."

Trot was thoughtful for a few moments and looked around her a little
anxiously. Now and then a dark form would shoot across their pathway
or pass them at some distance, but none was near enough for the girl
to see plainly what it might be. Suddenly they swam right into a big
school of fishes, all yellowtails and of very large size. There must
have been hundreds of them lying lazily in the water, and when they
saw the mermaids they merely wriggled to one side and opened a path
for the sea fairies to pass through. "Will they hurt us?" asked
Trot.

"No indeed," laughed the Princess. "Fishes are stupid creatures
mostly, and this family is quite harmless."

"How about sharks?" asked Cap'n Bill, who was swimming gracefully
beside them, his hand clutched in that of pretty Merla.

"Sharks may indeed be dangerous to you," replied Clia, "so I advise
you to keep them at a safe distance. They never dare attempt to bite
a mermaid, and it may be they will think you belong to our band; but
it is well to avoid them if possible."

"Don't get careless, Cap'n," added Trot.

"I surely won't, mate," he replied. "You see, I didn't use to be
'fraid o' sharks 'cause if they came near I'd stick my wooden leg at
'em. But now, if they happens to fancy these green scales, it's all
up with ol' Bill."

"Never fear," said Merla, "I'll take care of you on our journey, and
in our palaces you will find no sharks at all."

"Can't they get in?" he asked anxiously.

"No. The palaces of the mermaids are inhabited only by themselves."

"Is there anything else to be afraid of in the sea?" asked the
little girl after they had swum quite a while in silence.

"One or two things, my dear," answered Princess Clia. "Of course, we
mermaids have great powers, being fairies; yet among the sea people
is one nearly as powerful as we are, and that is the devilfish."

"I know," said Trot. "I've seen 'em."

"You have seen the smaller ones, I suppose, which sometimes rise to
the surface or go near the shore, and are often caught by
fishermen," said Clia, "but they are only second cousins of the
terrible deep-sea devilfish to which I refer."

"Those ones are bad enough, though," declared Cap'n Bill. "If you
know any worse ones, I don't want a interduction to 'em."

"The monster devilfish inhabit caves in the rugged, mountainous
regions of the ocean," resumed the Princess, "and they are evil
spirits who delight in injuring all who meet them. None lives near
our palaces, so there is little danger of your meeting any while you
are our guests."

"I hope we won't," said Trot.

"None for me," added Cap'n Bill. "Devils of any sort ought to be
give a wide berth, an' devilfish is worser ner sea serpents."

"Oh, do you know the sea serpents?" asked Merla as if surprised.

"Not much I don't," answered the sailor, "but I've heard tell of
folks as has seen 'em."

"Did they ever live to tell the tale?" asked Trot.

"Sometimes," he replied. "They're jes' ORful creatures, mate."

"How easy it is to be mistaken," said Princess Clia softly. "We know
the sea serpents very well, and we like them."

"You do!" exclaimed Trot.

"Yes, dear. There are only three of them in all the world, and not
only are they harmless, but quite bashful and shy. They are
kind-hearted, too, and although not beautiful in appearance, they do
many kind deeds and are generally beloved."

"Where do they live?" asked the child.

"The oldest one, who is king of this ocean, lives quite near us,"
said Clia. "His name is Anko."

"How old is he?" inquired Cap'n Bill curiously.

"No one knows. He was here before the ocean came, and he stayed here
because he learned to like the water better than the land as a
habitation. Perhaps King Anko is ten thousand years old, perhaps
twenty thousand. We often lose track of the centuries down here in
the sea."

"That's pretty old, isn't it?" said Trot. "Older than Cap'n Bill, I
guess."

"Summat," chuckled the sailor man, "summat older, mate, but not
much. P'raps the sea serpent ain't got gray whiskers."

"Oh yes he has," responded Merla with a laugh. "And so have his two
brothers, Unko and Inko. They each have an ocean of their own, you
know; and once every hundred years they come here to visit their
brother Anko. So we've seen all three many times."

"Why, how old are mermaids, then?" asked Trot, looking around at the
beautiful creatures wonderingly.

"We are like all ladies of uncertain age," rejoined the Princess
with a smile. "We don't care to tell."

"Older than Cap'n Bill?"

"Yes, dear," said Clia.

"But we haven't any gray whiskers," added Merla merrily, "and our
hearts are ever young."

Trot was thoughtful. It made her feel solemn to be in the company of
such old people. The band of mermaids seemed to all appearances
young and fresh and not a bit as if they'd been soaked in water for
hundreds of years. The girl began to take more notice of the sea
maidens following after her. More than a dozen were in the group;
all were lovely in appearance and clothed in the same gauzy robes as
Merla and the Princess. These attendants did not join in the
conversation but darted here and there in sportive play, and often
Trot heard the tinkling chorus of their laughter. Whatever doubts
might have arisen in the child's mind through the ignorant tales of
her sailor friend, she now found the mermaids to be light-hearted,
joyous and gay, and from the first she had not been in the least
afraid of her new companions.

"How much farther do we have to go?" asked Cap'n Bill presently.

"Are you getting tired?" Merla inquired.

"No," said he, "but I'm sorter anxious to see what your palaces look
like. Inside the water ain't as interestin' as the top of it. It's
fine swimmin', I'll agree, an' I like it, but there ain't nuthin'
special to see that I can make out."

"That is true, sir," replied the Princess. "We have purposely led
you through the mid-water hoping you would see nothing to alarm you
until you get more accustomed to our ocean life. Moreover, we are
able to travel more swiftly here. How far do you think we have
already come, Cap'n?"

"Oh, 'bout two mile," he answered.

"Well, we are now hundreds of miles from the cave where we started,"
she told him.

"You don't mean it!" he exclaimed in wonder.

"Then there's magic in it," announced Trot soberly.

"True, my dear. To avoid tiring you and to save time, we have used a
little of our fairy power," said Clia. "The result is that we are
nearing our home. Let us go downward a bit, now, for you must know
that the mermaid palaces are at the very bottom of the ocean, and in
its deepest part."




CHAPTER 4

THE PALACE OF QUEEN AQUAREINE


Trot was surprised to find it was not at all dark or gloomy as they
descended farther into the deep sea. Things were not quite so clear
to her eyes as they had been in the bright sunshine above the
ocean's surface, but every object was distinct nevertheless, as if
she saw through a pane of green-tainted glass. The water was very
clear except for this green shading, and the little girl had never
before felt so light and buoyant as she did now. It was no effort at
all to dart through the water, which seemed to support her on all
sides.

"I don't believe I weigh anything at all," she said to Cap'n Bill.

"No more do I, Trot," said he. "But that's nat'ral, seein' as we're
under water so far. What bothers me most is how we manage to
breathe, havin' no gills like fishes have."

"Are you sure we haven't any gills?" she asked, lifting her free
hand to feel her throat.

"Sure. Ner the mermaids haven't any, either," declared Cap'n Bill.

"Then," said Trot, "we're breathing by magic."

The mermaids laughed at this shrewd remark, and the Princess said,
"You have guessed correctly, my dear. Go a little slower, now, for
the palaces are in sight."

"Where?" asked Trot eagerly.

"Just before you."

"In that grove of trees?" inquired the girl. And really, it seemed
to her that they were approaching a beautiful grove. The bottom of
the sea was covered with white sand, in which grew many varieties of
sea shrubs with branches like those of trees. Not all of them were
green, however, for the branches and leaves were of a variety of
gorgeous colors. Some were purple, shading down to a light lavender;
and there were reds all the way from a delicate rose-pink to vivid
shades of scarlet. Orange, yellow and blue shades were there, too,
mingling with the sea-greens in a most charming manner. Altogether,
Trot found the brilliant coloring somewhat bewildering.

These sea shrubs, which in size were quite as big and tall as the
trees on earth, were set so close together that their branches
entwined; but there were several avenues leading into the groves,
and at the entrance to each avenue the girl noticed several large
fishes with long spikes growing upon their noses.

"Those are swordfishes," remarked the Princess as she led the band
past one of these avenues.

"Are they dang'rous?" asked Trot.

"Not to us," was the reply. "The swordfishes are among our most
valued and faithful servants, guarding the entrances to the gardens
which surround our palaces. If any creatures try to enter uninvited,
these guards fight them and drive them away. Their swords are sharp
and strong, and they are fierce fighters, I assure you."

"I've known 'em to attack ships, an' stick their swords right
through the wood," said Cap'n Bill.

"Those belonged to the wandering tribes of swordfishes," explained
the Princess. "These, who are our servants, are too sensible and
intelligent to attack ships."

The band now headed into a broad passage through the "gardens," as
the mermaids called these gorgeous groves, and the great swordfishes
guarding the entrance made way for them to pass, afterward resuming
their posts with watchful eyes. As they slowly swam along the
avenue, Trot noticed that some of the bushes seemed to have fruits
growing upon them, but what these fruits might be neither she nor
Cap'n Bill could guess.

The way wound here and there for some distance, till finally they
came to a more open space all carpeted with sea flowers of exquisite
colorings. Although Trot did not know it, these flowers resembled
the rare orchids of earth in their fanciful shapes and marvelous
hues. The child did not examine them very closely, for across the
carpet of flowers loomed the magnificent and extensive palaces of
the mermaids.

These palaces were built of coral; white, pink and yellow being
used, and the colors arranged in graceful designs. The front of the
main palace, which now faced them, had circular ends connecting the
straight wall, not unlike the architecture we are all familiar with;
yet there seemed to be no windows to the building, although a series
of archways served as doors.

Arriving at one of the central archways, the band of sea maidens
separated. Princess Clia and Merla leading Trot and Cap'n Bill into
the palace, while the other mermaids swam swiftly away to their own
quarters.

"Welcome!" said Clia in her sweet voice. "Here you are surrounded
only by friends and are in perfect safety. Please accept our
hospitality as freely as you desire, for we consider you honored
guests. I hope you will like our home," she added a little shyly.

"We are sure to, dear Princess," Trot hastened to say.

Then Clia escorted them through the archway and into a lofty hall.
It was not a mere grotto, but had smoothly built walls of pink coral
inlaid with white. Trot at first thought there was no roof, for
looking upward she could see the water all above them. But the
princess, reading her thought, said with a smile, "Yes, there is a
roof, or we would be unable to keep all the sea people out of our
palace. But the roof is made of glass to admit the light."

"Glass!" cried the astonished child. "Then it must be an awful big
pane of glass."

"It is," agreed Clia. "Our roofs are considered quite wonderful, and
we owe them to the fairy powers of our queen. Of course, you
understand there is no natural way to make glass under water."

"No indeed," said Cap'n Bill. And then he asked, "Does your queen
live here?"

"Yes. She is waiting now, in her throne room, to welcome you. Shall
we go in?"

"I'd just as soon," replied Trot rather timidly, but she boldly
followed the princess, who glided through another arch into another
small room where several mermaids were reclining upon couches of
coral. They were beautifully dressed and wore many sparkling jewels.

"Her Majesty is awaiting the strangers, Princess Clia," announced
one of these. "You are asked to enter at once."

"Come, then," said Clia, and once more taking Trot's hand, she led
the girl through still another arch, while Merla followed just
behind them, escorting Cap'n Bill. They now entered an apartment so
gorgeous that the child fairly gasped with astonishment. The queen's
throne room was indeed the grandest and most beautiful chamber in
all the ocean palaces. Its coral walls were thickly inlaid with
mother-of-pearl, exquisitely shaded and made into borders and floral
decorations. In the corners were cabinets, upon the shelves of which
many curious shells were arranged, all beautifully polished. The
floor glittered with gems arranged in patterns of flowers, like a
brilliant carpet.

Near the center of the room was a raised platform of mother-of-pearl
upon which stood a couch thickly studded with diamonds, rubies,
emeralds and pearls. Here reclined Queen Aquareine, a being so
lovely that Trot gazed upon her spellbound and Cap'n Bill took off
his sailor cap and held it in his hands.

All about the room were grouped other mother-of-pearl couches, not
raised like that of the queen, and upon each of these reclined a
pretty mermaid. They could not sit down as we do, Trot readily
understood, because of their tails; but they rested very gracefully
upon the couches with their trailing gauzy robes arranged in fleecy
folds.

When Clia and Merla escorted the strangers down the length of the
great room toward the royal throne, they met with pleasant looks and
smiles on every side, for the sea maidens were too polite to indulge
in curious stares. They paused just before the throne, and the queen
raised her head upon one elbow to observe them. "Welcome, Mayre,"
she said, "and welcome, Cap'n Bill. I trust you are pleased with
your glimpse of the life beneath the surface of our sea."

"I am," answered Trot, looking admiringly at the beautiful face of
the queen.

"It's all mighty cur'ous an' strange-like," said the sailor slowly.
"I'd no idee you mermaids were like this, at all!"

"Allow me to explain that it was to correct your wrong ideas about
us that led me to invite you to visit us," replied the Queen. "We
usually pay little heed to the earth people, for we are content in
our own dominions; but, of course, we know all that goes on upon
your earth. So when Princess Clia chanced to overhear your absurd
statements concerning us, we were greatly amused and decided to let
you see with your own eyes just what we are like."

"I'm glad you did," answered Cap'n Bill, dropping his eyes in some
confusion as he remembered his former description of the mermaids.

"Now that you are here," continued the Queen in a cordial, friendly
tone, "you may as well remain with us a few days and see the
wonderful sights of our ocean."

"I'm much obliged to you, ma'am," said Trot, "and I'd like to stay
ever so much, but mother worries jus' dreadfully if we don't get
home in time."

"I'll arrange all that," said Aquareine with a smile.

"How?" asked the girl.

"I will make your mother forget the passage of time so she will not
realize how long you are away. Then she cannot worry."

"Can you do that?" inquired Trot.

"Very easily. I will send your mother into a deep sleep that will
last until you are ready to return home. Just at present she is
seated in her chair by the front window, engaged in knitting." The
queen paused to raise an arm and wave it slowly to and fro. Then she
added, "Now your good mother is asleep, little Mayre, and instead of
worries I promise her pleasant dreams."

"Won't someone rob the house while she's asleep?" asked the child
anxiously.

"No, dear. My charm will protect the house from any intrusion."

"That's fine!" exclaimed Trot in delight.

"It's jes' won-erful!" said Cap'n Bill. "I wish I knew it was so.
Trot's mother has a awful sharp tongue when she's worried."

"You may see for yourselves," declared the Queen, and waved her hand
again. At once they saw before them the room in the cottage, with
Mayre's mother asleep by the window. Her knitting was in her lap,
and the cat lay curled up beside her chair. It was all so natural
that Trot thought she could hear the clock over the fireplace tick.
After a moment the scene faded away, when the queen asked with
another smile, "Are you satisfied?"

"Oh yes!" cried Trot. "But how could you do it?"

"It is a form of mirage," was the reply. "We are able to bring any
earth scene before us whenever we wish. Sometimes these scenes are
reflected above the water so that mortals also observe them."

"I've seen 'em," said Cap'n Bill, nodding. "I've seen mirages, but I
never knowed what caused 'em afore now."

"Whenever you see anything you do not understand and wish to ask
questions, I will be very glad to answer them," said the Queen.
