into the stream, diving deeply to avoid the arrows of the Northmen.

The fact of the river being in flood, which had caused the destruction
of the tower, now proved the cause of their safety. Had the water been
clear, the Danes on the bridge above could have marked their progress
and poured a storm of arrows upon them as they came to the surface; but
its yellow and turbid waters concealed them from sight, and each time
they rose to the surface for air they were enabled to take a rapid
breath and dive again before their enemies could direct and launch
their arrows at them.

As they drifted far down the stream, they reached the land beyond
bowshot of the Danes, and they soon entered the town amid the loud
acclamations of the citizens. The Danes now for the most part drew off
from the neighbourhood, and the Abbe Ebble led out a sortie, which
reached the Danish camp, and driving back those whom they found within
it, set it on fire and effected their retreat to Paris without loss, in
spite of the efforts of the enemy, who rapidly assembled at the sight
of the flames.

The Danes had brought in from the surrounding country such vast
quantities of cattle, sheep, and goats, that their camps would not
suffice to hold them, and they turned the church of St. Germain into a
stable and crowded it with these animals. The saint, as the Abbe
D'Abbon relates, indignant at this desecration, sent a terrible plague
among the cattle, and when the Danes in the morning entered the church
it contained nothing but carcasses in the last state of decomposition.

The valiant defence of Paris had given time for the rest of France to
arm, and the Danes scattered over the country now met with a stout
resistance. The Northmen were defeated in their efforts to capture Le
Mans, Chartres, and other towns, and were defeated in several battles
near Chartres by Godefroi and Odon.

In March Henri advanced with a strong force to the relief of Paris, and
arriving at night attacked the camp of the Danes, slew great numbers,
and captured a vast booty; and then, having supplied Paris with a
considerable amount of provisions, retired with his band before the
Danes had time to assemble in sufficient strength to oppose him.
Shortly afterwards the Danes expressed the desire of Siegfroi to hold
parley with the Count Eudes. Siegfroi and a number of his warriors
landed, and Eudes left the city and advanced to meet them. No sooner
had he reached them than he was attacked by the Northmen, but drawing
his sword he defended himself with immense bravery until the garrison
ran down to his succour, and the Danes were driven back to their ship
with loss of nearly half of their party.

The Danes now left the church of St. Germain L'Auxerrois and surrounded
the monastery of St. Germain des Pres, but the monks there paid him
sixty pounds of pure silver to leave them in peace. Siegfroi now wished
to abandon the siege which had already cost him so dear, but the
Northmen, furious at their losses, determined upon another assault.

"Very well," the king said; "have your way then. Attack Paris on all
sides, hew down its towers, and make breaches in its walls; for once I
will remain a spectator."

The Danes crossed the river and landed on the island, but owing to the
absence of large numbers on other expeditions, and the heavy losses
which they had suffered, their numbers were no longer so overwhelming,
and Count Eudes led out his forces to oppose them outside the walls.
This time Edmund headed his band of Saxons, who until now had only
taken part as archers in the defence.

The combat was a furious one. In spite of the valour of Eudes and Ebble
the Danes pressed hard upon the Franks, and were driving them back
towards the gates when Edmund led his Saxons, in the close phalanx in
which they had so often met the Danes in the field, to the front. With
irresistible force the wedge burst its way through the ranks of the
Danes, bearing all before it with its wedge of spears. Into the gap
thus formed Eudes and Ebble with their bravest men threw themselves,
and the Danes, severed in two, were driven back towards their ships.
But for some hours the rain had been falling heavily and the river was
rapidly rising and had already overflowed a portion of the island. Thus
the Danes had great difficulty in getting on board their ships again,
and great numbers were killed in doing so.

There was no longer any resistance to Siegfroi's wishes. A parley was
held with the city, and a further sum being added to that contributed
by the monks of St. Germain des Pres the Danes drew off from the town.

At this time the long confinement of so many men within the walls had
caused a pestilence to break out in Paris. The Archbishop Goslin, the
Bishop Everard of Sens, the Prince Hugues, and many others died. The
16th of April was the day on which the Parisians were accustomed to go
in solemn procession to the church of St. Germain. The Northmen,
knowing this, in mockery filled a wagon with grain and organized a mock
procession. The bullocks who drew the chariot suddenly became lame;
numbers of other bullocks were attached, but although goaded by spears
their united efforts were unable to drag the wagon an inch, and the
Danes were obliged at last to abandon their intention.

The same day St. Germain is reported to have further shown his power.
One of the Northmen, condemned for some offence to be executed, fled to
the church for refuge, and was there slain by his countrymen; but all
who took part in the deed at once fell dead. The Northmen, struck by
these miracles, placed a certain number as guard over the church to
prevent any from touching aught that it contained. One of these men, a
Dane of great stature, spread his bed in the church and slept there;
but to the astonishment of his comrades he was found in the morning to
have shrunk to the size of a new-born infant, at which stature he
remained for the rest of his life.

A miracle of an opposite kind was at the same time performed in the
town. A valiant warrior had from the effects of fever fallen into an
extreme weakness, and was devoured with grief at the thought that he
should no longer be able to take share in the defence of the town. To
him St. Germain appeared at night and told him that his prayers had
been heard, and that his strength should be restored to him. On
awakening in the morning he found that he was as vigorous and as robust
as ever.

Another day when the soldiers were carrying the banner of the saint
round the walls of the town, followed by the citizens chanting hymns,
one of the bearers of the holy relics, named Gozbert, was struck by a
stone from a catapult. The man who had fired it fell dead, while
Gozbert continued his promenade in no way injured by the blow. The Abbe
D'Abbon vouches for these miracles on the part of St. Germain in
defence of his faithful city.




CHAPTER XV: FRIENDS IN TROUBLE


Although for a time the Northmen abstained from grand assaults,
continued skirmishes took place. Sometimes parties landed beneath the
walls, and strove to carry off the cattle which the besieged turned out
to gather a little fresh food there. Sometimes the citizens, led by
Eudes or Ebble, would take boat and cross, and endeavour to cut off
small parties of the enemy. They had now sufficient boats at their
disposal for expeditions of this kind; for, in their last defeat, the
Danes had in their haste left several boats behind them. Of one of the
largest of these Edmund took possession, and going out in her at night,
several times succeeded in capturing Danish vessels, sometimes while
they were rowing along the river unsuspicious that any foes were near,
sometimes by boarding them as they lay alongside the bank.

As the vessels so captured were too large to be dragged ashore, and
could have been easily recaptured by the Danes, they were, after being
emptied of their contents, always burned. The plague continued its
ravages, and the city became straitened for provisions. Count Eudes
therefore determined to go to King Charles to urge him to hurry to the
succour of the town. Almost all the chiefs of the defence had fallen
victims to the pest, or had been killed in battle with the Danes, and
the count at his departure committed the defence of the city to the
Abbe Ebble and Edmund. He then crossed the stream at night, and made
his way successfully through the Danes.

The abbe and Edmund vied with each other in keeping up the spirits of
the garrison with successful little forays with the Danes, frequently
crossing the river to the one bank or the other, sometimes with parties
of only five or six men, and falling upon similar bodies of the enemy.
Several times they pounced upon small herds of the enemy's cattle, and
driving them into the river, directed them in their boats across the
stream.

In the commencement of July Eudes appeared on the slopes on Mont Martre
with three battalions of soldiers. The enemy, who were for the most
part on the other side of the Seine, crossed the river. A desperate
battle ensued. A portion of the garrison crossed in boats to the
assistance of their friends, Edmund leading over his band of Saxons.
With these he fell upon the rear of the Danes engaged in fighting with
the force under the count, and the Northmen, attacked on both sides,
gave way and took to flight. They were hotly pursued by the Franks.

The reinforcements entered Paris triumphantly by the bridge, which had
long since been repaired. But the siege was not yet over. When the news
of the victory of Eudes spread, the Danes again drew together from all
parts, and crossing the river, attacked the city on every side. The
onslaught was more furious than any which had preceded it. The Danes
had provided themselves with large numbers of mangonels and catapults.
Every man capable of bearing arms was upon the walls; but so furious
was the attack, so vast the number of the assailants, so prodigious
were the clouds of missiles which they rained upon the walls, that the
besieged almost lost heart.

The relics of St. Genevieve were taken round the walls. In several
places the Danes had formed breaches in the walls, and although the
besieged still struggled, hope had well-nigh left them, and abject
terror reigned in the city. Women ran about the streets screaming, and
crying that the end was at hand. The church bells tolled dismally, and
the shouts of the exultant Danes rose higher and higher. Again a
general cry rose to St. Germain to come to the aid of the town. Just at
this moment Edmund and Egbert, who had till now held the Saxons in
reserve, feeling that a desperate effort must be made, formed up their
band, and advancing to the principal breach, passed through the ranks
of the disheartened Franks, and with levelled pikes charged headlong
down into the crowd of Danes. The latter, already exhausted by their
efforts, were at once borne back before the serried pikes of their
fresh assailants. In vain their chiefs at that point tried to rally
them; nothing could withstand the impetus of the Saxon attack.

Astonished at seeing the tide of battle swept away from the breach, the
French believed that St. Germain had wrought a miracle in their favour,
and taking heart poured out in the rear of the Saxons. The news of the
miracle spread rapidly. Through the breaches, and from every gate, they
poured out suddenly upon the Danes, who, struck with consternation at
this sudden onslaught by a foe whom they had already regarded as
beaten, hesitated, and soon took to flight. Vast numbers were cut down
before they could reach their vessels. A great portion fled towards the
bridge and endeavoured to cross there; but their numbers impeded them,
and the Saxons and Franks, falling upon their rear, effected a terrible
slaughter.

Two days after the battle a force of six hundred Franks arrived from
the Emperor Charles. The Danes sought to oppose their entrance to the
city, but were defeated with a loss of three thousand men. The siege
was now virtually over, and in a short time the emperor himself with a
great army arrived. It was now November, and after some negotiations
the Danes agreed upon the receipt of seven hundred pounds of silver to
retire to Burgundy and to leave the country at the beginning of March.

Having wasted Burgundy, however, they again returned to Paris.
Consternation seized the capital when the fleet of the Northmen was
seen approaching. A treaty was, however, made, for the wind had fallen
just when the Danish fleet, which had but lately arrived and was
descending the river, was abreast of Paris. As soon as the wind became
favourable the Northmen broke the truce, slew a number of Franks who
had mingled among them, and passed up the Marne.

In the meantime Emperor Charles had died and Count Eudes had been
chosen his successor. When the Danes again advanced against Paris he
speedily sent reinforcements. The town had already repulsed an attack.
Eudes himself on St. John's Day was advancing with 1000 men-at-arms
when he was attacked by 10,000 mounted Danes and 9000 footmen. The
combat was desperate but the Franks were victorious. Eudes, however,
had other difficulties. Burgundy and Aquitaine revolted, and in order
to secure peace to the kingdom he made a treaty with the Danes, giving
over to them the province of Normandy.

Edmund and Egbert had no part in the second siege of Paris. As soon as
the place was relieved by the Emperor Charles they prepared to depart.
Taking boats they ascended the river, and to their joy found the Dragon
safe in the hiding place where she had been lying for nearly a year.
She was brought out into the stream and floated down to Paris, where by
the order of Count Eudes she was thoroughly repaired and redecorated.

The Franks, convinced that next only to the assistance of St. Germain
they owed the safety of their city to the valour of the Saxons, loaded
them with presents; and these, with the gifts which they had previously
received after the destruction of the three towers, and the sums for
which the booty captured from the Danes had been sold, made up a great
treasure.

Upon the day before they had arranged to sail a Danish boat was seen
rowing down the stream. It approached the Dragon and the helmsman asked:

"Is this ship the Dragon? and has it for a captain Edmund the Saxon?"

"I am Edmund," he replied, "and this is the Dragon. What would you with
me?"

"I am sent by the Jarl Siegbert, who lies wounded near, to beg that you
will come to him immediately, as he is in a sore strait and needs your
assistance."

"I will come at once," Edmund said. "Put one of your men on board to
show me where he is, for I shall be there before you."

Edmund's horn sounded the signal, and messengers were sent to the town
to order the crew at once to repair on board the Dragon. Edmund landed
and took leave of the Frankish leaders. The provisions and stores were
hastily carried on board, and then, amidst the enthusiastic cheers of
the inhabitants, who thronged the walls and shore, the oars were got
out and the Dragon proceeded at the top of her speed up the river.

On the way Edmund questioned the Dane, and found that Siegbert had been
wounded in the last assault upon Paris. He had not been present at the
first part of the siege, having but recently arrived from Norway. His
daughter Freda had accompanied him. "Yes," she was still unmarried,
although many valiant Northmen had sought her hand, chief among them
the brave leader Sweyn "of the left hand;" but there had been a fray on
the previous night in Siegbert's camp, and it was said--but for that he
could not vouch--that Freda had been carried off.

The news filled Edmund with anxiety. Ever since the day he left her on
her father's galley his thoughts had turned often to the Danish maiden,
and the resolution to carry out his promise and some day seek her again
had never for a moment wavered. He had seen many fair young Saxons, and
could have chosen a bride where he would among these, for few Saxons
girls would have turned a deaf ear to the wooing of one who was at once
of high rank, a prime favourite with the king, and regarded by his
countrymen as one of the bravest of the Saxon champions; but the
dark-haired Freda, who united the fearlessness and independence of a
woman with the frankness and gaiety of a child, had won his heart.

It was true she was a Dane and a pagan; but her father was his friend,
and would, he felt sure, offer no objections on the ground of the
enmity of the races. Since Guthorn and his people had embraced
Christianity, the enmity between the races, in England at least, was
rapidly declining. As to her religion, Edmund doubted not that she
would, under his guidance and teaching, soon cast away the
blood-stained gods of the Northmen and accept Christianity.

In the five years of strife and warfare which had elapsed since he saw
her Edmund had often pictured their next meeting. He had not doubted
that she would remain true to him. Few as were the words which had been
spoken, he knew that when she said, "I will wait for you even till I
die," she had meant it, and that she was not one to change. He had even
been purposing, on his return to England, to ask King Alfred to arrange
through Guthorn for a safe pass for him to go to Norway. To hear, then,
that she had been carried off from her father's side was a terrible
blow, and in his anxiety to arrive at Siegbert's tent Edmund urged the
rowers to their fullest exertions.

It was three hours after leaving Paris when the Dane pointed to a
village at a short distance from the river and told him that Siegbert
was lying there. The Dragon was steered to shore, and Edmund leaping
out followed the Dane with rapid footsteps to the village. The wounded
jarl was lying upon a heap of straw.

"Is it really you, Edmund?" he exclaimed as the young Saxon entered.
"Glad am I indeed that my messenger did not arrive too late. I heard of
you when we first landed--how the Danes, when they sailed up the Seine,
had seen a Saxon galley of strange shape which had rowed rapidly up the
river; how the galley herself had never again been seen; but how a
young Saxon with his band had performed wonders in the defence of
Paris, and had burned well-nigh half the Danish fleet.

"They said that the leader was named Edmund, for they had heard the
name shouted in battle; and especially when he, with one other alone,
escaped from the burning tower and swam the river. So I was sure that
it was you. Then, a week back, my men told me of a strange ship which
had passed down the river to Paris, and I doubted not that it was your
Dragon, which had been hidden somewhere during the siege. I thought
then of sending to tell you that I was lying here wounded; but Freda,
who had always been talking of you, suddenly turned coy and said that
you might have forgotten us, and if you wanted us you would come to us
in Norway."

"But where is Freda?" Edmund, who had been listening impatiently,
exclaimed. "One of your men told me that she had been carried off. Is
it true?"

"Alas! it is true," Siegbert replied; "and that is why I sent for you.
I have never been good friends with Bijorn since the wounding of his
son, but after a time the matter blew over. Sweyn, who though but with
one arm, and that the left, has grown into a valiant warrior, is now,
Bijorn being dead, one of our boldest vikings. A year since he became a
declared suitor for Freda's hand. In this, indeed, he is not alone,
seeing that she has grown up one of our fairest maidens, and many are
the valorous deeds that have been done to win a smile from her; but she
has refused all suitors, Sweyn with the others. He took his refusal in
bad part, and even ventured to vow she should be his whether she willed
it or not. Of course I took the matter up and forbade all further
intimacy, and we had not met again till the other day before Paris. We
had high words there, but I thought no more of it. A few days
afterwards I was struck by a crossbow bolt in the leg. It smashed my
knee, and I shall never be able to use my leg again. I well-nigh died
of fever and vexation, but Freda nursed me through it. She had me
carried on a litter here to be away from the noise and revelry of the
camp. Last night there was a sudden outcry. Some of my men who sprang
to arms were smitten down, and the assailants burst in here and tore
Freda, shrieking, away. Their leader was Sweyn of the left hand. As I
lay tossing here, mad with the misfortune which ties me to my couch, I
thought of you. I said, 'If any can follow and recapture Freda it is
Edmund.' The Danes had for the most part moved away, and there were few
would care to risk a quarrel with Sweyn in a matter which concerned
them not closely; but I felt that I could rely upon you, and that you
would spare no pains to rescue my child."

"That will I not!" Edmund exclaimed; "but tell me first what you think
are his plans. Which way has he gone, and what force has he with him?"

"The band he commands are six shiploads, each numbering fifty men. What
his plans may be I know not, but many of the Danes, I know, purposed,
when the war was finished here, to move east through Burgundy. Some
intended to build boats on the banks of the Rhine and sail down on that
river, others intended to journey further and to descend by the Elbe. I
know not which course Sweyn may adopt. The country between this and the
Rhine swarms with Danes. I do not suppose that Sweyn will join any
other party. Having Freda with him, he will prefer keeping apart; but
in any case it would not be safe for you to journey with your band, who
would assuredly become embroiled with the first party of Danes they
met; and even if they be as brave as yourself they would be defeated by
such superior numbers."

"You do not think that Sweyn will venture to use violence to force
Freda to become his wife?"

"I think he will hardly venture upon that," Siegbert said, "however
violent and headstrong he may be. To carry off a maiden for a wife is
accounted no very evil deed, for the maiden is generally not unwilling;
but to force her by violence to become his wife would be a deed so
contrary to our usages that it would bring upon him the anger of the
whole nation. Knowing Sweyn's disposition, I believe that were there no
other way, he would not hesitate even at this, but might take ship and
carry her to some distant land; but he would not do this until all
other means fail. He will strive to tire her out, and so bring her in
her despair to consent to wed him."

Edmund was silent for three or four minutes; then he said: "I must
consult my kinsman Egbert. I will return and tell you what I purpose
doing."

On leaving the cottage Edmund found Egbert walking up and down outside
awaiting the result of the interview. He had been present when the Dane
had told of Freda's abduction, and knew how sore a blow it was to the
young ealdorman, for Edmund had made no secret to him of his intention
some day to wed the Danish jarl's daughter. Edmund in a few words
related to him the substance of Siegbert's narrative, and ended by
saying: "Now, Egbert, what is best to be done?"

"'Tis of no use asking me, Edmund; you know well enough that it is you
that always decide and I agree. I have a hand to strike, but no head to
plan. Tell me only what you wish, and you may be sure that I will do my
best to execute it."

"Of course we must follow," Edmund said; "of that there is no question.
The only doubt is as to the force we must take. What Siegbert said is
true. The Danish bands are so numerous to the east that we should be
sure to fall in with some of them, and fight as we might, should be
destroyed; and yet with a smaller number how could we hope to rescue
Freda from Sweyn's hands?"

Edmund walked up and down for some time.

"I think," he went on at last, "the best plan will be to take a party
of but four at most. I must choose those who will be able to pass best
as Danes. With so small a number I may traverse the country unobserved.
I will take with me two of Siegbert's men, who, when we get nigh to
Sweyn's band, may join with him and tell me how things are going, and
how Sweyn treats his captive. If I find he is pushing matters to an
extreme I must make some desperate effort to carry her off; but if, as
is more probable, he trusts to time to break her resolution, I shall
follow at a short distance."

