for the discovery and arrest of suspects.

"I charge this young woman with being an aristocrat in disguise.
She is the daughter of the ci-devant Marquis de St. Caux, who was
executed on the 2d of September at Bicetre."

"Murdered, you mean, sir," Marie said in a clear haughty voice.
"Why not call things by their proper name?"

"I am sorry," Lebat went on, not heeding the interruption, "that
it should fall to my lot to denounce her, for I acknowledge that
in the days before our glorious Revolution commenced I have visited
at her father's chateau. But I feel that my duty to the republic
stands before any private considerations."

"You have done perfectly right," the president of the committee
said. "As I understand that the accused does not deny that she
is the daughter of the ci-devant marquis, I will at once sign the
order for her committal to La Force. There is room there still,
though the prisons are filling up again fast."

"We must have another jail delivery," one of the committee laughed
brutally; and a murmur of assent passed through the chamber.

The order was made out, and Marie was handed over to the armed
guard, to be taken with the next batch of prisoners to La Force.

Harry was some twenty yards behind Marie and her companion when
Lebat checked his horse before her. He recognized the man instantly,
and saw that Marie's disguise was discovered. His first impulse
was to rush forward to her assistance, but the hopelessness of any
attempt at interference instantly struck him, and to the surprise
of the two girls, who were looking into a shop, and had not noticed
what was occurring, he turned suddenly with them down a side street.

"What are you doing, Harry? We shall lose the others in the crowd
if we do not keep them in sight," Jeanne said.

"I know what I am doing, Jeanne; I will tell you presently." He walked
along several streets until he came to an unfrequented thoroughfare.

"There is something wrong, Harry. I see it in your face!" Jeanne
exclaimed. "Tell us at once.

"It is bad news," Harry said quietly. "Try and nerve yourselves,
my dear girls, for you will need all your courage. Marie is captured."

"Oh, Harry!" Virginie exclaimed, bursting into tears, while Jeanne
stood still and motionless.

"Why are you taking us away?" she said in a hard sharp voice which
Harry would not have recognized as hers. "Our place is with her,
and where she goes we will go. You have no right to lead us away.
We will go back to her at once."

"You can do her no good, Jeanne, dear," Harry said gently. "You
could not help her, and it would only add to her misery if Virginie
and you were also in their hands. Besides, we can be of more use
outside. Trust to me, Jeanne; I will do all in my power to save
her, whatever the risk."

"You could not save our father and mother," Jeanne said with a
quivering lip.

"No, dear; but I would have saved them had there been but a little
time to do so. This time I hope to be more successful. Courage,
Jeanne! Do not give way; I depend on your clear head to help me.
Besides, till we can get her back, you have to fill Marie's place
and look after Virginie."

The appeal was successful, and Jeanne burst into a passion of
tears. Harry did not try to check them, and in a short time the
sobs ceased and Jeanne raised her head again.

"I feel better now," she said. "Come, Virginie, and dry your eyes,
darling; we shall have plenty of time to cry afterwards. Are we to
go home, Harry? Have they taken Louise?"

"I do not know, Jeanne; that is the first thing to find out, for
if they have, it will not be safe for you to return. Let us push on
now, so that if she has not been taken we shall reach home before
her. We will place ourselves at the corner of your street and wait
for an hour; she may spend some time in looking for us, but if she
does not come by the end of that time I shall feel sure that it
is because she cannot come, and in that case I must look out for
another place for you."

They hurried on until they were nearly home, the brisk walk having,
as Harry had calculated it would do, had the effect of preventing
their thoughts from dwelling upon Marie's capture. They had not
been more than a quarter of an hour at their post when Harry gave
an exclamation of satisfaction as he saw Louise Moulin approaching.
The two girls hurried to meet her.

"Thank God you are both safe, dears!" she exclaimed with tears
streaming down her cheeks. "I thought of you in the middle of it
all; but I was sure that Monsieur Sandwith would see what was being
done and would get you away."

"And you, Louise," said Harry, who had now come up, "how did you
get away? I have been terribly anxious, thinking that they might
seize you too, and that would have been dreadful."

"So they would have done," the old woman said; "but when that evil
man looked away for a moment, mademoiselle whispered, 'Fly, Louise,
for the children's sake!' and I slipped away into the crowd without
even stopping to think, and ran into a shop; and it was well I did,
for he shouted to them to seize me too, but I was gone, and as I
don't think he noticed me before, they could not find me; and as
soon as they had all moved away I came out. I looked for you for
some time, and then made up my mind that Monsieur Sandwith had come
on home with you."

"So I did, you see," Harry said; "but I did not dare to go in until
we knew whether you had been taken too. If you had not come after
a time we should have looked for another lodging, though I knew
well enough that you would not tell them where you lived."

"No, indeed," the old woman said. "They might have cut me in pieces
without getting a single word from me as to where I lived.  Still
they might have found out somehow, for they would have been sure to
have published the fact that I had been taken, with a description
of me. Then the neighbours would have said, 'This description is
like Louise Moulin, and she is missing;' and then they would have
talked, and the end of it would have been you would have been
discovered. Will you come home with us, Monsieur Sandwith?"

"I will come after it's dark, Louise. The less my visits are noticed
the better."

"This is awful!" Harry said to himself as he turned away. "The
marquis and his wife massacred, Ernest and Jules murdered, Marie
in prison, Victor mad with fever, Jeanne and Virginie with no one
to trust to but me, my people at home in a frightful state of mind
about me. It is awful to think of. It's enough to drive a fellow
out of his senses. Well, I will go and see how Victor is going on.
The doctor thought there was a change yesterday. Poor fellow! If
he comes to his senses I shall have hard work to keep the truth
about Marie from him. It would send him off again worse than ever
if he had an idea of it."

"And how is your patient to-day, madame?" he asked, as Victor's
nurse opened the door to him.

"He is quieter, much quieter," she replied. "I think he is too weak
to rave any longer; but otherwise he's just the same. He lies with
his eyes open, talking sometimes to himself, but I cannot make out
any sense in what he says. The  doctor has been here this morning,
and he says that he thinks another two days will decide. If he does
not take a turn then he will die. If he does, he may live, but even
then he may not get his reason again. Poor young fellow! I feel
for him almost as if he were my son, and so does Jacques."

"You are both very good, madame," Harry said, "and my friend is
fortunate indeed to have fallen into such good hands. I will sit
with him for three or four hours now, and you had better go and
get a little fresh air."

"That I will, monsieur. Jacques is asleep. He was up with him all
last night, and I had a good night. He would have it so."

"Quite right!" Harry said. "You must not knock yourself up, madame.
You are too useful to others for us to let you do that. Tomorrow
night I will take my turn."




CHAPTER IX

Robespierre


After dark Harry presented himself at Louise Moulin's.

"Have you thought of anything, Harry?" was Jeanne's first question.
She was alone, for Louise was cooking, and Virginie had lain down
and cried herself to sleep.

"I have thought of a number of things," he replied, for while he
had been sitting by Victor's bedside he had turned over in his mind
every scheme by which he could get Marie out of prison, "but at
present I have fixed upon nothing. I cannot carry out our original
plan of seizing Marat. It would require more than one to carry
out such a scheme, and the friend whom I relied upon before can no
longer aid me."

"Who is it?" Jeanne asked quietly. "Is it Victor de Gisons?"

"What! Bless me, Jeanne!" Harry exclaimed in surprise. "How did
you guess that?"

"I felt sure it was Victor all along," the girl said. "In the first
place, I never believed that he had gone away. Marie told me she
had begged and prayed him to go, and that he had only gone to please
her. She seemed to think it was right he should go, but I didn't
think so. A gentleman would not run away and leave anyone he liked
behind, even if she told him. It was not likely. Why, here are
you staying here and risking your life for us, though we are not
related to you and have no claim upon you. And how could Victor
run away?  But as Marie seemed pleased to think he was safe, I said
nothing; but I know, if he had gone, and some day they had been
married, I should never have looked upon him as a brother. But I
felt sure he wouldn't do it, and that he was in Paris still. Then,
again, you did not tell us the name of the friend who was working
with you, and I felt sure you must have some reason for your
silence. So, putting the two things together, I was sure that it
was Victor. What has happened to him?  Is he in prison too?"

"No, he is not in prison, Jeanne," Harry said, "but he is very
ill." And he related the whole circumstances of Victor's fever.
"I blamed myself awfully at first for having hit him so hard, as
you may suppose, Jeanne; but the doctor says he thinks it made no
difference, and that Victor's delirium is due to the mental shock
and not in any way to the blow on the head. Still I should not like
your sister to know it. I am very glad you have guessed the truth,
for it is a comfort to talk things over with you."

"Poor Marie!" Jeanne said softly. "It is well she never knew about
it. The thought he had got safely away kept her up. And now, tell
me about your plans. Could I not take Victor's place and help you to
seize Marat? I am not strong, you know; but I could hold a knife,
and tell him I would kill him if he cried out. I don't think I
could, you know, but he wouldn't know that."

"I am afraid that wouldn't do, Jeanne," Harry said with a slight
smile, shaking his head. "It was a desperate enterprise for two of
us.  Besides, it would never do for you to run the risk of being
separated from Virginie. Remember you are father and mother and
elder sister to her now. The next plan I thought of was to try and
get appointed as a warder in the prison, but that seems full of
difficulties, for I know no one who could get me such a berth, and
certainly they would not appoint a fellow at my age unless by some
extraordinary influence. Then I thought if I let out I was English
I might get arrested and lodged in the same prison, and might
help her to get out then. From what I hear, the prisoners are not
separated, but all live together."

"No, no, Harry," Jeanne exclaimed in a tone of sharp pain, "you
must not do that of all things. We have only you, and if you are
once in prison you might never get out again; besides, there are
lots of other prisons, and there is no reason why they should send
you to La Force rather than anywhere else. No, I will never consent
to that plan."

"I thought it seemed too doubtful myself," Harry said. "Of course,
if I knew that they would send me to La Force, I might risk it.  I
could hide a file and a steel saw about me, and might cut through
the bars; but, as you say, there is no  reason why they should send
me there rather than anywhere else. I would kill that villain who
arrested her--the scoundrel, after being a guest at the chateau!--but
I don't see that would do your sister any good, and would
probably end in my being shut up. The most hopeful plan seems to
me to try and bribe some of the warders. Some of them, no doubt,
would be glad enough to take money if they could see their way to
letting her out without fear of detection."

"But you know we thought of that before, Harry, and agreed it would
be a terrible risk to try it, for the very first man you spoke to
might turn round on you."

"Of course there is a certain risk, Jeanne, anyway. There is no
getting a prisoner out of La Force without running some sort of
risk; the thing is to fix on as safe a plan as we can. However, we
must think it out well before we do try. A failure would be fatal,
and I do not think there is any pressing danger just at present.
It is hardly likely there will be any repetition of the wholesale
work of the 2nd of September; and if they have anything like a trial
of the prisoners, there are such numbers of them, so many arrested
every day, that it may be a long time before they come to your
sister. I do not mean that we should trust to that, only that
there is time for us to make our plans properly. Have you thought
of anything?"

"I have thought of all sort of things since you left us this morning,
Harry, but they are like yours, just vague sort of schemes that
do not seem possible when you try to work them out. I do not know
whether they let you inside the prisons to sell everything to the
prisoners, because if they did I might go in with something and
see Marie, and find out how she could be got out."

Harry shook his head.

"I do not think anyone would be allowed in like that, but if they
did it would only be a few to whom the privilege would be granted."

"Yes, I thought of that, Harry; but one of them might be bribed
perhaps to let me take her place."

"It might be possible," Harry said, "but there would be a terrible
risk, and I don't think any advantage to compensate for it. Even if
you did get to her and spoke to her, we should still be no nearer
to getting her out. Still we mustn't be disheartened. We can hardly
expect to hit upon a scheme at once, and I  don't think either of
our heads is very clear to-day; let us think it over quietly, and
perhaps some other idea may occur to one of us, I expect it will be
to you.  Now, good-night; keep your courage up. I rely very much
upon you, Jeanne, and you don't know what a comfort it is to me that
you are calm and brave, and that I can talk things over to you. I
don't know what I should do if I had it all on my own shoulders."

Jeanne made no answer, but her eyes were full of tears as she put
her hands into Harry's, and no sound came from her lips in answer
to his good-night.

"That girl's a trump, and no mistake," Harry said to himself as
he descended the stairs. "She has got more pluck than most women,
and is as cool and calm as if she were twice her age. Most girls
would be quite knocked over if they were in her place. Her father
and mother murdered, her sister in the hands of these wretches,
and danger hanging over herself and Virginie! It isn't that she
doesn't feel it. I can see she does, quite as much, if not more,
than people who would sit down and howl and wring their hands. She
is a trump, Jeanne is, and no mistake. And now about Marie. She
must be got out somehow, but how? That is the question. I really
don't see any possible way except by bribing her guards, and
I haven't the least idea how to set about that. I think to-morrow
I will tell Jacques and his wife all about it; they may know some
of these men, though it isn't likely that they do; anyhow, three
heads are better than one."

Accordingly, next morning he took the kind-hearted couple into his
counsel. When they heard that the young lady who had been arrested
was the fiance of their sick lodger they were greatly interested,
but they shook their heads when he told them that he was determined
at all hazards to get her out of prison.

"It isn't the risk so much," Jacques said, "that I look at. Life
doesn't seem of much account in these days; but how could it be
done? Even if you made up your mind to be killed, I don't see that
would put her a bit nearer to getting out of prison; the place is
too strong to break into or to break out of."

"No, I don't think it is possible to succeed in that sort of way;
but if the men who have the keys of the corridors could be bribed,
and the guard at the gate put soundly to sleep by drugging their
drink, it might be managed."

Jacques looked sharply at Harry to see if he was in earnest, and
seeing that he was so, said drily:

"Yes, if we could do those things we should, no doubt, see our way;
but how could it be managed?"

"That is just the point, Jacques. In the first place it will be
