only been here two.  Some of these foreign spies lurking about London;
that's what they were."

The Rat had not waited until the keys arrived.  He had swung himself at
his swiftest pace back through the streets to No. 7 Philibert Place.
People turned and stared at his wild pale face as he almost shot past
them.

He had left himself barely breath enough to speak with when he reached
the house and banged on the door with his crutch to save time.

Both Loristan and Lazarus came to answer.

The Rat leaned against the door gasping.

"He's found!  He's all right!" he panted.  "Some one had locked him in
a house and left him.  They've sent for the keys. I'm going back.
Brandon Terrace, No. 10."

Loristan and Lazarus exchanged glances.  Both of them were at the
moment as pale as The Rat.

"Help him into the house," said Loristan to Lazarus.  "He must stay
here and rest.  We will go."  The Rat knew it was an order.

He did not like it, but he obeyed.

"This is a bad sign, Master," said Lazarus, as they went out together.

"It is a very bad one," answered Loristan.

"God of the Right, defend us!" Lazarus groaned.

"Amen!" said Loristan.  "Amen!"

The group had become a small crowd by the time they reached Brandon
Terrace.  Marco had not found it easy to leave the place because he was
being questioned.  Neither the policeman nor the agent's clerk seemed
willing to relinquish the idea that he could give them some information
about the absconding pair.

The entrance of Loristan produced its usual effect.  The agent's clerk
lifted his hat, and the policeman stood straight and made salute.
Neither of them realized that the tall man's clothes were worn and
threadbare.  They felt only that a personage was before them, and that
it was not possible to question his air of absolute and serene
authority.  He laid his hand on Marco's shoulder and held it there as
he spoke.  When Marco looked up at him and felt the closeness of his
touch, it seemed as if it were an embrace--as if he had caught him to
his breast.

"My boy knew nothing of these people," he said.  "That I can guarantee.
He had seen neither of them before.  His entering the house was the
result of no boyish trick.  He has been shut up in this place for
nearly twenty-four hours and has had no food.  I must take him home.
This is my address."  He handed the young man a card.

Then they went home together, and all the way to Philibert  Place
Loristan's firm hand held closely to his boy's shoulder as if he could
not endure to let him go.  But on the way they said very little.

"Father," Marco said, rather hoarsely, when they first got away from
the house in the terrace, "I can't talk well in the street. For one
thing, I am so glad to be with you again.  It seemed as if--it might
turn out badly."

"Beloved one," Loristan said the words in their own Samavian, "until
you are fed and at rest, you shall not talk at all."

Afterward, when he was himself again and was allowed to tell his
strange story, Marco found that both his father and Lazarus had at once
had suspicions when he had not returned.  They knew no ordinary event
could have kept him.  They were sure that he must have been detained
against his will, and they were also sure that, if he had been so
detained, it could only have been for reasons they could guess at.

"This was the card that she gave me," Marco said, and he handed it to
Loristan.  "She said you would remember the name." Loristan looked at
the lettering with an ironic half-smile.

"I never heard it before," he replied.  "She would not send me a name I
knew.  Probably I have never seen either of them.  But I know the work
they do.  They are spies of the Maranovitch, and suspect that I know
something of the Lost Prince.  They believed they could terrify you
into saying things which would be a clue. Men and women of their class
will use desperate means to gain their end."

"Might they--have left me as they threatened?" Marco asked him.

"They would scarcely have dared, I think.  Too great a hue and cry
would have been raised by the discovery of such a crime.  Too many
detectives would have been set at work to track them."

But the look in his father's eyes as he spoke, and the pressure of the
hand he stretched out to touch him, made Marco's heart thrill.  He had
won a new love and trust from his father.  When they sat together and
talked that night, they were closer to each other's souls than they had
ever been before.

They sat in the firelight, Marco upon the worn hearth-rug, and they
talked about Samavia--about the war and its heart-rending struggles,
and about how they might end.

"Do you think that some time we might be exiles no longer?" the boy
said wistfully.  "Do you think we might go there together--and see
it--you and I, Father?"

There was a silence for a while.  Loristan looked into the sinking bed
of red coal.

"For years--for years I have made for my soul that image," he said
slowly.  "When I think of my friend on the side of the Himalayan
Mountains, I say, 'The Thought which Thought the World may give us that
also!'"



XVIII

"CITIES AND FACES"

The hours of Marco's unexplained absence had been terrible to Loristan
and to Lazarus.  They had reason for fears which it was not possible
for them to express.  As the night drew on, the fears took stronger
form.  They forgot the existence of The Rat, who sat biting his nails
in the bedroom, afraid to go out lest he might lose the chance of being
given some errand to do but also afraid to show himself lest he should
seem in the way.

"I'll stay upstairs," he had said to Lazarus.  "If you just whistle,
I'll come."

The anguish he passed through as the day went by and Lazarus went out
and came in and he himself received no orders, could  not have been
expressed in any ordinary words.  He writhed in his chair, he bit his
nails to the quick, he wrought himself into a frenzy of misery and
terror by recalling one by one all the crimes his knowledge of London
police-courts supplied him with. He was doing nothing, yet he dare not
leave his post.  It was his post after all, though they had not given
it to him.  He must do something.

In the middle of the night Loristan opened the door of the back
sitting-room, because he knew he must at least go upstairs and throw
himself upon his bed even if he could not sleep.

He started back as the door opened.  The Rat was sitting huddled on the
floor near it with his back against the wall.  He had a piece of paper
in his hand and his twisted face was a weird thing to see.

"Why are you here?" Loristan asked.

"I've been here three hours, sir.  I knew you'd have to come out
sometime and I thought you'd let me speak to you.  Will you--will you?"

"Come into the room," said Loristan.  "I will listen to anything you
want to say.  What have you been drawing on that paper?" as The Rat got
up in the wonderful way he had taught himself.  The paper was covered
with lines which showed it to be another of his plans.

"Please look at it," he begged.  "I daren't go out lest you might want
to send me somewhere.  I daren't sit doing nothing.  I began
remembering and thinking things out.  I put down all the streets and
squares he MIGHT have walked through on his way home. I've not missed
one.  If you'll let me start out and walk through every one of them and
talk to the policemen on the beat and look at the houses--and think out
things and work at them--I'll not miss an inch--I'll not miss a brick
or a flagstone--I'll--"  His voice had a hard sound but it shook, and
he himself shook.

Loristan touched his arm gently.

"You are a good comrade," he said.  "It is well for us that you are
here.  You have thought of a good thing."

"May I go now?" said The Rat.

"This moment, if you are ready," was the answer.  The Rat swung himself
to the door.

Loristan said to him a thing which was like the sudden lighting of a
great light in the very center of his being.

"You are one of us.  Now that I know you are doing this I may even
sleep.  You are one of us."  And it was because he was following this
plan that The Rat had turned into Brandon Terrace and heard the
Samavian song ringing out from the locked basement of Number 10.

"Yes, he is one of us," Loristan said, when he told this part of the
story to Marco as they sat by the fire.  "I had not been sure before.
I wanted to be very sure.  Last night I saw into the depths of him and
KNEW.  He may be trusted."

From that day The Rat held a new place.  Lazarus himself, strangely
enough, did not resent his holding it.  The boy was allowed to be near
Loristan as he had never dared to hope to be near.  It was not merely
that he was allowed to serve him in many ways, but he was taken into
the intimacy which had before enclosed only the three.  Loristan talked
to him as he talked to Marco, drawing him within the circle which held
so much that was comprehended without speech.  The Rat knew that he was
being trained and observed and he realized it with exaltation.  His
idol had said that he was "one of them" and he was watching and putting
him to tests so that he might find out how much he was one of them.
And he was doing it for some grave reason of his own.  This thought
possessed The Rat's whole mind.  Perhaps he was wondering if he should
find out that he was to be trusted, as a rock is to be trusted.  That
he should even think that perhaps he might find that he was like a
rock, was inspiration enough.

"Sir," he said one night when they were alone together, because The Rat
had been copying a road-map.  His voice was very low--"do you think
that--sometime--you could trust me as you trust Marco?  Could it ever
be like that--ever?"

"The time has come," and Loristan's voice was almost as low as his own,
though strong and deep feeling underlay its quiet--"the time has come
when I can trust you with Marco--to be his companion--to care for him,
to stand by his side at any moment. And Marco is--Marco is my son."
That was enough to uplift The Rat to the skies.  But there was more to
follow.

"It may not be long before it may be his part to do work in which he
will need a comrade who can be trusted--as a rock can be trusted."

He had said the very words The Rat's own mind had given to him.

"A Rock!  A Rock!" the boy broke out.  "Let me show you, sir. Send me
with him for a servant.  The crutches are nothing. You've seen that
they're as good as legs, haven't you?  I've trained myself."

"I know, I know, dear lad."  Marco had told him all of it.  He gave him
a gracious smile which seemed as if it held a sort of fine secret.
"You shall go as his aide-de-camp.  It shall be part of the game."

He had always encouraged "the game," and during the last weeks had even
found time to help them in their plannings for the mysterious journey
of the Secret Two.  He had been so interested that once or twice he had
called on Lazarus as an old soldier and Samavian to give his opinions
of certain routes--and of the customs and habits of people in towns and
villages by the way. Here they would find simple pastoral folk who
danced, sang after their day's work, and who would tell all they knew;
here they would find those who served or feared the Maranovitch and who
would not talk at all.  In one place they would meet with hospitality,
in another with unfriendly suspicion of all strangers.  Through talk
and stories The Rat began to know the country almost as Marco knew it.
That was part of the game too--because it was always "the game," they
called it.  Another part was The Rat's training of his memory, and
bringing home his proofs of advance at night when he returned from his
walk and could describe, or recite, or roughly sketch all he had seen
in his passage from one place to another.  Marco's part was to recall
and sketch faces.  Loristan one night gave him a number of photographs
of people to commit to memory.  Under each face was written the name of
a place.

"Learn these faces," he said, "until you would know each one of them at
once wheresoever you met it.  Fix them upon your mind, so that it will
be impossible for you to forget them.  You must be able to sketch any
one of them and recall the city or town or neighborhood connected with
it."

Even this was still called "the game," but Marco began to know in his
secret heart that it was so much more, that his hand sometimes trembled
with excitement as he made his sketches over and over again.  To make
each one many times was the best way to imbed it in his memory.  The
Rat knew, too, though he had no reason for knowing, but mere instinct.
He used to lie awake in the night and think it over and remember what
Loristan had said of the time coming when Marco might need a comrade in
his work. What was his work to be?  It was to be something like "the
game."  And they were being prepared for it.  And though Marco often
lay awake on his bed when The Rat lay awake on his sofa, neither boy
spoke to the other of the thing his mind dwelt on. And Marco worked as
he had never worked before.  The game was very exciting when he could
prove his prowess.  The four gathered together at night in the back
sitting-room.  Lazarus was obliged to be with them because a second
judge was needed.  Loristan would mention the name of a place, perhaps
a street in Paris or a hotel in Vienna, and Marco would at once make a
rapid sketch of the face under whose photograph the name of the
locality had been written.  It was not long before he could begin his
sketch without more than a moment's hesitation.  And yet even when this
had become the case, they still played the game night after night.
There was a great hotel near the Place de la Concorde in Paris, of
which Marco felt he should never hear the name during all his life
without there starting up before his mental vision a tall woman with
fierce black eyes and a delicate high-bridged nose across which the
strong eyebrows almost met.  In Vienna there was a palace which would
always bring back at once a pale cold-faced man with a heavy blonde
lock which fell over his forehead.  A certain street in Munich meant a
stout genial old aristocrat with a sly smile; a village in Bavaria, a
peasant with a vacant and simple countenance.  A curled  and smoothed
man who looked like a hair-dresser brought up a place in an Austrian
mountain town.  He knew them all as he knew his own face and No. 7
Philibert Place.

But still night after night the game was played.

Then came a night when, out of a deep sleep, he was awakened by Lazarus
touching him.  He had so long been secretly ready to answer any call
that he sat up straight in bed at the first touch.

"Dress quickly and come down stairs," Lazarus said.  "The Prince is
here and wishes to speak with you."

Marco made no answer but got out of bed and began to slip on his
clothes.

Lazarus touched The Rat.

The Rat was as ready as Marco and sat upright as he had done.

"Come down with the young Master," he commanded.  "It is necessary that
you should be seen and spoken to."  And having given the order he went
away.

No one heard the shoeless feet of the two boys as they stole down the
stairs.

An elderly man in ordinary clothes, but with an unmistakable face, was
sitting quietly talking to Loristan who with a gesture called both
forward.

"The Prince has been much interested in what I have told him of your
game," he said in his lowest voice.  "He wishes to see you make your
sketches, Marco."

Marco looked very straight into the Prince's eyes which were fixed
intently on him as he made his bow.

"His Highness does me honor," he said, as his father might have said
it.  He went to the table at once and took from a drawer his pencils
and pieces of cardboard.

"I should know he was your son and a Samavian," the Prince remarked.

Then his keen and deep-set eyes turned themselves on the boy with the
crutches.

"This," said Loristan, "is the one who calls himself The Rat. He is one
of us."

The Rat saluted.

"Please tell him, sir," he whispered, "that the crutches don't matter."

"He has trained himself to an extraordinary activity," Loristan said.
"He can do anything."

The keen eyes were still taking The Rat in.

"They are an advantage," said the Prince at last.

Lazarus had nailed together a light, rough easel which Marco used in
making his sketches when the game was played.  Lazarus was standing in
state at the door, and he came forward, brought the easel from its
corner, and arranged the necessary drawing materials upon it.

Marco stood near it and waited the pleasure of his father and his
visitor.  They were speaking together in low tones and he waited
several minutes.  What The Rat noticed was what he had noticed
before--that the big boy could stand still in perfect ease and silence.
It was not necessary for him to say things or to ask questions--to look
at people as if he felt restless if they did not speak to or notice
him.  He did not seem to require notice, and The Rat felt vaguely that,
young as he was, this very freedom from any anxiety to be looked at or
addressed made him somehow look like a great gentleman.

Loristan and the Prince advanced to where he stood.

"L'Hotel de Marigny," Loristan said.

Marco began to sketch rapidly.  He began the portrait of the handsome
woman with the delicate high-bridged nose and the black brows which
almost met.  As he did it, the Prince drew nearer and watched the work
over his shoulder.  It did not take very long and, when it was
finished, the inspector turned, and after giving Loristan a long and
strange look, nodded twice.

"It is a remarkable thing," he said.  "In that rough sketch she is not
to be mistaken."
