and trouble. Now I have success and money and power, all that would
have kept her alive and happy, and it is too late. She died for lack of
love and care, nursing and cherishing, and I can never forget it. All
that has come to me seems now and then so useless, since I cannot share
it with her!"

This was a new Mr. Aladdin, and Rebecca's heart gave a throb of
sympathy and comprehension. This explained the tired look in his eyes,
the look that peeped out now and then, under all his gay speech and
laughter.

"I'm so glad I know," she said, "and so glad I could see her just as
she was when she tied that white muslin hat under her chin and saw her
yellow curls and her sky-blue eyes in the glass. Mustn't she have been
happy! I wish she could have been kept so, and had lived to see you
grow up strong and good. My mother is always sad and busy, but once
when she looked at John I heard her say, 'He makes up for everything.'
That's what your mother would have thought about you if she had lived,
and perhaps she does as it is."

"You are a comforting little person, Rebecca," said Adam, rising from
his chair.

As Rebecca rose, the tears still trembling on her lashes, he looked at
her suddenly as with new vision.

"Good-by!" he said, taking her slim brown hands in his, adding, as if
he saw her for the first time, "Why, little Rose-Red-Snow-White is
making way for a new girl! Burning the midnight oil and doing four
years' work in three is supposed to dull the eye and blanch the cheek,
yet Rebecca's eyes are bright and she has a rosy color! Her long braids
are looped one on the other so that they make a black letter U behind,
and they are tied with grand bows at the top! She is so tall that she
reaches almost to my shoulder. This will never do in the world! How
will Mr. Aladdin get on without his comforting little friend! He
doesn't like grown-up young ladies in long trains and wonderful fine
clothes; they frighten and bore him!"

"Oh, Mr. Aladdin!" cried Rebecca eagerly, taking his jest quite
seriously; "I am not fifteen yet, and it will be three years before I'm
a young lady; please don't give me up until you have to!"

"I won't; I promise you that," said Adam. "Rebecca," he continued,
after a moment's pause, "who is that young girl with a lot of pretty
red hair and very citified manners? She escorted me down the hill; do
you know whom I mean?"

"It must be Huldah Meserve; she is from Riverboro."

Adam put a finger under Rebecca's chin and looked into her eyes; eyes
as soft, as clear, as unconscious, and childlike as they had been when
she was ten. He remembered the other pair of challenging blue ones that
had darted coquettish glances through half-dropped lids, shot arrowy
beams from under archly lifted brows, and said gravely, "Don't form
yourself on her, Rebecca; clover blossoms that grow in the fields
beside Sunnybrook mustn't be tied in the same bouquet with gaudy
sunflowers; they are too sweet and fragrant and wholesome."



XXIII

THE HILL DIFFICULTY

The first happy year at Wareham, with its widened sky-line, its larger
vision, its greater opportunity, was over and gone. Rebecca had studied
during the summer vacation, and had passed, on her return in the
autumn, certain examinations which would enable her, if she carried out
the same programme the next season, to complete the course in three
instead of four years. She came off with no flying colors,--that would
have been impossible in consideration of her inadequate training; but
she did wonderfully well in some of the required subjects, and so
brilliantly in others that the average was respectable. She would never
have been a remarkable scholar under any circumstances, perhaps, and
she was easily out-stripped in mathematics and the natural sciences by
a dozen girls, but in some inexplicable way she became, as the months
went on, the foremost figure in the school. When she had entirely
forgotten the facts which would enable her to answer a question fully
and conclusively, she commonly had some original theory to expound; it
was not always correct, but it was generally unique and sometimes
amusing. She was only fair in Latin or French grammar, but when it came
to translation, her freedom, her choice of words, and her sympathetic
understanding of the spirit of the text made her the delight of her
teachers and the despair of her rivals.

"She can be perfectly ignorant of a subject," said Miss Maxwell to Adam
Ladd, "but entirely intelligent the moment she has a clue. Most of the
other girls are full of information and as stupid as sheep."

Rebecca's gifts had not been discovered save by the few, during the
first year, when she was adjusting herself quietly to the situation.
She was distinctly one of the poorer girls; she had no fine dresses to
attract attention, no visitors, no friends in the town. She had more
study hours, and less time, therefore, for the companionship of other
girls, gladly as she would have welcomed the gayety of that side of
school life. Still, water will find its own level in some way, and by
the spring of the second year she had naturally settled into the same
sort of leadership which had been hers in the smaller community of
Riverboro. She was unanimously elected assistant editor of the Wareham
School Pilot, being the first girl to assume that enviable, though
somewhat arduous and thankless position, and when her maiden number
went to the Cobbs, uncle Jerry and aunt Sarah could hardly eat or sleep
for pride.

"She'll always get votes," said Huldah Meserve, when discussing the
election, "for whether she knows anything or not, she looks as if she
did, and whether she's capable of filling an office or not, she looks
as if she was. I only wish I was tall and dark and had the gift of
making people believe I was great things, like Rebecca Randall. There's
one thing: though the boys call her handsome, you notice they don't
trouble her with much attention."

It was a fact that Rebecca's attitude towards the opposite sex was
still somewhat indifferent and oblivious, even for fifteen and a half!
No one could look at her and doubt that she had potentialities of
attraction latent within her somewhere, but that side of her nature was
happily biding its time. A human being is capable only of a certain
amount of activity at a given moment, and it will inevitably satisfy
first its most pressing needs, its most ardent desires, its chief
ambitions. Rebecca was full of small anxieties and fears, for matters
were not going well at the brick house and were anything but hopeful at
the home farm. She was overbusy and overtaxed, and her thoughts were
naturally drawn towards the difficult problems of daily living.

It had seemed to her during the autumn and winter of that year as if
her aunt Miranda had never been, save at the very first, so censorious
and so fault-finding. One Saturday Rebecca ran upstairs and, bursting
into a flood of tears, exclaimed, "Aunt Jane, it seems as if I never
could stand her continual scoldings. Nothing I can do suits aunt
Miranda; she's just said it will take me my whole life to get the
Randall out of me, and I'm not convinced that I want it all out, so
there we are!"

Aunt Jane, never demonstrative, cried with Rebecca as she attempted to
soothe her.

"You must be patient," she said, wiping first her own eyes and then
Rebecca's. "I haven't told you, for it isn't fair you should be
troubled when you're studying so hard, but your aunt Miranda isn't
well. One Monday morning about a month ago, she had a kind of faint
spell; it wasn't bad, but the doctor is afraid it was a shock, and if
so, it's the beginning of the end. Seems to me she's failing right
along, and that's what makes her so fretful and easy vexed. She has
other troubles too, that you don't know anything about, and if you're
not kind to your aunt Miranda now, child, you'll be dreadful sorry some
time."

All the temper faded from Rebecca's face, and she stopped crying to say
penitently, "Oh! the poor dear thing! I won't mind a bit what she says
now. She's just asked me for some milk toast and I was dreading to take
it to her, but this will make everything different. Don't worry yet,
aunt Jane, for perhaps it won't be as bad as you think."

So when she carried the toast to her aunt a little later, it was in the
best gilt-edged china bowl, with a fringed napkin on the tray and a
sprig of geranium lying across the salt cellar.

"Now, aunt Miranda," she said cheerily, "I expect you to smack your
lips and say this is good; it's not Randall, but Sawyer milk toast."

"You've tried all kinds on me, one time an' another," Miranda answered.
"This tastes real kind o' good; but I wish you hadn't wasted that nice
geranium."

"You can't tell what's wasted," said Rebecca philosophically; "perhaps
that geranium has been hoping this long time it could brighten
somebody's supper, so don't disappoint it by making believe you don't
like it. I've seen geraniums cry,--in the very early morning!"

The mysterious trouble to which Jane had alluded was a very real one,
but it was held in profound secrecy. Twenty-five hundred dollars of the
small Sawyer property had been invested in the business of a friend of
their father's, and had returned them a regular annual income of a
hundred dollars. The family friend had been dead for some five years,
but his son had succeeded to his interests and all went on as formerly.
Suddenly there came a letter saying that the firm had gone into
bankruptcy, that the business had been completely wrecked, and that the
Sawyer money had been swept away with everything else.

The loss of one hundred dollars a year is a very trifling matter, but
it made all the difference between comfort and self-denial to the two
old spinsters Their manner of life had been so rigid and careful that
it was difficult to economize any further, and the blow had fallen just
when it was most inconvenient, for Rebecca's school and boarding
expenses, small as they were, had to be paid promptly and in cash.

"Can we possibly go on doing it? Shan't we have to give up and tell her
why?" asked Jane tearfully of the elder sister.

"We have put our hand to the plough, and we can't turn back," answered
Miranda in her grimmest tone; "we've taken her away from her mother and
offered her an education, and we've got to keep our word. She's
Aurelia's only hope for years to come, to my way o' thinkin'. Hannah's
beau takes all her time 'n' thought, and when she gits a husband her
mother'll be out o' sight and out o' mind. John, instead of farmin',
thinks he must be a doctor,--as if folks wasn't gettin' unhealthy
enough these days, without turnin' out more young doctors to help 'em
into their graves. No, Jane; we'll skimp 'n' do without, 'n' plan to
git along on our interest money somehow, but we won't break into our
principal, whatever happens."

"Breaking into the principal" was, in the minds of most thrifty New
England women, a sin only second to arson, theft, or murder; and,
though the rule was occasionally carried too far for common sense,--as
in this case, where two elderly women of sixty might reasonably have
drawn something from their little hoard in time of special need,--it
doubtless wrought more of good than evil in the community.

Rebecca, who knew nothing of their business affairs, merely saw her
aunts grow more and more saving, pinching here and there, cutting off
this and that relentlessly. Less meat and fish were bought; the woman
who had lately been coming two days a week for washing, ironing, and
scrubbing was dismissed; the old bonnets of the season before were
brushed up and retrimmed; there were no drives to Moderation or trips
to Portland. Economy was carried to its very extreme; but though
Miranda was well-nigh as gloomy and uncompromising in her manner and
conversation as a woman could well be, she at least never twitted her
niece of being a burden; so Rebecca's share of the Sawyers' misfortunes
consisted only in wearing her old dresses, hats, and jackets, without
any apparent hope of a change.

There was, however, no concealing the state of things at Sunnybrook,
where chapters of accidents had unfolded themselves in a sort of serial
story that had run through the year. The potato crop had failed; there
were no apples to speak of; the hay had been poor; Aurelia had turns of
dizziness in her head; Mark had broken his ankle. As this was his
fourth offense, Miranda inquired how many bones there were in the human
body, "so 't they'd know when Mark got through breakin' 'em." The time
for paying the interest on the mortgage, that incubus that had crushed
all the joy out of the Randall household, had come and gone, and there
was no possibility, for the first time in fourteen years, of paying the
required forty-eight dollars. The only bright spot in the horizon was
Hannah's engagement to Will Melville,--a young farmer whose land joined
Sunnybrook, who had a good house, was alone in the world, and his own
master. Hannah was so satisfied with her own unexpectedly radiant
prospects that she hardly realized her mother's anxieties; for there
are natures which flourish, in adversity, and deteriorate when exposed
to sudden prosperity. She had made a visit of a week at the brick
house; and Miranda's impression, conveyed in privacy to Jane, was that
Hannah was close as the bark of a tree, and consid'able selfish too;
that when she'd clim' as fur as she could in the world, she'd kick the
ladder out from under her, everlastin' quick; that, on being sounded as
to her ability to be of use to the younger children in the future, she
said she guessed she'd done her share a'ready, and she wan't goin' to
burden Will with her poor relations. "She's Susan Randall through and
through!" ejaculated Miranda. "I was glad to see her face turned
towards Temperance. If that mortgage is ever cleared from the farm, 't
won't be Hannah that'll do it; it'll be Rebecca or me!"



XXIV

ALADDIN RUBS HIS LAMP

"Your esteemed contribution entitled Wareham Wildflowers has been
accepted for The Pilot, Miss Perkins," said Rebecca, entering the room
where Emma Jane was darning the firm's stockings. "I stayed to tea with
Miss Maxwell, but came home early to tell you."

"You are joking, Becky!" faltered Emma Jane, looking up from her work.

"Not a bit; the senior editor read it and thought it highly
instructive; it appears in the next issue."

"Not in the same number with your poem about the golden gates that
close behind us when we leave school?"--and Emma Jane held her breath
as she awaited the reply.

"Even so, Miss Perkins."

"Rebecca," said Emma Jane, with the nearest approach to tragedy that
her nature would permit, "I don't know as I shall be able to bear it,
and if anything happens to me, I ask you solemnly to bury that number
of The Pilot with me."

Rebecca did not seem to think this the expression of an exaggerated
state of feeling, inasmuch as she replied, "I know; that's just the way
it seemed to me at first, and even now, whenever I'm alone and take out
the Pilot back numbers to read over my contributions, I almost burst
with pleasure; and it's not that they are good either, for they look
worse to me every time I read them."

"If you would only live with me in some little house when we get
older," mused Emma Jane, as with her darning needle poised in air she
regarded the opposite wall dreamily, "I would do the housework and
cooking, and copy all your poems and stories, and take them to the
post-office, and you needn't do anything but write. It would be
perfectly elergant!"

"I'd like nothing better, if I hadn't promised to keep house for John,"
replied Rebecca.

"He won't have a house for a good many years, will he?"

"No," sighed Rebecca ruefully, flinging herself down by the table and
resting her head on her hand. "Not unless we can contrive to pay off
that detestable mortgage. The day grows farther off instead of nearer
now that we haven't paid the interest this year."

She pulled a piece of paper towards her, and scribbling idly on it read
aloud in a moment or two:--

  "Will you pay a little faster?" said the mortgage to the farm;
       "I confess I'm very tired of this place."
  "The weariness is mutual," Rebecca Randall cried;
       "I would I'd never gazed upon your face!"

"A note has a 'face,'" observed Emma Jane, who was gifted in
arithmetic. "I didn't know that a mortgage had."

"Our mortgage has," said Rebecca revengefully. "I should know him if I
met him in the dark. Wait and I'll draw him for you. It will be good
for you to know how he looks, and then when you have a husband and
seven children, you won't allow him to come anywhere within a mile of
your farm."

The sketch when completed was of a sort to be shunned by a timid person
on the verge of slumber. There was a tiny house on the right, and a
weeping family gathered in front of it. The mortgage was depicted as a
cross between a fiend and an ogre, and held an axe uplifted in his red
right hand. A figure with streaming black locks was staying the blow,
and this, Rebecca explained complacently, was intended as a likeness of
herself, though she was rather vague as to the method she should use in
attaining her end.

"He's terrible," said Emma Jane, "but awfully wizened and small."

"It's only a twelve hundred dollar mortgage," said Rebecca, "and that's
called a small one. John saw a man once that was mortgaged for twelve
thousand."

"Shall you be a writer or an editor?" asked Emma Jane presently, as if
one had only to choose and the thing were done.

"I shall have to do what turns up first, I suppose."

"Why not go out as a missionary to Syria, as the Burches are always
coaxing you to? The Board would pay your expenses."

"I can't make up my mind to be a missionary," Rebecca answered. "I'm
not good enough in the first place, and I don't 'feel a call,' as Mr.
Burch says you must. I would like to do something for somebody and make
things move, somewhere, but I don't want to go thousands of miles away
teaching people how to live when I haven't learned myself. It isn't as
if the heathen really needed me; I'm sure they'll come out all right in
the end."

"I can't see how; if all the people who ought to go out to save them
stay at home as we do," argued Emma Jane.

"Why, whatever God is, and wherever He is, He must always be there,
ready and waiting. He can't move about and miss people. It may take the
heathen a little longer to find Him, but God will make allowances, of
course. He knows if they live in such hot climates it must make them
lazy and slow; and the parrots and tigers and snakes and bread-fruit
trees distract their minds; and having no books, they can't think as
well; but they'll find God somehow, some time."

"What if they die first?" asked Emma Jane.

"Oh, well, they can't be blamed for that; they don't die on purpose,"
said Rebecca, with a comfortable theology.


In these days Adam Ladd sometimes went to Temperance on business
connected with the proposed branch of the railroad familiarly known as
the "York and Yank 'em," and while there he gained an inkling of
Sunnybrook affairs. The building of the new road was not yet a
certainty, and there was a difference of opinion as to the best route
from Temperance to Plumville. In one event the way would lead directly
through Sunnybrook, from corner to corner, and Mrs. Randall would be
compensated; in the other, her interests would not be affected either
for good or ill, save as all land in the immediate neighborhood might
rise a little in value.

Coming from Temperance to Wareham one day, Adam had a long walk and
talk with Rebecca, whom he thought looking pale and thin, though she
was holding bravely to her self-imposed hours of work. She was wearing
a black cashmere dress that had been her aunt Jane's second best. We
are familiar with the heroine of romance whose foot is so exquisitely
shaped that the coarsest shoe cannot conceal its perfections, and one
always cherishes a doubt of the statement; yet it is true that
Rebecca's peculiar and individual charm seemed wholly independent of
accessories. The lines of her figure, the rare coloring of skin and
hair and eyes, triumphed over shabby clothing, though, had the
advantage of artistic apparel been given her, the little world of
Wareham would probably at once have dubbed her a beauty. The long black
braids were now disposed after a quaint fashion of her own. They were
crossed behind, carried up to the front, and crossed again, the
tapering ends finally brought down and hidden in the thicker part at
the neck. Then a purely feminine touch was given to the hair that waved
back from the face,--a touch that rescued little crests and wavelets
from bondage and set them free to take a new color in the sun.

Adam Ladd looked at her in a way that made her put her hands over her
face and laugh through them shyly as she said: "I know what you are
thinking, Mr. Aladdin,--that my dress is an inch longer than last year,
and my hair different; but I'm not nearly a young lady yet; truly I'm
not. Sixteen is a month off still, and you promised not to give me up
till my dress trails. If you don't like me to grow old, why don't you
grow young? Then we can meet in the halfway house and have nice times.
Now that I think about it," she continued, "that's just what you've
been doing all along. When you bought the soap, I thought you were
grandfather Sawyer's age; when you danced with me at the flag-raising,
you seemed like my father; but when you showed me your mother's
picture, I felt as if you were my John, because I was so sorry for you."

"That will do very well," smiled Adam; "unless you go so swiftly that
you become my grandmother before I really need one. You are studying
too hard, Miss Rebecca Rowena!"

"Just a little," she confessed. "But vacation comes soon, you know."

"And are you going to have a good rest and try to recover your dimples?
They are really worth preserving."

A shadow crept over Rebecca's face and her eyes suffused. "Don't be
kind, Mr. Aladdin, I can't bear it;--it's--it's not one of my dimply
days!" and she ran in at the seminary gate, and disappeared with a
farewell wave of her hand.
