as a man who makes no mistakes."

"Then, if the mine proves of value, you'll have gotten a cheap piece of
property after all."

"Yes, indeed."

"Won't those swindlers be mad when they hear of this!"

"Most likely, my lad; but they have nobody to blame but themselves. I
bought their shares in good faith, while they sold them in bad faith."

"Is your title perfectly clear now?"

"Absolutely so."

"Then I hope the mine proves to be worth millions."

"Thank you, my boy."

"I'd like to own a mine like that myself."

"Would you? Well, perhaps you will some day."

"It's not likely. A hotel boy doesn't earn enough to buy a mine," and
our hero laughed.

"If I find the mine worth working and open up for business, how would
you like to go out there and work for me?"

"I'd like it very much, Mr. Vane."

"Very well, I'll bear that in mind," answered the possessor of the
mining shares.

"Why don't you buy up the rest of the mining shares first?"

"I am going to do so--if I can locate them."

"Perhaps the owners will sell cheap."

"I shall explain the situation and make a fair offer. I do not believe
in any underhand work," was the ready answer.

"Then you are not like some men I have met," said Joe, and told about
Ulmer Montgomery and his so-called antiquities.

"That man will never amount to anything, Joe--mark my words. He will
always be a hanger-on as we call them, in the business world."

"I believe you, sir."

"Honesty pays in the long run. A rogue may make something at the start
but sooner or later he will find himself exposed."

Maurice Vane remained at the hotel for a week and then left to go to
Chicago on business. From that point he was going to Montana as soon as
the weather permitted.

After that several weeks slipped by without anything unusual happening.
During those days Joe fell in again with Felix Gussing.

"We are going to move to Riverside," said the dude, if such he may still
be called, although he was a good business man. "I have rented a house
there--the old Martin place--and if you ever come to the town you must
visit us."

"Thank you, I will," answered our hero.

"My wife thinks a great deal of you and you must stop at the house
during your stay at Riverside," went on Felix Gussing.

A change came for Joe much quicker than was anticipated. One night, late
in the winter, he was just preparing to retire, when he smelt smoke.
He ran out of his room and to an air shaft and saw the smoke coming up
thickly.

"The hotel must be on fire!" he thought. "If it is, I'll have to notify
the management!"

He jumped rather than ran down the several stairways to the hotel
office. Here he told the proprietor and the cashier. An examination was
made and the fire was located in the laundry.

"Go and awaken all the guests," said Mr. Drew, and Joe ran off to do
as bidden. Other boys did the same, and before long the guests were
hurrying through the hallways and down the elevators and stairs.

By this time the smoke was coming thickly, and presently a sheet of
flame burst through at the rear of the hotel. The fire alarm had been
given and several engines and a hook-and-ladder company dashed on the
scene.

"Are your guests all out?" demanded a police officer.

"I believe so," answered Mr. Drew.

"I'm going to take a look around," said Joe, and darted upstairs once
more.

He visited room after room, only to find them empty. From the rear of
the hotel came the crackling of flames and down in the street the fire
engines were pounding away, sending their streams of water into the
structure.

On the third floor of the building our hero came across an old lady who
was rather queer in her mind. The lady was also lame and walked with
great difficulty.

"Oh, Joseph! what is the trouble?" she cried.

"The hotel is on fire, Mrs. Dalley. Come, let me help you out."

"On fire! Oh, I must save my canary!" And the old lady started back for
her room.

"You haven't got time, Mrs. Dalley. Come with me."

"I cannot let my dear Dick perish!" answered the old lady, firmly.

Joe looked along the hall and saw that the flames were moving swiftly
toward the room the old lady had occupied. To enter the apartment would
be highly dangerous.

"You simply can't go after the bird, madam," he said. "Come with me!"

"My bird! my bird!" screamed Mrs. Dalley, and tried to run, or rather
hobble, towards her room, despite the smoke that was now rolling over
her head.

"You must come with me!" exclaimed Joe, and drew her back. She tried to
struggle and then, without warning, fainted in his arms.

The burden was a heavy one, but our hero did not shirk the task before
him. He half dragged and half carried the unconscious lady to the
nearest staircase and almost fell to the bottom.

The smoke on the second floor was so thick he could scarcely see.

But he kept on and went down another flight and reached the office. He
could hardly breathe and the tears were running down both cheeks.

"Hullo there, boy!" came the call of a fireman, as he appeared through
the smoke. "Better get out of here!"

"Help me with this lady," answered Joe.

"A lady! Oh, all right!" And in a moment more the fireman had Mrs.
Dalley over his shoulder and was carrying her out. Joe came close
behind. The lady was taken to a nearby drug store where she speedily
revived.

By the prompt efforts of the fire department only a small portion of the
hotel was burnt. But the whole building was water-soaked, and all of the
boarders had to move out, and then the place was closed up.

"Out of a place once again," thought our hero, rather dismally. "What's
to do next?"

This was not an easy question to answer. He looked around for another
opening but, finding none, resolved to pay a visit to Riverside.

"I can call on the Gussings, and on Ned," he thought. "I know all of
them will be glad to see me. And maybe Mr. Mallison will be wanting to
make some arrangements for next summer. I suppose he'll run the boats as
usual."

"Going to leave Philadelphia, eh?" said Frank. "Do you intend to come
back, Joe?"

"I don't know yet, Frank."

"Well, I wish you luck."

"I wish you the same."

"If you go to work for Mallison this summer, maybe you can get me a job
too."

"I'll remember that," answered our hero.

His preparations were soon made, and then he boarded a train for
Riverside. He did not dream of the surprises in store for him.



CHAPTER XXIV.


THE BLUE BOX AT LAST.


After calling on the Gussings and being invited to remain there for
several days, Joe took himself to Ned Talmadge's residence.

Ned was very glad to see him and had to give all the particulars of
another trip he had made to the West.

"I had a splendid time," said Ned. "I wish you had been along."

"Then you like the West, Ned?"

"Indeed I do,--better than the East."

"Perhaps I'll go West some day," went on our hero, and told his friend
of what Maurice Vane had said.

"I saw some mines while I was out there," continued Ned. "I went to the
very bottom of one mine. I can tell you I felt a bit shivery, being so
far underground."

"I suppose the miners get used to it."

"It would be a joke on those swindlers if that mine should prove of
value," went on Ned, after a pause.

"I hope, for Mr. Vane's sake, it does prove valuable."

"Now your hotel is burnt out, what are you going to do?"

"I haven't made up my mind, Ned. Perhaps I'll come back here, to work
for Mr. Mallison."

"Then we'll be together again next summer. That will suit me."

The boys had a good time together and then Joe said he would like to pay
a visit to his old home on the mountain side. Ned readily consented to
go along.

"But I don't imagine you'll find much of the old cabin left," he added.

There was still a little ice in the lake, but they rowed to the spot
without great difficulty and made their way to the tumble-down cabin.

It was not an inviting sight and it made Joe feel sober to view the
locality.

"Joe, you never heard anything of that blue box, did you?" asked Ned,
after several minutes of silence.

"No."

"It ought to be somewhere in this vicinity."

"It's gone, and that is all there is to it," said our hero, and gave a
long sigh.

The boys tramped around the vicinity for a good half hour, and then sat
down on a hollow log to eat a lunch they had brought along.

"Let us build a fire beside the old log," said Ned. "It will help to
keep us warm."

Joe was willing and the two boys soon had some leaves and twigs
gathered, and placed some good-sized branches on top to make the blaze
last. Then they began to eat and to warm themselves at the same time.

"This log would make a good hiding-place for some wild animal," remarked
Ned. "Can anything be inside?"

"It's not likely, Ned. The smoke would drive out any living creature."

"I'm going to get a stick and poke into the log."

Both boys procured sticks and began to poke at the log. Presently they
felt something move and a half-dazed snake came into view.

"There's your animal, Ned!" exclaimed Joe.

"Oh, a snake! Keep him away!" roared Ned, badly frightened.

"He can't hurt you--he is too stiff from the cold," answered our hero,
and quickly dispatched the snake with a stone.

"Do you suppose there are any more in the tree?" asked the rich boy,
still keeping at a distance.

"More than likely. I'll poke around with my stick and see."

"Be careful!"

"I am not afraid."

Joe's stick had something of a crotch on the end of it and with this he
began to rake among the dead leaves that had blown into the hollow log.
He brought out a great quantity but no more snakes showed themselves.

"I reckon he was the only one after all, Ned."

"The log is burning!" said Ned, an instant later. "See, the smoke is
coming out of the hollow."

"My stick is caught," said Joe, pulling hard on something. "I
guess--well, I declare!"

He gave a jerk, and from the hollow came a square object, covered with
smoking dirt and leaves.

"What is it?"

"Unless I am mistaken, it is a tin box."

"Oh, Joe, the blue box?"

Joe did not answer for he was brushing the smoking leaves and dirt from
the object. As he cleaned it off he caught sight of some blue paint. On
one end the box was badly charred from the fire.

"It's the blue box, sure enough," said Joe.

"And we came close to burning it up!" groaned Ned. "Oh, Joe, I am so
sorry!"

"It's not your fault, Ned, I was as much to blame as anybody. But who
would look for the box out here?"

"Perhaps some wild animal carried it off."

"That may be."

Joe had the box cleaned off by this time. It was still hot at one end
and smoking. He tried to pull it open, but found it locked.

"The contents will burn up before I can open it!" cried Joe.

He did not know what to do, and in desperation began to pry at the box
with his stick and his jackknife. Then the box broke open, scattering
some half-burnt papers in all directions.

The boys picked the papers up and also a small bag of buckskin. When Joe
opened the bag he found it contained exactly a hundred dollars in gold.

"That's a nice find," said Ned. "Anyway, you are a hundred dollars
richer than you were."

Joe began to peruse the half-burnt documents but could make little or
nothing out of them. He saw his own name and also that of a certain
William A. Bodley, and an estate in Iowa was mentioned.

"What do you find, Joe?"

"I can't tell you, Ned. The papers are too badly burnt."

"Let me look at them."

Our hero was willing, and the two boys spent an hour in trying to
decipher the documents.

"It is certainly a puzzle," said the rich boy. "Why not let my father
look over them?"

Joe was willing, and after wrapping up the documents with care, and
pocketing the hundred dollars in gold, Joe led the way back to the
boat. The wreck of the blue box was left behind, for it was rusty and
worthless.

That evening Mr. Talmadge, Ned and Joe spent two hours in going over the
documents and trying to supply the parts which had been rotted or burnt
away. They were only successful in part.

"I do not wish to say much about this, Joe," said Ned's father. "But
it would seem from these papers that you are the son of one William
A. Bodley, who at one time owned a farm in Iowa, in the township of
Millville. Did you ever hear Hiram Bodley speak of this?"

"Never."

"We might write to the authorities at Millville and see what they have
to say."

"I wish you'd do it. They may pay more attention to you than to a boy."

"I'll write at once."

"Father, hadn't Joe better stay here until we get a reply?" put in Ned.
