of gray dawn they looked over the sides of the sofas and discovered rolling
plains dotted with queer villages, where the houses, instead of being dome-
shaped--as they all are in the Land of Oz--had slanting roofs that rose
to a peak



211
in the center. Odd looking animals were also moving about upon the open
plains, and the country was unfamiliar to both the Tin Woodman and the
Scarecrow, who had formerly visited Glinda the Good's domain and knew it
well.

"We are lost!" said the Scarecrow, dolefully. "The Gump must have carried us
entirely out of the Land of Oz and over the sandy deserts and into the
terrible outside world that Dorothy told us about."

"We must get back," exclaimed the Tin Woodman, earnestly. "we must get back
as soon as possible!"

"Turn around!" cried Tip to the Gump. "turn as quickly as you can!"

"If I do I shall upset," answered the Gump. "I'm not at all used to flying,
and the best plan would be for me to alight in some place, and then I can
turn around and take a fresh start."

Just then, however, there seemed to be no stopping-place that would answer
their purpose. They flew over a village so big that the Woggle-Bug declared
it was a city. and then they came to a range of high mountains with many
deep gorges and steep cliffs showing plainly.

"Now is our chance to stop," said the boy, finding



212
they were very close to the mountain tops. Then he turned to the Gump and
commanded: "Stop at the first level place you see!"

"Very well," answered the Gump, and settled down upon a table of rock that
stood between two cliffs.

But not being experienced in such matters, the Gump did not judge his speed
correctly; and instead of coming to a stop upon the flat rock he missed it
by half the width of his body, breaking off both his right wings against the
sharp edge of the rock and then tumbling over and over down the cliff.

Our friends held on to the sofas as long as they could, but when the Gump
caught on a proJecting rock the Thing stopped suddenly--bottom side up--and
all were immediately dumped out.

By good fortune they fell only a few feet; for underneath them was a monster
nest, built by a colony of Jackdaws in a hollow ledge of rock; so none of
them--not even the Pumpkinhead--was injured by the fall. For Jack found
his precious head resting on the soft breast of the Scarecrow, which made an
excellent cushion; and Tip fell on a mass of leaves and papers, which saved
him from injury. The Woggle-Bug had bumped his round head against



213               Full page line-art drawing.

               ALL WERE IMMEDIATELY DUMPED OUT.



214
the Saw-Horse, but without causing him more than a moment's inconvenience.

The Tin Woodman was at first much alarmed; but finding he had escaped
without even a scratch upon his beautiful nickle-plate he at once regained
his accustomed cheerfulness and turned to address his comrades.

"Our Journey had ended rather suddenly," said he; "and we cannot justly
blame our friend the Gump for our accident, because he did the best he could
under the circumstances. But how we are ever to escape from this nest I must
leave to someone with better brains than I possess."

Here he gazed at the Scarecrow; who crawled to the edge of the nest and
looked over. Below them was a sheer precipice several hundred feet in depth.
Above them was a smooth cliff unbroken save by the point of rock where the
wrecked body of the Gump still hung suspended from the end of one of the
sofas. There really seemed to be no means of escape, and as they realized
their helpless plight the little band of adventurers gave way to their
bewilderment.

"This is a worse prison than the palace," sadly remarked the Woggle-Bug.

"I wish we had stayed there," moaned Jack.



215
"I'm afraid the mountain air isn't good for pumpkins."

"It won't be when the Jackdaws come back," growled the Saw-Horse, which lay
waving its legs in a vain endeavor to get upon its feet again. "Jackdaws are
especially fond of pumpkins."

"Do you think the birds will come here?" asked Jack, much distressed.

"Of course they will," said Tip; "for this is their nest. And there must be
hundreds of them," he continued, "for see what a lot of things they have
brought here!"

Indeed, the nest was half filled with a most curious collection of small
articles for which the birds could have no use, but which the thieving
Jackdaws had stolen during many years from the homes of men. And as the nest
was safely hidden where no human being could reach it, this lost property
would never be recovered.

The Woggle-Bug, searching among the rubbish--for the Jackdaws stole
useless things as well as valuable ones--turned up with his foot a
beautiful diamond necklace. This was so greatly admired by the Tin Woodman
that the Woggle-Bug presented it to him with a graceful speech, after which
the Woodman hung it around his neck with much pride,



216               Full page line-art drawing.

               TURNED UP A BEAUTIFUL DIAMOND NECKLACE.



217
rejoicing exceedingly when the big diamonds glittered in the sun's rays.

But now they heard a great jabbering and flopping of wings, and as the sound
grew nearer to them Tip exclaimed:

"The Jackdaws are coming! And if they find us here they will surely kill us
in their anger."

"I was afraid of this!" moaned the Pumpkinhead. "My time has come!"

"And mine, also!" said the Woggle-Bug; "for Jackdaws are the greatest
enemies of my race."

The others were not at all afraid; but the Scarecrow at once decided to save
those of the party who were liable to be injured by the angry birds. So he
commanded Tip to take off Jack's head and lie down with it in the bottom of
the nest, and when this was done he ordered the Woggle-Bug to lie beside
Tip. Nick Chopper, who knew from past experience Just what to do, then took
the Scarecrow to pieces (all except his head) and scattered the straw over
Tip and the Woggle-Bug, completely covering their bodies.

Hardly had this been accomplished when the flock of Jackdaws reached them.
Perceiving the intruders in their nest the birds flew down upon them with
screams of rage.



218               Full page line-art drawing.



219               Dr. Nikidik's Famous Wishing Pills


The Tin Woodman was usually a peaceful man, but when occasion required he
could fight as fiercely as a Roman gladiator. So, when the Jackdaws nearly
knocked him down in their rush of wings, and their sharp beaks and claws
threatened to damage his brilliant plating, the Woodman picked up his axe
and made it whirl swiftly around his head.

But although many were beaten off in this way, the birds were so numerous
and so brave that they continued the attack as furiously as before. Some of
them pecked at the eyes of the Gump, which hung over the nest in a helpless
condition; but the Gump's eyes were of glass and could not be injured.
Others of the Jackdaws rushed at the Saw-Horse; but that animal, being still
upon his back, kicked out so viciously with his wooden legs that he beat off
as many assailants as did the Woodman's axe.



220

Finding themselves thus opposed, the birds fell upon the Scarecrow's straw,
which lay at the center of the nest, covering Tip and the Woggle-Bug and
Jack's pumpkin head, and began tearing it away and flying off with it, only
to let it drop, straw by straw into the great gulf beneath.

The Scarecrow's head, noting with dismay this wanton destruction of his
interior, cried to the Tin Woodman to save him; and that good friend
responded with renewed energy. His axe fairly flashed among the Jackdaws,
and fortunately the Gump began wildly waving the two wings remaining on the
left side of its body. The flutter of these great wings filled the Jackdaws
with terror, and when the Gump by its exertions freed itself from the peg of
rock on which it hung, and sank flopping into the nest, the alarm of the
birds knew no bounds and they fled screaming over the mountains.

When the last foe had disappeared, Tip crawled from under the sofas and
assisted the Woggle-Bug to follow him.

"We are saved!" shouted the boy, delightedly.

"We are, indeed!" responded the Educated Insect, fairly hugging the stiff
head of the Gump in his joy. "and we owe it all to the flopping of the
Thing, and the good axe of the Woodman!"



221

"If I am saved, get me out of here!" called Jack; whose head was still
beneath the sofas; and Tip managed to roll the pumpkin out and place it upon
its neck again. He also set the Saw-Horse upright, and said to it:

"We owe you many thanks for the gallant fight you made."

"I really think we have escaped very nicely," remarked the Tin Woodman, in a
tone of pride.

"Not so!" exclaimed a hollow voice.

At this they all turned in surprise to look at the Scarecrow's head, which
lay at the back of the nest.

"I am completely ruined!" declared the Scarecrow, as he noted their
astonishment. "For where is the straw that stuffs my body?"

The awful question startled them all. They gazed around the nest with
horror, for not a vestige of straw remained. The



222
Jackdaws had stolen it to the last wisp and flung it all into the chasm that
yawned for hundreds of feet beneath the nest.

"My poor, poor friend!" said the Tin Woodman, taking up the Scarecrow's head
and caressing it tenderly; "whoever could imagine you would come to this
untimely end?"

"I did it to save my friends," returned the head; "and I am glad that I
perished in so noble and unselfish a manner."

"But why are you all so despondent?" inquired the Woggle-Bug. "The
Scarecrow's clothing is still safe."

"Yes," answered the Tin Woodman; "but our friend's clothes are useless
without stuffing."

"Why not stuff him with money?" asked Tip.

"Money!" they all cried, in an amazed chorus.

"To be sure," said the boy. "In the bottom of the nest are thousands of
dollar bills--and two-dollar bills--and five-dollar bills--and tens,
and twenties, and fifties. There are enough of them to stuff a dozen
Scarecrows. Why not use the money?"

The Tin Woodman began to turn over the rubbish with the handle of his axe;
and, sure enough, what they had first thought only worthless papers were
found to be all bills of various denominations,



223
which the mischievous Jackdaws had for years been engaged in stealing from
the villages and cities they visited.

There was an immense fortune lying in that inaccessible nest; and Tip's
suggestion was, with the Scarecrow's consent, quickly acted upon.

They selected all the newest and cleanest bills and assorted them into
various piles. The Scarecrow's left leg and boot were stuffed with five-
dollar bills; his right leg was stuffed with ten-dollar bills, and his body
so closely filled with fifties, one-hundreds and one-thousands that he could
scarcely button his jacket with comfort.

"You are now" said the Woggle-Bug, impressively, when the task had been
completed, "the most valuable member of our party; and as you

               Line-Art Drawing



224
are among faithful friends there is little danger of your being spent."

"Thank you," returned the Scarecrow, gratefully. "I feel like a new man; and
although at first glance I might be mistaken for a Safety Deposit Vault, I
beg you to remember that my Brains are still composed of the same old
material. And these are the possessions that have always made me a person to
be depended upon in an emergency."

"Well, the emergency is here," observed Tip; "and unless your brains help us
out of it we shall be compelled to pass the remainder of our lives in this
nest."

"How about these wishing pills?" enquired the Scarecrow, taking the box from
his jacket pocket. "Can't we use them to escape?"

"Not unless we can count seventeen by twos," answered the Tin Woodman. "But
our friend the Woggle-Bug claims to be highly educated, so he ought easily
to figure out how that can be done."

"It isn't a question of education," returned the Insect; "it's merely a
question of mathematics. I've seen the professor work lots of sums on the
blackboard, and he claimed anything could be done with x's and y's and a's,
and such things, by mixing them up with plenty of plusses and minuses and
equals, and so forth. But he never said anything, so far as



225
I can remember, about counting up to the odd number of seventeen by the even
numbers of twos."

"Stop! stop!" cried the Pumpkinhead. "You're making my head ache."

"And mine," added the Scarecrow. "Your mathematics seem to me very like a
bottle of mixed pickles the more you fish for what you want the less chance
you have of getting it. I am certain that if the thing can be accomplished
at all, it is in a very simple manner."

"Yes," said Tip. "old Mombi couldn't use x's and minuses, for she never went
to school."

"Why not start counting at a half of one?" asked the Saw-Horse, abruptly.
"Then anyone can count up to seventeen by twos very easily."

They looked at each other in surprise, for the Saw-Horse was considered the
most stupid of the entire party.

"You make me quite ashamed of myself," said the Scarecrow, bowing low to the
Saw-Horse.

"Nevertheless, the creature is right," declared the Woggle-Bug; for twice
one-half is one, and if you get to one it is easy to count from one up to
seventeen by twos."

"I wonder I didn't think of that myself," said the Pumpkinhead.



226

"I don't," returned the Scarecrow. "You're no wiser than the rest of us, are
you? But let us make a wish at once. Who will swallow the first pill?"

"Suppose you do it," suggested Tip.

"I can't," said the Scarecrow.

"Why not? You've a mouth, haven't you?" asked the boy.

"Yes; but my mouth is painted on, and there's no swallow connected with it,'
answered the Scarecrow. "In fact," he continued, looking from one to another
critically, "I believe the boy and the Woggle-Bug are the only ones in our
