'Push on, good horse, for we have no time to lose!' cried Petru; then he
shut up the box, and put it in his pocket.

They rushed on as fast as ghosts, as whirlwinds, as vampires when they
hunt at midnight, and how long they rode no man can tell, for the way is
far.

'Stop! I have some advice to give you,' said the horse at last.

'What is it?' asked Petru.

'You have known what it is to suffer cold; you will have to endure heat,
such as you have never dreamed of. Be as brave now as you were then. Let
no one tempt you to try to cool yourself, or evil will befall you.'

'Forwards!' answered Petru. 'Do not worry yourself. If I have escaped
without being frozen, there is no chance of my melting.'

'Why not? This is a heat that will melt the marrow in your bones--a heat
that is only to be felt in the kingdom of the Goddess of Thunder.'(3)

(3) In the German 'Donnerstag'--the day of the Thunder God, i.e.
Jupiter.

And it WAS hot. The very iron of the horse's shoes began to melt, but
Petru gave no heed. The sweat ran down his face, but he dried it with
his gauntlet. What heat could be he never knew before, and on the way,
not a stone's throw from the road, lay the most delicious valleys, full
of shady trees and bubbling streams. When Petru looked at them his heart
burned within him, and his mouth grew parched. And standing among the
flowers were lovely maidens who called to him in soft voices, till he
had to shut his eyes against their spells.

'Come, my hero, come and rest; the heat will kill you,' said they.

Petru shook his head and said nothing, for he had lost the power of
speech.

Long he rode in this awful state, how long none can tell. Suddenly the
heat seemed to become less, and, in the distance, he saw a little hut
on a hill. This was the dwelling of the Goddess of Thunder, and when he
drew rein at her door the goddess herself came out to meet him.

She welcomed him, and kindly invited him in, and bade him tell her all
his adventures. So Petru told her all that had happened to him, and why
he was there, and then took farewell of her, as he had no time to lose.
'For,' he said, 'who knows how far the Fairy of the Dawn may yet be?'

'Stay for one moment, for I have a word of advice to give you. You are
about to enter the kingdom of Venus;(4) go and tell her, as a message
from me, that I hope she will not tempt you to delay. On your way back,
come to me again, and I will give you something that may be of use to
you.'

(4) 'Vineri' is Friday, and also 'Venus.'

So Petru mounted his horse, and had hardly ridden three steps when he
found himself in a new country. Here it was neither hot nor cold, but
the air was warm and soft like spring, though the way ran through a
heath covered with sand and thistles.

'What can that be?' asked Petru, when he saw a long, long way off, at
the very end of the heath, something resembling a house.

'That is the house of the goddess Venus,' replied the horse, 'and if we
ride hard we may reach it before dark'; and he darted off like an
arrow, so that as twilight fell they found themselves nearing the house.
Petru's heart leaped at the sight, for all the way along he had been
followed by a crowd of shadowy figures who danced about him from right
to left, and from back to front, and Petru, though a brave man, felt now
and then a thrill of fear.

'They won't hurt you,' said the horse; 'they are just the daughters of
the whirlwind amusing themselves while they are waiting for the ogre of
the moon.'

Then he stopped in front of the house, and Petru jumped off and went to
the door.

'Do not be in such a hurry,' cried the horse. 'There are several things
I must tell you first. You cannot enter the house of the goddess Venus
like that. She is always watched and guarded by the whirlwind.'

'What am I to do then?'

'Take the copper wreath, and go with it to that little hill over
there. When you reach it, say to yourself, "Were there ever such lovely
maidens! such angels! such fairy souls!" Then hold the wreath high in
the air and cry, "Oh! if I knew whether any one would accept this wreath
from me... if I knew! if I knew!" and throw the wreath from you!'

'And why should I do all this?' said Petru.

'Ask no questions, but go and do it,' replied the horse. And Petru did.

Scarcely had he flung away the copper wreath than the whirlwind flung
himself upon it, and tore it in pieces.

Then Petru turned once more to the horse.

'Stop!' cried the horse again. 'I have other things to tell you.

Take the silver wreath and knock at the windows of the goddess Venus.
When she says, "Who is there?" answer that you have come on foot and
lost your way on the heath. She will then tell you to go your way back
again; but take care not to stir from the spot. Instead, be sure you say
to her, "No, indeed I shall do nothing of the sort, as from my childhood
I have heard stories of the beauty of the goddess Venus, and it was not
for nothing that I had shoes made of leather with soles of steel, and
have travelled for nine years and nine months, and have won in battle
the silver wreath, which I hope you may allow me to give you, and have
done and suffered everything to be where I now am." This is what you
must say. What happens after is your affair.'

Petru asked no more, but went towards the house.

By this time it was pitch dark, and there was only the ray of light
that streamed through the windows to guide him, and at the sound of his
footsteps two dogs began to bark loudly.

'Which of those dogs is barking? Is he tired of life?' asked the goddess
Venus.

'It is I, O goddess!' replied Petru, rather timidly. 'I have lost my way
on the heath, and do not know where I am to sleep this night.'

'Where did you leave your horse?' asked the goddess sharply.

Petru did not answer. He was not sure if he was to lie, or whether he
had better tell the truth.

'Go away, my son, there is no place for you here,' replied she, drawing
back from the window.

Then Petru repeated hastily what the horse had told him to say, and no
sooner had he done so than the goddess opened the window, and in gentle
tones she asked him:

'Let me see this wreath, my son,' and Petru held it out to her.

'Come into the house,' went on the goddess; 'do not fear the dogs, they
always know my will.' And so they did, for as the young man passed they
wagged their tails to him.

'Good evening,' said Petru as he entered the house, and, seating himself
near the fire, listened comfortably to whatever the goddess might choose
to talk about, which was for the most part the wickedness of men,
with whom she was evidently very angry. But Petru agreed with her in
everything, as he had been taught was only polite.

But was anybody ever so old as she! I do not know why Petru devoured her
so with his eyes, unless it was to count the wrinkles on her face; but
if so he would have had to live seven lives, and each life seven times
the length of an ordinary one, before he could have reckoned them up.

But Venus was joyful in her heart when she saw Petru's eyes fixed upon
her.

'Nothing was that is, and the world was not a world when I was born,'
said she. 'When I grew up and the world came into being, everyone
thought I was the most beautiful girl that ever was seen, though many
hated me for it. But every hundred years there came a wrinkle on my
face. And now I am old.' Then she went on to tell Petru that she was the
daughter of an emperor, and their nearest neighbour was the Fairy of the
Dawn, with whom she had a violent quarrel, and with that she broke out
into loud abuse of her.

Petru did not know what to do. He listened in silence for the most
part, but now and then he would say, 'Yes, yes, you must have been badly
treated,' just for politeness' sake; what more could he do?

'I will give you a task to perform, for you are brave, and will carry it
through,' continued Venus, when she had talked a long time, and both
of them were getting sleepy. 'Close to the Fairy's house is a well, and
whoever drinks from it will blossom again like a rose. Bring me a flagon
of it, and I will do anything to prove my gratitude. It is not easy! no
one knows that better than I do! The kingdom is guarded on every side by
wild beasts and horrible dragons; but I will tell you more about that,
and I also have something to give you.' Then she rose and lifted the lid
of an iron-bound chest, and took out of it a very tiny flute.

'Do you see this?' she asked. 'An old man gave it to me when I was
young: whoever listens to this flute goes to sleep, and nothing can wake
him. Take it and play on it as long as you remain in the kingdom of the
Fairy of the Dawn, and you will be safe.

At this, Petru told her that he had another task to fulfil at the well
of the Fairy of the Dawn, and Venus was still better pleased when she
heard his tale.

So Petru bade her good-night, put the flute in its case, and laid
himself down in the lowest chamber to sleep.

Before the dawn he was awake again, and his first care was to give to
each of his horses as much corn as he could eat, and then to lead them
to the well to water. Then he dressed himself and made ready to start.

'Stop,' cried Venus from her window, 'I have still a piece of advice
to give you. Leave one of your horses here, and only take three. Ride
slowly till you get to the fairy's kingdom, then dismount and go on
foot. When you return, see that all your three horses remain on the
road, while you walk. But above all beware never to look the Fairy
of the Dawn in the face, for she has eyes that will bewitch you, and
glances that will befool you.

She is hideous, more hideous than anything you can imagine, with owl's
eyes, foxy face, and cat's claws. Do you hear? do you hear? Be sure you
never look at her.'

Petru thanked her, and managed to get off at last.

Far, far away, where the heavens touch the earth, where the stars kiss
the flowers, a soft red light was seen, such as the sky sometimes has in
spring, only lovelier, more wonderful.

That light was behind the palace of the Fairy of the Dawn, and it took
Petru two days and nights through flowery meadows to reach it. And
besides, it was neither hot nor cold, bright nor dark, but something of
them all, and Petru did not find the way a step too long.

After some time Petru saw something white rise up out of the red of the
sky, and when he drew nearer he saw it was a castle, and so splendid
that his eyes were dazzled when they looked at it. He did not know there
was such a beautiful castle in the world.

But no time was to be lost, so he shook himself, jumped down from his
horse, and, leaving him on the dewy grass, began to play on his flute as
he walked along.

He had hardly gone many steps when he stumbled over a huge giant, who
had been lulled to sleep by the music. This was one of the guards of the
castle! As he lay there on his back, he seemed so big that in spite of
Petru's haste he stopped to measure him.

The further went Petru, the more strange and terrible were the sights he
saw--lions, tigers, dragons with seven heads, all stretched out in the
sun fast asleep. It is needless to say what the dragons were like, for
nowadays everyone knows, and dragons are not things to joke about. Petru
ran through them like the wind. Was it haste or fear that spurred him
on?

At last he came to a river, but let nobody think for a moment that this
river was like other rivers? Instead of water, there flowed milk,
and the bottom was of precious stones and pearls, instead of sand
and pebbles. And it ran neither fast nor slow, but both fast and slow
together. And the river flowed round the castle, and on its banks slept
lions with iron teeth and claws; and beyond were gardens such as only
the Fairy of the Dawn can have, and on the flowers slept a fairy! All
this saw Petru from the other side.

But how was he to get over? To be sure there was a bridge, but, even if
it had not been guarded by sleeping lions, it was plainly not meant for
man to walk on. Who could tell what it was made of? It looked like soft
little woolly clouds!

So he stood thinking what was to be done, for get across he must.

After a while, he determined to take the risk, and strode back to the
sleeping giant. 'Wake up, my brave man!' he cried, giving him a shake.

The giant woke and stretched out his hand to pick up Petru, just as we
should catch a fly. But Petru played on his flute, and the giant fell
back again. Petru tried this three times, and when he was satisfied that
the giant was really in his power he took out a handkerchief, bound the
two little fingers of the giant together, drew his sword, and cried for
the fourth time, 'Wake up, my brave man.'

When the giant saw the trick which had been played on him he said to
Petru. 'Do you call this a fair fight? Fight according to rules, if you
really are a hero!'

'I will by-and-by, but first I want to ask you a question! Will you
swear that you will carry me over the river if I fight honourably with
you?' And the giant swore.

When his hands were freed, the giant flung himself upon Petru, hoping to
crush him by his weight. But he had met his match. It was not yesterday,
nor the day before, that Petru had fought his first battle, and he bore
himself bravely.

For three days and three nights the battle raged, and sometimes one had
the upper hand, and sometimes the other, till at length they both lay
struggling on the ground, but Petru was on top, with the point of his
sword at the giant's throat.

'Let me go! let me go!' shrieked he. 'I own that I am beaten!'

'Will you take me over the river?' asked Petru.

'I will,' gasped the giant.

'What shall I do to you if you break your word?'

'Kill me, any way you like! But let me live now.'

'Very well,' said Petru, and he bound the giant's left hand to his right
foot, tied one handkerchief round his mouth to prevent him crying out,
and another round his eyes, and led him to the river.

Once they had reached the bank he stretched one leg over to the other
side, and, catching up Petru in the palm of his hand, set him down on
the further shore.

'That is all right,' said Petru. Then he played a few notes on his
flute, and the giant went to sleep again. Even the fairies who had been
bathing a little lower down heard the music and fell asleep among the
flowers on the bank. Petru saw them as he passed, and thought, 'If they
are so beautiful, why should the Fairy of the Dawn be so ugly?' But he
dared not linger, and pushed on.

And now he was in the wonderful gardens, which seemed more wonderful
still than they had done from afar. But Petru could see no faded
flowers, nor any birds, as he hastened through them to the castle. No
one was there to bar his way, for all were asleep. Even the leaves had
ceased to move.

He passed through the courtyard, and entered the castle itself.

What he beheld there need not be told, for all the world knows that the
palace of the Fairy of the Dawn is no ordinary place. Gold and precious
stones were as common as wood with us, and the stables where the horses
of the sun were kept were more splendid than the palace of the greatest
emperor in the world.

Petru went up the stairs and walked quickly through eight-and-forty
rooms, hung with silken stuffs, and all empty. In the forty-ninth he
found the Fairy of the Dawn herself.

In the middle of this room, which was as large as a church, Petru saw
the celebrated well that he had come so far to seek. It was a well
just like other wells, and it seemed strange that the Fairy of the Dawn
should have it in her own chamber; yet anyone could tell it had been
there for hundreds of years. And by the well slept the Fairy of the
Dawn--the Fairy of the Dawn--herself!

And as Petru looked at her the magic flute dropped by his side, and he
held his breath.

Near the well was a table, on which stood bread made with does' milk,
and a flagon of wine. It was the bread of strength and the wine of
youth, and Petru longed for them. He looked once at the bread and once
at the wine, and then at the Fairy of the Dawn, still sleeping on her
silken cushions.

As he looked a mist came over his senses. The fairy opened her eyes
slowly and looked at Petru, who lost his head still further; but he just
managed to remember his flute, and a few notes of it sent the Fairy
to sleep again, and he kissed her thrice. Then he stooped and laid his
golden wreath upon her forehead, ate a piece of the bread and drank a
cupful of the wine of youth, and this he did three times over. Then he
filled a flask with water from the well, and vanished swiftly.

As he passed through the garden it seemed quite different from what
it was before. The flowers were lovelier, the streams ran quicker, the
sunbeams shone brighter, and the fairies seemed gayer. And all this had
been caused by the three kisses Petru had given the Fairy of the Dawn.

He passed everything safely by, and was soon seated in his saddle again.
Faster than the wind, faster than thought, faster than longing, faster
than hatred rode Petru. At length he dismounted, and, leaving his horses
at the roadside, went on foot to the house of Venus.

The goddess Venus knew that he was coming, and went to meet him, bearing
with her white bread and red wine.

'Welcome back, my prince,' said she.

'Good day, and many thanks,' replied the young man, holding out the
flask containing the magic water. She received it with joy, and after a
short rest Petru set forth, for he had no time to lose.

He stopped a few minutes, as he had promised, with the Goddess of
Thunder, and was taking a hasty farewell of her, when she called him
back.

'Stay, I have a warning to give you,' said she. 'Beware of your life;
make friends with no man; do not ride fast, or let the water go out of
your hand; believe no one, and flee flattering tongues. Go, and take
care, for the way is long, the world is bad, and you hold something very
precious. But I will give you this cloth to help you. It is not much
to look at, but it is enchanted, and whoever carries it will never be
struck by lightning, pierced by a lance, or smitten with a sword, and
the arrows will glance off his body.'
