
'And pray, pretty prophetess,' he said, attempting to chuck her under
the chin, 'what have I got to repent of?'

'That you know best yourself,' said the girl.  'You have but to look
into your books or your heart.'

'Can you tell me, then, what I have to repent of?' said the groom of
the chambers.  'That you know best yourself,' said the girl once more.
'The person who told me to tell you said the servants of this house had
to repent of thieving, and lying, and unkindness, and drinking; and
they will be made to repent of them one way, if they don't do it of
themselves another.'

Then arose a great hubbub; for by this time all the servants in the
house were gathered about her, and all talked together, in towering
indignation.

'Thieving, indeed!' cried one.  'A pretty word in a house where
everything is left lying about in a shameless way, tempting poor
innocent girls!  A house where nobody cares for anything, or has the
least respect to the value of property!'

'I suppose you envy me this brooch of mine,' said another.  'There was
just a half sheet of note paper about it, not a scrap more, in a drawer
that's always open in the writing table in the study! What sort of a
place is that for a jewel?  Can you call it stealing to take a thing
from such a place as that?  Nobody cared a straw about it.  It might as
well have been in the dust hole!  If it had been locked up--then, to be
sure!'

'Drinking!' said the chief porter, with a husky laugh.  'And who
wouldn't drink when he had a chance?  Or who would repent it, except
that the drink was gone?  Tell me that, Miss Innocence.'

'Lying!' said a great, coarse footman.  'I suppose you mean when I told
you yesterday you were a pretty girl when you didn't pout? Lying,
indeed!  Tell us something worth repenting of!  Lying is the way of
Gwyntystorm.  You should have heard Jabez lying to the cook last night!
He wanted a sweetbread for his pup, and pretended it was for the
princess!  Ha! ha! ha!'

'Unkindness!  I wonder who's unkind!  Going and listening to any
stranger against her fellow servants, and then bringing back his wicked
words to trouble them!' said the oldest and worst of the housemaids.
'One of ourselves, too!  Come, you hypocrite!  This is all an invention
of yours and your young man's, to take your revenge of us because we
found you out in a lie last night.  Tell true now: wasn't it the same
that stole the loaf and the pie that sent you with the impudent
message?'

As she said this, she stepped up to the housemaid and gave her, instead
of time to answer, a box on the ear that almost threw her down; and
whoever could get at her began to push and bustle and pinch and punch
her.

'You invite your fate,' she said quietly.

They fell furiously upon her, drove her from the hall with kicks and
blows, hustled her along the passage, and threw her down the stair to
the wine cellar, then locked the door at the top of it, and went back
to their breakfast.

In the meantime the king and the princess had had their bread and wine,
and the princess, with Curdie's help, had made the room as tidy as she
could--they were terribly neglected by the servants. And now Curdie set
himself to interest and amuse the king, and prevent him from thinking
too much, in order that he might the sooner think the better.
Presently, at His Majesty's request, he began from the beginning, and
told everything he could recall of his life, about his father and
mother and their cottage on the mountain, of the inside of the mountain
and the work there, about the goblins and his adventures with them.

When he came to finding the princess and her nurse overtaken by the
twilight on the mountain, Irene took up her share of the tale, and told
all about herself to that point, and then Curdie took it up again; and
so they went on, each fitting in the part that the other did not know,
thus keeping the hoop of the story running straight; and the king
listened with wondering and delighted ears, astonished to find what he
could so ill comprehend, yet fitting so well together from the lips of
two narrators.

At last, with the mission given him by the wonderful princess and his
consequent adventures, Curdie brought up the whole tale to the present
moment.  Then a silence fell, and Irene and Curdie thought the king was
asleep.  But he was far from it; he was thinking about many things.
After a long pause he said:

'Now at last, MY children, I am compelled to believe many things I
could not and do not yet understand--things I used to hear, and
sometimes see, as often as I visited my mother's home.  Once, for
instance, I heard my mother say to her father--speaking of me--"He is a
good, honest boy, but he will be an old man before he understands"; and
my grandfather answered, "Keep up your heart, child: my mother will
look after him."  I thought often of their words, and the many strange
things besides I both heard and saw in that house; but by degrees,
because I could not understand them, I gave up thinking of them.  And
indeed I had almost forgotten them, when you, my child, talking that
day about the Queen Irene and her pigeons, and what you had seen in her
garret, brought them all back to my mind in a vague mass.  But now they
keep coming back to me, one by one, every one for itself; and I shall
just hold my peace, and lie here quite still, and think about them all
till I get well again.'

What he meant they could not quite understand, but they saw plainly
that already he was better.

'Put away my crown,' he said.  'I am tired of seeing it, and have no
more any fear of its safety.'  They put it away together, withdrew from
the bedside, and left him in peace.



CHAPTER 25

The Avengers

There was nothing now to be dreaded from Dr Kelman, but it made Curdie
anxious, as the evening drew near, to think that not a soul belonging
to the court had been to visit the king, or ask how he did, that day.
He feared, in some shape or other, a more determined assault.  He had
provided himself a place in the room, to which he might retreat upon
approach, and whence he could watch; but not once had he had to betake
himself to it.

Towards night the king fell asleep.  Curdie thought more and more
uneasily of the moment when he must again leave them for a little
while.  Deeper and deeper fell the shadows.  No one came to light the
lamp.  The princess drew her chair close to Curdie: she would rather it
were not so dark, she said.  She was afraid of something--she could not
tell what; nor could she give any reason for her fear but that all was
so dreadfully still.

When it had been dark about an hour, Curdie thought Lina might have
returned; and reflected that the sooner he went the less danger was
there of any assault while he was away.  There was more risk of his own
presence being discovered, no doubt, but things were now drawing to a
crisis, and it must be run.  So, telling the princess to lock all the
doors of the bedchamber, and let no one in, he took his mattock, and
with here a run, and there a halt under cover, gained the door at the
head of the cellar stair in safety.  To his surprise he found it
locked, and the key was gone.  There was no time for deliberation.  He
felt where the lock was, and dealt it a tremendous blow with his
mattock.  It needed but a second to dash the door open.  Someone laid a
hand on his arm.

'Who is it?' said Curdie.

'I told you they wouldn't believe me, sir,' said the housemaid.  'I
have been here all day.'

He took her hand, and said, 'You are a good, brave girl.  Now come with
me, lest your enemies imprison you again.'

He took her to the cellar, locked the door, lighted a bit of candle,
gave her a little wine, told her to wait there till he came, and went
out the back way.

Swiftly he swung himself up into the dungeon.  Lina had done her part.
The place was swarming with creatures--animal forms wilder and more
grotesque than ever ramped in nightmare dream.  Close by the hole,
waiting his coming, her green eyes piercing the gulf below, Lina had
but just laid herself down when he appeared.  All about the vault and
up the slope of the rubbish heap lay and stood and squatted the
forty-nine whose friendship Lina had conquered in the wood.  They all
came crowding about Curdie.

He must get them into the cellar as quickly as ever he could.  But when
he looked at the size of some of them, he feared it would be a long
business to enlarge the hole sufficiently to let them through.  At it
he rushed, hitting vigorously at the edge with his mattock.  At the
very first blow came a splash from the water beneath, but ere he could
heave a third, a creature like a tapir, only that the grasping point of
its proboscis was hard as the steel of Curdie's hammer, pushed him
gently aside, making room for another creature, with a head like a
great club, which it began banging upon the floor with terrible force
and noise.  After about a minute of this battery, the tapir came up
again, shoved Clubhead aside, and putting its own head into the hole
began gnawing at the sides of it with the finger of its nose, in such a
fashion that the fragments fell in a continuous gravelly shower into
the water.  In a few minutes the opening was large enough for the
biggest creature among them to get through it.

Next came the difficulty of letting them down: some were quite light,
but the half of them were too heavy for the rope, not to say for his
arms.  The creatures themselves seemed to be puzzling where or how they
were to go.  One after another of them came up, looked down through the
hole, and drew back.  Curdie thought if he let Lina down, perhaps that
would suggest something; possibly they did not see the opening on the
other side.  He did so, and Lina stood lighting up the entrance of the
passage with her gleaming eyes.

One by one the creatures looked down again, and one by one they drew
back, each standing aside to glance at the next, as if to say, Now you
have a look.  At last it came to the turn of the serpent with the long
body, the four short legs behind, and the little wings before.  No
sooner had he poked his head through than he poked it farther
through--and farther, and farther yet, until there was little more than
his legs left in the dungeon.  By that time he had got his head and
neck well into the passage beside Lina.  Then his legs gave a great
waddle and spring, and he tumbled himself, far as there was betwixt
them, heels over head into the passage.

'That is all very well for you, Mr Legserpent!' thought Curdie to
himself; 'but what is to be done with the rest?'  He had hardly time to
think it, however, before the creature's head appeared again through
the floor.  He caught hold of the bar of iron to which Curdie's rope
was tied, and settling it securely across the narrowest part of the
irregular opening, held fast to it with his teeth.  It was plain to
Curdie, from the universal hardness among them, that they must all, at
one time or another, have been creatures of the mines.

He saw at once what this one was after.  The beast had planted his feet
firmly upon the floor of the passage, and stretched his long body up
and across the chasm to serve as a bridge for the rest. Curdie mounted
instantly upon his neck, threw his arms round him as far as they would
go, and slid down in ease and safety, the bridge just bending a little
as his weight glided over it.  But he thought some of the creatures
would try the legserpent's teeth.

One by one the oddities followed, and slid down in safety.  When they
seemed to be all landed, he counted them: there were but forty-eight.
Up the rope again he went, and found one which had been afraid to trust
himself to the bridge, and no wonder! for he had neither legs nor head
nor arms nor tail: he was just a round thing, about a foot in diameter,
with a nose and mouth and eyes on one side of the ball.  He had made
his journey by rolling as swiftly as the fleetest of them could run.
The back of the legserpent not being flat, he could not quite trust
himself to roll straight and not drop into the gulf.  Curdie took him
in his arms, and the moment he looked down through the hole, the bridge
made itself again, and he slid into the passage in safety, with
Ballbody in his bosom.

He ran first to the cellar to warn the girl not to be frightened at the
avengers of wickedness.  Then he called to Lina to bring in her friends.

One after another they came trooping in, till the cellar seemed full of
them.  The housemaid regarded them without fear.

'Sir,' she said, 'there is one of the pages I don't take to be a bad
fellow.'

'Then keep him near you,' said Curdie.  'And now can you show me a way
to the king's chamber not through the servants' hall?'

'There is a way through the chamber of the colonel of the guard,' she
answered, 'but he is ill, and in bed.'

'Take me that way,' said Curdie.

By many ups and downs and windings and turnings she brought him to a
dimly lighted room, where lay an elderly man asleep.  His arm was
outside the coverlid, and Curdie gave his hand a hurried grasp as he
went by.  His heart beat for joy, for he had found a good, honest,
human hand.

'I suppose that is why he is ill,' he said to himself.

It was now close upon suppertime, and when the girl stopped at the door
of the king's chamber, he told her to go and give the servants one
warning more.

'Say the messenger sent you,' he said.  'I will be with you very soon.'

The king was still asleep.  Curdie talked to the princess for a few
minutes, told her not to be frightened whatever noises she heard, only
to keep her door locked till he came, and left her.



CHAPTER 26

The Vengeance

By the time the girl reached the servants' hall they were seated at
supper.  A loud, confused exclamation arose when she entered.  No one
made room for her; all stared with unfriendly eyes.  A page, who
entered the next minute by another door, came to her side.

'Where do you come from, hussy?' shouted the butler, and knocked his
fist on the table with a loud clang.

He had gone to fetch wine, had found the stair door broken open and the
cellar door locked, and had turned and fled.  Among his fellows,
however, he had now regained what courage could be called his.

'From the cellar,' she replied.  'The messenger broke open the door,
and sent me to you again.'

'The messenger!  Pooh!  What messenger?'

'The same who sent me before to tell you to repent.'

'What!  Will you go fooling it still?  Haven't you had enough of it?'
cried the butler in a rage, and starting to his feet, drew near
threateningly.

'I must do as I am told,' said the girl.

'Then why don't you do as I tell you, and hold your tongue?' said the
butler.  'Who wants your preachments?  If anybody here has anything to
repent Of, isn't that enough--and more than enough for him--but you
must come bothering about, and stirring up, till not a drop of quiet
will settle inside him?  You come along with me, young woman; we'll see
if we can't find a lock somewhere in the house that'll hold you in!'

'Hands off, Mr Butler!' said the page, and stepped between.

'Oh, ho!' cried the butler, and pointed his fat finger at him. 'That's
you, is it, my fine fellow?  So it's you that's up to her tricks, is
it?'

The youth did not answer, only stood with flashing eyes fixed on him,
until, growing angrier and angrier, but not daring a step nearer, he
burst out with a rude but quavering authority:

'Leave the house, both of you!  Be off, or I'll have Mr Steward to talk
to you.  Threaten your masters, indeed!  Out of the house with you, and
show us the way you tell us of!'
