in it carefully both sorts of plums. Then he walked bravely on for many
days, having no food but the berries by the wayside, and was in great
danger from wild beasts and savage men. But he feared nothing, except
that his plums should decay, and this never happened.

At last he came to a civilised country, and with the sale of some jewels
that he had about him on the evening of his flight he took passage on
board a vessel for the Low Countries. So, at the end of a year and a
day, he arrived at the capital of the kingdom.


VIII

The next day he put on a false beard and the dress of a date merchant,
and, taking a little table, he placed himself before the door of the
church.

He spread carefully out on a fine white cloth his Mirabelle plums, which
looked for all the world as if they had been freshly gathered, and
when he saw the Princess coming out of church he began to call out in a
feigned voice: 'Fine plums! lovely plums!'

'How much are they?' said the Princess.

'Fifty crowns each.'

'Fifty crowns! But what is there so very precious about them? Do they
give one wit, or will they increase one's beauty?'

'They could not increase what is perfect already, fair Princess, but
still they might add something.'

Rolling stones gather no moss, but they sometimes gain polish; and the
months which John had spent in roaming about the world had not been
wasted. Such a neatly turned compliment flattered Ludovine.

'What will they add?' she smilingly asked.

'You will see, fair Princess, when you taste them. It will be a surprise
for you.'

Ludovine's curiosity was roused. She drew out the purse and shook out as
many little heaps of fifty crowns as there were plums in the basket. The
little soldier was seized with a wild desire to snatch the purse from
her and proclaim her a thief, but he managed to control himself.

His plums all sold, he shut up shop, took off his disguise, changed his
inn, and kept quiet, waiting to see what would happen.

No sooner had she reached her room than the Princess exclaimed, 'Now let
us see what these fine plums can add to my beauty,' and throwing off her
hood, she picked up a couple and ate them.

Imagine with what surprise and horror she felt all of a sudden that
something was growing out of her forehead. She flew to her mirror and
uttered a piercing cry.

'Horns! so that was what he promised me! Let someone find the
plum-seller at once and bring him to me! Let his nose and ears be cut
off! Let him be flayed alive, or burnt at a slow fire and his ashes
scattered to the winds! Oh, I shall die of shame and despair!'

Her women ran at the sound of her screams, and tried to wrench off the
horns, but it was of no use, and they only gave her a violent headache.

The King then sent round a herald to proclaim that he would give
the hand of the Princess to anyone who would rid her of her strange
ornaments. So all the doctors and sorcerers and surgeons in the Low
Countries and the neighbouring kingdoms thronged to the palace, each
with a remedy of his own. But it was all no good, and the Princess
suffered so much from their remedies that the King was obliged to
send out a second proclamation that anyone who undertook to cure the
Princess, and who failed to do it, should be hanged up to the nearest
tree.

But the prize was too great for any proclamation to put a stop to the
efforts of the crowd of suitors, and that year the orchards of the Low
Countries all bore a harvest of dead men.


IX

The King had given orders that they should seek high and low for the
plum-seller, but in spite of all their pains, he was nowhere to be
found.

When the little soldier discovered that their patience was worn out, he
pressed the juice of the green Queen Claude plums into a small phial,
bought a doctor's robe, put on a wig and spectacles, and presented
himself before the King of the Low Countries. He gave himself out as a
famous physician who had come from distant lands, and he promised that
he would cure the Princess if only he might be left alone with her.

'Another madman determined to be hanged,' said the King. 'Very well,
do as he asks; one should refuse nothing to a man with a rope round his
neck.'

As soon as the little soldier was in the presence of the Princess he
poured some drops of the liquid into a glass. The Princess had scarcely
tasted it, when the tip of the horns disappeared.

'They would have disappeared completely,' said the pretended doctor,
'if there did not exist something to counteract the effect. It is only
possible to cure people whose souls are as clean as the palm of my hand.
Are you sure you have not committed some little sin? Examine yourself
well.'

Ludovine had no need to think over it long, but she was torn in pieces
between the shame of a humiliating confession, and the desire to be
unhorned. At last she made answer with downcast eyes,

'I have stolen a leather purse from a little soldier.'

'Give it to me. The remedy will not act till I hold the purse in my
hands.'

It cost Ludovine a great pang to give up the purse, but she remembered
that riches would not benefit her if she was still to keep the horns.

With a sigh, she handed the purse to the doctor, who poured more of the
liquid into the glass, and when the Princess had drunk it, she found
that the horns had diminished by one half.

'You must really have another little sin on your conscience. Did you
steal nothing from this soldier but his purse?'

'I also stole from him his cloak.'

'Give it me.'

'Here it is.'

This time Ludovine thought to herself that when once the horns had
departed, she would call her attendants and take the things from the
doctor by force.

She was greatly pleased with this idea, when suddenly the pretended
physician wrapped himself in the cloak, flung away the wig and
spectacles, and showed to the traitress the face of the Little Soldier.

She stood before him dumb with fright.

'I might,' said John, 'have left you horned to the end of your days, but
I am a good fellow and I once loved you, and besides--you are too like
the devil to have any need of his horns.'


X

John had wished himself in the house of the Seagull. Now the Seagull was
seated at the window, mending her net, and from time to time her eyes
wandered to the sea as if she was expecting someone. At the noise made
by the little soldier, she looked up and blushed.

'So it is you!' she said. 'How did you get here?' And then she added in
a low voice, 'And have you married your Princess?'

Then John told her all his adventures, and when he had finished, he
restored to her the purse and the mantle.

'What can I do with them?' said she. 'You have proved to me that
happiness does not lie in the possession of treasures.'

'It lies in work and in the love of an honest woman,' replied the little
soldier, who noticed for the first time what pretty eyes she had. 'Dear
Seagull, will you have me for a husband?' and he held out his hand.

'Yes, I will,' answered the fisher maiden, blushing very red, 'but only
on condition that we seal up the purse and the mantle in the copper
vessel and throw them into the sea.'

And this they did.

Charles Deulin.





THE MAGIC SWAN



There were once upon a time three brothers, of whom the eldest was
called Jacob, the second Frederick, and the youngest Peter. This
youngest brother was made a regular butt of by the other two, and they
treated him shamefully. If anything went wrong with their affairs,
Peter had to bear the blame and put things right for them, and he had
to endure all this ill-treatment because he was weak and delicate and
couldn't defend himself against his stronger brothers. The poor creature
had a most trying life of it in every way, and day and night he pondered
how he could make it better. One day, when he was in the wood gathering
sticks and crying bitterly, a little old woman came up to him and asked
him what was the matter; and he told her all his troubles.

'Come, my good youth,' said the old dame, when he had finished his tale
of woe, 'isn't the world wide enough? Why don't you set out and try your
fortune somewhere else?'

Peter took her words to heart, and left his father's house early one
morning to try his fortune in the wide world, as the old woman had
advised him. But he felt very bitterly parting from the home where
he had been born, and where he had at least passed a short but happy
childhood, and sitting down on a hill he gazed once more fondly on his
native place.

Suddenly the little old woman stood before him, and, tapping him on the
shoulder, said, 'So far good, my boy; but what do you mean to do now?'

Peter was at a loss what to answer, for so far he had always thought
that fortune would drop into his mouth like a ripe cherry. The old
woman, who guessed his thoughts, laughed kindly and said, 'I'll tell you
what you must do, for I've taken a fancy to you, and I'm sure you won't
forget me when you've made your fortune.'

Peter promised faithfully he wouldn't, and the old woman continued:

'This evening at sunset go to yonder pear-tree which you see growing at
the cross roads. Underneath it you will find a man lying asleep, and a
beautiful large swan will be fastened to the tree close to him. You must
be careful not to waken the man, but you must unfasten the swan and take
it away with you. You will find that everyone will fall in love with
its beautiful plumage, and you must allow anyone who likes to pull out
a feather. But as soon as the swan feels as much as a finger on it, it
will scream out, and then you must say, "Swan, hold fast." Then the hand
of the person who has touched the bird will be held as in a vice, and
nothing will set it free, unless you touch it with this little stick
which I will make you a present of. When you have captured a whole lot
of people in this way, lead your train straight on with you; you will
come to a big town where a Princess lives who has never been known to
laugh. If you can only make her laugh your fortune is made; then I beg
you won't forget your old friend.'

Peter promised again that he wouldn't, and at sunset he went to the tree
the old woman had mentioned. The man lay there fast asleep, and a large
beautiful swan was fastened to the tree beside him by a red cord. Peter
loosed the bird, and led it away with him without disturbing the bird's
master.

He walked on with the swan for some time, and came at last to a
building-yard where some men were busily at work. They were all lost in
admiration of the bird's beautiful plumage, and one forward youth, who
was covered with clay from head to foot, called out, 'Oh, if I'd only
one of those feathers how happy I should be!'

'Pull one out then,' said Peter kindly, and the youth seized one from
the bird's tail; instantly the swan screamed, and Peter called out,
'Swan, hold fast,' and do what he could the poor youth couldn't get his
hand away. The more he howled the more the others laughed, till a girl
who had been washing clothes in the neighbouring stream hurried up to
see what was the matter. When she saw the poor boy fastened to the swan
she felt so sorry for him that she stretched out her hand to free him.
The bird screamed.

'Swan, hold fast,' called out Peter, and the girl was caught also.

When Peter had gone on for a bit with his captives, they met a chimney
sweep, who laughed loudly over the extraordinary troop, and asked the
girl what she was doing.

'Oh, dearest John,' replied the girl, 'give me your hand and set me free
from this cursed young man.'

'Most certainly I will, if that's all you want,' replied the sweep, and
gave the girl his hand. The bird screamed.

'Swan, hold fast,' said Peter, and the black man was added to their
number.

They soon came to a village where a fair was being held. A travelling
circus was giving a performance, and the clown was just doing his
tricks. He opened his eyes wide with amazement when he saw the
remarkable trio fastened on to the swan's tail.

'Have you gone raving mad, Blackie?' he asked as well as he could for
laughing.

'It's no laughing matter,' the sweep replied. 'This wench has got so
tight hold of me that I feel as if I were glued to her. Do set me free,
like a good clown, and I'll do you a good turn some day.'

Without a moment's hesitation the clown grasped the black outstretched
hand. The bird screamed.

'Swan, hold fast,' called out Peter, and the clown became the fourth of
the party.

Now in the front row of the spectators sat the respected and popular
Mayor of the village, who was much put out by what he considered nothing
but a foolish trick. So much annoyed was he that he seized the clown by
the hand and tried to tear him away, in order to hand him over to the
police.

Then the bird screamed, and Peter called out, 'Swan, hold fast,' and the
dignified Mayor shared the fate of his predecessors.

The Mayoress, a long thin stick of a woman, enraged at the insult done
to her husband, seized his free arm and tore at it with all her might,
with the only result that she too was forced to swell the procession.
After this no one else had any wish to join them.

Soon Peter saw the towers of the capital in front of him. Just before
entering it, a glittering carriage came out to meet him, in which was
seated a young lady as beautiful as the day, but with a very solemn and
serious expression. But no sooner had she perceived the motley crowd
fastened to the swan's tail than she burst into a loud fit of laughter,
in which she was joined by all her servants and ladies in waiting.

'The Princess has laughed at last,' they all cried with joy.

She stepped out of her carriage to look more closely at the wonderful
sight, and laughed again over the capers the poor captives cut. She
ordered her carriage to be turned round and drove slowly back into the
town, never taking her eyes off Peter and his procession.

When the King heard the news that his daughter had actually laughed, he
was more than delighted, and had Peter and his marvellous train brought
before him. He laughed himself when he saw them till the tears rolled
down his cheeks.

'My good friend,' he said to Peter, 'do you know what I promised the
person who succeeded in making the Princess laugh?'

'No, I don't,' said Peter.

'Then I'll tell you,' answered the King; 'a thousand gold crowns or a
piece of land. Which will you choose?'

Peter decided in favour of the land. Then he touched the youth, the
girl, the sweep, the clown, the Mayor, and the Mayoress with his little
stick, and they were all free again, and ran away home as if a fire were
burning behind them; and their flight, as you may imagine, gave rise to
renewed merriment.

Then the Princess felt moved to stroke the swan, at the same time
admiring its plumage. The bird screamed.

'Swan, hold fast,' called out Peter, and so he won the Princess for
his bride. But the swan flew up into the air, and vanished in the blue
horizon. Peter now received a duchy as a present, and became a very
great man indeed; but he did not forget the little old woman who had
been the cause of all his good fortune, and appointed her as head
housekeeper to him and his royal bride in their magnificent castle.

Kletke.





THE DIRTY SHEPHERDESS



Once upon a time there lived a King who had two daughters, and he loved
them with all his heart. When they grew up, he was suddenly seized with
a wish to know if they, on their part, truly loved him, and he made up
his mind that he would give his kingdom to whichever best proved her
devotion.

So he called the elder Princess and said to her, 'How much do you love
me?'

'As the apple of my eye!' answered she.

'Ah!' exclaimed the King, kissing her tenderly as he spoke, 'you are
indeed a good daughter.'

Then he sent for the younger, and asked her how much she loved him.

'I look upon you, my father,' she answered, 'as I look upon salt in my
food.'

But the King did not like her words, and ordered her to quit the court,
and never again to appear before him. The poor Princess went sadly up
to her room and began to cry, but when she was reminded of her father's
commands, she dried her eyes, and made a bundle of her jewels and her
best dresses and hurriedly left the castle where she was born.

She walked straight along the road in front of her, without knowing very
well where she was going or what was to become of her, for she had
never been shown how to work, and all she had learnt consisted of a few
household rules, and receipts of dishes which her mother had taught her
long ago. And as she was afraid that no housewife would want to engage a
girl with such a pretty face, she determined to make herself as ugly as
she could.

She therefore took off the dress that she was wearing and put on some
horrible old rags belonging to a beggar, all torn and covered with mud.
After that she smeared mud all over her hands and face, and shook her
hair into a great tangle. Having thus changed her appearance, she went
about offering herself as a goose-girl or shepherdess. But the farmers'
wives would have nothing to say to such a dirty maiden, and sent her
away with a morsel of bread for charity's sake.

After walking for a great many days without being able to find any work,
she came to a large farm where they were in want of a shepherdess, and
engaged her gladly.

One day when she was keeping her sheep in a lonely tract of land, she
suddenly felt a wish to dress herself in her robes of splendour. She
washed herself carefully in the stream, and as she always carried
her bundle with her, it was easy to shake off her rags, and transform
herself in a few moments into a great lady.

The King's son, who had lost his way out hunting, perceived this lovely
damsel a long way off, and wished to look at her closer. But as soon
as the girl saw what he was at, she fled into the wood as swiftly as a
bird. The Prince ran after her, but as he was running he caught his
foot in the root of a tree and fell, and when he got up again, she was
nowhere to be seen.

When she was quite safe, she put on her rags again, and smeared over her
face and hands. However the young Prince, who was both hot and thirsty,
found his way to the farm, to ask for a drink of cider, and he inquired
the name of the beautiful lady that kept the sheep. At this everyone
began to laugh, for they said that the shepherdess was one of the
