Kaffirs was given a glass of spirits and water, for they had brought up
a bottle with them in case of illness or any special need; and it was
evident from their chattering teeth and broken speech that the natives
needed a stimulant badly. Before it became light the horses were
saddled, and the five natives told to take them along the hill a mile
farther. When they had seen them off the lads returned to their former
post above the station. They had several times, when they looked out
during the night, seen a great light in that direction, and had no
doubt that some of the fallen huts had caught fire.

[Illustration: "THERE WAS A TREMENDOUS ROAR AND A BLINDING CRASH."]

Prepared as they were for a scene of destruction, the reality far
exceeded their expectations. All the waggons within a considerable
distance of the explosions were smashed into fragments, their wheels
broken and the axles twisted. The ammunition trucks had disappeared,
and many close to them had been completely shattered. Those in which
the muskets had been were a mere heap of fragments; the rest of the
trucks lay, some with their sides blown in, others comparatively
uninjured. Some were piled on the top of others three or four deep;
their contents were scattered over the whole yard. Boxes and cases were
burst open, and their contents--including large quantities of tea,
sugar, tinned provisions in vast quantities, and other stores--ruined.

Some still smoking brands showed where the huts had stood, and the dead
bodies of some twenty natives and several Portuguese officials, were
scattered here and there. The bodies of eight Boers were laid out
together by the bridge, and forty or fifty men were wandering aimlessly
amid the ruins. A huge cannon stood upright nearly in the centre of the
yard. It had fallen on its muzzle, which had penetrated some feet into
the earth. They could not see where its fellow had fallen. Five others,
which looked like fifteen-pounders, were lying in different directions,
the other three had disappeared. Rifles twisted, bent, and ruined were
lying about everywhere.

"It is not as good as the bridge," Chris said after they had used their
glasses for some time in silence, "but it is a heavy blow for them, and
I should think it will be a week before the line can be cleared ready
for traffic. Even when they begin they will feel the loss of so much
rolling-stock. There were five engines in the yard. Every one of these
has been upset, and will want a lot of repairs before it is fit for
anything again. I wish I had a kodak with me to take a dozen
snap-shots, it would be something worth showing when we get back. Well,
we may as well be moving. The Boers look as if they were stupefied at
present, but they will be waking up presently, and the sooner we start
for Lorenzo Marques the better."

Half an hour later they had mounted and were on their way, travelling
slowly till they came upon the road, and then at a fast pace. Jack rode
the spare horse, the other natives rode the ponies in turn, those on
foot keeping up without difficulty by laying a hand on the saddles.
Sometimes they trotted for two or three miles, and then went at a walk
for half an hour, and stopped altogether for four hours in the heat of
the day, for they were now getting on to low land, being only some
three hundred feet above the sea. They reached Lorenzo Marques at about
nine o'clock in the evening, and failing to find beds, for the town was
full of emigrants from the Transvaal, they camped in the open. In the
morning they sold the two ponies, and were fortunate in finding a
steamer lying there that would start the next day. Being very unwilling
to part with their horses they arranged for deck passages for them,
taking their own risk of injury to them in case of rough weather
setting in. Every berth was already engaged, but this mattered little
to them, as they could sleep upon the planks as well as on the ground.

They found that there was some excitement in the town, as there was a
report that there had been an explosion and much damage done near
Komati-poort. No particulars were, however, known, as the railway
officials maintained a strict silence as to the affair. It was known,
however, that the telegraphic communication with the Transvaal was
broken, and that three trains filled with Kaffir labourers, and
accompanied by a number of officials and a company of soldiers, had
gone up early that morning. Among the fugitives strong hopes were
expressed that the damage had been serious enough to interrupt the
traffic for some little time, and to cause serious inconvenience to the
Boers, and some even hazarded the hope that the bridge had suffered.
This, however, seemed unlikely in the extreme.

Fortunately the weather was fine on the run down to Durban, and the
passage of three hundred miles was effected in twenty-four hours. It
was now just a month since they had left Maritzburg, and as soon as
they landed with their horses and followers they learned that much had
taken place during that time.

They had started on the 10th of November. The Boers were then steadily
advancing, and so great did the danger appear, that Durban had been
strongly fortified by the blue jackets, aided by Kaffir labour. On the
25th Sir Redvers Buller had arrived, and by this time a considerable
force was gathered at Estcourt. The British advance began from that
town on the following day. The place had been entirely cut off, Boers
occupying the whole country as far as the Mooi river. General Hildyard,
who commanded at Estcourt, had been obliged to inarch out several times
to keep them at a distance from the town, and one or two sharp
artillery engagements had taken place, the Boers being commanded by
General Joubert in person. They had always retired a short distance,
but their movements were so rapid that it was useless to follow; and
the troops had each time fallen back to Estcourt. On the 28th the Boers
had blown up the bridge across the Tugela, and our army was moving
forward, and a great battle was expected shortly. On landing Chris rode
at once to the address given by his mother, and found that she had
sailed for Cape Town a week before. Riding then to the railway, he
found that the line was closed altogether to passenger traffic, but
that a train with some troops and a strong detachment of sailors was
going up that evening. Learning that a naval officer was in command, as
the military consisted only of small parties of men who had been left
behind, when their regiments left, to look after and forward their
stores, he went to him. He had, before landing, donned his civilian
suit.

"What can I do for you, sir?" the officer, who was watching a party
loading trucks with sheep, asked.

"My name is King, sir. I have just returned from an expedition to
Komati, I and three friends with me, and we have succeeded in blowing
up a large number of waggons containing a battery of field artillery,
two very heavy long guns, which, by the marks on the case, came from
Creusot, some eight or ten thousand rifles, and six truck-loads of
ammunition."

"The deuce you have!" the officer said, looking with great surprise at
the lad who told him this astonishing tale. Then sharply he added: "Are
you speaking the truth, sir? You will find it the worse for you if you
are not."

"What I say is perfectly true," Chris said quietly. "We only arrived an
hour since from Lorenzo Marques. This open letter from General Yule
will show you that the party of boys of whom I was the leader, have
done some good service before now."

The officer opened and read the letter. "I must beg your pardon for
having doubted your word," he said, as he handed it back. "After
adventuring into a Boer camp, and giving so heavy a lesson to a
superior force of the enemy, I can quite imagine you capable of
carrying out the adventure you have just spoken of. Now, sir, what can
I do for you?"

"I have come to ask if you will allow myself and my three friends to
accompany you."

"That I will most certainly. And indeed, as you have a report to make
of this matter to General Buller, you have a right to go on by the
first military train. Is there anything else?"

"Yes, sir; I should be greatly obliged if you will authorize the
station-master to attach a carriage to the train to take our five
horses."

"I will go with you to him," the officer said. "I can't say whether
that can be managed or not."

The station-master at first said that it was impossible, for his orders
were for a certain number of carriages and trucks, and with those
orders from the commanding officer he could not add to the number.

"But you might slip it on behind, Mr. Station-master," the officer
said. "There are four gentlemen going up with a very important report
to Sir Redvers Buller."

"I would do it willingly enough," the station-master said, "but the
commanding officer is bound to be down here with his staff, and he
would notice the horses directly."

"They might be put in a closed van, sir," Chris urged. "And as there
are so many full of stores, it would naturally be supposed that this
was also loaded with them."

The official smiled. "Well, young gentleman, I will do what I can for
you. As the officer in command of the train has consented, I can fall
back upon his authority if there should be any fuss about it. The train
will start at eight this evening; you had better have your horses here
two hours before that. Entrain them on the other side of the yard, and
I will have the waggon attached to the train quietly as soon as you
have got them in. The general is not likely to be down here till half
an hour before the train starts, and it is certainly not probable that
he will count the number of carriages."

It was now half-past five, and Chris joined his friends, who were
waiting with the horses and Kaffirs near the station. They had hardly
expected him so soon, as they did not know that his mother had left.

"Good news," he said. "There is a through train going up this evening,
and I have got permission for us and the horses to go; but they must be
put in a truck by half-past six, and we may as well get them in at
once. We still have our water-skins; the Kaffirs had better get them
filled at once, and a good supply of mealies for the horses on the way;
there is no saying how long we may be. Willesden, do you run into a
store and get a supply of bread and a cold ham for ourselves; a good
stock of bread for the Kaffirs, and a jar of water, and a hamper, with
a lock, containing two dozen bottles of beer, the mildest you can get,
for them. We are sure to get out for a few minutes at one of the
stations, and can then unlock the hamper and give them a bottle each.
It would never do to leave it to their mercy; they would drink it up in
the first half-hour, and then likely enough quarrel and fight. For
ourselves, we will have a small skin of water and, say, three bottles
of whisky. The carriage is sure to be full, and it will be acceptable
in the heat of the day tomorrow. The remainder of our supply of tea and
so on, and the lamp and other things, had better all go in with the
horses, and everything we do not absolutely want in the train with us;
there will be little room enough. Get an extra kettle, then we can not
only make ourselves a cup of tea or cocoa on the road, but give some to
any friend we may make; besides, it is sure to come in useful when we
get to the front."

"I will see to all that."

"If you will, take Jack with you to carry the things you buy."

"I had better take two of them; it will be a good weight."

"Very well, take one of the Zulus; the other can lead the spare horse,
and likely enough we shall have some trouble in getting them into the
waggon."

That work, however, turned out more easy than he had expected. The
station-master pointed out the waggon that he was to take, which was
standing alone on one of the lines of rails. They all set to work, and
were not long in running it alongside an empty platform, from which the
horses were led into it without trouble, being by this time accustomed
to so many changes that they obeyed their masters' orders without
hesitation. They had, too, already made one railway journey, and had
found that it was not unpleasant. The station-master happened to catch
sight of them, and sent two of the porters to take the waggon across
the various points to the rear of the train, where it was coupled. The
water-skins had been filled and the horses given a good drink before
entering the station, and the stores, waterproofs, and other spare
articles stowed with the horses. The shutter was closed, and the
Kaffirs told that on no account were they to open it or show their
faces until the train had left the station.

In a few minutes Willesden came up with the two natives heavily laden.
As soon as the stores and natives were all safely packed away and the
door of the van locked by one of the porters, the lads went out and had
a hearty meal at an hotel near the station. When they returned a large
number of soldiers and sailors were gathered on the platform. Their
baggage had already been stowed, and they were drawn up in fours,
facing the train, in readiness to enter when the word was given, the
officers standing and chatting in groups. The station was well lighted,
as, in addition to the ordinary gas-lamps, several powerful oil-lamps
had been hung up at short intervals. The naval men were in the front
part of the train, and on Chris walking up there the officer in command
beckoned to him.

"I will take you in the carriage with me, Mr. King. We want very much
to hear your story, and there is plenty of room for you. Your three
companions will go in the next two compartments, which will contain
junior officers and midshipmen, and I am sure that they too will be
very welcome. Before we board the train I will get you all to go and
sit at the windows at the other side. If you will bring your friends up
I will introduce them to their messmates on the trip. As soon as we
have all entered, we shall be at the window saying good-by to our
friends, and no one will catch sight of you. It is just as well, for
although I feel perfectly justified in taking you on to make your
report to the commander-in-chief, my senior might fuss over it; and
although he might let you go on, there would be a lot of explanations
and bother. Have you got your horses in?"

"Yes, sir; we were able to manage that capitally."

"Then you had better bring your comrades up at once, Mr. King, and I
will introduce them to those they will travel with." Chris brought up
his three friends and introduced them to the officer, who then took
them to the group of youngsters.

"Gentlemen," he said, "these three gentlemen will travel in your
compartment. They have seen a great deal of the war, and belong to one
of the mounted volunteer corps. They have a wonderful story to tell
you, and I am sure you will be delighted with their companionship. They
will take their seats just before the men entrain. They must occupy the
seats near the farther window, and as you will no doubt all be looking
out on this side, they will probably not be noticed, which would be all
the better, as it is a little irregular my taking them up."

By this time a considerable number of people were crowded in the
station, friends of the officers and comrades of the sailors, who
looked enviously at those going forward, while they themselves might
possibly not get a chance of doing so. A quarter of an hour later the
officer said:

"I am going to give the order to entrain. This is my compartment. You
and your friends had better slip into your places at once."

As soon as they had got in the order was given, and with the regularity
of a machine the three hundred men entered the train. As soon as they
had done so the officers took their places. The crowd moved up on to
the platform, and there was much shaking of hands, cheering, and
exhortations to do for the Boers. Suddenly there was a backward
movement on the part of the spectators, and the commanding naval
officer on the station, with several others and a group of military
men, came on to the platform. They were received by the officers in
command of the sailors and soldiers, and walked with them along the
platform talking. This was evidently a matter of ceremony only. The
usual questions were put as to the stores, and after standing and
chatting for eight or ten minutes the officers took their places in the
train, the engine whistled, and the train moved on, amid loud cheering
both from those on the platform and the men at the windows. As soon as
they were fairly off, Chris's friend said:

"I have already introduced you to these officers, Mr. King, but I have
not told them any of your doings. I can only say, gentlemen, that this
young officer is in command of a section of Volunteer Horse, and has
done work that any of us might be proud indeed to accomplish. The best
introduction I can give him, before he begins to tell his story, is by
reading a letter with which General Yule has furnished him."




CHAPTER XI

BACK WITH THE ARMY


While the letter was being passed round from hand to hand, a good deal
to Chris's discomfort, he had time to look more closely than he had
done before at his travelling companions. Three of them were young
lieutenants, the fourth an older man, shrewd but kindly faced. In
introducing him, his friend said: "This is our medico, Dr. Dawlish. I
hope that you will have no occasion to make his professional
acquaintance." When they had all read the letter, the senior lieutenant
said: "Now, Mr. King, we won't ask much of you to-night; we shall have
all to-morrow to listen to your story. We have all had a pretty hard
day's work, and shall before long turn in. Perhaps you will tell us to
begin with what your corps is, and how you became the officer."

"There are twenty-one of us, sir, and we are all about the same age. We
were great friends together at Johannesburg, where our fathers were for
the most part connected with mining. As things went on badly, we
decided to form ourselves into a corps if the war broke out. They chose
me as their leader--for no particular reason that I know of--and with
the understanding that if I did not quite give satisfaction, I should
resign in favour of one of the others. We all came down with our
families from Johannesburg when war was declared, and were grossly
insulted and ill-treated by the Boers, several of the ladies, among
them my mother, being struck on the face with their whips; which, you
can imagine, quite confirmed our determination to fight against them.
We had all obtained our parents' consent, and when we got to
Pietermaritzburg, proceeded to get our horses and equipments. That is
all."

"A great deal too short, Mr. King," the lieutenant said. "We want to
know what steps you took, and how you managed it. Did you come down all
the way by train?"

Chris related the events of the journey with more detail, and how, all
being well furnished with money, they had lost no time in getting all
they required, and going back by train to Newcastle.

"That is a good point to leave off," the officer said. "Tomorrow
morning we will take your story in instalments, and I do hope you will
give us the details as minutely as you can. They will greatly interest
us, as we are going in for that sort of thing, and it will show us what
can be done by a small number of young fellows accustomed to the
country, well-mounted, and, I am sure, from what General Yule says,
remarkably well led." All were provided with flasks, and after sampling
the contents of these, they wrapped themselves in their rugs and were
soon fast asleep. The other three lads did not get off so easily, the
younger officers were all so delighted at the prospect of soon being
engaged that they were in no way inclined to sleep, and it was not
until the seniors had long been soundly off that they too agreed to
postpone the rest of the boys' narrative until the next morning. The
train travelled very slowly, and Pietermaritzburg--a distance of
seventy miles--was not reached until day was breaking. Here there was a
long pause, and all alighted to stretch their limbs. The lads ran to
the end of the train; Jack was looking out.

"I thought that we should stop here, baas," he said; "and I have got
the kettles boiling and ready."

"Good man!" Chris said. "How have the horses passed the night?"

"They have been very quiet, baas."

"That is good to know. Take the kettles off and put three good handfuls
of tea in each."

"Yes, baas."

"When they are emptied, fill them with fresh water and put them again
on the stove. When they boil, bring them to our carriages, having of
course put some tea in before you take them off the lamp. Now, give me
one of those large loaves and the ham, and all the mugs and knives. We
will start breakfast first in my compartment, Willesden; we will pass
you in the ham when we have done with it. Anyhow, the kettles will hold
enough for a mug for everyone in our three compartments, and by the
time we have drunk that the second lot will be boiling. Open a couple
of tins of milk, Jack, and then you can bring them along when you have
taken the kettles. There is no extraordinary hurry, for I heard them
say that we should wait here at least an hour."

There was some amusement among the soldiers and sailors as Jack,
carrying the kettles, and Chris, Willesden, Brown, and Peters with ham,
bread and butter, tin mugs, plates, and three open tins of preserved
milk, came along down the platform.

