up in it - with one of his enormous stockings turned down to show
the gigantic bruise on his vast leg.  Immense tears of fury still
stood on his flushed giant face.  He looked so surprised, and he
was so large to be wearing an Eton collar, that the others could
not help laughing.

'The Sammyadd's done us again,' said Cyril.

'Not us - ME,' said Robert.  'If you'd got any decent feeling you'd
try to make it make you the same size.  You've no idea how silly it
feels,' he added thoughtlessly.

'And I don't want to; I can jolly well see how silly it looks,'
Cyril was beginning; but Anthea said:

'Oh, DON'T!  I don't know what's the matter with you boys to-day.
Look here, Squirrel, let's play fair.  It is hateful for poor old
Bobs, all alone up there.  Let's ask the Sammyadd for another wish,
and, if it will, I do really think we ought to be made the same
size.'

The others agreed, but not gaily; but when they found the Psammead,
it wouldn't.

'Not I,' it said crossly, rubbing its face with its feet.  He's a
rude violent boy, and it'll do him good to be the wrong size for a
bit.  What did he want to come digging me out with his nasty wet
hands for?  He nearly touched me!  He's a perfect savage.  A boy of
the Stone Age would have had more sense.'

Robert's hands had indeed been wet - with tears.

'Go away and leave me in peace, do,' the Psammead went on.  'I
can't think why you don't wish for something sensible - something
to eat or drink, or good manners, or good tempers.  Go along with
you, do!'

It almost snarled as it shook its whiskers, and turned a sulky
brown back on them.  The most hopeful felt that further parley was
vain.  They turned again to the colossal Robert.

'Whatever shall we do?' they said; and they all said it.

'First,' said Robert grimly, 'I'm going to reason with that baker's
boy.  I shall catch him at the end of the road.'

'Don't hit a chap littler than yourself, old man,' said Cyril.

'Do I look like hitting him?' said Robert scornfully.  'Why, I
should KILL him.  But I'll give him something to remember.  Wait
till I pull up my stocking.'  He pulled up his stocking, which was
as large as a small bolster-case, and strode off.  His strides were
six or seven feet long, so that it was quite easy for him to be at
the bottom of the hill, ready to meet the baker's boy when he came
down swinging the empty basket to meet his master's cart, which had
been leaving bread at the cottages along the road.

Robert crouched behind a haystack in the farmyard, that is at the
corner, and when he heard the boy come whistling along, he jumped
out at him and caught him by the collar.

'Now,' he said, and his voice was about four times its usual size,
just as his body was four times its, 'I'm going to teach you to
kick boys smaller than you.'

He lifted up the baker's boy and set him on the top of the
haystack, which was about sixteen feet from the ground, and then he
sat down on the roof of the cowshed and told the baker's boy
exactly what he thought of him.  I don't think the boy heard it all
- he was in a sort of trance of terror.  When Robert had said
everything he could think of, and some things twice over, he shook
the boy and said:

'And now get down the best way you can,' and left him.

I don't know how the baker's boy got down, but I do know that he
missed the cart, and got into the very hottest of hot water when he
turned up at last at the bakehouse.  I am sorry for him, but, after
all, it was quite right that he should be taught that English boys
mustn't use their feet when they fight, but their fists.  Of course
the water he got into only became hotter when he tried to tell his
master about the boy he had licked and the giant as high as a
church, because no one could possibly believe such a tale as that.
Next day the tale was believed - but that was too late to be of any
use to the baker's boy.

When Robert rejoined the others he found them in the garden.
Anthea had thoughtfully asked Martha to let them have dinner out
there - because the dining-room was rather small, and it would have
been so awkward to have a brother the size of Robert in there.  The
Lamb, who had slept peacefully during the whole stormy morning, was
now found to be sneezing, and Martha said he had a cold and would
be better indoors.

'And really it's just as well,' said Cyril, 'for I don't believe
he'd ever have stopped screaming if he'd once seen you the awful
size you are!'

Robert was indeed what a draper would call an 'out-size' in boys.
He found himself able to step right over the iron gate in the front
garden.

Martha brought out the dinner - it was cold veal and baked
potatoes, with sago pudding and stewed plums to follow.

She of course did not notice that Robert was anything but the usual
size, and she gave him as much meat and potatoes as usual and no
more.  You have no idea how small your usual helping of dinner
looks when you are many times your proper size.  Robert groaned,
and asked for more bread.  But Martha would not go on giving more
bread for ever.  She was in a hurry, because the keeper intended to
call on his way to Benenhurst Fair, and she wished to be dressed
smartly before he came.

'I wish WE were going to the Fair,' said Robert.

'You can't go anywhere that size,' said Cyril.

'Why not?' said Robert.  'They have giants at fairs, much bigger
ones than me.'

'Not much, they don't,' Cyril was beginning, when Jane screamed
'Oh!' with such loud suddenness that they all thumped her on the
back and asked whether she had swallowed a plum-stone.

'No,' she said, breathless from being thumped, 'it's - it's not a
plum-stone.  it's an idea.  Let's take Robert to the Fair, and get
them to give us money for showing him!  Then we really shall get
something out of the old Sammyadd at last!'

'Take me, indeed!' said Robert indignantly.  'Much more likely me
take you!'

And so it turned out.  The idea appealed irresistibly to everyone
but Robert, and even he was brought round by Anthea's suggestion
that he should have a double share of any money they might make.
There was a little old pony-trap in the coach-house - the kind that
is called a governess-cart.  It seemed desirable to get to the Fair
as quickly as possible, so Robert - who could now take enormous
steps and so go very fast indeed - consented to wheel the others in
this.  It was as easy to him now as wheeling the Lamb in the
mail-cart had been in the morning.  The Lamb's cold prevented his
being of the party.

It was a strange sensation being wheeled in a pony-carriage by a
giant.  Everyone enjoyed the journey except Robert and the few
people they passed on the way.  These mostly went into what looked
like some kind of standing-up fits by the roadside, as Anthea said.
just outside Benenhurst, Robert hid in a barn, and the others went
on to the Fair.

There were some swings, and a hooting tooting blaring
merry-go-round, and a shooting-gallery and coconut shies.
Resisting an impulse to win a coconut - or at least to attempt the
enterprise - Cyril went up to the woman who was loading little guns
before the array of glass bottles on strings against a sheet of
canvas.

'Here you are, little gentleman!' she said.  'Penny a shot!'

'No, thank you,' said Cyril, 'we are here on business, not on
pleasure.  Who's the master?'

'The what?'

'The master - the head - the boss of the show.'

'Over there,' she said, pointing to a stout man in a dirty linen
jacket who was sleeping in the sun; 'but I don't advise you to wake
him sudden.  His temper's contrary, especially these hot days.
Better have a shot while you're waiting.'

'It's rather important,' said Cyril.  'It'll be very profitable to
him.  I think he'll be sorry if we take it away.'

'Oh, if it's money in his pocket,' said the woman.  'No kid now?
What is it?'

'It's a GIANT.'

'You ARE kidding?'

'Come along and see,' said Anthea.

The woman looked doubtfully at them, then she called to a ragged
little girl in striped stockings and a dingy white petticoat that
came below her brown frock, and leaving her in charge of the
'shooting-gallery' she turned to Anthea and said, 'Well, hurry up!
But if you ARE kidding, you'd best say so.  I'm as mild as milk
myself, but my Bill he's a fair terror and -'

Anthea led the way to the barn.  'It really IS a giant,' she said.
'He's a giant little boy - in Norfolks like my brother's there.
And we didn't bring him up to the Fair because people do stare so,
and they seem to go into kind of standing-up fits when they see
him.  And we thought perhaps you'd like to show him and get
pennies; and if you like to pay us something, you can - only, it'll
have to be rather a lot, because we promised him he should have a
double share of whatever we made.'

The woman murmured something indistinct, of which the children
could only hear the words, 'Swelp me!' 'balmy,' and 'crumpet,'
which conveyed no definite idea to their minds.
She had taken Anthea's hand, and was holding it very firmly; and
Anthea could not help wondering what would happen if Robert should
have wandered off or turned his proper size during the interval.
But she knew that the Psammead's gifts really did last till sunset,
however inconvenient their lasting might be; and she did not think,
somehow, that Robert would care to go out alone while he was that
size.

When they reached the barn and Cyril called 'Robert!' there was a
stir among the loose hay, and Robert began to come out.  His hand
and arm came first - then a foot and leg.  When the woman saw the
hand she said 'My!' but when she saw the foot she said 'Upon my
civvy!' and when, by slow and heavy degrees, the whole of Robert's
enormous bulk was at last completely disclosed, she drew a long
breath and began to say many things, compared with which 'balmy'
and 'crumpet' seemed quite ordinary.  She dropped into
understandable English at last.

'What'll you take for him?' she said excitedly.  'Anything in
reason.  We'd have a special van built - leastways, I know where
there's a second-hand one would do up handsome - what a baby
elephant had, as died.  What'll you take?  He's soft, ain't he?
Them giants mostly is - but I never see - no, never!  What'll you
take?  Down on the nail.  We'll treat him like a king, and give him
first-rate grub and a doss fit for a bloomin' dook.  He must be
dotty or he wouldn't need you kids to cart him about.  What'll you
take for him?'

'They won't take anything,' said Robert sternly.  'I'm no more soft
than you are - not so much, I shouldn't wonder.  I'll come and be
a show for to-day if you'll give me' - he hesitated at the enormous
price he was about to ask - 'if you'll give me fifteen shillings.'

'Done,' said the woman, so quickly that Robert felt he had been
unfair to himself, and wished he had asked thirty.  'Come on now -
and see my Bill - and we'll fix a price for the season.  I dessay
you might get as much as two quid a week reg'lar.  Come on - and
make yourself as small as you can, for gracious' sake!'

This was not very small, and a crowd gathered quickly, so that it
was at the head of an enthusiastic procession that Robert entered
the trampled meadow where the Fair was held, and passed over the
stubbly yellow dusty grass to the door of the biggest tent.  He
crept in, and the woman went to call her Bill.  He was the big
sleeping man, and he did not seem at all pleased at being awakened.
Cyril, watching through a slit in the tent, saw him scowl and shake
a heavy fist and a sleepy head.  Then the woman went on speaking
very fast.  Cyril heard 'Strewth,' and 'biggest draw you ever, so
help me!' and he began to share Robert's feeling that fifteen
shillings was indeed far too little.  Bill slouched up to the tent
and entered.  When he beheld the magnificent proportions of Robert
he said but little - 'Strike me pink!' were the only words the
children could afterwards remember - but he produced fifteen
shillings, mainly in sixpences and coppers, and handed it to
Robert.

'We'll fix up about what you're to draw when the show's over
to-night,' he said with hoarse heartiness.  'Lor' love a duck!
you'll be that happy with us you'll never want to leave us.  Can
you do a song now - or a bit of a breakdown?'

'Not to-day,' said Robert, rejecting the idea of trying to sing 'As
once in May', a favourite of his mother's, and the only song he
could think of at the moment.

'Get Levi and clear them bloomin' photos out.  Clear the tent.
Stick up a curtain or suthink,' the man went on.  'Lor', what a
pity we ain't got no tights his size!  But we'll have 'em before
the week's out.  Young man, your fortune's made.  It's a good thing
you came to me, and not to some chaps as I could tell you on.  I've
known blokes as beat their giants, and starved 'em too; so I'll
tell you straight, you're in luck this day if you never was afore.
'Cos I'm a lamb, I am - and I don't deceive you.'

'I'm not afraid of anyone's beating ME,' said Robert, looking down
on the 'lamb'.  Robert was crouched on his knees, because the tent
was not big enough for him to stand upright in, but even in that
position he could still look down on most people.  'But I'm awfully
hungry I wish you'd get me something to eat.'

'Here, 'Becca,' said the hoarse Bill.  'Get him some grub - the
best you've got, mind!'  Another whisper followed, of which the
children only heard, 'Down in black and white - first thing
to-morrow.'

Then the woman went to get the food - it was only bread and cheese
when it came, but it was delightful to the large and empty Robert;
and the man went to post sentinels round the tent, to give the
alarm if Robert should attempt to escape with his fifteen
shillings.

'As if we weren't honest,' said Anthea indignantly when the meaning
of the sentinels dawned on her.

Then began a very strange and wonderful afternoon.

Bill was a man who knew his business.  In a very little while, the
photographic views, the spyglasses you look at them through, so
that they really seem rather real, and the lights you see them by,
were all packed away.  A curtain - it was an old red-and-black
carpet really - was run across the tent.  Robert was concealed
behind, and Bill was standing on a trestle-table outside the tent
making a speech.  It was rather a good speech.  It began by saying
that the giant it was his privilege to introduce to the public that
day was the eldest son of the Emperor of San Francisco, compelled
through an unfortunate love affair with the Duchess of the Fiji
Islands to leave his own country and take refuge in England - the
land of liberty - where freedom was the right of every man, no
matter how big he was.  It ended by the announcement that the first
twenty who came to the tent door should see the giant for
threepence apiece.  'After that,' said Bill, 'the price is riz, and
I don't undertake to say what it won't be riz to.  So now's yer
time.'

A young man squiring his sweetheart on her afternoon out was the
first to come forward.  For that occasion his was the princely
attitude - no expense spared - money no object.  His girl wished to
see the giant?  Well, she should see the giant, even though seeing
the giant cost threepence each and the other entertainments were
all penny ones.

The flap of the tent was raised - the couple entered.  Next moment
a wild shriek from the girl thrilled through all present.  Bill
slapped his leg.  'That's done the trick!' he whispered to 'Becca.
It was indeed a splendid advertisement of the charms of Robert.
When the girl came out she was pale and trembling, and a crowd was
round the tent.


'What was it like?' asked a bailiff.

'Oh! - horrid! - you wouldn't believe,' she said.  'It's as big as
a barn, and that fierce.  It froze the blood in my bones.  I
wouldn't ha' missed seeing it for anything.'

The fierceness was only caused by Robert's trying not to laugh.
But the desire to do that soon left him, and before sunset he was
