the brave California Mexicans. They might exist for a time on the bodies
of their animals, but they must perish without water.

General Kearney called his friends together during the afternoon to
consult as to whether any possible means of escape was before them. He
could see none. He had sent three scouts to Commodore Stockton at San
Diego, asking for immediate help, but the three were captured by the
Mexicans on their return. Kearney had succeeded in exchanging a Mexican
lieutenant, whom he held prisoner, for one of the scouts, but nothing
was gained thereby. The messenger reported that they had been unable to
reach San Diego, and Commodore Stockton, therefore, was in ignorance of
the peril of his countrymen not far distant.

When every one expressed himself as unable to see the first ray of
hope, Carson in his deliberate, modest way said that it was clear only a
single possibility remained--that was by procuring relief from Commodore
Stockton at San Diego. Though the other scouts had failed to reach
him, Carson expressed his belief that he could succeed. At any rate, he
desired to make the attempt to pass the Mexican lines.

Lieutenant Beale, since Minister to Austria, and favorably known
throughout the country, immediately seconded the proposition,
volunteering to accompany Carson. General Kearney gladly and gratefully
accepted the offer, and the arrangements were instantly made. These
arrangements were of the simplest nature. The beleaguered Americans
were surrounded by three cordons of sentinels, and it was necessary
for Carson and Beale to make their way past them in order to reach San
Diego.

When night was fully descended, the two left the rocks and approaching
the first line, sank upon their hands and knees, and crawled forward
with the silence and stealth of Indian scouts. Despite the utmost care,
their shoes made a slight noise now and then, and to avoid it, they took
them off and shoved them in their belts.

The exploit of Lieutenant Beale and Kit Carson was a most remarkable
one in every respect. Frequently through the gloom they would catch the
faint outlines of a sentinel, pacing back and forth. Instantly the two
would lie flat on their faces until the man moved away, when the painful
progress would be resumed.

The slightest forgetfulness was certain to prove fatal, for the
Mexicans, knowing the desperate straits of the Americans, must have
been expecting some such attempt and were therefore more than usually
watchful.

Once a mounted Mexican rode close to the prostrate figures, sprang off
his horse and lit his cigarette. He was so close that the tiny flame
showed his nose and features, as it was held in front of his face, while
lighting the twist of tobacco. During that most trying moment, as
Kit Carson afterwards declared, he distinctly heard the beating of
Lieutenant Beale's heart.

There seemed no escape but finally the horseman drove away and the
painful progress was continued for fully two miles, during which both
men were constantly peering through the darkness for signs of danger.
Again and again they were compelled to halt, and lying flat on their
faces, wait till their fate was determined.

"We are through," whispered Carson at last, when considerable distance
beyond the last row of sentinels.

"Thank heaven!" exclaimed Lieutenant Beale in the same guarded voice.

"Now we'll put on our shoes and travel as fast as we know how to San
Diego--"

The mountaineer paused in dismay, for, while creeping over the plain, he
had lost both his shoes that were thrust in his belt. The Lieutenant had
been equally unfortunate, and, as it was utterly out of their power
to recover them, they could only push on barefooted, over a soil that
abounded with thorns and prickly pears. As these could not be seen in
the darkness, their feet were soon wounded to a distressing degree. It
was necessary to avoid the well beaten trails, so that the route was not
only made longer, but much more difficult on account of the obstacles
named.

Yet they were working for a great stake. The lives of General Kearney
and his brave men were in the balance. If Carson and Beale failed to
bring help right speedily, they were doomed.

All night long, through the succeeding day and far into the following
night, the couple, worn, wearied and with bleeding feet, pushed ahead.
When exhausted, they would halt for a brief while, but the thought of
their imperilled comrades, and the fear that some of the Mexicans were
pursuing them, speedily started them off again and they kept to their
work with a grim resolution which heeded not fatigue, suffering and
wounds.

The only compass Carson had was his eye, but he was so familiar with the
country that he never lost himself. The weary men were still trudging
forward, when through the darkness ahead suddenly flashed out a
star-like point of light. Several others appeared and a minute after
they dotted the background of gloom like a constellation.

"That's San Diego!" exclaimed Carson, who could not be mistaken. The
couple could scarcely restrain their joy. New life and activity thrilled
their bodies, and they hurried on with the same elastic eagerness they
felt at the beginning.

In a short while they were challenged by sentinels, and making known
their mission, were taken before Commodore Stockton. That officer, with
his usual promptness, sent a force of nearly two hundred men to the
relief of General Kearney. They took with them a piece of ordnance which
for want of horses the men themselves were forced to draw.

They advanced by forced marches to the endangered Americans, scarcely
pausing night or day, until in sight of the Mexicans, who considering
discretion the better part of valor, withdrew without exchanging a shot
with the naval brigade.

As may be supposed, the feet of Carson and Beale were in a frightful
condition, when they reached San Diego. The mountaineer, on that
account, did not return with the reinforcements, but he described the
course and location so minutely that no difficulty was experienced by
the relieving force.

Lieutenant Beale was a man of sturdy frame, accustomed to roughing it
on the frontier, but the sufferings he underwent on that eventful night
were such that he felt the effects for years afterward.



CHAPTER XXX.


 Capture of Los Angeles--Court Martial of Fremont--Carson Appointed a
 Bearer of Dispatches to Washington--His Journey to St. Louis--Visits
 Washington--Appointed Lieutenant by President Polk--Ordered Back Across
 the Continent--His Journey--Assigned to Duty at Tajon Pass--Again
 Ordered to Washington--His Appointment not Confirmed by the United
 States Senate--Visit to Washington--Return to New Mexico.

The chief force of the Mexicans was at Los Angeles over a hundred miles
to the north of San Diego. They numbered six or seven hundred and were
strongly intrenched. General Kearney and Commodore Stockton joined their
commands and marched to attack them. Arriving in front of the town, they
scattered the Mexicans intrenched on the outside, and then marched into
the place. But the enemy had fled and gone northward to meet Fremont
who was on his way from Monterey with four hundred men to attack Los
Angeles.

The Mexicans had not long to search when they found Fremont, but,
instead of giving him battle, their commander surrendered, possibly
preferring to give him the honor, instead of selecting the other
commanders. Fremont continued his march to Los Angeles, where they went
into winter quarters, and Carson, who had been devoting his valuable
services to General Kearney, now rejoined his old friend, Fremont.

It may be stated in this place that the jealousy between Commodore
Stockton and General Kearney assumed such a shape at that time that
Fremont was compelled to acknowledge either one or the other as his
superior officer. He selected Commodore Stockton as the one to whom he
owed superior allegiance. The result of the petty quarrel was the trial
of Fremont by court martial, the particulars of which are too well known
to require further reference at our hands.

In the following March, Kit Carson was selected to carry despatches to
Washington. Lieutenant Beale, who was still suffering from the exposure
and hardships he had undergone, accompanied him, together with a guard
of a dozen veteran mountaineers. Lieutenant Beale was so weak that
Carson for many days was obliged to lift him on and off his horse; but
the clear air, the healthful exercise and the cheery companionship of
the hardy scout were the best tonics in the world, and probably did the
invalid more good than any other treatment that could have been devised.

Carson took an extremely southern route, and his superior skill and
knowledge of the country and its inhabitants enabled him to avoid all
danger until he reached a tributary of the lower Colorado. While in camp
at midnight, they were assailed with a shower of arrows from a party
of Indians; but, as Carson expected the attack, he had made such
preparations that not one of his men were injured.

Without any other incident worth the mention, Carson and his escort
reached St. Louis. There the renowned mountaineer became the hero of
the hour. He was taken at once to the home of Hon. Thomas H. Benton, the
distinguished statesman and the father in law of Colonel Fremont, who
introduced him to the leading Citizens.

The first person to greet Carson when he stepped from the cars in
Washington was Mrs. Fremont, who recognized him from the description
given by her husband in his letters. She compelled him to accompany her
to the house of her father, where he remained an honored guest during
his stay in Washington, which was for a considerable time.

Among the compliments paid Carson while in the capital was that of his
appointment by President Polk, as lieutenant in the rifle corps of the
United States army, and he was ordered to return across the continent
with despatches. At Fort Leavenworth, Carson was furnished with an
escort of fifty men who were volunteers in the war against Mexico.

The journey westward was marked by no stirring incident until he reached
the eastern declivity of the Rocky Mountains, where a company of United
States Volunteers were overtaken. They had in charge an enormous train
of wagons on the way to New Mexico. On the morning after the encampment
of Carson near them, the Indians made an attack upon the volunteers,
capturing all their cattle and more than twenty horses. The mountaineer
and his men dashed to the rescue, recaptured all the cattle, but were
unable to retake the horses.

Shortly after, Carson and his company reached Santa Fe. There he parted
from the volunteers and hired sixteen others with which he continued the
journey, thereby obeying the instructions received at Fort Leavenworth.

Pursuing the even tenor of his way, he arrived at a tributary of the
Virgin River, when he abruptly came upon an encampment of several
hundred Comanches, who, as Carson happened to know, had massacred a
number of settlers only a short time before. Understanding as thoroughly
as he did the treacherous nature of these people, he made a bold front,
and, when they attempted to visit his camp, peremptorily ordered them to
keep away.

He added that he knew all about them, and the first one who moved closer
would be shot. Furthermore, if they did not depart, within a specified
time, he notified them that they would be fired upon. These were such
audacious words that the Comanches doubted their sincerity. To test it,
some of them overstayed their time. Not wishing to break his pledge,
Carson ordered his men to fire, One of the warriors fell, while several
others, who were badly wounded, came to the conclusion that when the
great mountaineer made a statement there was likely to be considerable
truth in it.

Food soon became so scarce that mule meat formed the only diet until
they reached Los Angeles. Carson pushed on to Monterey where he
delivered the despatches to the proper officer, and then returning to
Los Angeles he was assigned to duty in Captain Smith's Company of
United States dragoons. He was given command of twenty-five dragoons and
directed to proceed to Tajon Pass, through which marauding Indians were
accustomed to pass when returning from their raids in California. It
was an important point, and the winter of 1847-48 was spent in the
performance of the duties thus placed upon him. In the spring, he was
once more ordered to carry despatches to Washington, an escort being
furnished him as in the previous instance.

In crossing Grand River, one of the rafts became unmanageable, upset,
losing considerable valuable property and endangering the lives of a
number of the company. A large force of Utah and Apache Indians were
encountered, but Carson managed them with the same skill he had shown
them so many times before.

On arriving at Taos, he spent several days with his family and friends,
after which he proceeded to Santa Fe. There he learned that the United
States Senate had refused to confirm his nomination as lieutenant in
the army. Many of his friends were so angered over this slight that they
urged him to refuse to carry the despatches further; but his reply, as
given by Dr. Peters, is so admirable that we quote it:

"I was entrusted with these despatches, having been chosen in
California, from whence I come, as the most competent person to take
them through safely. I would try to fulfill this duty even if I knew it
would cost me my life. It matters not to me, while I am performing this
service for my country, whether I hold the rank of lieutenant in the
United States Army or am known merely as an experienced mountaineer. I
have gained some little honor and credit for the manner in which I
have always conducted myself when detailed on any special and important
business, and I would on no account now wish to forfeit the good opinion
formed of me by a majority of my countrymen because the United States
Senate did not deem it proper to confer on me an appointment which I
never solicited, and one which, had it been confirmed, I would have
resigned at the termination of the war."

Having determined to perform his duty, he made careful inquiries as to
the state of feeling among the Indians through whose country the trail
led. The reports were of the most alarming character: the Comanches were
on the war path with a vengeance. They were swarming all along the old
Santa Fe Trail, on the watch for parties whom they could overwhelm and
destroy.

Such being the case, Carson resorted to the bold artifice of making a
trail of his own. He reduced his escort to ten experienced mountaineers
and then struck out upon his new route. He rode northward from Taos
until within a region rarely visited by hostiles, when he changed his
course by the compass several times. By this means, he reached Fort
Kearney on the Platte and finally arrived at Fort Leavenworth. Not only
had he avoided all trouble with Indians, but by following the new route,
had found abundance of game so that the entire trip was but little more
than a pleasure excursion.

All danger was over at Fort Leavenworth, where he parted from his escort
and went alone to Washington. Previous to this, the war with Mexico
had ended, the treaty of peace having been signed February 2, 1848, and
proclaimed on the 4th of July following.

Carson tarried in Washington only long enough to deliver his despatches
to the proper authorities, when he turned about and made his way to
Taos, New Mexico, where he joined once more his family and friends.



CHAPTER XXXI.


 Hostility of the Apaches--Colonel Beale Sends an Expedition Against
 Them--Nothing Accomplished--Colonel Beale Leads an Expedition with
 Carson as Guide--Capture and Release of Two Chiefs--March to the
 Arkansas--Another Failure--Carson and Maxwell Build a Ranche--Fremont's
 Fourth Expedition--The Murderous Apaches--A Fruitless Pursuit.

Kit Carson was one of those whose destiny seems to be that of stirring
incident and adventure. No man possessed such an intimate knowledge of
the manners, customs and peculiarities of the tribes in the southwest,
and with his exceptional woodcraft, skill and high courage his services
were always indispensable.

While he was at Taos, the Indians around him were restless until the
whole country was seething and on the verge of a general revolt.
Colonel Beale, commanding officer of the district, had established his
headquarters at Taos. The Apaches committed so many outrages that he
believed the only course open was to administer a thorough chastisement;
but it was tenfold easier to reach such a conclusion than it was to
carry it out. A strong force having been despatched to bring them to
account, pursued them to the mountains from which they were compelled to
return without accomplishing anything at all. The subsequent history of
these Apaches and of General Crook's campaign against them are
familiar enough to all to justify the declaration that they have proven
themselves the bravest and most formidable tribe that has defied the
United States government during the past half century.

Disappointed that the officer whom he sent failed to do anything,
Colonel Beale took command himself and employed Kit Carson as guide.
Instead of stopping in the mountains because they were blocked with
snow, as the former expedition had done, Colonel Beale forced his way
with great difficulty through them. The search for the Indians was long
but fruitless. The cunning red skins were at home in their fastnesses
and not a solitary warrior was bagged.

As the supply of provisions was running low, Colonel Beale was forced to
return and retrace his steps. On their return, they came upon a village
of Apaches into which the soldiers charged; but the nimble warriors
easily got away, with the exception of a couple of chiefs who fell into
the hands of the Americans. Hoping to rouse the chivalry and gratitude
of their nature, Colonel Beale lectured them kindly and after their
promise to behave themselves, allowed them to depart. As soon as they
were beyond rifle shot, they must have grinned with exultation, for it
was not their nature to repay kindness with anything but cruelty.
