'Oh, rot! come on.'

Generally the Dentist would have; but even worms will turn if they are
hot enough, and if their feet are hurting them. 'I don't care, I shall!'
he said.

Oswald overlooked the mutiny and did not say who was leader. He just
said--

'Well don't be all day about it,' for he is a kind-hearted boy and can
make allowances. So Denny took off his boots and went into the pool.
'Oh, it's ripping!' he said. 'You ought to come in.'

'It looks beastly muddy,' said his tolerating leader.

'It is a bit,' Denny said, 'but the mud's just as cool as the water, and
so soft, it squeezes between your toes quite different to boots.'

And so he splashed about, and kept asking Oswald to come along in.

But some unseen influence prevented Oswald doing this; or it may have
been because both his bootlaces were in hard knots.

Oswald had cause to bless the unseen influence, or the bootlaces, or
whatever it was.

Denny had got to the middle of the pool, and he was splashing about,
and getting his clothes very wet indeed, and altogether you would have
thought his was a most envious and happy state. But alas! the brightest
cloud had a waterproof lining. He was just saying--

'You are a silly, Oswald. You'd much better--' when he gave a
blood-piercing scream, and began to kick about.

'What's up?' cried the ready Oswald; he feared the worst from the way
Denny screamed, but he knew it could not be an old meat tin in this
quiet and jungular spot, like it was in the moat when the shark bit
Dora.

'I don't know, it's biting me. Oh, it's biting me all over my legs! Oh,
what shall I do? Oh, it does hurt! Oh! oh! oh!' remarked Denny, among
his screams, and he splashed towards the bank. Oswald went into the
water and caught hold of him and helped him out. It is true that Oswald
had his boots on, but I trust he would not have funked the unknown
terrors of the deep, even without his boots, I am almost sure he would
not have.

When Denny had scrambled and been hauled ashore, we saw with horror and
amaze that his legs were stuck all over with large black, slug-looking
things. Denny turned green in the face--and even Oswald felt a bit
queer, for he knew in a moment what the black dreadfulnesses were. He
had read about them in a book called Magnet Stories, where there was a
girl called Theodosia, and she could play brilliant trebles on the piano
in duets, but the other girl knew all about leeches which is much more
useful and golden deedy. Oswald tried to pull the leeches off, but they
wouldn't, and Denny howled so he had to stop trying. He remembered from
the Magnet Stories how to make the leeches begin biting--the girl did it
with cream--but he could not remember how to stop them, and they had not
wanted any showing how to begin.

'Oh, what shall I do? What shall I do? Oh, it does hurt! Oh, oh!' Denny
observed, and Oswald said--

'Be a man! Buck up! If you won't let me take them off you'll just have
to walk home in them.'

At this thought the unfortunate youth's tears fell fast. But Oswald gave
him an arm, and carried his boots for him, and he consented to buck
up, and the two struggled on towards the others, who were coming back,
attracted by Denny's yells. He did not stop howling for a moment, except
to breathe. No one ought to blame him till they have had eleven leeches
on their right leg and six on their left, making seventeen in all, as
Dicky said, at once.

It was lucky he did yell, as it turned out, because a man on the
road--where the telegraph wires were--was interested by his howls, and
came across the marsh to us as hard as he could. When he saw Denny's
legs he said--

'Blest if I didn't think so,' and he picked Denny up and carried him
under one arm, where Denny went on saying 'Oh!' and 'It does hurt' as
hard as ever.

Our rescuer, who proved to be a fine big young man in the bloom of
youth, and a farm-labourer by trade, in corduroys, carried the wretched
sufferer to the cottage where he lived with his aged mother; and then
Oswald found that what he had forgotten about the leeches was SALT. The
young man in the bloom of youth's mother put salt on the leeches, and
they squirmed off, and fell with sickening, slug-like flops on the brick
floor.

Then the young man in corduroys and the bloom, etc., carried Denny home
on his back, after his legs had been bandaged up, so that he looked like
'wounded warriors returning'.

It was not far by the road, though such a long distance by the way the
young explorers had come.

He was a good young man, and though, of course, acts of goodness are
their own reward, still I was glad he had the two half-crowns Albert's
uncle gave him, as well as his own good act. But I am not sure Alice
ought to have put him in the Golden Deed book which was supposed to be
reserved for Us.

Perhaps you will think this was the end of the source of the Nile (or
North Pole). If you do, it only shows how mistaken the gentlest reader
may be.

The wounded explorer was lying with his wounds and bandages on the sofa,
and we were all having our tea, with raspberries and white currants,
which we richly needed after our torrid adventures, when Mrs Pettigrew,
the housekeeper, put her head in at the door and said--

'Please could I speak to you half a moment, sir?' to Albert's uncle.
And her voice was the kind that makes you look at each other when the
grown-up has gone out, and you are silent, with your bread-and-butter
halfway to the next bite, or your teacup in mid flight to your lips.

It was as we suppose. Albert's uncle did not come back for a long while.
We did not keep the bread-and-butter on the wing all that time, of
course, and we thought we might as well finish the raspberries and white
currants. We kept some for Albert's uncle, of course, and they were the
best ones too but when he came back he did not notice our thoughtful
unselfishness.

He came in, and his face wore the look that means bed, and very likely
no supper.

He spoke, and it was the calmness of white-hot iron, which is something
like the calmness of despair. He said--

'You have done it again. What on earth possessed you to make a dam?'

'We were being beavers,' said H. O., in proud tones. He did not see as
we did where Albert's uncle's tone pointed to.

'No doubt,' said Albert's uncle, rubbing his hands through his hair. 'No
doubt! no doubt! Well, my beavers, you may go and build dams with your
bolsters. Your dam stopped the stream; the clay you took for it left
a channel through which it has run down and ruined about seven pounds'
worth of freshly-reaped barley. Luckily the farmer found it out in time
or you might have spoiled seventy pounds' worth. And you burned a bridge
yesterday.'

We said we were sorry. There was nothing else to say, only Alice added,
'We didn't MEAN to be naughty.'

'Of course not,' said Albert's uncle, 'you never do. Oh, yes, I'll kiss
you--but it's bed and it's two hundred lines to-morrow, and the line
is--"Beware of Being Beavers and Burning Bridges. Dread Dams." It will
be a capital exercise in capital B's and D's.'

We knew by that that, though annoyed, he was not furious; we went to
bed.

I got jolly sick of capital B's and D's before sunset on the morrow.
That night, just as the others were falling asleep, Oswald said--

'I say.'

'Well,' retorted his brother.

'There is one thing about it,' Oswald went on, 'it does show it was a
rattling good dam anyhow.'

And filled with this agreeable thought, the weary beavers (or explorers,
Polar or otherwise) fell asleep.



CHAPTER 8. THE HIGH-BORN BABE

It really was not such a bad baby--for a baby. Its face was round and
quite clean, which babies' faces are not always, as I daresay you know
by your own youthful relatives; and Dora said its cape was trimmed with
real lace, whatever that may be--I don't see myself how one kind of
lace can be realler than another. It was in a very swagger sort of
perambulator when we saw it; and the perambulator was standing quite by
itself in the lane that leads to the mill.

'I wonder whose baby it is,' Dora said. 'Isn't it a darling, Alice?'

Alice agreed to its being one, and said she thought it was most likely
the child of noble parents stolen by gipsies.

'These two, as likely as not,' Noel said. 'Can't you see something
crime-like in the very way they're lying?'

They were two tramps, and they were lying on the grass at the edge of
the lane on the shady side fast asleep, only a very little further on
than where the Baby was. They were very ragged, and their snores did
have a sinister sound.

'I expect they stole the titled heir at dead of night, and they've been
travelling hot-foot ever since, so now they're sleeping the sleep
of exhaustedness,' Alice said. 'What a heart-rending scene when the
patrician mother wakes in the morning and finds the infant aristocrat
isn't in bed with his mamma.'

The Baby was fast asleep or else the girls would have kissed it. They
are strangely fond of kissing. The author never could see anything in it
himself.

'If the gipsies DID steal it,' Dora said 'perhaps they'd sell it to us.
I wonder what they'd take for it.'

'What could you do with it if you'd got it?' H. O. asked.

'Why, adopt it, of course,' Dora said. 'I've often thought I should
enjoy adopting a baby. It would be a golden deed, too. We've hardly got
any in the book yet.'

'I should have thought there were enough of us,' Dicky said.

'Ah, but you're none of you babies,' said Dora.

'Unless you count H. O. as a baby: he behaves jolly like one sometimes.'

This was because of what had happened that morning when Dicky found
H. O. going fishing with a box of worms, and the box was the one Dicky
keeps his silver studs in, and the medal he got at school, and what is
left of his watch and chain. The box is lined with red velvet and it was
not nice afterwards. And then H. O. said Dicky had hurt him, and he was
a beastly bully, and he cried. We thought all this had been made up, and
were sorry to see it threaten to break out again. So Oswald said--

'Oh, bother the Baby! Come along, do!'

And the others came.

We were going to the miller's with a message about some flour that
hadn't come, and about a sack of sharps for the pigs.

After you go down the lane you come to a clover-field, and then a
cornfield, and then another lane, and then it is the mill. It is a
jolly fine mill: in fact it is two--water and wind ones--one of each
kind--with a house and farm buildings as well. I never saw a mill like
it, and I don't believe you have either.

If we had been in a story-book the miller's wife would have taken us
into the neat sanded kitchen where the old oak settle was black
with time and rubbing, and dusted chairs for us--old brown Windsor
chairs--and given us each a glass of sweet-scented cowslip wine and
a thick slice of rich home-made cake. And there would have been fresh
roses in an old china bowl on the table. As it was, she asked us all
into the parlour and gave us Eiffel Tower lemonade and Marie biscuits.
The chairs in her parlour were 'bent wood', and no flowers, except some
wax ones under a glass shade, but she was very kind, and we were very
much obliged to her. We got out to the miller, though, as soon as we
could; only Dora and Daisy stayed with her, and she talked to them about
her lodgers and about her relations in London.

The miller is a MAN. He showed us all over the mills--both kinds--and
let us go right up into the very top of the wind-mill, and showed us
how the top moved round so that the sails could catch the wind, and
the great heaps of corn, some red and some yellow (the red is English
wheat), and the heaps slice down a little bit at a time into a square
hole and go down to the mill-stones. The corn makes a rustling soft
noise that is very jolly--something like the noise of the sea--and you
can hear it through all the other mill noises.

Then the miller let us go all over the water-mill. It is fairy palaces
inside a mill. Everything is powdered over white, like sugar on pancakes
when you are allowed to help yourself. And he opened a door and showed
us the great water-wheel working on slow and sure, like some great,
round, dripping giant, Noel said, and then he asked us if we fished.

'Yes,' was our immediate reply.

'Then why not try the mill-pool?' he said, and we replied politely; and
when he was gone to tell his man something we owned to each other that
he was a trump.

He did the thing thoroughly. He took us out and cut us ash saplings for
rods; he found us in lines and hooks, and several different sorts of
bait, including a handsome handful of meal-worms, which Oswald put loose
in his pocket.

When it came to bait, Alice said she was going home with Dora and Daisy.
Girls are strange, mysterious, silly things. Alice always enjoys a rat
hunt until the rat is caught, but she hates fishing from beginning to
end. We boys have got to like it. We don't feel now as we did when
we turned off the water and stopped the competition of the competing
anglers. We had a grand day's fishing that day. I can't think what made
the miller so kind to us. Perhaps he felt a thrill of fellow-feeling in
his manly breast for his fellow-sportsmen, for he was a noble fisherman
himself.

We had glorious sport--eight roach, six dace, three eels, seven perch,
and a young pike, but he was so very young the miller asked us to put
him back, and of course we did. 'He'll live to bite another day,' said
the miller.

The miller's wife gave us bread and cheese and more Eiffel Tower
lemonade, and we went home at last, a little damp, but full of
successful ambition, with our fish on a string.

It had been a strikingly good time--one of those times that happen in
the country quite by themselves. Country people are much more friendly
than town people. I suppose they don't have to spread their friendly
feelings out over so many persons, so it's thicker, like a pound of
butter on one loaf is thicker than on a dozen. Friendliness in the
country is not scrape, like it is in London. Even Dicky and H. O. forgot
the affair of honour that had taken place in the morning. H. O. changed
rods with Dicky because H. O.'s was the best rod, and Dicky baited H.
O.'s hook for him, just like loving, unselfish brothers in Sunday School
magazines.

We were talking fishlikely as we went along down the lane and through
the cornfield and the cloverfield, and then we came to the other lane
where we had seen the Baby. The tramps were gone, and the perambulator
was gone, and, of course, the Baby was gone too.

